THE WORKS OF EDMOND WALLER Esquire, Lately a Member of the Honorable HOUSE
of COMMONS, In this present Parliament.

Imprimatur NA. BRENT. December. 30. 1644.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley. 1645.

Of His MAJESTI^S receiving the news of the Duke of Buckinghams death.
So earnest with thy God, can no new care:
No sense of danger interrupt thy prayer?
The sacred Wrestler till a blessing given
Quits not his hold, but halting conquers heaven:
Nor was the stream of thy devotion stopped
When from the body such a limb was lopped,
As to thy present state was no less maime,
Though thy wise choice has since repaired the same;
Bold Homer durst not so great virtue ^ain
In his best pattern^ of Patrolus slain,
With such amazement as weak mothers use,
And ^rantick gesture he receives the news:
Yet fell his darling by th'impartiall chance
Of war, imposed by Royal Hectors lance,
Thine in full peace, and by a vulgar haud
Torn from thy bosom left his high command.
The famous Painter can allow no place
For private sorrow in a Princes face:
Yet that his price might not exceed belief,
He cast a ^ail upon supposed grie^e.
It Was want of such a president as this
Made the old heathen frame their god amiss.
Their Phoebus should not act a fonder part
For the fair boy, then he did from his heart;
Nor blame for Hiaci^thus fate his own
That kept from him wi^h'd death, had thou bin known.
Yet he that weighs with thine good David's deeds,
Shall sinde his passion, not his love exceeds.
He cursed the mountains where his brave friend died,
But lest salfe Ziba with his heir divide:
Where thy mottall love to thy blessed friends,
Like that of heaven upon their seed descends.
Such huge extremes inhabit thy great mind,
God-like unmoved, and yet like woman kind;
Which of thy ancient Poets had not brought
Our Charles his pedigree, from heaven and taught
How some bright dame comprest by mighty love
Produced this mixed divinity and love?
To the King on his Navy.
Where ere thy Navy spreads her canvas wings
Homage to thee, and peace to all she brings:
The French and Spaniard when thy flags appear
Forget their hatred, and consent to fear.
So love from Ida did both hoasts survey,
And when he pleased to thunder part the fray.
Ships heretofore in seas like fishes sped,
The mightiest still upon the smallest fed.
Thou on the deep impos'st stricter laws,
And by that justice have removed the cause
Of those rude tempests which for rapine sent,
Too o^t alas, involved the innocent.
Now shall the Ocean as thy Thames be fre^
From both those ^ates of storms and pi^acie*
But we most happy, who can fear no force
But winged troops, or Pegasean horse.
It Is not so hard for greedy foes to spoil
Another Nation as to touch our soil.
Should natures self invade the world again,
And ore the center spread the liquid main:
Thy power were safe, and her (...) hand,
Would but enlarge the bounds of they command.
Thy dreadful sleete would (...) let thee Lord of all,
And ^ide in triumph ore the drowned ball.
Those towers of oak ore ^ertile plains might (...)
And visit m^untains where they once did grow.
The worlds restorer once could not endure
That finished Bahell should those men secure:
Whose pride designed, that fabrics should have stood
Above the reach of any second sloud.
To thee his ^^osen more indulgent he
Dares trust such power with so much piety.
Upon His MAJESTY'S repairing of PAUL'S.
THat shipwrackt vessel which The Apostle boro
Scarce suffered more upon Melitas shore,
Then did his Temple in the sea of time
(Our Na^ons glory, and our N^^ions crime.)
When the first Monarch of this happy Isle*
Moved with the ruin of so brave a pile,
This work of cost and pie^y begun
To be accomplished by his glorious Son:
Who all that came within the ample thought
Of his wise sire, has to perfection brought.
He like Amphion makes those quarries leap
Into fair figures from a consus'd heap:
For in his art of Regiments is found
A power like that of harmony in sound.
Those antique minstrels sure were Charles like Kings,
Cities their lutes, and full jects hearts their strings;
On which with so divine a hand they struck
Consent of motion from their breath they took.
So all our minds with his conspire to grace
The Gentiles great Apostle, and deface
Those State observing sheds, that like a chain
Seemed to confine and fetter him again;
Which the glad Saint shakes off at his command
As once the viper from his facred hand:
So joys the aged Oak when we divide
The creeping lvy from his injured side.
Ambition rather would effect the same
Of some new structure; to have (...) her name
Two distant virtues in one act we find
The modesty, and greatness of his mind;
Which not content to be above the rage
And injury of all impairing age,
In its own worth secure, does higher clime,
And things half swallowed from the jaws of time
Reduce an earnest of his grand design
To frame no new Chuch, but the old resine:
Which Spouse like may with comely grace command
(...) then by force of argument or hand.
For doubtful reason few can apprehend,
And War brings ruin, where it should amend.
But beauty with a bloodlesse conquest finds
A welcome sovereignty in rudest minds.
Not ought which Shebas wondering Queen beheld
Amongst the works of Solomon excelled,
His ships and building; emblems of a heart
Large both in magnanimity and art:
While the propitious heavens this work attend,
Long wanted showers they forget to send;
As if they meant to make it understood
Of more importance then our vital food.
The Sun which rises to salute the quire,
Already finished, setting shall admire
How private bounty could so far extend;
The King built all, but Charles the Western end:
So proud a fabric to devotion given,
At once it threatens and obliges heaven.
Laomedon that had the gods in pay,
Neptune, with him that rules the sacred day,
Could no such structure raise, Troy walled so high,
Th'Atrides might as well have forced the sky.
Glad, though amazed, are our neighbor Kings
To see such power employed in peaceful things,
They list not urge it to the dreadful field,
The task is easier to destroy, then build,
of the danger of His Majesty (being Prince) escaped all the rode at Saint
An^tere.
Nor had his Highness bid farewell to Spain,
And reached the sphere of his own power the main*
With British bounty in his ship he sea^s,
Th'Hesperian Princes, his amazed guests;
To find that watery wildernesle exceed
The entertainment of their great Madrid.
Healths to both Kings attended with he rore
Of Cannons echoed from th'effrightod shore;
With loud, esemblance of his thunder prove
Bacchus the seed of cloud compelling love;
W^ile to his harp divine, Arion sings
The loves and conquests of our Albion Kings,
Of the fourth Edward was his noble song,
Fierce, goo^ly, valiant, beautiful and young.
He rent the Crown from vanquished Henry's head,
Raised the while rose, and trampled on the red:
Till love triumphing ore the victors prids,
Brought Mars and Warwick to the conquered side:
Neglected Warwick (whose bold hand like fate
Gives and resumes the Scepter of our State)
Wooes for his master, and with double shame
Himself deluded, mocks the Princely dame.
The lady Bona whom just anger burns,
And foreign was with civil rage returns:
Ah spare) our swords where beauty is too blame,
Love gave th'affront, and must repair the same:
When France shall boast of her whose conquering cies
Have made the best of English hearts their prize;
Have power to alter the decree of fate,
And change again the councels of our State.
What the Proph^tick muse intends alone
To him that feels the secret wound is known:
With the sweet sound of this harmonious lay
About the keele delighted Dolphins play:
Too sure a sign of Seas ensuing rage,
Which must anon this Royal troop engage:
To whom soft sleep seems more secure and sweet
Within the Town commanded by our fle^t.
These mighty Peers placed in the gilded Barge,
Proud with the burden of so brave a charge;
With painted oars the youth begin to sweep
Neptunes smooth face, and cleave the yelding deep,
Which soon becomes the seat of sudden war
Between the wind and tide that siercely jar;
As when a sort of lusty shepherds try
Their force at football, care of victory
Makes them salute so rudely breast to breast,
That their encounters seem too rough for jest.
They ply their feet, and still the restless ball
Tossed too and fro is urged by them all.
So fares the doubtful Barge't wixt tide and winds,
And like effect of their contention ^inds;
Yet the bold Britains s^ill securely rowed,
Charles and his virtue was their sacred load:
Then which a greater pledge heaven could not give
That the good boat, this tempest should outlive:
But storms increase, and now no hope of grace
Among them shines, save in the Princes face.
The rest resign their courage, skill and sight
To danger, horror, and unwelcome night.
The gentle vessel wont with state and pride
On the smooth back of silver Thames to ride;
Wanders Astonished in the angry maine
As Titans car did, while the golden rain
Filled the young hand of his adventrous son
When the whole world an equal hazard run
To this of ours: the light of whose desire,
Waves threaten now, as that was skar'd by fire,
The impatient sea grows impotent and raves
That (night assisting) his impetuons waves
Should find resistance from so light a thing:
These surges ruin, those our safety bring.
The Oppressed vestell does the charge abide,
Only because as^ail'd on every side.
So men with rage and passion set on fire,
Trembling for haste impeach their mad desire.
The pale Iberians had expired with fear:
But that their wonder did divert their care,
To see the Prince with danger moved no more
Then with the pleasures of their court before.
God-like his courage seemed whom nor delight
Could soften, nor the face of death affright.
Next to the power of making tempests cease
Was in that storm, to have so calm a peace.
Great Maro could no greater tempest feign
When the loud winds usurping on the maine;
For angry Juno labored to destroy
The hated relics of confounded Troy:
His bold Eneas, on like billows tossed
In a tall ship, and all his Countries lost:
Dissolves with fear, and both his hands upheld,
Proclaims them happy whom the Greeks had quel'd*
In honorable sight our Hero set
In a small shallow fortune in his debt;
So nearo a hope of Crowns and Scepters more
Then ever Priam, when he slourish'd, wore
His loins yet full of ungot Princes, all
His glory in the bud; lets nothing fall,
That argues fear: if any thought anoyes
The gallant youth, it is loves untasted joy^s,
And dear remembrance of that fatal glance,
For which he lately pawned his heart in France:
Where he had seen a brighter Nymph then she
That sprung out of his present foe; the sea
That noble ardor more then mortal fire,
The conquered ocean could not make expire:
Nor angry Thetis, raise her waves above
The heroique Prince, his courage, or his love,
It Was indignation, and not fear he felt,
The shrine should perish where that Imaged welt.
Ah love forbid, the noblest of thy strain
Should not survive to let her know his pain:
Who nor his peril minding, nor his slame,
Is entertained with some less serious game
Among the bright Nimphs of the Gallique Court,
All highly borne, obsequious to her sport:
They roses seem within their early pride,
But half reveal, and half their beauties hide.
She the glad morning which her beams does throw,
Upon their smiling lea^es, and gild them so:
Like brihht Aurora, whose refulgent Ray
Foretells the fervor of ensuing day:
And warnes the shepherd with his ^locks retreat
To leafie shadows from the threatened heat.
From Cupids string of many shasts that fled
Winged with those plumes which noble same had shed:
As through the wondering world she flew and told
Of his adventures haughty, brave and bold:
Some had already touched the Royal maid,
But loves first summons seldom are obeyed,
Light was the wound the Princes care unknown,
She might not, would not, yet reveal her own.
His glorious name had so possessed her ears,
That with delights, those antique tales she hears
Of Inson, Thesous, and such Worthies old,
As with his story best resemblance hold.
And now she viewes, as on the wall it hung
What old Musens so divinely sung:
Which art with life and love did so inspire
That she discernes, and favors that desire:
Which there provokes th'adventrous youth to swim
And in Leanders dangers pities him;
Whose not new love alone but fortune seeks
To srame his story like that amorous Greeks.
For from the stern of some good ship appears,
A friendly light which moderates their fears:
New courage from reviving hope they take,
And climbing ore the waves that taper make;
On which the hope of all their lives depends,
As his on that fair Heroes hand extends.
The ship at anchor like a fixed rock
Breaks the proud billows which her large sides knock;
Whose rage restrained foming higher swells,
And from her port the weary barge repells;
Threatening to make her forced out again,
Repeat the dangers of the troubled maine.
Twice was the cable hurled in vain; the fates
Would not be moved for our sister States:
For England is the third successful throw,
And then the Genius of that Land they know:
Whose Prince must be (as their own books devise)
Lord of the Scene, where now the danger lies.
Well sung the Roman Bard, all human things
Of dearest value, hang on slender strings.
O see the then ^ole hope, and in design
Of heaven our joy supported by a line:
Which for that instant was heavens care above
The chain that's fixed to the throne of Jove;
On which the fabric of our world depends,
One linck dissolved, the whole creation ends,
To the QUEEN, occasioned upon fight of her MAJESTY'S Picture.
WEll fare the hand which to our humble sight
Presents that beauty which the dazzling light
Of Royal splendour hides from weaker eyes:
And all excess (save by this art) denies.
Here only we have courage to behold
This beam of glory, here we dare unfold
In numbers thus the wonders we conceive;
The gracious Image seeming to give leave
Propitious stands, vouchsafing to be seen;
And by our muse saluted Mighty Queen*
In whom th'extreams of power and beauty move
The Queen of Britain and the Queen of Love.
As the bright Sun (to which we owe no sight)
Of equal glory to your beauties light,
Is wisely placed in so sublime a seat
T'extend his light, and moderate his heat.
So happy' it is you move in such a sphere
As your high Majesty with awful fear,
In humane breasts might qualify that fire
Which kindled by those eyes had flamed higher,
Then when the scorched world like hazard run
By the approach of the ill guided Sun.
No other Nimphs have title to men's hearts,
But as their meannesse larger hope imparts:
Your beauty more the fondest lover moves
With admiration then his private loves;
With admiration. for a pitch so high
(Save sacred Charles his) never love durst fly.
Heaven that preferred a Scepter to your hand
Favored our freedom, more then your command.
Beauty had crowned you, and you must have bin
The whole worlds mistress, other then a Queen.
All had bin Rivals; and you might have spared,
Or killed and tyrannized without a guard.
No power achieved, either by arms or birth
Equals loves empire, both in heaven and earth.
Such eyes as yours, on Jove himself have thrown
As bright and fierce a lightning as his own:
Witness our Jove prevented by their flame
In his swift passage to the ^esperian dame.
When (like a Lion) finding in his way
To some intended spoil a fairer prey.
The Royal youth pursuing the report
Of beauty, found it in the Gallique Court:
There public care with private passion fought
A doubtful combat in his noble thought.
Should he confess his greatness, and his love,
And the free faith of your great brother prove.
With his Achates breaking through the cloud
Of that disguise which did their graces shroud;
And mixing with those gallants at the ball,
Dance with the Ladies and outshine them all:
Or on his journey ore the mountains ride;
So when the fair Le^cothee he espied
To check his steeds; impatient Phoebus carn'd,
Though all the world was in his wars concerned,
What may hereafter her meridian do,
Whose dawning beauty warmed his bosom so:
Not so divine a flame, since deathlesse gods
Forbore to visit the defiled abodes
Of men, in any mortal breast did burn,
Nor shall till piety and they returene.
The Apology of sleep:
For not approaching the Lady who can do any thing but sleep when she pleases.
MY charge it is, those breaches to repair
Which nature takes from sorrow, toil and care,
Rest to the limbs and quiet, I conser
On troubled minds; but naught can add to her
Whom heaven and her transcendent thoughts have placed
Above those ills which wretched mortals taste.
Bright as the deathlesse gods, and happy she
From all that may infringe delight, is free;
Love at her Royal fe^t his quiver lays,
And not his mother with more haste obeyes.
Such real pleasures, such true joys suspense,
What dream can I present to recompense?
Should I with lightning fill her a wfull hands,
And make the clouds seem all at her commands;
Or place her in Olimpus top, a guest
Among th'mortalls who with Nectar feast:
That power would seem that entertainment short
Of the true splendour of her present Court;
Where all the joys and all the glories are
Of three great Kingdoms, severed from the care,
I that of sumes and humid vapors made,
Ascending do the seat of sen^e invade.
No cloud in so serene a mansion find
To over-cast her ever shining mind,
Which holds resemblance with those spotless skies,
Where flowing Nilus want of rain supplies.
That crystal heaven, where Phoebus never shrouds
His golden beams, nor wraps his face in clouds.
But what so hard which numbers cannot force,
So stoops the moon, and rivers change their course.
The bold Moenian made me dare to steep
Jove's dreadful temples in the dew of sleep.
And since the Muses do invoke my power.
I shall no more decline that sacred bower
Where Gloriana their great mistress lies,
But gently taming those victorious eyes,
Charm all her senses; till the joy full Sun
Without a rival hal^e his course has run:
Who while my hand that ^airer light consines
May boast himself the brightest thing that shines.
The Country to my Lady of Carlisle.
Madam:
OF all the sacred Muse inspired,
Orpheus alone could with the woods comply
Their rude inhabitants his song admired,
And natures self in those that could lie.
Your beauty next our solitude invades,
And warms us shining, through thickest shades.
Nor ought the tribute which the wondering Cou^^
Paies your fair eyes, prevail with you o^ scorn
The answer and consent to the report
Which eccho-like the Country does return.
Mirrors are taught to flatter, but our springs
Present th'impartiall images of things.
A rural judge disposed of beautics prize,
A simple shepherd was preferred to Jove,
Down to the mountains from the partial skies
Came Iano, Pallas, and the Queen of Love,
To plead for that which was so justly given
To the bright Carlisle of the Court of Heaven,
Catlile a name which all our words are taught,
Loud as his Amarillis to resound.
Carlisle a name which on the bark is wrought
Of every tree that's worthy of the wound.
From Phoebus rage, our shadows, and our streams,
May guard us better then from Carliles beams.
The Countess of Carlisle in mourning.
When from black clouds no part of sky is clear
But just so much as lets the Sun appear:
Heavens then would seem thy image, and reslect
Those sable vestments, and that bright aspect.
A spark of virtue by the deepest shade
Of sad adversity is fairer made;
Nor less advantage does thy beauty get
A Venus rising from a sea of jet.
Such was the appearance of new formed light
While yet it strugled with eternal night:
Then mourn no more lest thou admit increase
Of glory by the noble Lords deccase.
We find not that the laughter loving dame
Mourned for Anchises; ^ was enough she came
To grace the mortal with her deathlesse bed,
And that his living eyes such beauty fed:
Had she bin there, untimely joy through all
Men's hearts diffused, had marred the sunerall.
Those eyes were made to banish grief: as well
Bright Phoebus might affect in shades to dwell,
As they to put on sorrow; nothing stands
But power to grieve, exempt from thy commands:
If thou lament, thou must do so alone
Griese in thy presence, can lay hold on none:
Yet still persi^t the memory to love
Of that great Mercury of our mighty Jove:
Who by the power of his enchanting tongue
Swords from the hands of threatening Monarchs wrung
War he presented, orsoon made it cease,
Instructing Princes in the arts of peace:
Such as made Sheba's curious Queen resort
To the large hearted Hebrews famous Court.
Had Homer sat among his wondering guests,
He might have learned at those stupendous feasts,
With greater bounty, and more sacred state.
The banquet of the gods to celebrate.
But O! what elocution might he use,
What potent charms that could so soon infuse
His absent masters love into the heart
Of Henrietta for cing her to part
From her loved brother, Country, and the Sun,
And like Camilla ore the waves to run
Into his arms, while the Parisian dames
Mourn for their ravished glory at her slames?
No less amazed then the amazed stars,
When the bold charmer of Theslalia wars
With heaven it self, and numbers does repeat,
Which call discending Cinthia from her seat.
In answer to, etc.
What ^ury has provoked thy wit to da^e
with Diomed, to wound the queen of love
Thy mistress envy, or thine own detpair?
Not the just Pallas in thy heast did move.
So blind a rage with such a different fate,
He honor won, where thou have purchased ^^re
She gave assistance to his Trojanfoe;
Tho^ that without a rival thou maicst love*
Do to the beauty of thy Lady owe,
While after her the gazing world does move
Can thou not be content to love alone,
Or is thy mistress not content with one?
Have thou not read of fairy Arthurs shield,
Which but disclosed, amazed the weaker eyes
Of proudest foe, and won the doubtful field?
So shall thy Rebel wit become her prize.
Should thy Iambecks swell into a book,
All were con^uted with one Radiant loook.
Heaven he obliged that place her in the skies,
Rewarding Phoebus, for inspiring so
His noble brain by likening to those eyes
His joyful beams, but Phoebus is thy foe:
And neither ayds thy fancy not thy sight,
So ill thou rim'st against so fair a light.
On my Lady Dorothy Sidneyes Picture.
Such was Philo^lea, and such Dorus flame,
The matchless Sidney that immortal frame
Of perfect beauty on two pillars placed;
Not his high fancy could one pattern graced:
With such extremes of excellence compose
Wonders so distant in one face disclose:
Such cheerful modesty, such humble state,
Moves certain love, but with as douotfull fate;
As when beyond our greedy reach we see
Inviting fruit on too sublime a tree.
All the rich flowers through his Arcadia found
Amazed we see, in this one garland bound.
Had but this copy which the Artists took
From the fair picture of that noble Book,
Stood at Calanders the brave friends had jarr'd,
And Rivalls made, the ensuing story marred.
Just nature first instructed by his thought
In his own house thus practiced what he taught.
This glorious piece transcend^ what he could think:
So much his blood is nobler then his ink.
To Vandike.
RAre Artisan, whose pensill moves
Not our delights alone, but loves:
From thy shop of beauty, we
Slaves return that entered free.
The headless lover does not know
Whose eyes they are that wound him so:
But con^ounded with thy art,
Inquires her name that has his heart:
Another who did long refrain
Feels his old wound bleed fresh again;
With dear remembrance of that face,
Where now he reads new hopes of grace:
Nor scorn, not cruelty does find,
But gladly suffers a false wind
To blow the ashes of despair
From the reviving brand of care:
Fool that forget'st her stubborn look,
This softness from thy finger took:
Strange that thy hand should not inspire
The beauty only but the fire:
Not the form alone and grace,
But act and power of a face:
May thou yet thy self as well,
As all the world beside excel;
So thou (...) truth rehearse
(Tha^ I may m^ke it live in verse)
Why tho^ could not at one assay
That face to after times convey,
Which this (...); was it thy wit
To make her of before thee fit?
Cons^sle* and we will forgive thee this,
For who would not repeat that bliss,
And frequent sight of such a dame
Buy with the hazard of his same?
Yet who can tax thy blamelesle skill,
Though thy good hand had failed still?
When natures self so often erres,
She for this many thousand years
Seems to have practiced with much care,
To frame the race of women fair;
Yet never could a perfect birth
Produce before to grace the earth:
Which waxed old ere it could see
Her that amazed thy art and thee.
But now'us done, O let me know
Where those immortal colors grow,
That could this deathlesle piece compose
In lillies, or the sading role:
No for this thest thou have clim'd higher
Th^n did Prometheus for his fire.
As Pens-hurst.
While in this Park I sing, the listening Dee^e
Attend my passion, and forget to fear.
When to the Beeches I report my slame,
They bow their heads as if they felt the same:
To Gods appealing, when I reach their bowrs
With loud complaints, they answer me in showrs,
To thee a wild and cruel soul is given,
More de^s then trees, and prouder then the heaven.
Loves so prof^st, why do thou falsely feign
Thy self a Sidney? from which noble strain
He sprung, that could so far ^x^l^ the name
Oflove, and warm our Nation with his slame:
That all we can ^f love or high desire,
Seems but the smoke of amorous Sidneyes fire:
Nor call her mother who so well do prove,
One breast may hold both chastiry and love:
Never can she, that so exceeds the spriag
In joy and bounty, be supposed to bring
One so destructive, to no humane stock
We owe this fierce unkindnesse; but the rock,
That cloven rock produced thee, by whose side
Nature to recompense the fatal pride
Ofsuch stern beauty, placed those healing springs
Which not more help then that destruction brings,
Thy heart no ruder then the rugged stone,
I might like Orpheus with my numerous moan
Melt to compassion; now my traitrous song,
With thee conspires to do the singer wrong:
While thus I suffer not my self to lose
The memory of what augments my woes:
But with my own breath still soment the sire
Which slames as high as fancy can aspire.
This last complaint the indulgent ears did pierce
Of just Apollo President of verse
Highly concerned, that the Muse should bring
Damage to one whom he had taught to sing:
Thus he advised me on yon aged tree,
Hang up thy lute, and high thee to the sea,
That there with wonders thy diverted mind
Some truce at least my with affection find.
Ah cruel Nymph from whom her humble swain
Flies for relief unto the raging maine:
And from the winds and tempests does expect
A milder fate then from her cold neglect:
Yet there he will pray that the unkind may prove
Blessed in her choice, and vows this endless love
Springs from no hope of what she can confer
But from those gifts which heaven has heaped on her.
At Pens-hurst.
HAd Dorothea lived when mortals made
Choice of their deities, this sacred shade
Had held an altar to her power that gave
The peace and glory, which these alleys have
Embroydred so with flowers where she stood,
That it became a garden of wood:
Her presence has such more then humane grace
That it can civilize the rudest place,
And beauty too, and order can impart
Where nature nere intended it, nor art.
The plants acknowledge this, and her admire
No less then those of old did Orpheus Lire:
If she sit down with tops all toward her bowed.
They round about her into arbours crowd:
Or if she walk, in even ranks they stand
Like some well marshalled and obsequious band.
Amphion so made stones and timber leap
Into fair figures from a confused heap:
And in the symetry of her parts is found
A power like that of harmony in sound.
Ye^ lof^y beeches tell this matchless dame
That if together ye fe^d all on one slame;
It could not equalize the hundred part
Of what her eyes have kindled in my heart.
Go boy and carve this passion on the bark
Of yonder tree, which stands the sacred mark
Of noble Sidneys birth; when such beninge,
Such more then mortal making stars did shine:
That there they cannot bu^ for ever prove
The monument and pledge of humble love:
His humble love whose hope shall nere rise higher
Then for a pardor that he dares admire.
To my Lord of Lei^^ster.
NOt that thy trees at Pens-hurst groan
Oppressed with their timely load,
And seem to make their silent moan,
That their great Lord is now abroad:
They to delight his taste or eye
Would spend themselves in fruit and dye.
Not that thy harmless Dear repine,
And think themselves unjustly stain
By any other hand then thine,
Whose arrows they would gladly stain:
No nor thy frien^s which hold too dear
That peace with France which keeps thee there;
All these are less then that great cause,
Which none exacts your presence here,
Wherein there meet the diverse laws
Of publiqae and domestique care.
For one bright Nymph our youth contend^.
And on your prudent choice depends.
Not the bright shield of Thetis sun,
For which such steroe debate did rise,
That the great Ajax, Telemon
^^efus'd to live without the prize.
Those Achave Peers did more engage,
Then she the gallants of our age.
That beam of beauty which begun
To warm us so when thou were here,
Now scorches like the raging sun
When Syri^s does first appear.
O six this slame, and let despair
Redeem the rest from endless care^
To my young Lady Lucy Sidney.
Why came I so untimely forth
Into a world which wanting thee
Could entertain us with no worth
Or shadow of felicity?
That time should me so far remove
From that which I was borne to love.
Yet fairest blossom do not slight
That age which you must know so soon,
The rosy morn resignes her light,
And milder glory to the moon:
And then what wonders shall you do,
Whole dawning beau^y warmes us so?
Hope waits upon the slowry prime,
And summer though it be lestle gay*
Yet is not looked on as a time
Of declination or decay.
For with a full hand that does bring
All that was promised by the spring.
Of the Lady who can sleep when she pleases.
NO wonder sleep from careful lovers ^lyes
To bathe himself in Sacharissa's eyes.
As fair Aftrea once from earth to heaven
By strife and loud impiety was driven:
So with our plaints offended, and our tears
Wife Somnus to that Paradise repaires,
Waits on her will, and wretches does forsake
To court the nymph for whom those Wretches Wake:
More proud then Phoe^us of his throne of gold
Is the sost god those softer lims to hold:
Nor would exchange with love to hide the skies
In darkning clouds the power to close her eyes:
Eyes which so far all other lights control,
They Warm our mortal parts, but these our soul:
Let her free spirit whose unconquered breast
Holds such deep quiet and untroubled rest:
Know that though Venus and her son should spare
Her Rebel heart, and never teach her care:
Yet Hymen may enforce her vigils keep,
And for another joy suspend her sleep.
Of the mis-repore of her being painted.
As when a sort of Wolves infelt the night
With their wild howlings at fair Cinthia's light,
The noise may chase sweet slumber from our eyes,
But never reach the mistress of the skies:
So with the news of Sacharissa's wrongs,
Her vexed servants blame those envious tongu^^.
Call love to witness that no painted fire
Can scorch men so, or kindle such desire:
While unconcerned she seems moved no more
With this new malice then our loves before:
But from the height of her great mind looks down
On both our passions without smile or frown:
So little care of what is done below
Has the bright dame whom heaven affects so,
Paints her: it is true with the same hand which spreads
Like glorious colors through the flowery m^ads.
When lavish nature with her best attire
Clothes the gay spring, the s^ason of desire.
Paints her, it is true, does her cheek adorn
With the same art wherewith she paints the morn:
With the same art wherewith she gildeth so
Those painted clouds which form Thaumantias ^ow.
Of her passing through a crowd of people.
AS in old Chaos Heaven with earth confused,
And stars with rocks together crushed and bruis'^.
The Sun his light no further could extend
Then the next hill which on his shoulders leaned:
So in this throng bright Sacharissa fared,
Oppressed by those who strove to be her guard:
As ships though never so obsequious, fall
Foul in a tempest on their Admiral:
A greater ^avour this disorder brought
Unto her servants then their a w^^ll thought
Durst entertain, when thus compelled they pressed
The yielding marble of her snowy br^ast:
While love insults disguised in a cloud,
And welcome force of the unruly crowd.
So th'amorous tree while yet the air is calm.
Just distance keeps from his desired palm.
But when the wind her ravished branches throws
Into her arms, and mingles all their bows:
Though loath he seems her tender leaves to press.
More loath he is that friendly storm should cease:
From whose rude bounty, he the double use
At once receives of pleasure and excuse.
SONG
SAy lovely dream, where could thou find^
Shades to counterfeit that face?
Colors of this glorious kind,
Come not from any mort^ll race.
In heaven it self thou sure were dre^t
With that Angell-like disguise*
Thus deluded am I blessed,
And see my joy with closed eyes.
But at this Image is too kind
To be other then a dream
Cruel Sacharissa's mind
Never put on that sweet extreme.
Fair dream if thou intend'st me grace
Change that heavenly face of thine,
Paint despised love in thy face,
And make it to appear like mine.
Pale, wan, and meager let it look,
With a pity moving shape,
Such as wander by the brook
Of Lethe, or from graves escape.
Then to that matchless Nymph appear,
In whose shape thou shinest so
Softly in her sleeping ear,
With humble words express my woe.
Perhaps from greatness, state, and pride,
Thus surprised she may ^all:
Sleep does disproportion hide,
And death resembling equals all.
SONG.
BEhold the brand of beauty tossed;
See how the motion does delate the flame:
Delighted love his spoils does boast,
And triumph in this game.
Fire to no place confined,
Is both our wonder and our fear,
Moving the mind,
Like lightning hurled through the air.
High heaven the glory does increase
Of all her shining lamp this artfull way,
The Sun in figures such as these
Joys with the Moon to play.
To the sweet strains they advance,
Which do result from their own fear*
As the Nimphs dance,
Moves with the numbers which she hears.
To Amorett.
Fair that you may truly know
What you un^o T^irsis owe,
I will tell you how I do
Sacharissa love and you.
Joy salutes me when I set
My ble^t eyes on Amorett:
But with wonder I am struck
When I on the other look.
If sweet Amoret complains,
I have sense of all her pains;
But for Sacharissa, I
Do not only grieve, but die,
All that of my self is mine
Lovely Amoret is thine;
Sacharissa's captive feign
Would untie his iron chain.
And those scorching beams to (...)
To thy gentle shadow run:
If the soul had free election
To dispose of her affection,
I would not thus long have borne
Haughty Sacharissa's scorn;
But it is some pure power above,
Which controuls our will in love.
If not love, a strong desir^
To cr^ate and spread that fire
In my br^asts, solicites me
Beaut^ous Am^ret for thee.
It Is amazement more then love
Which her radiant eyes do move;
If less splendour wait on thine,
Yet they so benignly shine.
I would turn my dazelled sight
To behold their milder light,
But as hard it is to destroy
That high slame, as to enjoy;
Which, how easily I may do
Heaven (as easily ^cal'd) do'es know:
Amoret as sweet and good
As the most delicious food,
Which but tasted does impart
Life and goodness to the heart.
Sacharissa's beauty, wine,
Which to madness does incline.
Such a liquor as no brain
That is mortal can sustain.
Scarce can I to Heaven excuse
That Devotion which I use
Unto that adored Dame;
For it is not unlike the same
Which I thither ought to send;
So that if it could take end
It Would to Heaven it self be due
To succeed her and not you,
Who already have of me
All that is not Idolatry;
Which though not so fierce a slame
Is longer like to be the same.
Then smil^ on me, and I will prove,
Wonder is sho^ter lived, then Love.
The story of Phoebus and Daphne applied.
THirsis a youth of the inspired train,
Fair Sacharissa loved, but loved in vain:
Like Ph^bus s^ng the no l^sse amorous boy,
Like Daphne she as lovely and as coy:
With numbers he the flying Nymph pursues,
With numbers such as Phoebus self might use:
Such is the chase when love and fancy leads
Ore craggy mountains and through slowry meads;
Invoke to testify the lovers care,
Or form some image of his cruel fair:
Urged with his fury like a wounded Dear,
Ore these he fled, and none approaching near;
Had reached the nymph with his harmonious lay,
Whom all his charms could not incline to stay.
Yet what he sung in his immortal strain,
Though unsuccessefull, was not sung in vain:
All but the Nymph that should redress his wrong,
Attend his passion, and approve his song.
Like Phoebus thus acquiring unsought praise,
He caught at love, and filled his arm with bays.
Of Mrs. Ardea.
BEhold, and listen while the fair
Breaks in sweet sounds and wil^ing air^.
And with her own breath fanns the fire
Which her bright eyes do sust inspire:
What reason can that love control,
Which more then one way courts the soul?
So when a slash of lightning falls
On our abodes, the danger calls
For humane aid, which hopes the flame
To conquer, though from heaven it came.
But if the wind with that conspire,
Men strive not but deplore the fire.
On the discovery of a Ladies painting.
PIgmaleons fate reverst is mine,
His marble love took flesh and blood;
All that I worship is divine:
That beauty now it is understood,
Appears to have no more of life
Then that whereof he framed his wife.
As women yet who apprehend
Some sudden cause of (...) fear,
Although that seeming cause take end.
And they behold no danger near:
A shaking through their limbs they find
Like leaves saluted by the wind.
So though the beauty do appear,
No beauty which amazed me so,
Yet from my brea^t I cannot tear
The passion which from thence did grow*
Nor yet out of my fancy raze
The print of that supposed face.
A real beauty though too near,
The fond Narcissus did admire;
I do^^ on that which is no where,
The sign of (...) ^teeds my fire:
No mortal fl^me was ^^e so cruel
As this which thus surviv^s the fuel.
To a Lady from whom he received a Silver Pen.
Madam,
INtending to have tried
The silver favor which you gave,
In ink the shining point I did,
And drencht it in the sable wave:
When grieved to be so fowly stained,
On you it thus to me compla^^'d.
Suppose you had deserved to take
From her fair hand so fair a boon,
Yet how deserved I to make
So ill a change, who ever won
Immortal prai^e for what I wrought,
Instructed by her noble thought.
I that e^pr^ss^d her commands
To migh^y Lords and Princely Dames,
Alway^s most welcome to their hands,
Proud that I would record their names.
Must now be taught an humble style
Some meaner b^^uty to beguile.
So I the wronged pen to please,
Make it my humble thanks express
Unto your Ladyship in these,
And now it is forced to confess
That your great self did nere indite;
Nor that to one more noble write.
On a bread of diverse colors, woven by four Ladies.
TWice twenty slender virgin finger twine,
This curious web where all their fancies shine;
As Nature them, so they this shade have wrought
Soft as their hands, and various as their thought.
Not Juno's bird when his fair train dispread,
He woes the female to his painted bed:
No not the bow which so adorns the skies,
So glorious is, or boasts so many dies.
On the head of a Stag.
SO we some antique Hero's strength
Learn by his lances, weight and length;
As these vast beams express the beast,
Whose shadie brows alive they dressed.
Such game while yet the world was new,
The migh^y Nimrod did pursue.
What (...) of our feeble race,
Or dogs dare such a (...) chase?
Resembling with each blow he strikes
The change of a whole troop of Pikes:
O fer^ile head which every year
Could such a crop of wonder bear I
The teeming ea^^h did never bring
So soon, so hard, so huge a thing;
Which might it never have been cast
Each years growth added to the last:
These lofty branches had supplied
The earths bold sons prodigious pride:
Heaven with these engines had bin sealed
When mountains heaped on mountains failed.
To a Lady in retirement.
SEes not my love how time resumes
The glory which he (...) these flowers;
Though none should ^aste their sweet perfumes,
Yet must they live but some few hours,
Time what we forbear devoures.
Had Hellen, or the Egyptian Queen,
Bin (...) so (...) of their graces,
The (...) beauties must at length have bin
The (...) of age which finds out faces
In the most retired places.
Should some malignant planet bring
A barren drought or ceaselesse shower
Upon the Autumn or the Spring;
And spare us neither fruit nor flower
Winter would not stay an hour.
Could the resolve of loves neglect
Preserve ye from the violation
Of coming years, then more respect
Were due to so divine a fashion,
Nor would I divulge my passion.
The Misers speech in a Mask.
BAlls of this metal slack'd Atlanta's pace,
And on the amo^ous youth bestowed the race:
Venus, the Nymphs mind measuring by her own,
Whom the rich spoils of Cities overthrown
Had prostrated to Mars could well advise
Th'adventrous lover how to gain the prise:
Nor le^^e may Jupiter to gold ascribe,
When he turned himself into a bribe:
Who can blame ^Diana or the brazen tower,
That they which stood not the Almighty shower;
Never till then did love make Jove pat on
A form more bright and noble then his own?
Nor were it just would he resume that shape
That slack devotion should his thunder escape.
^Twas not revenge for grieved Apollos wrong
Those asses ea^s on Mida's Temple hung;
But fond repentance of his happy wish,
Because his meat grew metal like his dish.
Would Bacchus bless me so, I Would constant hold
Unto my wish, and dye creating gold.
To my Lord of Northumberland upon the death of his Lady.
TO this great loss a Sea of Tears is due,
But the whole debt not to be paid by you:
Charge not your self with all, nor render vain
Those showers the eyes of us your servants rain.
Shall grief contract the largeness of that heart,
In which nor fear not anger ha^ a part?
Virtue would blush, if time should boast (which cries,
Her sole child dead their tender mothers eyes)
Your minds relief, where reason triumphs so
Over all passions, that they nere could grow
Beyond their limits in your noble breast,
To harm another, or impeach your rest.
This we observed, delighting to obey
One who did never from his great self stray:
Whose mild example seemed to engage
Th'obsequious Seas, and teach them not to rage.
The brave Emilius his great charge laid down,
(The force of Rome, and fate of Macedon)
In his lo^t sons did feel, the cruel stroke
Of changing fortune, and thus highly spoke
Before Romes people; we did often implore
That if the Heavens had any ill in store,
For your Emil^us they would power it still
On his own House, and let you flourish still.
You on the barren Sea (my Lord) have spent,
Whole Springs and Summers to the public lent:
Suspended all the pleasures of your life,
And shortened the short joy of such a wife.
For which your Countrey's more obliged then
For many lives of old, less happy men.
You that have sac^ific^d to great a part
Of youth and private b^sse, ought to impart
Your sorrow too, and give your friends a right
As well in your affliction, as delight:
Then with Emilian courage bear this cross,
Since public persons only public loss
Ought to affect, and though her form and youth,
Her application to your will and truth,
That noble sweetness, and that humble state
All snatched away by such a hasty fate,
Might give excuse to any common breast,
With the huge weight of so such grief oppressed.
Yet let no portion of your life be stained
With passion, but your character maintained
To the last act; it is enough her Stone
May honored be with superscription
Of the sole Lady, who had power to move
The great Northumberland to grieve and love.
To my Lord Admiral of his late sickness and Recovery.
With joy like ours the Thracian youth invades
Or pheus returning from th^^ Elisian shades,
Embrace the Hero, and his stay implore,
Make it their public suit, he would no more
Desert them so, and for his Spouses sake,
His vanished love t^mpt the Lethean lake:
The La^ye^ (...) ^rightest of that time,
Ambi^^ous all his lo^^y bed to c^^me.
Their doubtful hopes with expectation feed
Who shall the fair Euridice succeed:
Euridice for whom his num^rous moan
Makes listening trees, and salvage mountains groan:
Through ^ll the air his sounding strings dilate
Sorrow like that which touch our hearts of late:
Your pining sickness and your restless pain,
At once the land aff^cting, and the main,
When the glad news that you were Admiral,
Scarce through the Nation spread 'twas feared by all*
That our great Charles, whose wisdom shines in you,
Would be perplexed how to choose anew.
So more then private was the joy and grief,
That at the worst, it gave our souls relief:
That in our age such sense of virtue lived,
They j^y'd so justly, and justly grieved:
(...) her fairest lights eclipsed seems
Her self to suffer in those sharp extremes;
While not from thine alone thy blood retires,
But from those cheeks which all the world admires.
The stem thus threatened, and the sap in thee
Droop all the branches of that noble tree:
Their beauty they and we our loves suspend,
Noug^t can our wishes, save thy health intend:
As lillies overcharged with rain they bend
Their beauteous heads, and with high heaven contend
^old th^e within their snowy arms, and cry
(...) is too faultlesse, and too young to dye:
So like immortalls round about thee they
(...), that they fright approaching death away:
Who would not languish by so fair a train,
To be lamented and restored again?
Or thus withheld, what hasty soul would go,
Though to the blessed, ore young Adonis so?
Fair Venus mourned, and with the precious shower
Of her warm tears cherish't the springing flower.
The next support fair hope of your great name,
And second pillar of that noble frame:
By loss of thee would no advantage have,
But step by step pursues thee to the grave.
And now rel^ntl^sse fate about to end
The line which backward does so far extend,
That antique stock which still the world supplye^
With bravest spirits, and with brightest eyes.
Kind Phoebus interposing bid me say
Such storms no more shall shake that house, but they
Like Neptune, and his Sea-borne niece shall be
The shining glories of the Land and Sea:
With courage guard, and beauty warm our age,
And lovers fill with like Poetique rage.
On the friendship betwixt Sacharissa and Amorett.
TEll me lovely loving pair,
Why so kind, and so severe?
Why so careless of our care,
Only to prove your selves so dear?
By this cunning change of hearts,
You the power of love control,
While the boys deluded darts,
Can arrive at neither soul.
For in vain to either breast
Still beguiled love does come,
Where he finds a foreign g^uest.
Neither of your hearts at home.
Debtors thus with like design,
When they never mean to pay:
That they may the Law decline,
To some friend make all away.
Not the silver Doves that fly,
Yoak't in Cithar^^s carr,
Not the wings that lift so high,
And convey her son so far.
Are so lovely, sweet, and fair,
Or do more enable love,
Are so choicely matched a pair,
Or with more content do move.
A la Malade.
AH lovely Am^ret the care
Of all that know what is good or faire^
Is Heaven become our Rival too,
Had the rich gifts conferred on you.
So amply thence the common end,
Of giving Lovers to pretend.
Hence to this pining sickness
To weary thee to a con^ents meant
Of leaving us) no power is given,
Thy beauties to impair the heaven:
Solicites thee with such a care,
As Roses from their stalks we tare:
When we would still preserve them new,
And fresh as on the bush they grew.
With such a grace you entertain,
And look with such contempt on pain
That languish in you, conquer more,
And wound us deeper then before.
The lightnings which in storms appear,
Scorch more then when the skies are clear.
And as pale sickness does invade
Your frailer part, the breaches made
In that fair lodging still more clear,
Make the bright ghuest your soul appear.
So Nimphs ore pathlesse mountains born,
Their light robes by the brambles torn
From their fair limbs, exposing new
And unknown beauties to the view,
Of following gods increase their flame,
And haste to catch the flying Game.
Of her Chamber.
THey taste of death that do at Heaven arive,
But we this Paradise approach alive.
Instead of death the dart of love does strike,
And renders all within, these walls alike:
The high in titles and the shepherd here
Forgets his greatness, and forgets his fear:
All stand amazed and gazing on the fair
Loose thought of what themselves or others are:
Ambition loose, and have no other scope,
Save Carliles favor to employ their hope.
The Thracian could (though all those tales were true
The bold Greeks tell) no greater wonders do,
Before his feet, so sheep and Lions lay
Fearlesse and wrathlesse while they heard him play
The Gay, the wise, the gallant, and the grave,
Subdued alike all* but one passion have:
No worthy mind but finds in hers there is
Something proportioned to the rule of his:
Whilst she with cheerful, but impartial grace,
(Born for no one, but to delight the race
Of men) like Phoebus, so divides her light,
And warmes us that she stoops not from her height.
Of loving at first sight.
NOt caring to observe the wind,
Or the new sea explore,
Snatched from my self how far behind,
Already I behold the shore.
May not a thousand dangers sleep
In the smooth bosom of this deep?
No: it is so rocklesse, and so clear,
That the rich bottom does appear
Paved all with precious things not torn
From shipwrackt vessels, but there borne.
Sweetness, truth, and every grace,
Which time and youth are wont to teach,
The eye may in a moment reach,
And read distinctly in her face
Some other Nymph with colors faint,
And pensill slow may Cupid paint;
And a weak heart in time destroy,
She has a stamp and prints the boy,
Can with a single look inslame
The coldest breast, the rudest tame.
The self banished.
IT is not that I love you less
Then when before your feet I lay:
But to prevent the sad increase
Of hopeless love, I keep away.
In vain (alas) for every thing
Which I have known belong to you:
Your form does to my fancy bring,
And make my old wounds bleed a^^W.
Whom the spring from the new sun,
Already has a fever got;
Too la^^ ^^gins those shafts to shun
Which Phoebus through his veins has shot.
Too late he would the pain assuage,
And to thick shadows does retire;
About with him he bears the rage,
And in his tainted bl^ud the fire.
But vowed I have, and never must
Your banished servant trouble you;
For if I break you may mistrust
The vow I make to love you too.
Of the Queen.
THe Lark that shuns on lofty bough to build
Her humble nest, lies silent in the field:
But if the promise of a cloudlesse day,
Aurora smiling bids her rise and play:
Then straight she shows 'twas not for want of voice,
Or power to climb, she made so low a choice;
Singing she mounts, her angry wings are stretched
Toward heaven, as if from heaven her note she fetched.
So we retiring from the busy throng,
Use to restrain the ambition of our song;
But since the light which now informs our age
Breaks from the court indulgent to her rage:
Thither my Muse, like bold P^^metheus flies
To light her torch at Gloriana's eyes.
Those sovereign beams which heal the wounded soul,
And all our cares, but once beheld control;
There the p^or lover that has l^ng endured
Some proud Nimphs scorn, of his fond passion cur^d;
Fares like the man who first upon the ground
A glow-worme spied, supposing he had found
A moving Diamond, a breathing stone
(For life it had, and like those jewels shone:)
He held it dear till by the springing day
Informed he threw the worthless worm away.
She saves the lover as we gangreen stay
By cutting hope like a lop't limb away:
This makes her bleeding patients to accuse
High heaven, and these expostulations use:
Could nature then no private woman grace
(Whom we might dare to love) with such a face,
Such a compl^xion, and so radiant eyes,
Such lovely motion, and such sharp replies?
Beyond our reach, and yet within our sight,
What envious power has placed this glorious light?
Thus in a starry night fond children cry
F^^ the rich spangles that adorn the sky,
Which though they shine for ever fixed there,
With light and influence relieve us here.
A^^ her affections are to one incli^'d,
(...) and compassion to mankind:
To whom while she so far ex^ends her grace,
She ^akes but good the promise of her face:
For mercy has (could mercies self be seen)
No (...) then this prop^tious Queen;
Such guard and comfort the distressed find
From her large (...), and from her larger mind,
That whom (...) would ruin, it prefers,
For all the miserable are (...) ^ers.
So the fair tree whereon the Eagle builds
Poor sheep from tempest, and their (...) shields.
The Royal bird possesses, all the bows,
But shade and shelter to the ^lock allows.
Joy of our age, and safety of the next,
For which so often thy fertile womb is ^ext:
Nobly contented, for the public good
To waste thy spirits, and diffu^e thy blood:
What vast hopes may these Islands entertain,
Where Monarchs thus descended are to reign?
Led by commanders of so fair a line,
Our Seas no longer shall our power confine.
A brave Romance who would exactly frame,
First brings his Knight from some immortal Dame:
And then a weapon, and a flaming shield,
Bright as his mothers eyes he makes him weild.
None might the mother of Achilles be,
But the fair pearl, and glory of the Sea.
The man to whom great Maro gives such fame
From the high bed of heavenly Venus came;
And our next Charles, (whom all the stars design
Like wonders to accomplish) springs from thine.
SONG.
Go lovely rose,
Tell her that wastes her time and me,
That now she knows
When I resemble her to thee
How sweet and fair she seems to be.
Tell her that's young,
And shuns to have her grace spied
That had thou sprung
In deserts where no men abide,
Thou must have uncommonded died.
Small is the worth
Of beauty from the light retired;
Bid her come forth,
Suffer her self to be desired,
And not blush so to be admired.
Then dye that she,
The common fate of all things rare
May read in thee
How small a part of time they share,
That are so wondrous sweet and fair.
Thirsis, Galatea.
Th. AS lately I on Silver Thames did ride,
Sad Gal^tea, on the banck I spied:
Such was her look as sorrow taught to shine,
And thus she grac^t me with a voice divine.

Gal. You that can tune your sounding strings so well
Of Ladies beauties, and of love to tell;
Once change your note, and let your Lut^ report
The justest grief that ever touch^t the Court.

Th. Fair Nymph, I have in your delights no ^^^re,
Nor ought to be concerned in your care:
Yet would I sing if I your sorrows knew,
And to my aid invoke no Muse but you.

Gal. Hear then, and let your song augment our gri^^
Which is so great as not to wish relief:
She that had all which nature gives or chance,
Whom fortune joined with virtue to advance,
To all the joys this Island could afford
The greatest Mistress, and the kindest Lord:
Who with the Royal mixed her Noble blood,
And in high grace with Gloriana stood.
Her bounty, sweetness, beauty, goodness, such,
That none ere thought her happiness too much:
So well inclined her favors to confer,
And kind to all, as Heaven had bin to her:
The virgins part, the mother, and the wife,
So well she a^ted in this span of life;
That though few years (too few alas) she told,
She seemed in all things but in beauty old.
As unripe fruit, whose verdant stalks do cleave
Close to the tree, which grieves no less to leave
The smiling pendant which adornes her so,
And (...) Autumn, on the bough should grow:
So (...) her youthful soul not easily fore't.
Or from so fair, so sweet a seat divorc't:
Her fare at once did hasty seem and slow,
At once too cruel and unwilling too.

Th. Under how hard a law are mortals born,
Whom now we engage, we anon must mourn:
What Heaven sets highest, and seems not to prize,
Is soon removed from our wondering eyes:
But since the sisters did so soon untwine
So (...) a thread, (...) strive to piece the line.
Vouchsafe sad Nymph to let me know the Dame,
And to the Muses I Will commend her name:
Make the wide Country echo to your moan,
The listening trees and savage mountains groan:
What rocks not moved when the death is sung
Of one so good, so lovely, and so young.

Gal. 'Twas Hamilton whom I had named before,
But naming her; grief lets me say no more.

Tabula Phoebi and Daphnis.
ARcadia juvenis Thirsis, Phoebique sacerdos,
Ingenti frustra Galateae ardebat amore.
Haud Deus ipse o^^m Daphni majora canebat,
Nec fuit asperior Daphne, neo pulc^rior illa:
Carminibus Phoebo dignis premit ille fugacem
Per rupes, per saxa, volans per florida vates
Pascua, formosam nunc his componere Nimpham,
Hunc illis crudelem insana m^nte solebat:
Audiit illa proculmiserum Citheramque sonant^m,
Audiit at nullis respexit mota querelis;
Ne tamen omnino caneret, desertus ad alta
Sidera perculsi, referunt nova carmina mon^^^;
Sic non quaesitis cumulatus laudibus olim
Elapsa reperit Daphni sua laurea Phoebus.
The battle of the Summer Islands.
Canto I.
What fruit they have, and how heaven smiles
Upon those late discovered lsles.
Aid me Bell^na while the dreadful fight
Betwixt a Nation and two Whales I write:
Seas stained with goar, I sing advent^rous toil,
And how these Monsters did disarme an I^le.
Bermud^^ walled with rocks, who does not know
That happy Island where h^ge Lemons grow,
And Orange trees which golden fruit do bear,
The Hesperian garden boasts of ^^ne so fair?
Where shining pearl, coral, and many a pound
On the rich shore, of Ambergris is found:
The lofty Cedar which to heaven aspires,
The Prince of trees is fuel for their fires:
The smoke by which their loaded spits do turn
For incense, might on sacred Altars burn.
There private roofs on odorous timber borne,
Such as might Palaces for Kings adorn:
The sweet Palmettas, a new Bacchus yield
With leaves as ample as the broadest shield:
Under the shadow of whose friendly boughs
They fit carrowsing, where their liquor grows:
Figs there unplanted through the fields do grow,
Such as fierce Cato did the Romans show;
With the rare fruit inviting them to spoil,
Carthage the mistress of so rich a soil:
The naked rocks are not unfruitful there,
But at some const^nt seasons every year:
Their barren top with loucious food abound,
And with the eggs of various fowls are crowned:
Tobacco is their worst of things which they
To English Landlords as their Tribute pay:
Such is the mould, that the blessed Tennant feeds
On precious fruits, and pays his rent in weeds:
With candid plantines and the jucy Pine,
On choicest Melons and sweet Grapes they dine,
And with Potato's fat their wanton Swine:
Nature these Cates with such a lavish hand
Powers out among them, that our cou^^er Land
Tastes of that bounty, and does Cloth return,
Which not for warmth, but ornament is worn:
For the kind Spring which but salutes us here
Inhabits there, and courts them all the year:
Ripe fruits and blossoms, on the same trees live,
At once they promise what at once they give:
So sweet the air, so moderate the clime,
None sickly lives, or dies before his time.
Heaven sure has kept this spot of earth uncurst
To show how all things were created first:
The tardy plants in our cold Orchards placed,
Reserve their fruits for the next ages taste:
There a small grain in some few months will be
A firm, a lofty, and a spacious tree:
The Parma christi, and the fair Papah,
Now but a seed (preventing natures law)
In half the circle of the hafty year
Project a shade, and lovely fruit do wear:
And as their trees in our dull Region set
But faintly grow, and no perfection get:
So in this Northern tract our hoa^^er throats
Utter unripe and ill constrained notes,
Where the supporter of the Poets style,
Phoebus on them eternally does smile.
O how I long my careless limbs to lay
Under the plantanes shade, and all the day
With amorous eyes my fancy entertain,
Invoke the Muses, and improve my vein:
No passion there in my free breasts should move,
None but the sweet and best of passions love:
There while I sing if gentle love be by
That tunes my lute, and winds the strings so high:
With the sweet sound of Sacharissa's name,
I Will make the listening salvages grow tame.
But while I do these pleasing dreams indite,
I am diverted from the promised ^ight.
Canto II.
Of their affright, and how their foes
Discovered were, this Canto shows.
THough Rocks so high about this Island rise,
That well they may the numerous Turk despise;
Yet is no humane fate exempt from fear
Which shakes their hearts, while through the I Will they hea^
A lasting noise, as horrid and as loud
As thunder makes before it breaks the cloud.
Three days they dread this murmur ere they know
From what blind cause th'unwonted sound may grow:
At length two monsters of unequal size
Hard by the shore a sisher man espies;
Two mighty Whales, which swellings Seas had tossed,
And left them prisoners on the rocky coast,
One as a mountain vast, and with her came
A Cub not much inferior to his Dam:
Here in a poole among the Rocks engaged,
They roared like Lions caught in toils and raged:
The man knew what they were, who heretofore
Had seen the like lie murdered on the shore,
By the wild fury of some tempest cast
The fate of ships and shipwrackt men to taste;
As careless dames whom wine and sleep betray
To frantic dreams their Infants overlay:
So there sometime the raging Ocean fails,
And her own brood exposes when the Whales
Against sharp Rocks like reeling vessels quash't,
Though huge as mountains, are in pieces dash't;
Along the shore their dreadful limbs lie scattered,
Like hills with ear hquakes shaken, torn and shattered:
Heart sure of bras^e they had who tempted first,
Rude Seas that spare not what themselves have nursed.
The welcome news through all the Nation spread,
To sudden joy and hope converts their dread.
What lately was their public terror, they
Behold with glad eyes as a ce^taine prey;
Dispose already of th'untaken spoil,
And as if purchase of their future toil,
These share the bones* and they div^le the oil*
So was the (...) man by the Bear oppressed,
Whose hide he sold before he caught the beast.
They man their Boats, and all their young men arm
With whatsoever may the Monsters harm;
Pikes, holberts, spits and darts, that wound so far
The tools of peace, and instruments of war:
Now was the time for vigrous lads to show
What love or honor could invite them too;
A goodly Theater where rocks are round
With reverend age, and lovely lasses crowned:
Such was the lake which held this dreadful pare
Within the bounds of noble Warwicks share:
Warwick^ bold Earl, then which no title bears
A greater sound among our British Peers:
And worthy he the memory to renew
The fate and honor, to that title due;
Whose brave adventures have transferred his name,
And through the new world spread his growing fame.
But how they fought, and what their valor gained,
Shall in another Ca^^o be contained.
Canto III.
The bl^udy fight, succeslesse toil,
And how the Fish sacked the Isle.
THe Boat which on the first assault did go
Stroke with a harping Iron the younger foe*
Who when he felt his side so rudely goar'd
Loud as the Seas that nourish't him he roared;
As a broad bream to please some curious taste,
While yet alive in boiling water cast;
(...) with unwonted heat, boyles, flings about
The sco^ching brass, and h^rles the liquor out:
So with the barbed Javeling stung, he raves,
And scourges with his tail the suffering waves;
Like fairy Talas with his iron slayle,
He threatens ruin with his pondrous tail;
Dissolving at one stroke the battered Boat,
And down the men fall drenched in the moat:
With every fierce encounter they are forced
To quit their boats, and fare like men unhorst.
The bigger Whale like some huge Carrack lay,
Which wants Sea room, with her foes to play;
Slowly she swims, and when provoked she would
Advance her tail, her head salutes the mud.
The shallow water does her force infringe,
And renders vain her tails impet^ous swinge.
The shining steel her tender sides receive,
And there like Bees they all their weapons leave.
This sees the Cub, and does himself oppose
Betwixt his cumbred mother and her foes:
With desperate courage he receives her wounds,
And men and boats his active tail confounds.
Their surges joined, the Seas with billows fill,
And make a tempest, though the winds be still.
Now would the men with half their hoped prey
Be well content, and wish this cub away:
Their wish they have, he to direct his dam
Unto the gap through which they thither came,
Before her swims, and quits the hostile lake,
A prisoner there, but for his mothers sake.
She by the Rocks compelled to stay behind,
Is by the vastness of her bulks confined.
They shout for joy, and now on her alone
Their fury falls, and all their darts are thrown:
Their lances spent; one bolder then the rest
With his broad sword provoked the sluggish beast:
Her oily side devoures blade and heft,
And there his Steel the bold Bermudian left.
Courage the rest from his example take,
And now they change the color of the lake.
Blood flows in rivers from her wounded side,
As if they would prevent the tardie tide;
And raise the flood to that propitious height,
As might convey her from this fatal straight.
She swims in blood, and blood does spouting throw
To heaven, that Heaven men's cruelties might know.
Their fixed javelings in her side she wears,
And on her back a grove of pikes appears.
You would have thought had you the monster seen
Thus dressed, she had another I sland been:
Roaring she tears the air with such noise,
(As well resembled with conspiring voice
Of routed Armies, when the field is won)
To reach the ears of her escaped son.
He (though a league escaped from the foe)
Hasts to her aid, the pious Trojan so
Neglecting for Creusas life his own,
Repeats the danger of the burning Town,
The men amazed blush to see the seed
Of monsters, humane piety exceed,
Well proves this kindness what the Grecians sung,
That loves bright mother from the Ocean sprung.
Their courage droops, and hopeless now they wish
For composition with th'unconquer'd fish:
So she their weapons would restore again,
Through rocks they would hew her passage to the main.
But how instructed in each others mind,
Or what commerce can men with monsters find.
Not daring to approach their wounded ^o,
Whom her courageous son protected so:
They charge their musket, and with hot desire
Of fell revenge, renew the fight with fire.
Standing alooffe with lead, they bruise the scales,
And tare the flesh of the incensed Whales.
But no success their fierce endeavors found,
Not this way could they give one fatal wound*
Now to their Fort they are about to send
For the loud Engines which their Isle defend.
But what those pieces framed to batter walls
Would have effected on those mighty Whales,
Great Neptune will not have us know, who finds
A tide so high that it relieves his friends.
And thus they parted with exchange of harms,
Much blood the Mon^^ers lost, and they their Arms.
Upon the death of my Lady Rich.
MAy those already cu^st Essexian plains,
Where hasty death and pining sickness raigns,
Prove all a Desert, and none there make stay,
But savage beasts, or men as ill as they.
There the fair light which all our Island graced,
Like Hero's taper in the windows placed;
Such fate from the malignant air did find,
As that exposed to the boystrous wind.
Ah cruel Heaven to snatch so soon away
Her, for whose life had we had time to pray,
With thousand vows and tears we should have sought,
That sad decrees suspension to have wrought.
But we (alas) no whisper of her pain,
Heard till it was sin to wish her here again.
That horrid word at once like lightning spread,
Struck all our ears, The Lady Rich is dead.
Heart rending news, and dreadful to those few
Who her resemble, and her steps pursue.
That death should license have to rage among
The fair, the wise, the virtuous, and the young.
The Paphian Queen from that fierce battle born,
With goared hand and vail so rudely torn:
Like terror did among the immortals breed,
Taught by her wound that God^sses might bleed:
All stand amazed, but (...) the rest
Th'heroique D^me whose happy womb she blessed,
Moved with just grief expostulates with Heaven,
Urging that promise to th'obsequious given,
Of longer life, for nere was pious soul
More apt to obey, more worthy to control.
A skillful eye at once, might read the race
Of Caledonian Monarchs in her face;
And sweet humility her look and mind,
At once were lofty, and at once were kind.
There dwelt the scorn of vice, and pity too,
For those that did what she disdained to do:
So gentle and severe, that what was bad
At once her hatred and her pardon had.
Gracious to all, but where her love was due,
So fast, so faithful, loyal and so true,
That a bold hand as soon might hope to force
The rolling lights of Heaven, as change her course.
Some happy Angel that beholds her there,
Instruct us to record what she was here:
And when this cloud of so^row's over-blown,
Through the wide world we will make her graces known.
So fresh the wound is, and the grief so vast,
That all our art and power of speech is waste.
Here passion swayes; but there the Muse shall raise
Eternal monuments of louder praise.
There our delight complying with her fame,
Shall have occasion to recite thy name,
Fair Sacharissa, and now only fair,
To sacred friendship we will an Altar rear
Such as the Romans did erect of old,
Where on a marble pillar shall be told
The lovely passion each to other bare,
With the resemblance of that matchless pair,
Narciss^s to the thing for which he pined,
Was not more like then yours to her fair mind:
Save that you graced the several part of life,
A spotless Virgin, and a faultlesse wife.
Such was the sweet converse twixt her and you,
As that she holds with her associates now.
How false is hope, and how regardlesse fate,
That such a love should have so short a date?
Lately I saw her sighing part from thee
(Alas that that the last farewell should bell)
So looked Astr^^, her remove designed
On those distressed friends she left behind:
Consent in virtue knit your heart so fast,
That still the knot in spite of death does last:
For as your tears and sorrow-wounded soul
Prove well that on your part this bond is whole:
So all we know of what they do above
Is that they happy are, and that they love;
Let dark oblivion and the hollow grave
Content themselves our frailer thoughts to have:
Well chosen love is never taught to dye,
But with our nobler part invades the sky:
Then grieve no more, that one so heavenly shaped
The crooked hand of trembling age escaped;
Rather since we behold her not decay,
But that she vanished so entire away:
Her wondrous beauty and her goodness merit,
We should suppose that some propitious spirit,
In that Celestial form frequented here,
And is not dead, but ceases to appear*
To the Queen Mother upon her Landing.
GReat Queen of Europe where thy off spring wears
All the chief Crowns, whose Princes are thy heirs
As welcome thou to Sea girt Britains shore*
As ^rst Latona (who fair Cinthia bore)
To Delos was. Here shines a Nymph as bright,
By thee disclosed, with like increase of light.
Why was her joy in Belgia confined?
Or why did you so much regard the wind?
Scarce could the Ocean (though enraged) have tossed
Thy Sovereign bark; but where the obsequious Coast
Pay tribute to thy bed: Romes conquering hand
More vanquished Nations under her command,
Never reduced: glad Berecinthia, so
Among her deathlesse Progeny did go,
A wreath of Towers adorned her reverend head,
Mother of all that on Ambro^ia ^ed:
Thy godly race must sway the age to come,
As she Olympus, peopled with her womb,
Would those Commanders of mankind obey
Their honored Parent, all pretenses lay
Down at your Royal feet, compose the jarres,
And on the growing Turk discharge these wars:
The Christian Knights that sacred tomb should wrest,
From Pagan hands, and triumph over the East.
The Englands Princes, and Gallias Dolphin might
Like young Rinaldo, and Tancredo fight
In single combat; by their swords again
The proud Argant^s, and fierce Soldans slain.
Again, might we their deeds recite,
And with your Thuscan exalt the sight*
SONG.
PEace babbling Muse,
I dare not sing what you indite:
Her eyes refuse
To read the passion which they write.
She strikes my Lute, but if it sound,
Threatens to hurl it on the ground.
And I no less her anger dread,
Then the poor wretch that fains him dead.
While some fierce Lion does embrace
His breathless corpse, and lick his face.
Wrapped up in silent fears he lies,
Torn all in pieces if he cries.
Of Love.
ANger in hasty words or blows,
It self discharges on our foes.
And sorrow too, finds some relief,
In tears which wait upon our grief.
So every passion but fond love
Unto its own redress does move.
But that alone the wretch inclines
To what prevents his own designs:
Makes him lament, and sigh, and weep,
Disordred, tremble, fawn and creep,
Postures which render him despised,
Where he endeavors to be prized*
For women borne to be controlled
Stoop to the forwards and the bold,
Affect the haughty and the proud,
The gay and frollick, and the loud;
Who first the generous steed oppressed*
Not kneeling did salute the beast;
But with high courage life and force
Approaching, tamed the unruly horse:
Unwisely we, the wiser East
Pity supposing them oppressed
With Tyrants force whose law is will,
By which they govern, spoil and kill
Each Nymph, but moderately fair,
Command with no less rigor here.
Should some brave Turk that walks among
His twenty Lasses bright and young,
And beckens to the willing Dame
Preferred to quench his present flame:
Behold as many Gallants here.
With modest guise, and silent fear,
All to our female Idol bend,
Whilst her high pride does scarce descend;
To mark their follyes he would swear
That these her guard of Eunuchs were;
And that a more Majestique Queen,
Or humbler slaves he had not seen.
All this with indignation spoke,
In vain I strugled with the yoke
Of mighty love, that conquering look,
When next beh^ld like lightning stroke
My blasted soul, and made me bow
Lower then those I pitied now.
So the tall Stag upon the brink
Of some smooth stream about to drink^:
Surveying there his armed head,
With shame remembers that he sled.
The scorned dogs resolves to try
The combats next, but if their cry
Invades again his trembling ear,
He straight resumes his wonted fear.
Leaves the untasted Spring behind,
And winged with fear out-flyes the wind.
To the mutable fair.
HEre Coelia for thy sake I part
With all that grew so near my heart:
The passion that I had for thee,
The faith, the love, the constancle*
And that I may successful prove,
Transform my self to what you love.
Fool that I was so much to prize
Those simple virtues you despise.
Fool that with such dull arrows strove,
Or hoped to reach a flying Dove.
For you that are in motion still,
Decline our force, and mock our skill.
Who like Don Quix^t do advance
Against a Windmill our vain lance.
Now will I wander through the air,
Mount make a stoop at every fair,
And with a fancy unconfined
(As lawless as the Sea or wind)
Pursue you whereso^re you fly,
And with your various thoughts comply.
The formal stars do travel so,
As we their names and courses know,
And he that on their changes looks,
Would think they governed by our books.
But never were the clouds reduced
To any Art, the motion us'de:
By these free vapors are so light,
So frequent, that the conquered sight
Despair to find he rules that guide
Those gilded shadows as they slide.
And therefore of the spacious air
Jove's royal consort had the care:
And by that power did once escape,
Declining bold ^xions rape.
She with her own resemblance graced,
A shining cloud which he embraced.
Such was that Image so it smiled,
With seeming kindness which begui^'d
Your Thirsis lately when he thought
He had his fleeting Coelia caught.
It Was shaped like her, but for the fair
He fil^'d his arms with yielding air.
A fate for which he grieves the less,
Because the gods had like success.
For in their story one (we see)
Pursues a (...), and takes a tree.
A second with a Lovers haste
Soon overtakes whom he had chac't.
But she that did a virgin seem
(...), appears a wand^ing stream.
(...) his suppo^ed love a third
(...) greedy hold upon a bird:
(...) stands amazed to find his dear,
A wild inhabitant of the air.
To these old tales such Nymphs as you
Give credit, and still make them new.
The Amorous now like wonders find
In the swift changes of your mind.
But Coeli^ if you apprehend
The Muse of your incensed friend:
Nor would that he record your blame,
And make it live repeat the same.
Again deceive him and again,
And then he swears he will not complain.
For still to be deluded so,
Is all the pleasures Lovers know.
Who, like good Faulkners take delight,
Not in the quarrey, but the flight.
Of Salley.
OF Jason, These^s and such worthies old,
Light seem the tales antiquity has told:
Such beasts and monsters as their force oppressed
Some places only, and sometimes infest.
Salley that scorned all power and laws of men,
Goods with their owners hurrying to their den.
And future ages threatening with a crude
And savage race successively renewed.
Their king despising with rebellious pride,
And foes professed to all the world beside,
This pest of mankind gives our Hero fame,
And through th'obliged world dilates his name.
The Prophet once to cruel Agag said,
As thy fierce sword has mothers childlesse made:
So shall the sword make thine: and with that word
He hewed the man in pieces with his sword.
Just Charles like measure has returned to these,
Whose Pagan hands had stained the troubled Seas;
With ships they made the spoiled Merchant mourn,
With ships their City and themselves are torn.
O^e squadron of our winged Castles sent
Ore-threw their Fort, and all their Navy rent.
For not content the dangers to increase,
And act the part of tempest in the Seas,
Like hungry Woolves these pirates from our shore,
Whole flocks of sheep and ravished cattle bore.
Safely they did on other Na^ions prey,
Fools ^o provoke the Sovereign of the Sea.
Mad Cacus ^o whom like ill fate persuades
The heard of fair Alcmena's seed invades.
Who for reve^ge, and mortals glad relief,
Sacked the dark cave, and crushed that horrid theif.
Moroccos Monarch wondering at this fact,
Save that his presence his aff^irs exact,
Had come in person to have seen and known
The injured worlds revenger, and his own.
Hither he sends the chief among his Peers,
Who in his bark well chosen presents bears
To the renowned for piety and force,
Poor captives manumiz'd and matchless horse.
To Mrs. Braughton.
Fair fellow servant may your gentle ^are
Prove more propitious to my ^leighted care:
Then the bright Dames we serve, for her relief,
(Vexed with the long expressions of my grief)
Receive these plaints, nor will her high disdain
Forbid my humble Muse to court her train.
So in those Nations which the Sun adore,
Some modest Persian, or some weak eyed More,
No higher dares advance his dazzled sight
Then to some gilded cloud, which near the light
Of their ascending God adorns the East,
And graced with his beams out-shines the rest.
Thy skillful hand contributes to our woe,
And whets those arrows which confounds us so:
A thousand Cupids in those curls do (...),
Those curious nets those slender fingers knit.
The graces put not more exactly on
Th'attire of Venus, when the ^all she won,
Then Sacharissa by thy c^re is dressed,
When all our youth prefers her to the rest.
You the soft seasons know when best her mind
May be to pity or to love inclined,
In some well chosen hour supply his fear,
Whose hopeless love drust never tempt the ^are
Of that stern godd^fse you (her Priest) decl^re
What offerings man propitiate the fair
Rich orient pearl, bright stones that near decay,
Or pollisht lines which longer last then they.
For if I thought she took delight in those,
To where the cheerful morn does first disclose,
(The shadie night removing of her beams)
Winged with bold love, I Would sly to fetch such gems.
But since her eyes, her teeth her lip excels
All that is found in mines, or fishes shells:
Her nobler part as far exceeding these,
None but immortal gifts her mind can please.
Those shining Jewels Greece and Troy bestowed,
The snowy wrists and lovely neck did load,
Of Sparta's Queen. But when the town was burned,
Those fading glories were to Ashes turned:
Her beauty too had perished, and her fame,
Had not the muse redeemed them from the flame.
Puerperium.
YOu Gods that have the power,
To trouble, and compose
All that's beneath your bower,
Calm silence on the Seas, on earth impose.
Fair V^nus in thy soft arms,
The God of rage confine,
For thy whispers are the charms
Which only can divert his fierce design.
What though he frown, and to tumult do incline,
Thou the flame,
Kindled in his breast can tame,
With that snow which unmelted lies on thine?
Great Goddess give this thy sacred ^sland rest,
make heaven smile,
That no storm disturb us, while
Thy chief care our Halcyon builds her nest.
Great Gloriana: fair Gloriana,
Bright as high heaven is, and fertile as earth,
Whose beauty relieves us,
Whose royal bed gives us
Both glory and peace.
Our present joy and our hopes increase.
To Phillis.
PHillis, why should we delay
Pleasures shorter then the day?
Could we (which we never can)
Stretch our lives beyond their span?
Beauty like a shadow flies,
And our youth before us dies,
Or would youth and beauty stay,
Love has wings and will away.
Love has swifter wings then time,
Change in love to heaven does clime.
Gods that never change their state,
Varyed often their love and hate.
Phillis, to this truth we owe,
All the love betwixt us two:
Let not you and I inquire,
What has been our past desire,
On what Shepherds you have smiled,
Or what Nymphs I have beguiled.
Leave it to the Planets too,
What we shall hereafter do:
For the joys we now may prove,
Take advice of present love.
To Phillis:
PHillis, it was love that injured you,
And on that rock your Thirsis threw,
Who for proud Coelia could have died,
Whilst you no less accused his pride.
Fond Love his darts at random throws,
And nothing springs from what he sowes,
From foes discharged as often meet,
The shining points of arrows fleet,
In the wide air creating fire,
As souls that join in one desire.
Love made the lovely Venus burn
In vain, and for the cold youth mourn;
Who the pursuit of churlish beasts,
Preferred to sleeping on her breasts.
Love makes so many hearts the prize,
Of the bright Calisles conquering eyes,
Which she regards no more then they,
The tears of lesser beauties weigh.
So have I seen the lost clouds power,
Into the sea a useless shower,
And the vexed Sailors curse the rain,
For which poor shepherds prayed in vain.
Then Phillis, since our passions are
Governed by chance, and not the care
But sport of Heaven, which takes delight
To look upon this Parthian flight
Of Love, still flying or in chase,
Never incountring face to face*
No more to love we will sacrific^,
But to the best of Deities.
And let our hearts which love disjoined,
By his kind Mother be combined.
SONG.
While I listen to thy voice,
Chloris, I feel my life decay,
That powerful noise
Calls my flitting soul away.
Oh suppress that Magic sound,
Which destroys without a wound!
Peace Chloris peace, or singing die,
That together you and I,
To heaven may go,
For all we know:
Of what the blessed do above
Is that they sing, and that they love.
SONG.
STay Phoebus, stay,
The world to which you fly so fast:
Conveying day,
From us to them can pay your have,
With no such object, nor salute your ris^
With no such wonder, as de Mornay's eyes.
Well do this prove,
The error of those Antique books,
Which made you move,
About the world her charming looks
Would fix your beams, and make it ever day,
Did not the rolling earth snatch her away.
To Amoret.
AMoret, thy milky way,
Framed of many namelesse stars,
The smooth stream where none can say,
He this drop to that preferres.
Amoret, my lovely foe,
Tell me where thy strength does lie,
Where the power that charms us so,
In thy Soul, or in thy eye?
By that snowy neck alone,
Or thy grace in motion seen,
No such wonders could be done*
Yet thy waste is straight and clean*
As Cupids sheft, or Hermes rod,
And powerful too as either God,
To my Lord of Falkland.
BRave Holland load, and with him Falkland goes,
Who hears this told and does not straight suppose
We send the Graces and the Muses forth,
To civilize, and to instruct the North?
Not that these Ornaments make swords less sharp,
Apollo wears as well his bow as harp*
And though he be the Patron of that Spring,
Where in calm peace, the sacred Virgins sing.
He courage had to guard the invaded throne
Of Love, and cast the ambitious Giants down.
Ah (noble Friend) with what impatience all
That know thy worth, and know how prodigal
Of thy great Soul thou art, longing to twist
Bays with that Ivy, which so early kissed
Thy youthful temples? with what horror we
Think on the blind events of war and thee?
To Fate exposing that all-knowing breast,
Among the throng as cheaply as the rest:
Where Oaks and brambles (if the copse be burned)
Confounded lie to the same ashes turned.
Some happy wind over the Ocean blow
This tempest yet, which hights our Island so.
Guarded with ships, and all the Sea our own,
From heaven this mischief on our heads is thrown.
In a late dream the Genius of this Land,
Amazed, I saw, like a fair Hebrew stand,
When first she felt the twins begin to jarre,
And found her womb the seat of Civil war:
Inclined to whose relief, and with presage
Of better fortune for the present age,
Heaven send's, quoth I, this di^cord for our good,
To warm, perhaps, but not to waste our blood,
To raise our drooping spirits, grown the scorn
Of our proud neighbors, who ere long shall mourn,
(Though now they joy in our expected harms)
We had occasion to resume our Arms.
A Lion so with self-provoking smart,
His rebel tail scourging his nobler part,
Calls up his courage, then begins to roar,
And charge his foes, who thought him mad before.
Of a Lady who writ in praise of Mira.
WHile she pretends to make the Graces known,
Of matchless Mira, she reveals her own,
And when she would another praise indite,
Is by her glass instructed how to write.
To one married to an old man.
SInce thou would needs, bewitched with some ill charms,
Be buried in those monumentall arms:
All we can wish, is, may that earth lie light
Upon the tender limbs, and so good night.
For drinking of Healths.
^ Et Bruites, and Vegetalls, that cannot think,
So far as drought and nature urges drink:
A more indulgent Mistres^e guides our sprights,
Reason, that dares beyond our appetites,
She would our ^are as well as thirst redress,
And with Divinity rewards excess.
Deserted Ar^adn^ thus supplied,
Did (...) Theseus cruelty deride,
Bacchus (...) from her exalted thought,
B^^^sh'd the man, her passion, and his faut^
Bacchus and P^oebus are by Jove allied,
And each by others timely heat supplied:
All that the Grapes owe to his lightning fires,
Is paid in numbers which their juice inspires.
Wine fills the veins, and healths are understood,
To give our Friends a title to our blood:
Who naming me, does warm his courage so,
Shows for my sake what his bold hand would do.
To Flavia, Song:
It Is not your beauty can engage
My wary heart:
The Sun in all his pride and rage,
Has not that Art:
And yet he shines as bright as you,
If brightness could our souls subdue.
It Is not the pretty things you say,
Nor those you write,
Which can make Thirsis heart your prey,
For that delight:
The graces of a well-taught mind,
In some of our own we find.
No Flavia, it is your love, I fear
Loves surest darts,
Those which so seldom fail him are
Headed with hearts.
Their very shadows make us yield,
Dissemble well, and win the field.
On my Lady Isabella playing on the Lute.
SUch moving sounds, from such a careless touch,
So unconcerned her self, and we so much:
What Art is this, that with so little pains,
Transports us thus, and over the spirit reigns?
The trembling strings above her fingers proud,
And tell their joy for every kiss aloud:
Small force there needs to make thee tremble so,
Touched by that hand; who would not tremble tro?
Here Love takes stand, and while she charms the ear
Empties his quiver on the listening Dear:
Music so softens and disarmes the mind,
That not an Arrow does resistance find.
Thus the fair tyrant celebrates the prize,
And acts her self the triumph of her eyes,
So Nero once with harp in hand, survay'd
His flaming Rome, and as it burnt he played.
The Fall.
SEe how the will-earth gives way
To take the impression where she lay:
See how the mould as loath to leave
So sweet a burden, still does cleave
Close to the Nymphs stained garment? here
The coming Spring would first appear,
And all this place with roses strew,
If busy feet would let them grow.
Here Venns smiled to see blind chance
It self, before her son advance,
And a fair image to present
Of what the Boy so long had meant:
^ was such a chance as this made all
The World into this order fall:
Thus the first lovers, on the clay
Of which they were composed lay;
So in their prime with equal grace
Met the first patterns of our race:
Then blush not (fair) or on him frown,
Or wonder how you both came down;
But touch him, and heel tremble strait,
How could he then support your weight?
How could the Youth alas, but bend
When his whole heaven upon him leaned?
If ought by him amiss were done,
^ was that he let you rise so soon.
Of Silvia.
OUr sighs are heard, just heaven declares
The sense it has of lovers cares;
She that so far the rest outshin'd,
Silvia the fair whiles she was kind;
As if her frowns impaired her brow,
Seems only not unhandsome now:
So when the sky makes us endure
A storm, it self becomes obscure.
Hence `tis that I conceal my flame,
Hiding from Flavias self her name;
Lest she provoking heaven should prove
How it rewards neglected love;
Better a thousand such as I
Their grief untold should pine and dye:
Then her bright morning overcast
With sullen clouds should be defaced.
The Budd.
LAtely on yonder swelling bus^^,
Big with many a coming Rose,
This early Bud began to blush,
And did but half it self disclose;
And plucked it, though no better g^owh^;
Yet now you see how full it is blow^^;
Still as I did the leaves inspire,
With such a purple light they shon
As if they had bin made of fire,
And ^preading so would flame anon:
All that was meant by air or sun
To the young flower my breath has done.
If our loose breath so much can do,
What may the same informe's of love,
Of purest love and music too
When Flavia it aspires to move:
When that which lifele^se buds per^wades
To wax more ^oft her youth invades.
To a Lady singing a Song of his composing.
CHloris your self you so excel
When you vouchsafe to breath my thought,
That like a spirit with this spell
Of my own teaching I am taught.
That Eagles fate and mine are one
Which on that shaft that made him dye,
Espied a feather of his own
Wherewith he meant to soar so high.
Had echo with so sweet a grace,
Narcissns loud complaints returned,
Not for reflection of his face:
But of his voice the Boy had mourned.
At the marriage of the Dwar^fes.
THe sign or chance makes others wive,
But nature did this match contrive;
Eve might as well have Adam fled
As she denied her little bed
To him for whom heaven seemed to frame,
And measure out this only dame.
Thrice happy is that humble pair
Beneath the level of all care;
Over whose heads those arrows ^lye
Of sad distrust and jealousy:
Secured in as high extreme,
As if the world held none but them.
To him the fairest Nimphs do show
Like moving mountains top't with snow:
And every Man a Polipheme
Does to his Galatea seem:
None may presume her faith to prove,
He pro^fers death that proffers love.
Ah (Cloris) that kind nature thus
From all the world had severed us;
Creating for our selves us two,
As love has me for only you.
Upon Ben. Johnson.
MIrror of Poets, mirror of our age!
Which her whole face beholding on thy stage;
Pleased and displeased with her own faults, indures
A remedy like those whom music cures:
Thou have alone those various inclinations
Which Nature gives to Ages, Sexes, Nations:
Have tracked with thy All-re^embling Pen
What ever custom has imposed on men:
Or ill got habit which deserts them so,
That scarce one brother can the brother know,
Is representing to the wondering eyes
Of all that see or read thy Comedies:
Who ever in those glasses look, may find
The spots returned or graces of the mind:
And by the help of so divine an Art
At leisure view and dress his nobler part.
Narcissus couzened by that ^latt'ring Well,
And nothing could but of his beauty tell,
Had here discovering that the deformed stat^
Of his fond mind preserved himsel^e with hate;
But virtue too as well as vice, is clad
In flesh and blood so well, that Plato had
Beheld what his high fancy once embraced,
Virtue with ^olours, speech, and motion graced:
The sundry postures of thy copious muse,
Who would expre^se a thousand tongues must use;
Whose fate's no less peculiar then thy Art,
For as thou could all characters impart:
(...) none could render thine who still escapes
^ike Prot^us in variety of shapes:
Who was, nor this, nor that, but all we find,
And all we can imagine in mankind.
To Mr. George Sands, on his Translation of some parts of the Bible.
HOw bold a work attempts that pen,
Which would enrich our vulgar tongue,
With the high raptures of those men,
Who here with the same spirit sung:
Wherewith they now assist the Quire
Of Angels, who their Songs admire?
Whatever those inspired souls
Were u^ged to express did shake,
The aged deep and both the Poles
Their numerous Thunder could awake
Dull earth, which does with heaven consent,
To all they wrote, and all they meant.
Say (Sacred Bard) what could bestow
Courage on thee, to ^oare so high?
Tell me^ (brave Friend) what helped thee so
To shake off all mortality?
To light this Torch thou have climbed higher,
Then he^ who stole Celestial fire.
Chloris and Hilas.
Chl. HIlas O Hilas why sit we mute,
Now that each bird saluteth the Spring:
Wind up the slackned strings of thy Jute,
Never can thou want matter to sing?
For love thy breast does fill with such a fire,
That what^oe're is fair, moves thy desire,

Hill. Swe^test you know, the sweetest of things,
Of various flowers the Bee's do compose,
Yet no particular taste it brings
Of Violet, Woodbind, Pink, or Rose:
So love the resultance is of all our graces
Which ^low from a thousand several faces.

Chl. Hilas, the birds which chant in this grove,
Could we but know their language they use,
They would instruct us better in love,
And reprehend thy inconstant muse:
For love their breasts does fill with such a fire,
That what they once do choose, bound their desire,

Hill. Chloris this change the birds do approve,
Which the warm season hither does bring;
Times from your self does further remove
You, then the winter from the gay Spring:
She that like lightning shined while her face lasted,
The oak now resembl^s which lightning have blasted.

Under a Ladies Picture.
SUch Hellen was, and who can blame the Boy,
That in so bright a flame consumed his Troy?
But had like virtue shined in that fair Gre^k,
The amorous shepherd had not dared to seek*
Or hope for pity, but with silent moan,
And better fate had perished all alone.
In answer of Sir John Sucklings verses.
Con. STay here fond youth, and ask no more, be wise,
Knowing too much, long since lost Paradise.

Pro. And by your knowledge we should be bere^t
Of all that Paradise which yet is left.

Con. The virtuous joys thou have thou would^t should still
Last in their pride, and would not take it ill:
If rudely from sweet dreams, and for a toy
Thou awak't the wakes himself that does enjoy.

Pro. How can the joy or hope which you allow
Be styled virtuous, and the end not so?
Talk in your sleep and shadows still admire,
It Is true, he wakes that feels this real fire,
But to sleep better; for who ere drinks deep
Of this Nepenthe, rocks himself asleep.

Con. Fruition adds no new wealth, but destroys,
And while it pleases much yet still it cloyes:
Who thinks he shall be happier made for that,
As reasonably might hope he might grow fat
By eating to a surfeit, this once past,
What relishes? even kisses lose their taste.

Pro. Blessings may be repeated, while they cloy,
But shall we starve, cause surfeiting destroy?
And if fruition did the taste impair
Of kisses: why should yonder happy pair
Where joys, just Himen, warrants all the night
Consume the day too in this le^^e delight.

Con. Urge not it is necessary; alas we know
The homeliest thing that mankind does is so.
The world is of a large extent we see,
And must be peopled, children there must be,
So must bread too, but s^^ce there are enough
Borne to that drudgery, what need we plough?

Pro. I need not plough since what the stooping Hind
Gets of my pregnant land, must all be mine:
But in this nobler tillage it is not so,
For when Anchises did fair Venus know
What intrest had poor Vulcan in the boy,
Great bold Aeneas, or the present joy.

Con. Women enjoyed what (...)tofore they have been,
Are like Romances read, or Scenes once seen:
Fruition dulls, or spoils the play much more
Then if one read, or knew the plot before.

Pro. Plays and Romances read, and seen, do fall
In our opinions, yet not seen at all:
Whom would they please? to an Heroic tale,
Would you not listen, least it should grow stale?

Con. It Is expectation makes a blessing dea^e,
Heaven were not heaven, if we knew what it were.

Pro. If It were not heaven, if we knew what it were,
Twould not be Heaven to those that now are there.

Con. As in prospects we are there pleased most,
Where something keeps the eye from being lost,
And leaves room to gue^^e; so here restraint,
Holds up delight, that with exce^se would faint.

Pro. Restraint preserves the pleasure we have got,
But he n^ere has it, that injoyes it not.
In goodly prospects who contracts the space,
O^ ^akes not all the bounty of the place?
We wish removed what ^tandeth in our light,
And nature blamed for limitting our sight,
Where you stand wisely winking at the view
Of the (...) prospect, may be always new.

Con. (...) who know all the wealth they have, are poor:
(...) only rich that cannot tell his store.

Pro. Not he that knows the wealth he has is poor,
But he that dares not touch nor use his store.

To A. H: of the different success of their Loves.
THrice happy pair of whom we cannot know,
Which first began to love, or loves most now:
Fair course of passion where two lovers start,
And run together, heart still yoak't in heart:
Successful youth, whom love has taught the way,
To be victorious in thy first essay.
Sure lov's an Art best practiced at first,
And where the experienced still prosper worst.
I with a different fate pursued in vain
The haughty Coelia, till my just disdain
Of her neglect, above that passion born;
Did pride to pride oppose, and scorn to scorn.
Now s^ee relents, but all too late to move
A heart diverted to a Nobler love:
The scales are turned, her kingdom weighs no more,
Now, then my vows and service did before:
So in some well wrought hangings, you may see
How Hector leads, and how the Grecians fly,
Here the fierce Mars his courage so inspires,
That with bold hands the Argive Fleet he ^ires,
But there from heaven the blew eyed virgin falls,
And frighted Troy retires within her walls.
They that are foremost in that bloody place,
Turn head anon and gives the Conquerours chase:
So like the chances are of love and war,
That they alone in this distinguished are:
In love the Victors from the vanquished fly,
They fly that wound, and they pursue that dye*
An Apology for having loved before.
THey that never had the use
Of the Grapes surprising juice;
To the first delicious cup,
All their reason render up:
Neither do nor care to know,
Whether it be the best or no.
So they that are to love inclined;
Swayed by chance, not choice, or art:
To the first that is fair or kind,
Make a present of their heart:
It Is not she that first we love,
But whom dying we approve.
To man that was in the evening made,
Stars gave the first delight:
Admiring in the glooming shade,
Those little drops of light.
Then at A^rora, whose fair hand
Removed him from the skies:
He gazing toward the East did stand,
She entertained his eyes.
But when the bright sun did appear,
All those he began despise,
His wonder was determined there,
He could no higher rise.
He neither might, nor wished to know
A more re^ulgent light:
For that as mine, your beauties now,
Employ his utmost sight.
Palamede to Zelinde, Ariana, Lib. 6.
FAirest piece of well formed earth,
Urge not thus your haughty birth:
The power which you have over us, lies
Not in your race, but in your eyes.
None but a Prince, alas, that voy^^
Confines you to a narrow choice!
Should you no honey vow to taste,
But what the Master Bees have placed
In compass of their cells, how small
A portion to your share would fall?
Nor all appear among those few,
Worthy the stock from whence they grew:
The sap which at the root is bred,
In trees, through all the boughs is spread,
But virtues which in Parents shine,
Make not like progre^se through the Line.
It Is not from whom, but where we live;
The place does often those graces give.
Great Julius on the Mountains bred,
A flock perhaps, or Herd had led.
He that the world subdued, had been
But the best wrastler on the green.
It Is Art and knowledge, which draw forth
The hidden seeds of native worth:
They blow those sparks, and make them rise
Into such ^lames, as touch the Skies*
To the old Hero's hence was given,
A Pedigree which reached to Heaven,
Of mortal seed they were not held,
Which other mortals so excelled,
And beauty too in such excess
As yours, Zelind^, claims no less.
Smile but on me, and you shall scorn,
Henceforth to be of Princes born.
I can describe the shady Grove
Where your loved Mother slept with Jove,
And yet excuse the faultlesse Dame,
Caught with her Spouses, shape, and name:
Thy matchle^se f^rm will credit bring,
To all the wonders I shall sing.
FINIS.
Mr. WALLERS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT. 1641.
Against the Prelates Innovations, False Doctrine, and Discipline; reproving the
persuasion of some Clergymen to his Majesty of Inconveniences: Who
themselves, instead of Tilling the Ground, are become sowers of Tares.
With a Motion for the Fundamental, and Vital Liberties of this Nation,
which it was wont to have.
Mr. Speaker,
WE shall make it appear^, the err^urs of Divines who would that a Monarch,
can be absolute, and that he can do all things ad libitum, receding not only
from their Text, (though that be wandering too) but from the way their own
profession might teach them. Stare super vias antiquas, and remove not the
ancient bounds and Land^marks, which our Fathers have set.

If to be absolute, were to be restrained by no Laws: Then can no King in
Christendom be so, for they all stand obleidged to the Laws Christian, and
we ask no more, for to this Pillar, be our Privileges fixed. Our Kings at
their Coronation, having taken a Sacred Oath, not to in^ringe them, I am sorry
these men take no more care, for the informing of our Faith of these things,
which they tell us for our Souls health; whilst we know them so manife^tly
in the wrong way, in that which concerns the Liberties and Privileges of the
Subjects of England.

They gain preferment, and then it is no matter, though they neither believe
themselves, nor are believed by others, But since they are so ready, to let
loose the Conscience of our Kings, we are the more carefully to proceed, for
our protection against this Pulpit-law, by declaring, and rein^orcing
Municipall Laws of this Kingdom.

It is worthy the observation, how new this opinion, or rather this way of
rising, is ^ven amongst themselves.

For,(Mr. Speaker) Mr. Hooker, who was no refractory man, (as they term it)
thinks that the first government was Arbitrary, until it w^^ found, that to
live by one man's will, becomes all men's misery; these are his words, and that
these were the original of inventing Laws.

And (Mr. Speaker,) if we look farther back, our Hi^tories will tell us, that
the Prelates of this Kingdom, have often been the Mediators, between the King
and his Subjects, to present and pray redress of their grievances, and had
reciprocally then, as much love and reverence from the people.

But these Preachers, more active then their Predece^sors, and wiser than the
Laws, have found out a better form of Government.

The King must be a more absolute Monarch, then any of his Predecessors, and to
them be must owe it, though in the mean time, they hazard the hearts of his
People, and involve Hi^ into a thousand Dif^iculties.

For suppose, this form of Government were inconvenient; ( Mr. Speaker) this is
but a Supp^sition; for this five ^undred years, it ^ath not only maint^ined us
in safety, but made us victorious over other Nati^ns: But suppose, this form of
Government were inconvenient; and they have another Idea of one more
convenient; We all know, how dangerous Innovations are, though to the better;
and what hazard those Princes run, that enterprise the Change of a long
establis^ed Government.

Now ( Mr. Speaker) of all our Kings that have gone before, and of all that are
to succeed in this happy race, why should so pious, and so good a King, be
exposed to this trouble and hazard? Besides, that King so diverted, can never
do^ any great matters abroad.

But ( Mr. Speaker) whil^^^ these men have thus bent their Wits against the Law
of their Co^ntry; have they not neglected their own profession? What tares are
grown up in the field, which they should have tilled? I leave it to ^ second
consideration, not but Religion be the first thing in our purposes and desires:
But that which is first in dignity, is not always to preceed in order of time,
for well-being, supposes a being; and the first impedi^ent which men n^t^^ally,
endeavor to remove, is the want of those things, without which they cannot
subsist. God first a^signed unto Adam, ^^intenance of l^fe, and added to him a
title to the re^t of ^he Creat^res, before he appointed Law to observe.

And let me tell you* that i^ our Adversaries have any ^uch define, as there is
nothing more easy. then to impose Re^igion on a people ^eprived of their
Liberties, so there is nothing more hard, then to do the same upon Freemen.

And therefore ( Mr. Speaker) I conclude with this motion, that there may be an
Order presently made, that the first thing this House goes about, shall be the
restoring of this Nation in general, to the fundamental and vital Liberties*
the prosperity of our Goods, and freedom of our Persons; And then We will
forthwith, consider of the supply de^^red.

And thus shall We discharge the tru^^ reposed in us, by those that sent us
hither: And His Majesty shall see, that we will make more then ordinary ^aste
to satisfy His demands; and we shall let all those know that seek to ha^^en
the matter of supply, that they will so far delay it, as they give no
interruption to the Former.

Mr. WALLERS SPEECH in PARLIAMENT, At a Conference of both Houses in the
painted Chamber July 6. 1641.
My LORDS,
I Am commanded by the House of Commons, to present you with these Articles
against Mr. Justice Crawley, which when your Lordships shall have been pleased
to hear read, I shall take leave (according to custom) to say somshing of what
I have collected from the sense of that House concerning the crimes therein
contained.

Here the charge was read containing his extrajudiciall opinions subscribed,
and judgment given for Ship Money, and afterward a Declaration in his charge
at an Assize, that Ship Money was so inherent a right in the Crown, that it
would not be in the power of a Parliament to take it away.

MY LORDS, Not only my wants but my affections render me less fit for this
employment: for though it has not been my happiness to have the Law a part of
my breeding, there is no man honors that profession more, or has a greater
reverence toward the grave Judges the Oracles thereof. Out of Parliament all
our Courts of Justice are governed or directed by them, and when a Parliament is
called, if your Lordships were not assisted by them, and the House of Commons
by other Gentlemen of that Robe, experience t^lls us it might run a hazard of
being styled Parlamentum indo^torum. But as all professions are obnoxious to
the malice of the professors, and by them most easily betrayed, so (my Lords)
these Articles have told you how these brothers of the Coyf are become fratres
in malo; how these sons of the Law have torn out the bowels of their mother:
But this Judge (whose charge you last heard) in one expression of his excels no
less his Fellows, then they have done the worst of their predecessors, in
this conspiracy against the Commonwealth. Of the Judgment for Ship Money, and
those extrajudiciall opinions preceding the same (wherein they are jointly
concerned) you have already heard, how unjust and pernicious a p^^ceeding that
was in so public a Cause, has been su^ficiently expressed to your Lordships:
But this man, adding despair to our mi^ery, ^ells us from the Bench, that
Ship Money was a Right so inherent in the Crown, that it would not be in the
power of an Act of Parliament to take it away. Herein (my Lords) he did not
only give as deep a wound to the Commonweal^h as any of the rest, but dipped
his dart in such a poison, that so far as in him lay, it might never receive
a cure. As by those abortive opinions subscribing to the subve^sion of our
propriety, before he heard what could be said for it, he prevented his own, so
by this declaration of his, he endeavors to prevent the Judgment of your
Lordships too, and to confine the power of a Parliament, the only place where
this (...) might be redrest: Sure he is more wise and learned, then to believe
himself in this opinion, or not to know how ridiculous it would appear to a
Parliament, and how dangerous to himself, and therefore no doubt but by saying
no Parliament could abolish this Judgment, his meaning was that this Judgment
had abolished Parliaments.

This imposition of Ship Money springing from a pretended necessity, was it not
enough that it was now grown annual, but he must in^ayle it upon the State
for ever, at once making necessity inherent to the Crown, and slavery to the
Subject? Necessity, which dissolving all Law is so much more prejudicial to
his Majesty then to any of us, by how much the Law has invested his Royal
State with a greater power, and ampler fortune, for so undoubted a truth it has
ever bin, that Kings as well as Subjects are involved in the confusion which
necessity produces, that (...) Heathen thought their gods also obliged by the
same, Pareamus necessitati qaam nec homines nec dii superant: This Judge then
having in his charge at the Assize declared the dissolution of the Law, by this
supposed necessity, with what conscience could he at the same Assize proceed
to condemn and punish men, unless perhaps he m^ant the Law was still in force
for our destruction, and not for our preservation, that it should have power to
kill, but none to protect us; a thing no less horrid then if the Sun should
burn without lighting us, or the ^arth serve only to bury and not to feed and
nourish us. But (my Lords) to demonstrate that this was a supposititious
imposed necessity, and such as they could remov^ when they pleased, at the last
Convention in Parliament a price was set upon it, for twelve Subsidies you
shall reverse this Sentence; It may be said that so much money would have
removed the present necessity, but here was a Rate set upon future necessity,
For twelve Subsidies you shall never suffer necessity again, you shall for
^ver abolish that judgment; Here this mystery is revealed, this visour of
necessity is pulled off, and now it appears that this Parliament of Judges had
very frankly and bountifully presented his Majesty with twelve Subsidies to be
levied on your Lordships, and the Commons: Certainly there is no privilege
which more properly belongs to a Parliament, then to open the purse of the
Subject, and yet these Tudges, who are neither capable of sitting among us in
the house of Commons, nor with your Lordships, otherwise then as your
assistants, have not only aslum'd to themselves this privilege of Parliament,
but pr^sum'd at once to make a present to the Crown of all that either your
Lordships or the Commons of England do, or shall her a^t^r possess.

And because this man has had the boldness ^o put the power of Parliament in
ball^nce with the opinion of the Judges, I shall entreat your Lordships to
observe by way of comparison the solemn and safe proceeding of the one, with
the precipitate dispatch of the other. In Parliament (as your Lordships know
well) no new Law can pass, or old be ab^ogated, till it has been thrice read
with your Lordships, thrice in the Commons House, and then it receives the
Royal Assent, so that it is like gold seven times purified; whereas these
Judges by this o^e resolu^ion of thei^s would persuade his Majesty, that by
naming necessity he might at once dissolve (at least s^spend) the great Charter
32 times confirmed by his Royal Progenitors, the Petition of Right, and all
other Laws provided for the mainten^nce of the Right and Propriety of the
Subject; a strange force (my Lords) in the sound of this word necessity, that
like a Charm it should silence the Laws, while we are dispoyl'd of all we
have, for that but a part of our goods was taken is owing to the g^ac^ and
goodness of the King, for so much as conc^rnes these Judges, we have no more
left then they perhaps may de^^rve to have, when your Lordships shall ^ave
passed Judgment upon them: This for the n^glect of their Oaths, and betraying
that public tr^st, which for the conservation of our Laws was reposed in them.

Now for the cruelty and unmercifulnes of this judgment, you may please to
remember that in the old Law they were forbid to sees a Kid in his mothers
milk, of which the received interpretation is, that we should not use that to
the destruction of any creature which was intended for its preservation: Now
(my Lords) God and Nature has given us t^^ Sea as our best Guard against our
Enemies, and our ships as our greatest glory above other Nations, and how
barbarously would these men have let in the sea upon us, at once to wash away
our Liberties, and to overwh^lm, if not our Land, all the propriety we have
therein, making the supply of our Navy, a pretense for the ^uine of our Nation;
for observe I beseech you the fruit and consequenc^ of this judgment, how this
money has prospered, how contrary an effect it has had ^o the end for which
they pretended to take it: On every County a ship is annually imposed, and w^o
would not expect, but our seas by this time should be covered with the number
of our ships? Alas (my Lords) the daily complaints of the decay of our Navy
tell us how ill Ship Money has maintaind the Sovereignty of the Sea; and by the
many petitions which we receive from the wives of those miserable Captives at
Algier (being between four and five thousand of our Countrymen) it does too
ev^dently appear that to make us slaves at home, is not the way to keep us
from being made slaves abroad; so far has this judgment been from relieving
the present, or preventing the fu^ure necessity, that as it changed our real
propriety into the shadow of a propriety, so of a feigned it has m^de a Real
necessity.

A little before the approach of the Gauls to Rome, while the Romans h^d yet
no apprehension of that danger, there was heard a voice in the air, louder
then ordinary, The Gauls are come, which voice after they had sacked the City,
and besieged the Capitol, was held so ominous, that Livie relat^s it as a
Prodigy; This Anticipation of necessity seems to have been no l^sse ominous to
us* These ^udges like ill boading birds have called necessity upon the State in
a time when I dare say they thought themselves in greatest security; but if it
seem superstitious to take this as an Omen, sure I am, we may look on it as a
cause of the unfeigned necessity we now suffer, for what regret and discontent
had this judgment bred among us? And as when the noise and tumult in a private
house grows so loud as to be ^eard into the streets, it calls inthe next
dwellers ^ither kindly to appease, or to make their own use of the domestic
strife; so in all likelihood our known discontents at home have been a
concurrent cause to invite our Neighbors to visit us so much to the expense and
trouble of both these Kingdoms.

And here, my Lords, I cannot but take notice of the most sad effect of this
oppression, the ill influence it has had upon the ancient reputation and valor
of the English Nation: and no wonder, for if it be ^rue that oppression makes a
wise man mad, it may well suspend the courage of the valiant: The same happened
to the Romans, when for renown in Arms they most ^xcell'd the rest of the
world; the story is but short, `twas in the time of the Decemviri (and I think
the chief troublers of our State may make up that number,) The Decemviri, my
Lords, had subverted the Laws, suspended the Courts of Justice, and (which was
the greate^t grievance both to the Nobility and people) had for some years
omi^ted to assemble the Senate, which was their Parliament: This, says the
Historian, did not only deject the Romans, and make them despair of their
Liberty, but ^ansed them to be Iesse valued by their Neighbors: The Sabines
take the advantage and invade them; and now the `Decemviri are forced to call
the long-desired Senate whereof the people were so glad, that Hostibus belloque
gratiam habuerunt: This Assembly breaks up in discontent, nevertheless the war
proceeds; Forces are raised, led by some of the Decemviri, and with the Sabines
they meet in the field: I know your Lordships expect the event: my Authors
words of his Country men ar^ these, Ne quid du^^^^ aut auspicio Decemvirorum
prospere g^reretur, vinci se paticbantur, They chos^ rather to suffer a present
diminution of their Honor, then by victory to confirm the tyranny of their new
Masters: At their r^turn from this unfortunate expedition, after some
distempers and expostulations of the people, another Senate, that is, a second
Parliament, is called, and there the D^cemviri are questioned, deprived of their
authority, imprisoned, banished, and some lose their lives: and soon after this
vindication of their Liberties, the Romans by their better succ^sse made it
appear to the world, that liberty and courage dwell always in the same breast,
and are never to be divorced. No doubt, my Lords, but your Justice shall have
the like effect upon this dispirited people; `tis not the restitution of our
ancient Laws alone, but the restoration of our ancient courage which is
expected from your Lordships: I need not say any thing to move your just
indignation, that this man should so cheapely give away that which your Noble
Ancestors with so much courage and industry had so long maintained: you have
often bin told how careful they were though with the hazard of their lives and
fortunes, to derive thos^ Rights and Liberties as entire to posterity as they
received them from their Fathers; what they did with labor you may do with
ease, what they did with danger you may do securely: the foundation of our
Laws is not shaken with the Engine of War, they are only blasted with the
breath of these men, and by your breath they may be restored.

What Judgments your Predecessors have given, and what punishments their
Predecessors have suffered for offenses of this nature, your Lordships have
already been so well informed, that I shall not trouble you with a repetition
of those precedents: Only (my Lords) something I shall take leave to observe
of the person with whose charge I have presented you, that you may the less
doubt of the wilfulness of his offense.

His education in the Innes of Court, his constant practice as a Counselor,
and his experience as a Judge (considered with the mischief he has done)
makes it appear that this Progress of his through the Law, has been like that
of a diligent Spy through a Country, into which he meant to conduct an enemy.

To let you see he did not offend for company, there is one crime so peculiar
to himself, and of such malignity, that it makes him at once incapable of your
Lordships favor, and his own subsistence incompatible with the right and
propriety of the Subject: for if you leave him in a capacity of interpreting
the Laws, has he not already declared his opinion, That your votes and
resolutions against Ship Money are void, and that it is not in the power of a
Parliament to abolish that Judgment? To him* my Lords, that has thus played
with the power of Parliament, we may well apply what was once said to the Goat
browsing on the Vine.

Rode, caper, vitem, tamen hinc cum stabis ad ar^^ In Tua quod fu^di cornus
possit, erit: He has cropped and infringed the privileges of a banished
Parliament, but now it is returned, he may find it has power enough to make a
Sacrifice of him, to the better establishment of our Laws* and in truth what
other satisfaction can ^e make his injured Country, then to confirm by his
example those Rights and Liberties which he had ^uin'd by his opinion?

For the proofs, my Lords, they are so manifest, tha^ they will give you
little trouble in the disquisition; his crimes are already upon Record, the
Delinquent and the Witness is the same; having from several seats of
Judicature proclaimed himself an Enemy to our Laws and Nation, Ex ore suo
judi^abit^r. To which purpose I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the House of Common^, to desire your Lordships that as speedy a
proceeding may be had against Mr. Justice Crawley, as the course of
Parliaments will permit.

Mr. WALLERS SPEECH IN THE HOVES of COMMOMS On Tuesday the 4th of July, 1643.
Being brought to the Bar, and having leave given him by the SPEAK^R, to say
what he could for himself, before they proceeded to expel him the HOUSE.
Mr. Speaker,
I Acknowledge it a great mercy of God, and a great favor from you, that I am
once more suffered to behold this Honorable Assembly. I m^ane not to make use
of it to say any thing in my own defense by justification or denial of what I
have done, I have already confessed enough to make me^ appear, worthy not
only to be put out of this House, but out of the World too. All my humble
request to you is, that if I seem to you as unworthy to live, as I do to my
self, I may have the honor to receive my death from your own hands, and not
b^e exposed to a Trial by the Counsel of War: what ever you shall think me
worthy to suffer in a Parliamentary way, is not like to find stop any where
else.

This (Sir) I hope you will be pleased for your own sakes to grant me, who am
already so miserable, that nothing can be added to my calamity, but to be
made the occasion of creating a President to your own disadvantage; besides the
right I may have to this, consider I beseech you, that the eyes of the world
are upon you, you Govern in chief, and if you should expose your own Members to
the punishment of others, it will be thought that you either want Power, or
leisure to chasti^e them your selves: Nor Let any man despise the ill
consequence of such a President as this would be, because he sees not
presently the inconveniences which may ensue: You have many Armies on Foot, and
it is uncertain^ how long you may have occasion to use them. Soldiers and
Commanders (though I know well they of the Parliaments Army, excel no le^se in
modesty, then they do in Courage) are generally of a Nature ready to pretend
to the utmost power of this kind, which they conceive to be due to them, and
may be too apt upon any occasion of discontent to make use of suc^ a President
as this. In this very Parliament you have not been without some taste of the
experience hereof, it is now somewhat more than two y^are^ since you had an
Army in the North, paid and directed by your selves, and yet you may be
pleased to remember there was a considerable number of Offi^ers in that Army,
which joined in a Petition or Remonstrance to this House, taking notice of what
some of the Members had said here, as they supposed to their disadvantage, and
did little less then require them of you; it is true, there had been some
tampering with them, but what has happened at one time, may wisely be thought
possible to fall out again at another.

Sir, I presume but to point you out the danger; if it be not just, I know you
will not do me the wrong to expose me to this trial; if it be just, your
Army may another time require the same justice of you, in their own behalf,
against some other Member, whom perhaps you would be less willing to part
with. Necessity has of late forced you into untrodden paths; and in such a case
as this where you have no president of your own, you may not do amiss to look
abroad upon other States and Senates, which exercise the ^upream Power, as you
now do here.

I dare confidently say you shall find none either Ancient of Modern, which
ever exposed any of their own order to be tried for his life by the Officers
of their Armies abroad, for what he did, while he resided among them in the
Senate.

Among the Romans the practice was so contrary, that some inferior Officers in
their Army far from the City, having been sentenced by their General, or
Commander in chief, as deserving death by their Discipline of War, have
nevertheless (because they were Senators) appealed thither, and the cause has
received a new hearing in the Senate. Not to use more wor^s to persuade you to
take heed that you wound not your selves through my sides in violating the
Privileges belonging to your own persons, I shall humbly desire you to
consider likewise the nature of my offense, (not but that I should be much
ashamed to say any thing in diminution thereof: God knows it is horrid enough,
for the evil it might have occasioned) but if you look near it, it may
perhaps appear to be rather a Civil then a Martial crime, and so to have
title to a Trial at the Common Law of the Land; there may justly be some
difference put between me^ and others in this business.

I have had nothing to do with the other Army, or any intention to begin the
offer of violence to any body. It was only a civil pretense to that which I
then foolishly conceived to be the right of the Subject. I humbly refer it to
your considerations, and to your consciences. I know you will take care not to
shed the blood of War in Peace, that blood by the law of War, which has a
right to be tried by the Law of Peace.

For so much as concerns my self and my part in this business, (if I were
worthy to have any thing spoken, or patiently heard in my behalf) this might
truly be said, that I made not this busines^e but found it, it was in other
men's hands long before it was brought to me, and when it came, I extended it
not, but restrained it. For the Propo^itions of letting in part of the Kings
Army, or offering violence to the Members of this House, I ever disallowed and
utterly rejected them,

What it was that moved me to entertain discou^se of this business so far as
I did, I will tell you ingeniously, and that rather as a warning for others,
than that it make any thing for my self; it was only an impatience of the
inconve^ences of the present War, looking on things with a carnal eye, and
not minding that which chiefly (if not only) ought to have been considered,
the inestimable value of the Cause you have in hand, the Cause of God and of
Religion, and the nec^ssiti^^s you are forced upon for the maintenance of the
same; as a just punish^ent for this neglect, it pleased God to de^er^ and
suffer m^e with a fatal blindness, to be led on, and ^gaged in such Counsels
as were wholly disproportioned to the rest of my life; This (Sir) my own
Conscience tells me was the caus^ of my failing, and not malice, or any ill
habit of mind, or disposition toward the Commonwealth, o^ ^o the Parliament:
for from whence should I ^^ve it? If you look on my birth, you will not find it
i^ my blood: I am of a Stock which has bo^n you better fruit: if you look on
my education, it has been almost from my childhood in this House, and among
the best sort of men; and for the whole practice of my life till this time, if
another were to speak for me, he might reasonably say, that neither my actions
out of Parliament, nor in my expressions in it, have savoured of dis-affection
or malice to the Liberties of the People, or Privileges of Parliament.

Thus Sir, I have set before your eyes, both my person and my case, wherein I
shall make no such defense by denying, or extenuating any thing, I have done,
as ordinary Delinquents do, my address to you, and all my plea shall only be
such as Children use to their Parents, I have offended; I confess it, I never
did any thing like it before; it is a passage unsui^able to the whole course of
my life beside, and for the time to come, as God that can bring light out of
darkness, has made this business in the event useful to you, so a so has
he to me^: you have by it made an happy discov^ry of your Enemies, and I of my
self, and the evil principles I walked by; so that if you look either on what
I have been heretofore, or what I now am, and by Gods grace assi^tin^* me,
shall always continue to be, you may perhaps think me fit to be an example
of your compassion and ^lemency.

Sir, I shall no sooner leave you, but my life will depend on your breath, and
not that alone, but the subsistence of some that are more innocent. I might
therefore show you my Children, wh^m the rigor of your lustice would make
complete Orphans, being already Motherle^se. I might show you a F^mily, wherein
there are some unworthy to have their share in that mark of Infamy which now
threatens us: But something there is, which if I could show you, would move you
more then all this, it is my Heart, which abhorres what I ^^ve done, more, and
is more sever^ to it self, then the severest Judge can be. A heart (Mr.
Speaker) so awakned by this a^fliction, and so entirely d^voted to the Cause
you maintain, that I earnestly desire of God to incline you, so to dispose of
me, whether for lif^ or for death, as may most conduce to the advancement
thereof.

Sir, not to trouble you any longer, if I dye, I shall dye praying for you; if
I live, I shall live serving you, and ^ender you back the use and employment of
all those days you shall add to my life.

After this, having withdrawn himself, he was called in again, and (being by
the Speaker required thereto) gave them an exact account how he came first to
the knowledge of this business; as also what Lords were acquainted there with,
or had engaged th^mselves therein.

FINIS.

