INSTRUCTIONS to a PAINTER FOR THE Drawing of a Picture of the state and
posture OF THE English Forces at Sea, Under the Command of his Royal Highness
in the Conclusion of the year 1664.
First Draw the Sea, that portion which between,
The greater World, and this of ours is seen:
Here place the British, there the Holland Fleet,
Vast floating Armies, both prepared to meet.
Draw the whole World, expecting who shall Reign
After this Combat, over the conquered Mayn;
Make Heaven concerned, and an unusual Star
Declare the importance of the approaching War.
Make the Sea shine with Gallantry, and all
The English Youth flock to their Admiral
The valiant DUKE, whose early Deeds abroad
Such Rage in Fight, and Art in Conduct showed.
His bright Sword, now, a dearer Interest draws,
His Brothers Glory, and his Country's Cause.
Let thy bold Pencil Hope and Courage spread
Through the whole Navy by his Highness led;
Make all appear, where such a Prince is by,
Resolved to Conquer, or resolved to Dye.
With his Extraction and Heroic mind,
Make the proud Sails swell more than with the wind.
Preventing Cannon, make his louder Fame
Check the Batavians, and their fury Tame.
So hungry Wolves, though greedy of their Prey,
Stop, when they find a Lion in their way.
Make him be-stride the Ocean, and mankind
Ask his consent to use the Sea and Wind:
While his tall Ships in the barred Chanel stand,
He grasps the Indies in his Armed hand.
Paint an East Wind, and make it blow away.
The excuse of Holland, for their Navies stay;
Make them look pale, and the bold Prince to shun,
Through the cold North, and Rocky Regions run;
To find the Coast, where morning first appears
By the Dark Pole, the wary Belgian stears,
Confessing now he dreads the English more
Than all the dangers of a frozen Shore;
While, from our Arms, security to find,
They fly so far they leave the Day behind.
Describe their Fleet abandoning the Sea,
And all their Merchants left a wealthy Prey.
Our first success in War, make Bacchus crown,
And half the Vintage of the year our own;
The Dutch their Wine, and all their Brandy lose,
Dis-arm'd of that from which their Courage grows.
While the glad English to relieve their Toil,
In Healths to their great Leader drink the spoil.
His high Command to Africks Coast extend,
And make the Moor before the English bend;
Those barbarous Pirates, willingly receive
Conditions, such as we are pleased to give.
Within those Streights make Hollands Smyrna Fleet,
With a small Squadron of the English meet;
Like Falcons these, those like a numerous Flock,
Of scattering Fowl, which would avoid the shock.
There Paint Confusion in a various shape,
Some sink, some yield, and flying some escape;
Europe and Africa from either Shore
Spectators are, and hear our Cannon roar.
While the divided World in this agree,
Men that fight so, deserve to rule the Sea.
LONDON; Printed in the Year 1665.


