A DIVINE THEATER, OR, A Stage for CHRISTIANS: Delivered In a Sermon at
CHRIST-CHURCH in OXFORD.

By JOHN WALL, Doctor in Divinity, and Praebendary of Christ-Church.

Vid^te quam suavis sit Dominus. Psalm. 34. 8. OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL, for
RI: DAVIS. 1662.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, GEORGE Lord Bishop of WORCESTER; My very
much Honored LORD: Increase of Grace here, and Glory hereafter.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
RIGHT REVEREND,
THough it be true which SENECA writes, ipsi nobis magnum Theatrum sumus: that
every good man is a Theater to himself; and has somewhat within whereon he
may reflect with comfort and delight: using that of Persius in a sense, -- Nec
te quaesiveris extra: yet give me leave amongst diverse glorious sights of
public rejoycings, to exhibit one text of holy Scripture to your view, the
fairest spectacle that ever was presented upon the Great Amphitheater of the
round world: The Salvation of God, the Salvation of Christ; most worthy to be
had in oculis and in osculis (as my Author speaks) by all such as kiss the
Son, and desire to embrace the sweetness of divine mercies.

Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonias, Harpyasve Invenies, hominem pagina nostra
sapit. vel potius Deum: the man that is brought forth with an Ecce in the
Gospel [Behold the man] the Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus. O
let him be ever in your sight, that has made you so great a Light, and set the
luster of Your Wisdom and Piety, as a Lantern in a Watchtower, or a candle
on the house top for direction unto many. My song is with the Prophet DAVID,
[Good luck have you with Your Honour] that runs after you, though you run
from it: Since it is a good saying, which Aenaeas Sylvius left as an Axiom,
Quod Viri Dignitatibus, non Dignitates Viris, sunt quaerendi; that men are to
be sought out for praeferments, more then praeferments by men.

The Patriark Joseph bears increase in his name, and is likened to a
flourishing bough, whose branches run over the wall: may it be so with your
Lordship, while the sheaves of others bow to yours; and men delight (as it
were) to behold the Salvation of God in the purity of your Doctrine, and the
blessed example of a good life, and holy Conversation. For that (as Saint Basil
writes in a Letter to his brother Nyssen) is both (...) and (...) an honorable
possession to those which have it, and a delectable Vision to all that look on
it.

For my part, I must needs rejoice, and claim a privilege therein, when I
consider the blessed increase of so choice a plant, whereof I had the first
watering in this University, when it was but in the budde; though now it bear
much fruit, and may be compared to the Rod of Aaron which sent forth ripe
Almonds.

We read of Plato, quod Socrati, illo discipulo, nihil contigit foelicius: quod
Athenis, illo cive, nihil gloriosius: That nothing befell Socrates more
fortunate then such a Scholar, nothing befell Athens more glorious then such a
member: Let others make what Parallel they please, I think my self happy in
your Prosperity, and do wish you strength answerable to your burden, for the
Honor of God, and Comfort of your Brethren; that your Graces may be multiplied
with your Honors; and the Spirit of God doubled upon you, as heretofore upon
Elizaeus: that you may be as Napthali satisfied with favors; and with Asher
yielding royal dainties, or pleasures for a KING; that you may be as the
beloved Disciple, on whose breast JESUS leaned when he inspired him with his
Oracles; or the blessed Apostle, who was a Vessel of Election ad portandum
nomen coram Regibus: at least in the words of Homer, -- (...). Dear unto
Princes, and such as are styled God's upon earth: studying always prodesse
quibus datur praeesse, if St Bernard be worth the hearing.

More desires I have of this kind, which I had rather pour forth in secret,
then expose openly.

Tu, quamcunque Deus tibi fortunaverit horam Grata sum manu. And be pleased to
receive the humble tender of the fruit we gather de ligno vitae (as Saint
Bernard speaks) from the tree of Life in the midst of Paradise; though herein
I may seem to bring Apples to Pomona, or as we have it in the Epigrammatist
Hyblaeis apibus Corfica mella dare.

For I am not ashamed to profess that I wept for joy when I first read your
Coronation Sermon, to see how divinely it was performed, to the Honor of GOD,
the delight of His M A. JESTY, and the Gracious settlement of Church and State
in their Ancient, and Fundamental Government and Splendor, the continuance
whereof I do heartily pray for, and rest

Most humbly devoted to Your Lordship in true Service and Affection JOHN WALL.

A DIVINE THEATER, OR, A Stage for Christians.
Luke. 3. 6. All flesh shall behold the Salvation of God.
A Diamond cuts a Diamond, and we point one stone that we may part an other:
The Word of God is more precious then any diamond, like unto the stones which
David took out of the brook when he smote Goliath. If any desire to convert
these stones into bread for the nourishment of the Saints: or to prove himself
a workman not ashamed, that can (...) divide the word of God aright, he must
compare Scripture with Scripture and point one place (as it were) for the
distribution and explication of an other.

Hence it is that both the Apostle and the Evangelists do often cite the Law
and the Prophets: nay Christ himself does frequently urge the books of Moses.
And here Saint Luke draws his Gospel from the mouth of Isaiah: and makes it
Paraphrasticall if not Identicall with his Prophecy; where it is said: The
voice of one crying in the wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord;
every valley shall be filled, and every hill shall be made low, the crooked
things shall be made straight, and the rough ways plain: the glory of the Lord
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it. Or (as we read) in this present
Scripture, All flesh shall behold the Salvation of God.

These words are both Prophetical and Evangelicall: recorded by Luke, but
delivered by the Baptist in a Sermon: who was the last Prophet and first
Evangelist (as the Fathers have observed) (...) (says learned Cyrill of
Jerusalem) Uniting both Covenants, of Law and Gospel, most eminently in his
person. They seem to be a declaration, or rather indeed a proclamation of that
true Messiah sent by God, and promised to our Fathers: wherein you have (...)
(as Moses spoke of that flaming bush) a Great sight or a strange vision for the
generality of men, and the generations of mankind, to view and speculate with
comfort and delight, the glorious Majesty of his Sacred Person whom the Angels
of God desire to behold continually. For says the text, Omnis caro* All flesh
shall behold the Salvation of God.

That which I shall present (as it were) from this scene, is,

First, a Spectacle: and that is (...)* The Salvation of God.

Secondly, a Manifestation of this Spectacle: and this is unto flesh: (...) to
All flesh without limitation or exception.

We are all pertakers of this sight, this Vision, this Spectacle, this
benediction. All flesh shall behold the Salvation of God.

Indeed God is well known in Jury, and his name is great in Israel: but he
shall be revealed to the Gentiles, and shine as a star unto the nations: the
Isles shall come unto him, and the ships of Tarsish shall bring their children.
All men, all ages, all Tribes, all Languages, shall come and see, and confess,
and magnify the goodness of the Lord, and the Salvation of our God, in the
tender bowels of his Son Christ Jesus.

I have now cleared the way of the text, like an other Baptist: and made the
paths straight (as it were) before you. If the feet of such as bring glad
tidings, were beautiful upon the mountains; then doubtless their lips ought
to be full of grace, and their words as honey, that sing of joy, and peace, and
glory, and Salvation. The first thing I am here to mention, the Salvation of
God: the God of our Salvation: and so I begin with the Spectacle which is (...)
the Salvation of God.

That which Austin spoke of love dulce verbum, dulcius factum. And that which
the Orator said of peace. Dulce nomen, Salutare beneficium is most agreeable
with Salvation: the name of Salvation is sweet and delectable; but the power
thereof is healing and comfortable; a precious blame, a Soverainge antidote; a
perfect cordial; a divine amulet against the sting of the Serpent, and the
poison of death: The bundle of Camphire in the Spouses breast; the cluster of
grapes in the vines of Engedi, that cheer the heart and rejoice the Spirit of
every Christian. And therefore Jacobs song was expectavit O God I have waited
for thy Salvation: And David's prayer was visita Domine -- O Lord visit us with
thy Salvation: But when Simeon beheld the Child, and took him in his arms, he
was ready to depart with joy and brake forth into that cycnaean voice (...),
Now do thou let thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation. What Is that but Jesus Christ the Son of God, the
desire of the Nations, the Sun of righteousness with healing under his wings?
who is light, and glory, and Salvation (as they are put together in that Elogy
of Simeon) the light of the Gentiles the glory of Israel, the Salvation of
both, whilst they are reconciled in one body; light in his doctrine; glory in
his person; Salvation in the power and the efficacy; the merit and the
excellency of his triumphant cross, and wonderful redemption. Salvation is
his name, and Salvation is with him; Salvation is his work, and Salvation is
of him; therefore was he borne, and therefore came he into the world, that he
might save Judah from their sins and Israel from their transgressions.

St Bernard observes in the style of our Messiah which is Jesus Christus
Nazarenus that every word is full of comfort: come to Jesus; he gives you life,
for that is a Savior: come to Jesus Christ, he gives you a Kingdom, for that is
the anointed of God the Father: come to Jesus Christ of Nazareth; he gives you
abundant sweetness and pleasures for ever more, for that signifies a garland
of pleasant flowers:

But when we have said as much as we can, it will hardly come up to this (...)
in the text, for that is Great Salvation; the Salvation of God, Salvation in
the abstract. Indeed the name of God joined with other terms as an Hebraisme
does make an Auxesis, and enforce an Emphasis in diverse places of holy
Scriptures. What do you understand by the Mountains of God, but Great
Mountains* and what do you understand by the Cedars of God, but Great Cedars?
and what do you understand by the Sons of God, that took unto them daughters
of men, but Great men, and tall Giants, of huge strength, and vast demensions?
In like manner the Salvation of God is a Great Salvation; a mighty Salvation;
or, as it is termed by the Prophet Zachary, (...) A horn of Salvation in the
house of David: in the first chapter of my Evangelist. We read of him in the
Prophet Habacuc; that he rides upon Horses and that his chariots bring
Salvation, Quadriga Evangalii (as St Hierome speaks) the glorious Chariots of
the four Evangelists, that bear his name, spread his truth; declare his
righteousness, and publish his Gospel amongst the nations. He brings it
Originally, they Organically; He authentically, they ministerially; as servants
and instruments, to him that is the rock and castle, the tower, and the
fortress, of our Salvation.

As for Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Gedion and the like Procuratours of outward
peace and temporal security, they were men of renown and worthy of honor in
their several Generations; as shadows and figures of Typical semblance: but
not to be compared with the Man in the Text, whom God has made so strong for
himself: the hand of God; the arm of God; the Salvation of God; the power of
God: or as he is styled elsewhere (...), the head of all power and the
firstborn of every creature.

He that looks into the books of the Heathen, will easily see the name of [
Salvation] is hardly found in all their writings. They have (...), but they
cannot tell what to make of (...): they have Salutem, but they cannot tell what
to make of Salvation: name and thing are both alike unknown to them: whereas
the Psalmist ascribes it to the Son of God for a twofold reason: The one, as he
is Doctor Ecclesiae: The other, as he is Redemptor Ecclesiae: First, as a Great
Master that taught Salvation, and gave knowledge of it by his word, and
doctrine; by his life, and conversation, being the way, the truth, and the
life: The way wherein you may walk; the truth wherein you may rest; the life
wherein you may rejoice, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Secondly, As
he is a Gracious Redeemer, that has wrought Salvation, and shall deliver his
Church from the bondage of Satan: a culpa, a macula, a poena, (as the Schoolmen
have distinguished:) From sin, and the stain thereof; from sin, and the guilt
thereof; from sin, and the pain thereof, in the Great Convention of the whole
world, before the Tribunal of his justice. The Prophet David says, he wrought
it in the midst of the earth; St Origin, that he wrought it again in the midst
of the Air; as well for the Prince thereof, as for the inhabitants of the
world.

But this is contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle; Christ being risen dies
not, in that he dyed, he dyed unto sin; in that he lives, he lives unto God.
And therefore St Bernard, is bold to say of him, impudenti mendacio crucifigit
Dominum gloriae, that he does crucify the Lord of glory, with the impudent
scandal of haereticall blasphemy. For my part I leave him to that received
Character; Vbi been, nemo melius; ubi male, nemo pejus. Most certain it is, he
wrought Salvation in the midst of the earth, that all Nations may draw unto it,
as lines aequidistant to their center. And that with incredible love and most
invincible patience, amid'st the indignities, and the contumelies of
reproachful adversaries, not with things corruptible as Silver, and gold, but
with the effusion of his own blood, as a lamb undefiled, and without spot. The
1, and the 1, of Peter.

For Salvation is a fruit, that does not grow on every tree: fructus Vitis (as
St Bernard has it) the fruit of the Vine; the bleeding Vine, that was not only
bound to the wood of his cross, but cut, and pierced, and bruised, and pruned,
in that husbandry of God, with the sharpest Amputations of his Fathers wrath:
To the end that he might verify, an ancient Prophesy, long since mentioned, by
the Patriark Jacob: In Sanguine Uvae lavabit stolam: he shall wash his Coat in
wine, and his Cloak in the blood of grapes: The Coat of his flesh, and the
Cloak of humane substance, Genesis. 40.

St Ambrose speaking of this Mystery, will have him to be Vitis and Uva both
together: A Vine as he hung upon the tree, and was fastened to his Cross: A
Grape in the Opening of his bowels, and the exuberant sweetness of Divine
grace: when he sent forth the Wine of comfort, even blood, and water, for the
Redemption of his Church, and Sanctification of his brethren. Then was he the
Author of Salvation, when he was made perfect, then and not till then (as we
gather from the Scripture.) Being made perfect, he became the Author of
aeternall Salvation: in the 5, and the 6, of the Epistle to the Hebrews. How
is that, by easy trials and gentle adventures? Surely no; it cost more to
redeem Souls, and therefore says the Author (...): He was sanctified through
afflictions, and he was perfected through afflictions, sighs, and groans,
sufferings, and afflictions, (in the 1, and the 10, of the same Epistle) His
Cross, was his perfection; and his Passion, was our consummation; the
perfection, of his Aeconomy; and the consummation, of our felicity; worthily
styled the Government upon his shoulders.

Whence is that of learned Augustine, Dormit Adam ut fiat Eva; and moritur
Christus ut fiat Ecclesia: The first Adam sleeps, that Eve may be formed, and
shaped: The second Adam dies, that his Church may be reformed, and saved. For
without blood, there is no remission; without a Sacrifice, there is no
reconciliation. The blood of Christ, is the redemption of man: the blood of
Christ, is the expiation of sin: the blood of Christ, is the satisfaction of
God* the blood of Christ, is the patefaction of heaven. Or to give it in the
language of St Bernard, Sanguis crucifixi est clavis paradisi: The blood of
Jesus, who was Crucified by the Jews; is the only key that unlocks Heaven, and
opens the gates, of that Celestial paradise.

Why then should any seek unto the creature, before the Creator; that Idol,
of the creature; that nothing, of the creature; like those foolish Proci,
amongst the Graecians; who went to the handmaid instead of the Mistress? Is not
this to desert the Fountain of Living water, and to dig Cisterns, which hold
no water? poor souls how are they deceived, that expect help, from a broken
staff, and lean wholly upon the reeds of Egypt, that may easily break, and
run into their hands? Their faith is vain; their hope is vain: and we may
bespeak them in the words of a Heathen -- Una Salus miseris nullam sperare
Salutem. Was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized into the name of
Paul? Nor Paul, nor Cephas; nor men, nor Angels, were able to emancipate us,
without the power of God, and the sweet Mediation of his Son Christ Jesus.
Consider the Generations of old, and look into the Vanity of former Ages: What
are the shrines, and the altars; the sepulchers, and the images, the molten
images, the graven images, of all the Saints, and Martyrs, since the world
began, but strange inventions, and strong delusions; which many run after to
their own destruction? Galba est non Getulicus: says the Historian, in a
military sense; And truly we may say, Christus and non Moses, in a Spiritual
sense: It is Christ, and not Moses: Christ, and not Aaron: How much less the
man of sin, which sits in the Temple of God, and usurps the chair as his
Vicar at Rome: can heal our grief, or Seal us a Pardon? It is not Peter, nor
Paul: nor James, nor John, must be our defense: but Christ alone, the rock of
our strength, and the God of our Salvation, who was made all things, to all
men: though in himself constantly One, (without variableness, or shadow of
change) The sheep, and the sheepaid; the root, and the flower; the door, and
the Sanctuary; the table, and the candlestick; A lion, a lamb; a rock, a stone;
The stone which the builders refused: and the stone which is made the Head of
the Corner: He it is that is Deus sospitalis, in a religious sense: the great
praeserver of mankind, by whom we look for safety, and deliverance. And
therefore as Christ said to Zachaeus, (...) this day is Salvation come unto
thee: so may I say to all that hear me (...) this day is Salvation come unto
you; the Salvation of God, the God of your Salvation. Come down Zachaeus, and
descend my brethren; come down hastily, and receive him joyfully, in the sound
of his Oracles, and the power of his Ordinances, which are daily published in
the midest of your Churches. Let Zachaeus come down from his extortion, and
let all depart from their transgression: the proud, from insolence, the wanton,
from dalliance, the strong from violence, and the blood thirsty from malice:
that Christ may find a gracious welcome, and set up his Throne, in every heart,
and in every conscience. The heavens send forth a deiw, and the clouds drop
righteousness: the earth opens, and brings Salvation; Salvation, and Justice,
come forth together: the word of truth, the breastplate of righteousness; the
sword of the Spirit; the helmet of Salvation: are given to us, as the armor of
God, and sent down amongst us, as the Roman Ancilia, from the clouds above, ut
inhabitet gloria in terra nostra, That we may triumph among the Saints, and
glory may dwell in our land, the 85, of the Prophet David. How can you neglect
so great Salvation, you that are partakers of a heavenly calling, and do
remember Jesus Christ, the high Priest of your Ministry, and profession? How
can you neglect so great, so eminent, so public, so evident Salvation; in the
view of the whole World, and the sight of all the Nations? Since the word
incarnate, that was made flesh, is openly revealed, and made known to flesh, to
all flesh, (as you have it, in the text) All flesh shall behold the Salvation
of God. And so I come to my Second General: From the Object, to the Evidence;
from the Spectacle, to the Manifestation: All flesh shall behold the Salvation
of God.

It is a quaint notion, which St Augustine has in a Tract upon John, that if
you take the first letters, of (...), and (...), which signify the four
corners of the World; they make up the name of Adam: to show the extent of his
nature, and the generality of his person; and that as in Adam all dye, so in
Christ they shall be made alive; all men, all flesh, from all parts, and from
all Coasts, young and old, male and female, bond and free, Jew and Gentile:
They shall all see the glory of the Lord, and behold the Salvation, of our God,

If it be a pleasant thing to look upon the Sun, (as we gather from the words
of Solomon) what is it to behold the Sun of Righteousness, and to see the face
of God, in his Son Christ Jesus, who is the brightness of his Glory, and the
Character of his Image? It is noted of St Hierome that he made a threefold
Option, and desired greatly to have seen, Paulum in Ore; Roman in flore; Deum
in carne; Paul in the exercise of his Ministry, as he was Preaching; Rome in
the Excellency of her beauty as she was flourishing; and Christ alive in the
substance of our Nature, when he took flesh, and rode (as it were) on the
white cloud of Virgin purity. Blessed are the eyes which see this* many
Prophets, and Righteous men, have desired to see it, and could not, as Christ
spoke of himself, in the Gospel of St Matthew: and therefore St Paul, brings
it forth with a kind of Praeamble, when he says (...) Great is the Mystery of
Godliness: which is Christ manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, Preached to the Gentiles, and received into Glory.

As for the substance of the Divine nature it is most invisible, not to be seen
with eyes of flesh; being all Majesty, all Glory; that such as pry into the
one, may be overwhelmed with the other. Moses sought it, and besought God for
it, but was never able to get a sight of it: Vidit Angelum, vidit nubem, (as we
have it in St Augustine) he saw an Angel, he saw a cloud; he saw fire, and he
saw smoke, with the like Creatures, of a visible nature: but did he ever see
the glorious Majesty of the living God? Surely no, he was feign to get into the
cleft of the rock, before he might be allowed to see his back parts: Yet was he
so beloved of God, that he took him into the Mount, and talked with him, as a
man speaks to his friend: but when he cried, show me thy glory, the Lord gave
him a round answer, and told him plainly (...) Thou can not see my face, and
again, my face shall not be seen. Exodus: 33: Consonant to that in the holy
Gospel; No man has seen God at any time, John the first, and the eightteenth.
Whence is that goldden saying, of a Golden speaker, (I mean Crysologus) Quem
non capit mundus, quomodo potest oculus? how can the ball of the eye receive
him, whom the ball of the whole World is not able to comprehend? Yet since the
invisible things of God, are manifest by the creature, that which is invisible
in it self, may be visible by an other: a Heavenly substance, by an earthly
substance; a Spiritual substance, by a corporal substance: the Divinity, by
the humanity; the Godhead, by the man hood; (...), that Aeternall power, and
Godhead mentioned by the Apostle, in the first to the Romans.

Hence it is, that God sent his only Son, borne of a woman, made under the
Law, that he might visit us, and we contemplate him; being flesh, of our flesh;
and bone, of our bone. And because the Gentiles made them Idols, in likeness
of men, out of a desire to see what they did but vainly worship: He gave his
word incarnate as a liveing image* that he might steal the honor to himself,
and draw it privily away, (...) (as St Chrysostom has observed) not in the
form of a Cherub, or by the conveiance of any Celestial body, taken from
above, and brought along with him (as the Valentinians do imagine) but in the
clothing of our humanity; and that as you have in the words of Nyssen (...) by
the rare foecundity of a chaste Virgin, whom the Prophet Ezekiel has compared
to the gate of the Sanctuary, that was never open; because the Lord God of
Israel did enter by it, Ezekel, 44. Of the word, he became flesh; of God, man;
of the Creator, a creature; of Lord and Master, a servant and minister: higher
then Angels, if we look unto the glory of his Aeternall generation; but lower
then Angels, if we consider the frailty of his temporal conception: when he
left the bosom of his Father, that he might Sanctify the Womb of his Mother,
and come forth of those chambers, Holy, and undefiled: with the tender bowels
of mercy, and loving kindness, in a true sense, and brotherly feeling of our
miseries, and imperfections: Natus mirabiliter sine peccato pro damnatis
miserabiliter cum peccato; (in the language of St Austin) borne strangly
without sin, for such as were to perish lamentably in sin; the guilt of sin,
and the confusion of their iniquities.

These, are the kisses of the mouth, which the Spouse desired, in the blessed
conjunction of both natures, for the infusion of grace, and the sweet
inspiration of heavenly comfort: Osculetur me osculo oris sui: Let him kiss me
with the kisses of his mouth, the first, and the first, of the song of Solomon:
the dear Kisses of his Love, and of his Mercy; of his favor, and of his
bounty; derived to us from that admirable dispensation, of the incarnate Deity.
The Fathers, of the Greek Church, call it (...) and (...), or more plainly,
(...), a voluntary condescension, of the Divine excellence; when God descends,
from the height of Majesty, that he may be incorporate with man; and man
ascends, from the depth of misery, that he may be joined with God, and assumed
to him, in the unity of his person.

For says Austin; Assumpsit humanitatem non amasit divinitatem: he kept his
Divinity, though he took our humanity; this was advanced, that was not
prejudiced; there came Honor to the one, without Detriment to the other;
whilst he proves the life of men, and yet remains the head of Angels.

There are many praevisions of this mystery, in the holy Patriarchs, and not a
few praedictions, in the Oracles of the Prophets. The Tabernacle of Moses, was
a direct figure of it; of this Tabernacle, this building; the Tabernacle of
God, the Tabernacle of his flesh: The Israelites saw his glory, in the former;
we saw it in the latter. Vidimus gloriam ejus, (says John the Evangelist) We
have seen the glory thereof, it has opened our eyes, claryfied our hearts;
enlightened our minds; purified our consciencies: Vidimus glorium ejus, We have
seen the glory thereof, As the only begotten Son of God; full of Grace and of
Truth. For indeed, there must needs be (...) (as Nyssen speaks) a true, real,
perfect, substantial building of the Tabernacle; where there is Christ in the
flesh, and God with us; a true Savior, a peculiar Immanuel, who shall not only
renew, and Sanctify; but repair, and Glorify the decayed Tabernacles of our
mortal bodies, by the Virtue of his Spirit, and the Omnipotency of his Godhead.

Hence it is, that we are enabled to see God; and thus it is, we are said to
behold the Lord of glory: though in himself he be undiscernable, and dwell in
light that is unapproachable. He took that from us, and preserves that in us,
which makes him known to us, and beloved of us: and therefore, since he comes
in the veil of flesh, and seems to be covered, as with the mantle of Elias, we
have boldness to draw nere, and look upon him, as the Sun in a cloud, or a
candle in a Lantern, tempered, and qualified, to the weakness of our sight,
and the infirmities of our nature. Which makes the Spouse, break forth into
those mystical expressions, My beloved stand's behind the wall; he looks
forth of the window, and shows himself by the lattesse; the second, and the
ninth of Solomon. What Is that but the wall of humane flesh, the window of
humane sense, and the lattesse of humane affections? (as St Bernard interprets)
whereby he looks upon us, and we look upon him, with Spiritual glances, and
heavenly dartings of saving knowledge, and mutual complacence, crying (as it
were, in the words of Jacob) I have seen the face of God, and my life is
preserved: at what time he set a mark on the place, and named it Peniel,
(which does signify the face of God,) for a token, of inward gladness, and
everlasting remembrance: Gen: 32. Quanta bonitas quanta dilectio, quanta
humilitas, quanta dignatio (as St Bernard) O the bountyfulnesse, and love of
God to man! who is able to conceive the length, and the breadth; the height, and
the depth of his infinite kindness, when he did not only, bow the Heavens, and
come down, but empty himself, and go back like the Sun in the Dial of Ahaz,
many degrees, that he might give us a sign, from the conception of a Virgin,
and restore us to life, by the power of his Salvation?

There are many results of Practical Holiness, from so great Philanthropie,
so great humanity; which the Apostle says, has appeared to us: Even Praise,
and honor, and Thanksgiving, and Obedience; with love unfeigned, from a pure
heart, and a good conscience. I wish it may be an incentive to them all; but
chiefly unto love, the bond of perfectness and the most imitable quality of
the Divine nature. That as God loved us, so ye love one another; that ye
descend to the infirmities of your Brethren, and take up their burdens; that
ye visit the Churches of the Saints, and relieve their wants: the rather
indeed, because we are but flesh, weak and frail, passible and mortal, or
(to speak in the language of St Augustine) Sperma foetidum, vas stercorum,
esca vermium: a lump of clay, the spawne of Adam, a seed of evil doers, and
vessels of corruption: Yet such as God has respect unto, in the Dispensation
of his Grace, and the Minifestation of his Glory. For it is not said, every
Soul, or every Spirit; but All Flesh shall behold the Salvation of God: where
the part is taken for the whole, and the worse for the better, to show that God
does not forsake man, in the vilest estate of a miserable condition; but
considers him as Flesh, and visits him in his blood, that he may raise, and
quicken him with the Quatridian Lazarus; though dead, and buried, in the grave
of sin; and the pollution of his iniquities.

For, He came to save that was lost, as he tells you in the eightenth, of St
Matthew; Not to cure the whole, but the sick; not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. Publicans, and Harlots; Theives, and Malefactors;
Blasphemers, and Hypocrites, Extortioners, and Oppressors: a Generation of
Vipers, a brood of Serpents, (as we gather from many places in the Gospel) to
seek the lost groat, to find the lost sheep, to reclame the lost child, to
reduce the lost Son, to exhilerate, and delight the glorious Angels with notice
of their conversion; since there is joy in heaven, with the Angels of God, for
one Sinner that repents. And therefore it is noted of the Spouse that she was
nigra and ^ormosa, beloved at the worst; and comely when she was black: by
nature black, by grace comely: black without, comely within; black in her
self, comely in him that is more beautiful, then all the sons of men; the joy
of the whole earth, and the glory of heaven: So that we may hope beyond hope,
and not be out of comfort, in our deformity; crying with the Poet, in a Divine
sense --

Alba ligusira cadunt vaccinia nigra leguntur. As for the Text, where it
mentions [ all Flesh] with a note of Universality, in a larger sense, it must
not be understood of Numericall persons, but of several conditions by way of
distribution, in Genera Singulorum (as the Schoolmen interpret) for though God
be in the midst of us, yet does he not sanctify all particulars (as we may
see by that Devil Judas.) The Sun may rise, and shine gloriously, though not
discerned by such as are blind, and shut up in a dungeon: in like manner, light
may come into the world, and not be comprehended by the darkness thereof; or
known to those whom the God of this world has blinded. Purga oculum ut videre
possis lucem oculorum (says learned Augustine) cleanse thine eyes, and purify
thy heart, that so thou mai'st behold the light of thine eyes, and the joy of
thy heart; for none shall see God but the pure in heart. Therefore Christ is
said to redeem the Saints out of every Tribe, and country, and language, and
Nation: where the particle is most emphaticall, and worthy observation, (...)
not every Tribe, but Out of every Tribe, and Country, and Language and Nation
(as we are taught, by St John, in the fifth chap: of the Revelat:) Jews, and
Graecians, Cretes, and Arabians; they shall all hear, they shall all see the
Wonders of God, and the Power of his Salvation. They which lived before, with
Corporal eyes, they which come after with Spiritual eyes; the eyes of faith,
and knowledge, and a right understanding of Heavenly Mysteries. They shall
believe, and see; they shall taste, and see by true experience, and sure
evidence, how good the Lord is in the remission of sin, and the free donation
of aeternall Righteousness: For the Promise is made to us, and to our
Children, and to such as are afar off, and to as many as the Lord our God shall
call. Acts: the 2. and the 39.

This Doctrine is most agreeable with the meaning of the Baptist, who was a
praecursor to our Lord and Savior in his first coming: though some extend the
words to his latter coming, when Christ shall be manifest to us, and we shall
be manifest to him, before the Tribunal of his Justice. But I wave that as
somewhat indirect, and desire much, you would Suck the milk of Divine truth,
from the breasts of consolation, that are open to you by the revelation of
Christ Jesus, and the sweet influence of his Evangelicall mercies; when he came
as rain into a fleec of wool, and did first visit us with his Corporal
praesence. Gabrill came, the Angels sang, the Babe sprang, the Air rang, and a
fountain of Oil brake forth in the midst of the earth as a sign to all the
Nations; a miraculous sign of flowing bounties, and healing mercies. It is not
to be imagined that any man now living, should have seen him with bodily eyes,
(unless it were Johannes de temporibus as some conceit) that was taken up to
Heaven in a cloud above sixteen hundred years ago. But if we consider the
power of his Salvation, that came forth of Sion in perfect beauty; the whole
earth is full of it, and we of this Land have found it, above other Nations in
a singular way, and peculiar manner: Sicut audivimus, sic vidimus, As we have
heard, so we have seen, in the City of our God, in the City of our King:
Salvation Corporal, Salvation Spiritual; the one of the Soul from Haeresy,
and distraction; the other of the Body from Calamity, and destruction: while
there are no tumults, no fightings, no violence, no complaining in our streets.
Blessed are the people that are in such a case, blessed are the people that
have the Lord for their God. Is it not a precious thing, to see Holiness, and
order meet together; Doctrine, and Discipline kiss each other Thanks be to God
we enter the Sanctuary, and go to his Altars; hear the word, and partake of
his Mysteries, without the disturbance of Lunatic men, and Fanatic spirits,
That Israel may rejoice in him that made him, and the Children of Sion be
joyful in their King. There was a time when the Heavens were shut, and the
Seals of grace (in a manner) sealed up by a marveilous restraint of
Sacramental Dispensations; but now we see them open again, with that blessed
Saint, and Proto Martyr Stephen, when he be held the Son of man at the right
hand of God: having a great light round about as the Apostle had at his
conversion; the light of joy, and comfort; safety, and deliverance.

When the wise men came to Jerusalem, they cried out Vidimus stellam ejus, We
have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him: in like manner, we
that are inhabitants of this Mystical Jerusalem, may dry out, Vidimus stellam
ejus, We have seen his star, and that as it were in the East, from the
Oriental praesence of our rising Sun, and the sweet reduction of our Gracious
Soveragin: The star of his Word, the influence of his Grace, the light of his
Truth, the motion of his Providence, the working of his Power, the power of his
Doctrine, the brightness of his Gospel, and the glory of his Kingdom, that
Evangelicall Kingdom, whereby he does rule in the heart of every Christian. O
that we might as truly say, we are come to worship, and to serve him with
Singleness of heart, and Purity of mind, in the beauty of Holinesle, and the
fervency of our Spirit! But I fear we come short of those performances, and do
not present him, as the men of the East are said to have done, with Gold,
Myrrh, and Frankinsense: the Gold of Faith, and Heavenly wisdom; the Myrrh of
Repentance, and bitter Contrition; the Frankinsense of Prayer, and hearty
Devotion.

Where is the Honor, and the Worship; the Duty, and the Service; the Labor,
and the Patience; the Tribute, and the Obedience we owe to the Power of so
Great a Majesty? Instead of all these we do often meet with contempt, and
infidelity; profaneness, and impiety: whilst some despise; others deride the
Grace, which brings Salvation with it: placeing themselves, (as the Prophet
has it (...) in the Chair of pride, or the Seat of the scornful: not unlike
unto those, Who laughed, and said, hail King of the Jews, if thou be the Son
of God come down from the cross: be saved others, himself he cannot save. I
tremble to recount, and am afraid to mention that Execrable speech, which a
Pope used to one of his Cardinals, when he said quantum nobis profuit de
Christo ^abula? Cursed Atheists, and Prodigy of men -- Dic qua Tysiphone,
quibus exagitare colub^is? What aileth thee to Blaspheme the Lord of Glory?
have thou more Devils in thy heart, then were cast out of Mary? God forbid any
Christian should ever harbor so vile a thought, and yet the Apostle says,
there shall be mockers in the last Days, denying the Lord that bought them: we
also find by experience that many live as if they took the Mystery of
Godliness, for a History of deceivablenesse; and held the Gospel of the
Kingdom little better than a Golden Legend.

But let these Men know, there is an ( auferatur impius) for the wicked; and
though God be merciful to the penitent Soul, they which provoke the eyes of his
Glory shall never see it, in the 26th Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah. Oh how
suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end (as the Psalmist
speaks with condoling admiration.)

Amongst diverse instances of Divine Justice, that of Alexander the sixth is
very famous, who invited his Cardinals to a great Feast, with an intent to
poison them for their means; and being very frolic, dyed lamentably in the
midst of his joviality, of a poisoned cup which he provided for others; by the
Providentiall mistake of his own servants: (as you have it recorded in his
life by Onuphrius)

-- Nec enim lex justior ulla est Quam necis artifices art perire sua. Beware
then my dear brethren of profane Scurrility, and mischievous practices,
whereby God is dishonored, or man injured, That you turn not the Grace into
wantonness, which teaches us to deny ungodliness; and make that an occasion
of falling which is given for a blessing. The rather indeed because St Paul
will not so much as allow of (...), or (...), in the fifth Chapter of his
Epistle to the Ephesians when men delight in that which is not comely, as
spots, and blots, in the feasts of Charity: and care not to make themselves
ridiculous Morio's, so they may others merry, with the offense, and scandal of
their Brethren: though in the Sanctuary of God, and the very midst of his most
Holy Temple, where they should put off the shoes, (as it were) of foul
reproach, and not defile it with unsavory pollutions; as they may learn from
a mere Heathen -- -- Sacer esi locus, extra Mei -- Shall I praise you in this?
I praise you not, to say no more then he does in a gentle reproof to the
Corinthians: Howbeit ye know that our Savior Christ, had a whip for gross
profaners of the Temple.

The best use we can make of Divine bounty, and Evangelicall mercy, is a good
life and honest conversation in the fear of God, and the duties of Religion. O
kiss the Son, and bless the God of your Salvation, who took of our flesh,
that he might give us of his Spirit, and pour it forth abundantly upon all
flesh; Men, and Women; Fathers, and Children; Princes, and Nobles; Rulers, and
Servants. For God is no accepter of Persons, but in every Nation he that
fears him, and works Righteousness is accepted of him. The tenth Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles. Without doubt their hearts are of stone, and not
of flesh, that do not melt, and dissolve with a sense of this Kindness. He
Descends, that we may Ascend; Ascend, and Descend upon the Son of man, Ascend
in Love, and the height of Contemplation: Descend in Obedience, and the
Hurnility of Subjection (as it is said of the Glorious Angels in the first
Chapter of St John the Evangelist.) If you would learn the manner, and desire
to know the wings that bring him to us, they are as the wings of a Dove; Whose
wings are of Gold, and whose feathers are of Silver: in argento Humanitas, in
auro Divinitas (says Elegant Bernard) by wings of Gold, we understand the
power of his Godhead; by feathers of Silver, the purity of his Manhood: the
Gold, and the Silver, that mere together in the Royal Person of our Gracious
Mediator, and most Precious Redeemer.

When the Seals of the book in the Revelation were opened, there was a voice
heard as the noise of Thunder, saying Come and see: I have loosed the Seals of
the Text, and displaid the Treasures thereof; the Love of God, the Salvation of
Christ; the Riches of his Grace, the Sweetness of his Peace, and reconciling
Merits: Give me leave to round your ears, and to rouse your Spirits as a
Son of Thunder, in the same Language Come and see, come and Sing; O come let
us sing unto the Lord, let us Heartily rejoice in the strength of our
Salvation: With Psalms, and Hymns of Divine praise, and Jubilar exultancies.
Who would not adore him that is Magnified by all the powers of Heaven, though
he took not Angels, but the seed of Abraham. Was Alpha, shall be Omega; was
the First, shall be the Last; was the Beginning, shall be the End; the End of
our Hope, the Consummation of our Happiness? Give him the Honor due unto his
Name; the Name of Jesus, the Name of a Savior; wherein we rejoice, and whereby
we Triumph over the greatest adversaries: As his Name is, so let his Praise be
Great, and wonderful; public and universal in all Churches, and in all
places: let his Saints praise him, let all his Saints praise him with Melody,
and with joyfulnesse. Crying aloud in the words of the Magnificat, He that is
Mighty, has done great things for us, and Holy is his name: Sometimes with the
Glorious Cherubims in Anthems, and Antiphonies; Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of
Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory. Sometimes with
the blessed Elders in Elogies and Doxologies, Salvation and Honor, VVisdome
and Power, be to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever; The
Lamb that came to us in a cloud of flesh, that all might see him; the Lamb that
shall come in the clouds of Heaven, that all may find him: they which have done
ill, to their grief; they which have done well, to their comfort, in the
Visions of Peace, and the sweet Fruition of his Beatificall praesence for ever
more. Which the Lord grant, for Jesus Christ his sake, To whom with the Father
and the Son, three Persons, and one God; be Ascribed all Power, Majesty, and
Dominion, this day, and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

