TITHES no Gospel Ministers Maintenance, PROVED: In a seasonable Answer to the
Arguments of Mr. John Crawford, Minister of High-Holden in Kent. by THOMAS WALL.
AS touching Tithes great has been the Controversy by writing and suffering,
both of the Martyrs of this Nation, and others of God's faithful Servants,
against the payment of the same; because it was an Heave Offering in the
Ceremonial Law, and so a shadow, abolished by the death of Christ; as says the
Apostle, The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change of
the Law; Heb. 7. 12. That one may admire men that profess themselves Teachers
of the Gospel, should stumble at so plain a Doctrine; therefore I could not
keep silence for many Reasons.

First, to show this Clerk of Holden the vanity of his Arguments.

Secondly, because that many who pretend separation from the National Church,
do pay Tithes, to the great dishonor of the Lord Christ; who say, by their
works, that Christ was not a faithful nor perfect Lawgiver to his Church, who
appointed a Ministry differing from the Ceremonial Law, and not a Maintenance.

Thirdly, to stop the mouths of false Teachers, who subvert whole Houses,
teaching things they ought not, for filthy lucre sake; Tit. 1. 11.

And lastly, to fulfill my Promise, that if he wrote, he should have an Answer.
And the reason wherefore I have put it in Print, is, That if my weak Labors do
no good to heal the miry places that be given to salt, which, says the Lord,
shall not be healed, (See Ezekiel. 47. 11. Jer. 51. 9. Isa. 57. 20.) it may by the
blessing of God do good to the Elect, to strengthen their Faith against this
Jewish and Popish innovasion of Tithes.

And before I come to answer Mr. Crawfords Arguments for Tithes, I think for
the more clear discovery of the unlawfulness of the payment of them in the
days of the Gospel, to insert four things:

First, the manner of the payment of Tithes by the Children of Israel in the
Land of Canaan.

2dly, What the Payer and Receiver of Tithes were by the Law enjoined to
perform, upon pain of the Curse, written, Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.

3dly, What Tithes figured in the days of the Gospel.

4thly, That they are abolished by the Death of Christ, etc.

First. The manner of the payment of Tithes was, The Children of Israel gave
the Tenth of the increase of their Land to the Levites, which was offered as an
heave offering to the Lord, for the service of the Tabernacle, Numb. 18. 21, 24.

2dly, Out of which Tyth, the Levites were to offer the tenth part, an
heave offering to the Lord, given to Aaron the High Priest, Numb. 18. 26, 28.

3dly, After the Children of Israel had given the first Tyth to the Levites,
they separated a second Tyth, which they are before the Lord, in the place
which the Lord had chosen to put his Name there, Deuteronomy. 14. 23.

4thly, This they did the first and second year, and in the third year it was
given to the Levites, and to the Poor, as it is written, At the end of three
years thou shall bring forth all the Tithe of thine increase the same year, and
shall lay it up within thy gates, for the Levites, the Stranger, the Fatherless
and the Widow, to eat and be satisfied, Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. And in the fourth and
fifth years it was eaten again by the owners at Jerusalem; And in the sixth
year it was given to the Poor; and the seventh year was a Rest, and a Sabbath
to the Land, then all things were common, Exodus 23. 10, 11.

First, The Payer and Receiver of Tithes were bound to keep the whole Law; as
it is written by our Apostle the true Expounder of the Law, For as many as are
of the works of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them. See and read diligently Gal. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
compared with Deuteronomy. 26. 26. And the paying of Tithes was and is a work of the
Ceremonial Law, which Christ has redeemed his People from, as ver. 12, 13.
Himself being the end of that Law for Righteousness, to all that believe in
him, Romans 10. 4.

2dly, As Tithes were an heave offering, so they were a figure and shadow, as
all other Offerings were, and so ended in Christ, as says the Scriptures,
Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me.
See Heb. 10. 5. compared with Psalm. 40. 6, 7. For the Law having a shadow of
good things to come, but the Body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17. Thus by the
daybreak of the Gospel, the shadows are gone, Cant. 2. 17. compared with Luke
1. 78, 79.

3dly, Know this, all you that pay and receive Tithes, that if one
Heave Offering in the Law be payable in the time of the Gospel, then are all
the Heave-offerings in the Law, for there were many. Read Exodus 29. 27, 28.
Lev. 7. 14, 32. Numb. 15. 19, 20, 21. Deuteronomy. 12. 11. Again, If any pay Tithes
(that believe they ought not) against their own consciences, and in their
Congregations approve of the Doctrine taught against it, yet for fear of the
loss of their Goods, or Imprisonment, do secretly pay the same, let them
remember the doctrine of Christ, Fear not them that can kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do; but I will forewarn you whom you
shall fear, Fear Him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell;
yea, I say unto you, Fear Him. Luke 12. 4, 5. And turn not to the beggarly
Elements and bondage of the Law, Gal. 4. 3. and refuse the Liberty that Christ
has purchased at so dear a rate, Gal. 5. 1.

4thly, Tyth being an Heave Offering, figured the Elect, the good Seed, and
Children of the Kingdom, called out of the World by the Call of the Gospel, and
gathered to Christ's Sheepfold and Kingdom, Mat. 13. 38. Romans 8. 28, 29, 30.
Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. John 15. 16. and 10. 16. Luke. 12. 32. as was prophesied by
Isaiah, -- In it shall be a Tenth, and it shall return: the holy Seed shall be
the substance thereof, Isa. 6. 13. Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ezra 9. 2.
Mal. 2. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 15. As living Sacrifices, holy and acceptable in the
service of God, Romans 12. 1. and 15. 16. being likewise no less than the
first fruits of God's Creation, reserved and chosen to his use in his Church
and Kingdom, Heb. 12. 23. Rev. 14. 4. Jam. 1. 18. Jer. 2. 3.

In the next place, I shall answer Mr. Crawford's Arguments which he brings for
the Sacrificing-Priests portion, even Tithes, which he so much coveteth after;
which is,

That which is commanded by a lawful Law, ought to be obeyed. But so are the
Tithes: Therefore ought to be paid. The Minor was proved by the conformity of
the Law to the Law of God, Gal. 6. 6.

Ans. What you mean by your lawful Law that commanded Tithes to be paid, you
express not, unless you mean Pope Paschillis's Decree, as Thomas Bacon says in
his Book of the Relics of Rome, who says, That Pope Paschillis decreed in
the year of our Lord 827, that Tithes should be given to the Priests: which
shows that for some hundreds of years after Christ's Death, Tithes were not for
Ministers maintenance; and then that Pope appointed it but for his
Massing-Priests. And it may be you think you have right to Tithes, because you
say the Service that was taken out of the Pope's Mass Book, and retain your
Ministry from that Fountain, the streams being left in this Land from Q. Mary's
days; which Ministry, or Ministers, when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown,
only turned their Coat, but 'twas the same Cloth; as of late again from Prelacy
to Presbytery; and the other turn again, from Presbytery to Prelacy: and all
this will you do, because your god is your belly, your glory is your shame, who
mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19.

Again, How conformable this Popes Law is to the Law of God, which you bring,
Gal. 6. 6. which says, Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him
that teaches in all good things, let the wise judge.

Moreover, You say in your Letter, you do not mean the Levitical Law to be your
lawful Law: therefore the Pope's; because you further say, there is no Law
taken away by that Text, Heb. 7. 12. but the Levitical Law; which was (say you)
to pay the Tithes of the Jews to the Tribe of Levi, for no other Law was in
force; therefore it concerns us not who are not of that Tribe or Nation. These
being your own words, the Reader may see you confess that Tithes are not due to
any Gentile by God's Law; and by your own grant, you being a Gentile, have no
right thereto.

Again, you say, It is a bad Argument to say that Tithes are changed from Levi,
and given to the People: but say you further, It is a very good one to say,
that they are changed from Levi, therefore they return to Christ, the first
proprieter, to whom they belong before the Law, and for ever.

Answ. Sir, if you will but stand to what you have granted, you will ever
hereafter be ashamed to plead for Tithes. If Tithes be returned to Christ the
Lord, which is a truth; then it is as it was before Tithes were given to the
Tribe of Levi, and every man has right to possess and enjoy the tenth part of
his yearly Revenues as well as nine parts, for so it was before Tithes were
commanded to be paid; and the Law that commanded Tithes to be paid to the Tribe
of Levi you grant is abolished: Then seeing the whole Earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. who dare be so bold as to covet the tenth
part of his neighbors Estate, and so live in the breach of the tenth
Commandment? but rather learn what the Scripture says, Let your Conversation
be without Covetousness; and be content with such things as you have, Heb. 13.
5. till another Command be given from the Lord (whose the Earth is) that Tithes
shall again be paid to what end he pleases and then I hope no Christian heart
will deny to pay them; and till that time we are taught by the Lord to honor
him with our substance, Prove. 3. 9. But we find not in his Testament any
Command for the payment of Tithes, and so not lawful, for the Reasons before
showed. Thus I hope, Mr. Crawford, your Parishioners will be glad to hear your
Confession; and more glad if you will let them live peaceably, to enjoy the
tenth part of their Estates as well as the nine parts; and for shame send with
all speed for your neighbor Thomas Chesman out of Maidstone-Prison, whom you
have kept there above seven years, and desire him to pray to the Lord to
forg^ve you, if you be not past recovery.

Your next Argument is, That which is due to an Evangelical Priesthood, is not
unlawful to be given to the Ministers of the Gospel: But so are the Tithes:
Therefore. The Minor was proved, by their being due to Melchisedech.

Answ. That which was due and paid to Melchisedech, was not the Increase of the
Land; but so is the Tithes: And that which was paid to Melchisedech, was the
Spoil of the Enemy, Genesis 14. Heb. 7. 4. and if your Argument be true, then the
Gospel Ministers Maintenance is not the Increase of the Land, but the Spoil of
the Enemy taken in War: so then this will follow, If there is no War, nor Spoil
taken, then the Ministers must have no Tithe. Moreover, the Ministers
Paymasters must be the Commanders of the Army, for Abraham was chief Commander,
and He paid the tenth of the Spoil to Melchisedech, and not the Farmers and
Husbandmen. If this be your faith, Sir, for shame leave off imprisoning your
poor neighbors the Farmers for Tithes, and go to the Commanders of the Army
for your Tithes; and if you can make it out to them that you are not only Clerk
of the Parish of High-Holden in Kent, but also a Priest of the most high God,
(for so Melchisedech was) you will have abundance due; for it is so long since
the Commanders paid Tithes, that doubtless there are great Arrears behind: And,
Sir, when they have paid you, return fourfold to your poor neighbors the
Farmers, which you so many years have wronged them of.

Your next Argument is, If the denying of them (as you do) be the doctrine of
Devils, then is the payment of Tithes lawful. But the former is true. Therefore
the latter. The Minor is proved from 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. for the tenth part
is meats as well as the ninth part, therefore to forbid them is unlawful.

Answ. I perceive, Sir, you are put to your shifts for Arguments; and that the
words of the Prophet may be justly applied unto you, Woe to the Idol Shepherd,
whose right-eye shall be utterly darkened. Know you not, that the Scipture ye
bring to prove your Arguments, reproves the doctrine of your Church (rather
than the lawful paying of Tithes) which forbids Meats and Marriages at
certain times of the year, witness your Lent, and the many Licenses which are
sold by the Authority of your Church, which the Apostle calls the Doctrine of
Devils; because Marriage is honorable, and a Civil Ordinance, and may be done
at any time of the year in which other Civil Actions ought to be done. And,
Sir, if you have no better Arguments than these, you must mourn for your
belly-god Tithe, as the Women did for Tammuz, Ezekiel 8. 14.

Your next Argument is; Who goes a Warfare at his own charge? The Lord h^^h
ordained that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

Answ. I wonder you are not ashamed to plead for Tithes to be the Maintenance
of the Ministers of the Gospel, since you say the Lord has ordained that they
who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Here we see, that as he
maintenance of the Ministers of the Law, was Tithes in part, which is returned
to the Lord, to whom they belong; and the same Lord has ordained another
Maintenance, even of the Gospel, and Christ himself, and his Servants he sent
forth to preach, lived on that Maintenance, which was the free-gift of their
Hearers; read Luke 8. 1, 2 3. 4. and 10. 7. Phil. 4. 16, 17, 18. Act. 20. 34,
35. And thus Christ's Ministers did not war upon their own charge, for Christ
the chief Captain said unto them, Eat and drink such things as they Give, (and
not violently take from them, as you do) for the Labourer is worthy of his
hire, Luke 10. 7. and thus they that preach the Gospel do live of the Gospel,
and not desire the Heave Offering of the Law. But you much resemble some of the
greedy Priests in the time of the Law, that were not content with the Lord's
allowance then, but thrust your flesh-hook in every poor-mans Kettle, 1 Samuel 2.
13, 14. as says the Prophet, taking up all with the Angle, and catch them in
their Net, to make their portion fat, and their meat plenteous; Hab. 1. 15, 16.
Like Micha's wandering Priest, who made his bargain by the year, and if a bigger
Living be proffered, away you go, Judge. 18. as an Hireling, Joh. 10. This is a
common practice with the wandering Stars of your Church, which are no true
Guides to poor souls.

And now let us hear what William Thorp, one of the Martyrs, witnesses against
you, in his Testament in Fox's Act and Mon. This Priesthood (says he) is blown
so high, and born up in pride, and vain glory of their Estate and Dignity, and
so blinded with worldly Covetousness, the^ disdain to follow Christ in very
meekness, and wilful poverty, living holily, and preaching God's Word truly,
freely, and continually, taking their livelihood at the free will of the
people, of their pure Alms, where and when they suffice not for their busy
preaching to get their sustenance with their hands; to this sentence, grounded
on Christ's own living, and teaching of his Apostles, these foresaid worldly
and fleshly Priests will not consent effectually. Surely, Mr. Crawford, if this
man were alive, you would account him rather for a Brownist, than approve of
his doctrine, though you now garnish his Tomb, as the persecuting Israelites
did the Tombs of the Prophets, whom their forefathers had slain, Mat. 23. 29.

Again, You say, What Law Christ abrogated is plain, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Col. 2.
14. which places were never against us, nor any partition between Jew and
Gentile, because the Gentiles paid Tithes to their false gods, as the Jews did
to the true one; in this particular there was an Agreement betwixt them: for
Cyrus King of Persia offered Tithes to Jupiter, the Romans to their gods;
Lucullus grew rich because he paid Tithe to Hercules, others to Apollo, and the
like: from which and the like testimonies it is clear there was no partition
between Jew and Gentile.

Answ. Sir, belike those two Scriptures, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. and Col. 2. 14. were
so clear against your Tithe, which was a part of the Law contained in
Ordinances, that you now have put a false gloss upon them, as other Corrupters
of Scripture do, 2 Cor. 2. 17. 2 Timothy 3. 8.

The foundation of your Argument is, That those Ordinances the Apostle speaks
of in the two forementioned Scriptures, which in Col. 2. 8. he calls worldly
rudiments, and in Gal. 4. 3, 9. beggarly elements, such as was Circumcision,
chapter 5. 2, 3. observing of Days and Months, Col. 2. 16. offering of Sacrifice,
paying of Tithe, and the like, which witnesses to the keepers of that Law they
were debtors to God, miserable sinners, under the Curse, unless they saw and
learned Christ in them, by whom the Bond is cancelled, and Curse done away: but
those that yet perform any part of that Law, spoken of in Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. and
the like, as Tithes was a part, a Heave Offering in the Law, deny Christ to be
ever in the World: But Mr. Crawf. acknowledges Christ to be come in words, and
to have abrogated that Law, yet denies him in works (Tit. 1. 16.) in receiving
Tithe; as all Offerings in Moses Law were part of that Law: Therefore, as I
said before, the foundation of your Argument is, That those Ordinances which
God commanded the Children of Israel to do, as aforesaid, The Heathen doing the
same to their false gods, made no partition between Jew and Gentile. Then it is
evident to any that are acquainted with Scripture or History, that they
imitated almost all things done in Israel, as Tithes (say you), and Temples,
Altars, Sacrifices, and the like, Act. 14. 13. Numb. 22. 8, 9, 18. and 23. 2,
3. And as Israel carried the Mysteries, or Book of the Law, in the Ark or
Coffer, Exodus 25. and Deuteronomy. 31. 25, 26. so did the Heathen the Mysteries of
their gods, L. Apul. de Asin^aur. lib. 11. so by your ground there was never
any partition between Jew and Gentile, in what the Gentiles imitated the Jews
in, and so the Apostle's words are vain.

Moreover, you say, Those the Apostles converted unto the Faith of Christ, they
forbade them not to pay the Heathen Priests the Maintenance settled on them by
the Laws of the several Nations.

Answ. Though all particulars are not expressed in the form of words we would
have them, yet a general Exhortation is sufficient to Godliness. We are then
taught by the Apostle, not to touch, taste, or handle the Commands or Doctrines
of men, though they have a show of will worship, Col. 2. 21, 22, 23. being
contrary to a plain Law, as it is written, Honor the Lord with thy Substance,
Prove. 3. 9, 10. and, as another Prophet says, Their sorrows shall be
multiplied that hasten after another god, or give gifts to another, Psalm. 16.
4. But the primitive Christians left none of their Estates to supply the
Heathen Priests, but employed their substance for the need of the Poor Saints,
Act. 2. 44, 45. as through that Book is plentifully showed, and in the
Epistles. And Sir, examine your Conscience, Would you be willing to pay the
Pope the Smoak-penny, or Peter's-penny, which the people in this Land sometime
have done? would your Parishioners like such a doctrine? and I hope they will
seriously read and consider these few lines, and beware of being misled any
longer by such a Guide as you are, who care not what you say for your gain from
your quarter, Isa. 56. 10, 11, 12. though you destroy a Nation, Hab. 1. 15, 16,
17.

Again, You confess the Apostle commands those Christians converted to
separate from the Idolaters company, and have no fellowship with them. What a
Paradox is this, that they must separate from them in their Persons, and yet
give their Estates to maintain their Idolatry! It is written, Converts shall
bring their Treasure to serve Christ in his Kingdom, Isa. 22. 18. as in Act.
11. 29. Phil. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18. for what they enjoy is but lent of the Lord,
and they, as Stewards, must give an account how they have used it, 1 Chronicles. 29.
14, 15, 16, 17. so that all persons are commanded to glorify God in their
Bodies and Spirits, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and honor the Lord with their Substance,
Pro. 3. 9. So then to maintain a false Minister, that is none of Christ's, is
to maintain an Idol, Zech. 11. 7. and we are commanded, as it is written,
Little Children, keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5. 21.

And lastly, As it was unlawful by God's Law to bring the Hire of a Whore into
the House of God, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. the Pope having appointed Tithes to maintain a
Whorish Service, so Tithes became the Hire of a Whore, Therefore let all
persons take heed lest they rebel against God's Law, in paying Tithes.

FINIS.

