More Work FOR THE DEAN.

In a Brief Answer to some Scandalous Reports, Published by Dr. STILLINGFLEET,
in his Book, Entitled, An Impartial Account of the History, Nature and Pleas
of the present Separation from the Communion of the Church of England; against
some of the Lords faithful Servants, namely, Mr. Henry Barrow, Mr. John
Greenwood, Mr. John Penry, who by the Bishops means, after long Imprisonment,
were put to death, contrary to Queen Elizabeth's mind, in the year 1593, because
they refused. Communion with the Church of England, by reason of the many
Popish Corruptions in the Ministry, and Worship retained therein: And also for
bearing their Testimony against the same; which is still the Cause many
Thousand Protestants refuse Communion with the Church of England at this day.

As likewise here is word for word the Petition of those persecuted Christians,
wherein is showed the Barbarous Usage of the Bishops to them.

Together with the Refutation of the then Esteemed Bishop of Winchester's
Blasphemous Doctrine, by Mr. Henry Barrow; with the Description of the true
Church of God, according to Christ's Testament, by the whole Church at London,
whom the Doctor calls Brownists; with the reason why they were so Nicknamed
by their Enemies. Very needful for all true Protestants to know.

By Thomas Wall.

Prove. 31. 8. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such a^ are
appointed to destruction.

LONDON, Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1681.

To the most Noble and Sincere hearted Protestants, Grace, Mercy and Peace be
multiplied.
IT may seem a thing very strange in nature for a Lamb, without fear, to meet a
Lion in the open field: As it was in Little David, when by faith he Encountered
with great Goliath; the Champion of the Pblistines; even so it may seem strange
to some, that so mean an instrument shall without fear meet. Dr. Stillingfleet,
fo great a Champion, in the open field. But seeing he has, with Goliath,
despised or desied that little flock of Christ's faithful Servants, the
heavenly Armies of the living God; therefore I cannot keep silent, having, with
David, the Lord on my side; his Truth for my Sword and Buckler; therefore for
the Honor of the Lord Jesus Christ, and love I bear to all his Servants, I
shall herein defend the Rights and Prerogatives of my Lord and Savior; That he
is the only Archbishop, Lord Spiritual, and Lawgiver to his Church, in all
things appertaining to the worship of his Father; And shall stand by the same
testimony which any of the Lords Servants have born against the Doctor, and all
the Canons of his Church to the contrary.

Secondly, Among all the Enemies of Gods people, the most wicked'st are those
that under the Visage of Christianity, would be reckoned among the Lords
Protestant people; in word, declaring they are on Christ's side, but in their
Works and Writings manifest their hatred against him, and all his faithful
Servants, for no other cause, but by manifesting their love to Christ, in
keeping his Commandment in Gods Worship, and bearing their testimony against
all men's inventions to the contrary: such an enemy has the Doctor manifested
himself to be to the Christians herein mentioned, in the false Reports
published against them, to the Defamation of their persons, their Writings, and
the Truth they professed and maintained, as is hereafter plainly discovered
concerning their Faith in the Description of the true Church of God, with all
her Officers, and in what order Christ has commanded in his Testament, for
them to walk therein, with Church. State Ministry, together with its holy
Order, I desire the Doctor to compare with his Church and Ministry, and then
declare to the world, which he believes in his conscience is the true Church
of God. If God be pleased to open his eyes, and carry him above all earthly
Wisdom, by his Spirit, unto an exceeding high Mountain, the height Rev. 21. 10.
of Israel, to behold the City filled with the glory of God; and unless God
does be his Ezekiel. 17. 22, 23. and 40. 2. Rev. 21. 11. Eccl. 10. 15.
help, he, with the Apostate Israelites, will still weary himself, and not know
how to find the way to the City; in which City, by the Canon or holy Rules
thereof, Christ has appointed for her Officers, Pastors, Teachers, Elders and
Deacons, Ephesians. 4. But the 7th Canon of the Doctors Church says, Whosoever
shall affirm, that the Government of that Church by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest that do bear office, is Antichristian, or
repugnant to the word of God, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and so
continue, until he repent, and publicly revoke his wicked Errors. Christ Jesus
has appointed the whole form of Gospel Worship to be learned out of his
Testament, and that it be agreeable to the Isa. 8. 20. Act. 20. 27.
same, upon pain of all the Curses in Gods Book, to him that adds or
diminishes to Rev. 22. 18. Prove. 30. 6.
or from. But the 4th Canon of the Doctors Church says, Whosoever shall
affirm, that the form of Gods worship, established by Law, and contained in the
book of Common Prayer, is a corrupt and superstitious, or unlawful worship of
God, or contains any thing in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures, let him
be excommunicated ipso facto, and such like, wherein is preferred the
Traditions and Orders of men to be equal to the inspired Rules in Christ's
Testament.

Now let me ask the Doctor, whether he believes in his conscience, that when
he comes to appear before the Lord Jesus, the chief Judge, that he shall be
judged for the breach of his Church Canons, or for the breach of Christ's
Canons, in his Testament; seeing the word of God tells us, that whatsoever
man that has engaged himself to be a worshipper of God, and shall break the
holy Rules in Worship he has promised to keep; and after Gods order, by
brethren, used for his recovery, Matthew. 18. if he stand obstinate, then that
which the Church, by the Rules of Christ, does by excommunicating him on earth,
is confirmed in heaven: but the curse for the breach of man's Canons in worship,
though pretended to God in worship, is the curse causeless, which shall not
come, Prove. 26. 2. But the curse turned into a blessing, upon all that do, Rev.
22. 11.
to wit, the Commandments of the Lord Jesus: they only have right to the Tree
of life, and may enter in through the gates in the City. So that it is not
enough for the Doctor to think it is sufficient for him, or his hearers to
believe verbally that Christ is the Son of God come in the flesh, as the only
foundation of Religion; but they that do expect salvation by Christ's Merits,
must not only believe he is the Son of God, but by their obedience confess the
same, that as a Son was he faithful in his house or Church, as Moses the
Prophet, like unto Moses the only Lawgiver for Gospel worship, as aforesaid;
which the Doctor does not obediently believe, so long as he retains the
Popish Office of a Dean, for one of Christ's Gospel Ministers, as though Christ
was not wise enough to give Titles fit for his Ministers. But as we read of the
Romish Church, that woman which sits upon a sear let colored beast, full of
the names of blasphemy: this name Dean proceeding from thence, may be reckoned
among them, Rev. 13. 1. and 17. 3.

And, lastly, as every true Christian must not only believe that Christ is the
Son of God come in the flesh, but also they must walk in him, rooted and
established, following Christ by the example of the Primitive Churches
commended in them: As when Israel had gone from the pure keeping in worship to
God, his Ordinances, and the Cove-Hant Mal. 2. 8.
of Levi, the call of the Lord to them, to reform their ways by the prophet
Malachi, was to remember the Law of Moses, and not Mal. 4. 4.
the Tradition, or Canons of men: and until this was done, they that feared the
Lord had separated from them, and spoke often one to another, and a book of
remembrance was Isa. 42. 4.
written for them, that thought on his Name, even his Law, and partook not in
the evil of the transgressors. Even so, when after the long Mat. 12. 21.
Apostasy of Christians, the Lord called them to come out of Babylon, and to
reform their Rev. 18. 4.
ways, but not by the Canons of men, but by the everlasting Gospel, taught by
the Servants of God in King Edward, Queen Elizazabeth, King James, and in King
Charles the 1st and 2d. to this day; and until this work be done, all that fear
the Lord do separate themselves, and speak often one to another: for which they
are and were still persecuted, reproached and defamed; but by whom but by the
Devil, called the Dragon and Serpent, Rev. 2. 10.
in his servants, out of whose mouths comes floods of teproaches to destroy the
woman, Rev. 12. 15.
had not the earth then, and still does by more than an ordinary Providence
help the woman, in drinking up, or rather hindering the work Verse 16.
of persecution.

Thus hoping the Doctor will lay these things to heart; and who knows, seeing
among Adams Sons some men for their malice and fury are compared to Lions, 2 Timothy 4. 17. but God in his mercy may give him grace to the changing of his
fierce nature. If the Lord by the Arrows of his Truth prick his heart, Psalm.
45. 5. Acts 2. 37. Heb. 4. 12. that so he may yield obedience to Christ Jesus,
and lie down with the Lambs in the Lords holy Mountain, even Sion his true
Church, Isa. 11. 7. Heb. 12. 22. where it is said, the Lords people shall be
all Righteous, Isa. 60. wise as Serpents, harmless as Doves, men in
understanding, children in malice, 1 Cor. 14. for such only can have right to
enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18. 3. that so he may for the time to come
see himself in the glass of Gods word new born, all his fleshly glory and
honor fading away by the Spirit of God blowing on him; so shall he beat his
sword of bitter words into ploughsheares, that by the word of God the fallow
ground of his uncircumcised heart be broken up, the seed of Gods truth sowed
therein watered by the heavenly dew of his grace, that he may bring forth the
fruits of righteousness, Jam. 3. 18. Heb. 12. 14.
which is peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
face of God; which is and shall be the prayers for the very enemies of him who
is the Lords unworthy servant,

Tho. Wall,

More Work FOR THE DEAN: Or, A brief ANSWER To some Scandalous Reports
published by Dr. Stillingfleet, etc.
THerefore among the many sore Travels King Solomon beheld among the Sons of
men, this, says he, is one, That for every right work a man is envied of his
neighbor, Eccles. 4. 4. Psalm. 106. 16. Numb. 11. 29. Matt. 26. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Now if that were a right work in the Lords Servants of old, in calling the
Lords people out of the temporal Babylon, to separate themselves from all the
filthiness of those Heathens, Ezra. 6. 21. that they might enter into Covenant
with the Lord, to serve or worship him, as he had given commandment by the hand
of Mose's both in Ministry, Ordinances and Order, for which work they were
envied of their Neighbors, Nehem. 4 and 5 Chapters; even so it was a-like
right work in these latter days, for the Lords Servants to call his elected
ones out of the Romish Sodomy, Egyptian and Spiritual Babylon, Rev. 11. 8. and
18. 4. that they might separate themselves from their abominable filthiness in
worship and nature, that so with the Lord they might enter into the Covenant of
the Gospel, Acts 2. 47. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Isa 62. 5. Ezekiel. 16 8. to worship him as
the Son of God, Christ Jesus, had appointed in his last Will and Testament,
both in Ministry, Ordinances, Time and Order; and for this right work, among
others, was Mr. Barrow, Mr. Greenwood, and Mr. Penry envied then to death by
their Neighbors, and now again, after their death, envied by Dr.
Stillingfleet, to the desamation of the memory (Prove. 10. 7.) of those whom God
had blessed, and are now at rest in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13.

2dly. The evil way this Doctor has taken to vent his envy against these
Servants of God, is, first, in calling their Books seditious; and therefore
because he could not prove it, he is driven to make use of the false reports of
their Enemies, such as never disclaimed against the succession of their
Ministry received from the Bishops, nor yet their vain School Titles of
Bachelor in Divinity, a Title not found in Christ's Testament, set in the front
of that Book called the Bloody Tenet, out of which Book, the Doctor tells us,
that Mr. Cotton said, Mr. Dod told him, that when Mr. Barrow was under the
Gibbet, he lift up his eyes and said, If I be deceived, thou have deceived me.
To which I answer, If Mr. Barrow did say those words, it might be drawn from
him upon the same occasion the like words, were drawn from the Prophet
Jeremiah, when the Priests and false Prophets seeing his constancy and
faithfulness in the Lords message against their evil doings (Jer. 20. 8, 10.)
derided him, which occasioned him to say, O Lord thou have deceived me, and I
was deceived, thou art stronger than I, and have prevailed: I am in derision
daily, every one mocketh me. Even so some of the Clergy being present when Mr.
Barrow suffered death, seeing his constant, testimony against their evil
doings, might deride him, and so might occasion those words from him. Surely if
the Doctor had had any thing worth noting against this man, a few Pages in his
Book should not have contained it: Thus all may see, it is more of malice than
of any just matter he had against him. And why at this time? Because the memory
of Mr. Barrow, Mr. Greenwood, and Mr. Penry was lately revived in a Christian
Warning-piece, presented to the Kings Majesty last April; so that if Mr.
Barrows Books therein mentioned, should be again sought after, which does so
lively discover the abomination of that Ministry of which the Doctor is one,
therefore he has endeavored to disgrace their persons, that their labors
might not be regarded; and therefore it will not be amiss by the way, to note
what Mr. Barrow has written, in one of his Books called the Discovery, which
the Doctor called seditious, for comparing the true Ministry of Christ and the
Ministry of Antichrist together; that as light makes manifest, so in laying
down Christ's true Ministry, the abomination of all other by it may be
discovered; of which subject in particular, Mr. Barrows words are these in his
Discovery, page 46.

The Ministry appointed by Christ unto the Government of Church be of two
sorts, Elders and Deacons, Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 5. Romans 12. Acts 20.
28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8. Acts 6. The Elders, some of them to give
attendance unto the public Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, as the Pastor
and Teacher; the other Elders together with them, to give attendance to the
public Government of the Church. The Deacons office, to attend to the
gathering and distributing the Contribution of the Church, for the maintenance
of the Ministry and Poor, 1 Cor. 16.

Now (says Mr. Barrow) to come to the Ministry of the Church of England, which
is so manifold and diverse as I know not how to begin to describe it; but let it
first be divided in these three sorts: 1. Reigning or governing. 2. Serving;
and 3 Collegiate. 1. Of the reigning and governing Ministers, are Arch bishops,
Lord Bishops, Arch Deacons, Chancellors, Commissaries, all of the High
Commission; as likewise such Civil Doctors, Proctors, Registers, Scribes,
Pursevants, Sumners, as attend upon their Courts of Faculties, Prerogative
Archees, Delegates. 2. Of the serving sort are, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Hireling Lecturies, Vagrant and Mercenary Preachers, House priests, Chaplains,
half priests, or Catechisers, Churchwardens, Side men, Quest-men,
Parish-Clarks. 3. Of the ministry Collegiate, are Lord Bishops, Deans, Sub
deans, Prebendaries, Canons, Petit Canons, Gospellers, Epistlers, Singing-men,
Singing boys, Vergers, Sextons. This division, I suppose, will well near
suffice for their Officers. But now how to divide or distinguish their Offices,
I know not, I am so unlearned and ignorant of such great secrets and high
mysteries; neither yet have I skill to marshal them in their degrees of honor
which I have heard say they have both in the Commonwealth and in their Schools,
as their Primate, their Metropolitan Graces, their Palatine Lord Bishops, and
their Barony Lordships, all which I wene be Peers of the Realm and Estates of
the Land. Now there are also certain Doctors of Divinity, and Batchellors of
Divinity, which have many great privileges and prerogatives of the Cap, the
Scarlet Gown, the Hood, the Habit, the Tippet, the Ring, the Chair, the one of
them being a Knights fellow, the other an Esquires, in any ground in England;
also how capable these are by Statute of how many Benefices, I cannot tell.

Now surely this discovery does not a little torment the Doctor, to cause him
to be so malicious against Mr. Barrow to disgrace him now he is dead, Papist
like, who burnt the bones of such as they call Heretics, many years after they
have murdered them, when as they did as Mr. Barrow has done, that is, bear
their testimony against the Rabble of Antichrists ministry, as is noted out of
the Book of Martyrs in the foresaid Christian Warning-piece to the King p. 23.
for what comfort can those have which call themselves ministers, and cannot
prove their Ordination to be according to Gospel Order, when at the last day
they will say, Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name, and cast out devils
in thy name, and have done many wondrous works, when Christ shall say to them,
I know you not; depart from me ye workers of iniquity? For is it not iniquity
for any to take upon them the name of a Dean instead of a Pastor, and to be a
persecutor rather than a preserver, and so contrary to Gods plain Law, to be a
talebearer, as it written, Levit. 19. 16, 17. Thou shall not go up and down as
a tale bearer among thy people; yea, to reproach the deceased Saints of the
Lord calling their Books seditious, not only for pleading that the ministry
appointed by Christ might by Protestants be embraced, but also for reproving
the blasphemous Doctrine of T. C. the then esteemed Bishop of Winchester, in
his Book against Martin Marprelate, namely this, that the Orders and Ordinances
which Christ has in his Testament left unto his Church, were but temporary,
whilst the Church was under Heathen Tyrants; and that where the Gospel is
embraced by a Christian Prince, they are not only not necessary but
inconvenient, yet intolerable, as bringing the utter subversion of the Land,
raising up rumults and uproars, and withdrawing the people from obedience unto
their Magistrates. Unto which Mr. Barrow replieth, that there ought throughout
all ages and estates of the world, in all places to be one and the same form of
outward Government in all true Churches of Christ unto the worlds end, scil.
that Apostolical primitive pattern left unto us in Christ's Testament, and none
other; which undoubted truth Mr. Barrow against the Bishops confirms both from
the Law and Gospel, in these words. The Lord when he erected his Tab^rnacle
among the Israelites, gave them a perfect pattern in all things, even to the
least instrument, hook, or tape therein, as also the whole composition of every
thing belonging thereunto, with all the Ordinances thereof, and left nothing to
the will and discretion of Moses, whose commendation was, that he was faithful
in all his house, as a servant, for a testimony of these things that were to be
spoken after, Exodus 25. Heb. 8. 5. Heb. 3. also we read of David in the
distribution of the order and functions of the Priests and Levites, and
likewise of Solomon and Zerubbabel in building the material Temple, how
perfectly the Lord set down the matter, form, number, size, place, order, and
use of every thing belonging thereunto, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11. as also what perfect
Laws was given by God for every thing to be done; and likewise how jealous the
Lord was over his Sanctuary; and what severe judgments was upon all them that
transgressed the least of his Ordinances, as is seen in Nadab, Abihu, Lev. 10.
Corah and his company, Numb. 16. on Eli and his sons, 1 Samuel 4. and sundry the
like: Now may we suppose God is less jealous, careful, provident over his
glorious Temple of lively stones, which consists of the bodies and souls of
his Saints, for the structure, instruments, form, order, and ordinances, which
shall abide to the worlds end, than he was of the other which consisted but of
wood and stone, and was to abide but for a time, being but a type and shadow of
the spiritual; if we think so, let the New Testament convince us, wherein is
left unto us a most exact, lively, and express pattern for all things
concerning the ministry, ordinances, maintenance, time, and order; therefore
Christ is said to be faithful (Heb. 3. 6.) in his own house as a Son, who is
the head of his body the Church (Col. 1. 18.) of the living God, the only Lord
spiritual and Archbishop of their soul, 1 Pet. 2. 25. If the Dr. be, as may be
supposed he is of the Bishops mind, by embracing an Office not once named in
Christ's Testament, to wit, a Dean, by it allowing that the Orders appointed by
Christ were but temporary; so that Christ's Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders
and Deacons, is not allowed by the Doctor to remain perpetual: When he has
proved it, he may be believed; and until then, Mr. Barrows testimony herein is
truth, and the contrary seditious: And they that own any other Ministry, Order,
or Ordinances in Gospel Worship than Christ has appointed, is intolerable, to
the utter subversion of all good orders in Christ's Church, and precurer of the
Judgments to come on that Land. Now if the Doctor will not believe this to be a
truth, though a truth proved by Scripture, because those he calls Brownists
declare it; I hope he will believe it, if some of the Ministers of his own
Church says it in the Admonition to the Parliament, in the Thirteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign; they in opposition to the Ministry of Arch and Lord
Bishops declare in the Epistle, Either we must have a right (Matt 9. 37 Ephesians. 4.
11, 12) Ministry of God, a right Government of his Church, Matt. 18. 15, 16,
17. according to the Scriptures, both which we lack; or else there can be no
right Religion, nor yet from the contempt thereof, can Gods Plagues be from us
any while deferred. And further, they say in Page 2. We allow and like well of
Popish Massmongers, men for all seasons, King Henry's Priests, Queen Mary's
Priests, who of a truth, if Gods Word were precisely kept, should from the same
be utterly removed. Now to leave this to the Doctors consideration, I shall in
the next place better inform the Doctor what end Mr. Barrow made that so the
Doctor may be ashamed to own his false report in his Book.

I find in a book Printed a little after Mr. Barrows death, in the year 1593,
Entitled Henry Barrow's Platform, by reason of some things Mr. Barrow had
Written, was after his death Printed: In which, the Publisher declares in
these words, A Gentleman of a good House told me, that Queen Elizabeth asked
the Learned Doctor Raynols what he then thought of those Two men Henry Barrow
and John Greenwood? he answered her Majesty, that it could not avail any thing
to show his judgment concerning them, seeing they were put to death; and being
loath to speak his mind further, Her Majesty charged him upon his Allegiance to
speak; whereupon he answered, that he was persuaded, if they had lived, they
would have been Two as worthy Instruments for the Church of God as has been
raised up in this Age. Her Majesty sighed and said no more. But after that she
riding to a Park near the place where they suffered death, called again to mind
their suffering of death; and being willing to take farther information
concerning them, demanded of the Earl of Cumberland who was present when they
suffered, What end they made? He answered, A very godly end, and prayed for
your Majesty, the State: moreover says the same Author, Mr. Philips, a
preacher famous, both seeing and hearing Mr. Barrow his holy speeches and
preparations for death, said, Barrow! Barrow! my soul be with thine. By all
which it appears, that this report which the Doctor has taken out of Mr.
Cotton's book, printed above 40. years after their death; and then, but that
Mr. Cotton should say Mr. Dod told him so, is very false; and the rather to be
believed it was false, because Mr. Cotton, though he went into New England, yet
could never forsake the order of his ministry received from the Bishops, nor
yet glorying in their vain School titles, as in the title of his book before
noted, he styles himself John Cotton Batchellor in Divinity. These fleshly
titles Paul was ashamed of, and accounted them but dung, though he had as many
to glory in, as any man, Phil. 3. all which Mr. Barrow reproved, which Mr.
Cotton did not like, therefore could report a hearsay against Mr. Barrow,
though no more dishonor to Mr. Barrow nor the cause he dyed for, than it was
to the prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 20. and the cause he suffered for; both for the
good old way of the Lord, under the Law, the other under the Gospel Worship.

In the next place, the Doctor is pleased to publish against Mr. Penry, That
Mr. Hildersham should tell Mr. Cotton, both ministers of the bishops order,
that Mr. Penry should say a little before his death, That he had deserved death
at the Queens hands, for that he had seduced many of her loyal subjects to a
separation from hearing the word of life in the Parish Churches; which though
himself had learned to discern the evil of, yet could he never recover diverse
of her Majesty's subjects whom he had seduced. To which I answer, as the wise
man says, Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just; but
his neighbor comes and searches him. Now by search I find that report cannot
in the least measure be true: First, being but the report of his enemy; and why
his enemy, but as the Apostle was to some in the Church of Galatia, for telling
them the truth, Gal. 4. 16. 1 King. 22. 8. Mr. Penry as well as Mr. Barrow,
testified against Mr. Hildersham's ministry, which testimony I shall easily
prove he maintained to his death, as appears by the consession of his faith,
his Letter to the Church at London he was a member of. 3. His Letter to his
Wife, all written near that time of his death. In his Confession he thus
declares himself: I detest against the Pope, his triple crown, his usurped
jurisdiction of either of both swords. I detest the limbs of that body, their
spiritual power, as Cardinals, Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Suffragans, Abbots,
Friars, Deans (this word Dean may vex the Dr.) Arch deacons, Commissaries,
Officials, Monks, Canons, Pr^bends Priests. Besides this testimony, which is
sufficient to prove the report false Mr. Hildersham raised against Mr. Penry,
let me here add what Mr. Penry wrote to the Church at London whereof he was a
member, in these words, Beloved, let us think our lot and portion more than
happy or blessed, that now we are vouchsafed the favor not only to know and
profess, but also to suffer for the sincerity of the Gospel: let us remember,
that great is our reward in heaven, if we endure unto the end. I testify unto
you for mine own part, as I shall answer before Jesus Christ and his elect
Angels, that I never saw any truth more clear and undoubted, than this witness
wherein we stand, first, against false Offices. 2. Callings. 3. Works. 4
Maintenance left and retained in the Land; and I thank my God I am not only
ready to be bound and banished, but even to dye in this cause by his strength.
Yea, my brethren, I greatly long in regard of my self, to be dissolved, and to
live in the blessed kingdom of heaven. Thus having from my heart with tears
performed, it may be my last duty toward you all in this life, and remember to
stand fat and faithful in Jesus Christ, as you have received him unto your
immortality; and confirm and establish you to the end, for the praise of his
glory, Amen. The 24th of the 4th month, April, 1593. He suffered death May 24.
next after.

Now if these be not, with his former testimonies, sufficient to clear Mr.
Penry from the Doctors calumniations, all written (we see) a little before his
death; I shall add a third testimony, which as Solomon says, a threesold cord
is not easily broken; even the last words to his Wife, when close prisoner,
looking every day to be carried to the place of Execution, all in print
presently after his death, and yet to be seen at this day, in these words.

To my beloved Wife, Hellen or Penry, partaker with me in this life of the
sufferings of the Gospel, in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, and
resting with me in undoubted hope of the glory that shall be revealed; all
strength, comfort, with all other spiritual blessings, be multiplied through
Jesus, Christ our Lord, I see, my beloved, my blood is laid for, so my days
and testimony is drawing to an end, for ought I know; and therefore you so dear
a sister, and so loving a wife in the Lord, as you have been unto me: first
then I beseech you stand fast in the truth which you and I profess at this
present in much outward discomfort and danger; let your soul and your body be
far from those Assemblies which yield either known or secret submission unto
the ordinance of the beast; that is, to receive his marks either in the right
hand, or in the forehead, as the spirit of God says, Rev 13. 16. for this are
you forbidden to do under the pain of Gods eternal wrath, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. 2
Cor. 6. 14, 15. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Rev. 22 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32.
Again, my beloved continue a member of the holy society whereof you and I are,
where the Lord in his Ordinances reigns; for here, and in all such Assemblies
the Lord dwells by his presence and power of his spirit, Mat. 18. 2. ^^and
28. 20. and 29. 45 Lev. 26. 11, 12 here he is a mighty protector and defonce
ready at hand, Isa 26. 1. and 4. 6. and his Ordinances you know has. he
greatly commanded to be kept and observed, Psalm. 119. 14. 1 Cor. 11. 1. 1 Timothy
6. 14. and the loving kindness of the Eternal is for ever and ever toward them
and their seed that remember to do them, Psalm. 103. 17, 18. whereas all those
are accursed that err from his statutes, and diminish from the obedience they
owe unto his Majesty, Psalm. 119. 2. Rev. 22. 9. Psalm. 119 118. I pray you work
all these places, with all such like in the word against those that make a
slight matter either to walk in the ways of God, or to be subject to small
corruptions, as they account them. Be armed with the power of the word against
all such lying delusions, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. 2 These. 2. 9. In conclusion, my
dear wife and sister, look not at any earthly thing; consecrate your self
wholly both body and soul, husband, children, and whatsoever you have, unto the
Lord your God, let them not be dearer unto you than his worship and service;
know it, know it to be an unspeakable preferment for you that he vouchsafed to
take either your self or any of yours to suffer affliction with him and his
Gospel here on earth, Luke 8 29, 30. Mat. 19. 29. I am persuaded that you have
undergone the profession of the truth set down by our Savior, Luke 14. 26, 27.
that is, to hate all in respect of his Gospel: fear not want of outward things,
for the Lord cares for you and yours: remember what is set down Heb. 11. 5.
Luke 12. 31. the Lord is my God, and yours, and the God of our seed. Thus with
many sweet and heavenly admonitions and advice, he says, I got means this day
to write thus much unto you, whereof no creature knows: therefore in great
haste, with many tears, yet in great spiritual comfort of soul, your husband
now for a season, and your beloved brother for evermore John Penry, an unworthy
soldier sure of the victory in the blood of the Lamb, 1 Cor. 15. 57. Rev. 12.
11. salute the whole Church from me, especially those in bonds, meaning those
56. members of the Church in London taken on a Lords day as they were serving
God.

Now of the barbarous usage they sustained by the bishops, I shall after herein
set down word for word as themselves have declared in a Petition they presented
then to the Parliament. In the mean time let me beseech the Christian Reader
impartially to judge by this testimony of Mr. Penry left behind him, yet to be
seen, though printed in the year he suffered, whether that Report the Doctor
has published to defame a worthy servant of Christ, for no other cause but
because he as well as other of the Lords servants, contended against the
ministry of lordly Prelates, not once named in Christ's testament, and that
Protest ants should not persuade themselves they were true worshippers of God,
until they had expelled out from among them the many corruptions in ministry
and ordinances; the neglect of which good work still calls for the judgments
of God to come on the Nation, as was in a second Warning piece a few months ago
proved to be the chief cause still why God is bringing his severe judgments on
these three Protestant Nations, presented to the late Parliament.

And now to add to all the former causes of Gods judgments threatened to follow
Mr. Hildersham's footsteps, the Doctor is not content to satisfy himself with
that false report, but to imitate him in publishing that scandalous name
Brownist on all those people; unto which scandalous name, to show the Doctor
his false, or rather his malicious spirit, in saying Mr. Brown was one of those
people, I shall here for the Readers satisfaction set down what Answer to this
Mr. Johnson Pastor of the people, returned to Mr. Hildersham and Mr. Jacob,
both the Bishops ministers. As for the name Brownist by which we are
reproached, the primitive Christians were by the Priests and Pharisees called a
Sect of Nazarens. Acts 24. 5. every where spoken against, Acts the 28. 22. as
at this day Protestants are by the Papists called Calvinists, Zuinglians,
Heugonots. 2dly, Mr. Brown, from whom this byword was taken, is Minister of
Mr. Jacob's Church, and so of Mr. Hildershams, all Ministers of the Church of
England, and not of ours; yet holding, as we hear in his Judgment, the truth we
profess, but for his practice in Worship, rem^ineth still in Apostasy, wherein
they are. So then, not we, but Mr. Jacob and Mr. Hildersham may, if any, be
called Brownists. See Francis Johnson's Answer to Mr. Jacob, Entitled, A
Treatise of the Church of England, page 2. And A Treatise of the Ministry of
England, in Answer to Mr. Hildersham, page 94.

Moreover, because Doctor Stilling fleet durst not in his Conscience fight
against the Cause of God these Servants of Christ maintained after the way of
plain dealing, therefore fights covertly, under the Banner of other men, yet
of the same mind with himself; and among the many, Mr. Gifford another Minister
of the Bishops making, whom he makes one of his chief Armor-bearers (in this
railing fight, Dragon like, with floods of reproaches against Gods Servants
which keeps the Commandments of God, and have (in their Writings) the Testimony
of Jesus, Rev. 12. 16. And it was not so bitter then, but it would be as bad
now (if the earth did not by more than by an ordinary providence help the
Church, the Woman, Rev. 12. 15.) Moreover, this man, the Doctor, as I remember,
makes no less than Eight times mention of Mr. Gifford, in Twelve Leaves of his
Book, against the forenamed Christians. Now if he would have the world believe,
that what Mr. Gifford has wrote against them to be as Oracles, undeniable
truths, surely I may, by the same Rule, desire all men likewise to believe that
to be a truth what Mr. Gifford has wrote against the Doctors Church and
Ministry; and the rather to believe in the latter, because who can tell better
the evil of their ways, than he who was a Bird in the same Cage of confusion
with them? Rev. 18. 2.

Mr. Giffords words are these, Through want and absence of a sincere Ministry,
there is a flood of ignorance and darkness overflowing the Land for the most
part; the fear of God is banished from the greatest part: The wonderful heaps
and piles of sin which should be washed away by the Word do undoubtedly cry
aloud in the ears of the Lord for vengeance upon the whole Realm. The Devil,
says he, is content those Preachers should ride upon his back, because he is
sure they will spur-gaul him but a little, they be very gentle Riders. Do you
not think, if they should set forth Gods word as they ought, and spread the
Light, that all wicked men, of which their Parishes be full, would storm and
fret against them? The Devil himself would fisk about if they spur gaul him but
a little; but they can tell a smooth tail in the Pulpit, garnished with some
merry Story for to make the people merry, or else some old rotten. Allegory, or
some far-set matter out of some great Writer, that their people might be at
their wits end to admire them: A man would think to see the people come out of
the Church blowing, that they were fed as full as ticks, when they go home with
empty Bellies: This I dare warrant you; if it be not so let me lose both my
ears, go through the Parishes of these Learned Divines, and except such as
fetch their Victuals otherwhere, ye shall not find Five among Five-score able
to understand the necessary grounds and principles of Religion; y^a, the people
will say, they be excellent deep men; but I love not those Wells that a man can
draw no Water out of them: See Mr. Giffords Book Entitled Country Divinity,
noted by Henry Ainsworth, in his Counterpoyson, page 101. Thus it is to be
hoped, if the Doctor cannot refute this Testimony, he will never hereafter
speak against the forenamed Christians Testimony, which in this particular said
no other thing in effect, concerning the Doctors Church and Ministry, than Mr.
Gifford did.

Moreover, the Doctor is not satisfied to shoot his Arrows of bitter words
against the Ancient Separation, but, through their sides, against all the
Nonconformists in this day, envying at their due birthrights and privileges
given them of God and man in freedom to serve the Lord, as they are
enlightened; and if in any thing, as doubtless none but comes short in a
perfect understanding in all things how they ought to walk with God, the
Doctors duty was then to have by the evidence of Gods written Word, wherein
they failed, in the spirit of Love to have better informed their
understandings, and not as an enemy (to his dissenting brethren as he calls
them) to infinuate into the Magistrates minds, by publishing to the world, that
Liberty of Concience has occasioned the growth of Poperty in this Nation, but
how greatly has the Doctors heart deceived him in this as in the former, is
not my judgment only; that the occasion of the growth of Popery is by reason of
so many corruptions retained in his Ministry and Worship in his Church, as is
noted in the Two Christian Warning pieces, one to the King, the other to the
late Parliament; but it is confirmed by his Right hand man, and chief Armor
bearer in this Battle against the Lords Servants, Mr. Gifford, in a Dialogue
between a Papist and a Protestant; in the Epistle Dedicatory, word for word
thus set down by Henry Ainsworth in his Counterpoyson, page 19.

Some do wonder how it should come to pass, that among us there should be so
many, which being born since the Gospel was restored in this Land, are so
zealously addicted to Popery which they never did know, and so utter enemies to
the Gospel which they, hear; but if they weigh the cause of this deadly
mischief, they would cease wondering, and rather wonder that there be no more:
For how can it be, so long as there be so many abuses in the Ministry, but that
many shall stumble and loath the Gospel? for from hence, as it is manifest, the
chief cause of this evil does spring.

True it is that our ministry does fight against them, but in such sort that it
does greatly increase them, seeming and pretending to tread upon these
Cockatrice eggs for to break them, and to destroy utterly the Viperous
generation; when as indeed they sit upon them, and so hatch the brood of this
evil kind, and bring them forth in great plenty: for behold a number cry out
against Popery, and proclaim utter defiance in speech; but their doings are
such that for every one they convert to the Gospel, they cause an hundred to
revolt, to be hardened in their errors, or to fall into flat Atheism, while many
contrary to the profession which they made, when they entered, setting aside the
care of souls; not esteeming nor regarding what became of them study most how
to climb high and to satisfy their ambitious desires of honor, raking
together Livings cove^, ously and greedily, not caring who feed the flock, so
they may come by the fleece. Moreover the door has been opened also to let
into the Church a rout and swarm of such as are more like the priests of
Jeroboam, than ministers of the Gospel, not only unlearned Idols, which have
mouths and speak not; which being weary of their occupation, and covet to live
easily, and to that end entered, but also riotous, dicers, gamesters, quaffers,
quarrellers, adulterers, and such like: if the matter were secret, I should do
amiss to make it manifest; but when it is open in the sight and view of all
men, who can complain justly?

Now let the Reader observe; thus says the Apostle, If one of themselves, even
a prophet of their own says it, therefore this witness is true, Tit. 1. 12,
13. and indeed what have many of their ministers said less in the first and
second admonition to the Parliament in the 13. year of Q. Elizabeth's reign,
1530. p. 49. in these words, What encouragement and favor have they showed the
Papists, when the Papists have been complained upon? how have they opened their
ears (meaning the Bishops) to their complaints against the ministers, and shut
their ears when the Papists have been complained upon? yea, some have said,
that conformable Papists were more tolerable than these Precisians and godly
men that seek for Reformation: Who be their Chancellors but most suspected
Papists? And where have they their most countenance, but of the Bishops? I hear
not of one of them, but is a briber. Who be their Sumners, but very Varlets?
What are their Canonists but suspected Papists? They wring their brethren if
they be Gods children, and let the papists go scot-free, or be punished but
lightly. And what more is expressly forbidden in the Scriptures, than those
names and offices which Christ has forbidden his ministers to be called,
gracious Lords, Luke 21. 25. 28. and many such things worth the observing by
all those that have the Book by them.

Thus I hope it is sufficiently proved, that it is not liberty of conscience
that is the cause Popery has increased in this land, but the gross abuses in
the Doctors Church and Ministry. Moreover, if the Lord of old was not against
liberty of conscience in things spiritual, who compelled not the Gibeonites,
Hittites, Gergashistes, or unclean Israelites that lived in the Lords Land, to
keep his Fast or Feast, or to do any part of his worship by the Civil Sword no
more it is the mind of God under the Gospel, Josh. 16. 10. Lev. 15. 44. 2 Cor.
7. 8. neither could the Doctor have been so ignorant of that, or so plain a
Gospel doctrine, if his study were spent as much in the book of God, as in
History; for as much as Christ Jesus, Creator and Lord of the whole earth, has
divided it freely to all Nations under the whole heavens, to dwell therein, and
appointed the bounds of their habitations, Genesis 10. 32. Acts 17. 26. and
accordingly Christ has expounded the parable, that the field is the world,
Mat. 13. 38. wherein the good seed, children of the kingdom; and the tares,
children of the wicked one, are allowed by Christ to grow together, though not
in the Church, Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. Prove. 25. 4, 5. Genesis 4. 6. Gal. 4. 30.
but in the field (unless the Doctor thinks the whole world be the Church) until
the Harvest or end of the world; for the Lord does cause his Sun to shine on
the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust; how then
dare mortal man by persecution debar his fellow creatures from the liberty
given them of God, so long as they do to all men as they would have others do
to them? but when they do otherwise contrary to the second table of Gods law,
the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13. 4. For he is the
minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil: surely
then it may be said to such that seek to have their brethren persecuted, they
do therein as it were call for fire to come down from heaven to destroy them,
Luke 9. 54. unto such Christ says, they know not what spirit they are of: for
who is he, O man, that makes thee to differ from another? 1 Cor. 4. 7. or have
thou any good in thee since thy fall, that thou have not received? therefore
man ought to know, that it is God only which persuades Japhet to dwell in the
tents of Shem, Genesis 9 27. so that to force men to be religious before God
gives them faith, is to make a Church of hypocrites, such as all persecuting
spirits are; and this spirit was ever seen in Lordly Prelates and their
accomplices, as by woeful experience the forenamed Christians felt, whom the
Dr. has reproached; as it is to be seen in a Petition in Q. Elizabeth's days
they presented to the Parliament aforementioned, seasonable in this day for all
Protestants to be acquainted with, concerning the Bishops cruelty to the
Nonconformists then, that would neither touch, taste, nor handle any popish
tradition or corruption either in Ministry or Worship. The Petition word for
word as follows.

The humble, most earnest, and lamentable Complaint and Supplication of the
persecuted Church and Servants of Christ called Brownists.

THE most high God, possessor of heaven and earth, brings at this present
before your Lordships and Wisdoms, Right Honorable, his own cause, his own
people, and his own sworn and most treacherous enemies, together with the most
shameful usage of his truth and servants, that ever has been heard of in the
days of Sions professed peace and tranquillity.

His cause and people he offers unto your consideration and defense in our
profession and persons, his enemies and their outrage against his truth and
servants in the persons and bloody proceedings of the Prelates of the Land and
their Accomplices.

We profess the same faith and truth of the Gospel which her Majesty and your
Honors, the whole Land, and all the Reformed Churches under heaven this day do
hold and maintain, we go beyond them, being our only fault even in the
judgments of our tyrannical and most savage enemies, in the detestation of all
Popery, that most fearful Antichristian Religion, and draw nearer in some
points by our practice, unto Christ's holy order and institution; this is our
faith, this is our cause in our sinful hands, and for the profession and
maintenance of which faith, the forenamed enemies of God detain in their hands
within the prisons about London, not to speak of other Gaols throughout the
Land, about threescore and twelve persons, men and women, young and old, lying
in cold, in hunger, in dungeons, in irons; of which number they have taken the
Lords day last past, being the third of the fourth month 1592. about some 56.
persons hearing the word of God truly taught, praying and praising God for all
his favors showed unto us, and unto her Majesty, your Honors, and the whole
Land, desiring our God to be merciful unto us, and to our gracious Princess and
Country; being employed in these holy actions, and no other, as the parties
who disturbed us can testify: they were taken in the very same place where the
persecuted Church and martyrs were enforced to use like exercise in Q. Mary's
days. The former number are now unbailably committed by the Prelates or bishop
of London, into close, for the most, in several prisons, as Bridewell, the
Clink, the Gatehouse, the Limbo or Dungeon in Newgate, the Fleet, the
Marshalsey, the Counter, the White-Lyon: wherein we willingly acknowledge the
lot and inheritance in this life, of our forefathers, and brethren, and holy
martyrs of the former age, and the entailed Aceldema, or blood succession of
the Sea of London, and that whole Lineage. Well, here our brethren lie, how
long Lord holy and true, thou know! in dungeons, in hunger, in cold, and in
nakedness, with all outward distresses, for these bloody men will allow them
neither meat, drink, fire, lodging, nor suffer any whose hearts the Lord would
stir up for their relief, to have any access unto them, purposing belike to
imprison them unto death, as they have done seventeen or eighteen others in the
same noisome Gaols within these six years; the wife and husband now taken by
them, they permit not to be in the same, but have sent them to be closely kept
in other Prisons; what the poor Family does at home in the mean time, your
Lordships may consider, and justly pity: Some of the Company had not one Penny
about them when they were sent to Prison, nor any thing being abroad, which is
the case of most of them, if not all, to procure themselves and their poor
Families any maintenance, save only their handy Labors and Trades; whereby it
is come to pass, that these enemies of God, do not only starve and undo a
number of men in Prisons, but even a lamentable company of poor Orphans and
Servants abroad; their unbridled slanders, their lawless privy searches, their
violent breaking open and rifling our Houses, their lamentable and barbarous
usage of Women and young Children in these hostile assaults, and ever robbing
and taking away whatsoever they think meet from us. In this Case their
unappeased, merciless pursuit of us from our Houses, Trades, Wife and Children,
especially from the holy Society of the Saints and Church of God, we are forced
to omit, lest we should be over-tedious to your Lordships; but their dealings
this way toward us is so woeful, Right Honorable, as we may truly demand, with
grief of heart, whether the foreign enemy, or our own Native Country men do
possess and bear Rule over us in our dear and native Country?

Their whole dealings herein is most barbarous, inhumane, but especially most
Antichristian, and such as exceed the cruelty of Heathens and Popish professed
Tyrants and persecutors: The Records of the Heathen persecution under Nero,
Trajan, Desius, Gallianus, Maximinian, can scant afford us any examples of like
cruelty and havoc; for the Heathen Romans would murder openly and
professedly; these godless men have put the blood of War about them in the Day
of Peace and Truce, which the whole Land professes to hold with Christ Jesus
and his Servants. Bishop Bouner, Story, Weston dealt not after this sort, for
those whom they committed close, they brought them in short space openly into
Smithfield to end their misery, and to begin their never-ending joy; whereas
Bishop Elmor, Doctor Stanhope, and Mr. Justis Young, with the rest of that
persecuting and blood-thirsty faculty, will do neither of these; no Fellon, no
Murderer, no Traitor in the Land are thus dealt with.

There are many of us by the Mercies of God still out of their hands; the
former exercise and profession we purpose not to leave by the assistance of
God: We have as good warrant to reject the ordinances of Antichrist, and labor
for the recovery of Christ's Holy Ordinances, as our Fathers in Queen Mary's
days. If our Cause were truly known to her Majesty and your wisdoms, we should
find greater favor than they did; whereas our state now is far more
lamentable, and therefore we humbly and earnestly crave of her Majesty and your
Lordships both, for our selves in miserable captivity, but just and equal trial
according to her Majesty's Laws; if we prove not our Adversaries to be in a
most pestilent and godless condition, both in regard of their offices and their
proceedings in them, and our selves to be in the right way, we desire not to
have the benefit of her Majesty's true and faithful Subjects, which of all
earthly favors, we account it to be one of the greatest. Are we Malefactors?
are we anywise undutiful to our Prince? maintain we any errors? Let us then be
judicially convicted thereof, and delivered to the Civil Authority; but let not
these bloody men, both accuse, condemn, and close murder us after this sort,
contrary to all Law, Equity and Conscience, where alone they are the Plaintiff,
the Accusers, the Judges and the Executioners of their most fearful, barbarous
Tyranny.

They should not, by the Laws of the Land, go any further in cases of Religion,
than their own Ecclesiastical censures, and then refer us to the Civil Powers;
their forefathers, Gardener, Bonner, Story, dealt thus equally, and we crave
but their equity. Oh! let her excellent Majesty our Sovereign, and your
wisdoms, consider and accord unto this our just Petition, for streams of
innocent blood are likely to be spilt in secret by these blood-thirsty men,
except her Majesty, and your Honors, do take order with their most cruel and
inhumane proceedings.

We crave for all of us, but liberty either to dye openly, or to live openly in
the Land of our Nativity; if we deserve death, it beseems the Magistrates of
Justice not to see us closely murdered, yea, starved to death with hunger and
cold, and stilled in loathsome Dungeons: If we be guiltless, we crave but the
benefit of our innocence, that we may have peace to serve our God and our
Prince, in the place and sepulchers of our Fathers.

Thus protesting our Innocence, complaining of Violence and Wrong, and crying
for Justice on the behalf, and in the name of that Righteous Judge, the God of
Equity and Justice, we continue our Prayers unto Him for her Majesty and your
Honors, whose hearts we beseech him to incline toward this our most equal and
just suit, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The condition of those poor Christians being so deplorable, some may marvel
the Queen, so worthy a Princess, did not relieve them! But it is no marvel,
when it is considered on the other hand, where the spiritual Lords, so called,
bear sway in a Nation, no pity can be expected, or favor to Christ's faithful
Servants, that without respect to persons, worship God, and speak his truth as
it is in Jesus. But, God be thanked, their power has been for many years
abated, and we have seen the days of peace to worship God, which they whom the
world was not worthy of longed to see, and many of them obtained it not, but
were taken away to a better inheritance, 1 Pet. 1. 4.

These things duly weighed, the Christian Reader may see what a persecuting
spirit these Lordly Prelates are of, and whether the Doctor is not of the same,
by all the symptoms of his Book, as an Herald sounding before his Brethren and
Reverend Fathers, what he has longed to be at, were the Carpenter removed out
of the way that has frayed short, Zach. 1. the Horns of their power, that as
yet they cannot use like cruelty, in that measure their predecessors have
done, as has been seen. Now why the Doctor has encouraged himself in this
evil work, to smite with the tongue. Jer. 18. 18. or fist of wickedness, Isa.
58. 4. his dissenting Brethren, as he calls them, in this his Dragon-like War,
by casting out of his mouth, Rev. 12. 16. with Psalm. 69. 14, 15. floods of
reproaches against Gods faithful Servants, because they kept the Commandments
of God, John 15. 14. and have the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12. 17. unles Deog
like, he hops, Psalm. 52. 4, 7. to obtain more favor, or with Baalam, to gain
some greater promotion, Numb. 22. 37. than yet he has, or rewards for his
pains; And is this the work of one that accounts himself a Minister of the
Gospel? Surely it no whit agrees to the word Gospel, which signifies glad
tidings of peace, as is the work of all true Gospel Ministers, says Christ, in
his first Sermon, Blessed is the peace maker. yea, also between man and man,
even among brethren how good it is! Psalm. 133. Thus ought no Christian to hate
the person of his very enemy, much less whom Christ calls his friends for
doing his Commandments, John 15. 14. And that these Christians whom the Doctor
reproachfully calls Brownists, were such, is evident by their Faith and
Practice, in their description of the true visible Church of Christ, which the
suffering Christians published to the year 1589. as follows word for word,
taken out of their Printed Copy.

A true description out of the Word of God, of the visible Church.

AS there is but (a) one God and Father of all, one Lord over all, and one
Spirit; so is there but (b) one Truth, one Faith, one Salvation, one Church,
called in one Hope, joined in one Profession, guided by one (c) Rule, even the
Word of the most high. (a) Genes. 1. 1. Exodus 20. 3. (b) 1 Timothy 2. 4. Phil. 1.
27. Ephesians. 2. 18. John 8. 41. (c) Deuteronomy. 6. 25. Romans 10. 8. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Joh.
8. 51. 1 John 2. 3, 4, etc.

This Church as it is universally understood, contains in it all the elect of
God that have been, are, or shall be: But being considered more particularly,
as it is seen in this present world, it consists of a company and fellowship
of (a) faithful and holy people (b) gathered in the name of Christ Jesus, their
only (c) King, (d) Priest, and (e) Prophet, (f) worshipping him aright, being
(g) peaceably and quietly governed by his Officers and Laws, (h) keeping the
unity of faith in the bond of peace and (i) love unfeigned. (a) Genesis 17. 1 Pet.
1. 2. Rev. 7. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 3. Joh. 17. 10, 20. (b) Psalm. 111. 1. and 149. 1.
Isa. 62. 12. Ephesians. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 14. 2. (c)Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Joh. 6. 37.
and 3. 14. and 12. 32. Luke 17. 37. (d) Genesis 44. 10. Psalm. 45. 6. Zach 9. 9.
Heb. 1. 8. (e) Romans 8. 34. Joh. 17. Heb. 5. 9. and 8. 1. and 4. 14. (f) Deuteronomy.
18. 15. Matt. 17. 5. Heb. 1. 2. Genesis 14. 18. (g) Exodus 20. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Lev.
10. 5. Joh. 4. 23. (h) Matt. 11. 29. 1 Cor. 11. 16. Mark 13. 34. Rev. 22. 9.
(i) Ephesians. 4. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 13. Mark 9. 50 John 13. 34. 1 Cor. 13. 4. 1 Pet. 1.
22. 1 John 3. 18.

Most (a) joyful, excellent and glorious things, are every where in the
Scriptures spoken of this Church. It is called the (b) City, (c) House, (d)
Temple, and (e) Mountain of the Eternal God: the (f) Chosen Generation, the
Holy Nation, the peculiar Peopls, the (g) Vineyard, the (h) Garden enclosed,
the Spring shut up, the sealed Fountain, the Orchard of Pomgranates with sweet
fruits, the (i) heritage, the (k) Kingdom of Christ: yea, his (l) Sister, his
Love, his Spouse, his (m) Queen, and his (n) Body, the joy of the whole Earth.
To this society is the (o) Covenant and all the Promises made of (p) Peace, of
Love, and of (q) Salvation, of the (r) Presence of God, of his Graces, of his
Power, and of his (s) Protection. (a) Psalm 87. 3. (b) Ibid. (c) 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Heb. 3. 6. (d) 1 Cor. 3. 17. (e) Isa. 2. 2. Micah 4. 1. Zach. 8. 3. (f) 1 Pet.
2. 9. (g) Isa. 5. 1. and 27. 2 (h) Song 4. 12. Isa. 51. 3. (i) Isa. 19. 25. (k)
Micha. 5. 2. Matt. 3. 2. Joh. 3. 5. (l) Song. 5. 2. (m) Psalm. 45. 9. (n) 1 Cor.
22. 27, Ephesians. 1. 23. (o) Gal. 4. 28. Romans 9. 24. (p) Psalm. 147. 14. 2 These. 3.
16. (q) Isa. 46. 13. Zach. 14. 17. (r) Isa 60. Ezech. 47. Zach. 4. 12. (s)
Ezech. 48. 35 Matt. 28. 20. Isa. 62.

And surely if this Church be considered in her parts, it shall appear most
beautiful, yea, most wonderful, and even (a) ravishing the senses to conceive,
much more to behold, what then to enjoy so blessed a Communion! For behold, her
(b) King and Lord, is the King of Peace, and Lord himself of all Glory. She
enjoys most holy and heavenly. (c) Laws, most faithful and vigilant (d)
Pastors, most sincere and pure (e) Teachers, most careful and upright (f)
Governors, most diligent and trusty (g) Deacons, most loving and sober (h)
Relievers, and a most (i) humble, meek, obedient, faithful, and loving people,
every (k) stone living, elect and precious, every stone has his beauty, his
(l) burden, and his (m) order. All bound to (n) edify one another, exhort,
reprove, and comfort one another (o) lovingly as to their own members, (p)
faithful as in the eyes of God. (a) Song 6. 4, 9. (b) Isa. 62. 11. Joh. 12. 15.
Heb. 2. 7, 8. (c) Matt. 11. 30. 1 John 5. 3 (d) Ephesians. 4. 11. Acts 20. (e) Romans
12. 7. (f) 1 Cor. 12. 21. Rom 12. 8. (g) Acts 6. (h) Rom 12. 8. (i) Matt. 15. 5
Ezekiel. 36. 38. Isa. 60. 8. Deuteronomy. 18. 9 13. (k) 1 Pet. 2. 5. 1 King. 7. 9. Zach.
14. 21. (l) Gal. 6, 2. (m) 1 Cor. 12. Romans 12. 3, etc. (n) Heb. 10. 24. (o)
Lev. 19. 17. 1 These. 4. 9. (p) Col. 3. 23. 1 John 3. 20.

No (a) Office here is ambitiously affected, no (b) Law wrong fully wrested or
(c) wilfully neglected, no (d) Truth hid or perverted, (e) every one here has
freedom and power (not disturbing the peaceable order of the Church) to utter
his complaints and griefs, and freely to reprove the transgression and errors
without exception of persons. (a) 2 Cor. 2. 17. 3 John 9. (b) 1 Timothy 4. 2, 3.
and 5. 21. and 6. 14. Gal. 6. 12. (c) 1 Cor ^5. (d) Jer. 23. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
(e) 1 Cor. 6. and 14. 30. Col. 4. 17.

Here is no (a) intrusion or climbing up another way into the sheepfold, than
(b) by the holy and free election of the Lords holy and free people, and that
according to the Lords Ordinance, humbling themselves by fasting and prayer
before the Lord, craving the direction of his holy Spirit, for the trial and
approving of Gifts, etc. (a) Joh. 10. 1. (b) Acts 1. 23. and 6. 3. and 14. 23.

Thus they orderly proceed to Ordination by fasting and prayer, in which (a)
action the Apostles used laying on of hands. Thus has every one of the people
interest in the election and ordination of their Officers, as also in the
administration of their Offices, upon (b) transgression, offense, abuse, etc.
having an especial care unto the inviolable order of the Church, as is
aforesaid. (a) 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22. (b) Luke 17. 3. Romans 16. 17. Col. 4. 17.

Likewise in this Church they have holy (a) Laws, as limits and bonds, which it
is lawful at no hand to transgress. They have Laws to direct them in the choice
of every Officer, what kind of men the Lord will have. Their Pastor must be
apt to (b) teach, no young Scholar, (c) able to divide the word aright, (d)
holding fast that faithful word, according to Doctrine, that he may be able
also to exhort, rebuke, improve with wholfom Doctrine, and to convince them
that say against it^ He must be (e) a man that loves goodness; he must be
wise, righteous, holy, temperate; he must be of life unreprovable, as Gods
Steward; he must be generally well reported of, and one that rules his own
household under obedience with all honesty; he must be modest, humble, meek,
gentle and loving; he must be a man of great (f) patience, compassion, labor
and diligence; he must always be careful and watchful over the flock whereof
the Lord has made him overseer, with all willingness and cheerfulness, not
holding his office in respect of persons, but doing his duty to every soul, as
he will answer before the chief Shepherd, etc. (a) Matt. 5. 19. 1 Timothy 1. 18.
(b) Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Mal. 2. 7. 1 Timothy 3. 1, etc. (c) 2 Timothy 2. 15. (d)Tit. 1. 9.
2 Timothy 4. 2. (e) Tit. 1. 7, 8. (f) Numb. 12. 3, 7 Isa. 50. 4, 5, 6. Jer. 3. 15.
Ezekiel. 34. 18. Acts 20. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 5. 21.

Their Doctor or Teacher must be a man apt to teach, able to divide the Word of
God aright, and to deliver sound and wholesome Doctrine from the same, still
building upon that sound ground work; he must be mighty in the Scriptures, able
to convince the gainsayers, and careful to deliver his Doctrine pure, sound and
plain, not with curiosity or affectation, but so that it may edify the most
simple, approving it to every man's Conscience; he must be of life unreprovable,
one that can govern his own household, he must be of manners sober, temperate,
modest, gentle and loving, etc. 1. Tim. 3. Titus 1. 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Cor. 17.
and 2, 4.

Their Elders must be of wisdom and judgment endued with the Spirit of God,
able to discern between cause and cause, between plea and plea, and accordingly
to prevent and redress evils, always vigilant and intending to see the
Statutes, Ordinances, and Laws of God kept in the Church, and that not only by
the people in obedience. but to see the Officers do their duties. These men
must be of life likewise unreprovable, governing their own families orderly,
they must be also of manners sober, gentle, modest, loving, temperate, etc.
Numb. 11. 24, 25. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. Acts 15. 1 Timothy 3. and 5. chap.

Their Deacons must be men of honest report, having the mystery of the says in
a pure conscience, endued with the Holy Ghost; they must be grave, temperate,
not given to excess, nor to filthy lucre. Acts 6. 3. 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9.

Their Relievers, or Widows, must be women of Sixty years of age at the least,
for avoiding of inconveniences; they must be well reported of for good works,
such as have nourished their Children, such as have not been harbarous to
Strangers; diligent and service able to the Saints, compassionate and helpful
to them in adversity, given to every good work, continuing in supplications and
prayers night and day. 1 Timothy 5. 9, 10.

These Officers must first be duly proved, then if they be found blameless,
administer, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 10.

Now as the persons, gifts, conditions, manners, life, and proof of these
Officers is set down by the Holy Ghost; so are their Offices limited, severed,
and diverse. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 18, 28.

The Pastors office is, to feed the sheep of Christ in green and wholesome
pastures of his Word, and lead them to the still waters, even to the pure
Fountain and River of life. He must guide and keep those sheep by that heavenly
sheephook and pastoral staff of the Word, thereby drawing them to him, thereby
looking into their souls, even into their most secret thoughts: Thereby
discerning their diseases, and thereby curing them; applying to every disease a
fit and convenient medicine, and according to the quality and danger of the
disease, give warning to the Church, that they may orderly proceed to
excommunication. Further, he must by this his sheephook watch over and defend
his flock from ravenous beasts and the Wolf, and take the little Foxes, etc.
Psalm. 23. Lev. 10. 10, 11. Numb. 18. 1. Ezekiel 44. 23, and 33, and 34. Joh. 21.
15. Acts 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5, 1. 4 Zach. 11. 7. Rev. 22. 2. Luke 12. 42. 2 Cor.
10. 4, 5. Heb. 4. 12. John 10. 11, 12. Song. 2. 15.

The Doctors Office is already set down in his description: His special care
must be, to build upon the only true groundw^ork, gold, silver, and precious
stones, that his work may endure the trial of the fire, and by the light of the
same fire, reveal the Timber, Hay and Stubble of false Teachers: he must take
diligent heed to keep the Church from errors. And further, he must deliver his
Doctrine so plainly, simply and purely, that the Church may increase with the
increasing of God, and grow up unto him which is the Head, Christ Jesus. 1 Cor.
3. 11, 12. Levit. 10. 10. Ezekiel. 33. 1, 2, etc. and 44. 24. Mal. 2. 6. 1 Cor. 3.
11. 1 Cor. 1. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 16. and 6. 20. Ephesians. 2. 20. Heb. 6. 1. 2 Pet. 2. 2.

The Office of the Ancients is expressed in their description: Their especial
care must be, to see the Ordinances of God truly taught and practiced, as well
by the Officers in doing their duty uprightly, as to see that the people obey
willingly and readily. It is their duty to see the Congregation holily and
quietly ordered, and no way disturbed by the contentious and disobedient,
froward and obstinate; not taking away the liberty of the least, but upholding
the right of all, wisely judging of times and circumstances. They must be ready
assistants to the Pastor and Teachers, helping to bear their burden, but not
intruding into their Office. Numb. 11. 16. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. and 16. 18. 2 Chronicles.
19. 8. Exodus 39. 42. 1 Timothy 3. 15. 2 Timothy 1. 13. 1 Cor. 11. 16. and 14. 33.
Gal. 2. 4, 5, 14. Col. 4. 16, 17. Acts 20, 1. Pet. 5. 1. Romans 12. 8.

The Deacons office is, faithfully to gather and collect by the ordinance of
the Church, the goods and benevolence of the faithful, and by the same
direction diligently and trustily to distribute them according to the necessity
of the Saints. Further, they must enquire and consider of the proportion of the
wants both of the Officers and other poor, and accordingly relate unto the
Church, that provision may be made. Acts 6. Romans 12. 8.

The Relievers and Widows office is, to minister to the sick, lame, weary and
diseased, such helpful comforts as they need, by watching, tending and helping
them: Further, they must show good example to the younger Women, in sober,
modest and godly conversation, avoiding idleness, vain talk, and light
behavior. Romans 12. 8. 1 Timothy 5. 9. etc.

These Officers, though they be diverse and several, yet are they not severed,
lest there should be a division in the body; but they are as members of the
body, having the same care one of another, jointly doing their several duties
to the service of the saints, and to the edification of the Body of Christ,
till we all meet together in the perfect measure of the fullness of Christ, by
whom all the Body being in the mean while thus coupled and knit together by
every joint for the furniture thereof, according to the effectual power which
is in the measure of every part, receives increase of the Body, unto the
edifying of it self in love; neither can any of these Offices be wanting,
without grievous lameness, and apparent deformity of the Body, yea, violent
injury to the Head Christ Jesus. Luke 9 46, 47, 48. John 13. 12 -- 17. 1 Cor.
12. 12, 25, 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 16.

Thus this holy Army of Saints is marshalled here in earth by these Officers,
under the conduct of their glorious Emperor CHRIST, that victorious Michael.
Thus it marches in this most heavenly order, and gracious array, against all
enemies both bodily and ghostly: peaceable in it self as Jerusalem; terrible to
the enemy as an Army with Banners; triumphing over their tyranny with patience,
their cruelty with meekness, and over Death it self with dying. Thus through
the blood of that spotless Lamb, and that Word of their Testimony, they are
more than Conquerors, brusing the head of the Serpent: yea, through the power
of his Word, they have power to cast down Satan like lightning; to tread upon
Serpents and Scorpions; to cast down strong holds, and every thing that
exalts it self against God. The Gates of Hell, and all the principalities and
powers of the world shall not prevail against it. Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. Rev. 14.
1, 2. Song 6. 3. Rev. 12. 11. Luke 10. 18, 19. 2 Cor. 10 5. Mat. 16. 18. Romans
8. 38, 39.

Further, He has given them the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that whatsoever
they bind on earth by his Word, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever they
loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Mat. 16. 19. John 20. 23. Mat. 18.
19.

Now this power which Christ has given unto his Church, and to every member of
his Church to keep it in order, he has not left it to their discretions and
lusts to be used or neglected as they will, but in his last Will and Testament
he has set down both an order of proceeding, and an end to which it is used.
Mat. 16. 16, 19. and 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. and 28. 20. Deuteronomy. 12. 31, 32. Rev. 22.
18, 19.

If the fault be private, holy and loving admonition and reproof is to be used,
with an inward desire and earnest care to win their Brother; but if he will not
hear, yet to take two or three other brethren with him, whom he knows most
meet for that purpose, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word
may be confirmed: And if he refuse to hear them, then to declare the matter to
the Church, which ought severely and sharply to reprehend, gravely to admonish,
and lovingly to persuade the party offending; showing him the heinousness of
his offense, and the danger of his obstinacy, and the fearful judgments of the
Lord. Lev. 19. 17, 18. Mat. 18. 15. Deuteronomy. 19. 15. Mat. 18. 16.

All this, notwithstanding the Church is not to hold him as an enemy, but to
admonish him and pray for him as a Brother, proving if at any time the Lord
will give him repentance: For this power is not given them to the destruction
of any, but to the edification of all. 2 These. 3. 15. 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10.

If this prevail not to draw him to repentance, then are they in the Name and
Power of the Lord JESUS with the whole Congregation, reverently in prayer to
proceed to excommunication; that is, unto the casting him out of their
congregation and fellowship, covenant and protection of the Lord, for his
disobedience and obstinacy, and committing him to Satan for the destruction of
the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, if such
be his good will and pleasure. Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 11.

Further, They are to warn the whole Congregation and all other faithful, to
hold him as a Heathen and Publican, and to abstain themselves from his society,
as not to eat or drink with him, etc. unless it be such as of necessity must
needs, as his Wife, his Children, and Family; yet these (if they be members of
the Church) are not to join to him in any spiritual exercise. Mat. 18. 17. 1
Cor. 5. 11.

If the offense be public, the party is publicly to be reproved and
admonished; if he then repent not, to proceed to excommunication, as aforesaid.
1 Timothy 5. 20. Gal. 2. 14. Jos. 7. 19. 2 Cor. 7. 9.

The repentance of the party must be proportionable to the offense, viz. If the
offense be public, public; if private, private; humbled, submissive,
sorrowful, unfeigned, giving glory to the Lord. Lev. 19. 17, 18. Prove. 10. 12.
Romans 12. 19. and 13. 10. and 14. 1.

There must great care be had of admonitions, that they be not captious or
curious, finding fault where none is, neither yet in bitterness or reproach;
for that were to destroy and not to save our Brother: but they must be
carefully done, with prayer going before, they must be seasoned with truth,
gravity, love and peace. Mat. 18. 15. and 26. 8. Gal. 6. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 24.
Mark 9. 50. Ephesians. 4. 29 James 5. 15, 19, 20.

Moreover, in this Church is an especial care had by every member thereof, of
offenses; the strong ought not to offend the weak, nor the weak to judge the
strong: but all graces here are given to the service and edification of each
other in love and long suffering. Luke 17. 1. Prove. 10. 12. Romans 14. 13, 19.
Gal. 6. 2.

In this Church is the Truth purely taught, and surely kept; here is the
Covenant, the Sacraments and Promises, the Graces, the Glory, the Presence, the
Worship of God, etc. Genesis 17. Lev. 26. 11, 12. Isa. 44. 3. Gal. 4. 28. and 6.
16. Isa. 60. 15. Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 13. Isa. 56. 7. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Isa. 12. 8.

Into this Temple enters no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abominations or lies, but they which are written in the Lambs Book of life.
Isa. 62. 1. Ezekiel. 44. 9. Isa. 35. 8. Zach. 14. 21. Rev. 21. 27.

But without this CHURCH shall be Dogs, and Enchanters, and Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes lies. Romans 2. 9. Rev
22. 15.

Now I leave the prudent to judge whether the Doctor be a friend or an enemy to
Christ's Truth and holy order of worship, and also to his Servants, by calling
their Books or Writings seditious; therefore it is high time for the Doctors
followers to beware of such a guide for their souls. Yea, and whether such a
man can be reputed a Christian, that calls the way of Gods Worship, so
agreeable to Christ's last Will and Testament, seditious? Yea, I say it is time,
as they tender their Souls eternal happiness, to examine their present state in
worship to God, and measure the same by the golden seed of Gods Word, Rev. 11.
1. to see if it agree to the description of the visible Church aforesaid,
collected out of the holy Scripture, both in the Ministry, Ordinances and
Order, as Christ Jesus has appointed; and for the better observation in every
particular, and fundamental grounds therein, to note these four things:

1st. As every building must have a foundation, so every true Church must have
Christ for the foundation thereof, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Mat. 16. 18.

2dly. The instrument in this building must be the written Word of God, to wit,
the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, 2. 20.

3dly The matter in this building must be visible Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2.

4thly. The way to begin this building must be answerable to the figurative
building of Tabernacle and Temple, that were built of the choicest things, and
costly, 1 Kings 5. 17.

Even so, answerable hereunto, the spiritual Temple was built of elect,
precious, living stones, 1 Pet. 2. 5. as was foretold in the Prophets, I will
lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundation with sapphire, and all thy
borders with pleasant stones, Isa. 54. 11. 6. 17, 21.

2. As the materials of the Temple and Tabernacle were all made fit before they
were joined together, so that there may be neither Hammer, 1 Kings. 6. 7. nor
any tool of Iron heard in the building. Even so in the spiritual, John first
preached in the Wilderness, fitting and squaring a people by the Ax of Gods
Word; so that the crookedness by nature in Gods Elect, was made straight; and
the rough places plain, Isa. 40 3. Mat. 3. 3. by being made new, creatures, 2
Cor. 5. 17. born again, so made fit for the Kingdom of God, John 3. 5. And this
was Gods way in Grace and Nature in all the Apostles, the wise Master Builder,
first in the Wilderness of the would by the Preaching the Word to convince, and
by it the Lord converting, and then by voluntary profession (not by might or
power of man, Zach 4. 6.) but by the Spirit of God were they joined together,
by the Covenant of Grace in Christ, with him their Lord spiritual, Head and
Husband of the Body, the Church. For so it is written, As a young man marries
a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee, Isa. 62. 5. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Acts 2. 45.
And thus says the Scriptures, Prepare thy work without, make it fit for thy
self in the field; and after build thine house, Prove. 24. 27.

But how contrary to this heavenly pattern was the Doctors. Church constituted
in every part, the examiner may see, if it were not too long here to insert;
but I refer the Reader to Henry Ainsworth's Counterpoison, page 205. 127.
comparing therewith Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments, Edit. 5. page 1187. 1190.
1184. and for noting these and suchlike things of the Doctors Church and
Ministry, the Doctor bespattereth Mr. Ainsworth in his Book with Words; so that
like Ishmael, his hand is against every good Christian, Genesis 16. 12.

Moreover, though the beginning of this spiritual building aforesaid, it is but
small compared to a grain of Mustard Seed, Mat. 13. 31. the day of small
things, Zech. 4. 10. yet not to be despised, if but two or three are gathered
together in Christ's name which is his Law, Isa. 42. 4. Mat. 12. 21. in the holy
order of his Gospel, to worship God by Christ's direction, they have the promise
of Gods presence to be with them, Mat. 18. 20. so waiting on the Lord, until he
multiply them to be not a few, Jer. 30. 19. even like the flock of his pasture,
Ezekiel. 34. 31. Acts 2. 47. So that then out of themselves the Lord has given
them direction to choose some into the office of Pastor and Teacher, with Elders
and Deacons as aforeshewed in the description of the true Church; unto which
Assembly thus gathered together in holy order, Christ Jesus is their Prophet
represented (in the offices of Pastor and Teacher, together with the membral
right of the men-members in Prophecy by the word taught among them) that they
may discern sin, Romans 7. 7. and righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. 2dly. Christ is a
Priest unto them, working upon the will and affections, killing them a
sacrifices, Heb. 9. 11. Romans 12. 1. that so a reasonable creature, by the
operation of true faith, may be given up to God in his service, Joh. 4. 23.
3dly. Christ is a King to them, Psalm. 2. 6. by his power, Phil. 2. 5. that the
word taught by prophecy, and applied by priesthood, may be walked in, Col. 2.
6. by a holy life and conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 1 5. and the whole Church
preserved from all adverse power of Sin, the World and the Devil; and after
this manner (seeing Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, John 18. 36.) must he
reign in the Church, until he has put all his enemies under his feet, Rev. 19.
16. 1 Cor. 15. 25.

Now it is evident that the Communion in the Doctors Church is not in this way
and order of God; the men of his Clergy will answer him in their second
admonition to the Parliament, page 40. in the 13th year of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign in the year 1570. who have thus written, We are so scarce come to the
outward face of a Church rightly reformed, that although some truths be taught
by some Preachers, yet no Preachers may, without danger of the Laws, utter all
the Truths comprised in the Book of God; it is so circumvented and wrapped within
the compass of such Statutes, such Penalties, such Advertisements, such
Articles, such Canons, such sober Caveats, and such manifold Pamphlets, that in
a manner, if it does bat peep out behind the skreen, the Laws of the Land, the
Book of Common Prayer, the Commissioners Advertisements, the Bishops Canons,
Linwood's Provincials, every Bishops Articles in his Diocese, my Lord of
Canterbury' s sober Caveats, his Licenses to Preachers, his high Court of
Prerogatives, or grave fatherly faculties; these together, or the worst of
them, as some of them be too bad, may not be broken or offended against, but
with more danger than to offend against the Bible: To these subscribing, and
subscribing again, and the third time subscribing are required; for these
Preachers and others are indicted, are fined, are imprisoned, are
excommunicated, are banished, or have some worse things threatened them; and the
Bible, that must have no further scope than by these it is assigned. Is this to
profess Gods Word? Is this Reformation?

Thus was fulfilled what was written under the names of Four evil Angels, who
should hinder the winds of Gods Spirit so much as in them lay, that the true
Preaching of the Gospel-should not blow upon any Tree, Mat. 3. 10. Luke 6. 43,
44, 45. contrary to Cant. 4. 16. yet as the Word of God cannot be bound, Isa.
55. 11. there still was by the breathing thereof, John 3. 8. a remnant of
sanctified ones, Trees of righteousness, who lived and reigned with Christ by
faith, over Sin, the World and the Devil, all the time of the beasts reign,
Rev. 20. 4.

Therefore what an evil has the Doctor done in desaming such that desired to
walk with Christ in his Commands, in worship, and refused only the inventions
of men therein? If he has done this in blind zeal, in ignorance as did Saul;
If with him he belong to Gods election, Romans 11: 7. there may be hopes, that as
God did change Readiness heart from the symptoms of the Letters in his name, which
signified mortal, so persecuted he the Saints to death, Acts 7. 58. and 9. 1,
2. Likewise Pontius Pilate, the first part of his name signified cruel or
inhumane, the other part, Pilate, signifying, a man Armed with a Roman Dart; so
was his nature, Christ suffering under the Roman power, was killed by the Dart
of Pilates sentence, he being Judge. So likewise the drawn Swords of bitter
words, Psalm. 55. 2. against Mr. Barrow and others then Prisoners in the Fleet,
is the first part of the Doctor's name, through whose sides the Doctor still
shoots them against all the Nonconformists, to the end he might have them
Still-in-fleet, the natural sense of almost every letter of his name; which
suiteth with the fruits of his nature, until God gives him a heart of true
repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. that so he no longer halt between two opinions,
holding the Popish office of a Dean; and so fight against all true Protestants
that shall bear their testimony against it, and all such like Titles, with men's
Traditions in Protestant Churches; and on the other hand would seem to fight
against the Papists: Surely this man is no Caleb nor Joshua in following the
Lord fully, but like the man in the Gospel that desires to know what he should
do to inherit eternal life; yet can go no further than he can keep his revenues
of great possessions.

Now if Balaam cold not cozen the Lord, to prevail by his Altar and Sacrifices
against Gods people, no more shall the Doctor with all his bowing, as some of
his Clergy have been said to have done, and so think thereby to prevail against
the Lords people, no sure.

Now who may without partiality, be accounted the most truest Protestants, but
those that walk with Christ, the most nearest to the Rules of his Gospel? And
is it not for so doing, that these Christians aforenamed are hated by the
Doctor? I Will leave the prudent to judge, and the Doctor to show the contrary if
he can. And wherefore are the Judgments of God threatened against this
Protestant Nation, but for the persecuting, and so make a prey of those that
depart from iniquity, and bearing their testimony against all man's inventions
in worship, as was signified in a Warning-piece to the King last April, 1680,
and another to the late Parliament; both to be had where this is sold,
published by the same Author.

Moreover, is this a day for the Doctor to give encouragement to the
Magistrate, to persecute their loyal Subjects, for matters of Religion? No
sure, he should have looked to the state of his flock, and see how it is
commingled with all sorts of people, as Mr. Gifford aforesaid has testified;
when as God has showed his Ministers, that their Work was to put a difference
between the holy and profane, the clean and the unclean; and for the neglect
thereof, they were charged with violating Gods Law, Ezekiel. 22. 26. (unless the
Doctor think there is no unclean visible wicked liver in his Parish.) Again,
says the Lord to the Prophet Jeremiah, If thou take the precious from the
vile, thou shall be as my mouth; let them return to thee, but return not thou
to them, Jer. 15 19. Even so under the Gospel are the godly forbidden to
partake with other men's sins, 1 Timothy 2. 22. because in speritual Communion, a
little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Gal. 5 9. Numb. 19. 22. So
one sinner suffered unpunished, not only destroys much good, Prove. 8. 9. but
brings that City or Church into a snare, Eccles. 9. 18. As Joshuah said to
Israel, If ye rebel, the Lord will be wrath with the whole congregation, Joshua
22. 18. What need then have all that have taken charge of the Souls of a Flock
or People, that if they neglect to put Gods Order, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. Lev. 19.
19. in practice, to punish by the Church censures all obstinate sinners, God
will not only requite it at their hands Ezekiel 3. 17. 18. and 33. 7 Heb. 13.
17. Act. 30. but for the neglect hereof he will renounce that Churches
Candlestick, Rev. 2. 5. so fight against them v. 16. and cast them into a bed
of great tribulation, Job 33. 19 Rev 2. 2. and spue them utterly from him; so
that the remnant of Gods marked, sealed ones, known to be such by their
departing from iniquity, shall walk with Christ in white, for they are worthy,
Rev. 3. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Ezekiel. 9. 4. Rev. 7. 3. when the other that will not be
admonished, the Lord says to them; I have left my heritage, I have given the
dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of her enemies, Jer. 11. 15. and 12.
7. For their inventions have I cast them out of my house, Hosea 9. 5. and have
abhorred the excellency of Jacob, and hate all his palaces; Amos 6. 8. for the
Lord is of purer eyes than to have fellowship with the throne of iniquity; he
has chosen Zion for his dwelling, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. Heb. 12. 22. Rev. 14. 1.
his way is holy in all the parts of his service, so that the polluted must not
knowingly dwell there, Isa. 35. 8. because they defile the holy things of God,
Lev. 22 3. therefore God will be sanctified in all that draw near to him in his
Lev. 10. 3. for as much as holiness becomes his house for ever, Psalm. 93. 5.
Now if the Doctor cannot see these things, and what a confusion there is, which
has caused a great many to separate from his Church for want of Gods Order in
it, let him not despise counsel, seeing he that refuses instruction despises
his own Soul, Prove. 15. 32.

And lastly, Seeing we are fallen into the last and perilous times, what man of
them that has any thing in him of the Spirit of a Christian, but would make it
his greatest work to use the uttermost of his endeavors to unite the hearts of
one Protestant to another, in the many difference in point of Religion, that so
as brethren they may withstand the common Enemy, even Gog and Magog, the Turk
and Papists, the last enemies of Gods people, who like unto the apostate and
heathen Nations, Psalm. 8. say, Come let us cut them off from being a nation,
that the name of Israel may be had no more in remembrance. And is not this the
signs of the times, when the Turk and Papist are by sea and land compassing the
camp of the Saints about in number, like the Canaanites Army, Joshua 11. 4. as
the sand on the shore, whom God may suffer to prevail for the sins of his
people, until he has refined them through the fire of affliction, Zach. 13. 9.
so melting the drofs from the silver; yet in the end the rod shall be broken
Isa. 10. 5, 24, 25. Psalm. 125. 3. that so they that lead into captivity, shall
go into captivity; and they that kill with the sword, shall be killed with the
sword, Rev. 13. 10. and be mad with sorrow enough, to say with that Heathen
King Adonibezeck, who caused threescore and ten Kings to gather meat under his
Table, having their right thumbs and toes cut off, As I have done, God hvth
requited me, Judge. 1. 7. If not this way, because the time draws nigh of
Christ's coming to judgment, then fire shall come down from heaven and devour
them, Rev. 20. 9. yea, so shall Christ come in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 These. 1. 8, 9, 10. in the mean time let all persecutors read their
portion, Matt. 25. 41. Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. and 19. 20. and 21. 8.

And lastly, If this way of plain dealing likes not the Doctor, I cannot help
it; for with Elihu I have learned not to flatter, Job 32. 22. nor as some men
desire to be smoothed in their sinful ways, Isa. 30. 10. but as the wise man
says, open rebuke is better than secret love, Prove. 27. 5. for who could sleep
silent, to see his brethren that are now at rest in the Lord, desamed, when as
the Lord says, the memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10. 7. and they shall
be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. whose labors shine in the
world as a comfort to the Lords people when revived, though the same be a
terror to their enemies, as is seen in the Doctor, and such like John speaks
of, to see more Seths raised up to maintain the faith faithful Abels dyed for,
Rev. 16. 11. Ezekiel. 37. Rev. 20. 5. Now the Lord in his infinite mercy bless
this small mite cast into the Treasury of all the Lords true Protestant people;
and also to the Doctor do I desire it may be for his everlasting comfort, that
so the Lord may have the glory, honor and praise, in and through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.

