A POEM ON THE Present Assembly OF PARLIAMNT, November 9th. 1685. Licensed,
November 7th. 1686. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for George Powell over against Lincolns-Inn-Gate. 1686.

A POEM ON THE Present Assembly OF PARLIAMENT, November 9th. 1685.
BReak sacred Morn on our expecting I Will,
And make our Albion's sullen Genius smile;
His brightest Glories let the Sun display,
He rose not with a more auspicious Ray,
Since God-like JAMES received The Coronation, April 23, 1685.
Imperial State,
Our only recompense for CHARLES his Fate.
A joyful Bridegroom then, our Eyes he drew,
And now seems wedded to his Realms anew:
Since when our panick Fears are quite o're-blown,
And on our Enemies Coast the Terror thrown.
Ye ancient Bards that Britain's Glory wrought
As warmly as our British Heroes fought,
Be still assisting to your Country's Fame,
And in my daring Song revive your Flame.
Behold, behold, the bright Assembly placed,
And with our Monarch's Sacred Presence graced:
Transported with a Vision so sublime,
Our thoughts review the Infant-Pride of time,
We think how at the New Creation sat
The Eternal Monarch in his Heavens fresh State;
The Stars yet wondering at each others Fires,
And all the Sons of Glory ranked in Quires.
As various Streams from distant Regions fall,
And in the Deep their general Counsel call,
Conveying thence supplies to every source,
And fail not to maintain the rolling Course;
Our Senate thus from every Quarter met,
And with our Peers in awful Council set,
Dispense their Influence to each Province round,
And in our I Will no barren spot is found.
Justice as freely as our Thames shall flow,
In Peace the Sailer steer, and Peasant plow,
Our Public safe from foreign Wrongs shall be,
And private Rights from Home-oppressors free.
Proceed brave Worthies then to your Debates,
And by your Counsels to direct our Fates.
Thus, JAMES the pious, valiant, wise and just,
Performs not only yours, but Europe's Trust;
Whose Power or Prudence makes their Discords cease,
Where he persuades not, he commands a Peace.
So (if small things with great may be compared)
We often have seen two Monarchs of the Herd,
Upon some long-disputed Plain engage
With equal Vigor, and with equal Rage;
Their goring Horns are in the Contest worn,
The harrass'd Earth is in the Combat torn;
But if a Lion from the Hill descends,
Their Fury ceases, and the Battle ends.
What though the Gallick Pride has swelled so high*
A warlike Empires Forces to defy,
To crush united States, confederate Power,
And quite suppress the Belgian Lions roar;
Yet let their Troops in silent Triumph come
From conquered Fields, and steal their Trophies home.
Take care their Cannon at just distance roar,
Nor with too near a Volley rouse our shore.
The Terror still of our Third Edward's Name
Rebukes their Pride, and checks their towering Fame:
Nor can the Tide of many rolling Years,
VVash the stained Fields of Cressey and Poictiers.
A conscious Terror strikes their Bosoms still,
When they behold that famous fatal Hill,
Where Edward, with his Host, Spectator stood,
And left the Prince to make the Conquest good.
Such was the Virtue of our Ancestors,
And such, on due resentment, shall be ours;
Averse from acting, as receiving wrong,
VVeak States support, and Terror to the strong;
Whose tempered Valor just Pretense requires,
As Flints are struck before they show their Fires.
Once more great Patriots in the Nation's stead,
With due respect, the Loyal Muses plead,
Since from your generous Trust our Peace did spring,
Joined with the matchless Conduct of our King.
Secure the Blessing you so well begun,
And take for Pattern what your selves have done.
So Albion to her ancient Fame shall grow,
By Heaven's Decrees above, and yours below.
Nor shall your Influence in our lesser world
Lie pent, but through the Universe be hurled:
Thence Christian Leagues shall firmly be combined,
While Turks and Rebels equal Fate shall find.
Thus Earth and Seas with safety shall be blessed,
And Peace as calm as their great Masters Breast.
Heaven to our I Will this Priv'ledge does allow,
Besides her self to have no powerful Foe.
By Rocks and Seas fenced round from foreign Harms,
And only liable to inbred Arms.
Such shocks (alas!) too often we have endured,
But even from homebred Rage are now secured:
No Storm can rise while Caesar guides the Helm,
While you support the Throne, and He the Realm.
Our Faith and Freedom trusted in his Hand,
Immovable as Fate's Decrees must stand.
Usurpers from their Promise may retreat,
And Commonwealths their public Trust defeat,
While each his private Interest does pursue,
But Heaven's and Britain's Monarch must be true.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Devout Exercise for every day of the Month, together with Meditations upon
the most important Truths of the Gospel, translated from the last Edition of
the Original, enlarged by the Author. Sir Tho. Moor's Vtopia in English. All
sorts of Law Books printed for, and sold by George Powel over against
Lincoln's Inn Gate.


