A SPEECH Made By Master WALLER Esquire, IN THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS,
Concerning EPISCOPACIE, Whether it should be committed or rejected. (...)

A Speech made by Mr Waller Esquire, in the Honorable of House of Commons,
concerning Episcopacy, whether it should be committed or rejected.
Mr Speaker,
THere is no doubt but the sense of what this Nation has suffered from the
present Bishops, has produced these complaints, and the apprehension Men have
of suffering the like in time to come, make so many desire the taking away of
Episcopacy. But I conceive it is possible that we may now not take a right
measure of the minds of the people by these petitions, for when they
subscribed them, the Bishops were armed with a dangerous Commission, of making
new Canons, imposing new oaths, and the like, but now we have disarmed them of
that power: these Petitioners lately; did look upon Episcopacy, as a Beast
armed with Horns and Claws, but now that we have cut and pared them, (and may
if we see cause, yet reduce it into narrower bounds) it may perhaps be more
agreeable; Howsoever if they be still in passion, it becomes us soberly to
consider the right use and antiquity thereof, and not to comply further with a
general desire, then may stand with a general good, We have already showed,
that Episcopacy, and the evils thereof, are mingled like water and oil; We
have also in part severed them.

But I believe you will find that our Laws and the present Government of the
Church are mingled like Wine and Water, so inseparable, that the Abrogation of
at least a hundred of our Laws is desired in this Petition. I have often heard
a Noble answer of the Lords commended in this House, to a proposition of like
nature, but of less consequence, they gave no other reason of their refusal
but this, Nolumus mutare leges Angliae: It was the Bishops, was so answered
then, and it would become the dignity and wisdom of this House, to answer
the people now with a Nolumus mutare. I see some are moved with a number of
hands against the Bishops, which I confess, rather inclines Me to their
defense, for I look upon Episcopacy, as a Counter-scarf, or outwork, which if
it be taken by this assault of the people, and withal this Mystery once
revealed, that we must deny them nothing when they ask it thus in troops, we
may in the next place, have as hard a task to defend our propriety, as we have
lately had to recover it from the prerogative. If by multiplying hands, and
petitions, they prevail for an equality in things Ecclesiastical, this next
demand perhaps may be Leaegraria, the like equality in things Temporal.

The Roman Story tells us, that when the people began to flock about the Senate,
and were more curious to direct and know what was done, then to obey, that
Commonwealth soon came to ruin. Their Legem rogare grew quickly to be a Legem
far, and after, when their Legions had found that they could make a Dictator,
they never suffered the Senate to have a voice any more in such Election. If
this great Innovation proceed, I shall expect a flat and level in learing too,
as well as in Church preferments. Horos alit arts, for though it be true, that
grave and pious Men do study for learning sake, and embrace virtue for it self,
yet it is as true, that youth (which is the season when learning is gotten) is
not without ambition, nor will ever take pains to excel in any thing, when
there is not some hope of excelling others in reward and dignity. There are two
reasons chiefly alleged against our Church Government. First Scripture, which
(as some Men thinks) points out another form. Secondly, the Abuses of the
present Superiors. For Scripture I will not dispute it in this place, but am
confident that when ever an equ all division of Lands and Goods shall be
desired, there will be as many places in Scripture found out, which seem to
favor that, as there are now alleged against the Prelacy or preferment in
the Church, And as for abuses where you are now in the Remonstrance told, what
this and that poor man has suffered by the Bishops, you may be presented with
a thousand Instances of poor Men, that have received hard measure from their
Landlords, and of worldly Goods abused, to the injury of others, and
disadvantage of the Owners, And therefore Mr Speaker my humble Motion is, that
we may settle Mens' minds herein, and by a question declare our Resolution to
reform, that is, not to abolish Episcopacy.

FINIS.

