THE LIFE AND DEATH, Of the Eminently Learned, Pious, and Painful Minister of
the Gospel, Dr. SAMVEL WINTER, Sometime Provest of Trinity College near Dublin
in Ireland.

Together with some Rare Examples of Gods gracious Answer to his Prayers, upon
several Occasions.

Prove. 10.7. The memory of the Just is blessed: But the Name of the Wicked
shall rot.

^sal. 34.15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous: and his ears are
open to their Cry.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the sign of the Bible and three Crowns
at the lowe^ end of Cheapside. 1671.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou have here a true Narrative of the Life and Death of that eminent Servant
of Jesus Christ, Samuel Winter Doctor in Divinity, who was for several years
Provest, or Master of Trinity College near Dublin in Ireland, published at the
desire of his sorrowful Widow, by a Person who had familiar acquaintance with
him for about twenty years, as well whilst he was Minister of Cottingham,
hereafter mentioned, as whilst he was in Ireland, and since his coming over
into England, and was present with him in the time of his Sickness, and at his
Death, who by reason of his long, and familiar Conversation with him, is able,
and does testify to the Truth of most of the latter passages in the ensuing
Discourse, from his own knowledge; which is thought fit to be Published, not so
much to adorn the Name, or to perfume the memory of the Deceased, as to provoke
others (especially Ministers of the Gospel) to a serious imitation of him, to
the Glory of God; edification of others, and the comfort of their own Souls
here, and at the appearing of Jesus Christ; which effect that it may produce,
is the earnest Prayer of the publisher

J. W.

Courteous Reader.
HOwever I can have no confidence that my commendation, or attestation to the
ensuing Narrative, of the Life and Death of so eminent a Servant of God, can
contribute any thing to a work that indeed needs it not, being so exactly
performed by a friend of approved faithfulness, and endeared affection, and so
thoroughly acquainted with him, who is the Subject of it. Yet the desire of the
pious and sorrowful Widow; and the entire love I had to her dear Husband now
with God, has occasioned the following lines; Which Justice to the dead, I
heartily desire may be beneficial to the living, as being not only what I had
from persons of integrity, but of the ^^ost part my own certain knowledge.
^^rely the Doctor was a pattern not unworthy his Brethrens imitation; and there
is no cause to doubt but that the ensuing Relation may glad the hearts of Gods
people, and stir them up to follow the faith of such lights. He was an other
Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures, having made them his particular study above
forty years together: upon which, is the read many Expositors, so he chiefly
studied the famous Comenta^ies of judicious and blessed Calvin, whom of all
others he most admired; and I may truly say, his labor was not in vain: for
that he attained to a more than ordinary dexterity, not only of knowing the
mind of God in his Word in the general, but particularly in the most difficult,
which he made sufficient proof of, in his opening of the Types and Prophesies,
especially the Revelations, having expounded a great part thereof in his
Divinity Lecture in the College of Dublin, whereof also he was Provest. I have
often heard him Preach excellently of the Types, which he admired for their
great usefulness in opening many difficulties in the New Testament* And for the
profitable part of Critical learning, so far as concerne^ the Hebrew and Creek
text of the Bible, he was very well verst in them especially the latter,
insomuch tha^ howsoever his Sermons were for the most part very plain (for in
them he sought not his own glory but his Masters, and the profit of his
hearers,) The learned and judicious, by his excellent faculty in opening
difficult Scriptures, found that in them wherewith they were benefited and
delighted. And some to my knowledge, have heartily wished that his Expositions
upon select Scriptures which were not ordinary, had been collected, digested,
and published by himself. But his Ge^ius being more for the Pulpit than ^he
Press, dashed such expectations. ^e was a most affectionate Preacher; such was
his zeal and fervency, that I may safely allude to that of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. Being affectionatly desirous of you, we were willing to have
imparted to you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our Souls, because ye
were dear unto us: Such was his longing after the Salvation of poor Sinners. I
have heard him often, with trouble, complain of the cold Preaching of some
Ministers, as if Christ were still in his Grave. Nor was the Lord wanting to
recompense this his labor of Love with a plentiful Harvest, making him a very
happy Instrument in the conversion of very many, and in the building up of many
also. And as his Sermons breathed of his affection, as is said, so they were
with power, for he was a Boenarges: so that notorious Sinners, as not able to
resist the spirit by which he spoke, have been compelled to yield, and to come
unto Christ. He made if his first work wherever he came, to humble sinners,
therein following the examples of the servants of God in Scripture, and the
grave advice given him by Mr. Dod, or Mr. Thomas Hooker, when he was to enter
upon a charge where the people were generally Rude and profane, On the other
hand, he was of an exceeding tender spirit toward such a^ were coming on to
Christ, or under spiritual trouble for loss of communion with him, that he
would even weep over them: an Argument of much grace thus kindly to bleed in
the wounds of grieved Saints. And so good was God to him, that as he sound his
assistance wonderful in Preaching what he had before prepared, so even in very
considerable digressions which he would purposely ^all into. I doubt not from
the motion of the spirit of God and his quickness, to observe the frame and
need of his hearers, which made him often say, that sometimes a digression was
no Transgression. And I may say to the glory of God, that however he has not
left many Books to perpetuate his memory, yet he has left many living Saints
whom he did beget unto Christ by the Gospel, the most lively Images of the
grace of God in him, and in whom though dead he yet speaks. His dear love to
the people and places where God was pleased most signally to seal to his
Ministry, deserves to be remembered, whom I have known him to mention with tears
of Joy, And indeed he was so set upon the fulfilling of his Ministry, that
nothing rejoiced him more than an opportunity of Preaching the Gospel. He would
of ten say, that his opportunities were his riches, and that his heart has been
often exceedingly lifted up at the ringing of the Sermon Bell. Nor was he thus
desirous to Preach, but as desirous that the word Preached might not slip out
of the hearts or memories of such of the hearers as he conversed with, turning
all discourses to what was lately Preached, saying, that as the Bell when it
was done ringing leaves a humming behind it, so should Sermons after they are
Preached. He was a man mighty in Prayer: he would often say, a man of much
Prayer was a man of much grace, and a man of little Prayer, was a a man of
little grace. As he was of a melted spirit in Prayer, so he was another Jacob,
a great wrestler with God. His Prayers were not only affectionate, but very
argumentative. He had a very great excellency in pleading with God from
Scripture Topics, which he would wonderfully improve. And as his communion
with God was great, so the Lord did to admiration let out himself (...) him,
not only eminently answering his prayers, but revealing many secrets to him in
and after prayer; some of which for the encouragement and comfort of the Godly
Reader I shall here take the liberty to relate. In his younger years he had a
Law-Sute with one about a Living he was possessed of, of good value, at last he
was about to resign it as being unable to withstand so potent an adversary. The
people hearing of his resolution, came to him, and besought him that he would
not but consider their precious Souls. His tenderness was such that he held on
the Suit to the expending of a very great sum of money, and in the end was
overcome. His then Wife was much cast down for that so great a part of their
estate was spent in that Suit; whereupon being abroad one day, h^ besought the
Lord exceeding earnestly to quiet his and her spirit with hi^ providence,
whereupon he said, h^ saw the Sky open and heard a voic^ which said to him,
that seeing h^ was willing to spend his estate for his Glory, neither he nor
his should ever want, which when he came home, he told his Wife with great Joy,
saying, he would not for (...) he was worth want that comfortable answer to his
prayers. At an other time being without his knowledge no^ min^ted in Parliament
to go with their Commissioners for Ireland, his wife was unwilling, he having a
precious people and great living where he was: Some also of his Wives nearest
Relations, coming upon that occasion to visit them, dissuaded him from going
himself also was fearful of the Sea: in this Straight, as his usual manner was
he retired to his Closet, where having spread the matter before the Lord, and
with much earnestness begging Counsel of God, the Lord so satisfied him, that
he told his Wife he must go, for he was assured he should be carried thither in
safety, and should be an Instrument to convert many Souls there. In both, the
Lord was pleased to fulfill his word after a wonderful manner, as there are
other Instances at hand, were it needful to multiply: as that of his persuasion
of the recovery of Mr. J. Mrs. M. and Mr. J. W. Even when sick in an other
Land, and his persuasion of Gods great care over these Nations for the sake of
the many thousands of the Righteous in them. Touching which in the close of a
day of prayer, he said he had an assurance by an audible voice, and a glorious
brightness that shined before him. It is not unknown to some how great an
encourager he was of godliness in all, especially in such as, under his.
Government in the College, were designed for the Ministry, whom he would
prefer in fellowships or other places before others, And the like tenderness he
showed his Brethren in the Ministry, when under any discouragement because of
their own weakness, biding them to look up, and telling them that the way to
have legs was to use legs. He was very communicative: for he loved to be asked
questions, especially touching the sense of difficult Scriptures, to which,
even upon the Sudden, he would answer admirably. His great humility he showed
in his delightful Converse with the meanest Saints. What he was in other
Relations needs not my recital. As he was a loving Father, so a Husband of
many, which leaves the deeper impression upon the heart of his Relict. Surely
he was a true friend, an useful Neighbor. But that I may draw to a Conclusion,
having already exceeded the bounds of an Epistle; what I have here spoken I
desire may provoke imitation, and that Ministers may thereby be excited to do
all the good they can in their day, seeing the Prophets do not live for ever;
that their words may live when they are dead, that having so served Gods
providence in their generation, they may enjoy that Crown of which he is in
full possession, and I desire all may seriously consider why the Lord continues
to remove our Lots, and to pluck up our stakes, and to fear lest it may be in
Judgment to us of these sinful times, as it is in mercy doubtless to them. And
I do heartily wish that these loud Voices of Gods providence might put us upon
our Watch, that keeping Faith and a good Conscience we may be in a readiness to
enter into the Joy of our Lord, when we shall be Called off the Stage of this
miserable world: Which the great God graciously vouchsafe in and through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Life and Death of the Reverend, Learned, and holy Doctor Samuel Winter,
sometime Provest of Trinity College by Dublin.
DOctor Samuel Winter was born in the year of our Lord 1603. at Balsal, His
Birth and education.
in the wood-land part of Warwickshire, about seven miles from the City of
Coventry, of Religious Parents. About the twelfth year of his age it pleased
God, by the Ministry of one Mr. Slader, then Preacher at the Chapel of Knowl,
near unto Balsal, (The Doctors Father having a great hand in bringing him
thither) to awaken his conscience, and to make him serious about the things
that concerned his everlasting Salvation, His Conversion.
as also to stir up in him earnest desires of doing good to the souls of
others; for which end, one day as he came from School, about a mile from his
Fathers house, he retired himself under an hedge to pray; and among other
Petitions, he begged of God that he would quallify him for the work of the
Ministry, and make his labor effectual, and successful therein; At which time
he thought that he heard a voice, saying, God has heard thy Prayer, Prayer
Answered.
and has designed thee for that Work, and thou shall be an Instrument of
Converting many Souls to God. This exceedingly cheared up his heart, insomuch
as coming home, he applied himself to his Father, requesting of him that he
might be trained up for the work of the Ministry: His Father asked him the
reason of his desires? He told him what Prayer he had made, and what return he
had from God to it.

His Father being much affected herewith, sent him to the Free School in
Coventry, where through his extraordinary diligence and industry, he made so
good a progress in Learning, that though at near fourteen years of Age, he
understood nothing or very little of the first rudiments of Grammar, yet,
within a few years he became fit for the University, and accordingly he was
sent to Cambridge, He goes to the University.
and placed in L. College, and had for some time, that famous Doctor Preston
for his Tutor. At the feet of this Gamaliel, those natural and gracious
abilities which he brought along with him, were much improved: and partly by
the help and directions of so excellent a Guide, and partly by Gods blessing
upon his unwearied labors, His proficiency there.
he attained to a great measure of knowledge, both in the Tongues and Arts, and
also in Divinity.

When he had Commenced Master of Arts, being as yet unwilling to enter upon
that great and dreadful work of the Ministry, he left Cambridge, and went to
Boston in Lincolnshire, He goes to Boston.
where he lived under the Ministry of Holy and learned Mr. John Cotton; out of
whose Family, after some time, he married a Wife one Mrs. Anne Beeston, a
Gentlewoman of a good extraction, His first Marriage.
and one that had a considerable Portion, the match being of Mr. Cottons
contrivance.

After his marriage, and some time continuance with his Wife, in Mr. Cottons.
(...) sickness.
Family, he fell into a very violent. Feavour, which in the Judgment of his
Physicians, was desperate, and left no hopes of his recovery: His Wife being
much affected, and afflicted herewith, he would often comfort her, telling her
that he should not die at this time, for that God had not yet fulfilled his
Promise made to him in his youth, wherein he had assured him that he should be
an Instrument of converting many Souls unto him. His recovery.
And accordingly he recovered, and then resolved to apply himself to the Work
of the Ministry: He enters upon the Ministry.
and being more ambitious to do God and his Church service, than to advance
himself in the World, he removed from Boston to a small living near Nottingham
called Woodborow, where by his painful, and powerful Preaching (many out of
neighboring Towns flocking to his Ministry, as the Doves to their windows) the
seeds of Grace through Gods blessing, were sown in the hearts of many, which
sprang up, and some of them remain unto this day. This place he always highly
esteemed, and would often call it, His Firstborn.

From Woodborow he was removed to York, where, His remove to York.
in that great and populous City, he continued a Lecturer for some time, and as
there he had great opportunities for service, so had he great success;
receiving there a manifest Seal to his Ministry, in the Conversion, and
Confirmation of many: But our Civil Wars coming on about that time, he could
not stay long at York: Yet, though the door was shut up against him in that
place, another large and effectual door was opened for him elsewhere. For
Cottingham, a great Town within three miles of Hull, His remove to Cottingham^
being then destitute of a Pastor, thither he was, by a more than ordinary
Providence, brought; and in that place, for about the space of eight years he
continued to be a burning, and shining Light, as it was said of John the
Baptist, burning in his Zeal and Doctrine, and shining in his Life and holy
Conversation. His activity for God.
He was exceeding active and industrious for God; He thought no pains too great
whereby the peoples Souls might be edified. He Preached to them in public
twice every Lords Day: He expounded the Chapters which he read, and Catechized
the Youth. In the evening he repeated his Sermons to his own Family, many of
the neighbors also resorting to him. On the week days he took occasion to go
from House to House, instructing the Ignorant, and endeavoring to build up his
Parishioners in their most holy Faith. And God was pleased so to bless his
labors, The success of his ^^inistry.
that he became instrumental to the Conversion, and Confirmation of many, who
attained (partly by his public Ministry, and partly by his private pains) a
great measure of Grace and Gifts; so that they made Conscience of the strict
observation of the Lords Day, of Closet, and Family duties, and other spiritual
services required by God as fruits of their Faith.

So meek, and affable he was in his carriage toward all men, that his company
was pleasing and delightful, even to many of those who had no relish of his
Doctrine. At Cottingham he buried his loving, His (...) d^es.
and dearly beloved Wife, who left him five Sons: which loss was yet (through
Gods merciful Providence) abundantly repaired in his second marriage, about
three years after with Mrs. Elizabeth Weaver, His second marriage.
the Daughter of Christopher Weaver Esquire with whom he had a good Portion, and
she proved excellently quallified for the good and comfort, both of him and his
children; and God was pleased so to bless her prudent management of his outward
affairs, that when he dyed, he left a plentiful estate to his Children, besides
all those Acts of more than ordinary bounty, which both in his Life, and at the
time of his Death he testified his Faith by.

In the year 1650. the Powers that were then in being, resolved to send over
four Commissioners into Ireland, for the settlement of that distracted, and
almost ruined Kingdom, and judgeing it necessary to send along with them a
godly, able and Orthodoxe Divine, His call to Ireland.
they ordered that Mr. Winter should attend these Commissioners thither: Which
Order of theirs being sent to him to Cottingham, where he then lived, he looked
upon it as a clear Call from God. Yet for his better satisfaction, he advised
with his Friends, and begged direction from God in a business of so weighty
concernment; after which he cheerfully embraced this Call, hoping that God
would bring some Glory to his own Name, by the labors of him, his unworthy
servant, in that Kingdom. And so, not consulting with flesh and blood, which
might have suggested unto him, that it would be an unadvised act, and
disadvantagious to him, to part with so tractable, and loving a People, and
with so good a Rectory, (it being above four hundred pound a year) and to cast
himself upon Strangers, neither knowing, nor capitulating with them what his
Salary should be, for the maintenance of himself and Family. And so, resigning
up his Living, he prepared for his Journey.

At his coming over into Ireland, His remove to Ireland.
the Commissioners allowed him but one 100. l. for the first year, which yet he
cheerfully accepted, though it did not defray the charges of their
Transportation, with such necessaries as he provided for the accommodation of
himself, and Family: much less did it repair the losses which he sustained
shortly after his Landing, His losses.
when the Irish Army took from his diverse Horses of good value, which he
carried over with him. A great part of his worldly delight consisting in
keeping good Horses.

In this his first year, His great pains.
he attended the Commissioners in several Journies which they made into the
four Provinces of Ireland, was their Household Chaplain, performed Family
duties, and Preached in Public every Lords Day, wheresoever they came. And in
the City of Dublin (where they continued the greatest part of their time) he
Preached sometimes twice every Lords Day in Christ-Church, before the
Commissioners, the Lord Major, and Aldermen of that City; many Gentlemen, and
others resorting to his Ministry.

Not long after, some other Ministers coming thither from England, the
Commissioners (for the ease of Mr. Winter,) used to request one or other of
them to Preach in the morning, reserving Mr. Winter for the afternoon, at which
time was the greatest Auditory: But he not being willing to be out of
employment, set up a Lecture, He sets up a Lecture.
which he Preached every Sabbath morning at seven a clock, in the Church of St.
Nicholas, within the said City: And this Lecture was frequented by the
Commissioners, City-Magistrates, and many others, so that he had a very
frequent Congregation; and to encouragepoor people to come to Church, His
prudence.
he caused some wite Loaves to be distributed among them always when the
Sermon was ended.

About this time the Commissioners finding that Trinity College by Dublin,
through the iniquity of the times, and distractions of the Kingdom, was left
destitute by the Fellows and Students, and thereby brought almost to ruin,
they thought it their duty, for the advancement of Religion and Learning, to
endeavor the repair of the same: And for the end they appointed the said Mr.
Winter to be the Provest, He is made Provest of the College.
or Master of it, and where (after a time) he Commenced Doctor in Divinity,
having with singular applause, and approbation, performed all Acts and
Exercises requisite thereunto. He also out of his care, and zeal to promote so
pious a work, in a short time encouraged, and procured the return of diverse
Fellows, It prospered under him.
and Students to the College, as also the coming over from England of several
hopeful young Scholars, whereby the College was suddenly replenished with
many Religious, and hopeful young men; likely to prove instruments of Gods
Glory in the work of the Ministry, and otherways. And by the great pains which
he took with them, instructing them both in Humane and Divine learning,
Preaching, and expounding the Sacred Scriptures to them, and often praying with
them, both in the College Chapel, and sometimes in his own Lodgings, he gave
as great hopes of the flourishing of that Seminary in Learning, and Piety, as
in any College in Christendom. And they to retaliate his care and pains, gave
him an honorable Testimonial under the College Seal, which I have thought fit
here to insert.

OMNIBVS Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint. Salutem in
Christo Domino sempiternam. Nos Vicecancellarius Vniversitatis, and Socii
seniores Collegii Sanctae and individuae Trinitatis juxta Dublin, Testamur
virum venerabilem Dominum Samuclem Winter Anglum verbi Divini praedicatorem
fidelem, verae religionis vindicem acerrimum, and de Collegio S. S. Trinitan in
Illustri Academia Cantabrigiensi Li^ beralium artium, and S. Theologiae oli^
studiosum, adductum fuisse ad nos cu^ uberrimis testimoniis ingenuitatis,
probitatis, doctrinae, and scientiae Theologicae^ (quorum meritorum suorum and
studioru^ luculentissimum documentum jampride^ tam public quam privatim in
celeberrim^ civitate Dubliniensi laudabiliter and egregie dederit) ad
capessendum gradu^ Doctoratus in Theologia; and illorum plurimorumque
doctissimorum de meliori not^ virorum, optime habilem, idoneum, and dignum
testimoniis judicatum fuisse, mu^ nere, officio, dignitate, and honor
Doctoratus in Theologia. Nos itaque quib^ ejus virtutum excellentia, meritorum
copia, diuturna studia, pervigilesque labores innotuerunt, habita rati ne
scientiae eloquentiae, doctrinae, facultaetis Theol^ gicae, peritiae
disputandi, interpretandi^ concionandi, and aliarum virtutum, and morum ejusdem
Samuelis Winter, quoru^ omnium certissimum specimen laudabiliter, egregie,
magistraliter, and more Doctore^ dederit public e suggesto per tres dies in
Collegii sacello. Nos igitur in venerand^ Vniversitatis nostrae Confessu,
eundem Samuelem Winter unanimiter, omniumque suffragiis in Christi nomine
approbatus, and sic approbatum Doctorem in Vniversa Theologia solenniter
pronuncia^imus, declaravimus, ac fecimus.

Quod nostrum Testimonium ut omnibus innotescat, subscriptis singulorum
nominibus, and publico Collegii nostri Sigillo corroborari and muniri
curavimus. Decimo septimo die Augusti anno Domini Millesimo sexcente^imo
quinguagesimo quarto. Hen. Jones Pro-Cancellarius. Miles Symner Williamson.
Nath. Hoyle. Johannes Stearne. Adam Cusacke.



Whilst Doctor Winter continued Provest of that College, he had occasion to go
to a place called Monouth, He Preaches at Monouth.
a populous Town about ten miles from Dublin; where (according to his custom in
most places where he came) he Preached, and found the People very attentive to
his Ministry, and desirous to be instructed in the way to Heaven: Whereupon, at
the earnest request, both of the Minister, and diverse others of the
Inhabitants, he rode over to their every three weeks, and Preached which he
continued for some years, Gods blesses his labors.
and God was pleased to bless his labors for the Conversion of many English,
and Irish which flocked to hear him.

The reason of his leaving that University and Kingdom is well known to many:
and he came away to his great outward prejudice, the College being indebted to
him in a considerable sum^ of moneys, which he had disbursed for the use
thereof, some part whereo^ they have, since his decease paid t^ his Son.

After his return into England, His return into England.
He with his Wife, sojourned with some Friends, sometimes in and about
West-Chester; sometimes at Coventry; and other sometimes with his Wives
Relations in Hertfordshire, and Rutlandshire. In all which places he became
(through Gods blessing) an Instrument of much good, not only in the Families
with whom he abode, but also to several Neighbors with whom he conversed.

Thus we have a brief account of the most considerable passages of this Doctors
Life, we are now come to the last Scene, wherein we shall find that saying made
good; Vita qualis, finis talis: His holy and humble Life, being concluded with
a comfortable and glorious Death. His Sun did not set in a Cloud, but shon out
with a more bright and greater luster than is ordinarily seen. It was his work
and business to glorify God in his Life, and God did highly honor him at his
Death: as will appear by that which follows.

Whilst he was in Rutlandshire, His last sickness.
on Thursday October the thirteenth, in the year 1666. he rode to a
Neighboring Town to assist in carrying on a Day of Humiliation; wherein,
having wearied his Body, and spent his spirits, he was fain to defer his return
home till the next day: On the Lords Day following he exercised twice for the
instruction of the Family with which he then abode, and at his going to bed, he
found himself not well. On Monday he continued ill, yet arose, came down, and
performed Family Duties. At dinner he could eat but little, and at night went
ill to bed, yet slept pretty well, His sickness increases.
only both those nights, he complained of a pain on his right side, and he had
fr^quent provocations to vomit, but without effect. Often he found himself cold:
yet when he came a little to the fire, he was too hot in his own senses
insomuch as his friends about him judged that it would turn to an Ague.

Wednesday and Thursday has distemper continued: and on Friday, finding himself
to grow weaker he desired that his Will might be fairly engrossed which lay by
him under his own hand ^^^ting; and withal he labored to persuade his Wife to
be content to part with him, saying, That it would n^ be long before they
should meet against and then he put up earnest Prayers unto God for her, and
some other of his Relations.

Upon Friday he sat up all the day, but still continued under his Bodily
distempers, and finding his strength to decay, he would often repeat that of
the Psalmist, The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up. On Saturday he sealed,
and Published his Will, He Publishes his Will.
all the day complaining of the Cramp that was in his left l^g. In the evening
he went to bed, and to the apprehension of those about him slept well that
night. About six a clock on the Sabbath morning, he raised himself up in his
bed, and with a cheerful and loud voice called to his Wife, who lay in a bed by
him, A fore^i^^ of Heave
saying, Sweetheart, I have been this night conversing with Spirits: and as in
a Rapture, he cried out, O ye Glories that are prepared for the Saints of God.
The Lord has been pleased to show me this night, the exceeding weight of Glory
which is laid up in Heaven for his Chosen ones. Adding farther, That he had
studied, and thought that he knew as much what the Glory of Heaven was, as
another man: But he now saw, that all the Divines on Earth were but Children in
the knowledge of that great Mystery of Heavenly Glory, which the Lord had that
night given him a clearer sight of, than ever formerly he had. That it was such
a Mystery as could not be comprehended by the wit of man; with many other such
like expressions, having his Soul so wonderfully elevated, that he could not
declare what he found, and felt therein.

Then did he desire that his Relations, and the rest of the Family might be
called up, that so he might make known unto them that immense weight of Glory,
which that night had been revealed unto him. When they were assembled, he did
with vehemence, and intention of spirit, endeavor to discover the same unto
them in expressions as aforesaid: Jov unspeakable.
But he was so swallowed up in the Contemplations thereof, that he could not
utter what he desired: And so he continued all that day, and even till he dyed
in very high Raptures, and great acclamations, by way of thankfulness unto God
for the Lord Jesus Christ, the Fountain of that Glory, and for those evident
discoveries of the same unto him.

Toward the evening of that Lord Day, an Honorable Person, together with his
Lady and some other Friends came to visit him, with whom he discoursed about
Heaven, Heavenly discourse.
and the thing of God as understandingly, fervently and fluently, as if he had
enjoyed hi^ best health; His understanding, and memory continuing as strong,
and vigorous as ever; in his discourse quoting several places of Scripture,
citing the very Chapter, Verse, and words of the Texts, and explaining the
meaning from the Hebrew, and Greek Originals.

After this discourse, which continued about the space of two hours, finding
himself weary, he betook himself to bed, all the company withdrawing into
another Chamber. After an hours repose, he desired that the said Honorable
Person, with his Lady, and other Friends, might be called in again, that he
might speak something more unto them, and when they, with the rest of the
Family were come into his Chamber, he told them, that he thought he had but a
short time to live. That he was going to Jesus Christ, with him to enjoy the
fullness of Joy, and those Rivers of pleasure, which God had lately discovered
unto him, and which he had laid up in Heaven for such as love him, and keep his
Commandments. O said he! If you had but a through sight thereof, it would make
you all to love Jesus Christ, and holiness, which is the only way prescribed by
God to attain to this Happiness. And then he went on to magnify the riches of
free Grace, through which alone the Saints do come to enjoy that exceeding,
exceeding, eternal weight of Glory, which neither eye has seen nor eat has
heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive of.

He exhorts them not to trouble themselves so much in laboring to ge^
assurance of Salvation, Good Counsel.
as to exam^^^ themselves carefully, and diligently whether they were in the
way of Sanctification: And for this and, he commended two things to their
serious meditations, about which, he advised them daily to ask their Souls
these two Questions: What am I? And, Where am I? What am I? Am I a New
Creature? Am I born again? I^ so, then New Thoughts, New Words, New Company,
and a New Conversation will appear. All old Thoughts, Words, and Actions will
be done away. Secondly, Where am I? Am I in that narrow way that leads to Life
Eternal, or in that broad way that leads to Death, and Damnation? He told them
that if any there present were still in the broad way, it had been better that
they had never been born. And (said he) If you will make this your continual
meditation, you cannot miscarry: And if you find yourself to be in the narrow
way, the Way of Sanctification, let God a^^ne with the Rest, to give you an
assurance of your future happiness, which he will do in his own time.

He farther declared to them, His Perseverance.
that as by (...) his Preaching through the whole course of his Ministry, he
had discovered, and published this way of holiness, through Christ to be the
only way to Heaven, so could he now at his death set forth no other way: And
that if he were now again to begin his Ministry, he could hold forth no other
way to attain unto Glory. And so with much earnestness of spirit, looking up
toward Heaven, he begged of God that the words of a dying man might make a
deep impression upon the hearts of his Hearers: And that, as God had made him
an Instrument of converting many Souls unto him in his Life, so he would bless
what he had now spoken, that some one Soul might be brought to Jesus Christ, by
this his last Sermon. Then he proceeded to further Heavenly discourses, and
Instructions, quoting sundry Texts of Scripture for the proof of what he spoke,
naming the Chapters, Verses, and words of the Texts, which he opened, and
explained out of the Originals, with that acuteness, and strength of words,
with that zeal, and fervency of spirit as was admirable, so that he drew tears
from the eyes of all that were present, whether young or old. And left any
there present should think that his understanding and memory were grown weak,
o^ that he was overcome through the abundance of Revelation which he had the
night before, to let them know that he had spoken to them the words of truth
and soberness, and that with a perfect understanding of what he spoke, he made
this Narrative following. He told them the manner of his education in Religion
from his childhood, and of the vanity which did attend his youthful days: and
where, and how God did appear to him for his Conversion at twelve years of his
age, and of the assurance which God had given him (as is before related) that
he should be an Instrument of converting many Souls to God. As also of his
proficiency in learning from that very time.

He farther declared (with tears trickling down his cheeks) that he had many
and many a time, A faithful Pastor.
in private, before he went to Preach, put God in mind of that Promise so made
unto him, and earnestly besought him to make good that Promise, by giving a
blessing to that Word of his, which he was then going to deliver, that some
Glory might redound to his holy Name thereby: To which his Prayers, God had
often been pleased to give a gracious Answer, and to let him know it, by the
Conversion of some, by those Sermons.

One of his Relations then present, fearing that his Spirits would be weakened
and spent by that his continued discourse, desired him to repose himself for a
while: To whom he replied, with much earnestness, and strength of voice: No,
His Zeal.
were I sure that this should be my last night (as indeed it proved) and the
last Sermon that I should Preach, I would continue it two hours longer. Adding,
that he was not afraid of Death: And turning his Head backward, he said, Death
is a Coward; he comes behind me: His Triumph.
He dares not look me in the Face. And farther he said, The Devil has often
assaulted me in my Life time: But God sto^d by me, and give me strength to
resist him, so that he could never hurt me.

All that day following he lay in Heavenly Contemplation and Raptares, His
Raptures.
often breaking forth in Praises unto God for Jesus Christ. And would sometimes
desire his Wife, and other Friends to tell him whether he were in the Body, or
out of the Body: for he could not tell. And a Minister being the in the House,
he desired that he might be called in: and when he was come, he propounded the
same Question unto him: who answered, That he was in Life, and among his
Friends on Earth, and therefore in the Body: To this he replied, It is true,
and therewith rested satisfred, and desired the Minister to pray with him:
which he did accordingly.

His Wife told him that some Friends present hoped that he might yet live: To
which he answered, Can a Dead man live? Will God work Miracles? Shortly after
he said, God is doing great things in the world: and he much bewailed the sad
condition of the Church of Christ, etc.

In the afternoon, The power of Death.
finding Death to approach, he often cried out, O the power of Death! Not that
he feared it; for it shrunk from him: but he found such a Power in Death as
none could know but those that were under it. He wished that his Sons had been
present, that they might see what the Power of Death was, and what it was to
die. He desired also that some Neighbors of the Town might be called in, that
he might Preach his last Sermon to them. And indeed, to this very time his
spirits, speech, and memory continued very active and strong.

About four a clock in the afternoon, his Wife, and his Wives Brother and
Sister, standing by his bedside, asked him how he did? He answered: Very Weak:
Adding; That he was going to Jesus Christ: Death not to be feared.
Bid them not be afraid of Death: with which words he put forth his hand, and
said; Brother, Sister, Take Death by the Hand; Be not afraid, Death is a
coward: He flies from (...). They found that his Hands were cold and Clammy,
whereby they perceived that he grew near to his end. And himself, not long
after, feeling that the dissolution of this earthly Tabernacle was now
approaching, lifting up his eyes toward Heaven, he cried out, Come Lord Jesus:
His blessed Death.
And presently, with a smiling countenance, he added, Art thou Come? And so he
breathed out his la^^.

Thus Reader, (...) through the more considerable passages of this blessed man's
Life, and Death Pause here a while, and take a view (...) all again, and then
surely thou can n^^ but wish (though it is desired for thee that it may be
from a better Principle than was in Balaam) Let me die the Death of this
blessed man, and let my last end be like his. But in vain shak thou wish for
this, if the pattern of his Holy, and Exemplary Life be neglected by thee.

It is Storied that a person of a loose Life, that hearing what a comfortable
end St. Bernard made, said to his companions: I would willingly die like St.
Bernard, but I would live like you. Its too certain that many are of the same
mind: but as it is impossible, but that an holy Life should have a blessed and
happy Death ( Mark the perfect man, and behold the Upright: For the end of that
man is Peace, Psalm 37.37.) So it is as impossible (in an ordinary way) that a
loose and wicked Life should have any other than a miserable and uncomfortable
Death, though some delusive, fadeing flashes of seeming comfort they may
sometimes have, yet are but as a blaze of Thorns, that is suddenly extinct. For
God himself has said it: There is no Peace to the wicked, Isa. 48.22. And
again: The wicked are driven away in their wickedness: But the Righteous has
Hope in his Death: Impius dum spirat sperat: Sed Justus cum exspirat sperat.
The wicked Hope while they live, with a vain, ungrounded Hope: But the
Righteous hope when they die, with a lively, and well-grounded Hope, that never
leaves them till it brings them to fruition.

There yet remain some things, which could not well be reduced to any one part
of the Narrative of this worthy Persons Life, and because they did, like so
many Golden Threads, pass through the whole Web; or like the spirits in the
blood, which run through the whole Body: and therefore these were thought sit
to be reserved to the close of all, that the Reader may have a view of them
altogether. And they are such Graces as were very remarkable in this Man of
God. For so I call him; no^ only because he was a Minister, and (...) Gods
Servant in a more (...) but also in regard of those eminent, and excellent
Virtues, appearing in him, by which God did set his Mark, (...) Seal upon him,
as his peculiar Treasure. And these Graces were so conspicuous in him, that all
that knew, and were acquainted with him, will readily attest to the Truth of
them.

And they may be thus ranked in Order.

1. His great Humility, and meekness of Spirit.

2. His diligence, and industry in his Calling.

3. His Zeal, and fervor, manifesting it self in his Praying, Preaching, and
Conference, and strict observation of the L^^d, Day.

4. His Liberality, and Bounty upon all good occasions.

5. His great Candor, and Ingenuity.

6. His Faith, and Patience.

First to begin with his Humility, (...).
as that excellent Grace which embellished, and gave a luster to all the r^st,
and is often inculcated, and enjoined in the holy Scriptures, and was most
admirable in our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who proposes himself as
a Pattern to us in that grace especially^ And surely all that knew this worthy
Doctor, will readily acknowledge this to have been very eminent in him, and
that not only in his words, and Garb, and some trivial actions, which may
easily be personated, and counterfeited: As they were in the Friar, who went
seemingly dejected, and always looking down ward to the Earth, until he was
made an Abbot, and then he altered his Mode, and gave this reason for it: That
he had long been looking for the Keys of the Abbey, and that now having found
them, he need no longer do according to his former custom. But in this person,
Humility was of an higher strain, and more deeply radicated in his heart. And
truly it was the more admirable in him, because he had diverse things which
might have elevated his thoughts, and puffed up his heart with Pride, as a
plentiful estate, a considerable rank in the world, and great abilities: But
these were poor things in his esteem. He could condescend to men of the lowest
rank: He used to magnify the abilities of others, whilst he thought, and spoke
meanly of his own, and was not offended if others did the like. He could easily
bear the Contradictions of others, and stoop to the lowest offices to do good
to Souls. Its well known that he would go to the poorest Neighbors houses in
his Parish, and there sit, and discourse with them about the great, and weighty
concernments (...) their Souls: Questioning with them, and instructing them:
And at his departure would give them some money that by his deeds he might add
the greater weight to his words; His (...).
and ma^^ his next return the more welcome And this he did, nor to gain
Preselytes to himself, or a Name among men; but to gain them to Christ, and to
be a means in furthering the Salvation of their Souls.

Secondly, His diligence, His Industry.
and Industry in his Calling was very great, and exemplary: A hard Student he
was, and so continued to the last. It is scarce credible, but to those that
saw, and knew it, what a great number of Books were found in his Library,
filled with Transcriptions from the Au^hours he read, besides pieces of
Controversy, and observations of his own. And indeed there were few Books that
he read, but he drew Notes out of them, and made Marks in them of what was most
considerable. To which, if we add all his Manuscripts (which had been the sum
of near twenty years study) lost in the time of the late Wars, we cannot but
conclude him to have been a most faithful, and painful labourer in Gods
Vineyard. His daily ^ractice declared him to be a person, ^areful to Redeem
Time, and fearful (...) lose, or wast it.

As soon as he was out of his bed in ^he morning, whilst he dressed himself,
His Studiousness.
his Wife, or a Servant read to him some Chapters in course, out of the Old and
New Testament. When he was dressed, he retired himself into his Study, where he
ordinarily continued till he was called down to Prayer, and Dinner. After
which, for better digestion, he intermitted his Studies, and took opportunity
of discourse with Friends, and Neighbors that came to visit him, who knew that
to be the only time wherein they might find him at leisure. For he used to
forbid any to come to him in the forenoon, that his studies might not be
interrupted. And after two or three hours intermission, he returned into his
study again, where for the most part, His (...).
he continued, both Summer, and Winter, till about eight a clock at night,
seldom eating any Supper, or very sparingly.

When he was come down, calling his Family together, he read a Chapter in
course, gave the sense of it, went to Prayer, and so to bed; often grudgeing
the time that he spent in sleep, Time precious.
and eating. To this may be added, that as it was his care to be well prepared
before he went to Preach (for he would not offer either to God or man that
which cost him nothing) so did he strive to get his heart into a right frame
for Preaching, that from the heart, he might speak to the hearts of his
hearers, as he used often to say: and to obtain assistance from God therein, he
used by private Prayer to beg Gods blessing upon his labors. It was his
frequent saying: That he was as circumspect, and diligent in studying what he
was to deliver, as if be expected no assistance from Christ; yet when be came
to Preach, disowning his own endeavors, he wholly cat himself upon Jesus
Christ for strength and assistance, as if he had not stuyed at all: And that
God had oftentimes suggested such matter into his mind, in the delivery of his
Sermons, as he had not thought on before, which he observed, God did abundantly
bless to the Comfort, and Edification of the Auditors.

He would often say: That his op^ortunities were his Riches; and he was ^areful
to improve them: whence it ^eldome came to pass that he Preached without making
some real impression upon his hearers, which was discovered by the Tears that
fell from many of them.

Thirdly, His Zeal.
In the next place his zeal and fervor deserves our consideration. It was the
Counsel of a grave Divine, That Christians should take heed that their old
judgments, did not abate their youthful affections. And certainly there was in
this our old Doctor, such warmth of affections as is seldom seen in so ancient
a man, and yet was it managed with such Christian Prudence, that he exercised
it, not about light and trivial matters, but about the greater, and more
substantial points of Religion; and that through the whole course of his Life:
Whether he Preached, Prayed, or discoursed about Divine things, all was
performed with much zeal, and heat of affections. He was fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. How glad was he of an opportunity of Preaching,
and if his liberty could have been purchased with money, what would he not have
given for it?

He was very affectionate in Prayer, His Prudence.
and yet were his affections so tempered with Prudence, and Judgment, that
though upon extraordinary occasions he would d^^^large himself therein, yet in
his Family Prayers, he was usually short, that so he might not make Religious
duties a burden to those that joined with him. And as his Prayers were
fervent, so he had this honor from God, that he had many signal returns, and
answers to his Prayers, as we shall hear afterward, and as can be attested by
many who received benefit by them both for Soul, and Bodily distempers, and
affections. He was conscienciously strict in the observation of the Lords
Days; The Sabbath Sanctified.
not permitting any discourses in his presence, but such as were suitable to
the Day, and to the Duties thereof: Rebuking, and reproving such as would take
liberty to discourse about their worldly businesses upon Gods Day.

Fourthly, His liberality and bounty were as eminent, His bounty and charity.
and exemplary as any of his other Graces. God gave him a good Estate, so a
large heart, which was a double mercy. He was rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate: Laying up in store for himself a good
Foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. He has been often heard
to say: That he could fare hardly, and go meanly, that he might be the better
enabled thereby to be charitable unto others that were in want: And it is
believed that few of his estate and rank exceeded him herein. Seldom did any
necessitous Persons come to him, seldom did he hear of the necessiti^s of
others, though at a distance from him, but they tasted of his Bounty.

He gave large sums of money every year, for diverse years together, to pious
and charitable uses, as his Wife can testify, who kept an account in writing
of the several sums so disbursed by him. Toward the relief of the poor,
persecuted Protestants in Pi^mont, he gave thirty pounds; and as much the same
year to another charitable use. He gave also several considerable sums yearly
for the support and encouragement of some poor Scholars in the University of
Dublin, besides a large sum of money disbursed out of his own purse toward
furnishing the Library there with Books. And as he had thus sundry ways
exercised his Bounty whilst he lived, so at his Death, he gave large Legacies
to pious and charitable uses: and God made good that Promise to him, Isa.
58.10. If thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
Soul: Then shall thy Light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the
Noonday.

5. To this Grace of Charity may be added his Candor, His Candor.
and courteous deportment, which gave a luster to his Bounty; according to that
of the Poet,

Dat been, dat multum,
Qui dat cum munere vultum.
He was not apt to be offended with others, much less apt to offend others. His
Meekness.
He always interpreted to the best sense that which might seemingly have
ministered occasion of offense; by which excellent temper, he drew love and
respect to himself wheresoever he came, and with whomsoever he conversed,
whether in private Families, or in his more public employments.

Sixthly, In the last place his Faith, His Faith, and Patience.
and Patience calls for our consideration: of which, as he had given good proof
in the whole course of his Life, so they eminently shon forth when he came to
die. In the time of his sickness he showed an holy, humble, and cheerful
resignation of himself to the wife and merciful disposal of God his Heavenly
Father: Not one repining word was heard to proceed out of his mouth. He was
dumb, and opened not his mouth, because it was the Lord that did it, Psalm
39.9. There was not any impatient, or uncomly motion seen in him: but being
full of Faith, of Christian Patience and courage, he feared not Death, but was
well prepared, and resolved against that stroke of it: And would often say, O
how happy a thing is it by Death to be about a possibility of Sinning!

The Heathen Philosophers called Death, The most terrible of all terribles: and
the Sacred Scripture calls it, The King of terrors. It is Storied, that one
hearing a person highly commended for his excellent Virtues, said, Let us stay
till his Death, and then we shall be the better able to judge of all these
things which make such a glittering show in him for the present. And certainly,
to be able to look the King of Terrou^s in the Face, without consternation, and
to meet the last enemy [Death] with Joy, and consolation, His Perseverance.
is no small evidence of a true, and strong Faith: and this was evidently seen,
and discerned in this worthy Doctor at the time of his Death.

He often declared in his health, that in his younger days he had been sorely
vexed, and pestered with Satan's Temptations: but at last, meeting with a plain,
honest Christian (such an other, probably, as the Shepherd was with whom Junius
met) to whom, complaining of his fears, he first rebuked him, and then
instructed him, Good Counsel.
saying, You look at the reward, without minding, and intending the Work, in
that you desire, and expect Assurance, before you have well resolved upon doing
your Duty. My advice therefore is, to mind what God requires of you in your
present station, and be serious, and diligent therein, and the other will come
in Gods due time. This advice, he professed, was of great use to him all his
Life after: so that after that time he was not troubled with such perplexing
thoughts as formerly he had been: but lived, and dyed in Peace, both with God
and man, in the great Climacterical year of his Age: October 22. 1666.

Examples of his power, and prevalency in Prayer.

The wise Solomon tells us, Prove. 12.2. That a good man obtains favor of the
Lord: That is, He has what he will of God. Id quod vult, a Domino impetrat;
quia eius voluntas est ipsissima Dei voluntas; nec aliud vult: As Mercer has
it, out of Rab^i Levi. It is written of Luther, ^^e vir potuit a Deo quicquid
voluit: That by his Prayers he could prevail with God at his pleasure.
Melancthon, and Myconius, being sick of desperate diseases, were both recovered
by Luthers Prayers. Sozomen says of Apollonius, that he never asked any thing
of God in all his Life which he obtained not Blessed is he that has what he
will, and wills nothing but what he should. The Persons of Saints (says a
Reverend Divine) are like secret pledges of common quiet, and their mediations
are a Shield to the Earth against the wrath of Heaven. We have many examples in
Scripture of the power, and efficacy of Prayer; and lest any should think that
those were extraordinary, and that the like are not to be found in our days,
take notice of these instances following.

I. When Mr. Winter in his younger days was cast out of his living, his first
Wife, having many Children, fell into great grief, and perplexity, fearing that
the, and hers would come to want. Mr. Winter was much troubled to see his Wives
discontents, and thereupon plied the Throne of Grace for cure thereof: and one
day, as he was riding abroad, and crying earnestly unto God about this matter,
he thought that he heard a voice saying unto him, Because thou have not spared
thine estate for my glory, neither thou, nor any of thine shall want. At his
return home he told this to his Wife with Joy, saying, That he would not for
all he was worth want that comfortable answer to his Prayers.

II. When an Order was sent to Mr. Winter from the Parliament to go with their
Commissioners into Ireland; his Wife was very unwilling thereunto; and some of
their near Relations came on purpose to dissuade him from it, himself also was
very fearful of the Seas. In this his great straight, he retired into his Study
(as his usual manner was in the like Cases) and there with much earnestness he
spread the matter before God, craving (...) guidance, and direction therein:
And the Lord was pleased to set it upon his spirit, that he should go, and be
carried in safety thi^ner, and there become an Instrument of converting many
Souls to God. When he had declared this to his Wife and Friends, they
acquiesced, and resolved upon that Journey. And according to this gracious
Promise of God, though they took Shipping in the midst of Winter, and went with
a Master that was not very well acquainted with those Seas, yet they found the
Seas Calm, and their passage so speedy, that whereas some other great Persons
went out before them, and with a more experienced Master, yet they arrived in
safety, about four and twenty hours before them, insomuch as the Captain of the
Ship said, That in his whole life he had never known so speedy, and calm a
passage before.

III. Not long after Mr. Winters coming into Ireland, he went with the
Commissioners unto Kilkenny, in which place Colonel Jones his Wife fell very
sick of the Yellow Jandise, and some other distempers: For which cause her
Husband called together some Ministers, and other Friends to spend some hours
in prayer unto God on her behalf: Mr. Winter was the last man that prayed: but
before he began, he went to her, and asked her, Whether she had Faith to be
healed? She answered, She thought she had: Then he went to prayer, and wrestled
exceedingly with God for her recovery: And when he had done, he went to her,
and advised her to be careful, and diligent in the use of all good means for
the recovery of health, adding, That she should live, and not die at that time.
At this saying, his Wife, and her Sister were much troubled, telling him in
private, that they had rather have given much money than that he should have
spoken so confidently of her recovery among so many Anabaptists: Fearing that
if this words proved true, they might be confirmed in their Enthusiastical
conceits: if otherwise, then that they might take occasion to scandalize his
Person, and Ministry: but he again affirmed, that she would not die of that
sickness.

Yet after this she continued very weak for a month, or mo^^: Her Doctors gave
her up for a dead woman: whereupon Mr. Winters Wife again blamed him for his
confident saying, that she must live: To which he smilingly answered, Well, she
is not yet dead. At length her disease so prevailed, that she lost the use of
her senses; and her Servants weeping about her, said, now she i^ near death
indeed. The Saturday following, as Mr. Winter sat at dinner, a messenger came
to him from Colonel Jones, to tell him, That if he would see his Wife alive,
he must come away presently, for that she was now a dying. At this Mrs. Winter
was much troubled, because of her Husbands former confidence in premising her
Life. But Mr. Winter made no great have to be gone, saying, That he well knew
when God answered his Prayers, and when no^.

After he had dined, he went to the House, where he found the Colonel sitting
by her, ready to close her eyes so soon as breath departed out of her body: for
so she had enjoined him in the time of her health. She lay speechless and
without sense; not answering, nor moving her eyes, though her Husband, and Mr.
Winter called unto her: whereupon her Husband thought that she had lost her
hearing. Mr. Winter desired that he might pray with her, but her Husband
refused, saying, that she was senseless, and had been a dying all that morning.
Mr. Winter again urged that he might pray with her. No, (said the Colonel) it
is to no purpose: She is now a dead woman. And Mr. Winter urged the third time
that he might pray, saying, Her life is yet in her, and so he went to prayer,
which he performed with much earnestness, and with many t^ars.

When Prayer was ended, Mr. Winter ^oing to her Bedside, she looked upon ^^m,
and with a smiling countenance, ^^id, O! See the fruit of Prayer! O! ^^e the
fruit of Prayer! Set me up, and ^^ve me something to eat: I am cured; but not
by Doctors: Only Free Grace, and Prayers have prevailed with God for me. They
asked her what she could eat? She answered, any thing. They gave her some bread
and butter, of which she did eat pretty heartily. Then did her Husband send for
her Doctors: But she bad them not to provide any more Physic for her, saying,
She would take none: For she would not dishonor God, and wrong Prayer so much
(by which she was now cured) as to take any more Physic: nor could she be by
any means persuaded to it.

On Monday following in the afternoon, Mrs. Winter heard that Mrs. Jones was
walking in her Garden, which she wondering at, went to see her, and found her
there. So soon as she saw Mrs. Winter, she went to meet her, and said. Oh! See
the fruit of Prayer! Mrs Winter blessed God for her recovery: whereupon She
said, My Doctors would b^^ me take some more Physic of them: B^^ it is God
that has cured me, and he (...) shall have the praise of it. I will take n^
thing of them. They shall not say, the they have cured me: For God by Pray^
has done it. Its prayer alone that (...) done it. And indeed herein God made
good that gracious Promise of his, Jam. 5.15. The Prayer of Faith shall save
the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up.

IV. Some months after Mr. Winter, with his Family, removed to Dublin, and
after some time, the aforesaid Mrs. Jones fell sick again, and her sickness
prevailed so far upon her, that growing very weak, she was confined to her bed.
whereupon, on a Lords Day, Mr. Winter and his wife went to visit her: when they
came, they found another Minister with her, but she called for Mr. Winter to
pray with her. A Lady that was present, coming to Mrs. Winters Sister, said, O!
Do you think this good woman will recover or not? She answered, I know not yet;
but when my Brother Winter has done praying I shall tell you more. When Mr.
Winter had ended his prayer, this Lady came to her again, saying, What do you
think now? She answered; She believed that she would not recover: and so said
Mrs. Winter also: the reason whereof was, because they observed that in his
prayer he was more earnest in praying for the spiritual and Eternal welfare of
her Soul, than for her Bodily Health.

When they were returned home, Mrs. Winter asked her Husband what he thought of
her? He answered, that she would dye: For that when in prayer he would have
begged of God the restore of her to health, he could not do it, but could only
pray for her eternal happiness. Faithful Prayer is ordained of God to be a
means to obtain what we desire, and pray for^ and therefore is never put up in
vain, but shall have an answer, 1 John 5.14, 15. For where God gives an heart
to speak, he has an ear to hear. And it is the observation of a Reverend
Divine of our own: That when God intends not to hear, he lays the Key of
prayer out of the way, as being loath that such precious breath as that of
prayer is, should be without its full, and dearest success.

After this Mrs. Jones grew worse and worse, and continued in a languishing
condition for some months. She had several Doctors, who still gave her hopes of
recovery. Mr. Winter prayed often with her, but still after the same manner,
insomuch as his Wife told him, that she thought he did not love Mrs. Jones as
formerly, because he prayed not for her life: he answered, that his love was
the same, but he was so bound up in his spirit that he could not pray for her
recovery, and therefore conceived that she would die.

At length Mrs. Jones finding herself very weak, sent for Mr. Winter to pray
with her, and after prayer, she said unto him, Sir, I hear you love me not so
much as formerly. God heard your prayers for me when I was a dying at Kilkenny:
but now you do not pray so earnestly for my Life as you did then. No (said he)
I neither do, nor can do it, though I love you as well as ever. For when I
would pray for your life, my Tongue is turned to pray for your Eternal walfare:
therefore I do believe you are not for this world, but will soon be in a
better. Think you so? Said she. Hereupon she sent for a Colonels Wife, between
whom and herself there was some difference, and they were reconciled together.
She sent also for her Husband, and imparted her mind to him: Adding, that she
saw she must die, for that Mr. Winter could not pray for her as he did in her
former sickness; and it pleased God presently after to take her to himself.

V. At an other time Mrs. Winters Sister going for England, left her only Son
with her; and after awhile the Child fell into a high Feavour, and one morning
the Maid, with whom the Child lay, came to her Mistress, and told her, She
feared the Child had the Plague, for that he had many spots on his bosom. And
the Plague at this time was in Dublin. Mrs. Winter sent for a Doctor, who when
he had seen the Child, said, that they were either Plague spots, or Feavour
spots, and that he much feared the Child's Life. Mrs. Winter went to her Husband
into his Study, and acquainted him with these things, requesting him that he
would be earnest with God in begging the Child's Life. At Noon, when her (...)
and came down, she asked him what he thought? He bad her not to perplex, and
trouble herself, for the Child would live: And before the next day the Child
began to amend, and within a few Days was perfectly well.

VI. Mrs. Winter herself was once under a strong Temptation to become an
Anabaptist, being persuaded that it was the way of God, and she had been dipped
but that she feared in would reflect upon her Husbands credit. Her Husband took
much pains with her, yet could she not be convinced of her error, but was both
night and day in great perplexity of spirit: Only she relied upon that gracious
Promise of Christ, John 7.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God. And at last she resolved to set a day apart to
seek unto God for satisfaction in this doubtful case. But it fell out that that
very day, they were earnestly invited to Dine with Doctor Jones, and her
Husband had promised to go: she said, she could not go, because she had set
that day apart upon such an occasion: Her Husband answered her; Thou must go,
for I have been praying for thee, and God has assured me, that thou shall be
satisfied, and that quickly too; and accordingly it came to pass: for she was
so resolved, and satisfied from Heaven, that afterward she was able to Dispute
with the Female Anabaptists, and to confute them; insomuch as some of the
Officers would let their Wives come no more at her.

VII. Whilst they were in Dublin Mrs. Winters Sisters Husband, being upon
occasion in London, fell dangerous sick: Sir Francis Pridjean, and an other
Doctor were his Physicians, who, after a time gave him up for Dead. An other of
Mrs. Winters Sisters, wrote her word of it, adding, That she believed that
before that letter came to her hands, he would be dead, and buried. Hereupon
his Wife desired that that afternoon might be set apart to seek unto God in his
behalf: and accordingly some Ministers and Christians were invited to meet
together for that end. When the time was come, Mrs. Winter requested her
Husband that he would come away; for that the company was met. He had her go
before; for he must endeavor to know of the Lord whether he was yet living or
no: For (said he) d^ you think that I will pray for a dead man? When some of
the Ministers had prayed, Doctor Winter came in. They prayed with submission,
that if he was yet in the Land of the Living, the Lord would be pleased to be
his Physician, and to direct, and bless all good means to him, for the recovery
of his health But in the close of the day, when Doctor Winter came to pray, he
showed much confidence that he was yet alive, and that he should live and
recover, to the amazement of all that were present: But his Sister, who knew
his manner, and had experience of the successfulness of his Prayers, between
hope and fear, could not contain herself from crying out. When the Doctor had
done and was risen from his knees, he went to her, and took her by the hand,
saying, Be of good comfort, for your Husband is alive, and shall recover, and
you shall see him again with comfort. She crying out aloud said, Ah Brother! I
fear he is dead. Do you think he is alive? I know (said he) that he is: and
repeated over his former words: And accordingly, in their next letters, they
heard of his amendment.

VIII. At another time Mrs. Winters Sister (who was with them in Ireland) fell
into a relaps after a Fever, being great with Child, and within two months of
her time: at which time she fell into a great bleeding at the Nose. She had
three Doctors, and Surgeons which used all their Art, and yet could not stop
it. At length she fell into Travel, and two Midwives were sent for to her. She
was fain to sit upright in her Bed, and could not lie down because of her
violent bleeding. Her Midwives, and Doctors gave her up for dead. And she grew
so weak that Mrs. Winter not being able to see her die, left her, and went to
her own lodgeing, where she found that her Sisters Husband had caused her
Husband to (...) and pray for his Wife, which he did with much earnestness; and
it pleased God that presently after, news was brought them that she was safely
delivered of a dead Child. Hereupon Doctor Winter and his Wife went to see her,
and found her still bleeding; and the Doctors, and Surgeons were sent for
again, who agreed to open a Vein, and let her blood. The Surgeon struck her
right arm, but no blood came. The Doctors bid him try the other arm, he
answered, that it was to no purpose, for she had no Pulse for some hours
before; yet the Doctors made him do it, and then some few drops of blood came:
but most of this time Doctor Winter was praying for her in the next room, and
she sometimes overheard him, but could not speak. Afterward she told them
that these thoughts were in her Head: Yonder good man, would have me live: but
is will not be.

(...) one of her Midwives bid her (...) Death, for she could not live. To
which one of the Doctors said, that sure she had forgotten Lazarus. No, replied
the Midwife; I have not forgotten him; but God must work as great a Miracle now
as he did then if she recovers. Yet it pleased God that she did recover, and
afterward one of the Doctors told Mrs. Winter, that he never saw one so near
unto death, to live; and that to him it was a Miracle. Here was another sweet
return to Doctor Winters Prayers, and his Sister would often acknowledge that
it was by the power of his Prayers that she was restored to life, and so others
thought also.

IX. The last time that the Soldiery pulled the English Parliament in pieces,
Doctor Winter, and his friends in Dublin, were in great fears of the confusions
which were like to follow: For which cause Doctor Winter kept Fasts Weekly with
his Congregation, for a great while together. One time as he was praying, in
imitation of Abraham's Intercession for Sodom, he used such like expressions.
Lord will thou also destroy the Righteous with the wicked? Peradventure there
be fifty thousand Righteous within these three Kingdoms: will thou also
destroy, and not spare these Nations for fifty thousand Righteous that are
therein? etc. And when he came to the last number of ten Thousand, as he
kneeled against a Post in the room, he saw a great shining Light about him, and
heard perfectly a voice saying: The Nations shall be spared for ten thousand
Righteous Persons sake.

Upon this gracious answer, he turned his prayers into praises and Thanksgiving
unto God for this speedy answer to his ^^rnest requests, insomuch as all the
company could not but take notice of it thought none of them heard the voice
but himself only. Mrs. Winter, upon some occasion was from home at this time:
Yet a Gentlewoman that was present told her afterward, that her Husband that
day was so ^levated in prayer, that he exceeded himself; and she never heard
him better, and that he was answered in his Petitions before he ^ose from his
knees. Mrs. Winter asked her, how the knew that? She answered, By his large
thanksgivings after he had done pleading with the Lord: Also a while after a
Gentl^man coming to see him, that had been present that day, embraced him,
saying, That he was a man, greatly beloved of the Lord, for that he could no
sooner ask, but he was answered, and his Petitions granted. And the week after
they heard that the pride of the soldiery had met with a great check.

Doctor Winter afterward told his Wife that he now perceived that a voice
might be spoken to one in a Room, and none else hear it. When he lay upon his
deathbed, his Wife again asked him about it, and he said, he did as plainly
hear the Voice, as he heard her speak. She asked him, If the Voice was like to
hers? He said, No, it was another kind of Voice. Thus we read, Acts 22.9. That
the men that went with Saul to Damascus, Saw indeed the Light, and were afraid:
but they heard not the Voice that spoke to him.

X. At Dublin there was one Mrs Smith, a Merchants Wife, which had been many
days in labor: Her Child was dead within her. She had good experienced
Midwives, and one Man-Midwife, and yet she could not be delivered. At last, one
morning they sent for Doctor Winter to pray with her, saying, that she could
not live till night, being so far spent. But it fell out that he was out of
Town. At night he came home, and then they sent an other messenger for him,
(her Husband saying, that she was not yet dead, but very near unto it) Doctor
Winter (though very weary) went to the house, and prayed very earnestly unto
God for her. When his prayer was ended, he spoke to the good women about her to
raise her up, and to use all good means for her help, saying that she should
live. But they (being hopeless of her Life, and delivery) desired that she
might be no more tortured, but that she might die in peace. Yet Doctor Winter
persuaded them to make one further trial, which at last they assented to, and
had good success: for in a short time she was safely delivered of her dead
Child. This Mrs. Smith, proving afterward with Child again, a Friend said to
her, She hoped it would be now better with her, than it was the time before: No
(said she) Doctor Winter is gone, and I must now die; which also came to pass:
for she could not be delivered.

XI. After Doctor Winters return into England, he, with his Wife, came to
London, and for a month sojourned in Doctor Drakes House: In which time his
second Daughter fell sick of the Twisting of the Guts. She had two able
Physicians, Doctor French, and Doctor Cox. She lay in very great torture from
Monday till Saturday night, and the Doctors had very little hope of her Life.
On Saturday evening Doctor Winter came in, and meeting with her Sister, asked
how she did? Her Sister answered, she thought that now she was very near unto
death: For that the Doctors, having prescribed something to be given her in a
Spoon, her teeth were so set, that her Aunt and she had much ado to open them
to put it into her mouth. But said she, Sir, what do you think of her? Give me
(said he) a candle, that I may go into my chamber, and anon I will tell you
whether she shall live or die.

When he came down, she met him at the foot of the stairs, and asked him what
he thought of her now? He answered, Your Sister will live. And going up into
her Chamber, he spoke to his Wife, and bid her to use all means possible for
her recovery: For (said he) she must not dye this time. His Wife begged of him
not to be so confident, for that she was very near unto Death, and no hopes of
Life remained. Yet he told her Mother, and Aunts that she should recover, and
live. His Wife was much troubled at it, notwithstanding all her former
experiences: But the next day, signs of her recovery began to appear, and
within a little space she was perfectly well. Some other instances might be
given, but these may suffice, as evidently demonstrating that the Lord is a
Prayer-hearing God, That never says to the seed o^ Jacob, Seek ye my Face in
vain.

Probably, the incredulous World will not believe these things to b^true^ but
judge them rather to be Romances, and fancies than realities: But there are so
many Conscientious Persons, and of Good credit yet living, who can, and will
attest the Truth of them, that there is no place left to distrust, or doubting,
among those that are sober, and judicious.

Amos 3.7. Surely the Lord God will d^ nothing, but he reveals his secret
un^^ his Servants the Prophets.

John 16.23. -- Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name; He will give it
you, v. 24. Hitherto have you asked nothing in my Name. Ask, and ye shall
receive that you Joy may be full.

A Letter written by Doctor Winter, to a Gentleman desiring of him a short and
plain account of what was necessary to the Person that would be saved.
THough many things in Scripture be required of a Christian which he is bound
to observe, not to ^^tain any Truth in unrighteousness, for whosoever
p^rsisteth in any sinful course against his light of Conscience, without
remorse, and hearty sorrow for the same sins fundamentally, Rom 1.18. For
the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against a^ ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Yet there are
not many things in themselves absolutely necessary to selvation, without which
no man can be Saved. These God in much mercy has set down in holy ^^itt, that
the meanest and weakest Christians may understand, Luke 19.42. If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace! etc. From whence (...) may observe that a man may know many things, ^^d
yet not know the thing which concerns his everlasting peace. The understanding
is the first that lives, and the last that dies. I say then,

1. First, It is absolutely necessary that there be a work of illumination and
conviction, and that a clear, full, particular, and through work be upon the
understanding: which must be renewed and sanctified as well as the will, John
16.9. when the Spirit is come he will reprove the world of Sin, because they
believe not on me, Ephesians. 4.23. And be renewed in the Spirit of your minds, so
that the soul see sin to be the greatest evil in the world, and Christ the
greatest good, the only excellent and desirable thing, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have
I in Heaven but Thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee,
Philip. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered to loss of
all things, and do coun^ them but Dung that I may win Christ. In the the young
man in the Gospel failed, for though (...) came running to Christ, yea kneeled
down to him, Himself being a Ruler, he thought he had kept the Commandments
from his youth; he thought he saw a^ excellency in Christ; else why went he
away sorrowful: yet because he saw a greater excellency in the world, and
Embraced that rather than Christ, (...) perished, Mark 10.17. Luke 18.18.

2 Secondly, It is necessary that the heart be broken. Psalm. 51.17. A broken
and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. A broken heart is the sound
heart, the oil of Grace is poured into the broken Vessel: as first the heart
must be broken with hearty sorrow for sin, as sin; as it is a breach of the Law
and Command of God, 1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits Sin, Transgresses the
Law: for Sin is the transgression of the Law. We must grieve for Christ
Crucified by and for us, Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon me whom they have
Pierced, and they shall mourn, as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be
in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. Till
Sin is bitter to us, Christ will not be sweet to us. Again he must be broken
down, 2 Cor. 10.5. That all the strong holds of Sin be tumbled down, and all
those high thoughts, and strong imaginations be laid low, that those invincible
forts of sin be levelled, and the will subdued to the will of Christ. Again
thirdly, the heart must be broken through, that the heart be contrite, Psalm.
51.17. A Contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

The heart must be as it were shivered in pieces, and melted before the Lord;
not like an Earthen Jugg, that is broken indeed, but the pieces remain hard as
before; and thus it was with Pharaoh King of Egypt. Again fourthly, its
necessary the heart be broken from Sin, as well as for sin, its called
Repentance from dead works, Heb. 6.1. He that does not break off his former
sins, and bid adieu to them, no more to act sin, and live in sin, as farmerly,
cannot expect to be saved in the day of Christ 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, that we being dead to sins, should
live unto righteousness.

3. Thirdly, Its necessary that we should be emptied of all self righteousness,
so that we rest not in any thing wrought in us, or by us as meritorious. Paul
is this sense looks it all as dr^ss, and dung, and at the last day when
perfect, desires only to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness,
which is of the Law, hut that which is of Faith by Jesus Christ, Philip. 3.9.
And as when a man gives possession, to another of an house, he turns all out,
no qui^^ thing must be there; so all Sin, and all confidence i^ our own
righteousness turn out, that Christ al^n^ may take possession of the Soul,
which he has purchased long ago at so dear a rate.

4. Fourthly, Its necessary that we he regenerate, and born from above, John
3.3, 5. Jesus said (...) Ni^^d^mns, except a man be born again, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Old things are past away, and all things become now.
W^ mu^t have new thoughts, new desires, new sea^^ new sorrows, new Joys, new
speeches, new company, new objects, a new conversation: in a word that (...)
live from Christ, according to Christ, and for Christ ends; and not contend
with Christ any more, ab^^^ the pre^eminence of the first cause, and the last
end; but make Christ the Alpha and Omega in all things

5. Fifthly, That we close with Christ by faith, as our Lord and Savior, John
1.12. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe in his name. The soul being first sensible of
its l^st estate, and secondly seeing a necessity of a Savior, Acts 4.12. And
thirdly being taken with the beauty and excellency of Christ, then faith
closes with Christ as Lord and Savior; takes Christ as a Prophet to instruct
him, and as a Priest to save him, and as a King to rule over him: And afterward
the soul attaines to assurance of his Love, 1 John 5.13. These things have I
written to you, that you believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may
know that ye have Eternal Life, by a holy walking with God, for in that sense
good works justify Faith declaratively, as faith does the sinner.

6. Sixthly and lastly, that we be sincere: that is, first to hate all sin and
loath it. Secondly, perform, or endeavor to perform all known duties, Psalm.
119.6. I shall not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments.
Thirdly, to walk as in the sight of God, Esa. 48 3. Remember now, O Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. Fourthly, That though we do but
little, yet what we do, we do for Gods ends, that he may be glorified, 1 Cor.
10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the
glory of God. O then let us be sincere, else we shall lose the things that we
have wrought, 2. John 8.

Look to your selves, that we lose not these things which we have wrought, but
that you receive a full reward. For this heaven of hypocrisy spreads, swells,
and sowres all we do, and so ma^^s all. It spreads and sowrs, then it puffs up
the Soul with spiritual pride, and no sin more dangerous than this. Hypocrisy
makes all we do, but as shining sins, as the gilded Mice of the Philistines,
that were sightly in the eyes of men; but of no value with God. Jehu did many
glorious things but all was nothing, because his heart was not upright with God
or before God.

These are the things that accompany Salvation, which whoever attains unto
shall certainly be Saved; without which the Lord according to Scripture rule
will not Save you; if they be not really, and effectually wrought in you, by
the holy spirit. Oh! then let me beseech you to whom these lines shall come,
Strive to enter in at the straight gate: be sure you build not upon a sandy
foundation, Mat. 7.26. But upon the rock Jesus Christ, Mat. 7.24. Rest not in
any thing short of Christ. Take heed you perish not near the City of refuge,
but consider that saying of Christ, Mat. 7.22. Many will say unto me in that
day, Lord, Lord have we not Prophesied in thy name, open to us, to whom Christ
will say depart from me I never knew you. Now to attain to what is here said;
is daily to seek to the Lord, who turns the hearts, as rivers of Waters, Prove.
21.1. And has Promised to take away the hearts of Stone and give hearts of
Flesh, and to put his spirit in us and cause us to walk in his ways, Ezekiel.
36.26, 27. We must attend in all holy ordinances; as constant prayer in secret
and with others: In hearing and daily reading the holy Scriptures, some part of
them. Also the Sacraments must not be neglected. Christ is a Prince and a
Savior: He gives Repentance and remission of sins: Acts 5.31. He is a God
hearing Prayers; to him must all flesh come says the Psalmist, and those that
come unto him he will in no wise cast off, John 6.37. Christ will forgive
iniquities, transgressions and sins. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you, and you shall
find rest to your Souls, Mat. 11.28. Christ is our Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

A Letter written by Doctor Winter, to a Gentlewoman who was under great
Trouble of mind.
My dear Friend and Sister in Christ,
I Received your welcome Letter, and return you many thanks for your dear
affections, and fervent Prayers for me an unworthy Instrument in the hands of
Christ. But am very sorry that you are relapsed into your former doubting
thoughts, which I entreat you to wave and lay aside, lest Christ upbraid you as
he did his Disciples, Mark 16. with your unbelief and hardness of heart. When
Christ was risen from the dead, and his work was done, he does not go to
Heaven, but stays on Earth (a place not fit for a glorified Body) and
convers^a with his Disciples, and that not so much for his (...) Honor to
prove himself not to be held by the h^^^s of death, as to strengthen our Faith;
and in the day of his Resurrection he appeared five times, like one that cannot
endure to be out of our company, though he ever finds something among us, that
might justly make him withdraw, as he did among them; therefore the Lord
upbraids them, for want (1) of clearness of faith, Luke 24.26. (2) of fullness
of faith, ver. 25. Slow of heart to believe (all) that the Prophets have
spoken, (3) of comfort of faith ver. 17. And are sad. (4) Of not owning their
faith. ver. 21. We trusted that it had been he that should have delivered
Israel. (5) Of readiness of faith. Ver. 25. O fools [and slow of heart] to
believe: He had expressed abundance of love in satisfying all the claims that
Justice would make; and when Satan verily thought he had dispatched him out of
the way (He being buried and that as a malefactor) so that either he should not
rise at all, or not in glory and reputation among men; now Christ rises in
despite of Hell, and the Father gives him glory, 2 Pet. 1.17. That our faith
and hope may be in God, and therefore Christ expresses a dissatisfaction, and
discontent at them for their unkindness, and unthankfulness, as if he had said,
Time was when you were glad to know any thing that concerned me, when you hung
upon me, and whatever I said to you was a Law, and catertained with greediness,
Why then are ye so backward now? Are my merits ere a whit the less? Or are you
not sensible of your need, that you are so slow of heart to believe in me your
everlasting Redeemer? Now consider what Christ spoke to them, He speaks to you
(for all Scripture is writ for our Learning) and though Christ will not
condemn you; yet he may and he does (it seems) upbraid you; and such
upbraidings and frowns of Christ, are or should be as much as death, yea Hell
it self to a believer, as Hell was before we believed: For the Conscience is
m^n wounded by way of Gods special love as a Friend, than by his hatred as an
Enemy. If it were possible for a man to be thrown out of Gods arm^ of Love into
Hell, Hell would be more to him than any other. For this made Christ's
sufferings so great, because he was so infinitely beloved of the Father as
always lying in his b^some. Consider what I say, as Christ takes it ill that
we should question his Love; so of all sins he will bear with none less than
that of Unbelief. The Disciples had many failings, but he upbraids them with no
sin so much as Unbelief, as being of all sins the most grievou^ to him;
therefore as you would make Conscience of any other sin, see that you make
Conscience of this, namely of not believing in the Son of God, 1 John 3 23.

Consider further why were these doubtings of Thomas and the Disciples
^ecorded, but to strengthen our faith, they doubted of the Resurrection of
Christ that the world might not doubt; and it is observable, that Thomas doubted
more than all the rest; therefore he bore a more eminent testimony to Christ
than they did; crying out My Lord and my God, being the first that ^wned Christ
as God; Go you and do likewise.

Trust perfectly in the grace of the Lord Jesus; and to encourage you, remember
(1) you have his Word for salvation, and that Word to us surer than that voice
from Heaven; This is my well beloved Son, hear Him, 2 Pet. 1.19. And the Earth
shall sooner reel, than the Word and Promise of God fail.

(2) You have his Covenant the sure mercies of David, Jer. 31.3, 17. If Heaven
above can be measured, and the foundations of the Earth searched out beneath. I
will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that which they have done.

(3) You have the Attributes of God for you, the Pillars of Heaven, yea the
Pillars of God, and are not these sufficient to support your soul? There is not
one Attribute of God against you, but all for you, yea Justice it self; so that
you may plead with God, not only in point of mercy, but of Justice also; for
Christ has satisfied for all your sins, therefore (with reverence be it
spoken) God cannot in justice require the same debt twice of your Surety, and
of you also, see Romans 3.2.

(4) You have this attested by the broad Seal of Heaven, namely the Sacrament
and Privy Seal of the spirit, called the Earnest of the Spirit against that
day, and then there will be no need of that Earnest, when we have the purchased
possession; but his Earnest shows you, that he is in Earnest, not in Jest^ and
G^d will not assuredly lose his Earnest, which is pare of the bargain and
confirms it to you.

(5) Consider all the glory of the Father (...) upon Christ was, that our faith
and hope might be in God; the Jews slighted Christ, (...) him, but had they
seen him in glory they would have believed on him.

(6) Christ should not discharge his office, if he should not re^eive such as
you, and do you think that Christ will be unfaithful to his Father, or to poor
souls that come unto God by him? I tell you the Lord has made two sorts of
Promises (1) of Faith, John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to
me, namely, by Faith. (2) To Faith as it Follows in the same verse, [and he
that comes I will in no wise cast out.]

(1) Of the Church, (2) Of my heart, (3) Of Heaven: Therefore make a venture
and cast your soul on him, who will not sail to keep safely that which is
committed to his trust.

And let me tell you farther, we are the Ambassadors of Christ to treat with
sinners in Christ's name, upon his own terms, and therefore if you come in upon
the terms of the Gosspel, out of the sense of the poverty of your spirit, and
close with Christ, as seeing an excellency in him, above all the world, so as
to give your self to him, and never to part with him, I say then that Christ is
bound, and must of necessity make good, what his Ambassadors have propounded
and concluded in his name, in whose name according to the contents of your
Letter, and the former knowledge I have had of you, I do declare as a Minister
of Christ that all your sins are forgiven you, and therefore I charge you that
you roll your self upon the Lord, the burden is too heavy for you to bear, but
what you cannot bear that roll upon the Lord, and know assuredly though we be
unfaithful, yet he abides faithful and cannot deny himself; the Promise is
made to the truth and not to the degrees of grace.

Lastly, if you persist in unbelief, consider how grievous this is to Christ:
forget not what was said before, that Christ upbraided the Disciples, and
doubtless the anger of Christ was never greater than the offense, nor the
reproof unsuitable unto the fault, therefore chide your soul; Why do thou cast
down thy self (O my soul?) Why art thou disquieted within me; still trust in
God, who is the help of my faces, that is, who saves eminently, perspicuously,
so that a man may see Salvation in the face.

If all that I have said will not prevail, know I have your Hand and Seal
against you, and must needs witness against you in that day; but I hope better
things of you, that the Bowels of Christ will melt you, and his arms opened
upon the Cross allure you to run to him, who never rejected any that came to
him; and do you think that you shall be the first?

As to that Query What is the lowest degree of faith? I answer, some say the
lowest act of faith is to see a possibility of mercy, but if I should say so, I
should exclude many a precious Saint out of Heaven: I say then the lowest act
of faith is to put a high estimate upon Christ as the chiefest of ten thousand,
Cant. 5.10. So as to cleave to him, and not to part with him for ever, though
the soul see no probability, no not possibility of mercy, this is poverty of
spirit, the lowest round of Jacobs Ladder. To make this plain^ suppose such a
Maid has strong affections to such a Person, but he is otherwise inclined, yea
engaged, so that there is no possibility of obtaining him, yet there is true
Love: The Case suits with many a soul, that cannot see any possibility of
enjoying Christ, yet Loves him dearly, could be content to beg with him, why
here is true Love, and therefore faith; for faith works by Love. Wherefore I
say look after Christ with a wishly eye, with a long look, and you shall be
saved, Isa. 45. For the prayers made toward Christ the living Temple, are heard
as well as the prayers that are made in the Temple, though they cannot evidence
their union with Christ.

My Dear Friend I commend these lines to you. The Pin of the Dyall points at
the hour of the day, but cannot tell what a Clock it is, unless the Sun shine:
unless the Lord shine upon your heart you can see no light of grace, or
comfort, The Lord create the fruit of the lips peace, which I beg for you.
Pray for me still, as I desire to do for You,

Your assured Friend, S. W.


