THE Dancing-School.

WITH THE ADVENTURES OF THE Easter Holy Days.

LONDON, Printed by I. How, in the Ram-head-Inn-Yard, in Fanchurch-Street, 1700.

Books Sold by J. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn-Yard in Fanchurch-Street; J. Weld,
at the Crown between the Temple-Gates in Fleet Street; and Mrs. Fabian, at
Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside.
1. SOt's Paradise: Or the Humors of a Derby-Ale-House: With a Satyr upon the
Ale. Price Six Pence. 2. A Trip to Iamaica: With a True Character of the People
and Island. Price Six Pence. 3. Eclesia and Factio. A Dialogue between
Bow-Steeple-Dragon, and the Exchange-Grashopper. Price Six Pence. 4. The Poet's
Ramble after Riches. With Reflections upon a Country Corporation. Also the
Author's Lamentation in the time of Adversity. Price Six Pence. 5. A Trip to
New England. With a Character of the Country and People, both English and
Indians. Price Six Pence. 6. Modern Religion and Ancient Loyalty: A Dialogue.
Price Six Pence. 7. The World Bewitched. A Dialogue between Two Astrologers and
the Author. With Infallible Predictions of what will happen from the Vices and
Villainies Practiced in Court, City and Country. Price Six Pence. 8. A Walk to
Islington: With a Description of New Tunbridge-VVells, and Sadler's
Musick-House. Price Six Pence. 9. The Humors of a Coffee-House: A Comedy.
Price Six Pence. 10 A Frolic to Horn-Fair. With a Walk from Cuckold's-Point
through Deptford and Greenwich. Price Sixpence. 11. The First Volume of the
LONDON-SPY? In Twelve Parts. 12. The First, Second Third, and Fourth Parts of
the Second Volume of the London-Spy.
All Written by the same Author.

THE Dancing-School, etc.
IN the Week before Easter, when Schoolboys plead their old Charter of Omnia
Been, in opposition to the Tyrannical Injunction of Buttock-Pennance, inflicted
according to the Arbitrary Wills of those Grammarian Monarchs, who Govern
absolute in their Kingdoms of Instruction, who now, pursuant to an old Custom,
submit to a Cessation of Birch Arms, by which they used to Rule, Awe, and
Terrify their Infant Subjects; and when Women's Tailors were as busy in
Turning of old Gowns, and Repairing the Decayed Ornaments of Maids, Wives, and
Widows, to set them off, as Nature does the Season of the Year, to the best
advantage, that they may walk with their Gallants to Islington, and there make
as great a Consumption of Bottle-Ale and Plumb-Cakes, as ever was made of Pig,
Pork, and pricked Wines, during the Revels of St. Bartholomew: 'Twas then I
found my Blood had acquired a pleasing warmth, and as it Circulated through its
Channels, gave to each Vein a Voluntary Titillation, without either Female
Dalliance, or the force of Imagination; that I began to be as Rampant as a
Parsons Bull in the Spring, turned into new Pasture; and could think of nothing
but fine Faces, Charming Bubbies, Plump Hips, Soft Bellies, Condescending
Mo-Mo-Modicums, and such sort of strange Whimsies; that I found my self almost
as Mad as Women Troubled with a Fura Matricis, and could not any longer be
without the Nocturnal, as well as Diurnal Happiness of Female Conversation.

In order to Lawfully procure to my self this mistaken Blessing, which every
Fool Admires till he Enjoys, and Enjoys till he Despises, I began to consider
the easiest and most probable means of obtaining this delightful Fangle, or
Modish Bauble, called a Woman; and such an one as a Man might be Content to be
Plagued with all days of his Life, for the sake only of the Old Trade of
Basket-making; at last, I made this Result, from some hours Deliberation, That
the common Method Citizens take to be made Cuckolds, might be as ready a Road
to Matrimony, as any Man could think on: Upon which I bought me about two Pound
and a half of Wig, two or three Else of Cravat, had a Gold Hat-band Stich'd
cross the Crown of my Hat, and the Frogs of my Belt let down as low as the
Rowls of my Stockins: Thus at a few Guineas Expense, made my self as pretty a
Fool in Fashion, as any's to be seen at Fop's Coffee-house, or amongst the
Audience at a New Play.

When thus Equipped, it being a great Ball-Week, I had recourse to a
Dancing-School, which I thought was the best Rendesvouz of willing Tits, that a
Man under my Circumstance could desire to shake his Breech amongst, by a little
Sealed Warrant, commonly called a Ticket, which I had procured from the Lord
Caperer Paramount, of Current, Minuet, and Bory; I obtained admittance,
Crowding in with a parcel of Grave Matrons, who had left their Husbands at
home, some to keep Shop, and othres to keep Bars, whilst themselves became
Spectators of their pretty Daughters Perfections. I had not been long settled
amidst the Motherly Assembly of Cheapside-Quality, but I found my self as Warm
as a Dutch Woman's Honor, when a Stove's under her Petticoats; being quickly
brought into such a fine Breathing Sweat, that I began to be much about as
easy under the Heat, as a new Married Man under Matrimony at Midsummer, that
like him what I expected would have proved a Pleasure, I found now to be
downright Drudgery; as soon as the Room was fully furnished with fine Ladys,
who were ranged by the Master of the Revels, in as regular an order, as Painted
Gallipots in an Apothecary's Shop; the pretty Female Poppets who were to
Entertain the Company with some new French Figaries, and feats of Activity,
were Ushered into Public View, adorned with precious Stones, collected from
several parts of the Town, to set off their Nursery of Bellfa's to the best
Advantage; who came in by two, and two, as exactly Paired as ever I saw Coach
Horses; and droping their Honors to the Assembly, moved cross the Room to
their Places, as Formal, and as Stiff, as Figures in a Raree-show, or a Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, going to deliver an Adress to show the City's
Loyalty; several Branches as well as Sconces of Candles being lighted, and the
Room being Crammed as full of Company, as St. Brides Church, upon a Spittle
Psalm at Easter, or an Anthem on Cicelia's Day: The Scholars being ranged upon
Forms or Shelves in several Degrees, one above another, the biggest being
seated uppermost, like the great Dishes in a Kitchen above the Plates; but were
so mightily infected with the Green Sickness, that the paleness of their Faces
made their Heads look in rows like the Poor's Whiteloaves in a Church: A
Concert of Coleyard-Musick was thrust up into a Bow-Window, where they sat
thrashing of Minuets and Bories, till their Faces Rained Sweat upon their
Papers and their Instruments, and made 'em look with as good a Gloss, as if
they had been new Varnished; but stoping the Pores of the Wood, so Damped the
sound, that had they strung up an old Butter-firkin for a Base, and made their
Trebles of Lignum Vitae, they could not have imposed a worse Sound upon the
Ears of the Audience than they did: I looked about me, like a Beau in a
Playhouse, to take a general Survey of the Ladies round me, and thought my
self as happy in my Company, as the Great Turk amidst his Seraglio, and pleased
my self with the Thoughts of having the Power to choose any one out of the Fair
Number.

All things being now in order to begin to show, Monsieur Shake-legs Faces
about to his fair Company of Female Pupils, whom he had brought under such
Discipline, that at one Word of Command, they advanced forward from their
Seats, seeming all to be as ready to put themselves upon a Gallop, as so many
Post Horses; when they had put themselves in a Ring, like so many Country
People going to Play at Drop-Glove, very concise Orders were dispatched to the
Listening Crowdero's to play the Brawles; which being done, the Cock led up the
Chickens, and away they scoured Round the Room after one another as if they
were playing at Train-Tro; at which kind of Sport they continued till they had
tired the Company, much worse than themselves, before they changed into
Variety; and than we had as many Changes given us upon Current, Bory Minuet,
and Fig, as could be rung upon four Bells, now and then intermixed with a
Figure-Dance, where they looked like so many Girls running the Mazes in
Tuttle-Fields, and she that run through with the least faults, should have a
Ginger-Bread Husband for her Reward: Every Dance I perceived, proved an
excellent Sudorisick to the Master, who now looked as Red in the Face, as if
his Head had Blushed for his Heels, and that he thought in his own Conscience,
it was too Effeminate a Profession to raise a Man to the Dignity of Lord Mayor,
or to be the Study of a Philosopher, that had any Guts in his Brains, to make
himself Learned in the sundry Motions and Measures of the Foot. I could not
forbear thinking it might be properly enough said, that a Dancing Master, is
the only Creature in the Creation that Walks with his Heels upwards; for no
doubt on it, for the great Service they do him, he prefers them in his own
Opinion above his Head; and things are to Mankind, not as they really are, but
as we make 'em, and believe 'em.

By this time, some Brother Professors of the Step, were hopp'd into his
Assistance, and gave him the Opportunity of retiring, partly through Ostentation,
and partly for refreshment, to change his Dancing Accouterments, and Entertain
the Eyes of the Spectators with a new piece of Prodigality; making his
Re-Entrance as fresh upon the Stage of his Theater in Epitomy, as a
Lincolns-Inn-Field Wrastler, after he has recovered new Vigor from the Sucking
of two or three China Oranges; and then amongst 'em the poor Girls were so
thoroughly Exercised, that some of them began to hobble like a Woman just lifted
off a Horseback, who has lost Leather by the Fatigue of a long Journey. The
Candles now began, for want of Snuffing, to burn as dim as if the Room had been
Haunted with Evil Spirits, so that there was a short Cessation of Dancing for a
time; and the Activity of the Foot was forced to give way to the Employment of
the Hands, which Danced round the Branches with such wonderful Expedition, that
I could not forbear thinking the Man that Snuff'd the Candles, was as great a
Proficient in his way, as he that had hired him for that purpose; in every
Interval the Quarteridges flowed so fast into the Masters Pocket, that the
Money chinck'd as he Caper'd, almost as loud as the Bells of a Morice-Dancer,
when he is hopping about the Hay; and I suppose, was much Pleasanter Music to
his Ears, than that he Danced to. The Tattles of the Motherly Spectators, began
now to swell into great Emulation, every one giving her own Female Offspring so
large a Character of the sweet humor and Disposition of her Child, that it is
scarce to be Credited; and so highly Commended the Docibility of the poor Lamb,
that she had not gone to School above a Fortnight, but she begun and made her
Father a Band of as good Point as ever was brought from Venice. Ay truly, I
believe in my Conscience, it is one of the Tractablest Children, I must say that
for her, that ever poor Woman brought into the World; and truly, as long as I
and her Father are able to give it her, she shall want no Education to make her
a Gentlewoman; for though we Sell Ale, it is true, yet, we bless God for it, we
get our Money as Honestly, and Enjoy our selves as Comfortably as any People in
our Station throughout the whole Parish, Marry do we, and I don't know why, if
we are able, we should not give our Children as good Breeding as any Body.
Truly Neighbor, says another, You're of my Mind, I declare it, for what ever
shift I make upon my own Account, my Children shall Learn their Haviours, and
not be Bred up Clowns, like Dorothy Mopsly, or Sarah Varges, that hang down
their Heads when they come amongst Strangers, as if they were Bred in a Hogsty;
and look so Sheepishly as if they could not say Bo to a Goose, when they meet
him; or had not Confidence enough to sit a minute upon a Lovers Knee, that
Courts 'em in the way of Civility. Such sort of Talk as this, filled up the
space of every Interval; the Master of the Ceremonies, full of Patience and Low
Bows, submiting to the reproofs of some Mothers, who were Jealous of his Care
and Diligence to their Children, ascribing their Daughters Dullness and Natural
Defects, to their Masters Negligence, the Doting Mother being as unable to
discern the Faults and Impediments of her own Progeny, as the Loving Cuckold is
to believe the Failings of his Wife; others so Extravagantly Opinionated of
their Daughters Performances, that the poor Wretch must be made a Slave to the
Folly of her Parent, and be called upon every minute to Answer by a dull
Repetition of her Excellencies, either the Pride of her Mother, or Vanity of
her Master, she being, it is likely, in the Thoughts of both, no small Credit to
him that taught the pretty Dancer, as well as she that bore the pretty Miss.

The rest of the Spectators, as well as my self, began now, I believe, to be
pretty well tired with the dull Swimming, and Capering, of every Sweating
Salatrix. The whole Company being made as hot and as wet, by Crowding so close,
and Sucking in one another Breaths, that had a Batch of hot Rye-Bread been
Anointed with Whey-Butter, just under our Noses, they could not have proved a
Sourer Nosegay, than what sprang out of the Pores of the Melting Assembly,
during the Time we were under this uneasy Confinement; for there was no
stirring without a general Consent; People were thumping at the Door, as if
Distracted, for admittance, like so many Batchelours struggling to Enter into
the State of Matrimony, not at all considering the wonderful Inconveniences
the many People were under, who had fallen into it already, and would as gladly
get out on it, could they break those Ecclesiastical Fetters which bind them to
their Bargains.

At last the Door being opened to let out somebody, who was, or as least played
the Hypocrite for their Ease, and pretended to be Fainting, In broke a Rabble
of People from without, of all Ages, both Sexes, and diverse Qualities, from the
Inns-of-Court Clark, to the Footman, and the Town-Lady, to the Tavern
Kitchen-Wench, that like so many Wheat Ears crammed into a Tunbridge Pie, we
Stewed, Cocks and Hens together, till we were thoroughly Baked in our own Fat
and Gravy. This disorder, to the great satisfaction of all those who had been
long Sitters, was some occasion of shortning our Penance; so that the
remainder of our Fooleries was ordered, first to be a Figure and a Song; and
then the whole Entertainment to be turned up in a few Country Dances, that the
Ladies, I suppose, might Couple themselves at last with Partners, who at least
would be so Civil to see them safe Home to their several Habitations, if not
make an Amor to 'em, and give 'em some Hopes of a further satisfaction: The
Song that they Sung was, I suppose, in Praise of Singing and Dancing; there was
something in it, of Come let us Trip it over the Plain, And Sing and Dance a
Main, or such sort of stuff, which I don't think worth Representing to the
Reader: I have given instead, one of my own as applicable to the purpose, which
I hope will give him greater Diversion. A Song upon Dancing.
DAncing was first a Maggot Bred,
In some Musicians Crazy Head:
When Ripe, being Slip'ry as an Eel,
It slid from thence, into his Heel;
And there it to this Day remains,
Having no further need of Brains;
Making 'em Skip with Nimble force,
As Eels in the Belly of a Horse:
Which Jockies use each Market Day,
To make 'em Dance, as People say.
Who Teach this slight of Foot in Schools
Great Reverence pay to Single Souls:
And little Friendship have for those,
Who always deal in double Shoes.
Some Men by Learned Heads grow Great,
But they advanced are by their Feet,
The Grandeur of the World Despise,
And never above a Caper Rise:
And when all is done, their formal Steps and Scrapes,
Makes Women Lucifers, and Men but Apes.


Their Song, instead of mine, being ended, as scurvily out of the Key, as an
Epithalamium sung by a Consort of Stroling Fiddlers under a Bridegrooms
Chamber-Window. The Word was no sooner given for Country Dances, but away
scoured an Auxiliary Troop of London-Prentices cross the Room, made, an onset
upon the Ladies, as if they had been going Vi et Armis, to Commit a Rape upon
the whole Female Convention; And when every one had chose a Mate, as Birds upon
a Valentines Day, Green Sleeves and Pudding-Pies was Ordered to be struck up,
and away they moved in Couples after the Master; who led up the Dance, like so
many Hounds following the Heels of a Huntsman, and shook their Breeches, with
as much seeming satisfaction to both Sexes concerned, as so many Faries could
possibly Enjoy in a Midnight Dance, upon a Lonely Plain in the Moonshine.

By this time I was thoroughly tired, as ever was poor Godfather at a
Christening, and having next to me a pretty kind of a Woman, at the full Age of
Maturity; who looked Modest enough, as times go, to refuse a Man to be a
Mistress, without a very close Siege, long Fatigue, large Expense, lavish
Promises, and the like; which I had no great Mind to be at the Trouble of, but
rather to Endeavor to Discover whether she had Virtue and Money enough,
answerable to her outward Perfections, to make a Wife on: Accordingly I
withdrew my Eyes from the Dancers, and applied a Succeeding Number of
Affectionate Glances to my Charming Neighbor, as the best Preface I thought I
could use to my following Solicitations, considering our Looks render our
Passions as Intelligible as Words, and oftentimes leave behind 'em a far deeper
Impression. When I had practiced this sort of Ogling for a few Minutes, and
gave her Signal Reasons to believe my Eyes meant something which my Modesty
hitherto, or some other Difficiency, had hindered my Tongue from more plainly
Expressing, I began to break out into such sort of Impertinence, as Lovers
usually Preamble with to introduce an Amor, to which she gave her Attention,
with as Modest an Indifference as becomes a Woman of Discretion.

This Heightened the good Opinion I had conceived, though it put me to a greater
puzzle to find Talk to Entertain her; for the less free a Woman is, the more it
puts a Man upon his Guard, and gives him the Trouble of Placing his Words under
greater Discipline, for fear he should be Laughed at; it being Natural for
Persons who say but little, to observe much, and take the greater Advantage of
others Failings. At last I proceeded to an Encomium on her Beauty, which I
found after the first Trembling onset, had inspired me with such Eloquence
that my Fancy Soared to more Hyperbole's than ever were stuffed into an
Accademy of Compliments: These I perceived gave the Ears of my new unknown
Mistress a little Titillation, and made her begin to Talk as fast in
Contradiction of my Flatteries, as she termed 'em, as I could find words to
Exhibit those Sentiments which the seeming Innocence of her Charms had
influenced me to conceive of her pretty Person.

By this time, being as much pleased with her Witty Conversation, as I was
before with her outward Appearances; I began to press hard to inform me by
which of these three Titles she distinguished herself, viz. Maid, Wife, or
Widow; considering with my self, in this Ripe and forward Age, she was scarce
Young enough to be the former, and full Old enough to be either of the latter;
at last after much Pains and Entreaties, I extorted a Confession of her
Circumstance, from her Sweet and Alluring Lips, which was attended with so
Innocent a Blush, when she told me a Maid, that none could have expressed, but
she that deserved the Title. Having thus far proceeded to my Satisfaction, I
had great hopes she would prove in reality, what her Carriage, as well as own
report, represented her to be; and now changed the former method of my Talk,
into importunies of waiting on her Home, to Protect her from the Accidents and
Insolences of the Night, so Beautiful a Creature was liable to in the Street;
which after many Humble Solicitations, as well as Arguments, I prevailed with
her to Consent to: My Happiness now began to swell in Proportion to the Favor
she had granted me, reflecting at the same time on her Sweet Beauty and
Deportment to heighten the Obligation, till I was grown as over-Joyful at these
my first Successes, as a Young Counsel that had carried a Cause, or a Young
Duellist that had Disarmed his Adversary.

By this time the Dancers having tired their Legs, as much at their Pastime, as
the Fiddlers had their Arms in Playing to 'em, the Master changing his
Spanish-Leather Shoes, for French-Wax, and the City Beaus having buckled on
their Street-Travelling Neats-Leather, and put their Pumps into their Pockets,
whilst the Ticklers of Cats Guts were Baging and Casing up their Musical
Handsaws, together with their instruments, and the Dancing Masters Equipage,
were Poisoning out the Company by Extinguishing the Lights, and saving the
Candles-Ends, to show their Masters good Husbandry; so that the People began to
Crowd out as fast into the Air for Refreshment, as they Thronged in for
Diversion; till it came to my Mistresses turn and mine, to relieve our Nostrils
from a mixture of ill Scents, and squeez our selves out of the Door, through
which Men, Women, and Children, Ebbed out as fast as Water through London Bridge
at a Spring Tide; till at last without use of our Legs, we were carried into
the Street with the force of the Current, like a Chip along a Kennel after a
Shower of Rain; where I called a Coach, and handed her in with as much Delight,
as ever an Old Miser thrust Gold into his Hoard, or a Usurer a Bond and
Judgment into the Drawer of his Closet. I now improved every minute to the
utmost, and was so all over Love, that I was afraid the Flame in my Breast,
would have Consumed my willing Carcass in as little time as Fire does a Brush
Faggot, in a Tavern: I now having gathered from her, who she was, and where she
Lived, and a Promise of her Company on Easter-Monday, upon large Protestations
of my Civil Behavior toward her, which she had tied me up to, with all
imaginable Strictness; and setting her down at the distance she requested from
the Habitation of her Friends, I Modestly wished her all Happiness, till our
next merry Meeting according to appointment; and so we parted.

I was mighty well pleased with reflecting, on the fair Progress I had thus
succesfully made in my new Intrigue: Which according to the good Opinion I was
willing to have of my pretty Mistress, I thought well worth Mannaging, and
resolved with my self, since I had made so fair a Beginning, I would pursue it
to some End or other, without foul reasons to the Contrary.

Having thus parted with my Cherubimical Acquaintance, I retired home to my
Lodging, being under too great an Amorous Inflammation for any thing to cool, as
I thought, but a secure possession of her sweet Embraces, and Dilectable
Conversation; of which I had such extravagant Conceptions, that I had raised
her Perfections in my Opinion above Humanity. Sleep, which we find by
experience is the best and most Natural Relief for an Intoxicated Mortal, under
the Enchantments of Bacchus, had no manner of Effect upon my more dangerous
Distemper, Love; for when I arose in the Morning, after a Nights repose, I
found as great a refreshment of my Passion, as I did of my Body; and could
foresee no other measures to prevent the re-encrease, or check the violence of
my Flame, but the means Nature has appointed for the relief of both Sexes under
so intolerable a Condition. I therefore thought it necessary to employ Loves
common Confident, the Pen, and try if the trusty Conveyance of my Affection by
a Letter, might not be a means of kindling the like Desires in my newfound
Angel, which her prevailing Beauty had raised in her Languishing Admirer to so
Superlative a Degree. Accordingly I adjourned from home, to the next
Coffee-house, where, after I had wished her all Happiness, equal to her
Perfection, in a large Glass of cold Tea, which I accounted the best Liquor to
inspire a young Lover, with extravagant Thoughts and apt Phrases, for the
discovery of so stubborn a Disease; which nothing could palliate, but her
Company; and nothing Cure, but the Embraces of her who had thus infected me; I
applied Pen to Paper, and dispatched this following Epistle to the Lady; which,
because I found her wittily inclined, I digested into a Comical Style, that she
might at once be Diverted with my Letter, and pleased with her own Conquest.
Madam,
AS sure as ever a Rattle-Snake with his Eyes ever tempted a Squirrel to drop
into his Mouth, so sure am I enchanted with the Luster of your fair Features,
that I could tumble into yours, were it but big enough to hold me. Had not the
Promise you have made me, to see me next Monday Morning, given me as great
assurance of being once more happy, as ever poor Cuckold had of being always
Miserable, if he has a handsome Woman to his Wife, and wants patience to bear
with her; I should as certainly have run stark-mad, through despair of your
Company, as ever was Old Maid, that had married an Eunuch, or an Old
Gazette-Monger, that had lost his Spectacles As your Beauty has made me burn
like a Taylors-Goose, just fetched home from an Alehouse Kitchen, so use me,
Dear Madam, that I may press down the Seam of your Perfections; that my Weight,
together with my Warmth, may lay 'em all as flat as a Flounder. I have as
little to say to recommend my self to your Favors, as a Modern Poet has in the
defense of an old Version of the Psalms: But only that I Love, Honor, and
Adore you, as much as ever an old doting Fool did Antiquities, or more than my
Lord-Mayors Sword Bearer does Custard. I therefore hope in time you will think
I have as just a Title to your Affections as an honest Man has to a good Name,
or an Old Scold to a Ducking-Stool. And if you, most Salutiferous Lady, will,
upon the Receipt hereof, vouchsafe but to admit me into one Corner of your
Affections, I do Promise, Vow, and Swear, with as much sincerity as ever a
Scotch-man took the Covenant, that I will always be as constant to you, as a
She-Hypocrite is to her Prayers; and cling as close to your dear sides, as a
Virginia- Creeper to the Walls of an old Fabric. I hope, most Angelical
Comfortress, these merry Motives will induce you to Compassion as well as
Laughter; and though they are delivered as if in Jest, pray take 'em in Earnest,
and believe for this once, a Man may Love you without expressing it in the old
Style of Hanging and Drowning. Therefore if this Method will not take with you,
let me know it in an answer, and my next Address shall be Collected out of the
last Dying Speeches in the Book of Martyrs. But till I find you affect Weeping
rather than Laughing, and are sooner to be Frighted into Pity, than Jested into
Gratitude, I shall still proceed to gain your good Opinion, as Bartholemew-Fair
Players do to please their Audience, more by Farce and Jocularity, than Tragedy
and Fine Speeches. So hoping as much for a kind Answer, and a Performance of
your Word, as ever Seamen did for a Fair Wind, or a Hackny Coachman for
Foul-Weather; I Remain, but not Rest,

Your most Importunate Phylocrates, T. D.




Having thus concluded this first Draught of Affection, I called for one of
Loves Messengers, a Porter, and dispatched him to my Lady, expecting no Answer
by the Bearer; believing she would take more time to Deliberate on the matter:
My new method of Courtship, being enough to surprise any Woman at first Sight,
who had not been accustomed to so Comical a Dialect; the Nimble Footed
Emissary, having sucessfully discharged his Business, made a speedy return with
a satisfactory Answer, by Word of Mouth; which was, That I should hear further
from her in the Afternoon; till which time, I was as uneasy as an Offender at
the Bar, during the Absence of the Jury to Consult their Verdict, Laboring
under as many various and Opposite Suggestions, and Delusions as a true Cocker
at a Cock Match, fancying one Minute would go for me, another Minute against
me; sometimes that she would be pleased with my Letter; sometimes that she would be
Angry; and under this sublunary Frenzy I remained till I was better satisfied
by her Answer: Having no more Stomach to my Dinner, than a Woman has to her
Breakfast that Morning she is to be Married.

At last, after being thro'ly tired with a tedious Expectancy, as all People
are, who stand Gaping for a Blessing of which they are doubtful, in comes a
Letter to my Lodging by the Peny-Post; where I sat waiting with as much
Impatience, as an Old Fool in a Coffee-house, tarrying for a News Letter, upon
the surrender of a Town; or the French Kings Dying of his Fistula in Ano. When
I had got the little Billet in my Hand, I Trembled like a Kentish Yeoman,
Troubled with a Tertian Ague; at last took Courage, like a Young Lover, about
to attack his Mistresses Virginity. And after I had Kissed it three or four
times, in respect to the fair Hand that had compiled the Manuscript; I opened
the Seal, and let my self boldly into the Secret, which I expected in a great
Measure, would prove a Vera Copia of my Mistresses Inclinations: A Recital of
which, I shall proceed to give you, as follows. Sir,
SInce you seem to compare me to a Rattle-Snake, I wonder you should express
such a Willingness to receive me into your Bosom; and indeed, could I think
you like a Squirrel, I should be very fearful to give you any admittance into
my Affections, since I have often heard, a Squirrel is a Creature who covers
his Back with his Tail. Or am I a Woman that can Gape so wide, as to swallow
any such Windfalls? In the succeeding Sentence, you say something of a Cuckold,
if you think your Stars have decreed you to be the Monster you talk on, I
desire you would trouble your self no further; for I should hate a Husband with
Horns, were they even of my own Grafting; and therefore I desire you would
apply your self to somebody more proper for your purpose. The old Maid that
has Married an Eunuch, I am heartily sorry for her; as for my part, I hope you
can see by my Looks I am none of the one, and if you find your self the other,
I desire you would rest your self contented, and think no more of a Wife, than
a Blind-man ought to do of Spectacles: For why should a Man have the Vanity to
covet that which its impossible he should use when he has got it in possession?
Therefore I advise you as a Friend, if you are in any such condition, to turn
your Back upon Matrimony, and think no more of a Wife, then a Lawyer Cares to
do of the next World; or a Citizen, of Horn-Fair. I am sorry my Eyes have put
you into the Condition of a Taylors-Goose, if you had not Cackled I should
never have known it; and since you could not keep your self Two Days under your
Distemper without divulging it, I am fearful if I should Administer to you the
Remedy I believe you want, you could never conceal the Cure. You acknowledge
you have nothing to recommend you to my Affections; and I must honestly
confess, for I hate Flattery, He that has nothing to say for himself, or can
nothing do to oblige his Mistress to Love him, is a Man likely to procure but a
small share in my Affections; for I can never Esteem a Man much, that is
furnished with so little. In the next place, you insist upon a Title which you
plead to my affections, which I cannot reconcile to your foregoing
acknowledgment; For how can a Man have a Title to any Woman's Esteem, when he
has nothing to Recommend him? You promise me, like a good Hearty Lover, if I
admit you into my Favor, you will be as Constant to me, as a Hypocrite to her
Prayers. In answer to which Highflown Compliment, I think my self Obliged to do
you just as much good, as Prayers do such a Hyppocrite. You tell me also,
you will stick as close to me as a Virginia- Creeper to an Old Fabric; since you
are so very Complesant to make an Old Wall of me, it is but just Reason you
should find my Heart as Obdurate, as a Brickbat. You desire me, what you have
spoke in Jest, that I would take in Earnest: I like not such a method of
Construction; for if I should Encourage you in good Earnest, by the same Rule,
I suppose you would make a Jest on it. As for the Old Style of Hanging and
Drowning, I think they are both too shameful Deaths for a Lover to make mention
of; and the poor Spirited Wretch who had no more Wit than to do either for a
Mistress, I should think had never Courage enough to win one; for nothing but
Cowardice is the Cause of Despair; and a Contemptible Death is but the just
reward of Cowardice: So as for your Book of Martyrs you may keep it for a
better use, for the most Religious are now a days grown more wise than to
follow their Examples; and as for Lovers in this Age, I would not have 'em
pretend to it. I like your Drolling Method of Courtship much better, and should
much rather play the part of a Comic Stage-Lover in Jest, than prove your self
a Tragic Fool in good Earnest, of which I am very sensible there is no great
danger. According to my Promise, I will meet you at the place appointed, where
I expect, according to yours, I shall meet with nothing but Civility, and you
will Oblige,

Your Servant, M. L.




Whether I had reason to like or dislike this pert Answer to my Letter, I Will
leave the Reader to judge; I conn'd it over and over, as often as a young
Priest does a Sermon, he designs to Preach without Book; and was mightily
pleased to find my Mistress so witty; I hugged and Kissed it with as much
pleasure as a Monkey would a Kitten, or an Old Woman her Grandchild; and was
so wonderful fond of this new Favor, that I could have swallowed it, as people
do Charms, for an Ague, had it not been a dishonor to so sweet an Epistle, to
have been converted into a S -- ce. I opened it, and shut it, as often in a
Day, as a Beau does his Snush-Box; and could no more think of Eating and
Drinking till I see her again, than a Crying-out-Woman can of Copulation in the
height of her Labor. In this kind of Intoxicated Condition, drunk between
Love and Joy, I remained till the Monday Morning in Easter Week, when near the
time of meeting, I posted to the place appointed, with as good a Will as ever a
Coward run from danger, or a Fool into it: where I had not spent above as much
time as a lusty Fellow requires to beget a Charge to the Parish, but in comes
my Lady, with such an Awful Presence, that the sight of her, as powerful as the
Wind of a Cannon Bullet, had like to have knocked me backwards, and struck me
as dumb, that I was no more able to deliver the fine Speech I intended for her,
without abundance of Hesitation, than Iockimo in Don John was able without
stammering to invite the Ghosts to Dinner with his Master; till after I had a
little recovered my self, like a Soldier after the first Onset, and then I
began to be as Bold, as a Lover could well be with so much Beauty, upon so
slender Acquaintance. 'Twill be a little too tedious to tell you in particular
what past between us, Kisses and kind Words I applied with Eagerness, which on
her part were received with a becoming Coyness. After we had prattled away, and
spent a little time in these sort of Love-Toys, we determined to take Coach,
being Holyday time, and go up to Highgate; proposing in our Journey to be
greatly diverted with the humors of the Mob, as we passed along the Road, it
being a Season of the Year, when Petty-Tradesmen and their, Wives, Prentices
and Servant Wenches, Attorneys Clerks and Schoolboys, Journey-men Shooemakers,
and Taylor's with their Mates, Soldiers with their Trulls, in short, Tag, Rag,
and Bobtail, all have recourse into the Fields, to recover the poor out-lying
Alehouse-keepers from the hardships brought upon 'em by the past Winter. As
soon as we had fitted our selves with that Love, as well as Lazy Convenience, a
Coach; I handed in my Mistress, and taking the advantage of her Stride, blessed
my Eyes with a Glance of her Green Silk Stockins, and pretty Pettitoes, which
my Chops water much more than the Cutting of a Lemon; and made my Heart go
pit-a-pat, like a young Girle's that had stumbled in an Alley upon a pair of
Active Lovers recreating themselves by Moonshine. Having thus put our selves in
order to proceed our little Journey, for varieties sake, I Will give you the
remainder in Verse, in hopes it may better please the Reader.

Our Charioteer, now mounting in his Box,
Hey-up, he cried, his Jades stood still as Stocks,
He Slashed, and Cut, and Cursed 'em, with a Pox.
With true Horse Language, and the use of Thong,
He, forced at last, his Hungry Tits along,
Who when once set on going, Ran ding dong.
Thus with his pair of Hide-bound Skeletons,
He drove us rattling over London Stones,
Almost to the Dislocation of our Bones.
In little time, to Islington we came;
For Cakes and Ale, a Town of Ancient Fame;
Which to this day's frequented for the same.
Where Whiffs so Sav'ry did our Nostrills Fan,
From Cakes, Eel-Pies, and Tarts in Patti-Pan,
Like Twelf-tide Air, in Wood-street newly drawn.
At every Door, as we the Town passed through,
A basket of hot Buns was set in View;
No doubt but some within were Buttered too.
Those set without were to make Children Cry,
Or Tempt the well-sown Longing Mothers Eye,
Who cannot without a Pot and Cake go by.
Peasants in Streams did out of London Ebb,
And though each Scoundrel had his homely Drab,
The Cock took care to Nurse the bawling Squab.
The Wife she Trotted after on the Road,
Scolding at something had Dissension sowed,
For Married Clowns can never agree abroad.
Some in old Oliverian Coats were clad,
With narrow Skirts, and little Buttons made;
And at their Backs their good Wive's Pattens had,
Each Crop-Ear'd Prentice had his, walking Mate,
To Kiss, and Toy with, over an Alehouse Treat;
And make the Pleasures of his Walk more Sweet.
With these the Roades were filled on every side,
Ungainly Clothed in all their Easter Pride;
The Men Walked fast, the Wenches straddled Wide.
Some Clambring over Hedges, some over Styles,
Some Girls their A -- s show, the Men mean whiles,
Came after peeping to provoke their Smiles.
All hurried on, I wondered at their haste,
Or what enticed 'em to go on so fast,
The Reason I resolved to know at last.
We Kissed and Toy'd, and Merrily Jogged on,
My Mistress kinder and more free was grown,
To me all Modest Favors now were shown.
Like Quality we Sported at the Rout,
And when we pleased, Contemptibly looked out
Upon the Sweating Slaves that walked on Foot.
Sometime drew up our Sashes made of Tin,
To hide from Vulgars Eyes Loves Toys within;
And when we'd done, we dropped 'em down agin.
Our minutes might have been much more improved,
Had she, like me, without Discretion Loved;
Her Virtues were too powerful to be moved.
By now to the Bottom of the Hill we came,
The Horses Cough'd and Groaned to see the same;
And at its height grew very sick and lame.
The Coachman light to give his Carrion ease,
They pulled till farted to their Driver please;
And now and then dropped down upon their knees
For all they kneeled, his whip he would not spare,
But Cut 'em up, and Cursed the Lazy pair;
And in his Thoughts prayed backwards for his Fare.
No Loaded Wagon in a soft deep Snow,
And drawn by Oxen, could have moved more slow,
Enough to have tired the Patience of a Beau.
Before we'd Conquered half our Rising way,
He fed his Starvlings, with a whisp of Hay.
Drawn from a Bag beneath his Coach-Box lay.
At last the Jades with heavy striving drew
Their Luggage to the top with much ado,
Where we the Ancient Village had in view.
I gave my Mistress Welcome to the Town.
Manners, with Love, in one sweet Kiss was shown.
Lest she should take her Courtier for a Clown.
No Country Fair, where Crowds of Swains resort,
To meet their Lasses, and Contend in sport,
Could be more full, or did their Mirth fall short.
To ease their tired Limbs, sat here and there,
Upon a Verdant Plat, a Loving pair,
Kissing and Toying in the open Air.
Others were Crowded into Alehouse yards,
Some Slaving were at Nine-pins, some at Cards,
Whilst Taylor's occupy'd the Shuffle-Boards.
Some into little hoop-stick Arbours crept,
The Parents Tipled whilst their Children slept,
And Maudling Wenches with their Sweet-hearts wept.
I asked the meaning of these numerous Trains,
And found the Giddy Crowd took all this Pains,
To see the Finchly Murderer hang in Chains.
To the high Tavern, where the Genrry meet,
We went, which could not yield one Slice of Meat;
Nothing we found but Cake and Cheese to Eat.
This Rabbles Fare, with us would not go down,
I offered for some Mutton-Stakes a Crown,
But could not get one Chop throughout the Town.
Is this, said I, a Village of such Fame,
For City Cuckold to refresh his Dame,
Pox take your famished Town; so back we came.
FINIS.

