A RELATION Of the Great and Wonderful INUNDATION OF WATERS IN North-holland,
VVaterland, etc.

Whereby not only the City of Amsterdam has Received many Millions of Damage
in Merchandise, Housing, and Shipping, etc. but also many Hundreds of Men,
Women, and Children have perished therein.

Confirmed by the Letters and Reports of Several the Most Eminent Merchants and
Persons of Credit now Living in those Parts.

With Allowance.

Printed for I. Berriff, 1675.

A COPY OF A LETTER From an Eminent English Merchant Residing in Amsterdam, to
a person of Quality in London, bearing Date the 6th. of November, 1675. Stilo
Novo.
SIR,
I Have great reason to be heartily sorry, not only for my self and many
others here, but also for the concern of several Gentlemen who have an interest
and correspondence here, though they inhabit other places; That I must give you
the sad relation of the unfortunatest accident, and of the greatest damage that
ever happened in these parts by inundation of Waters. For it pleased God that
on last Saturday Night a most furious North-West wind did blow so hard as to
force the Sea, with the Spring Tides over, and break down our Banks, Dikes, and
Sluices into the Country; insomuch that not only North-Holland, which we hear is
all overflowed and quite drowned, but also Haerlem Muyden, and this City have
received the considerablest losses that they ever yet sustained; for the
Haerlemmer-Meer breaking in upon us filled most of our streets and Burgh-walls,
with such floods of water that our Kel^^rs, Warehouses, and our lower-Rooms
are all under water, nay, even to the Statt-House it self, whereby not only
the goods and Merchandises therein are spoiled, and so much indamag'd that no
credible computation can as yet be given what exceeding detriment this City
alone has thereby sustained; many millions already besides the irrepairable
loss of many hundreds of Men, Women, and Children, who have perished already in
this second deluge.

And the Almighty God alone knows when we shall see end of our Miseries; for
the Waters as yet rather increase then abate; I my self am forced to remove out
of my House for my own and Families securities, and yet know not well where to
go to be free from danger, having already suffered damage for my own friends
and correspondents accounts to the value of 200000 Guilders in my Sellars and
Warehouses that I know of; and what is not yet come to my knowledge; and what
may happen no Man can imagine, but God's will be done; It is a sad thing to be
confined to live in a Country situated so low, that a Man must be beholding to
the Trench of the banks, for the security of his life and fortune; for if at
any time the great Dike between Harlem and Amsterdam give way, (as it has many
times done within these few years) the whole Country again becomes that Sea
which once it was; nor are we exposed only to accident, but even to the malice
of our enemies, and (which has been as fatal to us as any thing) our own
convenience, of which this last war has given severe Testimonies, wherein you
know the inhabitants of these parts have been almost as severe to themselves
for their preservation; and this very inundation which looks so like
destruction; but I believe 'twill be no advantage to you, and I am sure it is
no way pleasant to me to enlarge my self upon our misfortunes; I shall only add
that amidst them all, I am

SIR, Your most Humble Obliged Servant J. W.
Poscript.
SIR,
I Had almost forgotten to acquaint you that by reason of these great Floods,
all the inhabitants of this place are so severely afflicted with colds, that
many families are forced to shut up their Shops, having no body to follow their
employments.

Vale.



