

THE LIFE OF JOHN DONE, Dr. in DIVINTY, AND Late DEAN of Saint PAUL'S Church
LONDON.

The second impression corrected and enlarged.

Ecclus. 48.14.

He did wonders in his life, and at his death his works were marvelous.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for R. Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop under
S. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1658.

TO MY Noble and honored Friend Sir ROBET HOLT of Aston, in the County of
Warwick, Baronet.
SIR,
WHen this relation of the life of Doctor Done was first made public, it had
besides the approbation of our late learned and eloquent King, a conjunction
with the Authors most excellent Sermons to support it; and thus it lay some
time fortified against prejudice; and those passions that are by busy and
malicious men too freely vented against the dead.

And yet, now, after almost twenty years, when though the memory of Dr. Done
himself, must not, cannot die, so long as men speak English; yet when I thought
Time had made this relation of him so like my self, as to become useless to the
world, and content to be forgotten; I find that a retreat into a desired
privacy, will not be afforded; for the Printers will again expose it and me to
public exceptions; and without those supports, which we first had and needed,
and in an Age too, in which Truth and Innocence have not been able to defend
themselves from worse then severe censures.

This I foresaw, and Nature teaching me selfe-preservation, and my long
experience of your abilities assuring me that in you it may be found: to you,
Sir, do I make mine addresses for an umbrage and protection: and I make it with
so much humble boldness, as to say 'twere degenerous in you not to afford it.

For, Sir,

Dr. Done was so much a part of your self, as to be incorporated into your
Family, by so noble a friendship, that I may say there was a marriage of souls
betwixt him and your John King. B. of Land.
reverend Grandfather, who in his life was an Angel of our once glorious
Church, and now no common Star in heaven.

And Dr. Donne's love died not with him, but was doubled upon his Heir, your
beloved Uncle the Bishop of Hen: King now B.C.
Chichester, that lives in this froward generation, to be an ornament to his
Calling. And this affection to him was by Dr. D. so testified in his life, that
he then trusted him with the very secrets of his soul; and at his death, with
what was dearest to him, even his fame, estate, and children.

And you have yet a further title to what was Dr. Donne's, by that dear
affection and friendship that was betwixt him and your parents, by which he
entailed a love upon your self, even in your infancy, which was increased by
the early testimonies of your growing merits, and by them continued, till D.
Done put on immortality; and so this mortal was turned into a love that
cannot die.

And Sir, 'twas pity he was lost to you in your minority, before you had
attained a judgment to put a true value upon the living beauties and
elegancies of his conversation; and pity too, that so much of them as were
capable of such an expression, were not drawn by the pensil of a Tytian or a
Tentoret, by a pen equal and more lasting then their art; for his life ought
to be the example of more then that age in which he died. And yet this copy,
though very much, indeed too much short of the Original, will present you with
some features not unlike your dead friend, and with fewer blemishes and more
ornaments than when 'twas first made public: which creates a contentment to
my self, because it is the more worthy of him, and because I may with more
civility entitle you to it.

And in this design of doing so, I have not a thought of what is pretended in
most Dedications, a Commutation for Courtesies: no indeed Sir, I put no such
value upon this trifle; for your owning it will rather increase my Obligations.
But my desire is, that into whose hands soever this shall fall, it may to them
be a testimony of my gratitude to your self and Family, who descended to such a
degree of humility as to admit me into their friendship in the days of my
youth; and notwithstanding, my many infirmities, have continued me in it till I
am become gray headed; and as Time has added to my years, have still increased
and multiplied their favors.

This, Sir, is the intent of this Dedication: and having made the declaration
of it thus public, I shall conclude it with commending them and you to Gods
dear love.

I remain, Sir, what your many merits have made me to be, The humblest of your
Servants, Isaac Walton.

TO THE READER.
MY desire is to inform and assure you, that shall become my Reader, that in
that part of this following discourse, which is only narration, I either speak
my own knowledge, or from the testimony of such as dare do any thing, rather
that speak an untruth. And for that part of it which is my own observation or
opinion, if I had a power I would not use it to force any man's assent, but
leave him a liberty to dis-believe what his own reason inclines him to.

Next, I am to inform you, that whereas Dr. Donne's life was formerly printed
with his Sermons, and then had the same Preface or Introduction to it; I have
not omitted it now, because I have no such confidence in what I have done, as
to appear without an apology for my undertaking it.

I have said all when I have wished happiness to my Reader.

I. VV.

THE Life of Dr. DONE, Late DEANE of Saint PAUL'S Church, Land.
IF the late deceased Provost of Eaton College, Sir Henry Wotton, that great
Master of Language and Art, had lived to see the publication of these Sermons,
he had presented the world with the Authors life exactly written, which was a
work worthy his undertaking, and he fit to undertake it. Betwixt whom and the
Author there was such a friendship contracted in their youth, as nothing but
death should force a separation. And though their bodies were divided yet their
affections were not, for that Learned Knights love followed his friends fame
beyond death and the forgetful grave. And this he testified by entreating me,
whom he acquainted with his intentions, to inquire of some particulars that
concerned it, not doubting but my knowledge of the Author and love to his
memory might make my diligence useful, I did prepare them in a readiness to be
augmented and rectifyed by his powerful pen; but then death prevented his
intentions.

When I heard that sad news, and heard also that these Sermons were to be
printed, and want the Authors Life, which I thought worthy to be recorded,
indignation or grief (truly I know not which) transported me so far, that I
reviewed my forsaken collections, and resolved the world should see the best
narration of it, that my artlesse pen guided by the hand of truth could present
to it.

I shall be demanded, as once Pompeys poor bondsman was (he was then alone on
the Seashore gathering the scattered pieces of an old broken Boat to burn the
neglected body of his dead Master) Who art thou that preparest the funerals of
Pompey the Great? Who I am that so officiously set the Authors Memory on fire?
I hope the question will have in it more of wonder then disdain: wonder indeed
the Reader may, that I who profess my self artlesse, should presume with my
faint light, to show forth his Life, whose very Name makes it illustrious. But
be this to the disadvantage of the person represented, certain I am it is much
to the advantage of the beholder, who shall here see the Authors picture in a
natural dress, which ought to beget faith in what is spoken; for he that
wants skill to deceive may safely be trusted.

And if the Authors glorious spirit which now is in heaven, can have the
leisure to look down and see me the meanest of all his friends, in the midst of
this officious duty, confident I am he will not disdain this well-meant
sacrifice to his memory; for whilst his conversation made me and many others
happy below, I know his humility and gentleness was eminent, and I have heard
Divines say, That those virtues which were but sparks upon earth, become great
and glorious stars in heaven.

This being premised, I proceed to tell the Reader, the Author was born in
London, of good and virtuous parents: and though his own learning and other
multiplied merits may justly seem sufficient to dignifie both himself and his
posterity; yet the Reader may be pleased to know that his Father was
masculinely and lineally descended from a very ancient Family in Wales, where
many of his name now live, that deserve and have great reputation in that
Country.

By his Mother he was descended of the Family of the famous and learned Sir
Tho. Moor, sometime L. Chancelour of Engl. as also from that worthy and
laborious Judge Rastall, who left Posterity the vast Statutes of the Law of
this Nation most exactly abridged.

He had his first breeding in his Fathers house, where a private Tutor had the
care of him, until the nineth year of his age, and in his tenth year was sent
to the University of Oxford, having at that time a good command both of the
French and Latin Tongue. This and some other of his remarkable abilities, made
one give this censure of him, That this age had brought forth another Picus
Mirandula; of whom Story says, That he was rather born than made wise by study.

There he remained in Hart-Hall, having for the advancement of his studies
Tutors of several Sciences to attend and instruct him, till time made him
capable, and his learning expressed in public exercises declared him worthy to
receive his first degree in the Schools, which he forbore by advice from his
friends, who being for their Religion of the Romish persuasion, were
conscionably averse to some parts of the Oath that is always tendered at those
times, and not to be refused by those that expect the titulary honor of their
studies.

About the fourteenth year of his age he was transplanted from Oxford to
Cambridge, where that he might receive nourishment from both Soiles, he staid
till his seventeenth year; all which time he was a most laborious Student,
often changing his studies, but endeavoring to take no degree, for the reasons
formerly mentioned.

About the seventeenth year of his age, he was removed to London, and then
admitted into Lincolns Inn, with an intent to study the Law; where he gave
great testimonies of his Wit, his Learning, and of his Improvement in that
profession: which never served him for other use than an Ornament and
Self-satisfaction.

His Father died before his admission into this Society, and being a Merchant
left him his portion in money (it was 3000 l.) His mother and those to whose
care he was committed, were watchful to improve his knowledge, and to that end
appointted him Tutors in the Mathematics, and all the Liberal Sciences, to
attend him. But with these Arts they were advised to instill particular
principles of the Romish Church, of which those Tutors professed (though
secretly) themselves to be members.

They had almost obliged him to their faith, having for their advantage
(besides many opportunities) the example of his dear and pious Parents, which
was a most powerful persuasion, and did work much upon him, as he professes
in his Pseudo-Martyr; a book of which the Reader shall have some account in
what follows.

He was now entered into the eighteenth year of his age, and at that time had
betrothed himself to no Religion that might give him any other denomination
than a Christian. And Reason and Piety had both persuaded him that there could
be no such sin as Schism, if an adherence to some visible Church were not
necessary.

He did therefore at his entrance into the nineteenth year of his age (though
his youth and strength then promised him a long life) yet being unresolved in
his Religion, he thought it necessary to rectify all scruples that concerned
that: and therefore waving the Law, and betrothing himself to no Art or
Profession, that might justly denominate him; he begun to survey the Body of
Divinity, as it is controverted betwixt the Reformed and the Roman Church. And
as Gods blessed Spirit did then awaken him to the search, and in that industry
did never forsake him, (they be his own words In his Preface to Pseudo-Mar.
) so he calls the same holy Spirit to witness this protestation, that in that
disquisition and search, he proceeded with humility and diffidence in himself,
and by that which he took to be the safest way, namely, his frequent prayers,
and an indifferent affection to both parties.

Being to undertake this search, he believed the Cardinal Bellarmine to be the
best defender of the Roman cause, and therefore betook himself to the
examination of his Reasons. The Cause was weighty, and wilful delays had been
inexcusable both toward God and his own conscience; he therefore proceeded in
this search with all moderate haste, and before the twentieth year of his age,
did show the then Dean of Gloucester (whose name my memory has now lost) all
the Cardinals works marked with many weighty observations under his own hand;
which works were bequeathed by him at his death as a Legacy to a most dear
Friend.

The year following he resolved to travel; and the Earl of Essex going first
the Cales, and after the Island voyages, he took the advantage of these
opportunities, waited upon his Lordship, and was an eyewitness of those happy
and unhappy employments.

But he returned not back into England, till he had staid some years first in
Italy, and then in Spain, where he made many useful observations of those
Countries, their Laws and manner of Government, and returned into England
perfect in their Languages.

The time that he spent in Spain was at his first going into Italy designed for
traveling the Holy Land, and for viewing Jerusalem and the Sepulcher of our
Savior. But at his being in the furthest parts of Italy, the disappointment of
company, or of a safe Convoy, or the uncertainty of returns for money into
those remote parts, denied him that happiness which he did often occasionally
mention with a deploration.

Not long after his return into England, that exemplary pattern of gravity and
wisdom, the Lord Elsemore, Keeper of the great Seal, and Lord cellour of
England, taking notice of his Learning, Languages, and other abilities, and
much affecting his person and condition, took him to be his chief Secretary,
supposing and intending it to be an Introduction to some more weighty
employment in the State, for which his Lordship did often protest he thought
him very fit.

Nor did his Lordship in this time of Mr. Donne's attendance upon him, account
him to be so much his servant, as to forget he was his friend; and to testify
it, did always use him with much courtesy, appointing him a place at his own
table, to which he esteemed his company and discourse a great ornament.

He continued that employment for the space of five years, being daily useful,
and not mercenary to his friends. During which time he (I dare not say
unhappily) fell into such a liking, as (with her approbation) increased into a
love with a young Gentlewoman that lived in that Family, who was Niece to the
Lady Elsemore, and Daughter to Sir George Moor, then Chancellor of the Garter
and Lieutenant of the Tower.

Sir George had some intimation of it, and knowing prevention to be a great
part of wisdom, did therefore remove her with much haste from that to his own
house at Lothesley, but too late, by reason of some faithful promises which
were so interchangably passed as never to be violated.

These promises were only known to themselves, and the friends of both parties
used much diligence and many arguments to kill or cool their affections to
each other: but in vain; for love is a flattering mischief, that has denied
aged and wise men a foresight of those evils that too often prove to be the
children of that blind father; a passion that carries us to commit errors with
as much ease as whirlwinds remove feathers, and beget in us an unwearied
industry to the attainment of what we desire. And such an industry did,
notwithstanding much watchfulness against it, bring them together (I forbear to
tell how) and to a marriage too without the allowance of those friends, whose
approbation always was and ever will be necessary to make even a virtuous love
become lawful.

And that the knowledge of their marriage might not fall, like an unexpected
tempest, on those that were unwilling to have it so; but that preapprehensions
might make it the less enormous, it was purposely whispered into the ears of
many that it was so, yet by none that could attest it. But to put a period to
the jealousies of Sir George, (Doubt often begetting more restless thoughts
then the certain knowledge of what we fear) the news was in favor to Mr.
Done, and with his allowance, made known to Sir George by his honorable
friend and neighbor Henry Earl of Northumberland: but it was to Sir George so
immeasurably unwelcome, and so transported him, that as though his passion of
anger and inconsideration might exceed theirs of love and error, he presently
engaged his sister the Lady Elsemore to join with him to procure her Lord to
discharge Mr. Done of the place he held under his Lordship. This request was
followed with violence; and though Sir George were remembered, that errors might
be over-punished, and desired therefore to forbear till second considerations
might clear some scruples, yet he became restless until his suit was granted,
and the punishment executed. The Lord Chancellor then at Mr. Donnes
dismission, saying, he parted with a Friend; and protested he thought him a
Secretary fitter for a King then a Subject.

But this Physic of M. Donne's dismission was not strong enough to purge out
all Sir George his choler, who was not satisfied till Mr. Done and his
Compupill in Cambridge that married him, namely, Samuel Brook (who was after
Doctor in Divinity, and Master of Trinity College) and his brother Mr.
Christopher Brook, Mr. Donne's Chamber-fellow in Lincolns Inn, who gave Mr.
Done his Wife, and witnessed the marriage, were all committed, and to three
several prisons.

Mr. Done was first enlarged, who neither gave rest to his body or brain, nor
any friend in whom he might hope to have an interest, until he had procured an
enlargement for his two imprisoned friends.

He was now at Liberty, but his days were still cloudy; and being past these
troubles, others did still multiply upon him; for his wife was (to her extreme
sorrow) detained fom him; and though with Jacob he endured not an hard service
for her, yet he lost a good one, and was forced to make good his title to her,
and to get possession of her by a long and a restless suit in Law, which
proved troublesome and chargeable to him, whose youth, and travel, and bounty,
had brought his estate into a narrow compass.

It is observed, and most truly, that silence and submission are charming
qualities, and work most upon passionate men; and it proved so with Sir George;
for these and a general report of Mr. Donne's merits, together with his
winning behavior, (which when it would entice, had a strange kind of elegant
irresistible art) these and time had so dispassionated Sir George, that as the
world had approved his daughters choice, so he also could not but see a more
then ordinary merit in his new son; and this melted him into so much remorse
(for Love and Anger are so like Agues, as to have hot and cold fits.) And love
in parents, though it may be quenched, yet is easily rekindled, and expires
not, till death denies mankind a natural heat) that he labored his sons
restoration to his place; using to that end both his own and his sisters power
to her Lord, but with no success; for his answer was, That though he was
unfeignedly sorry for what he had done, yet it was inconsistent with his place
and credit, to discharge and re-admit admit servants at the request of
passionate petitioners.

Sir George's endeavor for Mr. Donne's readmission, was by all means to be
kept secret (for men do more naturally reluct for errors, than submit to put
on those blemishes that attend their visible acknowledgement.) However it was
not long before Sir George appeared to be so far reconciled, as to wish their
happiness, and not to deny them his paternall blessing, but refused to
contribute any means that might conduce to their livelihood.

Mr. Donne's estate was the greatest part spent in many and chargable Travels,
Books, and dear-bought Experience; he out of all employment that might yield a
support for himself and wife, who had been curiously and plentifully educated;
both their natures generous, and accustomed to confer, but not to receive
courtesies: These and other considerations, but chiefly that his wife was to
bear a part in his sufferings, surrounded him with many sad thoughts, and some
apparent apprehensions of want.

But his sorrows were lessened and his wants prevented by the seasonable
courtesy of their noble kinsman Sir Francis Wolly of Pirford, who entreated
them to a cohabitution with him; where they remained with much freedom to
themselves, and equal content to him for many years; and as their charge
increased (she had yearly a child) so did his love and bounty.

It has been observed by wise and considering men, that wealth has seldom
been the portion, and never the mark to discover good people, but that Almighty
God, who disposes all things wisely, has of his abundant goodness denied it
(he only knows why) to many whose minds he has enriched with the greater
blessings of knowledge and virtue, as the fairer testimonies of his love to
mankind; and this was the present condition of this man of so excellent
erudition and endowments; whose necessary and daily expenses were hardly
reconcilable with his uncertain and narrow estate. Which I mention, for that at
this time there was a most generous offer made him for the moderating of his
worldly cares; the declaration of which shall be the next employment of my pen.

God has been so good to his Church, as to afford it in every age some such
men to serve at his Altar as have been piously ambitious of doing good to
mankind; a disposition that is so like to God himself, that it owes it self
only to him who takes a pleasure to behold it in his creatures. These times he
did bless with many such; some of which still live to be patterns of
Apostolical Charity, and of more than Humane Patience. I have said this
because I have occasion to mention one of them in my following discourse;
namely, Dr. Morton, the most laborious and learned Bishop of Durham, one that
God has blessed with perfect intellectuals, and a cheerful heart at the age
of 94 years (and is yet living) one that in his days of plenty used his large
Revenue to the encouragement of Learning and Virtue; and is now (be it spoken
with sorrow) reduced to a narrow estate, which he embraces without repining;
and still shows the beauty of his mind by so liberal a hand, as if this were
an age in which to morrow were to care for it self. I have taken a pleasure in
giving the reader a short, but true character of this good man, from whom I
received this following relation. He sent to Mr. Done, and entreated to borrow
an hour of his time for a Conference the next day. After their meeting there
was not many minutes passed before he spoke to Mr. Done to this purpose; Mr.
Done, The occasion of sending for you is to propose to you what I have often
revolved in my own thought since I last saw you: which, nevertheless, I will
not do but upon this condition, that you shall not return me a present answer,
but forbear three days, and bestow some part of that time in fasting and
prayer; and after a serious consideration of what I shall propose, then return
to me with your answer. Deny me not, Mr. Done, for it is the effect of a true
love, which I would gladly pay as a debt due for yours to me.

This request being granted, the Doctor expressed himself thus: Mr. Done, I know
your Education and Abilities; I know your expectation of a State-employment;
and I know your fitness for it; and I know too the many delays and
contingencies that attend Court-promises; and let me tell you, my love begot by
our long friendship and familiarity has prompted me to such an inquisition of
your present temporal estate, as makes me no stranger to your necessities,
which are such as your generous spirit could not bear, if it were not supported
with a pious patience: you know I have formerly persuaded you to wave your
Court-hopes, and enter into holy Orders; which I now again persuade you to
embrace, with this reason added to my former request: The King has now made me
Dean of Gloucester, and I am possessed of a Benefice, the profits of which are
equal to those of my Deanery, I will think my Deanery enough for my maintenance
(who am and resolve to die a single man) and will quit my Benefice and estate
you in it (which the Patron is willing I shall do) if God shall incline your
heart to embrace this motion. Remember, Mr. Done, no man's education or parts
make him too good for this employment, which is to be an Ambassador for him
who by a vile death opened the gates of life to mankind. Make me no present
answer; but remember your promise, and return to me the third day with your
resolution.

At the hearing of this, Mr. Donne's faint breath and perplexed countenance gave
a visible testimony of an inward conflict; but he departed without returning an
answer till the third day, and then it was to this effect; My most worthy and
most dear friend, since I saw you I have been faithful to my promise, and
have also meditated much of your great kindness, which has been such as would
exceed even my gratitude; but that it cannot do, and more I cannot return you;
and that I do with an heart full of humility and thanks, though I may not
accept of your offer; but my refusal is not for that I think my self too good
for that calling, for which Kings, if they think so, are not good enough: nor
for that my education and learning, though not eminent, may not, being assisted
with Gods grace and humility, render me in some measure fit for it: but I dare
make so dear a friend as you are my Confessor; some irregularities of my life,
have been so visible to some men, that though I have, I thank God, made my
peace with him by penitential resolutions against them, and by the assistance
of his grace banished them my affections; yet this, which God knows to be so,
is not so visible to man, as to free me from their censures, and it may be that
sacred calling from a dishonor. And besides, whereas it is determined by the
best of Casuists, that Gods glory should be the first end, and a maintenance
the second motive to embrace that calling; and though that each man may propose
to himself both together; yet the first may not be put last without a violation
of conscience, which he that searches the heart will judge. And truly my
present condition is such, that if I ask my own conscience whether it be
reconcilable to that rule, it is at this time so perplexed about it, that I can
neither give my self nor you an answer. You know Sir, who says, Happy is that
man whose conscience does not accuse him for that thing which he does. To these
I might add other reasons that dissuade me; but I crave your favor that I may
forbear to express them.

This was his present resolution, but the heart of man is not in his own
keeping; and he was destined to this sacred service by an higher hand, a hand
so powerful, as forced him to a compliance: of which I shall give the reader
an account before I shall give a rest to my pen.

Mr. Done and his wife continued with Sir Francis Wolly till his death; a
little before which time he was so happy as to make a perfect reconciliation
betwixt Sir George and his forsaken son and daughter, Sir George conditioning
by bond to pay to Mr. Done 800 l. at a certain day, as a portion with his
wife, or 20 l. quarterly for their maintenance, as the interest for it, till
the said portion was paid.

Most of those years that he lived with Sir Francis, he studied the Civil and
Common Laws; in which he acquired such a perfection, as was judged to hold
proportion with many who had made that study the employment of their whole life.

Sir Francis being dead, and that happy family dissolved, Mr. Done took for
himself an house in Micham (near to Croydon in Surrey) a place noted for good
air and choice company: there his wife and children remained, and for himself
he took lodgings in London near to White Hall, whither his friends and
occasions drew him very often, and where he was often visited by many of the
Nobility and others of this Nation, who used him in their Counsels of greatest
consideration.

Nor did our own Nobility only value and favor him, but his acquaintance and
friendship was sought for by most Ambassadors of foreign Nations, and by many
other strangers, whose learning or business occasioned their stay in this
Nation.

He was much importuned by many friends to make his residence in London, but he
still denied it, having settled his dear wife and children at Micham, whither
he often retired himself, and destined certain days to a constant study of
some points of Controversies; but after some years, the persuasion of friends
was so powerful, as to cause the removal of himself and family to London,
where Sir Robert Drewry, a Gentleman of a very noble estate, and a more
liberal mind, assigned him a very choice and useful house rent-free, next to
his own in Drewry-lane; and was also a cherisher of his studies, and such a
friend as sympathized with him and his in all their joy and sorrows.

Many of the Nobility were watchful and solicitous to the King for some
preferment for him; His Majesty had formerly both known and put a value upon
his company, and had also given him some hopes of a State-employment, being the
better pleased when Mr. Done attended him, especially at his meals, where
there were usually many deep discourses of general learning, and very often
friendly debates or disputes of Religion betwixt his Majesty and those Divines,
whose places required their attendance on him at those times: particularly, the
Dean of the Chapel, who then was Bishop Montague (the publisher of the learned
and eloquent Works of his Majesty) and the most reverend Doctor Andrews, the
late learned Bishop of Winchester, who then was the Kings Almoner.

About this time there grew many disputes that concerned the Oath of Supremacy
and Allegiance, in which the King had appeared and engaged himself by his
public writings now extant; and his Majesty discoursing with Mr. Done
concerning many of the reasons which are usually urged against the taking of
those Oaths, apprehended such a validity and clearness in his stating the
Questions, and his Answers to them, that his Majesty commanded him to bestow
some time in drawing the Arguments into a method, and then write his Answers to
them; and having done that, not to send but be his own messenger and bring them
to him. To this he presently applied himself, and within six weeks brought them
to him under his own handwriting, as they be now printed, the Book bearing the
name of Pseudo-Martyr.

When the King had read and considered that book, he persuaded Mr. Done to
enter into the Ministry; to which at that time he was and appeared very
unwilling, apprehending it (such was his mistaking modesty) to be too weighty
for his abilities; and though his Majesty had promised him a favor, and many
persons of worth mediated with his Majesty for some secular employment for him,
to which his education had apted him, and particulary the Earl of somerset,
when in his height of favor, being then at Theobalds with the King, where one
of the Clerks of the Council died that night, the Earl having sent immediately
for Mr. Done to come to him, said, Mr. Done, To testify the reality of my
affection, and my purpose to prefer you, stay in this garden till I go up to
the King, and bring you word that you are Clerk of the Council. The King gave a
positive denial to all requests; and having a discerning spirit, replied, I
know Mr. Done is a learned man, has the abilities of a learned Divine, and
will prove a powerful Preacher, and my desire is to prefer him that way. After
that, as he professes, In his book of Devotions.
the King descended almost to a solicitation of him to enter into sacred
Orders: which, though he then denied not, yet he deferred it for three years.
All which time he applied himself to an incessant study of Textuall Divinity,
and to the attainment of a greater perfection in the learned Languages, Greek
and Hebrew.

In the first and most blessed times of Christianity, when the Clergy were
looked upon with reverence, and deserved it, when they overcame their opposers
by high examples of Virtue, by a blessed Patience and long Suffering; those
only were then judged worthy the Ministry, whose quiet and meek spirits did
make them look upon that sacred calling with an humble adoration and fear to
undertake it; which indeed requires such great degrees of humility, and labor,
and care; that none but such were then thought worthy of that Celestial
dignity. And such only were then sought out, and solicited to undertake it.
This I have mentioned because forwardness and inconsideration could not in Mr.
Done as in many others, be an argument of insufficiency or unfitness, for he
had considered long, and had many strifes within himself concerning the
strictness of life and competency of learning required in such as enter into
sacred Orders; and doubtless, considering his own demerits, did humbly ask
God with St. Paul, Lord who is sufficient for these things? and with meek
Moses, Lord who am I? And sure if he had consulted with flesh and blood, he had
not put his hand to that holy plough. But, God who is able to prevail,
wrestled with him as the Angel did with Jacob, and marked him; marked him for
his own, marked him with a blessing, a blessing of obedience to the motions of
his blessed Spirit. And then, as he had formerly asked God with Moses, Who am
I? So now being inspired with an apprehension of Gods particular mercy to him,
he came to ask King David's thankful question, Lord who am I that thou art so
mindful of me? So mindful of me as to lead me for more then forty years
through this wilderness of the many temptations, and various turnings of a
dangerous life; so merciful to me as to move the learned of Kings, to
descend to move me to serve at thy Altar; so merciful to me as to move my
heart to embrace this holy motion, thy motions I will embrace. And I now say
with the blessed Virgin, Be it with thy servant as seems best in thy sight;
and so I do take the cup of salvation, and will call upon thy Name and preach
thy Gospel.

Such strifes as these St. Austine had, when St. Ambrose endeavored his
conversion to Christianity, with which he confesses, he acquainted his friend
Alipius. Our learned Author (a man fit to write after no mean Copy) did the
like. And declaring his intentions to his dear friend Dr. King then Bishop of
London, a man famous in his generation, and no stranger to Mr. Donnes
abilities. (For he had been Chaplain to the Lord Chancellor, at the time of
Mr. Donnes being his Lordships Secretary) That Reverend man did receive the
news with much gladness, and after some expressions of joy, and a persuasion
to be constant in his pious purpose, he proceeded with all convenient speed to
ordain him both Deacon and Priest.

Now the English Church had gained a second St. Austine, for I think none was
so like him before his conversion; none so like St. Ambrose after it; and if
his youth had the infirmities of the one, his age had the excellencies of the
other, the learning and holiness of both.

And now all his studies which had been occasionally diffused, were all
concentred in Divinity. Now he had a new calling, new thoughts, and a new
employment for his wit and eloquence. Now all his earthly affections were
changed into divine love; and all the faculties of his own soul were engaged in
the conversion of others. In preaching the glad tidings of remission to
repenting sinners; and peace to each troubled soul. To these he applied himself
with all care and diligence; and now, such a change was wrought in him, that he
could say with David, Oh how amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord God of Hosts!
Now he declared openly, that when he required a temporal, God gave him a
spiritual-blessing: And that, he was now gladder to be a doorkeeper in the
house of God, then he could to be enjoy the noblest of all temporal
employments.

Presently after he entered into his holy profession, the King sent for him, and
made him his Chaplain in ordinary; and promised to take a particular care for
his preferment.

And though his long familiarity with Scholars, and persons of greatest
quality, was such as might have given some men boldness enough to have
preached to any eminent Auditory, yet his modesty in this employment was such,
that he could not be persuaded to it, but went usually accompanied with some
one friend, to preach privately in some villages not far from London. This he
did till his Majesty sent and appointed him a day to preach to him; and though
much were expected from him, both by his Majesty and others, yet he was so
happy which few are, as to satisfy and exceed their expectations; preaching
the Word so, as showed his own heart was possessed with those very thoughts, and
joys that he labored to distill into others. A Preacher in earnest, weeping
sometimes for his Auditory, sometimes with them; always preaching to himself
like an Angel from a cloud, but in none; carrying some, as St. Paul was, to
Heaven in holy raptures, and enticing others by a sacred art and Courtship to
amend their lives; here picturing a vice so as to make it ugly to those that
practiced it; and a virtue so, as to make it be loved even by those that loved
it not, and all this with a most particular grace and an unexpressable addition
of comeliness.

There may be some that may incline to think (such indeed as have not heard
him) that my affection to my friend, has transported me to an immoderate
commendation of his preaching. If this meets with any such, Let me entreat,
though I will omit many, yet that he will receive at least a double witness
for what I say being attested by a Gentleman of worth, Mr. Chidley, and a
frequent hearer of his Sermons. It is part of a funeral elogy writ on him, and
a known truth though it be in verse.

-- Each Altar had his fire --
He kept his love but not his object: wit,
He did not banish, but transplanted it,
Taught it both time and place, and brought it home
To piety, which it does best become.
For say, had ever pleasure such a dress?
Have you seen crimes so shap'r, or lovelyness
Such as his lips did clothe Religion in?
Had not reproof a beauty-passing sin?
Corrupted nature sorrowed that she stood
So near the danger of becoming good.
And, when he preached she wished her ears exempt.
From piety, that had such power to tempt.
More of this, and more witnesses might be brought, but I forbear and return.

That summer, in the very same month in which he entered into sacred Orders,
and was made the Kings Chaplain, His Majesty then going his Progress, was
entreated to receive an entertainment in the University of Cambridge: And Mr.
Done attending his Majesty at that time, his Majesty was pleased to recommend
him to the University, to be made Doctor in Divinity, Doctor Harsnet (after
ArchBishop of York) was then Vice Chancellor, who knowing him to be the Author
of the Pseudo-Martyr, required no other proof of his abilities, but proposed it
to the University, who presently assented and expressed a gladness, that they
had such an occasion to entitle him to be theirs.

His abilities and industry in his profession, were so eminent, and he so known
and beloved by persons of quality, that within the first year of his entering
into sacred Orders, he had fourteen Advowsons of several Benifices presented to
him: But they were in the Country, and he could not leave his beloved London,
to which place he had a natural inclination, having received both his birth
and education in it, and contracted a friendship there with many; whose
conversation multiplied the joys of his life: But, an employment that might
affixe him to that place would be welcome, for he needed it.

Immediately after his return from Cambridge, his wife dyed, leaving him a man
of an unsettled estate, and (having buried five) the careful father of seven
children then living, to whom he gave a voluntary assurance never to bring them
under the subjection of a stepmother, which promise he kept most faithfully,
burying with his tears all his earthly joys in his most dear and deserving
wives grave; and betake himself to a most retired and solitary life.

In this retiredness which was often from the sight of his dearest friends, he
became crucified to the world, and all those vanities, those imaginary
pleasures that are daily acted on that restless stage, and they crucified to
him. Nor s it hard to think (being passions may be both changed and heightened
by accidents) but that that abundant affection which once was betwixt him and
her, who had long been the delight of his eyes, the Companion of his youth;
her, with whom he had divided so many pleasant sorrows and contented fears as
the Common People are not capable of: She being now removed by death, a
commeasurable grief took as full a possession of him as joy had done, and so
indeed it did: for now his very soul was elemented of nothing but sadness, now
grief took so full a possession of his heart, as to leave no place for joy. If
it did? It was a joy to be alone, where like a Pelican in the mildernesse, he
might bemoane himself without witness or restraint, and pour forth his
passions like Job in the days of his affliction, Oh that I might have the
desire of my heart! Oh that God would grant the thing that I long for! For then
as the Grave is become her house, so I would hasten to make it mine also; that
we two might there make our beds together in the dark. Thus as the Israelites
sat mourning by the rivers of Babylon, when they remembered Sion; so he gave
some ease to his oppressed heart by thus venting his sorrows. Thus he began
the day, and ended the night, ended the restless night and began the weary day
in lamentations. And thus he continued till a consideration of his new
engagements to God, and St. Paul's Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel:
disper'st those sad clouds that had now benighted his hopes, and forced him to
behold the light.

His first motion from his house was to preach, where his beloved wife lay
buried (in St. Clements Church near Temple-Barre London,) and his text was a
part of the Prophet Ieremy's Lamentations: Lo, I am the man that have seen
affliction.

And indeed his very words and looks testified him to be truly such a man; and
they with the addition of his sighs and tears did so work upon the affections
of his hearers, as melted and molded them into a companionable sadness; and
so they left the Congregation; but their houses presented them with objects of
diversion, and his presented him with no diversions, but with fresh objects of
sorrow, in beholding many helpless children, and a consideration of the many
cares and casualties that attended their education.

In this time of sadness he was importuned by the grave Benchers of Lincolns
Inn, once the friends of his youth, to accept of their Lecture, which by
reason of Dr. Gatakers removal from thence was then void; of which he
accepted, being most glad to renew his intermitted friendship with those whom
he so much loved, and where he had been a Saul, though not to persecute
Christianity, yet in his irregular youth to neglect the visible practice of it,
there to become a Paul, and preach salvation to his brethren.

And now his life was as a Shining light amongst his old friends; now he gave
an ocular testimony of the strictness and regularity of it; now he might say
as S. Paul advised his Corinthians, Be ye followers of me, as I follow Christ,
and walk as ye have me for an example; not the example of a busie-body, but of
a contemplative, an harmless, and an holy life and conversation.

The love of that noble society was expressed to him many ways; for, besides
fair lodgings that were set apart and newly furnished for him, with all
necessaries, other courtesies were daily added; so many and so freely, as if
they meant their gratitude should exceed his merits; and in this love-strife of
desert and liberality, they continued for the space of three years, he
preaching faithfully and constantly to them, and they liberally requiting him.
About which time the Emperor of Germany died, and the Palsgrave, who had
lately married the Lady Elizabeth the Kings only daugther, was elected and
crowned King of Bohemia, the unhappy beginning of many miseries in that Nation.

King James, whose Motto ( Beati Pacifici) did truly speak the very thoughts of
his heart, endeavored first to prevent, and after to compose the discords of
that discomposed State: and amongst other his endeavors did then send the Lord
Hay Earl of Doncaster his Ambassador to those unsettled Princes; and by a
special command from his Majesty Dr. Done was appointed to assist and attend
that employment to the Princes of the Union: for which the Earl was most glad,
who had always put a great value on him, and taken a complacency in his
coversation; and those of Lincolnes Inn that were his most entire friends were
glad also; for they feared that his immoderate study and sadness for his wives
death, would, as Jacob said, make his days few, and respecting his bodily
health, evil too: and of this there were some visible signs. At his going he
left his friends of Lincolns Inn, and they him with many reluctations: for
though he could not say as S. Paul to his Ephesians, Behold you to whom I have
peached the kingdom of God, shall from henceforth see my face no more; yet he
believing himself to be in a Consumption, questioned, and they feared it:
knowing that his troubled mind with the help of his unintermitted studies
hastened the decays of his weak body. But God turned it to the best, for this
employment (to say nothing of the event of it) did not only divert him from
those serious studies and sad thoughts, but seemed to give him a new life by a
true occasion of joy, to be an eyewitness of the health of his most dear and
most honored Mistress the Qu of Bohemia, in a foreign Nation, and to be a
witness of that gladness which she expressed to see him: Who having formerly
known him a Courtier, was much joyed to see him in a Canonical habit, and more
glad to be an ear-witness of his excellent and powerful preaching.

About fourteen months after his departure out of England, he returned to his
friends of Lincolns-Inne with his sorrows moderated, and his health improved,
and there be took himself to his constant course of preaching.

About a year after his return out of Germany, Dr. Carry was made Bishop of
Exeter, and by his removal the Deanery of St. Paul's being vacant, the King sent
to Dr. Done, and appointed him to attend him at dinner the next day. When his
Majesty was sat down, before he had eat any meat, he said after his pleasant
manner, Dr. Done, I have invited you to dinner, and though you sit not down
with me, yet I will carve to you of a dish that I know you love well; for I
know you love London, and I do therefore make you Dean of Paul's; and when I
have dined, then do you take your beloved dish home to your study; say grace
there to your self, and much good may it do you.

Immediately after he came to his Deanery, he employed workmen to repair and
beautify the Chapel, suffering, as holy David once vowed his eyes and temples
to take no rest, till he had first beautified the house of God.

The next quarter following, when his Father-in-law Sir Geo. Moor, whom Time
had made a lover and admirer of him, came to pay to him the conditioned sum
of twenty pounds; he refused to receive it, and said as good Jacob did, when he
heard his beloved son Joseph was alive, It is enough, you have been kind to me
and mine: I know your present condition, and I hope mine is or will be such as
not to need it: I will therefore receive no more from you upon that contract;
and in testimony of it freely gave him up his bond.

Immediately after his admission into his Deanery, the Vicarage of St. Dunston
in the West, London, fell to him by the death of Dr. White, the Advewson of it
having been formerly given to him by his honorable friend, Richard Earl of
Dorset, then the Patron, and confirmed by his brother the late deceased Edward,
both of them men of much honor.

By these and other Ecclesiastical endowments which fell to him about the same
time, given to him formerly by the Earl of Kent, he was enabled to become
charitable to the poor, and kind to his friends, and to make such provision for
his children, that they were not left scandalous, as relating to their or his
profession and quality.

The next Parliament, which was within that present year, he was chosen
Prolocutor to the Convocation; and about that time was appointed by his
Majesty, his most gracious Master, to preach very many occasional Sermons. All
which employments he performed, not only to the allowance but admiration of
the Representative Body of the whole Clergy of this Nation.

He was once, and but once, clowded with the Kings displeasure, and it was
about this time, which was occasioned by some malicious whisperer, who had told
his Majesty that Dr. Done had put on the general humor of the Pulpits, and
was become busy in insinuating a fear of the Kings inclining to Popery, and a
dislike of his Government: and particularly, for his turning the evening
Lectures into Catechizing, and expounding the Prayer of our Lord, and of the
Belief, and Commandments. His Majesty was more inclinable to believe this; for
that a person of Nobility and great note, betwixt whom and Dr. Done, there had
been a great friendship, was about this time discarded the Court (I shall
forbear his name, unless I had a fairer occasion) and justly committed to
prison; which begot many rumors in the common people, who in this Nation think
they are not wise, unless they be busy about what they understand not, and
especially about Religion.

The King received this news with so much discontent and restlesnesse, that he
would not suffer the Sun to set and leave him under this doubt; but sent for
Dr. Done, and required his answer to the Accusation; which was so clear and
satisfactory, that the King said he was right glad he rested no longer under
the suspicion. When the King had said this, Doctor Done kneeled down and
thanked his Majesty, and protested his answer was faithful and free from all
collusion, and therefore desired that he might not rise till as in like cases
he always had from God, so he might have from his Majesty some assurance that
he stood clear and fair in his opinion. Then the King raised him from his knees
with his own hands, and protested that he knew he was an honest man, and
doubted not but that he loved him truly. And having thus dismissed him, he
called some Lords of his Council into his chamber, and said with much
earnestness, My Doctor is an honest man: and my Lords, I was never better
satisfied with an answer: and I always rejoice when I think that by my means
he became a Divine.

He was made Dean the fiftieth year of his age; and in his fifty fourth year a
dangerous sickness seized him, which inclined him to a Consumption. But God,
as Job thankfully acknowledged, preserved his spirit, and kept his
intellectuals as clear and perfect, as when that sickness first seized his
body.

In this distemper of body his dear friend Dr. Henry King (chief Residenciary
of that Church, and now Bishop of Chicester) a man then generally known by the
Clergy of this Nation, and as generally noted for his obliging nature, visited
him daily, and observing that his sickness rendered his recovery doubtful, he
chose a seasonable time to speak to him, to this purpose.

Mr. Dean, I am by your favor no stranger to your temporal estate, and you are
no stranger to the Offer lately made us, for the renewing a Lease of the best
Prebends Corpse belonging to our Church; and you know, 'twas denied, for that
our Tenant being very rich, offered to fine at so low a rate as held not
proportion with his advantages: but I will raise him to an higher sum, or
procure that the other Residenciaries shall join to accept of what was offered:
one of those I can and will do without delay, and without any trouble either
to your body or mind, I beseech you to accept of my offer, for I know it will
be a considerable addition to your present estate.

To this, after a short pause, and raising himself upon his bed, he made this
reply.

My most dear friend, I most humbly thank you for your many favors, and this
in particular: But, in my present condition, I shall not accept of your
proposal; for doubtless there is such a Sin as Sacrilege, if there were
not, it could not have a name in Scripture. And the Primitive Clergy were
watchful against all appearances of it; and indeed then all Christians looked
upon it with horror and detestation: Judging it to be even an open defiance of
the power and providence of Almighty God, and a sad presage of a declining
Religion. But instead of such Christians, who had selected times set a part to
fast and pray to God, for a pious Clergy which they did obey, Our times abound
with men that are busy and litigious about trifles and Church-Ceremonies; and
yet so far from scrupling Sacrilege, that they make not so much as a quaere
what it is: But, I thank God I have, and dare not now upon my sick bed, when
Almighty God has made me useless to the service of the Church, make any
advantages out of it. But if he shall again restore me to such a degree of
health, as again to serve at his Altar, I shall then gladly take the reward
which the bountiful Benefactours of this Church have designed me; for God
knows my Children and relations will need it. In which number my mother (whose
Credulity and Charity has contracted a very plentiful to a very narrow estate)
must not be forgotten: But Dr. King, if I recover not, that little, that very
little, when divided into eight parts, must, if you deny me not so Charitable a
favor, fall into your hands as my mst faithful friend and Executor; of whose
Care and Justice; I make no more doubt then of Gods blessing on that which I
have conscienciously collected for them, and this I declare as my unalterable
resolution.

The reply to this was only a promise to observe his request.

Within a few days his distempers abated; and as his strength increased, so
did his thankfulness to Almighty God, testified in his book of Devotions,
which he published at his recovery. In which the reader may see, the most
secret thoughts that then possessed his soul, Paraphrased and make public; a
book that may not unfitly be called a Sacred picture of spiritual ecstasies,
occasioned and applyable to the emergencies of that sickness, which being a
composition of Meditations, disquisitions and prayers, he writ on his sickbed;
herein imitating the holy Patriarchs, who were wont to build their Altars in
that place, where they had received their blessings.

This sickness brought him so near to the gates of death, and he saw the grave
so ready to devour him, that he would often say his recovery was supernatural.
But God that restored his health continued it to him, till the fifty-ninth year
of his life. And then in August 1630. being with his eldest Daughter Mrs.
Harvie at Abury hatch in Essex, he there fell into a fever, which with the help
of his constant infirmity (vapors from the spleen) hastened him into so
visible a Consumption, that his beholders might say as St Paul of himself, He
dies daily; and he might say with Job, my welfare passes away as a cloud, the
days of my affliction have taken hold of me, and weary nights are appointed
for me.

Reader, this sickness continued long, not only weakening but wearying him so
much, that my desire is, he may now take some rest, and that before I speak of
his death thou will not think it an impertinent digression to look back with me
upon some observations of his life, which whilst a gentle slumber gives rest to
his spirits, may, I hope, not unfitly exercise thy consideration.

His marriage was the remarkable error of his life; an error which though he
had a wit able, very apt to maintain Paradoxes, yet he was very far from
justifying; and though his wives Competent years, and other reasons might be
justly urged to moderate severe Censures; yet he would occasionally condemn
himself for it: and doubtless it had been attended with an heavy Repentance,
if God had not blessed them with so mutual and Cordial affections, as in the
midst of their sufferings made their bread of sorrow taste more pleasantly then
the banquets of dull and low-spirited people.

The recreations of his youth were Poetry, in which he was so happy, as if
nature and all her varieties had been made only to exercise his sharp wit,
and high fancy; and in those pieces which were facetiously Composed and
carelessly scattered (most of them being written before the twentieth year of
his age) it may appear by his choice Metaphors, that both Nature and all the
Arts joined to assist him with their utmost skill.

It is a truth, that in his penitential years, viewing some of those pieces
loosely scattered in his youth, he wished they had been abortive, or so short
lived, that his own eyes had witnessed their funerals. But though he was no
friend to them, he was not so fallen out with heavenly Poetry as to forsake
that, no not in that in his declining age; witnessed then by many Divine
Sonnets, and other high, holy, and harmonious Composures. Yea even on his
former sickbed he wrote this heavenly Hymn, expressing the great joy that
then possessed his soul in the Assurance of Gods favor to him.

An Hymn to God the Father.
Will thou forgive that sin where I begun,
Which was my sin though it were done before?
Will thou forgive that sin through which I run,
And do run still though still I do deplore,
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For, I have more.
Will thou forgive that sin, which I have won
Others to sin, and made my sin their done?
Will thou forgive that sin which I did shun
A year or two, but wallowed in a score?
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For I have more.
I have a sin of fear, that when I Have spun
My last thread I shall perish on the shore:
But swear by thy self, that at my death thy Son
Shall shine as he shines now, and heretofore;
And having done that thou have done,
I fear no more.
I have the rather mentioned this Hymn, for that he caused it to be set to a
most grave and solemn tune, and to be often sung to the Organ by the Choristers
of that Church, in his own hearing, especially at the Evening Service; and at
his return from his Customary Devotions in that place, did occasionally say to
a friend, The words of this Hymn have restored to me the same thoughts of joy
that possessed my soul in my sickness when I composed it. And, Oh the power of
Church-musick! that Harmony added to it has raised the affections of my heart,
and quickened my graces of zeal and gratitude; and I observe, that I always
return from paying this public duty of Prayer and Praise to God with an
unexpressible tranquillity of mind, and a willingness to leave the world.

After this manner did the Disciples of our Savior, and the best of Christians
in those Ages of the Church nearest to his time, offer their praises to
Almighty God. And the reader of St. Augustines life may there find, that
toward his dissolution he wept abundantly, that the enemies of Christianity
had broke in upon them, and profaned and ruined their Sanctuaries, and because
their Public Hymns and Lauds were lost out of their Churches. And after this
manner have many devout souls lifted up their hands and offered acceptable
Sacrifices unto Almighty God in that place where Dr. Done offered his.

But now oh Lord --

Before I proceed further, I think fit to inform the reader, that not long
before his death he caused to be drawn a figure of the body of Christ extended
upon an Anchor, like those which painters draw when they would present us with
the picture of Christ Crucified on the Cross; his varying no otherwise then to
affixe him to an Anchor (the Emblem of hope) this he caused to be drawn in
little, and then many of these figures thus drawn to be engraven very small in
H^litropian Stones, and set in gold, and of these he sent to many of his
dearest friends to be used as Seals, or Rings, and kept as memorialls of him
and his affection.

His dear friends Sir Henry Goodier and Sir Robert Drewry, could not be of that
number, for they had put off mortality, and taken possession of the grave
before him. But Sir Henry Wootton, and Dr. Hall the late deceased Bishop of
Norwich were, and so were Dr. Duppa Bishop of Salisbury, and Dr. Henry King
Bishop of Chicester, (both now living-men) in whom there was and is such a
Commixture of general Learning, natural eloquence, and Christian humility,
that they deserve a Commemoration by a pen equal to their own, which none has
exceeded.

And in this enumeration of his friends, though many must be ommitted, yet that
man of primitive piety Mr. George Herbert may not, I mean that George Herbert,
who was the Author of the Temple or Sacred Poems and Ejaculations. ( A book, in
which by declaring his own spiritual Conflicts he has raised many a dejected
and discomposed soul, and charmed them into sweet and quiet thoughts: A book,
by the frequent reading whereof, and the assistance of that Spirit that seemed
to inspire the Author, the Reader may attain habits of peace and piety, and all
the gifts of the Holy Ghost and Heaven; and by still reading, still keep those
sacred fires burning upon the Altar of so pure a heart, as shall be freed from
the anxieties of this world, and fixed upon things that are above;) betwixt him
and Dr. Done there was a long and dear friendship, make up by such a' Sympathy
of inclinations, that they coveted and joyed to be in each others Company; and
this happy friendship was still maintained by many sacred indearments, of which
that which follows may be some Testimony.

To Mr. George Herbert, with one of my Seals of the Anchor and Crest. A sheafe
of Snakes used heretofore to be my Seal, the Crest of our poor Family.

Qui prius assuetus serpentum falce tabellas Signare, haec nostrae Symbola
parva domus Adscitus domui domini. -- Adopted in Gods family, and so
My old Coat lost into new Arms I go.
The Cross my seal in Baptism, spread below,
Does by that form into an Anchor grow.
Crosses grow Anchors, bear as thou should do
Thy Cross, and that Cross grows an Anchor too.
But he that makes our Crosses Anchors thus
Is Christ, who there is crucified for us.
Yet with this I may my first Serpents ho'd:
God gives new blessings, and yet leaves the old.
The Serpent may as wise my pattern be,
My poison, as he feeds on dust, that is me.
And as he rounds the earth to murder, sure
He is my death, but on the Cross my cure.
Crucify nature then, and then implore
All grace from him, crucified there before.
When all is Cross, and that Cross Anchor grown,
This seals a Catechism, not a seal alone.
Under that little seal great gifts I send,
Both works and prayers, pawnes and fruits of a friend,
Oh may that Saint that rides on our great Seal,
To you that bear his names large bounty deal.
I: Done.


In Sacram Anchoram Piscatoris GEO. HERBERT.
Quod Crux nequibat fixa Clavique additi,
Tenere Christu^ scilicet ne ascenderet
Tuive Christum --
Although the Cross could not Christ here detain,
When nailed unto't but he ascends again:
Nor yet, thy eloquence here keep him still,
But only whilst thou speak; this Anchor will.
Nor can thou be content, unless thou to
This certain Anchor add a seal, and so
The water and the earth, both unto thee
Do owe the Symbol of their certainty.
Let the world reel, we and all ours stand sure,
This Holy Cable's from all storms secure.
Love near his death desired to end,
With kind expressions to his friend;
He writ when is hand could write no more,
He gave his soul, and so gave over.
G. HERBERT.


I return to tell the Reader, that besides these verses to his dear Mr.
Herbert, and that Hymn that I mentioned to be sung in the Quire of S. Paul's
Church; he did also shorten and beguile many sad hours by composing other
sacred Ditties; and he writ an Hymn on his deathbed, which bears this title,
An Hymn to God my God in my sicknsse, March 23. 1630.

If these fall under the censure of a soul, whose too much mixture with earth
makes it unfit to judge of these high illuminations; let him know that many
holy and devout men have thought the soul of Prudentius to be most refined,
when not many days before his death he charged it to present his God each
morning and evening with a new and spiritual song; justified by the example of
King David and the good King Hezek^as, who upon the renovation of his years
paid his thankful vows to Almighty God in a royal Hymn, which he concludes
in these words, The Lord was ready to save, therefore I will sing my songs to
the stringed instruments all the days of my life in the temple of my God.

The latter part of his life may be said to be a continued study; for as he
usually preached once a week, if not oftener, so after his Sermon he never gave
his eyes rest, till he had chosen out a new Text, and that night cast his
Sermon into a form, and his Text into divisions, and next day betook himself
to consult the Fathers, and so commit his meditations to his memory, which was
excellent. But upon Saturday he usually gave himself and his mind a rest from
the weary burden of his weeks meditations, and spent that day in visitation of
friends, and other diversions of his thoughts, and would say, that he gave both
his body and mind that refreshment, that he might be enabled to do the work of
the day following, not faintly, but with courage and cheerfulness.

Nor was his age only so industrious, but in the most unsettled days of his
youth, his bed was not able to detain him beyond the hour of four in a morning:
and it was no common business that drew him out of his chamber till past ten.
All which time was employed in study; and if it seem strange, it may gain a
belief by the visible fruits of his labors; some of which remain as
testimonies of what is here written: for he left the resultance of 1400.
Authors, most of them abridged and analyzed with his own hand; he left also
sixscore of his Sermons all written with his own hand; also an exact and
laborious Treatise concerning self-murder, called Biathanatos, wherein all the
Laws violated by that Act are diligently surveyed and judiciously censured: a
Treatise written in his younger days, which alone might declare him then not
only perfect in the Civil and Canon Law, but in many other such studies and
arguments, as enter not into the consideration of many that labor to be
thought great Clerks, and pretend to know all things.

Nor were these only found in his study, but all businesses that past of any
public consequence, either in this or any of our neighbour-nations, he
abbreviated either in Latin, or in the Language of that Nation, and kept them
by him for a memorial. So he did the copies of diverse Letters and cases of
Conscience that had concerned his friends, with his observations and solutions
of them, and diverse other businesses of importance; all particularly and
methodically digested by himself.

He did prepare to leave the world before life left him, making his will when
no faculty of his soul was damped or made defective by sickness, or he
surprised by a sudden apprehension of death: but it was made with mature
deliberation, expressing himself an impartial Father by making his childrens
portions equal; and a lover of his friends, whom he remembered with Legacies
fitly and discreetly chosen and bequeathed. I cannot forbear a nomination of
some of them; for methinks they be persons that seem to challenge a recordation
in this place, as namely, to his brother-in-law Sir Th. Grimes, he gave that
striking Clock which he had long worn in his pocket. -- To his dear friend and
executor Dr. King, now Bishop of Chichester, that model of Gold of the Synod of
Dort, with which the States presented him at his last being at the Hague -- and
the two Pictures of Padrie Paulo and Fulgentio, men of his acquaintance when he
traveled Italy, and of great note in that Nation for their remarkable
learning. -- To his ancient friend Dr. Brook, Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge he gave the picture of the blessed Virgin and Joseph. -- To Dr.
Winniff (who succeeded him in the Deanery) he gave a picture called the
Sceleton. -- To the succeeding Dean, who was not then known, he gave many
necessaries of worth, and useful for his house; and also several Pictures and
Ornaments for the Chapel, with a desire that they might be registered, and
remain as a Legacy to his Successors. -- To the Earls of Dorset and of Carlisle
he gave several Pictures, and so he did to many other friends; Legacies given
rather to express his affection, then to make any addition to their Estates:
but unto the poor he was full of Charity, and unto many others, who by his
constant and long continued bounty might entitle themselves to be his
almes-people; for all these he made provision, and so largely, as having then
six children living, might to some appear more then proportionable to his
estate. I forbear to mention any more, lest the Reader may think I trespass
upon his patience: but I will beg his favor to present him with the beginning
and end of his Will.

In the name of the blessed and glorious Trinity, Amen. I John Done, by the
mercy of Christ Jesus, and by the calling of the Church of England Priest,
being at this time in good health and perfect understanding (praised be God
therefore) do hereby make my last Will and Testament in manner and form
following:

First, I give my gracious God an entire sacrifice of body and soul, with my
most humble thanks for that assurance which his blessed Spirit imprints in me
now of the Salvation of the one, and the Resurrection of the other; and for
that constant and cheerful resolution which the same Spirit has established in
me to live and die in the Religion now professed in the Church of England. In
expectation of that Resurrection I desire my body may be buried (in the most
private manner that may be) in that place of S. Paul's Church London, that the
now Residentiaries have at my request designed for that purpose, etc.

And this my last Will and Testament, made in the fear of God (whose mercy I
humbly beg and constantly rely upon in Jesus Christ) and in perfect love and
charity with all the world (whose pardon I ask from the lowest of my servants
to the highest of my superiors) written all with my own hand, and my name
subscribed to every page, of which there are five in number.

Sealed December. 13. 1630.

Nor was this blessed sacrifice of Charity expressed only at his death, but in
his life also, by a cheerful and frequent visitation of any friend whose mind
was dejected, or his fortune necessitous; he was inquisitive after the wants of
Prisoners, and redeemed many from thence that lay for their fees, or for small
debts; he was a continual giver to poor Scholars, both of this and foreign
nations. Besides what he gave with his own hand, he usually sent a servant, or
a discreet and trusty friend, to distribute his charity to all the Prisons in
London at all the Festival times of the year, especially at the Birth and
Resurrection of our Savior. He gave an hundred pounds at one time to an old
friend, whom he had known live plentifully, and by a too liberal heart then
decayed in his estate: and when the receiving of it was denied, by saying, he
wanted not; for as there be some spirits so generous as to labor to conceal
and endure a sad poverty, rather then those blushes that attend the confession
of it; so there be others to whom Nature and Grace have afforded such sweet and
compassionate souls, as to pity and prevent the distresses of mankind; which I
have mentioned because of Dr. Donne's reply, whose answer was, I know you want
not what will sustain nature, for a little will do that; but my defire is that
you who in the days of your plenty have cheered the hearts of so many of your
friends, would receive this from me, and use it as a cordial for the cheering
of your own: and so it was received. He was an happy reconciler of many
differences in the families of his friends and kindred, which he never
undertook faintly; for such undertakings have usually faint effects; and they
had such a faith in his judgment and impartiality, that he never advised them
to any thing in vain. He was even to her death a most dutiful son to his
Mother, careful to provide for her supportation; of which she had been
destitute, but that God raised him up to prevent her necessities; who having
sucked in the Religion of the Roman Church with her Mothers milk, spent her
estate in foreign Countries to enjoy a liberty in it, and died in his house
but three months before him.

And to the end it may appear how just a steward he was of his Lord and Masters
revenue, I have thought fit to let the Reader, know that after his entrance
into his Deanery, as he numbered his years, and at the foot of a private
account (to which God and his Angels were only witnesses with him) computed
first his revenue, then what was given to the poor, and other pious uses; and
lastly, what rested for him and his; he blessed each years poor remainder with a
thankful prayer; which for that they discover a more then common Devotion, the
Reader shall partake some of them in his own words.

So all is that remains of these two years. Deo Opt. Max. benigno
Lirgitori, a me, and ab iis
Quibus haec a me rese^vantur,
Gloria and gratia in aeternum.
Amen.
So that this year God has blessed me land mine with. -- Multiplicatae sunt
super
Nos misericordi ae tuae
Domine. --
Da Domine, ut quae eximmensu
Bonitate tua nobis elargiri
Dignatus sis, in quorumcunque
Manus dovenerint, in tuam
Semper cedant gloriam.
Amen.
In sine horum sex Annorum manet -- Quid habeo quid non accepi a Domino?
Lirgiatur etiam ut quae largitus est;
Sua iterum fiant, bono little usu; ut
Quemadmodum nec officiis hujus mundi,
Nec loci in quo me posuit dignitati, nec
Servis, nec egenis, in toto hujus anni
Curriculo mihi conscius sum me defuissi;
Ita and liberi, quibus quae supersunt,
Supersunt, grato animo e^ accipiant,
Et beneficum authorem recognoscant.
Amen.


But I return from my long Digression.

We left the Author sick in Essex, where he was forced to spend much of that
winter, by reason of his disability to remove from thence: And having never for
almost twenty years omitted his personal Attendance on his Majesty in that
month in which he was to attend and preach to him; nor having ever been left
out of the Roll and number of Lent-Preachers; and there being then (in January
1630.) a report brought to London, or raised there, that Dr. Done was dead:
That report gave him occasion to write this following letter to a friend.

Sir,
This advantage you and my other friends have by my frequent fevers, that I am
so much the oftener at the Gates of Heaven, and this advantage by the solitude
and close imprisonment that they reduce me to after; that I am so much the
oftener at my prayers, in which I shall never leave out your happiness; and I
doubt not but among his other blessings, God will add some one to you for my
prayers. A man would almost be content to dye (if there were no other benefit
in death) to hear of so much sorrow, and so much good Testimony from good men
as I (God be blessed for it) did upon the report of my death; yet I perceive it
went not through all, for one writ to me that some (and he said of my friends)
conceived I was not so ill as I pretended, but withdrew my self to live at
ease, discharged of preaching. It is an unfriendly, and God knows an
ill-grounded interpretation; for I have always been sorrier when I could not
preach, then any could be they could not hear me. It has been my desire, and
God may be pleased to grant it, that I might dye in the Pulpit; if not that,
yet that I might take my death in the Pulpit, that is, dye the sooner by
occasion of those labors. Sir, I hope to see you presently after Candlemas,
about which time will fall my Lent-Sermon at Court, except my Lord Chamberlain
believe me to be dead, and so leave me out of the roll; but as long as I live
and am not speechless, I would not willingly decline that service. I have
better leisure to write then you to read; yet I would not willingly oppress
you with too much Letter. God bless you and your Son as I wish

Your poor friend and servant in Christ Jesus, J. Done.


Before that month ended, he was designed to preach upon his old constant day,
the first Friday in Lent; he had notice of it, and had in his sickness so
prepared for that employment, that as he had long thirsted for it, so he
resolved his weakness should not hinder his journey; he came therefore to
London, some few days before his day appointed. At his being there many of his
friends (who with sorrow saw his sickness had left him only so much flesh as
did cover his bones) doubted his strength to perform that task; and therefore
dissuaded him from undertaking it, assuring him however, it was like to shorten
his days; but he passionately denied their requests, saying, he would not
doubt that God who in many weaknesses had assisted him with an unexpected
strength, would not now withdraw it in his last employment; professing an holy
ambition to perform that sacred work. And when to the amazement of some
beholders he appeared in the Pulpit, many thought he presented himself not to
preach mortification by a living voice, but mortality by a decayed body and
dying face. And doubtless many did secretly ask that question in Ezekiel, Do
these bones live? or can that soul Organize that tongue, Ezekiel. 37.3.
to speak so long time as the sand in that glass will move toward its Center,
and measure out an hour of this dying man's unspent life? Doubtless it cannot;
yet after some faint pauses in his zealous prayer, his strong desires enabled
his weak body to discharge his memory of his preconceived meditations; which
were of dying, the Text being, To God the Lord belong the issues from Death.
Many that then saw his tears, and heard his hollow voice, professing they
thought the Text prophetically chosen, and that Dr. Done had preached his own
funeral Sermon.

Being full of joy that God had enabled him to perform this desired duty, he
hastened to his house, out of which he never moved, till like St. Stephen, he
was carried by devout men to his Grave.

The next day after his Sermon, his strength being much wasted, and his spirits
so spent, as indisposed him to business, or to talk. A friend that had often
been a witness of his free and facetious discourse, asked him, Why are you
sad? To whom he replied with a countenance so full of cheerful gravity, as
gave testimony of an inward tranquillity of mind, and of a soul willing to take
a farewell of this world. And said, I am not sad, but most of the night past I
have entertained my self with many thoughts of several friends that have left
me here, and are gone to that place from which they shall not return: And that
within a few days I also shall go hence and be no more seen. And my
preparation for this change is become my nightly meditation upon my bed, which
my infirmities have now made restless to me. But at this present time I was in
a serious Contemplation of the goodness of God to me, who am less then the
least of his mercies; and looking back upon my life past, I now plainly see it
was his hand that prevented me from all temporal employment, and it was his
will that I should never settle nor thrive till I entered into the Ministry; in
which I have now lived almost twenty years (I hope to his glory) and by which
I most humbly thank him, I have been enabled to requite most of those friends
which showed me kindness when my fortune was very low, and (as it has
occasioned the expression of my gratitude) I thank God most of them have stood
in need of my requital. I have lived to be useful and comfortable to my good
father in Law Sir George Moore, whose patience God has been pleased to
exercise with many temporal crosses; I have maintained my own mother, whom it
has pleased God after a plentiful fortune in her younger days, to bring to a
great decay in her very old Age. I have quieted the Consciences of many that
have groaned under the burden of a wounded Spirit, whose prayers I hope are
available for me. I cannot plead innocence of life, especially of my youth: But
I am to be judged by a merciful God, who is not willing to see what I have
done amiss. And though of my self I have nothing to present to him but sins
and misery; yet I know he looks not upon me now as I am of my self, but as I am
in my Savior, and has given me even at this time some testimonies by his holy
Spirit, that I am of the number of his Elect: I am full of joy, and shall die
in peace.

I must here look so far back, as to tell the Reader, that at his first return
out of Essex, his old Friend and Physician, Dr. Fox, a man of great worth, came
to him to consult his health, who after a sight of him, and some queries
concerning his distempers, told him, That by Cordials and drinking milk twenty
days together, there was a probability of his restoration to health; but he
passionately denied to drink it. Nevertheless, Dr. Fox, who loved him most
entirely, wearied him with solicitations, till he yielded to take it for ten
days; at the end of which time he told Dr. Fox, he had drunk it more to
satisfy him, than to recover his health; and that he would not drink it ten
days longer upon the best moral assurance of having twenty years added to his
life, for he loved it not; and he was so far from fearing death (which is the
King of terrors) that he longed for the day of his dissolution.

It is observed, that a desire of glory or commendation is rooted in the very
nature of man, and that those of the severest and most mortified lives, though
they may become so humble as to banish self-flattery, and such weeds as
naturally grow there; yet they have not been able to kill this desire of glory,
but that like our radical heat it will both live and die with us; and many
think it should do so; and we want not sacred examples to justify the desire
of having our memory to outlive our lives: which I mention, because Dr. Done,
by the persuasion of Dr. Fox, yielded at this very time to have a Monument made
for him; but Dr. Fox undertook not to persuade how or what it should be; that
was left to Dr. Done himself.

This being resolved upon, Dr. Done sent for a Carver to make for him in wood
the figure of an Urn, giving him directions for the compass and height of it,
and to bring with it a board of the height of his body. These being got, and
without delay a choice Painter was in a readiness to draw his picture, which
was taken as follows. -- Several Charcole-fires being first made in his
large study, he brought with him into that place his winding sheet in his hand,
and having put off all his clothes, had his sheet put on him, and so tied with
knots at his head and feet, and his hands so placed as dead bodies are usually
fitted for the grave. Upon this Urn he thus stood with his eyes shut, and so
much of the sheet turned aside as might show his lean, pale, and death-like
face, which was purposely turned toward the East, from whence he expected the
second coming of our Savior. Thus he was drawn at his just height; and when
the picture was fully finished, he caused it to be set by his bedside, where
it continued, and became his hourly object till his death, and was then given
to his dearest friend and Executor Dr. King, who caused him to be thus carved
in one entire piece of white Marble, as it now stands in the Cathedral Church
of S. Paul's; and by Dr. Donn's own appointment these words were to be affixed
to it as his Epitaph:

JOHANNES DONE Sac. Theol. Professor

Post varia Studia quibus ab annis tenerrimis fideliter, nec infeliciter
incubuit;

Instinctu and impulsu Sp. Sancti, Monitu and Hortatu

REGIS JACOBI, Ordines Sacros amplexus Anno sui Jesus, 1614. and suae aetatis 42.

Decanatu hujus Ecclesiae indutus 27. Novembris 1621.

Exutus morte ultimo Die Martii 1631.

Hiclicet in Occiduo Cinere Aspicit Eum

Cujus nomen est Oriens.

Upon Monday following he took his last leave of his beloved Study, and being
sensible of his hourly decay retired himself to his bedchamber, and that week
sent at several times for many of his most considerable friends, with whom he
took a solemn and deliberate farewell; commending to their considerations some
sentences useful for the regulation of their lives, and dismissed them as good
Jacob did his sons, with a spiritual Benediction. The Sunday following he
appointed his servants, that if there were any business undone that concerned
him or themselves, it should be prepared against Saturdy next; for after that
day he would not mix his thoughts with any thing that concerned this world, nor
ever did. But as Job, so he waited for the appointed time of his dissolution.

And now he had nothing to do but die; to do which he stood in need of no
longer time, for he had studied long, and to so happy a perfection, that in a
former sickness he called God to witness In his book of Devotions.
he was that minute ready to deliver his soul into his hands, if that minute
God would determine his dissolution. In that sickness he begged of God the
constancy to be preserved in that estate forever; and his patient expectation
to have his immortal soul disrobed from her garment of mortality, makes me
confident he now had a modest assurance that his Prayers were then heard, and
his Petition granted. He lay fifteen days earnestly expecting his hourly
change, and in the last hour of his laft day, as his body melted away and
vapoured into spirit, his soul having, I verily believe, some revelation of the
Beatificall Vision, he said, I were miserable if I might not die; and after
those words closed many periods of his faint breath by saying often, Thy
kingdom come, thy will be done. His speech, which had long been his ready and
faithful servant, left him not till the last minute, and then forsook him, not
to serve another Master, but died before him, for that it was become useless
to him that now conversed with God on earth, as Angels are said to do in
heaven, only by thoughts and looks. Being speechless, he did as S. Stephen,
look steadfastly toward heaven, till he saw the Son of God standing at the
right hand of his Father: and being satisfied with this blessed sight, as his
soul ascended, and his last breath departed from him, he closed his own eyes,
and then disposed his hands and body into such a posture as required no
alteration by those that came to shroud him.

Thus variable, thus virtuous was the Life, thus excellent, thus exemplary was
the Death of this memorable man.

He was buried in that place of S. Paul's Church which he had appointed for that
use some years before his death, and by which he passed daily to pay his
public Devotions to Almighty God (who was then served twice a day by a public
form of Prayer and Praises in that place) but he was not buried privately,
though he desired it; for beside an unnumbred number of others, many persons of
Nobility and of eminency for Learning, who did love and honor him in his life,
did show it at his death, by a voluntary and sad attendance of his body to the
grave, where nothing was so remarkable as a public sorrow.

To which place of his Burial some mournful Friend repaired; and as Alexander
the Great did to the grave of the famous Achilles, so they strewed his with an
abundance of curious and costly Flowers; which course they (who were never yet
known) continued morning and evening for many days; not ceasing till the
stones that were taken up in that Church to give his body admission into the
cold earth (now his bed of rest) were again by the Masons art levelled and
firmed, as they had been formerly, and his place of burial undistinguishable
to common view.

Nor was this all the Honor done to his reverend Ashes; for as there be some
persons that will not receive a reward for that for which God accounts himself
a debtor; persons that dare trust God with their Charity, and without a
witness; so there was by some grateful unknown friend, that thought Dr.
Donne's memory ought to be perpetuated, an hundred Marks sent to his two
faithful Friends Dr. King and Dr. Monfort.
and Executors toward the making of his Monument. It was not for many years
known by whom, but after the death of Dr. Fox it was known that he sent it; and
he lived to see as lively a representation of his dead friend as Marble can
express; a Statue indeed so like Dr. Done, that (as his friend Sir Henry
Wotton has expressed himself) it seems to breath faintly, and Posterity shall
look upon it as a kind of artificial Miracle.

He was of Stature moderately tall, of a straight and equally-proportioned
body, to which all his words and actions gave an unexpressible addition of
Comeliness.

The melancholy and pleasant humor were in him so contempered, that each gave
advantage to the other, and made his Company one of the delights of mankind.

His fancy was unimitably high, equalled only by his great wit, both being
made useful by a commanding judgment.

His aspect was cheerful, and such as gave a silent testimony of a clear
knowing soul, and of a Conscience at peace with it self.

His melting eye showed that he had a soft heart, full of noble compassion, of
too brave a soul to offer injuries, and too much a Christian not to pardon them
in others.

He did much contemplate (especially after he entered into his Sacred Calling)
the mercies of Almighty God, the immortality of the soul, and the joys of
Heaven; and would often say, Blessed be God that he is God divinely like
himself.

He was by nature highly passionate, but more apt to reluct at the excesses of
it. A great lover of the offices of humanity, and of so merciful a spirit,
that he never beheld the miseries of mankind without pity and relief.

He was earnest and unwearied in the search of knowledge; with which his
vigorous soul is now satisfied, and employed in a continued praise of that God
that first breathed it into his active body; which once was a Temple of the
Holy Ghost, and is now become a small quantity of Christian dust.

But I shall see it reinanimated.

J. W.
To all my friends, Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
I Am not weary of writing; it is the course, but durable garment of my love;
but I am weary of wanting you. I have a mind like those bodies which have hot
Livers and cold stomachs; or such a distemper as traveled me at Paris, a
Fever, and dysentery: in which, that which is physic to one infirmity
nourishes the other. So I abhor nothing more then sadness, except the ordinary
remedy, change of company. I can allow my self to be Animal sociale, appliable
to my company, but not gregale, to herd my self in every troup. It is not
perfectly true which a very subtle, yet very deep wit, Averroes, says, that all
mankind has but one soul, which informs and rules us all, as one Intelligence
does the firmament and all the Stars in it; as though a particular body were
too little an organ for a soul to play upon. And it is as imperfect which is
taught by that religion which is most accommodate to sense (I dare not say to
reason (though it have appearance of that too) because none may doubt but that
that religion is certainly best which is reasonablest) That all mankind has
one protecting Angel; all Christians one other, all English one other, all of
one Corporation and every civil coagulation or society one other; and every
man one other. Though both these opinions express a truth; which is, that
mankind has very strong bounds to cohabit and concur in other then mountains
and hills during his life. First, common and mutual necessity of one another;
and therefore naturally in our defense and subventions we first fly to our
selves; next, to that which is likest, other men. Then, natural and inborn
charity, beginning at home, which persuades us to give, that we may receive:
and legal charity, which makes us also forgive. Then an ingraffing in one
another, and growing together by a custom of society: and last of all, strict
friendship, in which band men were so presumed to be coupled, that our
Confessor King had a law, that if a man be killed, the murderer shall pay a
sum felago suo, which the interpreters call, fide ligato, and comiti vitae.
All these bands I willingly receive, for no man is less of himself then I; nor
any man enough of himself: To be so, is all one with omnipotence. And it is
well marked, that in the holy Book, wheresoever they have rendered Almighty, the
word is Self-sufficient. I think sometimes that the having a family should
remove me far from the curse of Vaesoli. But in so strict obligation of Parent,
or Husband, or Master, (and perchance it is so in the last degree of
friendship) where all are made one, I am not the less alone, for being in the
midst of them. Therefore this oleum laetitiae, this balm of our lives, this
alacrity which dignifies even our service to God, this gallant enemy of
dejection and sadness, (for which and wickedness the Italian allows but one
word, Triste: And in full condemnation whereof it was prophesied of our blessed
Savior, Non erit tristis, in his conversation) must be sought and preserved
diligently. And since it grows without us, we must be sure to gather it from
the right tree. They which place this alacrity only in a good conscience, deal
somewhat too roundly with us, for when we ask the way, they show us the town
afar off: Will a Physician consulted for health and strength, bid you have good
sinews and equal temper? It is true, that this conscience is the resultance of
all other particular actions; it is our triumph and banquet in the haven; but I
would come toward that also, (as Mariners say) with a merry wind. Our nature
is Meteorique, we respect (because we partake so) both earth and heaven; for as
our bodies glorified shall be capable of spiritual joy, so our souls demerged
into those bodies, are allowed to partake earthly pleasure. Our soul is not
sent hither, only to go back again: we have some errand to do here: nor is it
sent into prison, because it comes innocent; and he which sent it, is just. As
we may not kill our selves, so we may not bury our selves: which is done or
endangered in a dull Monastic sadness, which is so much worse then jollity
(for upon that word I durst -- And certainly despair is infinitely worse then
presumption: both because this is an excess of love, that of fear; and because
this is up, that down the hill; easier, and more stumbling. Heaven is expressed
by singing, hell by weeping. And though our blessed Savior be never noted to
have laughed, yet his countenance is said ever to be smiling And that even
moderate mirth of heart, and face, and all I wish to my self, and persuade you
to keep. This alacrity is not had by a general charity and equanimity to all
mankind, for that is to seek fruit in a wilderness: nor from a singular
friend, for that is to fetch it out of your own pocket: but the various and
abundant grace of it, is good company; in which no rank, no number, no quality,
but ill, and such a degree of that as may corrupt and poison the good, is
exempt. For in nearer then them, your friend, and somewhat nearer then he, in
your self, you must allow some inordinatenesse of affections and passions: For
it is not true that they are not natural, but storms and tempests of our
blood and humors; for they are natural, but sickly. And as the Indian priests
expressed an excellent charity, by building Hospitalls, and providing
surgery for birds and beasts lamed by mischance, or age, or labor: so must
we, not cut off, but cure these affections, which are the bestiall part.

To Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
EVery Tuesday I make account that I turn a great hourglass, and consider that
a weeks life is run out since I writ. But if I ask my self what I have done in
the last watch, or would do in the next, I can say nothing; if I say that I
have passed it without hurting any, so may the Spider in my window. The
primitive Monks were excusable in their retirings and enclosures of
themselves: for even of them every one cultivated his own garden and orchard,
that is, his soul and body, by meditation, and manufactures; and they ought the
world no more, since they consumed none of her sweetness, nor begot others to
burden her. But for me, if I were able to husband all my time so thriftily, as
not only not to wound my soul in any minute by actual sin, but not to rob and
cousen her by giving any part to pleasure or business, but bestow it all upon
her in meditation, yet even in that I should wound her more, and contract
another guiltiness: As the Eagle were very unnatural, if because she is able
to do it, she should perch a whole day upon a tree, staring in contemplation
of the majesty and glory of the Sun, and let her young Eglets starve in the
nest. Two of the most precious things which God has afforded us here, for the
agony and exercise of our sense and spirit, which are a thirst and inhiation
after the next life, and a frequency of prayer and meditation in this, are
often envenomed, and putrefied, and stray into a corrupt disease: for as God
does thus occasion, and positively concur to evil, that when a man is
purposed to do a great sin, God infuses some good thoughts which make him
choose a less sin, or leave out some circumstance which aggravated that; so
the devil does not only suffer, but provoke us to some things naturally good,
upon condition that we shall omit some other more necessary and more
obligatory. And this is his greatest subtilty; because herein we have the
deceitful comfort of having done well, and can very hardly spy our error,
because it is but an insensible omission, and no accusing act. With the first
of these I have often suspected my self to be overtaken; which is, with a
desire of the next life: which though I know it is not merely out of a
weariness of this, because I had the same desires when I went with the tide,
and enjoyed fairer hopes then now: yet I doubt worldly encumbrances have
increased it. I would not that death should take me asleep: I would not have
him merely seize me, and only declare me to be dead, but win me, and overcome
me. When I must shipwreck, I would do it in a Sea, where mine impotency might
have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as
exercise for my swimming. Therefore I would fain do something; but that I
cannot tell what, is no wonder. For to choose is to do; but to be no part of
any body, is to be nothing. At most, the greatest persons, are but greatwens
and excrescences; men of wit and delighfull conversation, but as moles for
ornament, except they be so incorporated into the body of the world, that they
contribute something to the sustentation of the whole. This I made account that
I begun early, when I understood the study of our laws; but was diverted by the
worst voluptuousness, which is an Hydroptique immoderate desire of humane
learning and languages, beautiful ornaments to great fortunes: but mine needed
an occupation, and a course which I thought I entered well into, when I
submitted my self into such a service, as I thought might employ those poor
advantages which I had. And there I stumbled too, yet I would try again: for to
this hour I am nothing, or so little, that I am scarce subject and argument
good enough for one of mine own letters: yet I fear, that does not ever proceed
from a good root, that I am so well content to be less, that is, dead. You,
Sir, are far enough from these descents, your virtue keeps you secure, and your
natural disposition to mirth will preserve you; but lose none of these holds,
a slip is often as dangerous as a bruise, and though you cannot fall to my
lowness, yet in a much less distraction you may meet my sadness; for he is no
safer which falls from an high Tower into the leads, then he which falls from
thence to the ground: make therefore to your self some mark, and go toward it
alegrement. Though I be in such a planetary and erratick fortune, that I can
do nothing constantly, yet you may find some constancy in my constant
advising you to it.

Your hearty true friend J. Done.
I came this evening from M. Jones his house in Essex, where M. Martin has
been, and left a relation of Captain Whitcocks death, perchance it is no news
to you, but it was to me; without doubt want broke him; for when M. Hollands
Company by reason of the plague broke, the Captain sought to be at Mrs. Jones
house, who in her husbands absence declining it, he went in the night, his boy
carrying his cloak-bag, on foot to the Lord of Sussex, who going next day to
hunt, the Captain not then sick, told him he would see him no more. A Chaplain
came up to him, to whom he delivered an account of his understanding, and, I
hope, of his belief, and soon after dyed; and my Lord has buried him with his
own Ancestors. Perchance his life needed a longer sickness; but a man may go
faster and safer when he enjoyes that daylight of a clear and sound
understanding, than in the night or twy-light of an Ague or other disease. And
the grace of Almighty God does every thing suddenly and hastily but depart from
us, it enlightens us, warmes us, heates us, ravishes us at once. Such a
medicine, I fear, his inconsideration needed; and I hope as confidently that he
had it. As our soul is infused when it is created, and created when it is
infused, so at her going out, Gods mercy is had by asking, and that is asked by
having. Lest your Polesworth -- etc.



To Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
THis letter has more merit, then one of more diligence, for I wrote it in my
bed, and with much pain. I have occasion to sit late some nights in my study,
(which your books make a pretty library) and now I find that that room has a
wholesome emblematique use: for having under it a vault, I make that promise
me, that I shall die reading, since my book and a grave are so near. But it
has another unwholesomenesse, that by raw vapors rising from thence, (for I
can impute it to nothing else) I have contracted a sickness which I cannot
name nor describe. For it has so much of a continual Cramp, that it wrests
the sinews; so much of a Tetane, that it withdraws and pulls the mouth; and so
much of the Gout, (which they whose counsel I use say it is) that it is not
like to be cured, though I am too hasty in three days to pronounce it. If it
be the Gout, I am miserable; for that affects dangerous parts, as my neck and
breast, and (I think fearfully) my stomach, but it will not kill me yet. I
shall be in this world like a porter in a great house, ever nearest the door,
but seldomest abroad: I shall have many things to make me weary, and yet not
get leave to be gone. If I go, I will provide by my best means that you suffer
not for me in your bonds. The estate which I should leave behind me of any
estimation, is my poor fame, in the memory of my friends, and therefore I would
be curious of it, and provide that they repent not to have loved me. Since my
imprisonment in my bed, I have made a meditition in verse, which I call a
Litany; the word you know imports no other then supplication, but all Churches
have one form of supplication, by that name. Amongst ancient annals, I mean
some 800 years, I have met two Letanies in Latin verse, which gave me not the
reason of my meditations, for in good faith I thought not upon them then, but
they give me a defense, if any man; to a Lay man, and a private, impute it as a
fault, to take such divine and public names to his own little thoughts. The
first of these was made by Ratpertus a Monk of Suevia; and the other by S.
Notker, of whom I will give you this note by the way, that he is a private
Saint for a few parishes; they were both but Monks, and the Letanies poor and
barbarous enough; yet Pope Nicolas the 5. valued their devotion so much that he
canonized both their Poems, and commanded them for public service in their
Churches: mine is for lesser Chapels, which are my friends, and though a copy
of it were due to you, now, yet I am so unable to serve my self with writing it
for you at this time, (being some 30 staves of 9 lines) that I must entreat you
to take a promise that you shall have the first, for a testimony of that duty
which I owe to your love, and to my self, who am bound to cherish it by my best
offices. That by which it will deserve best acceptance, is, That neither the
Roman Church need call it defective, because it abhors not the particular
mention of the blessed Triumphers in heaven; nor the Reformed can discreetly
accuse it of attributing more then a rectified devotion ought to do. The day
before I lay down, I was at London, where I delivered your Letter for Sir
Edward Conway, and received another for you, with the copy of my Book, of which
it is impossible for me to give you a copy so soon, for it is not of much less
then 300 pages. If I die, it shall come to you in that fashion that your Letter
desires it. If I warm again, (as I have often seen such beg-gers as my
indisposition is, end themselves soon, and the patient as soon) you and I shall
speak together of that, before it be too late to serve you in that commandment.
At this time I only assure you, that I have not appointed it upon any person,
nor ever purposed to print it: which later perchance you thought, and grounded
your request thereupon. A Gent. that visited me yesterday told me that our
Church has lost Mr. Hugh Broughton, who is gone to the Roman side. I have
known before, that Serarius the Jesuit was an instrument from Cardinal Baronius
to draw him to Rome, to accept a stipend, only to serve the Christian Churches
in controversies with the Jews, without indangering himself to change of his
persuasion in particular deductions between these Christian Churches, or being
inquired of, or tempted thereunto. And I hope he is no otherwise departed from
us. If he be, we shall not escape scandal in it; because, though he be a man
of many distempers, yet when he shall come to eat assured bread, and to be
removed from partialities, to which want drove him, to make himself a
reputation, and raise up favorers; you shall see in that course of opposing
the Jews, he will produce worthy things: and our Church will perchance blush to
have lost a Soldier fit for that great battle; and to cherish only those
single Duellisms between Rome and England; or that more single, and almost
self-homicide, between the unconformed Ministers and Bishops. I writ to you
last week that the plague increased; by which you may see that my Letters --
opinion of the song, not that I make such trifles for praise; but because as
long as you speak comparatively of it with mine own, and not absolutely, so
long I am of your opinion even at this time; when I humbly thank God, I ask and
have, his comfort of sadder meditations; I do not condemn in my self, that I
have given my wit such evaporations as those, if they be free from
profaneness, or obscene provocations. Sir, you would pity me if you saw me
write, and therefore will pardon me if I write no more: my pain has drawn my
head so awry, and holds it so, that mine eye cannot follow mine hand: I receive
you therefore into my prayers, with mine own weary soul, and commend my self to
yours. I doubt not but next week I shall be good news to you, for I have
mending or dying on my side, which is two to one: If I continue thus, I shall
have comfort in this, that my Blessed Savior exercising his Justice upon my
two worldly parts, my fortune, and body, reserves all his mercy for that which
best tastes it, and most needs it, my soul. I profess to you truly, that my
lothnesse to give over now, seems to my self an ill sign, that I shall write no
more.

Your poor friend, and Gods poor patient, J. Done.

To the Humble Lady, the Lady Kingsmel, upon the death of her Husband.
MADAME,
THose things which God dissolves at once, as he shall do the Sun and Moon,
and those bodies at the last conflagration, he never intends to reunite again;
but in those things, which he takes in pieces, as he does man and wife in these
divorces, by death, and in single persons, by the divorce of body and soul, God
has another purpose to make them up again. That piece which he takes to
himself, is presently cast in a mould, and in an instant made fit for his use;
for heaven is not a place of a proficiency, but of present perfection. That
piece which he leaves behind in this world, by the death of a part thereof,
grows fitter and fitter for him, by the good use of his corrections, and the
entire conformity to his will. Nothing disproportions us, nor makes us so
incapable of being reunited to those whom we loved here as murmuring, or not
advancing the goodness of him who has removed them from hence. We would wonder
to see a man, who in a wood were left to his liberty to fell what trees he
would, take only the crooked and leave the straightest trees; but that man
has perchance a ship to build, and not a house, and so has use of that kind
of timber: let not us, who know that in Gods house there are many mansions, but
yet have no model, no design of the form of that building, wonder at his
taking in of his materials, why he takes the young and leaves the old, or why
the sickly over-live those that had better health. We are not bound to think,
that souls departed have divested all affections toward them whom they left
here; but we are bound to think, that for all their loves they would not be
here again: then is the will of God done in earth as it is in heaven, when we
neither pretermit his actions, nor resist them; neither pass them over in an
inconsideration, as though God had no hand in them; nor go about to take them
out of his hands, as though we could direct him to do them better. As Gods
Scriptures are his will, so his actions are his will; both are testaments,
because they testify his mind to us. It is not lawful to add a Schedule to
either of his wills: as they do ill, who add to his written will, the
Scriptures, a schedule of Apocryphal books; so do they also, who to his other
will, his manifested actions, add Apocryphal conditions, and a schedule of
such limitations as these: If God would have staid thus long, or if God would
have proceeded in this or this manner, I could have borne it. To say that our
afflictions are greater then we can bear, is so near to despairing, as that the
same words express both; for when we consider Cains words in that original
Tongue in which God spoke, we cannot tell whether the words be, My punishment
is greater then can be borne, or, My sin is greater then can be forgiven. But,
Madam, you who willingly sacrificed your self to God, in your obedience to him
in your own sickness, cannot be doubted to dispute with him about any part of
you, which he shall be pleased to require at your hands. The difference is
great in the loss of an arm, or a head; of a child, or a husband: but to them
who are incorporated into Christ their head, there can be no beheading; upon
you who are a member of the Spouse of Christ the Church, there can fall no
widow-head, nor orphanage upon those childeren to whom God is father. I have
not another office by your husbands death, for I was your Chaplain before in my
daily prayers; but I shall enlarge that office with other Collects than before,
that God will continue to you that peace which you have ever had in him, and
send you quiet and peaceable dispositions in all them with whom you shall have
any thing to do, in your temporal estate and matters of this world. Amen.

At my poor house at S. Paul's 26. October. 1624. Your Ladyships very humble and
thankful Servant in Chr. Jesus, J. Done.

An Epitaph written by Dr. Corbet, Bishop of Oxford, on his friend Dr. Done.
HE that wood write an Epitaph for thee,
And write it well, must first begin to be
Such as thou were, for none can truly know
Thy life and worth, but he that has lived so.
He must have wit to spare, and to hurl down
Enough to keep the gallants of the Town.
He must have learning plenty, both the Laws,
Civil and Common, to Judge any Cause.
Divinity great store above the rest,
Not of the last Edition, but the best.
He must have language, travel, all the Arts,
Judgment to use, or else he wants thy parts.
He must have friends the highest, able to do,
Such as Mecaenas, and Augustus too:
He must have such a sickness, such a death,
Or else his vain descriptions come beneath.
He that would write an Epitaph for thee,
Should first be dead; let it alone for me.
To the Memory of my ever desired Dr. Done. An Elegy by H. King. B. C.
TO have lived eminent in a degree
Beyond our loftiest thoughts, that is like thee;
Or to have had too much merit, is not safe,
For such excesses find no Epitaph.
At common graves we have poetic eyes,
Can melt themselves in easy Elegies;
Each quill can drop his tributary verse,
And pin it like the hatchments to the hearse:
But at thine, poem or inscription
(Rich soul of wit and language) we have none.
Indeed a silence does that tomb be fit,
Where is no Herald left to blazon it.
Widowed invention justly does forbear
To come abroad, knowing thou art not there:
Late her great patron, whose prerogative
Maintained and clothed her so as none alive
Must now presume to keep her at thy rate,
Though he the Indies for her dower estate.
Or else that awful fire which once did burn
In thy clear brain, now fallen into thy urn,
Lives thereto fright rude Empericks from thence,
Which might profane thee by their Ignorance.
Who ever writes of thee, and in a style
Unworthy such a theme, does but revile
Thy precious dust, and wake a learned spirit,
Which may revenge his rapes upon thy merit:
For all a low-pitch't fancy can devise
Will prove at best but hallowed injuries:
Thou like the dying Swan did lately sing
Thy mournful dirge in audience of the King;
When pale looks and faint accents of thy breath
Presented so to life that piece of death,
That it was feared and propheci'd by all
Thou thither came to preach thy Funeral.
Oh had thou in an Elegiack knell
Rung out unto the world thine own farewell,
And in thy high victorious numbers beat
The solemn measures of thy grieved retreat,
Thou might the Poets service now have mist,
As well as then thou did prevent the Priest:
And never to the world beholden be,
So much as for an Epitaph for thee.
I do not like the office; nor is it fit
Thou who did lend our age such sums of wit,
Should now re-borrow from her bankrupt mine
That ore to bury thee which first was thine:
Rather still leave us in thy debt, and know,
Exalted Soul, more glory it is to owe
Thy memory what we can never pay,
Then with embased Coin those rites defray.
Commit we then thee to thy self, nor blame
Our drooping loves that thus to thine own fame
Leave thee executors, since, but thine own
No pen could do thee Justice, nor bays Crown
Thy vast deserts, save that we nothing can
Depute to be thy ashes guardian:
So Jewellers no art or metal trust
To form the Diamond, but the Diamonds dust.
FINIS.

