The Complete Angler or the Contemplative Man's Recreation.

Being a Discourse of FISH and FISHING, Not unworthy the perusal of most
Anglers.

Simon Peter said, I go a fishing: and they said, We also will go with thee.
John 21.3.

London, Printed by T. Maxey for RICH. MARRIOT, in S. Dunstans Churchyard,
Fleetstreet, 1653.

To the Right Worshipful JOHN OFFLEY Of Madely Manor in the County of Stafford,
Esquire My most honored Friend. SIR,

I Have made so ill use of your former favors, as by them to be encouraged to
entreat that they may be enlarged to the patronage and protection of this Book.
and I have put on a modest confidence, that I shall not be denied, because it is
a discourse of Fish and Fishing, which you both know so well, and love and
practice so much.

You are assured (though there be ignorant men of an other belief) that Angling
is an Art; and you know that Art better then any that I know: and that this is
truth, is demo^strated by the fruits of that pleasant labor which you enjoy
when you purpose to give rest to your mind, and divest your self of your more
serious business, and (which is often) dedicate a day or two to this Recreation.

At which time, if common Anglers should attend you, and be eyewitnesses of
the success, not of your fortune, but your skill, it would doubtless beget in
them an emulation to be like you, and that emulation might beget an industrious
diligence to be so: but I know it is not atainable by common capacities.

Sir, this pleasant curiosity of Fish and Fishing (of which you are so great a
Master) has been thought worthy the pens and practices of diverse in other
Nations, which have been reputed men of great Learning and Wisdom; and amongst
those of this Nation, I remember Sir Henry Wotton (a dear lover of this Art)
has told me, that his intentions were to write a discourse of the Art, and in
the praise of Angling, and doubtless he had done so, if death had not prevented
him; the remembrance of which has often made me sorry; for, if he had lived to
do it, then the unlearned Angler (of which I am one) had seen some Treatise of
this Art worthy his perusal, which (though some have undertaken it) I could
never yet see in English.

But mine may be thought as weak and as unworthy of common view: and I do here
freely confess, that I should rather excuse my self, then censure others, my
own Discourse being liable to so many exceptions; against which, you (Sir)
might make this one, That it can contribute nothing to your knowledge; and lest
a longer Epistle may diminish your pleasure, I shall not adventure to make this
Epistle longer then to add this following truth, That I am really, Sir,

Your most affectionate Friend, and most humble Servant,
Iz. Wa.
TO THE Reader of this Discourse: But especially, To the honest ANGLER. I Think
fit to tell thee these following truths; that I did not undertake to write, or
to publish this discourse of fish and fishing, to please my self, and that I
wish it may not displease others; for, I have contest there are many defects in
it. And yet, I cannot doubt, but that by it, some readers may receive so much
profit or pleasure, as if they be not very busy men, may make it not unworthy
the time of their perusal; and this is all the confidence that I can put on
concerning the merit of this Book.

And I wish the Reader also to take notice, that in writing of it, I have made
a recreation, of a recreation; and that it might prove so to thee in the
reading, and not to read dull, and tediously, I have in several places mixed
some innocent Mirth; of which, if thou be a severe, sour complexioned man, then
I here disallow thee to be a competent Judge. For Divines say, there are
offenses given; and offenses taken, but not given. And I am the willinger to
justify this innocent Mirth, because the whole discourse is a kind of picture
of my own disposition, at least of my disposition in such days and times as I
allow my self, when honest Not. and R. R. and I go a fishing together; and let
me add this, that he that likes not the discourse, should like the pictures of
the Trout and other fish, which I may commend, because they concern not my self.

And I am also to tell the Reader, that in that which is the more useful part
of this discourse; that is to say, the observations of the nature and breeding,
and seasons, and catching of fish, I am not so simple as not to think but that
he may find exceptions in some of these; and therefore I must entreat him to
know, or rather note, that several Countries, and several Rivers alter the
time and manner of fishes Breeding; and therefore if he bring not candor to the
reading of this Discourse, he shall both injure me, and possibly himself too by
too many Criticisms.

Now for the Art of catching fish; that is to say, how to make a man that was
none, an Angler by a book: he that undertakes it, shall undertake a harder task
then Hales, that in his printed Book Called the private Schoo of defense.
undertook by it to teach the Art of Fencing, and was laughed at for his labor.
Not but that something useful might be observed out of that Book; but that Art
was not to be taught by words; nor is the Art of Angling. And yet, I think,
that most that love that Game, may here learn something that may be worth their
money, if they be not needy: and if they be, then my advice is, that they
forbear; for, I write not to get money, but for pleasure; and this discourse
boasts of no more: for I hate to promise much, and fail.

But pleasure I have found both in the search and conference about what is here
offered to thy view and censure; I wish thee as much in the perusal of it, and
so might here take my leave; but I will stay thee a little longer by telling
thee, that whereas it is said by many, that in Fly-fishing for a Trout, the
Angler must observe his twelve Flies for every Month, I say, if he observe
that, he shall be as certain to catch fish, as they that make Hay by the fair
days in Almanacks, and be no surer: for doubtless, three or four Flies rightly
made, do serve for a Tront all Summer; and for Winter-flies, all Anglers know,
they are as useful as an Almanac out of date.

Of these (because no man is born an Artist nor an Angler) I thought fit to
give thee this notice. I might say more, but it is not fit for this place; but
if this Discourse which follows shall come to a second impression, which is
possible, for slight books have been in this Age observed to have that fortune;
I shall then for thy sake be glad to correct what is faulty, or by a conference
with any to explain or enlarge what is defective:but for this time I have
neither awillingness nor leisure to say more, then wish thee a rainy evening
toread this book in, and that the east wind may never blow when thou go a
fishing. Farewell.

Iz. Wa.
Because in this Discourse of Fish and Fishing I have not observed a method,
which (though the Discourse be not long) may be some inconvenience to the
Reader, I have therefore for his easier finding out some particular things
which are spoken of, made this following Table.

The first Chapter is spent in a vindication or commendation of the Art of
Angling.

In the second are some observations of the nature of the otter, and also some
observations of the Chub or Cheven, with directions how and with what baits to
fish for him.

In chapt. 3. are some observations of Trouts, both of their nature, their
kinds, and their breeding.

In chap 4. are some direction concerning baits for the Trout, with advise how
to make the Fly, and keep the live baits.

In chap. 5. are some direction how to fish for the Trout by night; and a
qucstion, Whether fish hear? and lastly diroction bow to fish for the Umber or
Greyling.

In chap. 6. are some observations concerning the Salmon, with direction how to
fish for him.

In chap.7. are several observatiens concerning the, Luce or Pike, with some
directions how and with what baits to fish for him.

In chap.8. are several observations of the nature and breeding of Carps, with
some observations how to angle for them.

In chap 9. are some observations concerning the Bream, the Tench and Perch,
with some directions with what baits to fish for them.

In chap. 10. are several observations of the nature and breeding of Eeles,
with advice how to fish for them.

In chap. 11. are some observations of the nature and breeding of Barbels, with
some advice how, and with what baits to fish for them; as also for the Gudgion
and Bleak.

In chap.12. are general directions how and with what baits to fish for the
Ruff or Pope, the Roch, the Dace, and other small fish, with directions how to
keep Ant-flies and Gentles in winter, with some other observations not unfit to
be known of Anglers.

In chap. 13. are observations for the coloring of your Rod and Hair.


These directions the Reader may take as an ease in his search after some
particular Fish, and the baits proper for them; and he will show himself
courteous in mending or passing by some few errors in the Printer, which are
not so many but that they may be pardoned.

(I) The Complete ANGLER. OR, The contemplative Man's RECREATION.
Piscator.

Viator.


Piscator. You are well overtaken Sir; a good morning to you; I have stretched
my legs up Totnam Hill to overtake you, hoping your business may occasion you
toward Ware, this fine pleasant fresh May day in the Morning.


Viator. Sir, I shall almost answer your hopes: for my purpose is to be at
Hodsdess (three miles short of that Town) I will not say, before I drink; but
before I break my fast: for I have appointed a friend or two to meet me there
at the thatcht house, about nine of the clock this morning; and that made me so
early up, and indeed, to walk so fast.


Pisc. Sir, I know the thatcht house very well: I often make it my resting
place, and taste a cup of Ale there, for which liquor that place is very
remarkable; and to that house I shall by your favor accompany you, and either
abate of my pace, or mend it, to enjoy such a companion as you seem to be,
knowing that (as the Italians say) Good company makes the way seem the shorter.


Viat. It may do so Sir, with the help of good discourse, which (me thinks) I
may promise from you, that both look and speak so cheerfully. And to invite you
to it, I do here promise you, that for my part, I will be as free and
open-hearted, as discretion will warrant me to be with a stranger.


Pisc. Sir, I am right glad of your answer; and in confidence that you speak
the truth, I shall (Sir) put on a boldness to ask, whether pleasure or
business has occasioned your Journey.


Viat. Indeed, Sir, a little business, and more pleasure: for my purpose is to
bestow a day or two in hunting the Otter (which my friend that I go to meet,
tells me is more pleasant then any hunting whatsoever:) and having dispatched a
little business this day, my purpose is to morrow to follow a pack of dogs of
honest Mr. --, who has appointed me and my friend to meet him upon Amwel hill
to morrow morning by day break.


Pisc. Sir, my fortune has answered my desires; and my purpose is to bestow a
day or two in helping to destroy some of those villainous vermin: for I hate
them perfectly, because they love fish so well, or rather, because they destroy
so much: indeed, so much, that in my judgment, all men that keep Otter dogs
ought to have a Pension from the Commonwealth to encourage them to destroy the
very breed of those base Otters, they do so much mischief.


Viat. But what say you to the Foxes of this Nation? would not you as willingly
have them destroyed? for doubtless they do as much mischief as the Otters.


Pisc. Oh Sir, if they do, it is not so much to me and my Fraternity, as that
base Vermin the Otters do.


Viat. Why Sir, I pray, of what Fraternity are you, that you are so angry with
the poor Otter?


Pis. I am a Brother of the Angle, and therefore an enemy to the Otter, he does
me and my friends so much mischief; for you are to know, that we Anglers all
love one another: and therefore do I hate the Otter perfectly, even for their
sakes that are of my Brotherhood.


Viat. Sir, to be plain with you, I am sorry you are an Angler: for I have
heard many grave, serious men pity, and many pleasant men scoff at Anglers.


Pisc. Sir, There are many men that are by others taken to be serious grave
men, which we contemn and pitic; men of sour complexions; mony-getting-men,
that spend all their time first in getting, and next in anxious care to keep
it: men that are condemned to be rich, and always discontented, or busy. For
these poor-rich-men, we Anglers pity them; and stand in no need to borrow
their thoughts to think our selves happy: For (trust me, Sir) we enjoy a
contentedness above the reach of such dispositions.

And as for any scoffer, qui mockat mockabitur. Let me tell you, (that you may
tell him) what the witty Frenchman says in such a The Lord Mountagne in his
Apol. for Ra.Scbond.
Case. When my Cat and I entertain each other with mutual apish tricks (as
playing with a garter,) who knows but that I make her more sport then she makes
me? Shall I conclude her simple, that has her time to begin or refuse
sportivenesse as freely as I my self have? Nay, who knows but that our agreeing
no better, is the defect of my not under standing her language? (for doubtless
Cats talk and reason with one another) and that she laughs at, and censures my
folly, for making her sport, and pittes me for understanding her no better? To
this purpose speaks Mountagne concerning Cats: And I hope I may take as great a
liberty to blame any Scoffer, that has never heard what an Angler can say in
the justification of his Art and Pleasure.

But, if this satisfy not, I pray bid the Scoffer put this Epigram into his
pocket, and read it every morning for his breakfast (for I wish him no better;)
He shall find it fixed before the Dialogues of Lucian (who may be justly
accounted the father of the Family of all Scoffers:) And though I owe none of
that Fraternity so much as good will, yet I have taken a little pleasant pains
to make such a conversion of it as may make it the fitter for all of that
Fraternity.

Lucian well skilled in scoffing, this has writ,
Friend, that is your folly which you think your wit:
This you vent often, void both of wit and fear,
Meaning an other, when your self you jeer,
But no more of the Scoffer; for since Solomon says, he is an abomination to
men, he shall be so to me; and I think, to all that love Virtue and Angling.


Viat. Sir, you have almost amazed me: for though I am no Scoffer, Pro. 24.9.
yet I have (I pray let me speak it without offense) always looked upon
Anglers as more patient, and more simple men, then (I fear) I shall find you
to be.


Piscat. Sir, I hope you will not judge my earnestness to be impatience: and
for my simplicity, if by that you mean a harmlesnesse, or that simplicity that
was usually found in the Primitive Christians, who were (as most Anglers are)
quiet men, and followed peace; men that were too wise to sell their consciences
to buy riches for vexation, and a fear to die. Men that lived in those times
when there were fewer Lawyers, for then a Lordship might have been safely
conveyed in a piece of Parchment no bigger then your hand, though several skins
are not sufficient to do it in this wiser Age. I say, Sir, if you take us
Anglers to be such simple men as I have spoken of, then both my self, and those
of my profession will be glad to be so understood. But if by simplicity you
meant to express any general defect in the understanding of those that
profess and practice Angling, I hope to make it appear to you, that there is
so much contrary reason (if you have but the patience to hear it) as may remove
all the anticipations that Time or Discourse may have possessed you with,
against that Ancient and laudable Art.


Viat. Why (Sir) is Angling of Antiquity, and an Art, and an art not easily
learned?


Pis. Yes (Sir:) and I doubt not but that if you and I were to converse
together but til night, I should leave you possessed with the same happy
thoughts that now possess me; not only for the Antiquity of it, but that it
deserves commendations; and that it is an Art; and worthy the knowledge and
practice of a wise, and a serious man.


Viat. Sir, I pray speak of them what you shall think fit; for we have yet
five miles to walk before we shall come to the Thatcht house. And, Sir, though
my infirmities are many, yet I dare promise you, that both my patience and
attention will endure to hear what you will say till we come thither: and if
you please to begin in order with the antiquity, when that is done, you shall
not want my attention to the commendations and accommodations of it: and
lastly, if you shall convince me that it is an Art, and an Art worth learning, I
shall beg I may become your Scholar, both to wait upon you, and to be
instructed in the Art it self.


Pisc. Oh Sir, it is not to be questioned, but that it is an art, and an art
worth your Learning: the question will rather be, whether you be capable of
learning it? For he that learns it, must not only bring an enquiring,
searching, and discerning wit; but he must bring also that patience you talk
of, and a love and propensity to the art it felf: but having once got and
practiced it, then doubt not but the Art will (both for the pleasure and profit
of it) prove like to Virtue, a reward to it self.


Viat. Sir, I am now become so full of expectation, that I long much to have you
proceed in your discourse: And first, I pray Sir, let me hear concerning the
antiquity of it.


Pisc. Sir, I will preface no longer, but proceed in order as you desire me: And
first for the Antiquity of Angling, I shall not say much; but only this; Some
say, J. Da.
it is as ancient as Deucalions Flood: and others (which I like better) say,
Jer.Mar.
that Belus (who was the inventer of godly and virtuous Recreations) was the
Inventer of it: and some others say, (for former times have had their
Disquisitions about it) that Seth, one of the Sons of Adam, taught it to his
sons, and that by them it was derived to Posterity. Others say, that he left it
engraven on those Pillars which he erected to preserve the knowledge of the
Mathematics, Music, and the rest of those precious Arts, which by Gods
appointment or allowance, and his noble industry were thereby preserved from
perishing in Noah's Flood.

These (my worthy Friend) have been the opinions of some men, that possibly may
have endeavored to make it more ancient then may well be warranted. But for my
part, I shall content my self in telling you, That Angling is much more ancient
then the incarnation of our Savior: For both in the Prophet Amos, Chap.4.2.
and before him in Job, Chap.41.
(which last Book is judged to be written by Moses) mention is made of
fish-hooks, which must imply Anglers in those times.

But (my worthy friend) as I would rather prove my self to be a Gentleman, by
being learned and humble, valiant and inoffensive, virtuous and communicable,
then by a fond ostentation of riches; or (wanting these Virtues my self) boast
that these were in my Ancestors; [And yet I confess, that where a noble and
ancient Descent and such Merits meet in any man, it is a double dignification
of that person:] and so, if this Antiquity of Angling (which, for my part, I
have not forced) shall, like an ancient Family, be either an honor, or an
ornament to this virtuous Art which I both love and practice, I shall be the
gladder that I made an accidental mention of it; and shall proceed to the
justification, or rather commendation of it.


Viat. My worthy Friend, I am much pleased with your discourse, for that you
seem to be so ingenuous, and so modest, as not to stretch arguments into
Hyperbolicall expressions, but such as indeed they will reasonably bear; and I
pray, proceed to the justification, or commendations of Angling, which I also
long to hear from you.


Pisc. Sir, I shall proceed; and my next discourse shall be rather a
Commendation, then a Justification of Angling: for, in my judgment, if it
deserves to be commended, it is more then justified; for some practices that
may be justified, deserve no commendation: yet there are none that deserve
commendation but may be justified.

And now having said thus much by way of preparation, I am next to tell you,
that in ancient times a debate has risen, (and it is not yet resolved) Whether
Contemplation or Action be the chiefest thing wherein the happiness of a man
does most consist in this world?

Concerning which, some have maintained their opinion of the first, by saying,
[That the nearer we Mortals come to God by way of imitation, the more happy we
are:] And that God injoyes himself only by Contemplation of his own Goodness,
Eternity, Infiniteness and Power, and the like; and upon this ground many of
them prefer Contemplation before Action: and indeed, many of the Fathers seem
to approve this opinion, as may appear in their Comments upon the words of our
Savior to Luke 10. 41,42.
Martha.

And contrary to these, others of equal Authority and credit, have preferred
Action to be chief; as experiments in Physic, and the application of it, both
for the ease and prolongation of man's life, by which man is enabled to act, and
to do good to others: And they say also, That Action is not only. Doctrinal,
but a maintainer of humane Society; and for these, and other reasons, to be
preferred before Contemplation.

Concerning which two opinions, I shall forbear to add a third, by declaring my
own, and rest my self contented in telling you (my worthy friend) that both
these meet together, and do most properly belong to the most honest, ingenious,
harmless Art of Angling.

And first I shall tell you what some have observed, and I have sound in my
self, That the very sitting by the Rivers side, is not only the fittest place
for, but will invite the Anglers to Contemplation: That it is the fittest
place, seems to be witnessed by the children of Israel Psalm.137.
, who having banished all mirth and Music from their pensive hearts, and
having hung up their then mute Instruments upon the Willow trees, growing by
the Rivers of Babylon, sat down upon those banks bemoaning the ruins of Sion,
and contemplating their own sad condition,

And an ingenuous Spaniard says, [That both Rivers, and the inhabitants of the
watery Element, were created for wise men to contemplate, and fools to pass by
without consideration. And though I am too wise to rank my self in the first
number, yet give me leave to free my self from the last, by offering to thee a
short contemplation, first of Rivers, and then of Fish: concerning which, I
doubt not but to relate to you many things very considerable.

Concerning Rivers, there be diverse wonders reported of them by Authors, of
such credit, that we need not deny them an Historical faith.

As of a River in Epirus, that puts out any lighted Torch, and kindles any
Torch that was not lighted. Of the River Selarus, that in a few hours turns a
rod or a wand into stone (and our Camden mentions the like wonder in England:)
that there is a River in Arabia, of which all the Sheep that drink thereof have
their Wool turned into a Vermilion color. And one of no less credit then
Aristotle, In his Wonders of nature.
tells us of a merry River, the River Elusina, that dances at the noise of
Music, that with Music it bubbles, dances, and grows sandy, but returns to a
wonted calmness and clearness when the Music ceases. This is confirmed by
Ennius and Solon in his holy History.
And lastly, (for I would not tire your patience) Fosephus, that learned Few,
tells us of a River in Fudea, that runs and moves swiftly all the six days of
the week, and stands still and rests upon their Sabbath day. But Sir, lest this
discourse may seem tedious, I shall give it a sweet conclusion out of that holy
Poet Mr. George Herbert his Divine Contemplation on Gods providence.

Lord, who has praise enough, nay, who has any?
None can express thy works, but he that knows them;
And none can know thy works, they are so many,
And so complete, but only he that owes them.
We all acknowledge both thy power and love
To be exact, transcendent, and divine;
Who do so strangely, and so sweetly move,
Whilst all things have their end, yet none but thine.
Wherefore, most Sacred Spirit, I here present
For me, and all my fellows, praise to thee;
And just it is that I should pay the rent,
Because the benefit accrues to me.
And as concerning Fish, in that Psalm, wherein, for height of Poetry and
Wonders, the Prophet David Psalm. 104.
seems even to exceed himself; how does he there express himself in choice
Metaphors, even to the amazement of a contemplative Reader, concerning the Sea,
the Rivers, and the Fish therein contained. And the great Naturallist Pliny
says, [That Natures great and wonderful power is more demonstrated in the Sea,
then on the Land.] And this may appear by the numerous and various Creatures,
inhabiting both in and about that Element: as to the Readers of Gesner,
Randelitius, Pliny, Aristotle, and others is demonstrated: But I will sweeten
this discourse also out of a contemplation in Divine Dubartas, who Dubartas in
the fifth day.
says,

God quickened in the Sea and in the Rivers,
So many fishes of so many features,
That in the waters we may see all Creatures;
Even all that on the earth is to be found,
As if the world were in deep waters drowned.
For seas (as well as Skies) have Sun, Moon, Stars;
(As well as air) Swallows, Rooks, and Stares;
(As well as earth) Vines, Roses, Nettles, Melons,
Mushroms, Pinks, Gilliflowers and many milions
Of other plants, more rare, more strange then these;
As very fishes living in the seas;
And also Rams, Calves, Horses, Hares and Hogs,
Wolves, Urchins, Lions, Elephants and Dogs;
Yea, Men and Maids, and which I most admire,
The Mitred Bishop, and the cowled Friar.
Of which examples but a few years since,
Were shown the Norway and Polonian Prince.
These seem to be wonders, but have had so many confirmations from men of
Learning and credit, that you need not doubt them; nor are the number, nor the
various shapes of fishes, more strange or more fit for contemplation, then
their different natures, inclinations and actions: concerning which I shall beg
your patient ear a little longer.

The Cuttle-fish will cast a long gut out of her throat, which (like as an
Angler does his line) she sends forth and pulls in again at her pleasure,
according as she sees some little fish come near to her; and the Cuttle-fish
(being then hid in the gravel Mount.Essays: and others affirm this.
) lets the smaller fish nibble and bite the end of it; at which time she by
little and little draws the smaller fish so near to her, that she may leap upon
her, and then catches and devours her: and for this reason some have called
this fish the SeaAngler.

There are also lustful and chaste fishes, of which I shall also give you
examples.

And first, what Dubartas says of a fish called the Sargus; which (because
none can express it better then he does) I shall give you in his own words,
supposing it shall not have the less credit for being Verse, for he has
gathered this, and other observations out of Authors that have been great and
industrious searchers into the secrets of nature.

The Adulterous Sargus does not only change,
Wives everyday in the deep streams, but (strange)
As if the honey of Sea-love delight
Could not suffice his ranging appetite,
Goes courting She-Goats on the grassie shore,
Horning their husbands that had horns before.
And the same Author writes concerning the Cantharus, that which you shall also
hear in his own words.

But contrary, the constant Cantharus,
Is ever constant to his faithful Spouse,
In nuptial duties spending his chaste life,
Never loves any but his own dear wife.
Sir, but a little longer, andI have done.


Viat. Sir, take what liberty you think fit, for your discourse seems to be
Music, and charms me into an attention.


Pisc. Why then Sir, I will take a little liberty to tell, or rather to
remember you what is said of Turtle Doves: First, that they silently plight
their troth and marry; and that then, the Survivor scorns (as the Thracian
women are said to do) to outlive his or her Mate; and this is taken for such a
truth, that if the Survivor shall ever couple with another, the he or she, not
only the living, but the dead, is denied the name and honor of a true Turtle
Dove.

And to parallel this Land Variety, and teach mankind moral faithfulness, and
to condemn those that talk of Religion, and yet come short of the moral faith
of fish and fowl; Men that violate the Law, affirmed by Saint Paul to be writ
in their hearts, and which Rom.2.14 15.
he says shall at the last day condemn and leave them without excuse. I Pray
hearken to what Dubartas sings, Dubartas 5. day.
(for the hearing of such conjugal faithfulness, will be Music to all chaste
ears) and therefore, I say, hearken to what Dubartas sings of the Mullet:

But for chaste love the Mullet has no peer,
For, if the Fisher has surprised her pheer,
As mad with woe, to shore she follows,
Pressed to consort him both in life and death.
On the contrary, what shall I say of the House-Cock, which treads any Hen, and
then (contrary to the Swan, the Partridg, and Pigeon) takes no care to hatch,
to feed, or to cherish his own Brood, but is senseless though they perish.

And it is considerable, that the Hen (which because she also takes any Cock,
expects it not) who is sure the Chickens be her own, has by a moral impression
her care, and affection to her own Brood, more then doubled, even to such a
height, that our Savior in expressing his love to Jerusalem, quotes her for an
example of tender affection, as his Father had done Job for a pattern of
patience. Mat.23 37


And to parallel this Cock, there be diverse fishes that cast their spawne on
flags or stones, and then leave it uncovered and exposed to become a prey, and
be devoured by Vermin or other fishes: but other fishes (as namely the Barbel)
take such care for the preservation of their seed, that (unlike to the Cock or
the Cuckoe) they mutually labor (both the Spawner, and the Melter) to cover
their spawne with sand, or watch it, or hide it in some secret place
unfrequented by Vermin, or by any fish but themselves.

Sir, these examples may, to you and others, seem strange; but they are
testified, some by Aristotle, some by Pliny, some by Gesner, and by diverse
others of credit, and are believed and known by diverse, both of wisdom and
experience, to be a truth; and are (as I said at the beginning) fit for the
contemplation of a most serious, and a most pious man.

And that they be fit for the contemplation of the most prudent and pious, and
peaceable men, seems to be testified by the practice of so many devout and
contemplative men; as the Patriarks or Prophets of old, and of the Apostles of
our Savior in these later times, of which twelve he chose four that were
Fishermen: concerning which choice some have made these Observations.

First, That he never reproved these for their Employment or Calling, as he did
the Scribes and the Mony-Changers. And secondly, That he found the hearts of
such men, men that by nature were fitted for contemplation and quietness; men
of mild, and sweet, and peaceable spirits, (as indeed most Anglers are) these
men our blessed Savior (who is observed to love to plant grace in good
natures) though nothing be too hard for him, yet these men he chose to call
from their irreprovable employment, and gave them grace to be his Disciples and
to follow him.

And it is observable, that it was our Saviors will that his four Fishermen
Apostles should have a prioritie of nomination in the catalogue of his twelve
Apostles, as namely first, S. Peter, Andrew, James Mat.10.
and John, and then the rest in their order.

And it is yet more observable, that when our blessed Savior went up into the
Mount, at his Transfiguration, when he left the rest of his Disciples and chose
only three to bear him company, that these three were all Fishermen.

And since I have your promise to hear me with patience, I will take a liberty
to look back upon an observation that has been made by an ingenuous and
learned man, who observes that God has been pleased to allow those whom he
himself has appointed, to write his holy will in holy Writ, yet to express
his will in such Metaphors as their former affections or practice had inclined
them to; and he brings Solomon for an example, who before his conversion was
remarkably amorous, and after by Gods appointment, writ that The Canticles.
Love-Song betwixt God and his Church.

And if this hold in reason (as I see none to the contrary) then it may be
probably concluded, that Moses (whom I told you before, writ the book of Job)
and the Prophet Amos were both Anglers, for you shall in all the old Testament,
find fish-hooks but twice mentioned; namely, by meek Moses, the friend of God;
and by the humble Prophet Amos.

Concerning which last, namely, the Prophet Amos, I shall make but this
Observation, That he that shall read the humble, lowly, plain style of that
Prophet, and compare it with the high, glorious, eloquent style of the prophet
Isaiah (though they be both equally true) may easily believe him to be a good
natured, plain Fisherman.

Which I do the rather believe, by comparing the affectionate, lowly, humble
Epistles of S. Peter, S. James and S. John, whom we know were Fishers, with the
glorious language and high Metaphors of S. Paul, whom we know was not.

Let me give you the example of two men more, that have lived nearer to our own
times: first of Doctor Nowel sometimes Dean of S. Paul's, (in which Church his
Monument stands yet undefaced) a man that in the Reformation of Queen Elizabeth
(not that of Henry the VIII.) was so noted for his meek spirit, deep Learning,
Prudence and Piety, that the then Parliament and Convocation, both chose,
enjoined, and trusted him to be the man to make a Catechism for public use,
such a one as should stand as a rule for faith and manners to their posterity:
And the good man (though he was very learned, yet knowing that God leads us not
to heaven by hard questions) made that good, plain, unperplext Catechism, that
is printed with the old Service Book. I say, this good man was as dear a lover,
and constant practicer of Angling, as any Age can produce; and his custom was
to spend (besides his fixed hours of prayer (those hours which by command of the
Church were enjoined the old Clergy, and voluntarily dedicated to devotion by
many Primitive Christians:) besides those hours, this good man was observed to
spend, or if you will, to bestow a tenth part of his time in Angling; and also
(for I have conversed with those which have conversed with him) to bestow a
tenth part of his Revenue, and all his fish, amongst the poor that inhabited
near to those Rivers in which it was caught, saying often, That Charity gave
life to Religion: and at his return would praise God he had spent that day free
from worldly trouble, both harmlesly and in a Recreation that became a
Churchman.

My next and last example shall be that undervaluer of money, the late Provost
of Eaton College, Sir Henry Wotton, (a man with whom I have often fished and
conversed) a man whose foreign employments in the service of this Nation, and
whose experience, learning, wit and cheerfulness, made his company to be
esteemed one of the delights of mankind; this man, whose very approbation of
Angling were sufficient to convince any modest Censurer of it, this man was
also a most dear lover, and a frequent practicer of the Art of Angling, of
which he would say, ['Twas an employment for his idle time, which was not idly
spent;] for Angling was after tedious study [A rest to his mind, a cheerer of
his spirits, a divertion of sadness, a calmer of unquiet thoughts, a Moderator
of passions, a procurer of contentedness, and that it begot habits of peace and
patience in those that professed and practiced it.

Sir, This was the saying of that Learned man; and I do easily believe that
peace, and patience, and a calm content did cohabit in the cheerful heart of
Sir Henry Wotton, because I know, that when he was beyond seventy years of age
he made this description of a part of the present pleasure that possessed him, as
he sat quietly in a Summers evening on a bank a fishing; it is a description
of the Spring, which because it glides as soft and sweetly from his pen, as
that River does now by which it was then made, I shall repeat unto you.

This day dame Nature seemed in love:
The lusty sap began to move;
Fresh juice did stir the embracing Vines,
And birds had drawn their Valentines.
The jealous Trout, that low did lie,
Rose at a well dissembled fly;
There stood my friend with patient skill,
Attending of his trembling quil.
Already were the caves possessed
With the swift Pilgrims daivbed nest:
The Groves already did rejoice,
In Philomels triumphing voice:
The showrs were short, the weather mild,
The morning fresh, the evening smiled.
Jone takes her neat rubbed pail, and now
She trips to milk the sand-red Cow;
Where, for some sturdy football Swain,
Jone strokes a Sillibub or twain.
The fields and gardens were beset
With Tulips, Crocus, Violet,
And now, though late, the modest Rose
Did more then half a blush disclose.
Thus all looks gay and full of cheer
To welcome the new liveried year.
These were the thoughts that then possessed the undisturbed mind of Sir Henry
Wotton. Will you hear the wish of another Angler, and the commendation of his
happy life, Jo. Da.
which he also sings in Verse.

Let me live harmlesly, and near the brink
Of Trent or Avon have a dwelling place,
Where I may see my quil or cork down sink,
With eager bit of Perch, or Bleak, or Dace;
And on the world and my Creator think,
Whilst some men strive, ill gotten goods to embrace;
And others spend their time in base excess
Of wine or worse, in war and wantonness.
Let them that list these pastimes still pursue,
And on such pleasing fancies feed their sill,
So I the fields and meadows green may view,
And daily by fresh Rivers walk at will,
Among the Daifies and the Violets blue,
Red Hyacinth, and yellow Daffadil,
Purple Narcissus, like the morning rays,
Pale ganderglass and azure Culverkayes.
I count it higher pleasure to behold
The stately compass of the lofty Sky,
And in the midst thereof (like burning Gold)
The slaming Chariot of the worlds great eye,
The watery clouds, that in the air up rold,
With sundry kinds of painted colors fly;
And fair Aurora lifting up her head,
Still blushing, rise from old Tithonius bed.
The hills and mountains raised from the plains,
The plains extended level with the ground,
The grounds divided into sundry vains,
The vains enclosed with rivers running round;
These rivers making way through natures chains
With headlong course into the sea profound;
The raging sea, beneath the valleys low,
Where lakes, and rils, and rivulets do flow.
The lofty woods, the Forests wide and long
Adorned with leaves and branches fresh and green,
In whose cool bowres the birds with many a song
Do welcome with their Quire the Su^mers Queen:
The Meadows fair, where Flora's gifts among
Are intermixed, with verdant grass between.
The silver-scaled fish that softly swim,
Within the sweet brooks crystal watery stream.
All these, and many more of his Creation,
That made the Heavens, tke Angler often does see,
Taking therein no little delectation,
To think how strange, how wonderful they be;
Framing thereof an inward contemplation,
To set his heart from other fancies free;
And whilst he looks on these with joyful eye,
His mind is rapt above the Starry Sky.
Sir, I am glad my memory did not lose these last Verses, because they are
somewhat more pleasant and more suitable to May Day, then my harsh Discourse,
and I am glad your patience has held out so long, as to hear them and me; for
both together have brought us within the sight of the Thatcht House; and I must
be your Debtor (if you think it worth your attention) for the rest of my
promised discourse, till some other opportunity and a like time of leisure.


Viat. Sir, You have Angled me on with much pleasure to the thatcht House, and
I now find your words true, That good company makes the way seem short; for,
trust me, Sir, I thought we had wanted three miles of the thatcht House, till
you showed it me: but now we are at it, we will turn into it, and refresh our
selves with a cup of Ale and a little rest.


Pisc. Most gladly (Sir) and we will drink a civil cup to all the Otter Hunters
that are to meet you to morrow.


Viat. That we will, Sir, and to all the lovers of Angling too, of which number,
I am now one my self, for by the help of your good discourse and company, I
have put on new thoughts both of the Art of Angling, and of all that profess
it: and if you will but meet me too morrow at the time and place appointed, and
bestow one day with me and my friends in hunting the Otter, I will the next two
days wait upon you, and we two will for that time do nothing but angle, and
talk of fish and fishing.


Pisc. It Is a match, Sir, I Will not fail you, God willing, to be at Amwel Hill to
morrow morning before Sunrising.


CHAP. II.
Viat. My friend Piscator, you have kept time with my thoughts, for the Sun is
just rising, and I my self just now come to this place, and the dogs have just
now put down an Otter, look down at the bottom of the hill, there in that
Meadow, chequered with water Lillies and Ladysmocks, there you may see what
work they make: look, you see all busy, men and dogs, dogs and men, all busy.


Pisc. Sir, I am right glad to meet you, and glad to have so fair an entrance
into this days sport, and glad to see so many dogs, and more men all in
pursuit of the Otter; lets complement no longer, but join unto them; come
honest Viator, lets be gone, lets make haste, I long to be doing; no reasonable
hedge or ditch shall hold me.


Viat. Gentleman Huntsman, where found you this Otter?


Hunt. Marry (Sir) we found her a mile off this place a fishing; she has this
morning eaten the greatest part of this Trout, she has only left thus much of
it as you see, and was fishing for more; when we came we found her just at it:
but we were here very early, we were here an hour before Sunrise, and have
given her no rest since we came: sure she will hardly escape all these dogs and
men. I am to have the skin if we kill him.


Viat. Why, Sir, what is the skin worth?


Hunt. It Is worth ten shillings to make gloves; the gloves of an Otter are the
best fortification for your hands against wet weather that can be thought of.


Pis. I pray, honest Huntsman, let me ask you a pleasant question, Do you hunt
a Beast or a fish?


H. Sir, It is not in my power to resolve you; for the question has been
debated among many great Clerks, and they seem to differ about it; but most
agree, that his tail is fish: and if his body be fish too, then I may say, that
a fish will walk upon land (for an Otter does so) sometimes five or six, or ten
miles in a night. But (Sir) I can tell you certainly, that he devours much
fish, and kills and spoils much more: And I can tell you, that he can smell a
fish in the water one hundred yards from him ( Gesner says, much farther) and
that his stones are good against the Falling Sickness: and that there is an
herb Benione, which being hung in a linen cloth near a Fish Pond, or any haunt
that he uses, makes him to avoid the place, which proves he can smell both by
water and land. And thus much for my knowledge of the Otter, which you may now
see above water at vent, and the dogs close with him; I now see he will not
last long, follow therefore my Masters, follow, for Sweetlips was like to have
him at this vent.


Via. Oh me, all the Horse are got over the river, what shall we do now?


Hun. Marry, stay a little and follow, both they and the dogs will be suddenly
on this side again, I warrant you, and the Otter too it may be: now have at him
with Ki lbuck, for he vents again.


Via. Marry so he is, for look he vents in that corner. Now, now Ringwood has
him. Come bring him to me. Look, it is a Bitch Otter upon my word, and she has
lately whelped, lets go to the place where she was put down, and not far from
it, you will find all her young ones, I dare warrant you: and kill them all too.


Hunt. Come Gentlemen, come all, lets go to the place where we put down the
Otter; look you, hereabout it was that she kennell'd; look you, here it was
indeed, for here is her young ones, no less then five: come lets kill them all.


Pisc. No, I pray Sir; save me one, and I Will try if I can make her tame, as I
know an ingenuous Gentleman in Leichestershire has Mr. Nich. Seagrave.
done; who has not only made her tame, but to catch fish, and do many things
of much pleasure.


Hunt. Take one with all my heart; but let us kill the rest. And now lets go to
an honest Alehouse and sing Old Rose, and rejoice all of us together.


Viat. Come my friend, let me invite you along with us; I Will bear your charges
this night, and you shall bear mine to morrow; for my intention is to
accompany you a day or two in fishing.


Pisc. Sir, your request is granted, and I shall be right glad, both to
exchange such a courtesy, and also to enjoy your company.


Viat. Well, now lets go to your sport of Angling.


Pisc. Lets be going with all my heart, God keep you all, Gentlemen, and send
you meet this day with another bitch Otter, and kill her merrily, and all her
young ones too.


Viat. Now Piscator, where will you begin to fish?


Pisc. We are not yet come to a likely place, I must walk a mile further yet
before I begin.


Viat. Well then, I pray, as we walk, tell me freely how do you like my Host,
and the company? is not mine Host a witty man?


Pisc. Sir, To speak truly, he is not to me; for most of his conceits were
either Scripture-jests, or lascivious jests; for which I count no man witty:
for the Devil will help a man that way inclined, to the first, and his own
corrupt nature (which he always carries with him) to the latter. But a
companion that feasts the company with wit and mirth, and leaves out the sin
(which is usually mixed with them) he is the man: and indeed, such a man should
have his charges born: and to such company I hope to bring you this night; for
at Trout-Hal, not far from this place, where I purpose to lodge to night, there
is usually an Angler that proves good company.

But for such discourse as we heard last night, it infects others; the very
boys will learn to talk and swear as they heard mine Host, and another of the
company that shall be nameless; well, you know what example is able to do, and
I know what the Poet says in the like case:

-- Many a one
Owes to his Country his Religion:
And in another would as strongly grow,
Had but his Nurse or Mother taught him so.
This is reason put into Verse, and worthy the consideration of a wise man. But
of this no more, for though I love civility, yet I hate severe censures: I Will
to my own Art, and I doubt not but at yonder tree I shall catch a Chub, and
then we'll turn to an honest cleanly Ale house that I know right well, rest our
selves, and dress it for our dinner.


via. Oh, Sir, a Chub is the worst fish that swims, I hoped for a Trout for my
dinner.


Pis. Trust me, Sir, there is not a likely place for a Trout hereabout, and we
staid so long to take our leave of your Huntsmen this morning, that the Sun is
got so high, and shines so clear, that I will not undertake the catching of a
Trout till evening; and though a Chub be by you and many others reckoned the
worst of all fish, yet you shall see I Will make it good fish by dressing it.


Viat. Why, how will you dress him?


Pisc. I Will tell you when I have caught him: look you here, Sir, do you see?
(but you must stand very close) there lie upon the top of the water twenty
Chubs: I Will catch only one, and that shall be the biggest of them all: and that
I will do so, I Will hold you twenty to one.


viat. I marry, Sir, now you talk like an Artist, and I Will say, you are one,
when I shall see you perform what you say you can do; but I yet doubt it.


Pisc. And that you shall see me do presently; look, the biggest of these Chubs
has had some bruise upon his tail, and that looks like a white spot; that very
Chub I mean to catch; sit you but down in the shade, and stay but a little
while, and I Will warrant you I Will bring him to you.


viat. I Will sit down and hope well, because you seem to be so confident.


Pisc. Look you Sir, there he is, that very Chub that I showed you, with the
white spot on his tail; and I Will be as certain to make him a good dish of meat,
as I was to catch him. I Will now lead you to an honest Alehouse, where we shall
find a cleanly room, Lavender in the windows, and twenty Ballads stuck about
the wall; there my Hostis (which I may tell you, is both cleanly and
conveniently handsome (has dressed many a one for me, and shall now dress it
after my fashion, and I warrant it good meat.


viat. Come Sir, with all my heart, for I begin to be hungry, and long to be at
it, and indeed to rest my self too; for though I have walked but four miles
this morning, yet I begin to be weary; yester days hunting hangs still upon me.


Pisc. Well Sir, and you shall quickly be at rest, for yonder is the house I mean
to bring you to.

Come Hostis, how do you? will you first give us a cup of your best Ale, and
then dress this Chub, as you dressed my last, when I and my friend were here
about eight or ten days ago? but you must do me one courtesy, it must be done
instantly.


Host. I will do it, Mr. Piscator, and with all the speed I can.


Pisc. Now Sir, has not my Hostis made haste? and does not the fish look lovely?


viat. Both, upon my word Sir, and therefore lets say Grace and fall to eating
of it.


Pisc. Well Sir, how do you like it?


viat. Trust me,'it is as good meat as ever I tasted: now let me thank you for
it, drink to you, and beg a courtesy of you; but it must not be denied me.


Pisc. What is it, I pray Sir? you are so modest, that me thinks I may promise
to grant it before it is asked.


viat. Why Sir, it is that from henceforth you will allow me to call you
Master, and that really I may be your Scholar, for you are such a companion,
and have so quickly caught, and so excellently cooked this fish, as makes me
ambitious to be your scholar.


Pisc. Give me your hand: from this time forward I will be your Master, and
teach you as much of this Art as I am able; and will, as you desire me, tell you
somewhat of the nature of some of the fish which we are to Angle for; and I am
sure I shall tell you more then every Angler yet knows.

And first I will tell you how you shall catch such a Chub as this was;and then
how to cook him as this was: I could not have begun to teach you to catch any
fish more easily then this fish is caught; but then it must be this particular
way, and this you must do:

Go to the same hole, where in most hot days you will find floting near the
top of the water, at least a dozen or twenty Chubs; get a Grasshopper or two as
you go, and get secretly behind the tree, put it then upon your hook, and let
your hook hang a quarter of a yard short of the top of the water, and'tis very
likely that the shadow of your rod, which you must rest on the tree, will cause
the Chubs to sink down to the bottom with fear; for they be a very fearful
fish, and the shadow of a bird flying over them will make them do so; but they
will presently rise up to the top again, and there lie soaring till some shadow
affrights them again: when they lie upon the top of the water, look out the
best Chub, which you setting your self in a fit place, may very easily do, and
move your Rod as softly as a Snail moves, to that Chub you intend to catch; let
your bait fall gently upon the water three or four inches before him, and he
will infallibly take the bait, and you will be as sure to catch him; for he is
one of the leather-mouth'd fishes, of which a hook does scarce ever lose his
hold: and therefore give him play enough before you offer to take him out of
the water. Go your way presently, take my rod, and do as I bid you, and I will
sit down and mend my tackling till you return back.


viat. Truly, my loving Master, you have offered me as fair as I could wish:
I Will go and observe your directions.

Look you, Master, what I have done; that which joys my heart; caught just
such another Chub as yours was.


Pisc. Marry, and I am glad of it: I am like to have a towardly Scholar of you.
I now see, that with advice and practice you will make an Angler in a short time.


Viat. But Master, What if I could not have found a Grasshopper?


Pis. Then I may tell you, that a black Snail, with his belly slit, to show his
white; or a piece of soft cheese will usually do as well; nay, sometimes a worm,
or any kind of fly; as the Ant-fly, the Flesh-fly, or Wall-fly, or the Dor or
Beetle, (which you may find under a Cow-turd) or a Bob, which you will find in
the same place, and in time will be a Beetle; it is a short white worm, like to,
and bigger then a Gentle; or a Cod-worm, or Case-worm any of these will do very
well to fish in such a manner. And after this manner you may catch a Trout: in a
hot evening, when as you walk by a Brook, and shall see or hear him leap at
Flies, then if you get a Grasshopper, put it on your hook, with your line about
two yards long, standing behind a bush or tree where his hole is, and make your
bait stir up and down on the top of the water; you may, if you stand close, be
sure of a bit, but not sure to catch him, for he is not a leather mouthed fish:
and after this manner you may fish for him with almost any kind of live Fly,
but especially with a Grasshopper.


Viat. But before you go further, I pray good Master, what mean you by a
leather mouthed fish.


Pisc. By a leather mouthed fish, I mean such as have their teeth in their
throat, as the Chub or Cheven, and so the Barbel, the Gudgion and Carp, and
diverse others have; and the hook being stuck into the leather or skin of such
fish, does very seldom or never lose its hold: But on the contrary, a Pike, a
Perch, or Trout, and so some other fish which have not their teeth in their
throats, but in their mouths, which you shall observe to be very full of bones,
and the skin very thin, and little of it: I say, of these fish the hook
nevertakes so sure hold, but you often lose the fish unless he have gorged it.


Viat. I thank you good Master for this observation; but now what shall be done
with my Chub or Cheven that I have caught.


Pisc. Marry Sir, it shall be given away to some poor body, for I Will warrant you
I Will give you a Trout for your supper; and it is a good beginning of your Art to
offer your first fruits to the poor, who will both thank God and you for it.

And now lets walk toward the water again, and as I go I Will tell you when you
catch your next Chub, how to dress it as this was.


viat. Come (good Master) I long to be going and learn your direction.


Pisc. You must dress it, or see it dressed thus: When you have scaled him, wash
him very clean, cut off his tail and fins; and wash him not after you gut him,
but chine or cut him through the middle as a salt fish is cut, then give him
four or five scotches with your knife, broil him upon wood-cole or char-cole;
but as he is broiling, baste him often with butter that shall be choicely good;
and put good store of salt into your butter, or salt him gently as you broil or
baste him; and bruise or cut very small into your butter, a little Time, or some
other sweet herb that is in the Garden where you eat him: thus used, it takes
away the watrish taste which the Chub or Chevin has, and makes him a choice
dish of meat, as you your self know; for thus was that dressed, which you did
eat of to your dinner.

Or you may (for variety) dress a Chub another way, and you will find him very
good, and his tongue and head almost as good as a Carps; but then you must be
sure that no grass or weeds be left in his mouth or throat.

Thus you must dress him: Slit him through the middle, then cut him into four
pieces; then put him into a pewter dish, and cover him with another, put into
him as much White Wine as will cover him, or Spring water and Vinegar, and store
of Salt, with some branches of Time, and other sweet herbs; let him then be
boiled gently over a Chafing Dish with wood coals, and when he is almost boiled
enough, put half of the liquor from him, not the top of it; put then into him a
convenient quantity of the best butter you can get, with a little Nutmeg grated
into it, and sippets of white bread: thus ordered, you will find the Chevin and
the sauce too, a choice dish of meat: And I have been the more careful to give
you a perfect direction how to dress him, because he is a fish undervalued by
many, and I would gladly restore him to some of his credit which he has lost by
ill Cookery.


Viat. But Master, have you no other way to catch a Cheven, or Chub?


Pisc. Yes that I have, but I must take time to tell it you hereafter; or
indeed, you must learn it by observation and practice, though this way that I
have taught you was the easiest to catch a Chub, at this time, and at this
place. And now wear come again to the River; I will (as the Soldier says)
prepare for skirmish; that is, draw out my Tackling, and try to catch a Trout
for supper.


Viat. Trust me Master, I see now it is a harder matter to catch a Trout then a
Chub; for I have put on patience, and followed you this two hours, and not seen
a fish stir, neither at your Minnow nor your Worm.


Pisc. Well Scholar, you must endure worse luck sometime, or you will never make
a good Angler. But what say you now? there is a Trout now, and a good one too,
if I can but hold him; and two or three turns more will tire him: Now you see
he lies still, and the slight is to land him: Reach me that Landing net: So
(Sir) now he is mine own, what say you? is not this worth all my labor?


Viat. On my word Master, this is a gallant Trout; what shall we do with him?


Pisc. Marry even eat him to supper: We Will go to my Hostis, from whence we came;
she told me, as I was going out of door, that my brothet Peter, a good Angler,
and a cheerful companion, had sent word he would lodge there to night, and bring
a friend with him. My Hostis has two beds, and I know you and I may have the
best: we will rejoice with my brother Peter and his friend, tell tales, or sing
Ballads, or make a Catch, or find some harmless sport to content us.


Viat. A match, good Master, lets go to that house, for the linen looks white,
and smells of Lavender, and I long to lie in a pair of sheets that smells so:
lets be going, good Master, for I am hungry again with fishing.


Pisc. Nay, stay a little good Scholar, I caught my last Trout with a worm, now
I will put on a Minow and try a quarter of an hour about yonder trees for
another, and so walk toward our lodging. Look you Scholar, thereabout we shall
have a bit presently, or not at all: Have with you (Sir!) on my word I have
him. Oh it is a great loggerheaded Chub: Come, hang him upon that Willow twig,
and let us be going. But turn out of the way a little, good Scholar, toward
yonder high hedge: We Will sit whilst this shower falls so gently upon the teeming
earth, and gives a sweeter smell to the lovely slowers that adorn the verdant
Meadows.

Look, under that broad Beech tree I sat down when I was last this way a
fishing, and the birds in the adjoining, Grove seemed to have a friendly
contention with an Echo, whose dead voice seemed to live in a hollow cave, near
to the brow of that Primrose hill; there I sat viewing the Silver streams glide
silently toward their center, the tempestuous Sea, yet sometimes opposed by
rugged roots, and pibble stones, which broke their waves, and turned them into
some: and sometimes viewing the harmless Lambs, some leaping securely in the
cool shade, whilst others sported themselves in the cheerful Sun; and others
were craving comfort from the swollen Udders of their bleating Dams. As I thus
sat, these and other sighs had so fully possessed my soul, that I thought as the
Poet has happily expre(...)t it:

I was for that time lifted above earth;
And possessed joys not promised in my birth.
As I left this place, and entered into the next field, a second pleasure
entertained me, 'twas a handsome Milk-m(...)id, that had cast away all care,
and sung like a Nightingale; her voice was good, and the Ditty fitted for it;
'twas that smooth Song which was made by Kit Marlow, now at least fifty years
ago; and the Milk maids mother sung an answer to it, which was made by Sir
Walter Raleigh in his younger days.

They were old fashioned Poetry, but choicely good, I think much better then
that now in fashion in this Critical age. Look yonder, on my word, yonder they
be both a milking again: I will give her the Chub, and persuade them to sing
those two songs to us.


Pisc. God speed, good woman, I have been a fishing, and am going to Bleak Hall
to my bed, and having caught more fish then will sup my self and friend, will
bestow this upon you and your daughter, for I use to sell none.


Milkw. Marry God requite you Sir, and we will eat it cheerfully: will you drink a
draught of red Cows milk?


Pisc. No, I thank you:but I pray do us a courtesy that shall stand you and
your daughter in nothing, and we will think our selves still something in your
debt; it is but to sing us a Song, that that was sung by you and your daughter,
when I last past over this Meadow, about eight or nine days since.


Milk. what Song was it, I pray? was it, ComeShepherds deck your heads: or, As
at noon Dulcina rested: or Philida flouts me?


Pisc. No, it is none of those: it is a Song that your daughter sung the first
part, and you sung the answer to it.


Milk. O I know it now, I learned the first part in my golden age, when I was
about the age of my daughter, and the later part, which indeed fits me best,
but two or three years ago; you shall, God willing, hear them both. Come
Maudlin, sing the first part to the Gentlemen with a merry heart, and I Will sing
the second.


The Milk maids Song.
Come live with me, and be my Love,
And we will all the pleasures prove
That valleys, Groves, or hills, or fields,
Or woods and steepie mountains yields.
Where we will sit upon the Rocks,
And see the Shepherds feed our flocks,
By shallow Rivers, to whose falls
Mellodious birds sing madrigals.
And I will make thee beds of Roses,
And then a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers and a Kirtle,
Imbroidered all with leaves of Myrtle.
A Gown made of the finest wool
Which from our pretty Lambs we pull,
Slippers lined choicely for the cold,
With buckles of the purest gold.
A belt of straw and ivy buds,
With Coral clasps, and Amber studs:
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Come live with me, and be my Love.
The Shepherds Swains shall dance and sing
For thy delight each May morning:
If these delights thy mind may move,
Then live with me, and be my Love.
Via. Trust me Master, it is a choice Song, and sweetly sung by honest Maudlin:
I Will bestow Sir Thomas Overbury's Milk maids wish upon her, That she may dye in
the Spring, and have good store of flowers stuck round about her winding sheet.


The Milk maids mothers answer.
If all the world and love were young,
And truth in every Shepherds tongue?
These pretty pleasures might me move,
To live with thee, and be thy love.
But time drives flocks from field to fold:
When rivers rage and rocks grow cold,
And Philomel becomes dumb,
The Rest complains of cares to c ome.
The Flowers do fade, and wanton fields
To wayward Winter reckoning yields.
A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
Is fancies spring, but sorrows fall.
Thy gowns, thy shoes, thy beds of Roses,
Thy Cap, thy Kirtle, and thy Posies,
Soon break, soon wither, soon forgotten,
In folly ripe, in reason rotten.
Thy belt of straw and Ivy buds,
Thy Coral clasps and Amber studs,
All these in me no means can move
To come to thee, and be thy Love.
But could youth last, and love still breed,
Had joys no date, nor age no need;
Then those delights my mind might move
To live with thee, and be thy love.
Pisc. Well sung, good woman, I thank you, I Will give you another dish of fish one
of these days, and then beg another Song of you. Come Scholar, let Maudlin
alone, do not you offer to spoil her voice. Look, yonder comes my Hostis to call
us to supper. How now? is my brother Peter come?


Host. Yes, and a friend with him, they are both glad to hear you are in these
parts, and long to see you, and are hungry, and long to be at supper.


CHAP. III.
Piscat. WELL met brother Peter, I heard you and a friend would lodge here to
night, and that has made me and my friend cast to lodge here too; my friend is
one that would feign be a brother of the Angle: he has been an Angler but this
day, and I have taught him how to catch a Chub by daping with a Grasshopper, and
he has caught a lusty one of nineteen inches long. But I pray you brother, who
is it that is your companion?


Peter. Brother Piscator, my friend is an honest Country man, and his name is
Coridon, a most downright witty merry companion that met me here purposely to
eat a Trout and be pleasant, and I have not yet wet my line since I came from
home: But I will fit him to morrow with a Trout for his breakfast, if the
weather be any thing like.


Pisc. Nay brother, you shall not delay him so long, for look you here is a
Trout will fill six reasonable bellies. Come Hostis, dress it presently, and
get us what other meat the house will afford, and give us some good Ale, and
lets be merry.


Peter. On my word, this Trout is in perfect season. Come, I thank you, and
here is a hearty draught to you, and to all the brothers of the Angle,
wheresoever they be, and to my young brothers good fortune to morrow; I will
furnish him with a rod, if you will furnish him with the rest of the tackling,
we will set him up and make him a fisher.

And I will tell him one thing for his encouragement, that his fortune has made
him happy to be a Scholar to such a Master; a Master that knows as much both
of the nature and breeding of fish, as any man; and can also tell him as well
how to catch and cook them, from the Minow to the Sammon, as any that I ever
met withal.


Pisc. Trust me, brother Peter, I find my Scholar to be so suitable to my own
humor, which is to be free and pleasant, and civilly merry, that my resolution
is to hide nothing from him. Believe me, Scholar, this is my resolution: and so
here is to you a hearty draught, and to all that love us, and the honest Art of
Angling.


Viat. Trust me, good Master, you shall not sow your seed in barren ground, for
I hope to return you an increase answerable to your hopes; but however, you
shall find me obedient, and thankful, and serviceable to my best ability.


Pisc. It Is enough, honest Scholar, come lets to supper. Come my friend
Coridon, this Trout looks lovely, it was twenty two inches when it was taken,
and the belly of it looked some part of it as yellow as a Marygold, and part of
it as white as a Lily, and yet me thinks it looks better in this good sauce.


Coridon. Indeed, honest friend, it looks well, and tastes well, I thank you
for it, and so does my friend Peter, or else he is to blame.


Pet. Yes, and so I do, we all thank you, and when we have supt, I will get my
friend Coridon to sing you a Song, for requital.


Cor. I will sing a Song if any body will sing another; else, to be plain with
you, I will sing none: I am none of those that sing for meat, but for company; I
say, It Is merry in Hall when men sing all.


Pisc. I Will promise you I Will sing a Song that was lately made at my request by
Mr. William Basse, one that has made the choice Songs of the Hunter in his
carrere, and of Tom of Bedlam, and many others of note; and this that I will
sing is in praise of Angling.


Cor. And then mine shall be the praise of a Country man's life. What will the
rest sing of?


Pet. I will promise you I will sing another Song in praise of Angling, to morrow
night, for we will not part till then, but fish to morrow, and sup together, and
the next day every man leave fishing, and fall to his business.


Viat. It Is a match, and I will provide you a Song or a Ketch against then too,
that shall give some addition of mirth to the company; for we will be merry.


Pisc. It Is a match my masters; lets even say Grace, and turn to the fire, drink
the other cup to wet our whistles, and so sing away all sad thoughts.

Come on my masters, who begins? I think it is best to draw cuts and avoid
contention.


Pet. It is a match. Look, the shortest Cut falls to Coridon.


Cor. Well then, I will begin; for I hate contention.

Coridons Song.
Oh the sweet contentment
The country man does find!
high trolollie loliloe
high trolollie lee,
That quiet contemplation
possesses all my mind:
Then care away,
and wend along with me.
For Courts are full of flattery,
As has too often been tried;
high trolollie lolly lo
high trolollie lee,
The City full of wantonness,
and both are full of pride:
Then care away,
and wend along with me.
But oh the honest country man
Speaks truly from his heart,
high trolollie lolly lo
high trolollie lee,
His pride is in his Tillage,
his Horses and his Cart:
Then care away,
and wend along with me.
Our clothing is good sheep skins
Gray russet for our wives,
high trolollie lolly lo
high trolollie lee.
It Is warmth and not gay clothing
that does prolong our lives:
Then care away,
and wend along with me.
The ploughman, though he labor hard,
Yet on the Holy Day,
high trolollie lolly lo
high trolollie lee,
No Emperor so merrily
does pass his time away:
Then care away,
and wend along with me.
To recompense our Tillage,
The Heavens afford us showrs;
high trolollie lolly lo
high trolollie lee,
And for our sweet refreshments
the earth affords us bowers:
Then careaway, etc.
The Cuckee and the Nightingale
full merrily do sing,
high trolollie lolly lo
high trolollie lee,
And with their pleasant roundelayes
bid welcome to the Spring:
Then care away,
and wend along with me.
This is not half the happiness
the Country man injoyes;
high trolollie lolly lo
high trolollie lee,
Though others think they have as much
yet he that says so lies:
Then come away, turn
County man with me.

Pisc. Well sung Coridon, this Song was sung with mettle, and it was choicely
fitted to the occasion; I shall love you for it as long as I know you: I would
you were a brother of the Angle, for a companion that is cheerful and free from
swearing and scurrilous discourse, is worth gold. I love such mirth as does not
make friends ashamed to look upon one another next morning; nor men (that
cannot well bear it) to repent the money they spend when they be warmed with
drink: and take this for a rule, you may pick out such times and such
companies, that you may make your selves merrier for a little then a great deal
of money; for It Is the company and not the charge that makes the feast: and
such a companion you prove, I thank you for it.

But I will not complement you out of the debt that I owe you, and therefore I
will begin my Song, and wish it may be as well liked.

The Anglers Song.
As inward love breeds outward talk,
The Hound some praise, and some the Hawk,
Some better pleased with private sport,
Use Tenis, some a Mistress court:
But these delights I neither wish,
Nor envy, while I freely fish.
Who hunts, does often in danger ride;
Who hauks, lures often both far and wide;
Who uses games, may often prove
A loser; but who falls in love,
Is fettered in fond Cupids snare:
My Angle breeds me no such care.
Of Recreation there is none
So free as fishing is alone;
All other pastimes do no less
Then mind and body both possess;
My hand alone my work can do,
So I can fish and study too.
I care not, I, to fish in seas,
Fresh rivers best my mind do please,
Whose sweet calm course I contemplate,
And seek in life to imitate;
In civil bounds I fain would keep,
And for my past offenses weep.
And when the timorous Trout I wait
To take, and he devours my bait,
How poor a thing sometimes I find
Will captivate a greedy mind:
And when none bite, I praise the wise,
Whom vain alurements never surprise.
But yet though while I fish, I fast,
I make good fortune my repast,
And thereunto my friend invite,
In whom I more then that delight:
Who is more welcome to my dish,
Then to my Angle was my fish.
As well content no prize to take
As use of taken prize to make;
For so our Lord was pleased when
He Fishers made Fishers of men;
Where (which is in no other game)
A man may fish and praise his name.
The first men that our Savior dear
Did choose to wait upon him here,
Blessed Fishers were; and fish the last
Food was, that he on earth did taste:
I therefore strive to follow those,
Whom he to follow him has chose.
W. B.

Cor. Well sung brother, you have paid your debt in good coin, we Anglers are
all beholding to the good man that made this Song. Come Hostis, give us more
Alc and lets drin k to him.

And now lets every one go to bed that we may rise early; but first lets pay
our Reckoning, for I will have nothing to hinder me in the morning, for I will
prevent the Sunrising.


Pet. A match: Come Coridon, you are to be my Bedfellow: I know brother you
and your Scholar will lie together; but where shall we meet to morrow night? for
my friend Coridon and I will go up the water toward Ware.


Pisc. And my Scholar and I will go down toward Waltam.


Cor. Then lets meet here, for here are fresh sheets that smell of Lavender,
and, I am sure, we cannot expect better meat and better usage.


Pet. It Is a match. Good night to every body.


Pisc. And so say I.


Viat. And so say I.


Pisc. Good morrow good Hostis, I see my brother Peter is in bed still; Come,
give my Scholar and me a cup of Ale, and be sure you get us a good dish of meat
against supper, for we shall come hither as hungry as Hawks. Come Scholar, lets
be going.


Viat. Good Master, as we walk toward the water, will you be pleased to make
the way seem shorter by telling me first the nature of the Trout, and then how
to catch him.


Pisc. My honest Scholar, I will do it freely: The Trout (for which I love to
angle above any fish) may be justly said (as the ancient Poets say of Wine, and
we English say of Venson) to be a generous fish, because he has his seasons, a
fish that comes in, and goes out with the Stag or Buck: and you are to observe,
that as there be some barren Does, that are good in Summer; so there be some
barren Trouts, that are good in Winter; but there are not many that are so, for
usually they be in their perfection in the month of May, and decline with the
Buck: Now you are to take notice, that in several Countries, as in Germany and
in other parts compared to ours, they differ much in their bigness, shape, and
other ways, and so do Trouts; it is well known that in the Lake Lemon, the Lake
of Geneva, there are Trouts taken, of three Cubits long, as is affirmed by
Gesner, a Writer of good credit: and Mercator says, the Trouts that are taken
in the Lake of Geneva, are a great part of the Merchandise of that famous City.
And you are further to know, that there be certain waters that breed Trouts
remarkable, both for their number and smalness- I know a little Brook in Kent
that breeds them to a number incredible, and you may take them twenty or
forty in an hour, but none greater then about the size of a Gudgion. There are
also in diverse Rivers, especially that relate to, or be near to the Sea,(as
Winchester, or the Thames about Windsor) a little Trout called a Samlet or
Skegger Trout (in both which places I have caught twenty or forty at a
standing) that will bite as fast and as freely as Minnows; these be by some
taken to be young Salmons, but in those waters they never grow to be bigger
then a Herring.

There is also in Kent, near to Canterbury, a Trout (called there a Fordig
Trout) a Trout (that bears the name of the Town where'tis usually caught) that
is accounted rare meat, many of them near the bigness of a Salmon, but known
by their different color, and in their best season cut very white; and none
have been known to be caught with an Angle, unless it were one that was caught
by honest Sir George Hastings, an excellent Angler (and now withGod) and he has
told me, he thought that Trout bit not for hunger, but wantonness; and it is the
rather to be believed, because both he then, and many others before him have
been curious to search into their bellies what the food was by which they
lived; and have found out nothing by which they might satisfy their curiosity.

Concerning which you are to take notice, that it is reported, there is a fish
that has not any mouth, but lives by taking breath by the porinss of her gils,
and feeds and is nourished by no man knows what; and this may be believed of
the Fordig Trout, which (as it is said of the Stork, that he knows his season,
so he) knows his times (I think almost his day) of coming into that River out
of the Sea, where he lives (and it is like feeds) nine months of the year, and
about three in the River of Fordig.

And now for some confirmation of this; you are to know, that this Trout is
thought to eat nothing in the fresh water; and it may be the better believed,
because it is well known, that Swallows, which are not seen to fly in England
for six months in the year, but about Michaelmas leave us for a hotter climate;
yet some of them, that have been left behind their fellows, have View Sir Fra.
Bacon exper.899
been found (many thousand at a time) in hollow trees, where they have been
observed to live and sleep out the whole winter without meat; and so Albertus
observes See Topsel of Frogs.
that there is one kind of Frog that has her mouth naturally shut up about the
end of August, and that she lives so all the Winter, and though it be strange
to some, yet it is known to too many amongst us to be doubted.

And so much for these Fordidg Trouts, which never afford an Angler sport, but
either live their time of being in the fresh water by their meat formerly
gotten in the Sea, (not unlike the Swallow or Frog) or by the virtue of the
fresh water only, as the Camelion is said to live by the air.

There is also in Northumberland, a Trout, called a Bull Trout, of a much
greater length and bigness then any in these Southern parts; and there is in
many Rivers that relate to the Sea, Salmon Trouts as much different one from
another, both in shape and in their spots, as we see Sheep differ one from
another in their shape and bigness, and in the finess of their wool: and
certainly as some Pastures do breed larger Sheep, so do some Rivers, by reason
of the ground over which they run, breed larger Trouts.

Now the next thing that I will commend to your consideration is, That the
Trout is of a more sudden growth then other fish: concerning which you are also
to take notice, that he lives not so long as the Perch and diverse other fishes
do, as Sir Francis Bacon has observed in his History of life and death.

And next, you are to take notice, that after he is come to his full growth,
he declines in his body, but keeps his bigness or thrives in his head till his
death. And you are to know that he will about (especially before) the time of
his Spawning, get almost miraculously through Weires and Floud-Gates against
the stream, even through such high and swift places as is almost incredible.
Next, that the Trout usually Spawns about October or November, but in some
Rivers a little sooner or later; which is the more observable, because most
other fish Spawne in the Spring or Summer, when the Sun has warmed both the
earth and water, and made it fit for generation.

And next, you are to note, that till the Snn gets to such a height as to warm
the earth and the water, the Trout is sick, and lean, and lousy, and
unwholesome: for you shall in winter find him to have a big head, and then to be
lank, and thin, and lean; at which time many of them have sticking on them
Sugs, or Trout lice, which is a kind of a worm, in shape like a Clove or a Pin,
with a big head, and sticks close to him and sucks his moisture; those I think
the Trout breeds himself, and never thrives til he free himself from them,
which is till warm weather comes, and then as he grows stronger, he gets from
the dead, still water, into the sharp streams and the gravel, and there rubs
off these worms or lice: and then as he grows stronger, so he gets him into
swifter and swifter streams, and there lies at the watch for any fly or Minow
that comes near to him; and he especially loves the May fly, which is bred of
the Cod-worm or Caddis; and these make the Trout bold and lusty, and he is
usually fatter, and better meat at the end of that month, then at any time of
the year.

Now you are to know, that it is observed, that usually the best Trouts are
either red or yellow, though some be white and yet good; but that is not usual;
and it is a note observable that the female Trout has usually a less head and
a deeper body then the male Trout; and a little head to any fish, either Trout,
Salmon, or other fish, is a sign that that fish is in season.

But yet you are to note, that as you see some Willows or Palm trees bud and
blossom sooner then others do, so some Trouts be in some Rivers sooner in
season; and as the Holly or Oak are longer before they cast their Leaves, so
are some Trouts in some Rivers longer before they go out of season.


CHAP. IV.
AND having told you these Observations concerning Trouts, I shall next tell
you how to catch them: which is usually with a Worm, or a Minnow (which some
call a Penke;) or with a Fly, either a natural or an artificial Fly:
Concerning which three I will give you some Observations and Directions.

For Worms, there be very many sorts; some bred only in the earth, as the
earth worm; others amongst or of plants, as the dug worm; and others in the
bodies of living creatures; or some of dead flesh, as the Magot or Gentle, and
others.

Now these be most of them particularly good for particular fishes: but for the
Trout the dew-worm, (which some also call the Lob-worm) and the Brandling are
the chief; and especially the first for a great Trout, and the later for a
less. There be also of lob-worms, some called squireltnils (a worm which has a
red head, a streak down the back, and a broad tail) which are noted to be the
best, because they are the toughest, and and most lively, and live longest in
the water: for you are to know, that a dead worm is but a dead bait, and like
to catch nothing, compared to a lively, quick, stirring worm: And for a
Brandling, he is usually found in an old dunghill, or some very rotten place
near to it; but most usually in cow dung, or hogs dung, rather then horse dung,
which is somewhat too hot and dry for that worm.

There are also diverse other kinds of worms, which for color and shape alter
even as the ground out of which they are got: as the marshworm, the tag-tail,
the flag-worm, the dock-worm, the oake-worm, the gilt-tail, and too many to
name, even as many sorts, as some think there be of several kinds of birds in
the air: of which I shall say no more, but tell you, that what worms soever you
fish with, are the better for being long kept before they be used; and in case
you have not been so provident, then the way to cleanse and scour them
quickly, is to put them all night in water, if they be Lob-worms, and then put
them into your bag with fennel: but you must not put your Brandling above an
hour in water, and then put them into fennel for sudden use: but if you have
time, and purpose to keep them long, then they be best preserved in an earthen
pot with good store of moss, which is to be fresh every week or eight days;
or at least taken from them, and clean washed, and wrung betwixt your hands
till it be dry, and then put it to them again: And for Moss, you are to note,
that there be diverse kinds of it, which I could name to you, but will only tell
you, that that which is likest a Bucks horn is the best; except it be white
Moss, which grows on some heaths, and is hard to be found.

For the Minnow or Penke, he is easily found and caught in April, for then he
appears in the Rivers: but Nature has taught him to shelter and hide himself
in the Winter in ditches that be near to the River, and there both to hide and
keep himself warm in the weeds, which rot not so soon as in a running River; in
which place if he were in Winter, the distempered Floods that are usually in
that season, would suffer him to have no rest, but carry him headlong to Mils
and Weires to his confusion. And of these Minnows, first you are to know, that
the biggest size is not the best; and next, that the middle size and the
whitest are the best: and then you are to know, that I cannot well teach in
words, but must show you how to put it on your hook, that it may turn the
better: And you are also to know, that it is impossible it should turn too
quick: And you are yet to know, that in case you want a Minnow, then a small
Loch, or a Sticklebag, or any other small Fish will serve as well: And you are
yet to know, that you may salt, and by that means keep them fit for use three
or four days or longer; and that of salt, bay salt is the best.

Now for Flies, which is the third bait wherewith Trouts are usually taken. You
are to know, that there are as many sorts of Flies as there be of Fruits: I
will name you but some of them: as the dun fly, the stone fly, the red fly,
the moor fly, the tawny fly, the shel fly, the cloudy or blackish fly:
there be of Flies, Caterpillars, and Canker flies, and Bear flies; and indeed,
too many either for me to name, or for you to remember: and their breeding is
so various and wonderful, that I might easily amaze my self, and tire you in a
relation of them.

And yet I will exercise your promised patience by saying a little of the
Caterpillar, or the Palmer fly or worm; that by them you may guess what a work
it were in a Discourse but to run over those very many flies, worms, and little
living creatures with which the Sun and Summer adorn and beautify the river
banks and meadows, both for the recreation and contemplation of the Angler: and
which (I think) I my self enjoy more then any other man that is not of my
profession.

Pliny holds an opinion, that many have their birth or being from a dew that in
the Spring falls upon the leaves of trees; and that some kinds of them are from
a dew left upon herbs or flowers: and others from a dew left upon Colworts or
Cabbages: All which kinds of dews being thickened and condensed, are by the
Suns generative heat most of them hatched, and in three days made living
creatures, and of several shapes and colors; some being hard and tough, some
smooth and soft; some are horned in their head, some in their tail, some have
none; some have hair, some none; some have sixteen feet, some less, and some
have none: but (as our Topsel has with great diligence observed) those In his
History of Serpents.
which have none, move upon the earth, or upon broad leaves, their motion being
not unlike to the waves of the sea. Some of them he also observes to be bred
of the eggs of other Caterpillars: and that those in their time turn to be
Butter-flies; and again, that their eggs turn the following year to be
Caterpillars.

It Is endless to tell you what the curious Searchers into Natures productions,
have observed of these Worms and Flies: But yet I shall tell you what our
Topsel says of the Canker, or Palmer-worm, or Caterpiller; That whereas others
content themselves to feed on particular herbs or leaves (for most think, those
very leaves that gave them life and shape, gives them a particular feeding and
nourishment, and that upon them they usually abide;) yet he observes, that this
is called a Pilgrim or Palmer-worm, for his very wandering life and various
food; not contenting himself (as others do) with any certain place for his
abode, nor any certain kind of herb or flower for his feeding; but will boldly
and disorderly wander up and down, and not endure to be kept to a diet, or fixed
to a particular place.

Nay, the very colors of Caterpillars are, as one has observed, very elegant
and beautiful:I shall (for a taste of the rest) describe one of them, which I
will sometime the next month, show you feeding on a Willow tree, and you shall
find him punctually to answer this very description: His lips and mouth
somewhat yellow, his eyes black as Jet, his forehead purple, his feet and
hinder parts green, his tail two forked and black, the whole body stained with
a kind of red spots which run along the neck and shoulder-blades, not unlike
the form of a Cross, or the letter X, made thus cross-wise, and a white line
drawn down his back to his tail; all which add much beauty to his whole body.
And it is to me observable, that at a fixed age this Caterpiller gives over to
eat, a d toward winter comes to be cover d over with a strange shell or crust,
and so lives a kind of dead life, without eating all the winter, and (as others
View Sir Fra. Bacon exper. 728 and 90 in his NaturalHistory
of several kinds turn to be several kinds of flies and vermin, the Spring
following) so this Caterpiller then turns to be a painted Butterflye.

Come, come my Scholar, you fee the River stops our morning walk, and I will
also here stop my discourse, only as we sit down under this Honey-Suckle hedge,
whilst I look a Line to fit the Rod that our brother Peter has lent you, I
shall for a little confirmation of what I have said, repeat the observation of
the Lord Bartas.

God not contented to each kind to give,
And to infuse the virtue generative,
By his wise power made many creatures breed
Of liveless bodies, without Venus deed.
So the cold humor breeds the Salamander,
Who (in effect) like to her births commander,
ith child with hundred winters, with her touch
Quenches the fire, though glowing never so much
So in the fire in burning surnace springs
The Fly Perausta with the flaming wings;
Without the fire it dies, in it, it joys,
Living in that which all things else destroys.
So slow Boots underneath him sees G(...)rh. Herbal. Cambden.

In the icie Islands Goslings hatched of trees,
Whose fruitful leaves falling into the water,
Are turned ('it is known) to living fowls soon after
So rotten planks of broken ships, do change
To Barnacles. Oh transformation strange!
'Twas first a green tree, then a broken hull,
Lately a Mushroom, now a flying Gull.
Vi. Oh my good Master, this morning walk has been spent to my great pleasure
and wonder: but I pray, when shall I have your direction how to make Artificial
flies, like to those that the Trout loves best? and also how to use them?


Pisc. My honest Scholar, it is now past five of the Clock, we will fish til
nine, and then go to Breakfast: Go you to yonder Sycamore tree, and hide your
bottle of drink under the hollow root of it; for about that time, and in that
place, we will make a brave Breakfast with a piece of powdered Bief, and a
Radish or two that I have in my Fish-bag; we shall, I warrant you, make a good
honest, wholesome, hungry Breakfast, and I will give you direction for the
making and using of your fly: and in the mean time, there is your Rod and line;
and my advice is, that you fish as you see me do, and lets try which can catch
the first fish.


Viat. I thank you, Master, I will observe and practice your direction as far
as I am able.


Pisc. Look you Scholar, you see I have hold of a good fish: I now see it is a
Trout; I pray put that net under him, and touch not my line, for if you do,
then we break all. Well done, Scholar, I thank you. Now for an other. Trust
me, I have another bite: Come Scholar, come lay down your Rod, and help me to
land this as you did the other. So, now we shall be sure to have a good dish of
fish for supper.


Viat. I am glad of that, but I have no fortune; sure Master yours is a better
Rod, and better Tackling.


Pisc. Nay then, take mine and I will fish with yours. Look you, Scholar, I
have another: come, do as you did before. And now I have a bite at another. Oh
me he has broke all, there is half a line and a good hook lost.


Viat. Master, I can neither catch with the first nor second Angle; I have no
fortune.


Pisc. Look you, Scholar, I have yet another: and now having caught three brace
of Trouts, I will tell you a short Tale as we walk toward our Breakfast. A
Scholar (a Preacher I should say) that was to preach to procure the approbation
of a Parish, that he might be their Lecturer, had got from a fellow Pupil of
his the Copy of a Sermon that was first preached with a great commendation by
him that composed and precht it; and though the borrower of it preached it word
for word, as it was at first, yet it was utterly disliked as it was preached by
the second; which the Sermon Borrower complained of to the Lender of it, and
was thus answered; I lent you indeed my Fiddle, but not my Fiddlestick; and you
are to know, that every one cannot make music with my words which are fitted
for my own mouth. And so my Scholar, you are to know, that as the ill
pronunciation or ill accenting of a word in a Sermon spoils it, so the ill
carriage of your Line, or not fishing even to a foot in a right place, makes
you lose your labor: and you are to know, that though you have my Fiddle, that
is, my very Rod and Tacklings with which you see I catch fish, yet you have not
my Fiddle stick, that is, skill to know how to carry your hand and line; and
this must be taught you (for you are to remember I told you Angling is an Art)
either by practice, or a long observation, or both.

But now lets say Grace, and fall to Breakfast; what say you Scholar, to the
providence of an old Angler? Does not this meat taste well? and was not this
place well chosen to eat it? for this Sycamore tree will shade us from the Suns
heat.


Viat. All excellent good, Master, and my stomach excellent too; I have been at
many costly Dinners that have not afforded me half this content: and now good
Master, to your promised direction for making and ordering my Artificial fly.


Pisc. My honest Scholar, I will do it, for it is a debt due unto you, by my
promise: and because you shall not think your self more engaged to me then
indeed you really are, therefore I will tell you freely, I find Mr. Thomas
Barker (a Gentleman that has spent much time and money in Angling) deal so
judicially and freely in a little book of his of Angling, and especially of
making and Angling with a fly for a Trout, that I will give you his very
directions without much variation, which shall follow.

Let your rod be light, and very gentle, I think the best are of two pieces;
the line should not exceed, especially for three or four links toward the
hook) I say, not exceed three or four hairs; but if you can attain to Angle
with one hair, you will have more rises, and catch more fish. Now you must be
sure not to cumber your self with too long a Line, as most do: and before you
begin to angle, cast to have the wind on your back, and the Sun (if it shines)
to be before you, and to fish down the stream) and carry the point or top of
the Rod downward; by which means the shadow of your self, and Rod too will
be the least offensive to the Fish, for the sight of any shadow amazes the
fish, and spoils your sport, of which you must take a great care.

In the middle of March (till which time a man should not in honesty catch a
Trout) or in April, if the weather be dark, or a little windy, or cloudie, the
best fishing is with the Palmer-worm, of which I last spoke to you; but of
these there be diverse kinds, or at least of diverse colors, these and the
May-fly are the ground of all fly-Angling, which are to be thus made:

First you must arm your hook, with the line in the inside of it; then take
your Scissers and cut so much of a brown Malards feather as in your own reason
will make the wings of it, you having withal regard to the bigness or
littleness of your hook, then lay the outmost part of your feather next to your
hook, then the point of your feather next the shank of your hook; and having so
done, whip it three or four times about the hook with the same Silk, with which
your hook was armed, and having made the Silk fast, take the hackel of a Cock
or Capons neck, or a Plovers top, which is usually better; take off the one
side of the feather, and then take the hackel, Silk or Crewel, Gold or Silver
thread, make these fast at the bent of the hook, that is to say, below your
arming) then you must take the hackel, the silver or gold thread, and work it up
to the wings, shifting or still removing your fingers as you turn the Silk about
the hook: and still looking at every stop or turn that your gold, or what
materials soever you make your Fly of, do lie right and neatly; and if you find
they do so, then when you have made the head, make all fast, and then work your
hackel up to the head, and make that fast; and then with a needle or pin divide
the wing into two, and then with the arming Silk whip it about cross-wayes
betwixt the wings, and then with your thumb you must turn the point of the
feather toward the bent of the hook, and then work three or four times about
the shank of the hook, and then view the proportion, and if all be neat, and to
your liking, fasten.

I consess, no direction can be given to make a man of a dull capacity able to
make a fly well; and yet I know, this, with a little practice, will help an
ingenuous Angler in a good degree; but to see a fly made by another, is the
best teaching to make it, and then an ingenuous Angler may walk by the River
and mark what fly falls on the water that day, and catch one of them, if he see
the Trouts leap at a fly of that kind, and having always hooks ready hung with
him, and having a bag also, always with him with Bears hair, or the hair of a
brown or sad colored Heifer, hackels of a Cock or Capon, several colored Silk
and Crewel to make the body of the fly, the feathers of a Drakes head, black or
brown sheeps wool, or Hogs wool, or hair, thread of Gold, and of silver; silk of
several colors (especially sad colored to make the head:) and there be also
other colored feathers both of birds and of peckled fowl. I say, having those
with him in a bag, and trying to make a fly, though he miss at first, yet shall
he at last hit it better, even to a perfection which none can well reach him;
and if he hit to make his fly right, and have the luck to hit also where there
is store of trouts, and a right wind, he shall catch such store of them, as
will encourage him to grow more and more in love with the Art of flie-making.


Viat. But my loving Master, if any wind will not serve, then I wish I were in
Lapland, to buy a good wind of one of the honest witches, that sell so many
winds, and so cheap.


Pisc. Marry Scholar, but I would not be there, nor indeed from under this
tree; for look how it begins to rain, and by the clouds (if I mistake not) we
shall presently have a smoking shower, and therefore sit close, this Sycamore
tree will shelter us, and I will tell you, as they shall come into my mind,
more observations of fliefishing for a Trout.

But first, for the Wind; you are to take notice that of the winds the South
wind is said to be best. One observes, That

When the wind is south,
It blows you bait into a fishes mouth.
Next to that the west wind is believed to be the best: and having told you
that the East wind is the worst, I need not tell you which wind is best in
the third degree. And yet (as Solomon observes, that He that considers the
wind shall never sow: so he that busies his head too much about them, (if the
weather be not made extreme cold by as East wind) shall be a little
superstitious: for as it is observed by some, That there is no good horse of a
bad color; so I have observed; that if it be a clowdy day, and not extreme
cold, let the wind fit in what corner it will, and do its worst. And yet that
this for a Rule, that I would willingly fish on the Lee shore: and you are to
take notice, that the Fish lies, or swimms near the bottom in Winter then in
Summer, and also nearer the bottom in any cold day.

But I promised to tell you more of the Flie-fishing for a Trout, (which I may
haave time enough to do, for you see it rains May-butter.) First for a
May-flie, you may make his body with greenish coloued crewel, or willow color,
darkning it in most places, with waxed silk, or rib'd with a black hare, or
some of them rib'd with silver thread; and such wings for the color as you see
the fly to have at that season; nay at that very day on the water. Or you may
make the Oak-flie, with an Orange- tawny and black ground, and the brown of a
Mallards feather for the wings; and you are to know, that these two are most
excellent flies, that is, the May fly and the Oak fly: And let me again tell
you, that you keep as far from the water as you can possibly, whether you fish
with a fly or worm, and fish down the stream, and when you fish with a fly,
if it be possible, let no part of your line touch the water, but your fly
only; and be still moving your fly upon the water, or casting it into the water;
you your self, being also always moving down the stream. Ms. Barker commends
several sorts of the palmer flies, not only those rib'd with silver and gold,
but others that have their bodies all made of black, or some with red, and a
red hackel; you may also make the hawthorn-flie, whichis all black and not big,
but very small, the smaller the better; or the oak-fly, the body of which is
Orange color and black crewel, with a brown wing, or a fly made with a
peacocks feather, is excellent in a bright day: you must be sure you want not
in your Magazin bag, the Peacocks feather, and grounds of such wool, and crewel
as will make the Grasshopper: and note, that usually, the smallest flies are
best; and note also, that, the light fly does usually make most sport in a
dark day: and the darkest and least fly in a bright or clear day; and lastly
note, that you are to repair upon any occasion to your Magazin bag, and upon
any occasion vary and make them according to your fancy.

And now I shall tell you, that the fishing with a natural fly is excellent,
and affords much pleasure; they may be found thus, the May-fly usually in and
about that month near to the River side, especially against rain; the Oak-fly
on the Butt or body of an Oak or Ash, from the beginning of May to the end of
August it is a brownish fly, and easy to be so found, and stands usually with
his head downward, that is to say, toward the root of the tree; the final
black fly, or hawthorn fly is to be had on any Hawthorn bush, after the leaves
be come forth; with these and a short Line (as I showed to Angle for a Chub)
you may dap or dop, and also with a Grasshopper, behind a tree, or in any deep
hole, still making it to move on the top of the water, as if it were alive, and
still keeping yourself out of sight, you shall certainly have sport if there be
Trouts; yea in a hot day, but especially in the evening of a hot day.

And now, Scholar, my direction for fly-fishing is ended with this shower, for
it has done raining, and now look about you, and see how pleasantly that Meadow
looks, (...)ay and the earth smells as sweetly too. Come let me tell you what
holy Mr. Herbert says of such days and Flowers as these, and then we will
thank God that we enoy them, and walk to the Rever and sit down quietly and try
to catch the other brace of Trouts.

Sweet day, so cool, so calm, so bright,
The bridal of the earth and sky,
Sweet dews shall weep thy fall to night, for thou must die.
Sweet Rose, whose hew angry and brave
Bids the rash gazer wipe his eye,
Thy root is ever in its grave, and thou must die.
Sweet Spring, full of sweet days and roses,
A box where sweets ccompacted lie;
My Music shows you have your closes, and all must die.
Only a sweet and virtuous soul,
Like seasoned timber never gives,
But when the whole world turns to cole, then chiefly lives.

Viat. I thank you, good Master, for your good direction for fly-fishing, and
for the sweet enjoyment of the pleasant day, which is so far spent without
offense to God or man: and I thank you for the sweet close of your discourse
with Mr. Herberts Verses, which I have heard, loved Angling; and I do the
rather believe it, because he had a spirit suitable to Anglers, and to those
Primitive Christians that you love, and have so much commended.


Pisc. Well, my loving Scholar, and I am pleased to know that you are so well
pleased with my direction and discourse; and I hope you will be pleased too, if
you find a Trout at one of our Angles, which we left in the water to fish for
it self; you shall choose which shall be yours, and it is an even lay, one
catches: And let me tell you, this kind of fishing, and laying Night-hooks, are
like putting money to use, for they both work for the Owners, when they do
nothing but sleep, or eat, or rejoice, as you know we have done this last hour,
and sat as quietly and as free from cares under this Sycamore, as Virgils
Tityrus and his Melibaeus did under their broad Beech tree: No life, my honest
Scholar, no life so happy and so pleasant as the Anglers, unless it be the
Beggars life in Summer; for then only they take no care, but are as happy as we
Anglers.


Viat. Indeed Master, and so they be, as is witnessed by the beggars Song, made
long since by Frank Davison, a good Poet, who was not a Beggar, though he were
a good Poet.


Pisc. Can you sing it, Scholar?


Viat. Sit down a little, good Master, and I will try.

Bright shines the Sun, play, beggars, play;
here is scraps enough to serve to day:
What noise of viols is so sweet
As when our merry clappers ring?
What mirth does want when beggars meet?
A beggars life is for a King:
Eat, drink and play, sleep when we list,
Go where we will so stocks be mist.
Bright shines the Sun; play, beggars, etc.
The world is ours, and ours alone,
For we alone have world at will;
We purchase not, all is our own;
Both fields and streets we beggars fill:
Play beggars play, play, beggars play,
here is scraps enough to serve to day.
A hundred herds of black and white
Upon our Gowns securely feed,
And yet if any If any dare us bite,
He dies therefore as sure as Creed:
Thus beggars Lord it as they please,
And only beggars live at ease:
Bright shines the Sun, play beggars play,
here is scraps enough to serve to day.

Pisc. I thank you good Scholar, this Song was well humor'd by the maker, and
well remembered and sung by you; and I pray forget not the K(...)tch which you
promised to make against night for our Country man honest Coridon will expect
your Ketch and my Song, which I must be forced to patch up, for it is so long
since I learnt it, that I have forgot a part of it. But come, lets stretch our
legs a little in a gentle walk to the River, and try what (...)erest our Angles
will pay us for lending them so long to be used by the Trouts.


Viat. Oh me, look you Master, a fish, a fish.


Pisc. I marry Sir, that was a good fish indeed; if I had had the luck to have
taken up that Rod, it is twenty to one he should not have broke my line by
running to the Rods end, as you suffered him; I would have held him, unless he
had been fellow to the great Trout that is near an ell long, which had his
picture drawn, and now to be seen at mine Host Rickabies at the George in
Ware; and it may be, by giving that Trout the Rod, that is, by casting it to
him into the water, I might have caught him at the long run, for so I use
always to do when I meet with an overgrown fish, and you will learn to do so
hereafter; for I tell you, Scholar, fishing is an Art, or at least, it is an
Art to catch fish.


Viat. But, Master, will this Trout die, for it is like he has the hook in his
belly?


Pisc. I will tell you, Scholar, that unless the hook be fast in his very Gorge,
he will live, and a little time with the help of the water, will rust the hook,
and it will in time wear away as the gravel does in the horse hoof, which only
leaves a false quarter.

And now Scholar, lets go to my Rod. Look you Scholar, I have a fish too, but
it proves a loggerheaded Chub; and this is not much a miss, for this will
pleasure some poor body, as we go to our lodging to meet our brother Peter and
honest Coridon- Come, now bait your hook again, and lay it into the water, for
it rains again, and we will even retire to the Sycamore tree, and there I will
give you more directions concerning fishing; for I would fain make yon an
Artist.


Viat. Yes, good Master, I pray let it be so.


CHAP. V.
Pisc. WELL, Scholar, now we are sat down and are at ease, I shall tell you a
little more of Trout fishing before I speak of the Salmon, (which I purpose
shall be next) and then of the Pike. or Luce You are to know, there is night as
well as day-fishing for a Trout, and that then the best are out of their holds;
and the manner of taking them is on the top of the water with a great Lob or
Garden worm, or rather two; which you are to fish for in a place where the
water runs somewhat quietly (for in a stream it will not be so well discerned.)
I say, in a quiet or dead place near to some swift, there draw your bait over
the top of the water to and fro, and if there be a good Trout in the hole, he
will take it, especially if the night be dark; for then he lies boldly near the
top of the water, watching the motion of any Frog or Water-mouse, or Rat
betwixt him and the sky, which he hunts for if he sees the water but wrinkle
or move in one of these dead holes, where the great Trouts usually lie near to
their hold.

And you must fish for him with a strong line, and not a little hook, and let
him have time to gorge your hook, for he does not usually forsake it, as he often
will in the day-fishing: and if the night be not dark, then fish so with an
Artificial fly of a light color; nay he will sometimes rise at a dead Mouse or
a piece of cloth; or any thing that seems to swim cross the water, or to be in
motion: this is a choice way, but I have not often used it because it is void of
the pleasures that such days as these that we now enjoy, afford an Angler.

And you are to know, that in Hamp-shire, (which I think exceeds all England
for pleasant Brooks, and store of Trouts) they use to catch Trouts in the night
by the light of a Torch or straw, which when they have discovered, they strike
with a Trout spear; this kind of way they catch many, but I would not believe
it till I was an eyewitness of it, nor like it now I have seen it.


Viat. But Master, do not Trouts see us in the night?


Pisc. Yes, and hear, and smell too, both then and in the day time, for Gesner
observes, the Otter smells a fish forty furlong off him in the water; and that
it may be true, is affirmed by Sir Francis Bacon (in the eighth Century of his
Natural History) who there proves, that waters may be the Medium of sounds, by
demonstrating it thus, That if you knock two stones together very deep under
the water, those that stand on a bank near to that place may hear the noise
without any diminution of it by the water. He also offers the like experiment
concerning the letting an Anchor fall by a very long Cable or rope on a Rock,
or the sand within the Sea: and this being so well observed and demonstrated,
as it is by that learned man, has made me to believe that Eeles unbed
themselves, and stir at the noise of the Thunder, and not only as some think,
by the motion or the stirring of the earth, which is occasioned by that Thunder.

And this reason of Sir Francis Bacons has made me crave pardon of Exper.792
one that I laughed at, for affirming that he knew Carps come to a certain place
in a Pond to be fed at the ringing of a Bell; and it shall be a rule for me to
make as little noise, as I can when I am a fishing, until Sir Francis Bacon be
confuted, which I shall give any man leave to do, and so leave off this
Philosophical discourse for a discourse of fishing.

Of which my next shall be to tell you, it is certain, that certain fields near
Lemster, a Town in Herefordshire, are observed, that they make the Sheep that
graze upon them more fat then the next, and also to bear finer Wool; that is to
say, that that year in which they feed in such a particular pasture, they shall
yield finer wool then the year before they came to feed in it, and courser
again if they shall return to their former pasture, and again return to a finer
wool being fed in the fine wool ground. Which I tell you, that you may the
better believe that I am certain, If I catch a Trout in one Meadow, he shall be
white and faint, and very like to be lousy; and as certainly if I catch a
Trout in the next Meadow, he shall be strong, and red, and lusty, and much
better meat: Trust me (Scholar) I have caught many a Trout in a particular
Meadow, that the very shape and inamelled color of him, has joyed me to look
upon him, and I have with Solomon concluded, Every thing is beautiful in his
season.

It is now time to tell you next, (according to promise) some observations of
the Salmon; But first, I will tell you there is a fish, called by some an Umber,
and by some a Greyling, a choice fish, esteemed by many to be equally good with
the Trout: it is a fish that is usually about eighteen inches long, he lives in
such streams as the Trout does; and is indeed taken with the same bait as a
Trout is, for he will bite both at the Minnow, the Worm, and the Fly, both
Natural and Artificial: of this fish there be many in Trent, and in the River
that runs by Salisbury, and in some other lesser Brooks; but he is not so
general a fish as the Trout, nor to me either so good to eat, or so pleasant to
fish for as the Trout is; of which two fishes I will now take my leave, and
come to my promised Observations of the Salmon, and a little advice for the
catching him.


CHAP. VI.
THE Salmon is ever bred in the fresh Rivers (and in most Rivers about the
month of August) and never grows big but in the Sea; and there to an incredible
bigness in a very short time; to which place they covet to swim, by the
instinct of nature, about a set time: but if they be stopped by Mills,
Floud-gates or Weirs, or be by accident lost in the fresh water, when the
others go (which is usually by flocks or sholes) then they thrive not.

And the old Salmon, both the Melter and Spawner, strive also to get into the
Sea before Winter; but being stopped that course, or lost; gro v sick in fresh
waters, and by degrees unseasonable, and kipper, that is, to have a bony
gristle, to grow (not unlike a Hauks beak) on one of his chaps, which hinders
him from feeding, and then he pines and dies.

But if he gets to Sea, then that gristle wears away, or is cast off (as the
Eagle is said to cast his bill) and he recovers his strength, and comes next
Summer to the same River, (if it be possible) to enjoy the former pleasures
that there possessed him; for (as one has wittily observed) he has (like some
persons of Honor and Riches, which have both their winter and Summer houses)
the fresh Rivers for Summer, and the salt water for winter to spend his life
in; which is not (as Sir Francis Bacon In his History of Life and Death.
has observed) above ten years: And it is to be observed, that though they
grow big in the Sea, yet they grow not fat but in fresh Rivers; and it is
observed, that the farther they get from the Sea, the better they be.

And it is observed, that, to the end they may get far from the Sea, either to
Spawne or to possess the pleasure that they then and there find, they will
force themselves over the tops of Weirs, or Hedges, or stops in the water, by
taking their tails into their mouths, and leaping over those places, even to a
height beyond common belief: and sometimes by forcing themselves against the
stream through Sluices and Floud-gates, beyond common credit. And it is observed
by Gesner, that there is none bigger then in England, nor none better then in
Thames.

And for the Salmons sudden growth, it has been observed by tying a Ribon in
the tail of some number of the young Salmons, which have been taken in Weires,
as they swimm'd toward the salt water, and then by taking a part of them again
with the same mark, at the same place, at their return from the Sea, which is
usually about six months after; and the like experiment has been tried upon
young Swallows, who have after six months absence, been oserved to return to
the same chimney, there to make their nests, and their habitations for the
Summer following; which has inclined many to think, that every Salmon usually
returns to the same River in which it was bred, as young Pigeons taken out of
the same Dove-cote, have also been observed to do.

And you are yet to observe further, that the He Salmon susually bigger then
the Spawner, and that he is more kipper, and less able to endure a winter in
the fresh water, then the She is; yet she is at that time of looking less
kipper and better, as watery and as bad meat.

And yet you are to observe, that as there is no general rule without an
exception, so there is some few Rivers in this Nation that have Trouts and
Salmon in season in winter. But for the observations of that and many other
things, I must in manners omit, because they will prove too large for our narrow
compass of time, and therefore I shall next fall upon my direction how to fish
for the Salmon.

And for that, first, you shall observe, that usually he stays not long in a
place (as Trouts will) but (as I said) covets still to go nearer the Spring
head; and that he does not (as the Trout and many other fish) lie near the
water side or bank, or roots of trees, but swims usually in the middle, and
near the ground; and that there you are to fish for him, and that he is to be
caught as the Trout is, with a Worm, a Minnow, (which some call a Penke) or
with a Fly.

And you are to observe, that he is very, very seldom observed to bite at a
Minnow (yet sometime he will) and not often at a fly, but more usually at a Worm,
and then most usually at a Lob or Garden worm, which should be well scowred,
that is to say, seven or eight days in Moss before you fish with them; and if
you double your time of eight into sixteen, or more, into twenty or more days,
it is still the better, for the worms will still be clearer, tougher, and more
lively, and continue so longer upon your hook.

And now I shall tell you, that which may be called a secret: I have been a
fishing with old Oliver Henly (now with God) a noted Fisher, both for Trout and
Salmon, and have observed that he would usually take three or four worms out of
his bag and put them into a little box in his pocket, where he would usually
let them continue half an hour or more, before he would bait his hook with
them; I have asked him his reason, and he has replied, He did but pick the best
out to be in a readiness against he baited his hook the next time: But he has
been observed both by others, and my self, to catch more fish then I or any
other body that has ever gone a fishing with him, could do, especially S(...)s;
and I have been told lately by one of his most intimate and secret friends,
that the box in which he put those worms was anointed with a drop, or two, or
three of the Oil of Ivy-berries, made by expression or infusion, and that by
the worms remaining in that box an hour, or a like time, they had incorporated
a kind of smell that was irresistibly attractive, enough to force any fish,
within the smell of them, to bite. This I heard not long since from a friend,
but have not tried it; yet I grant it probable, and refer my Reader to Sir
Francis Bacons Natural History, where he proves fishes may hear; and I am
certain Gesner says, the Otter can smell in the water, and know not but that
fish may do so too: it is left for a lover of Angling, or any that desires to
improve that Art, to try this conclusion.

I shall also impart another experiment (but not tried by my self) which I will
deliver in the same words as it was by a friend, given me in writing.

Take the stinking oil drawn out of Poly pody of the Oak, by a retort mixed with
Turpentine, and Hivehoney, and anoint your hait therewith, and it will
doubtless draw the fish to it.

But in these things I have no great faith, yet grant it probable, and have had
from some chimical men (namely, from Sir George Hastings and others) an
affirmation of them to be very advantageous: but no more of these, especially
not in this place.

I might here, before I take my leave of the Salmon, tell you, that there is
more then one sort of them, as namely, a Tecon, and another called in some
places a Samlet, or by some, a Skegger: but these (and others which I forbear
to name) may be fish of another kind, and differ, as we know a Herring and a
Pilcher do; but must by me be left to the disquisitions of men of more leisure
and of greater abilities, then I profess my self to have.

And lastly, I am to borrow so much of your promised patience, as to tell you,
that the Trout or Salmon, being in season, have at their first taking out of
the water (which continues during life) their bodies adorned, the one with such
red spots, and the other with black or blackish spots, which gives them such an
addition of natural beauty, as I (that yet am no enemy to it) think was never
given to any woman by the Artificial Paint or Patches in which they so much
pride themselves in this age. And so I shall leave them and proceed to some
Observations of the Pike.

CHAP. VII
Pisc. IT is not to be doubted but that the Luce, or Pikrell, or Pike breeds by
Spawning; and yet Gesner says, that some of them breed, where none ever was,
out of a weed called Pikrell-weed, and other glutinous matter, which with the
help of the Suns heat proves in some particular ponds (apted by nature for it)
to become Pikes.

Sir Francis Bacon observes the Pike In his History of Life and Death.
to be the longest lived of any fresh water fish, and yet that his life is not
usually above forty years; and yet Gesner mentions a Pike taken in Swedeland
in the year 1449, with a Ring about his neck, declaring he was put into the
Pond by Frederick the second, more then two hundred years before he was last
taken, as the Inscription of that Ring, being Greek, was interpreted by the
then Bishop of worms. But of this no more, but that it is observed that the old
or very great Pikes have in them more of state then goodness; the smaller or
middle sized Pikes being by the most and choicest palates observed to be the
best meat; but contrary, the Eele is observed to be the better for age and
bigness.

All Pikes that live long prove chargeable to their keepers, because their life
is maintained by the death of so many other fish, even those of his own kind,
which has made him by some Writers to be called the Tyrant of the Rivers, or
the Fresh water-wolf, by reason of his bold, greedy, devouring disposition;
which is so keen, as Gesner relates, a man going to a Pond (where it seems a
Pike had devoured all the fish) to water his Mule, had a Pike bit his Mule by
the lips, to which the Pike hung so fast, that the Mule drew him out of the
water, and by that accident the owner of the Mule got the Pike; I tell you who
relates it, and shall with it tell you what a wise man has observed, It is a
hard thing to persuade the belly, because it has no ears.

But if this relation of Gesners be dis-believed, it is too evident to be
doubted that a Pike will devour a fish of his own kind, that shall be bigger
then this belly or throat will receive; and swallow a part of him, and let the
other part remain in his mouth till the swallowed part be digested, and then
swallow that other part that was in his mouth, and so put it over by degrees.
And it is observed, that the Pike will eat venomous things (as some kind of
Frogs are) and yet live without being harmed by them: for, as some say, he has
in him a natural Balsome or Antidote against all Poison: and others, that he
never eats a venomous Frog till he has first killed her, and then (as Ducks
are observed to do to Frogs in Spawning time, at which time some Frogs are
observed to be venomous) so thoroughly washed her, by tumbling her up and down in
the water, that he may de vour her without danger. And Gesner affirms, that a
Polonian Gentleman did faithfully assure him, he had seen two young Geese at
one time in the belly of a Pike: and he observes, that in Spain there is no
Pikes, and that the biggest are in the Lake Thracimane in Italy, and the next,
if not equal to them, are the Pikes of England.

The Pike is also observed to be a melancholy, and a bold fish; Melancholy,
because he always swims or rests himself alone, and never swims in sholes, or
with company, as Roach, and Dace, and most other fish do: And bold, because he
fears not a shadow, or to see or be seen of any body, as the Trout and Chub,
and all other fish do.

And it is observed by Gesner, that the bones, and hearts, and gals of Pikes
are very medicinable for several Diseases, as to stop blood, to abate Fevers,
to cure Agues, to oppose or expel the infection of the Plague, and to be many
ways medicinable and useful for the good of mankind; but that the biting of a
Pike is venomous and hard to be cured.

And it is observed; that the Pike is a fish that breeds but once a year, and
that other fish (as namely Loaches) do breed oftener; as we are certain.
Pigeons do almost every month, and yet the Hawk, a bird of prey (as the Pike is
of fish) breeds but once in twelve months: and you are to note, that his time
of breeding or Spawning is usually about the end of February; or somewhat
later, in March, as the weather proves colder or warmer: and to note, that his
manner of breeding is thus, a He and a She Pike will usually go together out of
a River into some ditch or creek, and that there the Spawner casts her eggs,
and the Melter hovers over her all that time that she is casting her Spawn, but
touches her not. I might say more of this, but it might be thought curiosity or
worse, and shall therefore forbear it, and take up so much of your attention as
to tell you, that the best of Pikes are noted to be in Rivers, then those in
great Ponds or Meres, and the worst in small Ponds.

And now I shall proceed to give you some directions how to catch this Pike
which you have with so much patience heard me talk of.

His feeding is usually fish or frogs, and sometime a weed of his own, called
Pikrel-weed, of which I told you some think some Pikes are bred; for they have
observed, that where no Pikes have been put into a Pond, yet that there they
have been found, and that there has been plenty of that weed in that Pond, and
that that weed both breeds and feeds them; but whether those Pikes so bred will
ever breed by generation as the others do, I shall leave to the disquisitions
of men of more curiosity and leisure then I profess my self to have; and shall
proceed to tell you, that you may fish for a Pike, either with a ledger, or a
walking bait; and you are to note, that I call that a ledger which is fixed, or
made to rest in one certain place when you shall be absent; and that I call
that a walking bait, which you take with you, and have ever in motion.
Concerning which two, I shall give you this direction, That your ledger bait is
best to be a living bait, whether it be a fish or a Frog; and that you may make
them live the longer, you may, or indeed you must take this course:

First, for your live bait of fi(...)h, a Roch or Dace is (I think) best and
most tempting and a Perch the longest lived on a hook; you must take your
knife, (which cannot be too sharp) and betwixt the head and the fin on his
back, cut or make an insition, or such a scar as you may put the arming wire of
your hook into it, with as little bruising or hurting the fish as Art and
diligence will enable you to do, and so carrying your arming wire along his
back, unto, or near the tail of your fish, betwixt the skin and the body of it,
draw out that wire or arming of your hook at another scar near to his tail;
then tie him about it with thread; but no harder then of necessity you must to
prevent hurting the fish; and the better to avoid hurting the fish, some have a
kind of probe to open the way; for the more easy entrance and passage of your
wire or arming: but as for these, time and a little experience will teach you
better than I can by words; for of this I will for the present say no more, but
come next to give you some directions how to bait your hook with a Frog.


Viat. But, good Master, did not you say even now, that some Frogs were
venomous, and is it not dangerous to touch them?


Pisc. Yes, but I will give you some Rules or Cautions concerning them. And
first, you are to note, there is two kinds of Frogs; that is to say, (if I may
so express my self) a flesh and a fish-frog: by flesh Frogs, I mean, frogs that
breed and live on the land; and of these there be several sorts and colors,
some being peckled, some greenish, some blackish, or brown: the green Frog,
which is a small one, is by Topsell taken to be venomous; and so is the Padock,
or Frog-Padock, which usually keeps or breeds on the land, and is very large
and bony, and big, especially the She frog of that kind; yet these will
sometime come into the water, but it is not often; and the land frogs are some
of them observed by him, to breed by laying eggs, and others to breed of the
slime and dust of the earth, and that in winter they turn to slime again, and
that the next Summer that very slime returns to be a living creature; this is
the opinion of Pliny: and In his 16th Book, De subtle. ex.
Cardanas undertakes to give reason for the raining of Frogs; but if it were in
my power, it should rain none but water Frogs, for those I think are not
venomous, especially the right water Frog, which about February or March breeds
in ditches by slime and blackish eggs in that slime, about which time of
breeding the He and She frog are observed to use diverse simber salts, and to
croke and make a noise, which the land frog, or Padock frog never does. Now of
these water Frogs, you are to choose the yellowest that you can get, for that
the Pike ever likes best, And thus use your Frog, that he may continue long
alive:

Put your hook into his mouth, which you may easily do from about the middle of
April till August, and then the Frogs mouth grows up and he continues so for at
least six months without eating, but is sustained, none, but he whose name is
Wonderful, knows how. I say, put your hook, I mean the arming wire, through his
mouth and out at his gills, and then with a fine needle and Silk sow the upper
part of his leg with only one stitch to the armed wire of your hook, or tie the
frogs leg above the upper joint to the armed wire, and in so doing use him as
though you loved him, that is, harm him as little as you may possibly, that he
may live the longer.

And now, having given you this direction for the baiting your ledger hook with
a live fish or frog, my next must be to tell you, how your hook thus baited
must or may be used; and it is thus: having fastened your hook to a line, which
if it be not fourteen yards long, should not be less than twelve; you are to
fasten that line to any bow near to a hole where a Pike is, or is likely to
lie, or to have a haunt; and then wind your line on any forked stick, all your
line, except a half yard of it, or rather more, and split that forked stick
with such a nick or notch at one end of it, as may keep the line from any more
of it ravelling from about the stick, then so much of it as you intended; and
choose your forked stick to be of that bigness as may keep the fish or frog from
pulling the forked stick under the water till the Pike bites, and then the Pike
having pulled the line forth of the clift or nick in which it was gently
fastened, will have line enough to go to his hold and powch the bait: and if you
would have this ledger bait to keep at a fixed place, undisturbed by wind or
other accidents, which may drive it to the shore side (for you are to note,
that it is likeliest to catch a Pike in the midst of the water) then hang a
small Plummet of lead, a stone, or piece of tyle, or a turfe in a string, and
cast it into the water, with the forked stick to hang upon the ground, to be as
an Anchor to keep the forked stick from moving out of your intended place till
the Pike come. This I take to be a very good way, to use so many ledger baits
as you intend to make trial of.

Or if you bait your hooks thus, with live fish or Frogs, and in a windy day,
fasten them thus to a bow or bundle of straw, and by the help of that wind can
get them to move cross a Pond or Mere, you are like to stand still on the shore
and see sport, if there be any store of Pikes; or these live baits may make
sport, being tied about the body or wings of a Goose or Duck, and she chased
over a Pond: and the like may be done with turning three or four live baits
thus fastened to bladders, or boughs, or bottles of hay, or flags, to swim down
a River, whilst you walk quietly on the shore along with them, and are still in
expectation of sport. The rest must be taught you by practice, for time will
not allow me to say more of this kind of fishing with live baits.

And for your dead bait for a Pike, for that you may be taught by one days
going a fishing with me or any other body that fishes for him, for the baiting
your hook with a dead Gudgion or a Roch, and moving it up and down the water,
is too easy a thing to take up any time to direct you to do it; and yet,
because I cut you short in that, I will commute for it, by telling you that
that was told me for a secret: it is this:

Dissolve Gum of Ivy in Oil of Spike, and therewith anoint your dead bait
for a Pike, and then cast it into a likely place, and when it has layen a short
time at the bottom, draw it toward the top of the water, and so up the stream,
and it is more then likely that you have a Pike follow you with more then
common eagerness.

This has not been tried by me, but told me by a friend of note, that pretended
to do me a courtesy: but if this direction to catch a Pike thus do you no
good, I am certain this direction how to roste him when he is caught, is
choicely good, for I have tried it, and it is somewhat the better for not being
common; but with my direction you must take thisCaution, that your Pike must
not be a small one.

First open your Pike at the gills, and if need be, cut also a little slit
toward his belly; out of these, take his guts, and keep his liver, which you
are to shred very small with: Time, Sweet Margerom, and a little
Winter-Savoury; to these put some pickled Oysters, and some Anchovis, both
these last whole for the Anchovis will melt, and the Oysters should not.) to
these you must add also a pound of sweet Butter, which you are to mix with the
herbs that are shred, and let them all be well salted (if the Pike be more then
a yard long, then you may put into these herbs more then a pound, or if he be
less, then less Butter will suffice:) these being thus mixed, with a blade or
two of Mace, must be put into the Pike's belly, and then his belly so sowed up;
then you are to thrust the spit through his mouth out at his tail; and then
with four, or five, or six split sticks or very thin laths, and a convenient
quantity of tape or filiting, these laths are to be tied round about the
Pike's body, from his head to his tail, and the tape tied somewhat thick to
prevent his breaking or falling off from the spit; let him be roasted very
leisurely, and often basted with Claret wine, and anchovis, and butter mixed
together; and also with what moisture falls from him into the pan: when you
have roasted him sufficiently, you are to hold under him (when you unwind or cut
the tape that ties him) such a dish as you purpose to eat him out of, and let
him fall into it with the sauce that is roasted in his belly; and by this means
the Pike will be kept unbroken and complete; then to the sauce, which was
within him, and also in the pan, you are to add a fit quantity of the best
butter, and to squeeze the juice of three or four Oranges: lastly, you may
either put into the Pike with the Oysters; two cloves of Garlic, and take it
whole out when the Pike is cut off the spit, or to give the sauce a hogoe, let
the dish (into which you let the Pike fall) be rubed with it; the using or not
using of this Garlic is left to your discretion.

This dish of meat is too good for any but Anglers or honest men; and, I trust,
you will prove both, and therefore I have trusted you with this Secret. And now
I shall proceed to give you some Observations concerning the Carp.


CHAP. VIII.
Pisc. THE Carp is a stately, a good, and a subtle fish, a fish that has not
(as it is said) been long in England, but said to be by one Mr. Mascall (a
Gentleman then living at Plumsted in Sussex) brought into this Nation: and for
the better confirmation of this, you are to remember I told you that Gesner
says, there is not a Pike in Spain, and that except the Eele, which lives
longest out of the water, there is none that will endure more hardness, or live
longer then a Carp will out of it, and so the report of his being brought out
of a foreign Nation into this, is the more probable.

Carps and Loches are observed to breed several months in one year, which most
other fish do not, and it is the rather believed, because you shall scarce or
never take a Male Carp without a Melt, or a Female without a Roe or Spawn; and
for the most part very much, and especially all the Summer season; and it is
observed, that they breed more naturally in Ponds then in running waters, and
that those that live in Rivers are taken by men of the best palates to be much
the better meat.

And it is observed, that in some Ponds Carps will not breed, especially in
cold Ponds; but where they will breed, they breed innumerably, if there be no
Pikes nor Perch to devour their Spawn, when it is cast upon grass, or flags,
or weeds, where it lies ten or twelve days before it be enlivened.

The Carp, if he have water room and good feed, will grow to a very great
bigness and length: I have heard, to above a yard long; though I never saw one
above thirty three inches, which was a very great and goodly fish.

Now as the increase of Carps is wonderful for their number; so there is not a
reason found out, I think, by any, why the should breed in some Ponds, and not
in others of the same nature, for soil and all other circumstances; and as
their breeding, so are their decays also very mysterious; I have both read it,
and been told by a Gentleman of tried honesty, that he has known sixty or
more large Carps put into several Ponds near to a house, where by reason of the
stakes in the Ponds, and the Owners constant being near to them, it was
impossible they should be stole away from him, and that when he has after three
or four years emptied the Pond, and expected an increase from them by breeding
young ones (for that they might do so, he had, as the rule is, put in three
Melters for one Spawner) he has, I say, after three or four years found neither
a young nor old Carp remaining: And the like I have known of one that has
almost watched his Pond, and at a like distance of time at the fishing of a
Pond, found of seventy or eighty large Carps, not above five or six: and that
he had forborne longer to fish the said Pond, but that he saw in a hot day in
Summer, a large Carp swim near to the top of the water with a Frog upon his
head, and that he upon that occasion caused his Pond to be let dry: and I say,
of seventie or eighty Carps, only found five or six in the said Pond, and those
very sick and lean, and with every one a Frog sticking so fast on the head of
the said Carps, that the Frog would not be got off without extreme force or
killing, and the Gentleman that did affirm this to me, told me he saw it, and
did declare his belief to be (and I also believe the same) that he thought the
other Carps that were so strangely lost, were so killed by Frogs, and then
devoured.

But I am fallen into this discourse by accident, of which I might say more, but
it has proved longer then I intended, and possibly may not to you be
considerable; I shall therefore give you three or four more short observations
of the Carp, and then fall upon some directions how you shall fish for him.

The age of Carps is by S. Francis Bacon (in his History of Life and Death)
observed to be but ten years; yet others think they live longer: but most
conclude, that (contrary to the Pike or Luce) all Carps are the better for age
and bigness; the tongues of Carps are noted to be choice and costly meat,
especially to them that buy them; but Gesner says, Carps have no tongues like
other fish, but a piece of flesh-like-fish in their mouth like to a tongue, and
may be so called, but it is certain it is choicely good, and that the Carp is
to be reckoned amongst those leather mouthed fish, which I told you have their
teeth in their throat, and for that reason he is very seldom lost by breaking
his hold, if your hook be once stuck into his chaps.

I told you, that Sir Francis Bacon thinks that the Carp lives but ten years;
but Janus Dubravius (a Germane as I think) has writ a book in Latin of Fish
and Fish Ponds, in which he says, that Carps begin to Spawn at the age of
three years, and continue to do so till thirty; he says also, that in the time
of their breeding, which is in Summer when the Sun has war med both the earth
and water, and so apted them also for generation, that then three or four Male
Carps will follow a Female, and that then she putting on a seeming coyness,
they force her through weeds and flags, where she lets fall her eggs or Spawn,
which sticks fast to the weeds, and then they let fall their Melt upon it, and
so it becomes in a short time to be a living fish; and, as I told you, it is
thought the Carp does this several months in the year, and most believe that
most fish breed after this manner, except the Eeles and it is thought that all
Carps are not bred by generation, but that some breed otherwise, as some Pikes
do.

Much more might be said out of him, and out of Aristotle, which Dubravius
often quotes in his Discourse, but it might rather perplex then satisfy you,
and therefore I shall rather choose to direct you how to catch, then spend more
time in discoursing either of the nature or the breeding of this Carp, or of
any more circumstances concerning him, but yet I shall remember you of what I
told you before, that he is a very subtle fish and hard to be caught.

And my first direction is, that if you will fish for a Carp, you must put on a
very large measure of patience, especially to fish for a River Carp: I have
known a very good Fisher angle diligently four or six hours in a day, for
three or four days together for a River Carp, and not have a bite: and you are
to note, that in some Ponds it is as hard to catch a Carp as in a River; that
is to say, where they have store of feed, and the water is of a clayish color;
but you are to remember, that I have told you there is no rule without an
exception, and therefore being possessed with that hope and patience which I wish
to all Fishers, especially to the CarpAngler, I shall tell you with what bait
to fish for him; but that must be either early or ate, and let me tell you,
that in hot weather (for hewill seldom bite in cold) you cannot be too early
or too late at it.

The Carp bites either at worms or at Paste; and of worms I- think the bluish
Marsh or Meadow worm is best; but possibly another worm not too big may do as
well, and so may a Gentle; and as for Pastes, there are almost as many sorts as
there are Medicines for the Toothach, but doubtless sweet Pastes are best; I
mean, Pastes mixed with honey, or with Sugar; which, that you may the better
beguile this crafty fish, should be thrown into the Pond or place in which you
fish for him some hours before you undertake your trial of skill by the
AngleRod: and doubtless, if it be thrown into the water a day or two before, at
several times, and in small pellets, you are the likelier when you fish for the
Carp, to obtain your desired sport: or in a large Pond, to draw them to any
certain place, that they may the better and with more hope be fished for; you
are to throw into it, in some certain place, either grains, or blood mixed with
Cowdung, or with bran; or any Garbage, as Chickens guts or the like, and then
some of your small sweet pellets, with which you purpose to angle; these small
pellets, being few of them thrown in as you are Angling.

And your Paste must be thus made: Take the flesh of a Rabet or Cat cut small,
and Bean-flower, or (if not easily got then) other flower, and then mix these
together, and put to them either Sugar, or Honey, which I think better, and
then beat these together in a Mortar; or sometimes work them in your hands,
(your hands being very clean) and then make it into a ball, or two, or three,
as you like best for your use: but you must work or pound it so long in the
Mortar, as to make it so tough as to hang upon your hook without washing from
it, yet not too hard; or that you may the better keep it on your hook, you may
kneade with your Paste a little (and not much) white or yellowish wool.

And if you would have this Paste keep all the year for any other fish, then
mix with it Virgins-wax and clarified honey, and work them together with your
hands before the fire; then make these into balls, and it will keep all the
year.

And if you fish for a Carp with Gentles, then put upon your hook a small piece
of Scarlet about this bigness, it being soked in, or anointed with Oil of
Peter, called by some, Oil of the Rock; and if your Gentles be put two or three
days before into a box or horn anointed with Honey, and so put upon your hook,
as to preserve them to be living, you are as like to kill this crafty fish
this way as any other; but still as you are fishing, chaw a little white or
brown bread in your mouth, and cast it into the Pond about the place where your
slote swims. Other baits there be, but these with diligence, and patient
watchfulness, will do it as well as any as I have ever practiced, or heard of:
and yet I shall tell you, that the crumbs of white bread and honey made into a
Paste, is a good bait for a Carp, and you know it is more easily made. And
having said thus much of the Carp, my next discourse shall be of the Bream,
which shall not prove so tedious, and therefore I desire the continuance of
your attention.


CHAP. IX.
Pisc. THE Bream being at a fuli growth, is a large and stately fish, he will
breed both in Rivers and Ponds, but loves best to live in Ponds, where, if he
likes the air, he will grow not only to be very large, but as fat as a Hog, he
is by Gesner taken to be more pleasant or sweet then wholesome; this fish is
long in growing, but breeds exceedingly in a water that pleases him, yea, in
many Ponds so fast, as to over store them, and starve the other fish.

The Baits good for to catch the Bream are many; as namely, young Wasps, and a
Paste made of brown bread and honey, or Gentels, or especially a worm, a worm
that is not much unlike a Magot, which you will find at the roots of Docks, or
of Flags, or of Rushes that grow in the water, or watery places, and a
Grasshopper having his legs nip'd off, or a fly that is in June and July to be
found amongst the green Reed, growing by the water side, those are said to be
excellent baits. I doubt not but there be many others that both the Bream and
the Carp also would bite at; but these time and experience will teach you how
to find out: And so having according to my promise given you these short
Observations concerning the Bream, I shall also give you some Observations
concerning the Tench, and those also very briefly.

The Tench is observed to love to live in Ponds; but if he be in a River, then
in the still places of the River, he is observed to be a Physician to other
fishes, and is so called by many that have been searchers into the nature of
fish; and it is said, that a Pike will neither devour nor hurt him, because the
Pike being sick or hurt by any accident, is cured by touching the Tench, and
the Tench does the like to other fishes, either by touching them, or by being
in their company.

Randelitius says in his discourse of fishes (quoted by Gesner) that at his
being at Rome, he saw certain Jews apply Tenches to the feet of a sick man
for a cure; and it is observed, that many of those people have many Secrets
unknown to Christians, secrets which have never been written, but have been
successsively since the days of Solomon (who knew the nature of all things
from the Shrub to the Cedar) delivered by tradition from the father to the son,
and so from generation to generation without writing, or (unless it were
casually) without the least communicating them to any other Nation or Tribe
(for to do so, they account a profanation): yet this fish, that does by a
natural inbred Balsome, not only cure himself if he be wounded, but others
also, loves not to live in clear streams paved with gravel, but in standing
waters, where mud and the worst of weeds abound, and therefore it is, I think,
that this Tench is by so many accounted better for Medicines then for meat: but
for the first, I am able to say little; and for the later, can say positively,
that he eats pleasantly; and will therefore give you a few, and but a few
directions how to catch him.

He will bite at a Paste made of brown bread and honey, or at a Marsh-worm, or
a Lob-worm; he will bite also at a smaller worm, with his head nip'd off, and a
Cod-worm put on the hook before the worm; and I doubt not but that he will also
in the three hot months (for in the nine colder he stirs not much) bite at a
Flag-worm, or at a green Gentle, but can positively say no more of the Tench,
he being a fish that I have not often Angled for; but I wish my honest Scholar
may, and be ever fortunate when he fishes.


Viat. I thank you good Master: but I pray Sir, since you see it still rains
May butter, give me some observations and directions concerning the Perch, for
they say he is both a very good and a bold biting fish, and I would fain learn
to fish for him.


Pisc. You say true, Scholar, the Perch is a very good, and a very bold biting
fish, he is one of the fishes of prey, that, like the Pike and Trout, carries
his teeth in his mouth, not in his throat, and dare venture to kill and devour
another fish; this fish, and the Pike are (says Gesner) the best of fresh
water fish; he Spawns but once a year, and is by Physicians held very
nutritive; yet by many to be hard of digestion: They abound more in the River
Poe, and in England, (says Randelitius) then other parts, and have in their
brain a stone, which is in foreign parts sold by Apothecaries, being there
noted to be very medicinable against the stone in the reins: These be a part of
the commendations which some Philosophycal brain have bestowed upon the
fresh water Perch, yet they commend the Sea Perch, which is known by having
but one fin on his back, (of which they say, we English see but a few) to be a
much better fish.

The Perch grows slowly, yet will grow, as I have been credibly informed, to
be almost two foot long; for my Informer told me, such a one was not long since
taken by Sir Abraham Williams, a Gentleman of worth, and a lover of Angling,
that yet lives, and I wish he may: this was a deep bodied fish; and doubtless
durst have devoured a Pike of half his own length; for I have told you, he is a
bold fish, such a one, as but for extreme hunger, the Pike will not devour; for
to affright the Pike, the Perch will set up his fins, much like as a
Turkie-Cock will sometimes set up his tail.

But, my Scholar, the Perch is not only valiant to defend himself, but he is
(as you said) a bold biting fish, yet he he will not bite at all seasons of the
year; he is very abstemious in Winter; and has been observed by some, not
usually to bite till the Mulberry tree buds, that is to say, till extreme
Frosts be past for that Spring; for when the Mulberry tree blossoms, many
Gardners observe their forward fruit to be past the danger of Frosts, and some
have made the like observation of the Pearches biting.

But bite the Perch will, and that very boldly; and as one has wittily
observed, if there be twenty or forty in a hole, they may be at one standing
all caught one after another; they being, as he says, like the wicked of the
world, not afraid, though their fellows and companions perish in their
sigh(...) And the baits for this bold fish are not many; I mean, he will bite
as well at some, or at any of these three, as at any or all others whatsoever;
a Worm, a Minnow, or a little Frog (of which you may find many in hay time) and
of worms, the Dunghill worm, called a brandling, I take to be best, being well
scowred in Moss or Fennel; and if you fish for a Perch with a Minnow, then it
is best to be alive, you sticking your hook through his back fin, and letting
him swim up and down about mid-water, or a little lower, and you still keeping
him to about that depth, by a Cork, which ought not to be a very light one: and
the like way you are to fish for the Perch with a small Frog, your hook being
fastened through the skin of his leg, toward the upper part of it: And lastly,
I will give you but this advise, that you give the Perch time enough when he
bites, for there was scarce ever any Angler that has given him too much. And
now I think best to rest my self, for I have almost spent my spirits with
talking so long.


Viat. Nay, good Master, one fish more, for you see it rains still, and you
know our Angles are like money put to usury; they may thrive though we sit
still and do nothing, but talk and enjoy one another. Come, come the other
fish, good Master.


Pisc. But Scholar, have you nothing to mix with this Discourse, which now
grows both tedious and tiresome? shall I have nothing from you that seems to
have both a good memory, and a cheerful Spirit?


Viat. Yes, Master, I will speak you a Coppie of Verses that were made by
Doctor Done, and made to show the world that he could make soft and smooth
Verses, when he thought them fit and worth his labor; and I love them the
better, because they allude to Rivers, and fish, and fishing. They be these:

Come live with me, and be my love,
And we will some new pleasures prove,
Of golden sands, and Crystal brooks,
With silken lines and silver hooks.
There will the River wispering run,
Warmed by thy eyes more then the Sun;
And there the inamel'd fish will stay,
Begging themselves they may betray.
When thou will swim in that live bath,
Each fish, which every channel has
Most amorously to thee will swim,
Gladder to catch thee, then thou him.
If thou, to be so seen, be loath
By Sun or Moon, thou darknest both;
And, if mine eyes have leave to see,
I need not their light, having thee.
Let others freeze with Angling Reeds,
And cut their legs with shells and weeds,
Or treacherously poor fish beset,
With strangling snares, or windowy net.
Let coarse bold hands, from slimy nest,
The bedded fish in banks outwrest,
Let curious Traitors sleave silk flies,
To 'witch poor wandering fishes eyes.
For thee, thou needst no such deceit,
For thou thy self art thine own bait;
That fish that is not caught thereby,
Is wiser far, alas, then I.

Pisc. Well remembered, honest Scholar, I thank you for these choice Verses,
which I have heard formerly, but had quite forgot, till they were recovered by
your happy memory. Well, being I have now rested my self a little, I will
make you some requital, by telling you some observations of the Eele, for it
rains still, and (as you say) our Angles are as money put to Use, that thrive
when we play.


CHAP. X.
IT is agreed by most men, that the Eele is both a good and a most dainty
fish; but most men differ about his breeding; some say, they breed by
generation as other fish do; and others, that they breed (as some worms do) out
of the putrefaction of the earth, and diverse other ways; those that deny them
to breed by generation, as other fish do, ask, if any man ever saw an Eel to
have Spawn or Melt? and they are answered, That they may be as certain of their
breeding, as if they had seen Spawn; for they say, that they are certain that
Eeles have all parts fit for generation, like other fish, but so small as not to
be easily discerned, by reason of their fatness; but that discerned they may
be; and that the He and the She Eele may be distinguished by their fins.

And others say, that Eeles growing old, breed other Eeles out of the
corruption of their own age, which Sir Francis Bacon says, exceeds not ten
years. And others say, that Eeles are bred of a particular dew falling in the
Months of May or June on the banks of some particular Ponds or Rivers (apted by
nature for that end) which in a few days is by the Suns heat turned into
Eeles. I have seen in the beginning of July, in a River not far from
Canterbury, some parts of it covered over with young Eeles about the thickness
of a straw; and these Eeles did lie on the top of that water, as thick as motes
are said to be in the Sun; and I have heard the like of other Rivers, as
namely, in Severn, and in a pond or Mere in Staffordshire, where about a set
time in Summer, such small Eeles abound so much, that many of the poorer sort
of people, that inhabit near to it, take such Eeles out of this Mere, with
sieves or sheets, and make a kind of Eele-cake of them, and eat it like as
bread. And Gesner quotes venerable Bede to say, that in England there is an
Island called Ely, by reason of the innumerable number of Eeles that breed in
it. But that Eeles may be bred as some worms and some kind of Bees and Wasps
are, either of dew, or out of the corruption of the earth, seems to be made
probable by the Barnacles and young Goslings bred by the Suns heat and the
rotten planks of an old Ship, and hatched of trees, both which are related for
truths by Dubartas, and our learned Cambden, and laborious Gerrard in his
Herball.

It is said by Randelitius, that those Eeles that are bred in Rivers, that
relate to, or be near to the Sea, never return to the fresh waters (as the
Salmon does always desire to do) when they have once tasted the salt water;
and I do the more easily believe this, because I am certain that powdered Bief
is a most excellent bait to catch an Eele: and Sr. Francis Bacon will allow the
Eeles life to be but ten years; yet he in his History of Life and Death,
mentions a Lamprey, belonging to the Roman Emperor, to be made tame, and so
kept for almost threescore years; and that such useful and pleasant
observations were made of this Lamprey, that Crassus the Orator (who kept her)
lamented her death.

It is granted by all, or most men, that Eeles, for about six months (that is
to say, the six cold months of the year) stir not up and down, neither in the
Rivers nor the Pools in which they are, but get into the soft earth or mud, and
there many of them together bed themselves, and live without feeding upon any
thing (as I have told you some Swallows have been observed to do in hollow
trees for those six cold months); and this the Eele and Swallow do, as not
being able to endure winter weather; for Gesner quotes Albertus to say, that in
the year 1125 (that years winter being more cold then usual) Eeles did by
natures instinct get out of the water into a stack of hay in a Meadow upon dry
ground, and there bedded themselves, but yet at last died there. I shall say no
more of the Eele, but that, as it is observed, he is impatient of cold, so it
has been observed, that in warm weather an Eele has been known to live five
days out of the water. And lastly, let me tell you, that some curious searchers
into the natures of fish, observe that there be several sorts or kinds of
Eeles, as the silver-Eele, and green or greenish Eel (with which the River of
Thames abounds, and are called Gregs); and a blackish Eele, whose head is more
flat and bigger then ordinary Eeles; and also an Eele whose fins are redish,
and but seldom taken in this Nation (and yet taken sometimes): These several
kinds of Eeles, are (say some) diversely bred; as namely, out of the corruption
of the earth, and by dew, and other ways (as I have said to you:) and yet it
is affirmed by some, that for a certain, the SilverEele breeds by generation,
but not by Spawning as other fish do, but that her Brood come alive from her no
bigger nor longer then a pin, and I have had too many testimonies of this to
doubt the truth of it.

And this Eele of which I have said so much to you, may be caught with diverse
kinds of baits; as namely, with powdered Bief, with a Lob or Garden-worm, with
a Minnow, or gut of a Hen, Chicken, or with almost any thing, for he is a
greedy fish: but the Eele seldom stirs in the day, but then hides himself,
and therefore he is usually caught by night, with one of these baits of which I
have spoken, and then caught by laying hooks, which you are to fasten to the
bank, or twigs of a tree; or by throwing a string cross the stream, with many
hooks at it, and baited with the foresaid baits, and a clod or plummer, or
stone, thrown into the River with this line, that so you may in the morning
find it near to some fixed place, and then take it up with a drag-hook or
otherwise: but these things are indeed too common to be spoken of; and an hours
fishing with any Angler will teach you better, both for these, and many other
common things in the practical part of Angling, then a weeks discourse. I shall
therefore conclude this direction for taking the Eele, by telling you, that in
a warm day in Summer, I have taken many a good Eele by snigling, and have been
much pleased with that sport.

And because you that are but a young Angler, know not what snigling is, I will
now teach it to you: you remember I told you that Eeles do not usually stir in
the day time, for then they hide themselves under some covert, or under boards,
or planks about Floud-gates, or Weirs, orMils, or in holes in the River banks;
and you observing your time in a warm day, when the water is lowest, may take a
hook tied to a strong line, or to a string about a yard long, and then into one
of these holes, or between any boards about a Mill, or under any great stone or
plank, or any place where you think an Eele may hide or shelter her self,
there with the help of a short stick put in your bait, but leisurely, and as
far as you may conveniently; and it is scarce to be doubted, but that if there
be an Eel within the sight of it, the Eele will bite instantly, and as
certainly gorge it; and you need not doubt to have him, if you pull him not our
of the hole too quickly, but pull him out by degrees, for he lying folded
double in his hole, will, with the help of his tail, break all, unless you
give him time to be wearied with pulling, and so get him out by degrees; not
pulling too hard. And thus much for this present time concerning the Eele: I
will next tell you a little of the Barbell, and hope with a little discourse of
him, to have an end of this shower, and fall to fishing, for the weather clears
up a little.

CHAP. XI.
Pisc. THE Barbell, is so called (says Gesner) from or by reason of his beard,
or wattels at his mouth, his mouth being under his nose or chaps, and he is one
of the leather mouthed fish that has his teeth in his throat, he loves to live
in very swift streams, and where it is gravelly, and in the gravel will root or
dig with his nose like a Hog, and there nest himself, taking so fast hold of
any weeds or moss that grows on stones, or on piles about Weirs, or
Floud-gates, or Bridges, that the water is not able, be it never so swift, to
force him from the place which he seems to contend for: this is his constant
custom in Summer, when both he, and most living creatures joy and sport
themselves in the Sun; but at the approach of Winter, then he forsakes the
swift streams and shallow waters, and by degrees retires to those parts of the
River that are quiet and deeper; in which places, (and I think about that time)
he Spawns; and as I have formerly told you, with the help of the Melter, hides
his Spawn or eggs in holes, which they both dig in the gravel, and then they
mutually labor to cover it with the same sand to prevent it from being
devoured by other fish.

There be such store of this fish in the River Danubie, that Randeitius says,
they may in some places of it, and in some months of the year, be taken by
those that dwell near to the River, with their hands, eight or ten load at a
time; he says, they begin to be good in May, and that they cease to be so in
August; but it is f^und to be otherwise in this Nation: but thus far we agree
with him, that the Spawne of a Barbell is, if be not poison, as he says, yet
that it is dangerous meat, and especially in the month of May; and Gesner
declares, it had an ill effect upon him, to the indangering of his life.

This fish is of a fine cast and handsome shape, and may be rather said not to
be ill, then to be good meat; the Chub and he have (I think) both lost a part
of their credit by ill Cookery, they being reputed the worst or coarsest of
fresh water fish: but the Barbell affords an Angler choice sport, being alustie
and a cunning fish; so lusty and cunning as to endanger the breaking of the
Anglers line, by running his head forcibly toward any covert or hole, or bank,
and then striking at the line, to break it off with his tail (as is observed by
Plutark, in his book De industria animalium) and also so cunning to nibble and
suck off your worm close to the hook, and yet avoid the letting the hook come
into his mouth.

The Barbell is also curious for his baits, that is to say, that they be clean
and sweet; that is to say, to have your worms well scowred, and not kept in
sour or mustie moss; for at a well scowred Lob-worm, he will bite as boldly as
at any bait, especially, if the night or two before you fish for him, you shall
bait the places where you intend to fish for him with big worms cut into
pieces: and Gentles (not being too much scowred, but green) are a choice bait
for him, and so is cheese, which is not to be too hard, but kept a day or two
in a wet linen cloth to make it tough; with this you may also bait the water a
day or two before you fish for the Barbel, and be much the likelier to catch
store; and if the cheese were laid in clarified honey a short time before (as
namely, an hour or two) you were still the likelier to catch fish; some have
directed to cut the cheese into thin pieces, and toste it, and then tie it on
the hook with fine Silk: and some advise to fish for the Barbell with Sheeps
tallow and soft cheese beaten or worked into a Paste, and that it is choicely
good in August, and I believe it: but doubtless the Lobworm well scoured, and
the Gentle not too much scowred, and cheese ordered as I have directed, are
baits enough, and I think will (...)erve in any Month; though I shall commend
any Angler that tryes conclusions, and is industrious to improve the Art. And
now, my honest Scholar, the long shower, and my tedious discourse are both
ended together; and I shall give you but this Observation, That when you fish
for a Barbell, your Rod and Line be both long, and of good strength, for you
will find him a heavy and a doged fish to be dealt withal, yet he seldom or
never breaks his hold if he be once stricken.

And now lets go and see what interest the Trouts will pay us for letting our
Angle-rods lie so long and so quietly in the water. Come, Scholar; which will
you take up?


Viat. Which you think fit, Master.


Pisc. Why, you shall take up that; for I am certain by viewing the Line, it
has a fish at it. Look you, Scholar, well done. Come now, take up the other
too; well, now you may tell my brother Peter at night, that you have caught a
lease of Trouts this day. And now lets move toward our lodging, and drink a
draught of Red-Cows milk, as we go, and give pretty Maudlin and her mother a
brace of Trouts for their supper.


Viat. Master, I like your motion very well, and I think it is now about
milking time, and yonder they be at it.


Pisc. God speed you good woman, I thank you both for our Songs last night; I
and my companion had such fortune a fishing this day, that we resolve to give
you and Maudlin a brace of Trouts for supper, and we will now taste a draught
of your Red Cows milk.


Milkw. Marry, and that you shall with all my heart, and I will be still your
debtor: when you come next this way, if you will but speak the word, I will
make you a good Sillabuh, and then you may sit down in a Hay cock and eat it,
and Maudlin shall sit by and sing you the good old Song of the Hunting in Chevy
Chase, or some other good Ballad, for she has good store of them: Maudlin has
a notable memory.


Viat. We thank you, and intend once in a Month to call upon you again, and
give you a little warning, and so good night; good night Maudlin. And now, good
Master, lets lose no time, but tell me somewhat more of fishing; and if you
please, first something of fishing for a Gudgion.


Pisc. I will, honest Scholar. The Gudgion is an excellent fish to eat, and
good also to enter a young Angler; he is easy to be taken with a small red
worm at the ground and is one of those leather mouthed fish that has his teeth
in his throat, and will hardly be lost off from the hook if he be once
stricken: they be usually scattered up and down every River in the shallows, in
the heat of Summer; but in Autome, when the weeds begin to grow sour or rot,
and the weather colder, then they gather together, and get into the deeper
parts of the water, and are to be fished for there, with your hook always
touching the ground, if you fish for him with a flote or with a cork; but many
will fish for the Gudgion by hand, with a running line upon the ground without
a cork as a Trout is fished for, and it is an excellent way.

There is also another fish called a Pope, and by some a Ruff, a fish that is
not known to be in some Rivers; it is much like the Perch for his shape, but
will not grow to be bigger then a Gudgion; he is an excellent fish, no fish
that swims is of a pleasanter taste; and he is also excellent to enter a young
Angler, for he is a greedy biter, and they will usually lie abundance of them
together in one reserved place where the water is deep, and runs quietly, and
an easy Angler, if he has found where they lie, may catch forty or fifty, or
sometimes twice so many at a standing.

There is also a Bleak, a fish that is ever in motion, and therefore called by
some the River Swallow; for just as you shall observe the Swallow to be most
evenings in Summer ever in motion, making short and quick turns when he flies
to catch flies in the air, by which he lives, so does the Bleak at the top of
the water; and this fish is best caught with a fine small Artificial Fly, which
is to be of a brown color, and very small, and the hook answerable: There is no
better sport then whiping for Bleaks in a boat in a Summers evening, with a
hazle top about five or six foot long, and a line twice the length of the Rod.
I have heard Sir Henry Wotton say, that there be many that in Italy will catch
Swallows so, or especially Martines (the Bird-Angler standing on the top of a
Steeple to do it, and with a line twice so long, as I have spoke of) and let me
tell you, Scholar, that both Martins and Blekes be most excellent meat.

I might now tell you how to catch Roch and Dace, and some other fish of little
note, that I have not yet spoke of; but you see we are almost at our lodging,
and indeed if we were not, I would omit to give you any directions concerning
them, or how to fish for them, not but that they be both good fish (being in
season) and especially to some palates, and they also make the Angler good
sport (and you know the Hunter says, there is more sport in hunting the Hare,
then in eating of her) but I will forbear to give you any direction concerning
them, because you may go a few days and take the pleasure of the fresh air,
and bear any common Angler company that fishes for them, and by that means
learn more then any direction I can give you in words, can make you capable of;
and I will therefore end my discourse, for yonder comes our brother Peter and
honest Coridon, but I will promise you that as you and I fish, and walk to
morrow toward London, if I have now forgotten any thing, that I can then
remember, I will not keep it from you.

Well met, Gentlemen, this is luckie th at we meet so just together at this
very door. Come Hostis, where are you? is Supper ready? come, first give us
drink, and be as quick as you can, for I believe we are all very hungry. Well,
brother Peter and Coridon to you both; come drink, and tell me what luck of
fish: we two have caught but ten Trouts, of which my Scholar caught three; look
here is eight, and a brace we gave away: we have had a most pleasant day for
fishing, and talking, and now returned home both weary and hungry, and now meat
and rest will be pleasant.


Pet. And Coridon and I have not had an unpleasant day, and yet I have caught
but five Trouts; for indeed we went to a good honest Alehouse, and there we
played at shovelboard half the day; all the time that it rained we were there,
and as merry as they that fished, and I am glad we are now with a dry house
over our heads, for hark how it rains and blows. Come Hostis, give us more
Ale, and our Supper with what haste you may, and when we have supped, lets have
your Song, Piscator, and the Ketch that your Scholar promised us, or else
Coridon will be doged.


Pisc. Nay, I will not be worse then my word, you shall not want my Song, and I
hope I shall be perfect in it.


Viat. And I hope the like for my Ketch, which I have ready too, and therefore
lets go merrily to Supper, and then have a gentle touch at singing and
drinking; but the last with moderation.


Cor. Come, now for your Song, for we have fed heartily. Come Hostis, give us a
little more drink, and lay a few more sticks on the fire, and now sing when you
will.


Pisc. Well then, here is to you Coridon; and now for my Song.

Oh the brave Fishers life,
It is the best of any,
It Is full of pleasure, void of strife,
And it is beloved of many:
Other joys
are but toys,
only this
lawful is,
for our skill
breeds no ill,
but content and pleasure.
In a morning up we rise
Ere Aurora's peeping,
Drink a cup to wash our eyes,
Leave the sluggard sleeping;
Then we go
too and fro,
with our knacks
at our backs,
to such streams
as the Thames
if we have the leisure.
When we please to walk abroad
For our recreation,
In the fields is our abode,
Full of delectation:
Where in a Brook
with a hook,
or a Lake
fish we take,
there we sit
for a bit,
till we fish entangle.
We have Gentles in a horn,
We have Paste and worms too,
We can watch both night and morn,
Suffer rain and storms too:
None do here
use to swear,
oaths do fray
fish away,
we sit still,
watch our quill,
Fishers must not rangle.
If the Suns excessive heat
Make our bodies swelter,
To an Osier hedge we get
For a friendly shelter,
where in a dike
Perch or Pike,
Roch or Dace
we do chase
Bleak or Gudgion
without grudging,
we are still contented.
Or we sometimes pass an hour,
Under a green willow,
That defends us from a shower,
Making earth our pillow,
There we may
think and pray
before death
stops our breath;
other joys
are but toys
and to be lamented.

Viat. Well sung, Master; this days fortune and pleasure, and this nights
company and Song, do all make me more and more in love with Angling. Gentlemen,
my Master left me alone for an hour this day, and I verily believe he retired
himself from talking with me, that he might be so perfect in this Song; was it
not Master?


Pisc. Yes indeed, for it is many years since I learned it, and having
forgotten a part of it, I was forced to pa(...)ch it up by the help of my own
invention, who am not excellent at Poetry, as my part of the Song may testify:
But of that I will say no more, least you should think I mean by discommending
it, to beg your commendations of it. And therefore without replications, lets
hear your Ketch, Scholar, which I hope will be a good one, for you are both
Musical, and have a good fancy to boot.


Viat. Marry, and that you shall, and as freely as I would have my honest
Master tell me some more secrets of fish and fishing as we walk and fish toward
London to morrow. But Master, first let me tell you, that that very hour which
you were absent from me, I sat down under a Willow tree by the water side, and
considered what you had told me of the owner of that pleasant Meadow in which
you then left me, that he had a plentiful estate, and not a heart to think so;
that he had at this time many Law Suites depending, and that they both damped
his mirth and took up so much of his time and thoughts, that he himself had
not leisure to take the sweet content that I, who pretended no title, took in
his fields; for I could there sit quietly, and looking on the water, see fishes
leaping at Flies of several shapes and colors; looking on the Hills, could
behold them spotted with Woods and Groves; looking down the Meadows, could see
here a Boy gathering L^llies and Ladysmocks, and there a Girl cropping
Culverkeys and Cowsl^ps, all to make Garlands sut^ble to this pleasant Month of
May; these and many other Field-flowers so perfumed the air, that I thought
this Meadow like the field in Sicily (of which Diodorus speaks) where the
perfumes arising from the place, makes all dogs that hunt in it, to fall off,
and to lose their hottest sent. I say, as I thus sat joying in mine own happy
condition, and pitying that rich man's that ought this, and many other pleasant
Groves and Meadows about me, I did thankfully remember what my Savior said,
that the meek possess the earth; for indeed they are free from those high,
those restless thoughts and contentions which corrode the sweets of life. For
they, and they only, can say as the Poet has happily expressed it,

Hail blessed estate of poverty!
Happy enjoyment of such minds,
As rich in low contentedness,
Can, like the reeds in roughest winds,
By yielding make that blow but small
At which proud Oaks andCedars fall.
Gentlemen, these were a part of the thoughts that then possessed me, and I there
made a conversion of a piece of an old Ketch, and added more to it, fitting
them to be sung by us Anglers: Come, Master, you can sing well, you must sing a
part of it as it is in this paper.


The ANGLERS Song.
For two Voices, Treble and Basse. CANTUS. Mr. Henry Laws.

MAn's life is but vain; for it is subject to pain, and sorrow, and short as a
buble; it is a hodge podge of business, and money, and care, and care, and money,
and trouble. But we will take no care when the weather proves fair, nor will we
vex now though it rain; we will banish all sorrow, and sing till to morrow, and
Angle, and Angle again.

The ANGLERS Song.
BASSUS.
For two Voices. By Mr. Henry Laws.

MAn's life is but vain; for it is subject to pain, and sorrow, and short as a
buble; it is a hodge podge of business, and money, and care, and care, and money,
and trouble. But we will take no care when the weather proves fair, nor will we
vex now though it rain; we will banish all sorrow, and sing till to morrow, and
Angle, and Angle again.

Pet. I marry Sir, this is Music indeed, this has cheered my heart, and made
me to remember six Verses in praise of Music, which I will speak to you
instantly.

Music, miraculous Rhetoric, that speak sense
Without a tongue, excelling eloquence;
With what ease might thy errors be excused
Were thou as truly loved as thou art abused.
But though dull souls neglect, and some reprove thee,
I cannot hate thee,'cause the Angels love thee.

Piscat. Well remembered, brother Peter, these Verses came seasonably. Come, we
will all join together, mine Host and all, and sing my Scholars Ketch over
again, and then each man drink the the other cup and to bed, and thank God we have
a dry house over our heads.


Pisc. Well now, good night to every body.


Pet. And so say I.


Viat. And so say I.


Cor. Good night to you all, and I thank you.


Pisc. Good morrow brother Peter, and the like to you, honest Coridon; come, my
Hostis says there is seven shillings to pay, lets each man drink a pot for his
mornings draught, and lay down his two shillings, that so my Hostis may not
have occasion to repent her self of being so diligent, and using us so kindly.


Pet. The motion is liked by every body; And so Hostis, here is your money, we
Anglers are all beholding to you, it will not be long ere I Will see you again. And
now brother Piscator, I wish you and my brother your Scholar a fair day, and
good fortune. Come Coridon, this is our way.


CHAP. XII.
Viat. GOod Master, as we go now toward London, be still so courteous as to
give me more instructions, for I have several boxes in my memory in which I
will keep them all very safe, there shall not one of them be lost.


Pisc. Well Scholar, that I will, and I will hide nothing from you that I can
remember, and may help you forward toward a perfection in this Art; and
because we have so much time, and I have said so little of Roch and Dace, I
will give you some directions concerning some several kinds of baits with which
they be usually taken; they will bite almost at any flies, but especially at
Ant-flies; concerning which, take this direction, for it is very good.

Take the blackish Ant-fly out of the Molehill, or Ant-hil, in which place you
shall find them in the Months of June; or if that be too early in the year,
then doubtless you may find them in July, August, and most of September; gather
them alive with both their wings, and then put them into a glass, that will
hold a quart or a pottle; but first, put into the glass, a handful or more of
the moist earth out of which you gather them, and as much of the roots of the
grass of the said Hillock; and then put in the flies gently, that they lose not
their wings, and so many as are put into the glass without bruising, will live
there a month or more, and be always in a readiness for you to fish with; but
if you would have them keep longer, then get any great earthen pot or barrel of
three or four gallons (which is better) then wash your barrel with water and
honey; and having put into it a quantity of earth and grass roots, then put in
your flies and cover it, and they will live a quarter of a year; these in any
stream and clear water are a deadly bait for Roch or Dace, or for a Chub, and
your rule is to fish not less then a handful from the bottom.

I shall next tell you a winter bait for a Roch, a Dace, or Chub, and it is
choicely good. About All-hollantide (and so till Frost comes) when you see men
ploughing up heath-ground, or sandy ground, or greenswards, then follow the
plough, and you shall find a white worm, as big as two Magots, and it has a
red head, (you may observe in what ground most are, for there the Crows will be
very watchful, and follow the Plough very close) it is all soft, and full of
whitish guts; a worm that is in Norfolk, and some other Countries called a
Grub, and is bred of the spawn or eggs of a Beetle, which she leaves in holes
that she digs in the ground under Cow or Horse-dung, and there rests all
Winter, and in March or April comes to be first a red, and then a black Beetle:
gather a thousand or two of these, and put them with a peck or two of their own
earth into some tub or firkin, and cover and keep them so warm, that the frost
or cold air, or winds kill them not, and you may keep them all winter and kill
fish with them at any time, and if you put some of them into a little earth and
honey a day before you use them, you will find them an excellent bait for
Breame or Carp.

And after this manner you may also keep Gentles all winter, which is a good
bait then, and much the better for being lively and tuffe, or you may breed and
keep Gentle thus: Take a piece of beasts liver and with a cross stick, hang it
in some corner over a pot or barrel half full of dry clay, and as the Gentles
grow big, they will fall into the barrel and scowre themselves, and be always
ready for use whenever you incline to fish; and these Gentles may be thus
made til after Michaelmas: But if you desire to keep Gentles to fish with all
the year, then get a dead Cat or a Kite, and let it be fly-blowne, and when the
Gentles begin to be alive and to stir, then bury it and them in moist earth,
but as free from frost as you can, and these you may dig up at any time when
you intend to use them; these will last till March, and about that time turn to
be flies.

But if you be nice to fowl your fingers (which good Anglers seldom are) then
take this bait: Get a handful of well made Malt, and put it into a dish of
water, and then wash and rub it betwixt your hands til you make in clean, and
as free from husks as you can; then put that water from it, and put a small
quantity of fresh water to it, and set it in something that is fit for that
purpose, over the fire, where it is not to boil apace, but leisurely, and very
softly, until it become somewhat soft, which you may try by feeling it betwixt
your finger and thumb; and when it is soft, then put your water from it, and
then take a sharp knife, and turning the sprout end of the corn upward, with
the point of your knife take the back part of the husk off from it, and yet
leaving a kind of husk on the corn, or else it is marred; and then cut off that
sprouted end (I mean a little of it) that the white may appear, and so pull
off the husk on the cloven side (as I directed you) and then cutting off a very
little of the other end, that so your hook may enter, and if your hook be small
and good, you will find this to be a very choice bait either for Winter or
Summer, you sometimes casting a little of it into the place where your flote
swims.

And to take the Roch and Dace, a good bait is the young brood of Wasps or
Bees, baked or hardened in their husks in an Oven, after the bread is taken out
of it, or on a fireshovel; and so also is the thick blood of Sheep, being half
dried on a trencher that you may cut it into such pieces as may best fit the
size of your hook, and a little salt keeps it from growing black, and makes it
not the worle but better; this is taken to be a choice bait, if rightly ordered.

There be several Oiles of a strong smell that I have been told of, and to be
excellent to tempt fish to bite, of which I could say much, but I remember I
once carried a small bottle from Sir George Hastings to Sir Henry Wotton (they
were both chimical men) as a great present; but upon enquiry, I found it did
not answer the expectation of Sir Henry, which with the help of other
circumstances, makes me have little belief in such things as many men talk of;
not but that I think fishes both smell and hear (as I have expressed in my former
discourse) but there is a mysterious knack, which (though it be much easier
then the Philosophers-Stone, yet) is not atainable by common capacities, or
else lies locked up in the brain or breast of some chimical men, that, like the
Rosi-crutions, yet will not reveal it. But I stepped by chance into this
discourse of Oiles, and fishes smelling; and though there might be more said,
both of it, and of baits for Roch and Dace, and other flote fish, yet I will
forbear it at this time, and tell you in the next place how you are to prepare
your tackling: concerning which I will for sport sake give you an old Rhyme out
of an old Fish-book, which will be a part of what you are to provide.

My rod, and my linc, my flote and my lead,
My hook, and my plummet, my whetstone and knife,
My Basket, my baits, both living and dead,
My net, and my meat, for that is the chief;
Then I must have thxed and hairs great and small,
With mine Angling purse, and so you have all.
But you must have all these tackling, and twice so many more, with which, if
you mean to be a fisher, you must store your self: and to that purpose I will
go with you either to Charles Brandons (near to the Swan in Golding-lane); or
to Mr. Fletchers in the Court which did once belong to Dr. Nowel the Dean of
Paul's, that I told you was a good man, and a good Fisher; it is hard by the
west end of Saint Paul's Church; they be both honest men, and will fit an Angler
with what tackling he wants.


Viat. Then, good Master, let it be at Charles Brandons, for he is nearest to
my dwelling, and I pray lets meet there the ninth of May next about two of the
Clock, and I Will want nothing that a Fisher should be furnished with.


Pisc. Well, and I Will not fail you, God willing, at the time and place appointed.


Viat. I thank you, good Master, and I will not fail you: and good Master, tell
me what baits more you remember, for it will not now be long ere we shall be at
Totenham High-Cross, and when we come thither, I will make you some requital of
your pains, by repeating as choice a copy of Verses, as any we have heard since
we met together, and that is a proud word; for we have heard very good ones.


Pisc. Well, Scholar, and I shall be right glad to hear them; and I will tell you
whatsoever comes in my mind, that I think may be worth your hearing: you may
make another choice bait thus, Take a hand full or two of the best and biggest
Wheat you can get, boil it in a little milk like as Frumitie is boiled, boil it
so till it be soft, and then fry it very leisurely with honey, and a little
beaten Saffron dissolved in milk, and you will find this a choice bait, and good
I think for any fish, especially for Roch, Dace, Chub or Greyling; I know not
but that it may be as good for a River Carp, and especially if the ground be a
little baited with it.

You are also to know, that there be diverse kinds of Cadis, or Caseworms, that
are to be found in this Nation in several distinct Counties, and in several
little Brooks that relate to biggerRivers, as namely one Cadis called a Piper,
whose husk or case is a piece of reed about an inch long or longer, and as big
about as the compass of a two pence; these worms being kept three or four days
in a woollen bag with sand at the bottom of it, and the bag wet once a day,
will in three or four days turn to be yellow; and these be a choice bait for
the Chub or Chavender, or-indeed for any great fish, for it is a large bait.

There is also a lesser Cadis-worm, called a Cock-spur, being in fashion like
the spur of a Cock, sharp at one end, and the case or house in which this dwells
is made of small husks and gravel, and slime, most curiously made of these, even
so as to be wondered at, but not made by man (no more then the nest of a bird
is:) this is a choice bait for any flote fish, it is much less then the Piper
Cadis, and to be so ordered; and these may be so preserved ten, fifteen, or
twenty days.

There is also another Cadis called by some a Straw-worm, and by some a
Ruffe-coate, whose house or case is made of little pieces of bents, and Rushes,
and straws, and water weeds, and I know not what, which are so knit together
with condensed slime, that they stick up about her husk or case, not unlike the
bristles of a Hedg-hog; these three Cadis are commonly taken in the beginning
of Summer, and are good indeed to take any kind of fish with slote or
otherwise. I might tell you of many more, which, as these do early, so those
have their time of turning to be flies later in Summer; but I might lose my
self, and tire you by such a discourse, I shall therefore but remember you,
that to know these, and their several kinds, and to what flies every particular
Cadis turns, and then how to use them, first as they be Cadis, and then as
they be flies, is an Art, and an Art that every one that professes Angling is
not capable of.

But let me tell you, I have been much pleased to walk quietly by a Brook with
a little stick in my hand, with which I might easily take these, and consider
the curiosity of their composure; and if you shall ever like to do so, then
note, that your stick must be cleft, or have a nick at one end of it, by which
means you may with ease take many of them out of the water, before you have
any occasion to use them. These, my honest Scholar, are some observations told
to you as they now come suddenly into my memory, of which you may make some
use: but for the practical part, it is that that makes an Angler; it is
diligence, and observation, and practice that must do it.


CHAP. XIII.
Pisc. Well, Scholar, I have held you too long about these Cadis, and my
spirits are almost spent, and so I doubt is your patience; but being we are now
within sight of Totenham, where I first met you, and where we are to part, I
will give you a little direction how to color the hair of which you make your
lines, for that is very needful to be known of an Angler; and also how to paint
your rod, especially your top, for a right grown top is a choice Commodity,
and should be preserved from the water soking into it, which makes it in wet
weather to be heavy, and fish ill favouredly, and also to rot quickly.

Take a pint of strong Ale, half a pound of soot, and a like quantity of the
juice of Walnut-tree leaves, and an equal quantity of Allome, put these
together into a pot, or pan, or pipkin, and boil them half an hour, and having
so done, let it cool, and being cold, put your hair into it, and there let it
lie; it will turn your hair to be a kind of water, or glass color, or greenish,
and the longer you let it lie, the deeper colored it will be; you might be
taught to make many other colors, but it is to little purpose; for doubtless
the water or glass colored hair is the most choice and most useful for an
Angler.

But if you desire to color hair green, then do it thus: Take a quart of
small Ale, half a pound of Allome, then put these into a pan or pipkin, and
your hair into it with them, then put it upon a fire and let it boil softly
for half an hour, and then take out your hair, and let it dry, and having so
done, then take a pottle of water, and put into it two handful of Mary-golds,
and cover it with a tile or what you think fit, and set it again on the fire,
where it is to boil softly for half an hour, about which time the scum will
turn yellow, then put into it half a pound of Copporis beaten small, and with it
the hair that you intend to color, then let the hair be boiled softly till
half the liquor be wasted, and then let it cool three or four hours with your
hair in it; and you are to observe, that the moreCopporis you put into it, the
greener it will be, but doubtless the pale green is best; but if you desire
yellow hair (which is only good when the weeds rot) then put in the more
Mary-golds, and abate most of the Copporis, or leave it out, and take a little
Verdigreece in stead of it.

This for coloring your hair. And as for painting your rod, which must be in
Oil, you must first make a size with glue and water, boiled together until the
glue be dissolved, and the size of a lie color; then strike your size upon the
wood with a bristle brush or pensil, whilst it is hot: that being quite dry,
take white lead, and a little red lead, and a little cole black, so much as all
together will make an ash color, grind these all together with Linseed oil,
let it be thick, and lay it thin upon the wood with a brush or pensil, this do
for the ground of any color to lie upon wood.

For a Green. Take Pink and Verdigreece, and grind them together in Linseed
oil, as thick as you can well grind it, then lay it smoothly on with your
brush, and drive it thin, once doing for the most part will serve, if you lay
it well, and besure your first color be thoroughly dry, before you lay on a
second.

Well, Scholar, you now see Totenham, and I am weary, and therefore glad that
we are so near it; but if I were to walk many more days with you, I could still
be telling you more and more of the mysterious Art of Angling; but I will hope
for another opportunity, and then I will acquaint you with many more, both
necessary and true observations concerning fish and fishing: but now no more,
lets turn into yonder Arbor, for it is a clean and cool place.


Viat. It Is a fair motion, and I will requite a part of your courtesies with a
bottle of Sack, and Milk, and Oranges and Sugar, which all put together, make a
drink too good for any body, but us Anglers: and so Master, here is a full
glass to you of that liquor, and when you have pledged me, I will repeat the
Verses which I promised you, it is a Copy printed amongst Sir Henry Wottons
Verses, and doubtless made either by him, or by a lover of Angling: Come
Master, now drink a glass to me, and then I will pledge you, and fall to my
repetition; it is a description of such Country recreations as I have enjoyed
since I had the happiness to fall into your company.

Quivering fears, heart tearing cares,
Anxious sighs, untimely tears,
Fly, fly to Courts,
Fly to fond worldlings sports,
Where strained Sardonick smiles are glosing still
And grief is forced to laugh against her will.
Where mirths but Mummery,
And sorrows only real be.
Fly from our Country pastimes, fly,
Sad troops of humane misery,
Come serone looks,
Clear as the Crystal Brooks,
Or the pure azur'd heaven that smiles to see
The Rich attendance on our poverty;
Peace and a secure mind
Which all men seek, we only find.
Abused Mortals did you know
Where joy, hearts ease, and comforts grow,
You Would scorn proud Towers,
And seek them in those Bowers,
Where winds sometimes our woods perhaps may shake,
But blustering care could never tempest make,
No murmurs ere come nigh us,
Saving of Fountains that glide by us.
Here Is no fantastic Mask nor Dance,
But of our kids that frisk and prance;
Nor wars are seen
Unless upon the green
Two harmless Lambs are butting one the other,
Which done, both bleating, run each to his mother:
And wounds are never found,
Save what the Plough share gives the ground.
Here are no false extrapping baits
To hasten too too hasty fates;
Unless it be
the fond credulity
Of silly fish, which, worldling like, still look
Upon the bait, but never on the hook;
Nor envy, 'nless among
The birds, for price of their sweet Song.
Go, let the diving Negro seek
For gems hid in some forlorn creek,
We all Pearls scorn,
Save what the dewy morn
Congeals upon each little spire of grass,
Which careless Shepherds beat down as they pass,
And Gold never here appears
Save what the yellow Ceres bears.
Blessed silent Groves, oh may you be
For ever mirths best nursery,
May pure contents
for ever pitch their tents
Upon these downs, these Meads, these rocks, these mountains,
And peace still slumber by these purling fountains
Which we may every year
find when we come a fishing here.

Pisc. Trust me, Scholar, I thank you heartily for these Verses, they be
choicely good, and doubtless made by a lover of Angling: Come, now drink a
glass to me, and I will requi(...)e you with a very good Copy of Verses; it is a
farewell to the vanities of the world, and some say written by Dr. D, but let
them be writ by whom they will, he tha writ them had a brave soul, and must
needs be possessed with happy thoughts at the time of their composure.

Farwell ye gilded follies, pleasing troubles,
Farwell ye honored rags, ye glorious bubbles,
Fame's but a hollow echo, gold pure clay,
Honor the darling but of our short day.
Beauty (the eyes idol) but a damask'd skin,
State but a golden prison, to live in
And torture freeborn minds; imbroidir'd trains
Merely but Pageants, for proud swelling vains,
And blood allied to greatness; is alone
Inherited, not purchased, nor our own.
Fame, honor, beauty, state, trai(...), blood and birth,
Are but the fading blossoms of the (...).
I would be great, but that the Sun does still,
Level his rays against the rising hill:
I would be high, but see the proudest Oak
Most subject to the rending Thunder-stroke;
I would be rich, but see men too unkind
Dig in the bowels of the richest mind;
I would be wise, but that I often see
The Fox suspected whilst the Ass goes free;
I would be fair, but see the fair and proud
Like the bright Sun, often setting in a cloud;
I would be poor, but know the humble grass
Still trampled on by each unworthy Ass:
Rich, hated; wise, suspected; scorned, if poor;
Great, feared; fair, tempted; high, still envied more
I have wished all, but now I wish for neither,
Great, high, rich, wise, nor fair, poor I Will be rather
Would the world now adopt me for her heir,
Would beauties Queen entitle me the Fair,
Fame speak me fortunes Minion, could I vie
Angels with India, with a speaking eye
Command bare heads, bowed knees strike Justice dumb
As well as blind and lame, or give a tongue
To stones, by Epitaphs, be called great Master,
In the loose Rhimes of every Poetaster;
Could I be more then any man that lives,
Great, fair, rich, wise in all Superlatives;
Yet I more freely would these gifts resign,
Then ever fortune would have made them mine
And hold one minute of this holy leisure,
Beyond the riches of this empty pleasure.
Welcome pure thoughts, welcome ye silent groves,
These guests, these Courts, my soul most dearly love
Now the winged people of the Sky shall sing
My chereful Anthems to the gladsome Spring;
A Prayer book now shall be my looking glass,
In which I will adore sweet virtues face.
Here dwell no hateful looks, no Palace cares,
No broken vows dwell here, nor pale faced fears,
Then here I Will sit and sigh my hot loves folly,
And learn t'affect an holy melancholy.
And if contention be a stranger, then
I Will nere look for it, but in heaven again.

Viat. Well Master, these be Verses that be worthy to keep a room in every man's
memory. I thank you for them, and I thank you for your many instructions, which
I will not forget; your company and discourse have been so pleasant, that I may
truly say, I have only lived, since I enjoyed you and them, and turned Angler.
I am sorry to part with you here, here in this place where I first met you, but
it must be so: I shall long for the ninth of May, for then we are to meet at
Charles Brandons. This intermitted time will seem to me (as it does to men in
sorrow) to pass slowly, but I will hasten it as fast as I can by my wishes, and
in the mean time the blessing of Saint Peter's Master be with mine.


Pisc. And the like be upon my honest Scholar. And upon all that hate
contentions, and love quietness, and virtue, and Angling.


FINIS.

