WAR, AND ITS EFFECTS, Laid out to the LIFE:

BEING A Seasonable Advice TO OUR PROTESTANT BRETHREN, Now ready to go against
the IRISH REBELS Usurping Authority in the Kingdom of IRELAND.

By Philopolites.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

Where Gentlemen and Others, may be furnished with most sorts of Acts of
Parliament and other State Matters; as also Books of Divinity,
Church Government, Sermons on most Occasions, etc.

To the Noble, Valiant and Generous Undertakers for the Retaking of the Kingdom
of IRELAND from the IRISH POPISH REBELS, now in Rebellion against the King and
Queen of ENGLAND.
Honored Sirs,
BEing assured that your Persons have been ever accompanied with Courage,
Valor, Wisdom, and Clemency, it has been a great emboldening unto your
Servant, to make a dutiful present hereof to your Perusals and Patronage; not
to the purpose, that this can be either your directions or instructions, (as
you be frequently conversant in all passages of this nature) but rather to
express such things to your view; knowing ye are expert in the Original.

Needless it were to teach Typhis to steer a Ship; or to instruct Automedon to
guide a Chariot, should your Servant apprehend any such Ambition, he must
necessarily incur the aspersion of Impudence, or express such palpable
ignorance, as might draw him into a just imputation of folly: But, noble Sirs,
such is the modesty of your humble servant, that by studying to be free from
either, he may evade the aspersion of both; only desiring your best
constructions of these his weak and unpolished labors, which present
themselves so rudely into your presence. Noble Spirits, upon your generous
dispositions, I humbly prostrate my self, together with these my imperfect
labors to your judicious censures, whose least distaste is able to stifle the
hope of your Servant, and whose favorable approbations, have Power to give
Life to these the weak Endeavors of

YOUR Humble Servant to all Posterity, Philopolites.

WAR, AND THE EFFECTS thereof, laid out to the Life, etc.
WAR in general is a Lawful Defense, What War is.
whereby the Lawful Magistrate, for just Causes taking up Arms, does publicly
repel Force with Force, revengeth public and general Injuries; or recovers
general, or generally sustained losses.

In this Definition, three things are observable, viz. First, That War is not
to be undertaken, but for just Causes. Secondly, That it belongs only unto the
Magistrate to make War, and not to private Persons. Thirdly, That it is not to
be moved, but repelled; not kindled, but quenched; that is, rather for Defense
than Offense; for the punishing of Injuries, than the doing of wrong; all which
shows evidently the lawfulness of the Protestants against Irish Papists in
Ireland, being for Religion enacted by Parliament, and the Republick's good,
and defense of the late Setlement, all at present being (in that Kingdom) under
Papal Jurisdiction, Military and Civil, contrary to Law.


The Query will be, what the Ground and Causes of War are.

Answer, First in general, Alexander the Great, The Causes of War.
being once demanded, why he endeavored by War to be Lord of the whole World;
made Answer, All the Wars that are raised in this World, are for one of these
three Causes, either to have many Gods, many Laws, or many Kings; Guevara
familiar. Epist. Page 240.
therefore, I desire (says he) by War to possess the World, and to command it,
that all the Inhabitants thereof, may Honor but one God, serve but one King,
and observe but one Law.

War comes sometimes from a good Ground or Cause, sometimes from a bad
Foundation.

Aug. in lib de verbo Domini.
Wars from a good Ground (as our now Protestant War with Ireland) is to make Men
live in Peace. Whence St. Augustine says; That even amongst, yea by, the true
Worshippers of God, Wars are often raised and undertaken, not out of
Covetousness or Cruelty, but out of a true and sincere desire of settling Peace.

Hence the Emblematists devised this Hieroglyphick to express this Truth, Andr.
Al^iat. Emblem. Page 445.
viz. a Helmet that had been used in War, being in time of Peace neglected and
laid by, a Swarm of Bees (Emblems of sweet Peace) come and live, build and
breed therein: The Motto was, Ex bello pax, Peace is the Offspring of War; or,
War the Parent of Peace; much like unto the Soldiers Sword which in Martial,
was turned in the time of Peace, into a Reapers Sickle, Pax me certa ducis
placidos curvavit in usus;
Agricolae nunc sum, Militis ante fui.


Secondly, Sometimes War comes from a bad bottom, (as the late Irish War began
Anno 1641) and springs from either of these evil roots; to wit, either,

First from some unbridled Pleasures, and immoderate and inordinate Lusts: Or,
Secondly, From diversity of Religion, (as it did here in England, in the Reign
of Charles the First;) sometimes Satan the Father and Prince of Heresies, stirs
up War against the Woman; and Antichrist always having an intestine hatred, and
bitterness of Spirit and Mind against Christ and his Truth, instigates and sets
on work still some Instruments or other, for the opposing, distructing and
dividing of those Persons who profess the Gospel: Or, Thirdly, from covetous
Designs and Affections. The Fountain and Original of all Wars (says Plutarch)
are the corrupt, covetous desires of Men. Fourthly, Wars come from Ambition, as
with Tyrconnil, who is Ambitious to Rule Ireland, that Kingdom never ruled by
Papists since Queen Elizabeth's Reign until now, he being there placed, it is
by a Romish King; yet by Act of Parliament contrary to Law, and at present he
still Usurping, contrary to the present established Powers and Authority.

Having thus far run over the Grounds and Causes of War. Our next thing is to
consider Requisita, what, or how many things be requisite in War.

Three things necessary in War, as a Soldier. Thuyd. lib. 5.
These three things are necessary: First, to be willing to fight; because if a
Man hunt with unwilling Hounds, he will scarcely ever catch the Hare; and if a
Man fight against his Will, he will hardly endeavor as he ought, to overcome
him, or them, with, or against whom he fights.

Secondly, to fear Disgrace and Shame; for in case he be shameless and fearless
of Disgrace, he will quickly flee, and forsake his Colors.

Thirdly, to be obedient to Commanders; for in case the Soldier does not obey
his Captain and Commanders, he will quickly be disranked, he may be quickly
slain or taken by the Enemy, and cannot perform any good service for him, under
whom he fights.

Three things necessary in War, as a Christian.
But to speak now as a Christian only; these three things are necessary in War.

First, a Lawful Authority commanding it; for War must not be attempted,
without the Authority of the Magistrate.

Secondly, 1 Judge. 20.13. 2 King. 18.14.
a Lawful and Just end or cause occasioning and moving it.

Thirdly, A good affection in following it, or a due consideration of the
manner of the enterprizing or prosecuting of this War; for though your cause of
War against Ireland at present, be Just; yet you must not rashly wage War, but
all other means must first be tried.

It is also requisite to enquire what the Nature of War is. What the Nature of
War is, and its Necessaries. Plutar. in Lacon. Bruso. lib. 3. c. 15. Witness
the Citizens of Dublin going to Collens-wood on black Monday in Easter week.


First, War is sometimes the Whetstone of Fortitude, and the encourager and
stirrer of Youth unto Martial Discipline. When the King of the Lacedoemonians
did threaten, that he would utterly destroy and raze a certain City (as
Tyrconnil does now threaten to Fire Dublin, in case he hears of Forces from
hence landing) which had often annoyed the Lacedoemonians (as Dublin has the
Irish ever since the Conquest, it being never taken by them, although now in
the hands of them by the permission of the late King) and found them work; the
Ephori would not permit it, saying, Thou shall not destroy nor abolish the
Whetstone of Youth, calling thus that City, which so often troubled them, The
Whetstone of Touth; because their young Men thereby were whetted, and their
Affection set on edge, to be skilful in the art of War, seeing there were those
so near them, who would try both their skill and strength upon every occasion
and advantage.

Isa. 21.15. Jer. 46.16. 2 Samuel 2.26. Jer. 5.22. Jer. 4.10.
Secondly, War most commonly is evil, whence the Scripture sometimes calls it a
Grievous Evil; sometimes an oppressing Evil; sometimes a bitter Evil, a
devouring Evil; and sometimes an Evil which pierces unto the Heart and Soul.

Thirdly, War is of that Nature, that few are enriched thereby, as may thus
appear: If any grow rich by War, then it is those who gather the spoils
thereof; but seldom these, therefore few or none. We say, Mala parta male
dilabuntur, Goods ill got, waste like Snow before the Sun; yea Lawful prey or
pillage is seldom long enjoyed, according to our English Proverb, (lightly
come, lightly go, and therefore I may spend it the more freely.)

Joh. 1.15. Heb. 11.34. 2 Samuel 11. Ezekiel. 14.21.
Again, War is a miserable Plague, whence this Word, War, in the Hebrew Tongue,
has its Name from cutting, biting, and devouring; because Wars devour and
consume many; Hence the Sword is said to have a Mouth, that is, an Edge; and to
eat, that is, to kill. War is one of God's four Plagues, 2 Samuel 24. Lev. 26.16.
Deuteronomy. 48.44.
yea one of his sorest Judgments, and seems to be one of the greatest of all
the three or four.

Let not these miseries, my dear Brethren, affrighten you, or cause ye to say,
If War be of this Nature, then what may we think thereof?

First, Augustine. in Sermon. de Centur.
Ye may safely think some War is Lawful, as St. Augustine says, If
Christianity should blame or tax all Wars, then, when the Soldiers asked
Christ, what they should do for the Salvation of their Souls; he would
undoubtedly have bidden them to cast away their Weapons, and to have given over
War, which Christ does not, but only forbids them to wrong any, and bid them be
content with their wages; which shows plainly that some Wars are Lawful, and
therefore not to be condemned: Just thus our War with Tyrconnil, and the Irish,
is not to be condemned, as you shall hear anon.

Secondly, Julius Caesar Com. Lib. 7.
You may think that the event of War is most uncertain, and therefore they are
much mistaken, who expect from Wars nothing but good news, and prosperous
success in all Designs and Enterprises; for he who puts on his Armor, must not
brag, as he that puts it off. Philip of Macedon warring upon the Grecians,
Diogenes came into his Tent, and being conducted to the Emperor, and asked if
he were a Southsayer or Fortune Tellers, answered, Yes, I am a true Fore-teller,
and Fortune Tellers of thy folly and vanity, who (when none compells thee) comes
to hazard thy Life and Kingdom, to cast the dice of War, whether thou shall
live or not, and whether thou shall have a Kingdom at Command, or to possess or
not. When two Armies are in the Fields, we see both of them to have warlike
weapons; and both to have Humane Bodies, and not the one of them to be armed,
and the other naked; the one Mortal, and the other Immortal; and therefore
success, event, expectation, never deceive us or frustrate our hope so much in
any thing, as in War.

War soon begun, but not easily ended.
Thirdly, You must consider, War is not so easily ended as begun, therefore you
are all to take notice of this, who undertake War, That it is easily begun, but
hardly ended; easy to enter into, but hard to get out of, (like a curious
Garden Maze) the beginning and ending not being in the same Man's power; for
every Coward or fresh water Soldier may begin War, but it is laid aside when
the Conqueror will.

Another thing necessary for War, Soldiers and Officers are to know, that is,
what things are justly taxed in War.

First, An implacable desire of revenge, or to mischief those with, or against
whom ye fight; for although ye may punish Offenses, yet ye must not revenge
your selves; for in War, ye should be more inclinable to spare, when ye can
take, and with safety keep alive, than to kill, especially, when the War is
undertaken for the punishment of Delinquents (as those now of Ireland) because
then, if ye may take them alive, they may fall by the Sword of Justice in the
Magistrates Hand, as well as by you in Battle; and therefore they who have no
mercy upon any in War, are justly taxed.

Secondly, Cruelty in revenging and punishing in Wars, is justly taxed; for
although any of you, may kill your Enemy in Battle, you are not to delight in
using Cruelty toward them, by devising new or strange torments (as the Irish
did to the Protestants in Ireland,) ripp up Women's Bellies, and take Infants
out of the same, or casting of People down into the water from high Bridges, as
they did over Port-down-Bridge; or for thrusting skeans into them, and leaving
them in torture. These Cruelties are to be avoided.

Thirdly, Cruelty and Pillage is taxed in War; for although it be not a Sin to
fight in War, yet to fight or War only for Prey or Pillage, is a Crime.

In the next place, The lawfulness of War at present with Ireland.
you are to consider the lawfulness of War, and how you may go against your
Enemies with a safe Conscience, and upon terms you now are going to fight.

First, Your now present War with Tyrconnil, is Just and Lawful, as it is for
the Protestant Religion there in Ireland, planted by Authority of Parliament,
and now a destroying by Popish Rebels, usurping, contrary to the Laws of
England, to which that Kingdom is subject, and has sworn Obedience.

Secondly, It is Lawful, as you now wage War, only to secure the Republick's
good, the continuance and settling of Peace and Quietness.

Qui desiderat pacem praeparat bellum. Vigetius. Tul. 1. Offic.
Men prepare War when they desire Peace, because (as we say in a Proverb)
Weapons bode Peace; yea, Wars are undertaken, that Men may live in Peace,
without Injury and Oppressions; Augustine. in lib de verbo Dom.
and as Men sustain and endure hard labor, upon hope of rest and ease; so wise
Men make War in hope, and for the perfecting of Tranquillity and Peace! Indeed,
Men do not desire Peace, that War may follow; but make War, that Peace may be
obtained: Let those therefore who wage War with or against any, be Peacemakers
in their warring; that is, laboring to overcome those against whom they fight
and contend, that so they may bring them to embrace the sweet and profitable
conditions of Peace. In War, we say the end must be good, which end in general
is God's Glory, in special conservation of Justice, and confirmation of Peace:
Pugna Pacis Matter, War is the Mother of Peace.

War is Lawful, as it is for the defense of Man's own rights, 2 Samuel 16.12.
or for the safety, safeguard and preservation of our Cities and Habitations,
(just thus is our condition, we poor Protestants of Ireland, Tyrconnil and all
his crew having taken away our Places, Offices, Cattle, Habitations, Rights and
Privileges, no Protestant having now any security for Life or Estate) for
reason teaches the Learned, Necessity makes the old Wife trot, Custom the
Gentiles, Cicpromilone.
and Nature the wild Beasts, to repay War with War, and Force by Force, when
they are robbed and deprived of their Right, by Injustice and Oppressions.

War is Lawful, when it is to repulse our Enemies; for Moses said to Joshua,
Choose us out Men, and go Fight: Upon which Words Piscator observes, That it is
Lawful for the People of God, to defend themselves with weapons against ours
Enemies: Thus do the Northern Protestants against the Papists in Ireland, who
will usurp all into their Hands if they can: Therefore when Moses bad Joshua to
choose out Men to go fight, he did nothing of himself, but by God's Directions.

Our War with the Papists of Ireland is just and lawful, being undertaken with
good Advice, and given over with all willingness, when it may, with Safety, and
Convenience, to the good and Benefit of Church and State.

Our War with Irish Papists is lawful as it is in the Defense of the Innocent:
For that War whereby either our Country is defended from Invaders as from
French, St. Ambros. de offic. Genesis 14.14.
or the weak and innocent from oppression, or our friends from Thiefs and
wicked Persons, is a most just War; or when War is attempted, to bridle the
insolency and Cruelty of the wicked.

Our War with Ireland at present, is Lawful, for the punishing of those public
injuries and wrongs done by Popish Government, by Popish Judges and Lawyers,
See Tul. Offic.
to the Protestants of that Realm, since the coming of the late King James the
Second to the Crown, for just Wars were wont to be thus defined, Contentions
whereby we endeavor to punish public injuries and wrongs; and therefore that
War was not only of old held just, but also necessary, which defended force by
force.

It is Lawful to fight against Ireland, as it is for the preservation of
Christians, and of the People of God, 2 Samuel 10.12.

Our War with Irish Papists is now Lawful, as the cause is just and weighty,
not light and frivolous, as about the shadow of an Ass, or the fleece of a
Goat, as the Proverbs are, that is, for trifles, and things of no value; but as
Suetonius said to and of Augustus, Suetonius in August. cap. 21.
Quod nulli genti sine justis and necessariis bellum intulit, That he never
made War with any Nation, without just and necessary Causes.

Our War is just, as it is taken by Lawful Authority from King, Queen, and from
a General Convention of a Nation and the Privy Council.

It is Lawful to War against the Irish, as they do at present injure all
Protestant Subjects, and as they have invited Foreigners to come and cut us off
from our Estates, Judge. 19.25. and 1.5.
Religion, and Liberties; for our Country may be here injured by two manner of
ways: First, as Tyrconnil invades us by unjust Forces, all our Temporal
Possessions and Goods, laboring by a strong Hand, to deprive us utterly of
them, whether they be our Liberties, Laws, Lives, Wealth, Inheritance, Wives,
Children, etc. Now against such as these, the Protestants have just cause to
defend their Rights, all being proved by God's Word. Secondly, as that Traitor
labors to rob and spoil us of our Spiritual and Eternal Treasure and Riches,
to wit, Deuteronomy. 13.14. 2 Samuel 10.12.
of our true Worship of God, the true, pure and sacred Scriptures and Religion,
and consequently the Salvation of our Souls.

Our War is Lawful (by God's Word) against Irish Papists, as against Apostates,
Deuteronomy. 13.12. See Lyranus in Numbers 31. And the Act of Parliament.
and back-leaders in Religion, contrary to Reformation, and the Laws of the
Nation, as well as of God.

Our War against Irish Papists is Lawful, as it is for the preservation of the
liberty of the Subject, and for the preventing of Popish slavery and bondage.
When time and necessity requires (says Tully) we must fight, because death is
to be preferred before base slavery and servitude, and a Man had better die in
the Wars, than live in disgrace and bondage.

Lastly, Our War is Lawful, as there is no other means left for the utter
expulsing of Tyranny, Popery, Rebellion, Idolatry, and Superstition out of that
Kingdom, but through War; as they be an insolent and stubborn sort of People,
not contented with what the Acts of Setlement provided, nor with toleration of
Mass, but strive to have all or nothing: Thus you see there is little hopes of
safety any more for Protestants to live in that Kingdom, but by War.

Brethren, having I hope encouraged you with the lawfulness of this just War,
there are more things yet to be considered: You are always to remember, that in
War, though your cause be just and lawful, and the Authority sufficient; yet
must not this War be rashly or hastily undertaken, for no Man tries
extremities at the first; for War is one of the sharpest remedies to cure the
maladies of a Commonwealth, and the event thereof is both doubtful and
dangerous, and therefore it is the last refuge you have, necessity enforcing
you thereunto.

Number. 10.9.
I know some sort of People will be apt to dispute whether it be Lawful for
Christians, now under the Gospel, to make War or not. That it is Lawful, it is
thus proved.

Judge. 1.38.
First, The Almighty God prescribed a form for making War, Deuteronomy. 20.1. therefore
certainly God himself did allow his People sometimes, and upon some occasions,
to make War.

Secondly, You may read that many of Gods, Faithful Servants have made War; as
Abraham, Genesis 14.18. as Moses, Exodus 17.8. Joshua, Exodus 17.9. Josh. 1.14.
Judge. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 11. Chapters. Also the Kings have made War, as
David, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah.

Luke 3.14.
Thirdly, St. John Baptist forbids not Soldiers to fight, neither commands he
them to give over War, if they would be saved, but to wrong none and to be
content with their wages.

Romans 13.4.
Fourthly, the Magistrate is said, not to bear the Sword in vain, but to be the
Minister of God for our good, and a revenger to execute wrath upon him who does
evil; which plainly shows, that the right of the Sword is allowed both
against private faults and Offenders, and also against public, who by Arms are
to be resisted and opposed.

Fifthly, Act. 10.1.
Cornelius the Centurion is commended for his Faith, and did not give over
Warfare (that we read of) when he was baptized; which, undoubtedly, the
Apostles would have mentioned, and not have suffered, if War had been
prohibited unto Christians; and so likewise is the Faith of another Centurion
commended highly, Matt. 8.10.

Sixthly it is most certain that the greatest part of the Magistrate's Duty is
to protect and defend Innocents, Orphans, Widows, and those that are oppressed,
(such as our Brethren and Sisters yet in Ireland, Romans 13.4.
and that have escaped Tyrconnil's Tyranny) which sometimes without Arms cannot
be done: And therefore if the Case require it, the godly Magistrates may flee
unto this last remedy, of War; now it may fall out, that not one, or two, or a
few, but a multitude may do evil, and commit some outrage, (as our Irish
Enemies) who cannot be resisted but by force of Arms, and then the Magistrates
are to use this means of the Sword, for the suppression of Evil, and the
vengeance of Evildoers.

Seventhly, Josh. 1. Jud. 11. and 13. Chap. 1 Samuel 15. and 30. Chap. Psalm. 44.
That which God persuades us unto, and which is done by the inspiration and
assistance of his Holy Spirit, is Lawful; but God often persuades and exhorts
the Saints to make War, and is said to be present with them by his Spirit, and
to give Victory unto them; and therefore War is Lawful.

Eighthly, That which the Saints do by Faith, is Lawful unto them, But by Faith
they make War, Heb. 11.34. therefore War is Lawful unto Christians.

Eccl. 3.8.
Ninthly, The Scripture says, There is a time to War, and a time to make Peace:
Therefore War is Lawful.

Lastly, Our great God himself, is styled, The Lord of Hosts, as a Man of War,
one who teaches our hands to War, and our fingers to Fight, and who gives
Victory in Battle: Therefore a Christian War, for God's Word, for the Truth and
Religion, is Lawful.

But others will perhaps startle you with this Query, Whether you may Lawfully
oppose Tyrconnil, he having the late King's Commission for his Government
there, which is yet not delivered up.

The Answer is, He had a Commission for being Lord Deputy of Ireland; but the
Query will be again, How far his Commission will warrant his Actions: For the
Earl of Strafford, who was formerly Lord Lieutenant of that Nation, was
questioned in one or two of the Articles against him, for going beyond his
Bounds and Commission.

Again, are the Protestants of Ireland, the King's Subjects, as well as the
Papists? or has he this inserted in his Commission, to oppress Protestants, to
Tyranize over them, and to suppress the Religion of the Church of England? no
surely, for to do that were not only contrary to the Laws of God, and of
England, but to the Coronation Oath of the late King James the Second, and to
his promise: Further note, Ireland is an Island or Realm, ever since
Gorguntius's his time, belonging to the Crown of England, and thereby subject
to the Laws and Powers thereof, and depends on the Government and Laws of
England, under whom ye your selves do derive your Commissions; and he, the said
Tyrconnil, usurpeth that Government in not delivering up that Sword.

Let us now come to the remedies against War, that are both for the preventing
and removal of it.

Now the remedies are either Moral, Martial, or Theological.

First, The Moral means are two; to wit, humble Suits and Supplications for
Peace unto them, from whom a War is feared, and expressions of the Loyalty of
our Actions, and sincerity of our Intentions and Desires, however they may be
wrested or misconstrued.

The Military means are many; namely, First, to follow close a Victory. This
was Hanibal's fault, who could tell better how to win the Field, than how to
use his Victory: And this Caesar blamed in Pompey, that having once the better
of him, he did not follow his Fortune.

Secondly, another Military means for removal of Wars, is Prudence, magnanimity
and skill in Martial Discipline, in the Captains, Commanders, and Officers.

Thirdly, Another is for Captains and Commanders to observe, and mark
diligently all conveniences and advantages of time and place, etc. both for
pitching their Tents, and fighting their Battles.

Fourthly, Another is, for Soldiers strength, Courage, Resolution, and
Obedience to their Commanders.

Fifthly, Another is for Captains and Soldiers in necessity, when they cannot
help one the other.

The last of our Martial means is, for Captains and common Soldiers to be well
armed, for and against all Essays and Assaults.

The Theological, or Religious remedies or means, for the preventing of Wars,
are these.

To War upon our selves: The Oracle of Apollo, answered those of Cyrrha, That
if they would live in Peace at home, they should make War with their Neighbors
abroad; but if we desire Peace with others, we must wage continual War with our
selves, our own Sins and wickednesses within, being the true cause of War
without.

Secondly, To humble our selves before God by fasting, Joel 2.3. Jonah 3.

Thirdly, To enter into a Covenant and a Holy League with God, Hos. 2.18.

Fourthly, Seriously to repent, and to turn truly unto God, Lev. 26.40. Deuteronomy.
30.1.32.36. 1 Samuel 7.3.

Fifthly, A promise of thankfulness and thanksgiving unto the Lord, if he will
be pleased to give Victory unto us, or preserve and deliver us from War, and
the performance of this promise, when he had answered our desires.

Sixthly, A Prayer unto God, and that both in general and particular.

First, In general, we must pray that the Lord would be our Captain in the time
of War, and take our part and fight for us, there being nothing without him
which will or can help us: Neither strong and well instructed Armies, Psalm.
33.16. Nor forced Cities, Amos 5.9. Nor great and mighty Colleagues or
Confederates, Psalm. 60.13.62.10. Therefore let us not trust in any of these, or
the like; but only in the Lord, as our Forefathers have done formerly, whom he
delivered from their Enemies.

You are (dear Brethren) likewise to consider the work of the Lord your God
ordinarily by means; therefore ye must in special and more particularly pray
when you are ready to fight, that the Lord would bestow on your Captains,
Commanders, Psalm. 20.1, 5.
and Officers such Wisdom, that they may consult of, manage and order all
things prudently and discreetly, and prosecute, yea execute all things
prosperously, unanimously and with good success.

Secondly, That God would incline the Hearts of the Soldiers unto Obedience
and Subjection to their Captains, and preserve them from all Sedition, and
rising up against their Commanders.

Thirdly, That the Almighty God would preserve both Commanders and common
Soldiers from all wickedness and impiety, especially from those heinous
offenses which too frequently follow the Camp, and accompany Wars; as namely,
Blasphemy, Fornication, Rapes, Swearing, Drunkenness, Gaming, Jars,
Contentions, Theft, Pilfering, etc.

Prove. 1.16. Prove. 28.9.
Now that these your Prayers may become Effectual, two things are required.

First, They must proceed from a pure Mind, and from a Heart purged from Sin.

Isa. 1.15. Isa. 59.2. Mich. 3.1. Jam. 1.16.
Secondly, They must proceed from a Faith unfeigned, to wit, from a firm
confidence and assurance, that the Lord of Hosts would hear your Prayers, in as
much as may stand with his Glory, and your Good. Thus much for the remedies or
means for the removing of the Plague of War from you.

It may in the last place be demanded, how Victory may be obtained in War, or
by what means you may not only be preserved from the power of your Enemies in
Battle, but also bring them by Conquest and Victory to Subjection?

First, the Martial means for the obtaining of Victory in War, are either
Negative or Affirmative.

As for the Negative, if Soldiers desire Conquest in fight, then in the first
place you must not fall to pillaging too soon, lest your Enemies take occasion
thereby to fall upon you, and so take you unprovided.

Secondly, You must not pursue your Enemies in flight so eagerly as to mingle
your selves with them, or to run your selves so far amongst them, that you are
not able to bring your selves off again with safety.

Thirdly, You must not trust at all to the multitude, for not always that Army
which is the greatest prevails, but often times the least; for proof sake,
Darius against Alexander, Pompey against Caesar, Hanibal against Scipio,
Antonius against Augustus, and Mithridates against Sylla, had greater Forces
without comparison than their Enemies, and yet were overcome.

Fourthly, You must not trust in your own strength, Aug. de verbo Apost.
but hearken to the saying of a Grave and Pious Father, viz. to St. Augustine,
Thou have therefore, O Man, (says he) not overcome in Battle, because thou
presumedst of thy self; for he who before fight trusts in his own strength,
shall be thrown.

Now, as touching the Affirmative martial Means, for the obtaining of Victory
in War.

First, for Captains highly to prize their Soldiers: Fabius Maximus sent to
Rome to the Senate for Money to redeem the Soldiers which Hanibal had taken
Prisoners, and being denied thereof, commanded his Son to sell all his Lands,
and bring Money for their ransom, so highly did he value and esteem the
freedom of his Men: Thus every chief Officer should do, if he would win the
Love and Affection of his Soldiers, without which, a Commander should hardly
obtain Victory.

Livius.
Secondly Courage and Resolution in Battle; 300 noble Men of the House of the
Fabii, took upon them, all alone, to wage Battle against the Vientines, to
show, that a true and magnanimous Soldier will not fear to undertake any
noble, feasible Enterprise for the obtaining of Victory in the Day of Battle.

Sen. Epist. 15.
Thirdly, long Preparation for the Undertaking thereof: For he must long prepare
for War who would speedily overcome; because a long preparation of War makes a
speedy Victory.

Sen. Epist. 15.
Fourthly, prosecute your War with good Counsel and Advice; for there must be a
Council at Home, when there is a War abroad.

Fifthly, You are to have a diligent observation of all conveniences and
inconveniences which may happen, whether of Sun, Wind, Mists, etc. for the Sun
and Dust hinder your sight, and the Wind being contrary, or in your Face, is
noxious both to Horse, Rider, and all kinds of Dorts, Arrows, and Shots.

Sixthly, Trust not to the multitude of wild young blades, but to the use and
assistance of experienced Soldiers, who know their terms of art, postures,
conveniences, inconveniences, when to advance, when to fall off, and how to
use their Weapons, and how to handle their Arms; for if your Army do consist of
raw young and fresh water Soldiers, who seldom or never saw a Man wounded or
fall, Plutarch in Apoph.
when they come to see such fights, they will tremble and be confounded with
fear, and think rather to fly away than to stay.

Seventhly, Policy and Stratagems in War.
Policy and secret stratagems are to be observed in War; which Policy's
threefold.

First, In the immediate endangering of your Enemy; observe Hanibal, for he
never sought any Battle, without laying some ambush for the ensnaring of his
Enemies. For when a just War is taken in hand, it matters not whether a Man
endeavor to conquer, subdue, and worst his adversaries by open force, or
secret politic devices; for our Almighty God commanded Joshua by deceit or a
secret stratagem, to overcome the Inhabitants of Ai. Therefore remember
Antigonus, who being asked, how a Man should give the Onset upon his Enemy; (he
answered) either by force, or fraud; either openly, or by deceit.

Secondly, Policy in War is sometimes for the immediate preservation of an
Army, and mediate or consequent disadvantage of an Enemy; for P. Emilius to
avoid the Sun that shined in his face, and in his Horsemen, was so long in
ranging his Army, that by the time the Battles should jo^, the Sun was upon his
back: The like policy used Marius, against the Cymbrians; and Augustus, against
the Flemings.

Thirdly, Policy in War is sometimes for the encouraging of the Soldiers
against their Enemies: For Polemon to make his Soldiers fiercer in assailing
the Lacedaemonians, cast his Colors into the midst of his Enemies, whereupon
they pressed on them with greater violence, esteeming it a great shame to
abandon their Ancient, or to have their Enemies possess their Ensign.

These and many other the like Military means are and ought to be used for the
obtaining of Victory of War.

Some may Object and say, That Victory in War comes only from God; and
therefore, all Military means are vain, none being able to preserve us from
War. But hearken, we pray, to our Answer, to neglect the means wholly, is to
tempt God's Providence, and to trust in the means, is to distrust in God's
Providence: Therefore we must observe how means profit, and how not.

First, Military means will help you; and they be means ordained by God, for
the removal of the malady of War, if ye use them in the fear of the Lord your
God, and because ordained by him, putting our Trust, Confidence, and Affiance
for our Protection and Preservation wholly in him, and in his loving kindness
toward us, notwithstanding the use of means.

Lastly, My dear Brethren, you are to consider, these means will not help you,
if you despise and neglect your God, the God of Hosts; for Victory in War is
neither got by multitude, nor by strength, but by the aid and assistance of
him; now therefore these Military means must be used, still praying to God for
to grant his assistance to your endeavors, for he is the God of Victory, and
causes Wars to cease in the World, unto whom all praise and Glory belongs,
both for the enjoyment of all Good, and preservation from all Evil, whether of
sin or punishment.

FINIS.

