An ELEGIACK VERSE, On the Death Of the Pious and Profound GRAMMARIAN and
RHETORICIAN, Mr. ELIJAH CORLET, SCHOOLMASTER of CAMBRIDGE, Who Deceased Anno
Aetatis 77. Feb. 24. 1687.
On Roman Feet my stumbling Muse declines,
To walk unto his Grave, left by her Fall
She trespass, in accosting of his Head
With undeserved breach. In jingling Rythme
She thinks it not convenient to Dance
Upon his Sacred Hearse; but mournful Steps
If Metrically ordered, she computes
The most becoming of this Tragic Scene.
Could Heaven signific Ball (whose boundless Womb
Millions of flaming Aetna's does ingulf)
From Candle's dull and oleaginous
Transfused Beams, a glowing Atom draw,
Which might a super-added Luster give
Unto its conick Rays; then might our Verse
Swell with impregnant hopes of bringing forth
Some rich Disply of Corlet's Virtues rare.
But this Herculean Labor forced we deem
Not second to Impossibilities.
This presses hard our timorous heart whence flows
A Torrent of amazing Fears, whose Waves
Bode Universal Deluge to that Verse
That dares pretend to equalize his Fame.
Creep then, poor Rythmes, and like a timid Hare
Encircle his rich Vault, then gently squatt
Upon his Grave the Center there proclaim
Though he subside, yet his abounding Worth
Does infinitely supersede thy Lays.
Tell to the World what Dowries Nature showered
Into his large capacious Soul; almost
Profuse in large Donations; yet kind Art
Still adds unto the store, striving to reach
Perfection's Top, during a mortal state.
Sagacious Nature, provident that naught
Of her dispensed bounty frustrate prove,
Boyls up this Font of Learning to an head,
Which over-topping of its Banks she glides
Through Nature's Conduit-pipes into the Soil
Of tender Youth, which gaping sucks it in,
Like thirsty Stars Bright Phebus's liquid light.
A Master of his Trade, whose Art could square
Pillars of rooted strength whose shoulders might.
A Commonwealth uphold. Aholiab-like
Divinely qualified with curious Skill
To carve out Temple work, and cloth the Priest
With sacred Robes, adapted for the Use
Of Functions so divine. --
Rivers of Eloquence like Nectar flowed
From his Vast Ocean, where a Tully might
Surfeit with draughts of Roman Eloquence.
Immortal Oaks (whose golden mouth never blew
A blast defiled with indisposed Speech)
Suspecting his own parts, rarely pronounced
His Ciceronean lines, until they touched
This Lydius Lapis CORLET: then approved
They Are Eloquence proof esteemed, and challenged
The Roman Tribe of Orators to spend
Their subtilty, and pierce their Eagle's Eyes
Into their very bottom. --
Had Grecian Dialect and Roman Tongue
Survived this Age within their native Soil,
Endless had been their Feud; Athens and Rome
Had set their Tully's and Lemosthenes to sight
With Swords brandished with shining Eloquence
For to decide the Controverse, and prove
To whom by right Great CORLET did pertain.
This proving unsuccessful, naught can quench
Their flaming zeal, save by ( Colossos like)
Erecting his large Statue, whose proud feet
Might six their Station on the Pinacles
Of each of these Metropolies of Art.
Nor were his Parts exclusive of his Zeal
In serving his rich Donor. No Serpent
Bearing a fulgent Jewel in his Crest,
While cursed Poison steeps his venomed heart.
But Grace the Crown of all shone like a Sun
Fixed in the Center of that Microcosm.
Blown to the full, perfumed with sacred smell,
This flower Heaven plucked. When Natures (...)
Too feeble grown to bear such ponderous fruit
Elijah's Chariot born on Seraph's wings,
Mounts with this Treasure to the port of Bliss.
Sic moestus cecinit NEHEMIAH WALTER.


