THE NATURAL HISTORY OF Gloucester-shire.
By ABEL WANTNER, Citizen of GLOUCESTER.
CHAP. I. Of the Ancient City of Gloucester, from its Original.
AFTER such time as Julius Caesar had compelled the Britains, to become
Tributaries to the Roman Empire, Ann. Mundi ^0^5. He by reason of the Civil
wars that arose at Rome, was obliged to continue at Home for many Years. During
which time, either through his remiss Government, or else being not mindful of
those Kingdoms and Provinces, which had sorn Allegiance unto him, they revolt
from their Obedience, infomuch, that after his Decease, the succeeding
Emperors, ( viz.) Octavian Augustus, Tiberius Claudius, and Cajus Caligula,
thought it more Prudence, carefully to preserve what they had already gotten,
rather than uncertainly to grasp at any more: By which means Britain was left,
as it were, almost forgotten; until one Bericus, a Nobleman, Born in Britain
(who for Sedition, and other high Misdemeanors, was expelled his Native
Country) greatly solicited Claudius, the Son of Drucis, who was newly chosen
Emperor, by the Pretorian Soldiers ( Ann. Dom. 43.) to reduce Britain again
to the Roman Obedience; who being over-perswaded thereunto, Claudius Caesar
raises a powerful Army out of Gaul (or France) and other Places, and sends
them against Britain, under the Conduct of Aulus Plautius, his Praetoria, or
Deputy ( Ann. Dom. 44.) who, having crossed the Seas, landeth his Army without
Opposition, and gives Battle to Togodumus, their King, whom he forces to a
Retreat: But in this their good Success they did not long continue, for the
Britains did so assault the Romans, with their daily Fighting, and Skirmishing,
that Aulus Plautius was constrained to send to Rome for Claudius Caesar
(according to his own Appointment before, if Occasion so required) who after
some Dangers upon the Seas, safely arrived in Britain, and soon joins his
Forces with Aulus Plautius, his Deputy.

The Success of whose War, according to Dion, was the taking of Camolodunum,
(now Maldon in Essex) the chief Seat of the British Kings; the Subjection of
that part thereof next the Gauls, the disarming of the Inhabitants, and the
placing of a Colony of old Roman Soldiers therein, Claudius Caesar being the
first that ever fixed a complete Conquest in Britain.

These Things being happily achieved, Caesar, at the End of six Months,
returned to Rome, leaving Publius Ostorius Scapula, his Praetoria, (or Deputy)
to end the War; who soon reduced the higher Part of Britain into the Form of a
Roman Province; taking the Dobunies (who then possessed Oxford shire, and
Gloucester-shire,) into his Protection.

But our British Historians ( viz.) Jeffery of Monmouth, Llanquet, and Others
relate these Things far otherwise; saying, That Arviragus, the Youngest Son of
Cunobeline, (nor Togodumus) was King of the Britains, Ann. Dom. 45. In which
Year, (say they) Claudius Caesar came in Person against Britain, who, when he
could not obtain it by Force of Arms, came to a Composition with Arviragus, and
gave him his Daughter Jennissa in Marriage, which Marriage, (say they) was
consummated at Gloucester. Hereupon King Arviragus, to make the Town more
famous, where this Marriage was solemnized, did not only Beautify the same, but
he likewise greatly Enlarged it with new Buildings, and gave it the Name of
Claudia-Castria, or ( Castrum,) alluding to Claudius Cesar's Name.

But William of Malmsbury, an approved Author, tells you, that these were idle
Fables, begun by Jeffery of Monmouth, and carried on by their Historians, and
Commentators, Men altogether ignorant and unskilful in Antiquity, whose Truth
and Authority is so much to be doubted, that no Man of Sense will give any
Credit to them.

Now Dr. Plott, in his History of Oxfordshire (page 135.) says, That if it be
urged out of Ponticus Virinius, and some Others, that the Emperor Claudius was
at Gloucester, and that he either Enlarged, or Built that City, after his own
Name, in Memory of the Marriage of his Daughter Jennissa, with Arviragus, the
then King of the Britains: Nevertheless (says he) it must be answered, That
notwithstanding the Name of Claudius-Castrum, (now Gloucester) yet, in all
likelihood, there was never any such Matter; for neither Suetonius nor Dion,
(who both lived in his time, and had each of them born the Office of Conful,)
do make mention of any such Name as Jennissa, or that she was so disposed of by
him in Marriage, although they both do number up how many Children Claudius Caesar
had. Besides all this, the Dr. further adds, How was it possible that Claudius
Caesar, who came hither, and returned back to Rome in six Months, should have so
much time as to come to Gloucester, being a Place far in the Country, much more
to build or re-edify that City? For Dion expressly faith, that Claudius Caesar
was but sixteen Days in Britain, and in all Probability, those sixteen Days
were spent in ordering his Army, and that Arviragus was not known to Claudius
Caesar, but that he rather lived in the time of Domitian the sixth in Succession
after him.

Now although it cannot be certainly proved (by any reputable Author) who was
Gloucester's first Founder, yet most certain it is, that the Romans did Build
it, and that of set Purpose to be like a Yoke, as it were, upon the Necks of
the Silures, a fierce and warlike People, who then possessed all that Tract of
Ground, which lies between the two great Rivers, ( viz.) Wye and Severn,
called by the ancient Britains, Vaga, and Hafferne, of purpose to curb their
violent Incursions. And it is altogether as certain, that the Emperor
Antoninus gave it the Name of Glevum, and that he there planted a Colony of
Roman Soldiers, which were called, according to Ptolomy, Coloni-Glevum (or the
White Colony) and to confirm the same, the learned Cambden, in his former
Treatise says, (fol. 36.) That there was an ancient Inscription, found upon a
Quadrant Stone in the Walls of Bath, ( viz.) Dec. Colonia Glev. vixit, Ann.
LXXXVI.

It farther appears, that after the Exturpation of the Romans, that the Saxons
gave it the Name of of Glav-cester, which Word, according to Ninius, (as Mr.
Cambden well observes) came from Glev, and so proportionably Glevum, from the
British Word Caire-Glow, which signifies, white, fair, or splendid; derived or
taken from the High Duke Glovi, or Glovis, Great-Grandfather to King Vortigern,
from whence Glovernia, after whom, the Latins called it Gloucestriae, and the
Vulgar Gloucester, etc.

Having thus far spoken of its Original Foundation, and Name, come we, in the
next place, to treat of the Honor and Reputation it had in the time of the
Britains, with other Remarks to the Conquest, and from thence you have Variety
of Observations, to the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, who made it a City.

I find nothing recorded, by any reputable Author, concerning the City, or
Town, of Gloucester, during the time that the Romans were here in Britain:
Neither have I met with any thing that may be termed remarkable, till the
coming in of Hengist, Prince of the Pagan Saxons, who, through their perfidious
Treachery, slew four Hundred and Sixth of the British Nobility upon the Plain
of Amsbury, within three Miles of Salisbury, at a Place called since
Stone-Henge; which Stones are said to have been there erected as a Monument, or
Memorial of that most bloody and barbarous Slaughter. Amongst whom, at that
time, was the valiant Eldol, Duke of Gloucester, Brother unto Eldade, Bishop of
Gloucester: Who finding of a Stake, which by chance lay on the Ground, He, with
his own Hands, slew (according to Sr. William Dugdale) Seventeen of those
Saxons, and afterward made his Escape to his Dukedom of Gloucester, where he
raised what Forces he could procure, and at Place called Maezbel, on the North
of Humber, meets with Hengist, gives him Battle, and defeats his Army, (
Cambden out of Higden, sol. 208.).

Aethelstan, the 25th King of the West Saxons, Died at Gloucester, but was
Buried at Malmsbury in Wilt-shire, Ann. Dom. 940.

King Edward the Confessor held a famous Parliament at Gloucester, Ann. Dom.
1503. During which time Gruffith, King of South Wales, Rebelled; and, with
thirty Sail of Danish Ships, enters the River Severn, doing great Spoil to
the Country: But at last he was taken at Bullen-Dane, the same we now call
Bully, and there Beheaded, and afterward his Head was presented to King
Edward, at Gloucester.


