HEALTHS NEW STOREHOUSE OPENED, Offering to Familiar Use Such Supplies AS ARE
Most wanting and Really needful to Humane Frailty.

By HEALTH'S Student.

LONDON, Printed by Jane Clowes, and are to be sold by John Sweeting at the
Angel in Popes-head-Alley over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1661.

To the Reader.
IS it uncivil to advise a Reader? possibly it i^: And to little purpose to
persuade an unbia^s'd e^tertainment of these friendly Aids: It being the
unhappine^s of most times, to put off the acceptance of ^ew Di^coveries, till
it is too late, and to lea^e the benefit to be en^^red by the next Generation:
Jealou^ie, e^vy, fear of l^ss, being of ^ too strong for Truth: and, if these
were not; or could be silent; yet Wi^^-it-Self i^ apt to d^oll away their use.

A Scoff is a leight thing but often sadly paid ^^r: the Min^ highly (...)
da^^ing to stoop to the embrace of what it has (...) despi^ed, though it would
save its li^e* ^o c^o^e is every evil followed ^^th its o^^ punishment.

A me^ry heart, therefore, joined with Prudence, co^^iders ^ri^^^^y before it
^udges; thinks thr^^e before i^ sped^s: and, though apt to jest, yet is most
watchful against in^ury to any thing, deeming due ch^^k^, ^s bondage.

Why should it be Imagined, amid'st so much weakness, that nothing's wanting:
or, that things more pertinent cannot be supplied? Or, why things proposed in
nature of friendly and powerful assistance should not be so indeed? These are
tendered to familiar use, such as the weakest Women, and smallest Children, may
safely take. In such a case as this then, what cause is there of suspicion, but
to taste and try, and so put all, past all dispute?

Which may be done also without Charge: so confident is the present keeper of
the Storehouse, which now stands always open, for entertainment of the
Ingenious; and to make good its Title: Read on therefore without scruple, and
be satisfied with the reality of its provisions, and of the Integrity of

The Servant of your health, W. W.

HEALTHS NEW Storehouse Opened.
THough the youngest and the strongest days of life, are the times to lay in
for, and to secure, a long-lasting and healthful Constitution and the times of
health, to provide against the frequent assaults of sickness and distemper, yet
to most of either Sex, the voice of Experience seldom seems better then a
mockery. Tell them of their daily wast and expense of spirit, of their
continual generating within them the seeds of sickness and discases, they hear
you not; they are for this Gamesom sport, and the other wild and violent
Exercise, and if taken ill, do as others use to do, recover with difficulty,
with loss of blood and Spirits, boast of danger escaped, little or nothing
regarding how deeply their nature is thereby wounded, and so remain as unapt
for counsel as before.

And yet, as it is the surest way to eternal bliss, to remember thy Creator in
the days of thy Youth: so is it the most certain way, to the happiness of this
Life, (which rests very much in man's health and chea^fulness) to give diligent
heed betimes, to those advices which respect the well ordering of the Body, both
as to Diet, Physic, and Refreshment; and to endeavor after so much skill, at
least, as to be able to distinguish between pure and impure, proper and
improper, unto man; who being of Creatures next unto the Angels, both in his
intellects and constitution, ought to aim at so effectual and so refined a
Diet, that the faculties of his Soul, may be accommodated with so exquisite a
Spirit and so clear a Body, that there may be a perfect Harmony in the whole
Man.

And as these Considerations are most needful i^ time of Youth, in which the
most are apt to set light by all things which most concern them; so are they
not to be neglected by those of riper years, who commonly are so much wedded to
their customary ways, that if they keep themselves but any thing hearty and
free from pain, deem their Diet good, and themselves Well enough; though they
are either sad and melancholy, fearful, superstitious, fretful, passionate,
covetous, violent, and revengeful: All which may proceed (and does commonly)
from the impropriety of Spirits in what they feed on, or use for helps; and
might be otherwise without difficulty, to the much more comfort of themselves
and their relations.

Nor are the Elder sort unconcerned herein: it being too much from that
scrupulosity which dwells in them, and their distrust of all new Discoveries;
which makes the younger sort so unapt to give ear, or credit, to Counsels of
this nature: What? (say they) have we lived to these years, and do we not know
what is good for our selves? and this too, though they a^e full of infirmities,
of which by new Aids they might be discharged; forgetting also that no mere man
was ever yet too old to learn.

But hence it is, That although both Diet and Physic, in their best and
largest forces, do but weakly perform their offices; the first of Sustentation,
the other of Restoration; and, that man's health (which is so great a part of
his happiness) is so weakly defended that the strongest are soon brought upon
their knees, whilst the weak and sickly in their first illness (the time which
makes or marrs the cure) betaking themselves to dull putrid, and burning
helpers (for want of what is safe and kindly) instead of help betray themselves
to further mischief. Yet all Tenders of farther improvement either to Diet or
Physic, or other Aid, though never so needful, precious, and effectual, are
hardly and sowerly entertained; and under such regardlesnesse, as if there were
nothing but delusion in men, or an impossibility of adding any advancement to
the imperfit Art of Health.

Through which unpreparednesse, averseness, and indisposition to receive with
gladness and gratitude, the productions of the studious, it is, That although
the defects in Physic, Diet, etc. are so manifest, that the most Skilful
profess they believe, the far better part lies undiscovered: yet to make any
considerable supplies, it suffices not by Study, Labor and Industry, to
produce things excellent and necessary; except all possible means be likewise
used, to make their virtues and effects publicly and thoroughly understood, and
that in such sort, as to convince all scrupulous gainsayers.

These (and such like) are the causes of the present Opening of this new
Storehouse of Health, the close keeping thereof being of little more advantage
then a Candle set under a Bushel.

The new Aids therein presented, are in an allowed and Physical sense
Spiritual, untainted, friendly and powerful, as being proposed for an immediate
assistance unto that natural spirit of man, by which the Soul is united to the
Body, and which maintained in its right estate and condition, sustaineth all
its infirmities: so as this and is proportioned for supply of those Forces and
Powers, which both Diet and Physic has hitherto but faintly furnished; for
though properly they are neither Physic nor Diet, yet are they in aid of both,
by strengthening appetite and disgesture, by rectifying and quickening all the
natural faculties, by opening and clearing all the most secret passages of the
Body: and either speedily d^scharging the Distemper, or laying a sure
foundation for farther help: besides, by their benign qualities, and true
Humane Temperature, they are the most acceptable Food of the spirit, the joy of
the Heart, and delight of Life; and, as the genuine heat of the Sun brought
into the inward parts: such and no other are their heat and comfort.

And through whose variety and specifique virtues, hardly any distemper can
befall, but there is amongst them for fit relief, even in all distresses and
occasions; and that with such safety and innocence, that although they have
been frequently used by the weakest, both of men, women and Children, in their
most weak and sickly estates; yet never any thing but good was ever received
from them: so as these arrive happily to take place of all burning, drying, and
impure helpers, so much complained of in former times, yea and warned against
(though little regarded): as in these and the like sensible expressions. I
advise the healthy (much more the weak) to beware of those burning liquors,
which beguile the unadvised World (chiefly in times of mirth and refreshment):
The Life of man (or his Spirit) is in the Blood, which Blood is mild, and
quickly dried up with violent heat.

Such as the Blood is, such are the Spirits (for they issue from the Blood it
self) and such as the Spirits are, such is the temper or distemper of the Brain
and Heart; and such as the Brain is, well or ill disposed, so also are the
virtues of Imagination, Understanding, and Memory.

Proper and true humanized helps to Diet and Physic (such as these), are
therefore of more moment then can suddenly and cursorily be imagined: For, as
another learned one says, The Meat and Drink which we Diet on, or at least the
better part, is terminated into humors, and at last into Spirits, by whose
efficacy, the Flesh, Nerves, Bones, and all parts of the body are nourished,
and augmented, and do, by the never-tyred work of supply, repair decaying
nature. Of so great use are Spirits to the body; and so exceedingly beneficial
are al kindly means, which increase and improve them: The truth is, in that
warfare which is maintained all our life-long, twixt health and sickness, the
main Agents in our defense are our natural Spirits; yea so material unto life,
have the wisest ever deemed them, that they have assigned them to be like
little indiscernable Chains. 'To unite and fasten the Soul to the Body, and
which dissolving, the dissolution of the whole Fabric soon follows.

Which office and effect of Spirits, whoever duly weighs, will soon perceive,
that as nothing is or can be of greater importance to man's health, than the
plenteous contribution of Genuine and Benign Spirits; so also that the true
Improving Virtue of all things taken into the Body, depends upon their
version to the true Humane Temperature. Which being the peculiar qualification
and proper work of those Moderate Spirits with which this little Storehouse is
furnished, renders them most kindly and powerful assistants to Humane Frailty,
and an improvement of the Art of Health; of great importance, and not to be
despised.

Having thus expressed sufficient to induce a belief, that they are such an
assistance to man's Nature as is really wanting, needful and effectual for
supply of the daily wast and expense of Spirit, for heightning and rectifying
of Diet, Medicine, and Refreshment, and for relief in all necessities and
extremities: Take a view of them in their particular Titles, Virtues, and Uses,
as follows: And as

They are always to be had, at the Star in the Postern-Street, joining to
little Moor-fields, viz.
l. s. d. 1. Amicus Vitae: Good in all Surfets, Colds, Agues, etc. at the Pint.
00-01-00 2. Sarguis Vitae: In all Distempers of Stomach and Bowels, at 00-02-00
3. Ad^utrix Vitae: To procure Appetite and Digesture: A pleasing Cordial. 00-02
00 4. Vis Vitae: For Dropsy, Scurvy, Spleen, Wind, Gravel. 00-03-00 5. Succus
Vitae: For Convulsion, Passie, Falling Sickness, etc. 00-05-04 6. La^ Vitae:
For Rickets, Worms, Green-sicknesse, Mother-Fits. 00-05-04 7. Ra^^ix Vitae: In
Coughs, Shortness of Breath, Passions of the Heart, Vomitings, Looseness,
Gripings, etc. 00-06-00 8. Nutrix Vitae: For Consumptions Defluxions; a great
strengthner. 00-08-00 9. Salus Vitae: For all Cases, Infections, Pestilential,
or Dangerous. 00-08-00 10. Medulla Vitae: For Wastings, and all Weaknesses.
00-12-00 11. Deliciae Vitae: Against Sadness, Melancholy; a great Reviver.
01-00-00 12. Stella Vitae: (Not so mild) in Swounings, and all Extremities.
00-12-00 13. Ignis Vitae: (Very high) in Lethargies, Dullness of sight, etc.
00-16-00

There are also diverse others. AS, Spirits of Oranges, Lemons, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Rosemary, Angelica, Mint, Saffron, Bawm, Clary, Wormwood, Mace, Nutmegs, etc.
the virtues and uses whereof are so generally known, as needs no information.

All extracted with such special regard to the true humane Temperature, as
renders them of singular use in all conditions, especially to such whose weaker
Constitutions require Mild and Gentle Helpers; being called Spirits, not for
their Heat, but from their sublime Purity and Vivacity, which are more
Spiritual Qualities, and through which their Operations are not forcible and
violent, but (like Benign Influences) quiet, secret, sure, and most effectual.

So ye have here a large variety of powerful Assistances to humane Frailty,
with whose virtues, who ever thoroughly acquaint themselves, may easily and
pleasantly recrute their continual expense of Spirits, and (in their familiar
use) and strength and vigor to their usual diet; solace and recreate
themselves with real advantage to their healths, and supply all sudden
exigencies without fear of after-inconveniences.

Those now, who know not by sad experience, the difficulty of gaining credit to
truths of this kind, might well suppose enough had already been expressed; to
persuade at least a taste and trial of these, if not a fair and clear
acceptance: But so great a prejudice against new Discoveries, remains upon the
minds of the most by abuse of Deveivers: That what has been said in their
behalf, will hardly prevail for such a reliance upon their use, as their
virtues really deserve: Therefore to silence all opposers, and to obtain their
cheerful embracement; take here the sure testimony of some instances of their
happy victories and successes in diverse remarkable cases and conflicts. Wherein
though the Studier and Producer of them have much to say for daily benefits to
himself and relations (too numerous to recount): yet knowing, whoever duly
weighs the other instances, will easily conclude, They must needs have been
most serviceable, where they have been most employed: he refers wholly to their
other performances and cures else where.

The first of which shall be of a Child about four years old, that had long
time been extreme ill through a Feverish Distemper: The Parents using the
advice of Physicians and all good means for recovery, yet prevailed nothing; so
that the Child was utterly wasted, and no hope of Life remained; his Father
hearing of these Spirits, desired he might try some of them; so he took a Glass
somewhat like a sucking-bottle, holding about a quarter of a pint of the Radix
Vitae: Which the Child liking, kept it always in his hand and fell to sucking
of it a little and a little continually, and grew somewhat lightsome upon it;
the Father seeing it, bestowed as much more upon him, which he took in like
manner; and after that as much again, with which, through Gods blessing, he
became perfectly well.

The second shall be of an Ancient weak Woman fallen into a tedious fit of
sickness, Feverish, and so stuffed in her breast, as she was even breathless.
Much means of physic by Counsel of physicians she had used, but left hopeless
of all She understanding of my spirits, sent for about a pint of the Radix
vitae: and a while after that another; and soon after that another: by the use
whereof continually a little and a little, she became hearty and well again.
But near upon a twelvemonth after fell sick again, and then timely betaking her
self to the ^^me ^emedy, she with somewhat a less quantity recove^^d. And again
about a year after that falling ill again, b^ the very same means again
recovered and continued well for about twelve or fourteen months, as well as
her years considered could be expected.

The third I shall instance, is a Young Gentleman a student belonging to
Cambridge, in so deep a melancholy of mind, so disordered a body, and so
dejected and perplexed a countenance, as can hardly be imagined: stomach, and
head, and spleen, and liver, and bowels, and heart it self, all confounded: was
quite wearied with physic and utterly hopeless of remedy; his understanding
being exercised in nothing so much as in proving to himself an impossibilty of
recovery, and in thwarting all reasonings to the contrary. He was brought unto
me by one who had a very good esteem of my spirits; he was very unapt to
discourse with me, taking no pleasure to speak at all, so as I was fain to fall
into a continued discourse for a good season, showing some grounds of a hopeful
progress toward such effects as in probability could not fail in some
reasonable time, even insensibly and pleasantly to restore him to his native
(or a better) temperature. It wrought quick and effectual with him, for he was
of a sharp and sudden apprehension. We fell into full discourses: and he
became willing to taste my spirits which appearing above what he had conceived
of them, he became suddenly full of hope, and so fell into the use,
principally of the vis vita and Rosemary which indeed were very proper for him:
he used of them about three months time, yet in no great quantity; but such an
alteration did it produce in him, so sprightly confident, discreet, and manly,
strong, healthful, and cheerful, that there could not be more difference
between any two men, then was between what I saw him at first, and what he was
at last, to the joy and comfort of himself and all his friends; for which the
Author of all means of health be ever blessed and magnified.

The fourth Instance, shall be of a man of middle age; who had been a long time
under an extreme sickness: and had used much means with advice in physic, but
still became worse and worse. A friend of his who had tasted of my spirits,
recommended their use unto him as what was likely to do him good, so I received
a letter (it being many miles from London) wherein I was made acquainted with
his sad condition whereupon I sent him a pint of Ra^ix vitae and a quarter of a
pint of Salus vitae, with directions for their use: he was to take them in less
then a weeks time, the which he did: in all which time he found no great
alteration, but immediately after there came pouring from him upward (not like
vomitting being wholly without pain or straining) such abundance of thickened
ropy phlegm as was incredible; soon after which he became thoroughly well and
hearty.

A fifth, I shall Instance, is of a Woman about the age of thirty, taken with a
most violent pain about her heart, which continued with such fierceness that
she thought her heart would rend in pieces: she sent for a small quantity of
Radix vitae, little more then an ounce; but her husband coming home and seeing
in what state she was, sent for half a pint, and caused her to take plentiful
of it until she had by degrees taken it all: upon which she became completely
well that very night, and continued so without any the least ill effect
following. Which I the rather urge because some abusive Artsmen envying their
effects, have detained diverse from their use, affirming, that although they
give ease, yet ill effects follows; which is not in any measure true: for in
whatsoever case I have used them, either alone or mixed, I never perceived the
least bad effect, nor ever heard of any from any that ever used them; nor ever
was I entertained with any pretense of after-claps, but from the party last
mentiored, that was cured by the Radix and Salus: he indeed being brought to me
by his friend many months after, thanking me for the good he had received; his
friend with a tragical countenance interrupting him, said, Indeed he had been
cured by what was sent him, but yet a strange thing followed upon it. I
listened somewhat carefully what it might be, as being very strange to hear of
any sad effects: whereupon he smilingly told me his wife had brought him two
children at a birth, and so ended the sad story, which I relate to convince the
envious of their folly, and to clear my Spirits from such absurd Aspersions.

And other Instance, is of a young Child extremely weakened with long sickness,
feverish, and exceedingly stuffed in the breast and stomach, with a continual
Cough, and refusing all sustenance: the Father being well acquainted with the
virtue of my Lac vita gave some of it to the child, and though it be not of the
most pleasant taste amongst them, yet the child fell in love with it, and
continually lay sipping of it, and so continued till it became perfectly well.
The Father of this child imputes much of his own health thereunto also; and
has done to diverse very much good with it: Amongst others, being where a boy
had burned his eyes with Gunpowder by a squib, and diverse means being used to
quench the heat and inflammation which so exceedingly pained the boy, that he
roared again; This tenderhearted man grieving to see him in such misery, be
thought himself, that certainly that which hurt not a child taken inwardly, but
did so much good to the inward parts, might be as good for the tenderest
outward parts; so fell to bathing the boy's eyes therewith, which suppressed the
heat immediately and gave him ease, when other hopful things, usual in such
cases, had been applied in vain.

An other Instance I have of one of middle age, who upon the least taking cold
a Cough seizes him with that extremity as brings him to Death's door, being of
a Consumptive body: but having always in readiness, either the Radix or the
last named Lac vitae, he enjoyes an indifferent state of health.

An other Instance, is of a Gentlewoman in Labor long and tedious, and at
length so spent as her friends feared both mother and child; all usual cordials
failing, which being understood by a most noble person he sent for a small
quantity of my Radix vitae; which taking both she and her child were instantly
in the desired condition, and this with the value of so small a parcel of money
as a six pence: which I recite, because the envious discourage many from their
use by saying, They are chargeable. Indeed, they are pleasant and of familiar
use, and may by an excessive use be made chargeable; but so small a quantity
does so much good, that if advisedly used, I believe those who repine at their
success could hardly produce cheaper physic in such distressed cases.

An other Instance, I have of a middle-aged Woman in a most sad and dismal
condition much like the Cambridge scholar beforementioned. A friend of hers
that had of my Sanguis Vitae for his family, gave her a taste of it; which so
much revived her that she desired him being to come for London, to acquaint me
with her condition, which he did. And I sent her a pint of the same with
directions how to take it; especially to hold it in her mouth long, before she
swallowed it (which I find of great benefit in all): she took that, and sent
for more, till she recovered into a very happy and cheerful state of health,
both in body and mind.

An other instance, is of a woman ever apt to miscarry being young with child,
and subject to pains and weakness in the small of her back, I gave her only two
ounces of the Medulla vitae, which she was to take a good spoonful at a time in
a mess of Oatmeal, and milk to her breakfast every morning, which without more
help settled her in a good condition, and the next birth she had was of two
hopeful boys at once.

An other of a gentleman of quality and far in years, about fourscore, and
though of a good and wary diet; yet exceeding impotent in all his faculties,
weak appetite bad disgesture, his breath tainted, short, and unquiet sleeps;
with much difficulty retaining his water, drooping in countenance, and very
feeble in all parts who by the continual use night and day of my spirits for
near upon two years, obtained good appetite and strong disgesture, and so
apparently renewed in all parts that he became the wonder of all that knew him;
and I am confident could not by any persuasion be drawn from the use of them,
which some endeavoring to do by telling him that his body being used to them
will always look for them (which is another way of policy some use to withhold
people from their use) his answer was that he was glad his body looked for that
which did him so much good: and that it should not want thereof so long as he
could supply it, and so instead of being diswaded, persuaded all his friends to
the timely use of them. He took about four spoonful, at four in the afternoon,
and as much constantly after his first sleep in the night.

7. Another is of a gentleman who having for a long journey furnished himself
with a long strong (pillar fashioned) glass of the Radix (as he had formerly
done) toward the end of his journey, fell in company of a Minister and his
wife whose horse threw her so dangerously, that they feared she could not live
but forcing her to take a little of the Radix, she began to revive but when
they would have her take more; she could not be persuaded till she was assured
it was no common violent water, so taking more of it, she became perfectly well.

Another is of two gentlemen falling extreme ill upon the road, in so much that
it was thought impossible they could go on their journey, a friend of theirs
having about him a glass of the Radix, recovered them perfectly in an instant.

Another instance is of a gentlewoman of middle age often over toyld with
business, and at such times oppressed exceedingly with wind, wearisomeness and
pains in head and stomach who finds continual benefit and relief by the
constant use of the spirit of Rosemary, drawn in its perfection.

Another is of an ancient woman, who for some years has freed her self from
extremity of wind, and through Gods goodness lives comfortably by the constant
use of the Vis vitae.

Another of a gentleman, who having always a case of most of the sorts of the
spirits; has very often freed himself his wife and children from many sore and
threatening fits of sickness; and as he believes saved much money by the bargain.

Another instance, is of an ancient Gentlewoman above fourscore years old, who
being never without some of these spirits maintains a quickness of wit and
judgment with good health beyond imagination.

Another is of one who having an ancient friend long troubled with weakness and
sickness, persuaded her to use a pill which had often done him good; and withal
advised her to take immediately after it a small quantity of the Ra^ix, and
more at distances of times which she did; and professed that though the pill
wrought much yet she was rather srrengthened and more hearty that very day then
she had been of long time, and so continued.

Another is of an elderly woman, who being under an extreme fit of the mother;
her husband forced her to drink largely of the Vis vitae, and recovered her to
both their wonders.

Another instance, is of a gentlewoman about thirty, that by much weakness,
sickness, and an ^^pty dry Cough, having withal past through the whole course
of Physic, and even hopeless of recovery, being recommended to the use of
these Spirits (by one who had received much good by them) using of them about
four months, recovered beyond all expectation.

Another instance is, of a Girl about ten years old, in an extreme Fever, with
Thirst, shortness of Breath, Cough, with tough Phlegm, and vehement Pains in her
side; yet in this sad case sound no relief, like to what she had by continual
use of the Radix Vitae day and night, for it cooled and quenched her Thirst,
stayed her Cough, ripened her Phlegm, removed her Pains, and she recovered
without bleeding, which every one that saw her, thought impossible.

Another instance, take in the expressions of a Letter written to the Author,
from a Person of very perfect credit: as follows,

Our Dear Friend, Mr. (...) of (...) was lately sick to extreme peril, and
sundry hazardous faintings, neither could his Doctors, though two of them, and
those most eminent in their professions, find out means to persuade his
palate, to approve, or so much as endure the taste of ought they could
administer, until his wife put him in mind of your Radix Vitae; and her stock
being utterly spent, she makes an address to me, if I had any to supply it, if
none, to send for it; well, it was my happiness to be able to supply once,
again, and the third little Bottle of some four ounces: The next news I hear,
the Gentleman is well, and the Doctors upon taste and experience, approve and
admire the use of it: And I bless God for his Mercy that I had it for them.

And for a close to all: the last instance shall be of an Honorable Person,
who was much exercised in the Art of Chimestry; A Person of great worth that
had good esteem of the Spirits, desired he would please to go with him and taste
them, which somewhat unwillingly he did; being there, the Gentleman that
brought him, took two or three Glasses freely down, but could not prevail with
his Noble Friend, so much as to taste or sip of them, until he perceived he was
troubled at his coyness; then he tasted very nicely of one of them, then drank
it down, after that another, and another, and was so taken with them, and is to
this day, that he has made such profession of their pertinency to man's Health
and Prolongation of Life, that its evident he deems them the highest of Arts
attainment; affirming that he has tasted he is confident, the best that either
this Nation, or France, or Spain, or Italy, Germany, or the Netherlands
affords, yet never found any so pleasant, so powerful, and so friendly to man's
Nature, as these are, and i^geniously acknowledged that his aversness to taste
them was, for that he thought it impossible they could exceed what he had
elsewhere tasted, his after commendations resembling that of Ulysses in Homer.

Had you the Odor Smelt, and scent it cast,
It would have vexed you to forbear the taste,
But then (the taste gained too) the spirit it wrought.
To dare high things, set up an end my thought.
And I could for a farwell, tell a true story of some young Gentlemen, who have
found out the right use of these Spirits, fortifying their Nature therewith,
against the accidents attending early risings, late sittings up, Colds, Heats,
unseasonable Diet, toylsome bussling in Business, and continual discourse,
which their occasions subjects them to; all which they pass through with such
Celerity and Pregnancy, in suiting to all Persons and all affairs, that it may
be rationally supposed, the expense of forty or fifty shillings in these may
advantage them some hundreds of pounds yearly, besides the benefit of their
health, the greatest of Temporal Blessings.

And now having thus strewed their way with some of the Roses sprung from their
own virtues; It may be rationally hoped, that wheresoever they are henceforth
spoken of, they will be treated as true and useful Friends: There being not the
least circumstance here related, but what is real truth, and can so be
manifested in few hours time past all dispute: But if jealousy still remain;
It must be concluded to proceed from their covetous Philosophy whose fear of
loss, though from never so gross and putrid things, is cause enough to blast
and ^^ifle all new Discoveries, though never so much wanted, or transcendently
Beneficial: There being

No Enemies to true Science,
Like Arts-men without Conscience.
How far otherwise they may be of use, these instances well weighed will
sufficiently instruct, and Minister good grounds to believe that hardly any
person of any quality, but first or last, at one time or another, may have
special service by them: For who is there that wastes not daily their Natural
Spirits? Who is there that is not liable to the assaults of time and accidents?
Who almost that feels not at least the approaches of some infirmity or other?
Who then would be without such kindly and effectual helpers, as those have
approved themselves?

And although, for every one to carry a small Glass of the Radix or Salus
always about them, might seem ridiculous to youth and daring Spirits: yet that
Authentic Poem, both checks that humor; and (thus) highly warrants so
discreet a practice.

Canto. 6. 12.

Make way, said he, and give experience room;
The Confident of Age, though youth's, scorned guide
My wounds, though past, out-number yours to come
you can but hope, the knowledge I have tried.
His Hilts round pomel, he did then unscrew,
And thence (which he from Ancient Precept wore)
In a small Crystal, he a Cordial drew,
That weary LIFE could to her walks restore.
And as they are thus approved, so where great Magnificence and Delight draws
multitudes together, were they there so familiar as China Oranges, the fancy
would be infinitely advanced, and Nature secured from all fainting accidents.

But where there is daily large and great expense of Spirit, there they are
absolutely necessary; As after any stress of the Body, long and careful
Studies, earnest and loud speaking, in early risings, and late watchings,
violent exercises, hazardous walkings, and dangerous visitations of sick
people, or in crowds and steaming breathings of multitudes; And where damps and
noisome vapors are to be feared, such as have sometime befaln at Goal
deliveries, where for want of help at hand, many of all qualities have been
snatched away in a moment: in voyages of Sea, or journeys by Land or Water,
their use is singularly necessary.

They would be also infinitely useful at the Bath, where (as Doctor Venner in
his Learned Discourse observes) much prejudice is received by the common use of
things, ordinary putrid, and burning, to the great disparagement of those
admired Fountains, whilst the tenderest constitutions and weakest people,
might be familiar with these, and continually refresh themselves without any
after inconveniences.

As advantageous also would they be, were they relied upon, in the use of
Tunbridg, Epsome, or Barnet Waters, where frequently are incurred, most sad
inconveniences for want of such mild, safe, proper and powerful helpers.

And if it should be affirmed, that they are more useful in Physic diverse
ways, then can suddenly be imagined; and more proper for variation and
advancement of Cordials and Cordial Juleps, Electuaries, etc. than any thing
extant, and that they deserve to be well considered, and well studied to those
intentions, it is no more but what frequent experience would strongly plead for.

Much more might be insisted on, but to multiply, were to doubt the progress of
ingenuity.

POSTSCRIPT.
AS touching the quantity that may be taken of them, except the Stella Vitae,
and Ignis Vitae, a child may take out, two or three spoonfuls, as discretion
will direct; and sometimes more, allayed with Sugar does well, women in labor
have taken in two hours time, two ounces of the Salus, and may of any other of
them as safely: and to show clearly their In-offenciveness and Innocence; It is
frequent with Friends sitting and discoursing familiarly together in two or
three hours time to drink their quarterns, half pints and more a piece with
great delight and after contentment.

The Stella and the Ignis, may be taken a spoonful or two or more, without
danger, if the Parties can take it.

Upon the Inventor of the Moderate Spirits.
Wit went wool-gathering these many years.
And Englands Hippocrene was turned to tears.
The Muses choked with smoke and foggy Ale
Croaked in Styx: but now a wholesome gale
From th'Authours Spirits, so refreshes us
That we may style him Englands Pegasus,
Restorer of the Heliconian spring,
Where the revived Sisters chirp and sing.
Where Is Physic for to cure our feeble age
Of Surfets from the crambe of the stage,
And keep our Laurel green, that actors lack
No more supplies from the old sons of sack.
W. ROWLAND. M. D.

Upon Mr. W. W. his incomparable Moderate Spirits; The happy Ammunition of this
new Storehouse.
IN Surfets, Agues, or when Cold does nip,
Of sweet Amicus Vitae, take a sip.
If in thy Guts or Stomach thou perceive
Any distemper; Sanguis will relieve.
If Heart be faint, or if thy Meat thou loath,
Call for Adjutrix, she is good in both.
In Dropsy, Scurvey, Gravel, Spleen, and Wind,
Keep to Vis Vitae, and thou cure shall find.
In Falling Sickness or Convulsion
Make Succus Vitae, thy Companion.
In Rickets, Worms, Green Sickness, Mother-fits
Lac Vitae 's best, and each distemper hits.
In Coughs, short Breath, Vomiting, Looseness, Pain,
Take Radix Vitae if thou cure wilt gain.
In a Consumption if thou wilt save thy Purse,
Let pleasant Nutrix Vitae be thy Nurse.
In Plague time or in great infection, note
That Salus Vitae is the Antidote.
Is thy Back weak for which dame Nature groans?
Medulla take, she is marrow for thy bones.
Does Melancholy, Grief, or Care oppress,
Make rare Deliciae thy Mistress.
Keep Stella by thee if to swound you are bent,
And Ignis if thou wilt Lethargyes prevent.
If these thou have, or them to Sea do carry,
Thou art both Doctor and Apothecary.
They Are cheap and by experience wondrous rare;
Buy them: or wish at Sea, thou had them there.
W. ROWLAND. M. D.

To his honored Friend, the Aut^^ur, upon his useful Book, and admirable
Life-preserving Spirits.
FOR many years dull Ignorance did keep
The hood-wink't world in lazy, careless, sleep:
Poor Mortals then desired to know no more,
Then what was known two Centuries before
They breathed this air: Then did all secrets dwell
In the obscure recesses of a Cell;
All learning likewise (if there any were)
Took up a quiet, retired mansion there;
Then Ignorance and cold Stupidity
Triumphing sat in greatest Majesty.
But afterward pure Learning's rising light
Dispelled the shades of this obscurer Night,
This foggy night of loathsome Ignorance,
And once again did bravely re-advance
Philosophy, and all her radiant Rays,
Producing a clear Sky of Knowing Days;
Which still are crossed with the unhappy Fate
Of thinking all things bad, but what the State
Of Learning (though in darker times) contrived
Long since; condemning all, but what has lived
In the old Volums of the Stagarite,
Or in those other Galen once did write.
If to the Ancients, ancient times had been
So inauspicious, our Days had not seen
Their many now inventions, which did grow
From long, and tried Experience; for know
Their rare productions new inventions were,
When they did write them, and remained here.
Let then our knowing and quick-sighted days
Be kind to safe (though here un-practis'd) ways
Of health; condemn them not, except thou show
Some other reason; then, because they are new.
New Aids were wanting; These are a large supply,
Who e're denies it, does the truth defy;
Yet think not, Sir, your Moderate Spirits shall,
By selfish Interests be approved at all,
They being possessed with Qualities so rare,
As to exhale their profit into air:
Your matchless Spirits were (for ought we know)
The true Ambrosia and the Nectar too,
Antiquity does so applaud, which Jove
And all the other Powers so much did love.
These quickening Spirits I am almost bold
To think reserved were, till the world grew old
By Providence; for if they had been known
Long since, the world to such a bulk had grown
By their Life-strengthening virtue, that it might
E're this (perhaps) have sunk with its own weight.
WILL. SMITH, late of C. Hall, Came.

Upon certain knowledge of the Usefulness of these Spirits in Diet, Physic,
and Refreshment.
I Must confess if I but speak what is right,
They are the neatest ayds e're brought to light.
Galen or Paracelsus, were th'alive,
VVishing (as sure they did) the Art should thrive,
Gladly would entertain them, as the just mean
Highly to strengthen man, yet shun th'extream
Of an unkindly heat, and them commend
To general use, as bound more to intend
Their Patients welfare, than the vninesteem
Of being sole Authors of what e're were seen,
We know for want of such how most abuse
Their healths with putrid things of ^^mmon use;
At which who wink, and pass it silen^^y,
Are guilty of those ills which come thereby;
Whereof I am resolved my self to free,
And to promote what is good whos'ere it be.
R. B. M.

An Experimental Probat of these exquisite Spirits.
IS it not a fair design,
To advance the Muses nine,
Above the height of richest wine,
Now in wit's obstructed time?
Rare have been the effects of Sack,
But, or the old Writers still we lack,
Or why? no more of those? alack!
Sack can no more, though brain should crack.
Yet for supply, lo here you have
A fountain, will wit's credit save.
Of this new Helicon, then freely Lave,
And Merit All, True Poets crave.
W. N.

On Mr. W. W. his Gentle Spirits.
OF all those Spirits which the Chymic Art,
Or the Apothecarie's shops impart;
For Pureness, Mildness, Taste, and Virtues rare,
There Is none that with these Spirits may compare.
August 27. 1661. WILLIAM RAND, Dr. of Physic and the Liberal Arts.

FINIS.

