WANTON TOM: OR, The MERRY History OF Tom STITCH The TAILOR, Decked with such
pleasing Pastimes of Delight,
That 'twould invite a Lady, Lord, or Knight
To Read. It is a Gem, a Mint of treasure,
It is Sport and Mirth beyond all Measure.


Licensed,

R. L. S.



Printed for R. Butler, and Sold by Richard Kell, next Door to the Sign of the
Mytre, in St. Iohns-Street, 1685.

The Pleasant HISTORY OF Tom Stitch THE TAILOR:
CHAP. I. Of Tom Stitch's Parentage and Birth.
IN Thred-Needle-street, at the upper end of Thimble-Alley, lived one William
Stitch by Profession a Tailor, who was Married to Nan Needle, Whom many Men did
often Thread.
When they could gain her to their Bed.
She keeping company with many Men, to gain custom, at length she gained the
French disease* which increasing, she Burnt her Husbands thread; this being
known among their Customers, they used to jeer her, and say, She was a hot
Needle (...)ndeed to burn her Husbands Thread; and when her Husband asked them
for Work, they (...)nswered, No, no, do you think we will let you be our
Tailor, who sows with a hot Needle and a burning Thread. In a short time after
they were Married, there arose a great contention between him and his Wife,
concerning their Names, she would not have hers buried in forgetfulness, and
such a one as his to flourish: Her Husband, to save contention, yielded to let
her Name be joined to his, and so was called Stitch-Needle. Soon after that,
she lived a more chaste Life than heretofore, so that she proved with Child,
but her husband in a quarter of a year after died. He being dead, and she very
poor, could not tell whether to go for relief, having scarcely any Friend
living, that would regard her; the time soon slipped away, and the day of her
delivery drew nigh; but she not thinking it so nigh as it was, caused her to
neglect the getting such necessaries us one in her condition required; so one
day (unexpectedly) she fell in Travel, no one being with her but only one Maid,
who first ran to call the Neighbors, and then the Midwife, but being delivered
before she came, a poor Neighbor had dressed the newborn Babe, which was a
Boy* Then a Minister was sent for to Baptize him, who having order, Named him
Tom. Stitch; and a while after the woman asked the Moth(...) what she had to
give the Child? she answered a with a sigh, that she had nothing in the
Hou(...) but only a Porringerful of Buttered Cabbidge which she had eat part of
that day for her dinner (...) the Child crying very much, the Woman took i(...)
and warmed it, and then fed the Babe with it who ever since has loved Cabbidge
beyon(...) measure.

CHAP. II. Showing in what manner Tom was brought up of his being put
Apprentice, how by a ma(...) Prank he lay with his Mistress, how his Master,
caught him a Bed with her; likewis(...) how he had him before the Chamber(...)
for it, and how by a Jest he was freed.
IN a few years Tom's Mother Married again and lived very happy, put him to
School (...) there maintained him till he was big enough (...) be an
Apprentice, then his Mother bid him ma(...) choice of what Handicraft Trade he
would; (...) which he answered, That of all Tradest he lik(...) that of a
Tailor best. His Mother with (...) care imaginable, provided him a Master, who
who(...) Name was Mr. Deceitful, who had a s(...) (...)ife to Servants, and Tom
being more addict(...) to Waggery than ordinary, she was the more (...)ere to
him; for every morning, if he lay in past 5 of the Clock, she would go up with
(...)Cudgel in her hand, and pull Tom out of the (...)d, and beat him like a
Stock Fish; she using (...) serve him so once or twice a week, made him hint
(...)y how to prevent it; so one morning she (...)ning up to his Bedside in a
great rage, fell (...)on him, but he leaped out of the Bed crying, (...)omuch
that the tears run down his Cheeks, (...)n she running very eagerly to strike
him again, took up the fore-lappet of his Shirt and wiped (...) eyes, which
when she beheld, forbore to strike (...), turning her back to him, and so
departed (...) of the Room blushing, and never after that (...)uld she call Tom
up.

But he being not contented with what he had (...)ady done, soon contrived a
way to be revenged (...) her: For he imagined she kept company with (...)
Gallants, unknown to her Husband, (...)efore resolved to find her out if
possible. Tom (...)ing an opportunity, one day in the middle (...) (...)he
week, he saw her warining a clean Smock (...)ich was not usual,) began to
mistrust she was (...) meet a Gallant abroad, so after she had dressed
(...)self, and gone out, Tom followed her, t(...) (...) (...)ngth she flitted
into a noted School of Ve(...) where none but the Sons of Venus went
Practitioners, who had each a rich wrought Bed for a Study, and a Daughter of
Venus for a Book, which is according to the Poet, who says, A Woman is a Book,
and often found,
To prove far better in the sheets than bound.
No wonder then why men take such delight,
Above all things to Study in the Night.


Tom seeing where she went in, returned back to a Brokers shop, and hired a
very rich Suit, Coat, Sword, and a Perriwig: In this attire he walked much like
a Gentleman to that door where his Mistress went in, and enquired whether that
was not a School of Venus, where a Gentleman might have entertainment, to whom
the Servant replied, he might: Tom hearing this, entered in, and the first he
met was his then kind, though before cruel Mistress, decked with all the
tempting dresses Art could produce, her face looked like Alablaster, a Tower
upon her head to conquer her Lovers, nay, her Smiles seemed to overcome her
greatest Enemies; in this dress she beheld his beautiful Looks (which was
scarcely to be equaled by any) thought him to be some highborn Person, and her
self happy, only to admire him; at length, she broke silence, and gave him this
Courteous Salutation; Much Honored Sir, your looks do presage you are of some
Noble Extraction, your Majestical presence forces my tongue to express what my
heart thinks, yet I hope, Noble Sir, I shall not presume in so high a Nature,
but that you will forgive. I shall think my self happy to be reckoned in the
number of your Servants. He hearing her salute him, at his entrance with such
inviring expressions, imagined what she would be at, so taking her by the hand
desired her to be his Pilot into some haven of felicity; she yielded to his
request, and conducted him up stairs into a Chamber; after he had entered the
Chamber, he complemented her in this sort, Bright Madam, your matchless beauty
has Captivated my senses, and if you will but vouchsafe to honor me with your
Sweet and Delightful Company, I shall think my self more happy than Pari^, who
enjoyed the Grecian Queen; to which she replied, Dear Sir, Command me as your
own, while you remain here, nay, your sweet Looks has so charmed me, that I
could dye in your Arms, She yielding up her self so wholly to him, he
entertained her with all the choice vainties the house could afford; but as he
was taking his repose with her, he slipped a pair of Scizzers out of his pocket
and cut off a piece of her bew Petticoat, and after he had enjoyed her, made
what haste he could and discharged the reckoning and departed. At his departure
she hoped to have his company there again such a day of the following week, to
which he consented, promising not to fail.

Tom made have and sh^fted his clothes, and went home laughing to think how he
had served his Mistress, and how he could have her at his beck.

Tom's Mistress after she had missed the piece of her Petticoat, and thought
Tom had been some Gentleman her Husband had sent (fearing he had heard she was
there) on purpose to betray her (but never thought 'twas her man Tom) she
vexing her self a long time, could not tell what she had best do, sometimes,
thinking one thing, sometimes another, in this perplexity, at last she pined up
her Petticoat, and resolved to venture home, let what would be the event; so
home she went and found her Husband sitting by the Fire (poor Cuckold) warming
himself, not thinking where his wife had been, or whose Fire had warmed her.
When she perceived he was Ignorant where she had been, thought he made himself
so on purpose, to hear what she would say; she sitting by the Fire very
melancholy, at length her Husband asked her what made her so disconsolate? she
answered, she was not very well; the Cuckold (being very kind, as most are)
caused a Caudle to be made for her; yet she could not be well for 3 or 4 days;
Tom taking no notice of her at that time, but at last resol^^^ to speak to her
in this manner; Good Mistress I am very sorry to see you so Melancholy a^ you
have been these last 3 or 4 days, if you are any ways discontented, I will
venture my life (...) purchase your content; or if any has done you wrong,
i will spend every drop of blood in my body to right you, so you will but let me
know the cause of your being thus sad and sorrowful; she hearing him speak thus
to her, (which he never did before) checked him for his Sawcyness, ^^^ding him
begone, which he instantly did, but for as he was going out, Though I have
offended you now, some body else will please you before night, (that being the
day he appointed to me^^ her,) she hearing him say so, mistrusted he knew,
(having a Guilty Conscience) asked him wh^^ 'twas he said? Tom replied suddenly
to her again, I hope you will be pleased before night, and though you think I know
nothing, yet you would (...) glad if I did not know what I do; she being touched to
the quick, gave him half a Crown (...) tell her what he meant; this is the
thing that (...) mean, said he, and pulled the piece of her Petticoat out of
his Pocket; she blushing, gave him a piece of Gold, begging him not to tell her
Husband hoping he did not know already: No, said Tom, he does not know, nor I
will never let him; when he had promised her not to tell, she asked him how he
came by it? he answered, I ^m he that cut it off; then she blushing more and
more, said, Dear Tom, ^f thou this secret wilt to none impart,
A Purse of Gold i will give thee with my heart
Nay, i will kiss and love thee without measure,
And study day and night to yield, thee pleasure.
(...) have no power to frown nor angry be,
^'le not resist, do what thou list with me:
Tom hearing this, gave her a Kiss,
But first he ran to shut and lock the door,
Then did he to her as he had done before;
The scene is changed, no more in awe he will stand
For now the Man the Mistress does command.


Now Tom lived more like her Husband than a Prentice, having store of choice
dainties given him daily to eat, money enough, fine clothes, his (...)ed warmed
every night (in the Wintertime) and when his Master was out of Town, lay with
his Mistress, but unknown to the Maid or his fellow Prentice. Tom's Mistress
proving so kind, at length his Master took notice of it, and grew jealous, yet
thought 'twas only a Fancy of his, till at length 'twas so plain, that he could
not but take notice of it, and therefore resolved (if possible) to find them
out; so one day he feigned that a Lord who lived in the Country, ^ad sent for
him, to take measure to make him a Suit, and that he was to lie there (...)
night; but acquainted the Maid with his (...) (giving her a piece of Gold)
charging her at (...) of the Clock at night, to open the door when (...) gave
but one knock; he hired a horse, and had (...) brought to thee door, (the
better to blind his wif^ then mounted and Rid away.

Tom and his Mistress being glad of the opportunity thinking themselves safe, at
night (...) went to Bed, and he to her as soon as his fellow Prentice was
asleep, and there enjoyed the wished desires. But what should prove the mishap,
at twelve of the Clock her Husband knocked at the Door, and being let in by,
the Maid, went directly up stairs to his Wifes Bedside, draw'd the Curtains,
and there beheld his Wife and his Man Tom circled in one another Arms, both
being fast asleep; when he beheld them lying so lovingly, could scar^^ contain
himself in the bounds of reason, but was ready to pull them out of the Bed, yet
pausing a while upon it, resolved to make an example of them both, and first of
Tom; when he had called his Maid up to see, and be a witness of it, left the
room, and left them both asleep; so about 2 or 3 of the Clock in the afternoon
the next day, he came home, taking no notice of what he had seen in the night.
The next day in order to Toms punishment, had him warned before the
Chamberlain, which started him and his Mistress when they heard it, she wondering
that she did not know it; neither of them mistrusting it was for that. But she
(that morning as he was to appear before the Chamberlain) asked her Husband
what Tom had done that be should he had before the Chamberlain; to which he
replied, You shall know before night. When the time came, that Tom appeared
before the Chamberlain, his Master made this complaint of him, Worshipful Sir,
I have warned my man before you, to have him severely punished for being so
impudent and saucy as to lie with my Wife; and to prove the truth of it, I have
brought my Maid to Witness it, therefore I entreat your Worship to have him
punished with all the severity the Law can inflict. The Chamberlain hearing
what a fool he was, to proclaim himself a Cuckold, smiled in Conceit, then
called Tom and asked him whether that were true which his Master objected
against him? To which he answered, If it please your Worship, I cannot deny it;
You are, said the Chamberlain, an impudent Rogue; not, said Tom, such an
impudent Rogue as your Worship -- ta^kes me to be; Come Sirrah, said the
Chamberlain, I Will teach you to set your words closer together. He perceiving
Tom to be very Arch, rep(...) him for lying with his Mistress, telling him (...)
a great sin it was, bidding him Fly the E^ braces of his Mistress, as Joseph
did: Ma(...) please your Worship, said Tom, if his M(...) had been so fair as
mine, he would not ha^^ forborne her: When the Chamberlain h^^^^ this Jest he
fell a laughing, (as likewise all (...) then were present) and dismissed him
without a Punishment.

Tom's Master seeing him dismissed so, m^^^ what haste he could home, and told
his Wife ever she let Tom lie with her again he w(...) turn them both out of
doors; but if she w(...) promise never to lie with him again, he w(...) forgive
all that was past; yet for all her promi(...) she could not but love and steal
some sweet e^braces of her pretty Tom.

CHAP. III. Showing how Tom was revenged on the Maid for not telling him of his
Masters design, in taking him and his Mistress in Bed together; of his
Mistrisses death, and of his being turned out of doors.
WHen this Quarrel was over, and all things quiet, Tom studied how to be
^evenged on the Maid, for not acquainting him and his Mistress of his Masters
Plot, in catching ^im with his Mistress: Tom at length imagined (...) and his
fellow Prentice was Married, and ^^metimes he mist him in the night, yet never
^hought of any thing but that he rose to make water, etc. So now he resolved to
watch his water, and the next night slept Dog sleep, till about one of the
Clock he began to jogg him, and all to know if he were awake or no: Tom
per^^iving his design, lay still and said not a word, it seemed as if he were
asleep; the other think^^g him so, rose out of his Bed and went to the ^^pposed
Maid, staying with her two hours before (...) returned again, where he found
Tom (as he ^^ought) asleep. Tom sleeping Dog Sleep for ^^ree or four nights
together, observed him constantly to go to her. But the next night wh(...) he
was at Supper, he put Sleeping Pow^^^ into his Drink, to make him Sleep sound
(...) about one of the Clock (the same hour he (...) to rise) he jogged him, to
know whether (...) was asleep: When Tom perceived he (...) asleep, rose and
went to his Fellow Prent(...) Wife (but resolved if she spoke, only to
whis(...) she lying awake ready to receive him; when (...) heard him, she
desired him to drink that (...) of Sack, thinking Tom to be her Husband, when
he had drank it up, she received him in her Arms, Embracing him very lovingly,
t(...) remaining two hours enjoying his Hearts ^^light, and then with a parting
Kiss, (...) her adieu. When Tom came to his own (...) he found his Fellow
Prentice fast asleep as left him. In the morning about Six of (...) Clock, Tom
rose (leaving him asleep) (...) went down (the supposed Maid being up) to th^^^
her for the Sack he drank, and the kind Ent^^tainment she gave him in her Bed.
O (...)vens, said he, was it you? I beg you on (...) knees, never to reveal it
to any, for if yo^ do, I am undone! For I thought you to (...) your Fellow
Prentice, to whom I am Marry^^ No, said he, i will be even with you: (...) more
he threatened to tell, the more she pe^swaded him not, proffering him any thing
would desire, Since you are so willing to have it concealed, said he, I will
take some pity on you, though you would not of me; fetch me down half a years
wages: and she yielded to give him the money, but not to lie with him. No, said
he, I will lie with you, or tell. When she found she could not prevail, yielded
to him; but shortly after she proved with Child, and left her service, desiring
him never to reveal it, which he promised never to do.

In a month after she was gone, his Mistress fell sick and dyed, and he out of
his Time in a fortnight after. His Master being incensed against him, turned
him out of doors that very day his time was expired, so that poor Tom could not
tell whether to go, nor what to do, now his best Friend and loving Mistress was
dead, being ashamed to go near any of his Relations, he proving so ungrateful
to them in his Apprentiship.

CHAP. IIII. Showing how Tom forsook London, his sad Lamentation at his
departure; of his being entertained by an Old Woman (who was very Rich) in
Leeds in Yorkshire; likewise how he promised to marry her, and sixteen Maids in
one day, which he got with Child in Fifteen weeks; and lastly he appointed them
all to meet him in a particular place; and how he deceived them, and left the
Town.
SOon after Tom's Dear Mistress was dead (being almost in despair) resolved to
take Ramble into the Country, hoping to find employment there; So in order
thereunto he provided what necessaries he could, and the next week set forwards
on his Journey, and when he was about a Mile from London, in a Pleasant Field
upon a green banck, on a bright Sunshine day, he sat down and made this sad
Lamentation. O Fortune frown no more as thou have done,
But let my joys shine bright as does the Sun:
Let me no more upon the rock of fate be tossed
Nor think of her whom I have lately lost;
My loving mistress (which I made my Slave)
Is fled from me, for to embrace her grave.
Triumphing grief, I fear my heart will break,
My tears gush forth my tongue can scarcly speak.
None ever yet did mourn and weep like me,
Nor none, sure yet, had the like destiny;
But hold, in vain I grieve for her that is gone,
I Will no more to the regardless air moan;
If fortune will but smile on me again,
I Will quit my self from all this grief and pain;
Farewell rich London, and my Mother too,
For unto both I now must bid adieu.


Tom having eased his mind, rose up and went on till he came to Leeds where he
was entertained very kindly by an Old Rich Woman both at Board and Bed; for he
no sooner asked her but she consented, and was very glad when he su'd to her
for affection, whom she daily wished to enjoy; yet kept off at a seeming
distance for some time though not long.

This Old Woman doting on him, gave him any thing he desired, and Tom having
her purse as well as her heart at Command, asked one day (when he was Kissing
and playing with her) to lend him some money to set him up; (...) having not
the power to deny him, let him (...) what money he desired; when he was set
(...) (though in her house) made himself acquaint^^ with all the Maids he
could, who thought themselves never so happy as when they were in (...)
Company, and brought him all the work (...) possibly could, Tom seeing them so
loving kind to him, tickled their Phancies with prett^ Love stories, and one
above the rest, named (...) Betty, who procured him much work. The pretty Betty
imagined Tom loved her, ((...) having a Sweetheart before) therefore every
(...) she would constantly carry him a Leg of a Go^ or a Turkey, or some of her
choice daintys. To^ seeing how kind and loving she was, made he^ really think
he loved her, but resolved never (...) Marry her.

There was many other Maids he pretend^^ the like kindness for which his Old
Landla^^ perceiving, grew jealous of him: so one (...) after Tom had been
Kissing one before her (...) quarrelled with him, threatening to turn him (...)
of doors, and to arrest him for fifteen shilling^ he owed her. Tom soon quelled
her passi^^ with some sweet loving words, and was (...) into favor again: But
resolved not to kiss any of the Maids before her face, but went he^ to their
houses, there being sixteen of them which he had got with Child in Fifteen
weeks, ^romised to marry them all; sometimes one came (...) him to Marry her,
Sometimes another; ^ut he pretending sometimes one thing, sometimes another, so
that he could not marry them. ^owever (one day to blind them) bought a Gold
^ing, and told first his Lanlady, (if she would ^end him five pounds) he would
Marry her with that Ring; to which his old Landlady agreed, (...) then she
thought her self sure of him. When he had the five pounds, appointed her to
meet him in such a style, about half a mile from Leeds, at ^ight of the Clock
precisely, and from thence to be married privately. So likewise he went to all
the sixteen supposed Maids, which he had got with Child, showing them the Ring,
that he would marry them with, who rejoiced as much to see it, as if they were
already married, and gave to each of them one yard of scarlet Ribbon, to wear
under their Chins that day, desiring every one in particular to meet him the
next morning at 8 of the clock exactly, and from thence to go and (...)
Married, to which they agreed: But yet he r^quested one thing of every one, and
that was, ^o lend him what Money they could, for he had, as he feigned, laid
all his Money out to buy a Bargain of Cloth; they believed him, so one lent
him 5 pounds, some more, some less, according as they had; and when he had got
what Money he could, returned home to Bed. The next Morning rising very early*
desired his Landl^^^ to dress her self to be married, which she did, (...) went
directly to the place appointed. After (...) was gone, Tom made what have he
could (...) the Town, but not to meet his Landlady (...) the rest that he had
appointed; and after she (...) gone he writ these following Lines, and (...)
them under his Land-lady's Pillow.

Farwell old hostess, my smooth flat'ring (...)
Has proved to old for you, though i am but yo^
You had me sure, you thought, and that this (...)
I should with license grant you much delig^^
You that often times claimed d^bts of me, must
For I resolved, my self, to double pay.
Could you so much a fool think me to be,
To one that is old and cold to bride and (...)
No, the case is far more just as it does sta^^
For you too often had me at your command
Before his old Landlady was arrived at place appointed, there overtook her
first one (...) Maid with a Red Ribbon under her (...) then another, and
another, till eleven had pass (...) The old Woman seeing so many pass by (...)
with Ribbons under their Chins, wondered (...) much, till at length she came
near the (...) where she saw all those that had passed by he, (...) about five
or Six more, all sighing and wondering at each other, thinking every minute an
hour till they see him coming; at length they spied a man coming toward them,
made what have they could to meet him; but when they saw it was not him, all
their hearts were ready to break together; yet none broke silence, for fear of
betraying themselves; but the man spoke to them, and said, I have a Message to
deliver to you, but was charged not to declare it till I approached the Style,
impatiently waiting for her Bridegroom; as the others did. They being gathered
round about him; he pulled these following Lines out of his Pocket, they being
sent by wanton Tom to be read to them. To you poor Lasses, I these lines do
send,
Confessing each of you have been my Friend
Some brought me Work, some dainties for to eat,
Not thinking I should ever prove a cheat:
(...) true your hearts and Maidenheads I pierced,
(...) who will laugh? You're all alike d^stress^d;
Nay my old Hostess thought this day to Marry,
Yet she, like you, for me must longer Tarry.
And I your Money will as freely spend,
As e're your Maidenheads to me you lend,
Now for your Maiden heads you may comp^^
Your hearts, your money to return again,
Sigh and lament, but 'twill be all in vain.
Then farewell you, from Leeds I now am g^
And not contracted unto any one.
When I again do hear where he does dwell,
A Second Part all his Mad Pranks shall tell*


The End of the First Part.

