Reasons showing the consistency of the place of Custos Archivorum with that of
a Savilian Professor.
WHEREAS some objections have been suggested as if the place of Custos
Archivorum were inconsistent with that of a Savilian Professor, because of
those words Nullum [acceptet] in Vniversitate publicum officium (ut
Vicecancellarii, Procuratoris, Clerici Mercatus, and similium,) sub poena
amissionis omnis juris quod in Professione sua praetendere valeat. (Though if
it were so, a Savilian Professor were no more incapable of being chosen to that
office, then a Fellow of a College to be chosen Head, or presented to a
living, which if he accept he must loose his Fellowship.) These Reasons are
exhibited to the contrary.

1. That by publicum officium, is not here meant, all public employment in the
University whatsoever, is manifest: For if so, then might not the Savilian
Professors be ordinary Delegates of Convocation, Delegates for Accounts, for
Apeales, for Printing, for surveying Records, for making and reforming
Statutes, etc. contrary to the known constant usage of the University.

2. The Statute expressly declaring, what kind of Public Offices it does
intend, (to wit, that of Vice Chancellor, Proctor, Clerk of the Market, and
such as are like these,) is not to be extended beyond such as are there
mentioned. Now it is manifest, that this is neither one of those three there
mentioned, nor yet of like nature with any of them: They being all Offices of
Magistracy, and public Government: this only a place of Trust.

3. The Employment of Custos Archivorum, is so far from being one of the
Offices intended in that Statute, that 'twas not then in being when that
Statute was made: and therefore cannot be reputed one of those there intended;
but at the most Casus omissus.

If it be further objected, That though it be not within the letter of the
Statute, yet there may be as much reason why the Founder might have forbidden
this as some of those which be did forbid, and therefore that it might be
thought within the equity of the Statute:

It Is answered; Not only, That we are not to enquire, especially in penal
Laws, what might have been forbidden, but what is: or, That and caetera's, and
par ratio, are not, in Law, of any great weight for drawing in other crimes
beside what are particularly expressed (though in point of favor, they are
good grounds for relief in equity, against the rigor of a Law:) or, That penal
Laws are to be interpreted in the more favorable sense.

But also, That, in equity, there is much more reason for relief against those
particulars which are expressed, than to draw in such as are not: Because the
Revenues of the Savilian Professors come much short, not only of what Sir
Henry Savil did intend to settle, but even of what he thought he had, and the
Statutes do expressly presume to be, actually settled. And therefore no reason
to make the prohibition of other employments more strict than he has made it,
but rather more lax.

And upon this account, not only Dr. Bainbrige (though a Professor of Sir
Henry Savils own appointment in his life time) continued, with it, his practice
of Physic (an employment both of greater gain, and greater diversion, than
this of Custos Archivorum) and also a place in Merton College: But also Dr.
Turner, before a Committee of Parliament, justified his holding a Fellowship
(though in that Statute expressly forbid) together with his Professors place:
And Mr. Greaves enjoyed the profits of his Professors place, together with a
Fellowship of Merton College. And though these two latter examples, being
against the Letter of the Statute, might therefore be thought more disputable;
yet in the present case, where no such thing is, there is no reason upon
pretense of equity, to make the Statute stricter than it is.

So that neither the letter of the Statute, nor the equity of it, can in reason
be interpreted to exclude the place of Savilian Professor, as inconsistent with
that of Custos Archivorum.


