The Wallons CONSISTORY, AND EXCOMMUNICATION.

Printed in the Year of God, 1646.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE.
IT will seem all together monsterous and unheard of, that a poor woman of a
low condition, she being also a stranger should dare present a petition unto
your worships the Illustrous and renowned Magistrates and Governors of this
City, but having understood the Pious and Charitable Answers which have been
given unto those that have addressed themselves unto your worships and how
ready always you are to administer Justice with Judgment, have taken upon me
boldness to do it, also knowing that great Monnarchs among which we read of
an Emperor being on Horsbacke ready to go to wars allighted from his horse
to hear the complaint of a poor woman the which we read of in a book
called Dorte of Marcus Aurelius Chapter 47. This Emperor although he were a
Pagan being near his death called his Son unto him admonishing him unto
speedy Justice toward all, especially unto women, recommending unto him the
cause of a poor woman a widow named Drusia which had a great suit against one
of the senate, by reason that at the last distrations her husband was banished,
I have great pity of her said he unto his Son, for there are three months
past since she presented unto me her petition, but by reason of my great
affairs for war I could not declare her Justice, and now right worshipful
seeing that by the will of God these mournful and unnatural wars are
near to an end I hope your worships will be pleased to vouchsafe so much time
as to consider my just cause for it is against a senate or consistory and this
buissinesse is upon the cause of the banishment of my spouse, I say spiritualli
nevertheless their power cannot reach further then the sign, but in regard of
the thing signified this spouse is entered by faith into my heart, Ephesians
Chapter 3 now my humble petition unto your worships, is to desire your worships
to grunt unto me, that I may receive the communion among your people to the end
I may not be deprived of that visible sign, as by the grace of God, I am not,
of the thing signified.

She most humbly prays that your worships, would excuse her for her boldness
in presenting this her most humble and obedient petition where by she
Demonstrates the Sinister proceedings of her elders in their Consistory against
her. Jacquemine the wife of M. L. C.

To the Right worshipful the Magistrates of the City of Canterbury who are
lovers of righteous Judgment and daily Careful to execute true Justice, and
to all reverend professors of Divinity and true Preachers of the word of God.
Jacquemine the wife of Michaell the Clercq wishes all felicity in this world
and perpetual happiness in the world to come.
THe Complaint of a woman happening unto her as it did unto him which was borne
blind in the 9 Chapter of S. John, this man being enlightened by Jesus Christ:
would not blame him but spoke well of him, for which cause he was cast out of
the sinnagogue in the same manner this woman aknowledgeth, to have been blind a
long time, I mean of a spiritual blindness but after she was Illuminated
she could not endure to hear, that Doctrine ill spoken of by the which she
was enlightened, whereof she advised many simple folks, fearing they should
be deceived by false and erroneous Doctrine, for this thing she is thereatned
to be cast out of the sinagogue, which is to say excommunicated, therefore she
shows the cause why they would do her this reproach, and sets forth diverse
points, which have been preached falsely with hope that God will enable her to
maintain them, unto her last drop of Blood.

Cantorbury, Anno Dom: 1645.
The Wallons CONSISTORI, AND EXCOMMUNICATION.
One Cannot write too much
Read English French or Duth,
That to God's Laws belong,
By learning to be able
And understanding Stable,
To follow it in Faith strong.

THe Evangelist; shows us that a woman with great zeal and boldness came
into the house of Simon where Christ was with his Disciples, Ioh. 12. c.
and powered out her box of pretions ointment for the which the Disciples took
occasion to murmr but our Lord Jesus although his sacred body had no need of
such unction took his share there in and said unto his Disciples, Mark. 14. c
why trouble ye the woman for she has wrought a good work upon me for in
that this woman cast this ointment on my body she did it to bury me, Math: 26.
c 10. and 12. v.
now we that know that our Lord God enlarges his gi^tes, to whom he pleases?
Luk: 10. c. v. 21. Mat: 11. c. v. 25.
it Lies in his power. And liberty to be served by a woman's means or else by a
Child if it be his blessed will buth not with that sort of ointment, but with
a spiritual ointment, not serving for burialls, but serving for newborn and
renewing the poor Christian which is as yet ignorant among us, one may say
unto me, it is a ministers charge, it is true but every one must know that he
is bound to endeavor him self to advance the Glory of God, without regard of
sex age or condition: Our Lord Jesus Christ does give us that instruction at
the 7. Chap. of the Gospel of St. John as is said in the last and great day of
the feast Jesus stood and cried, 37.38. v.
saying if any man thirst let him come unto me and drink, he that believes in
me as the scripture says out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water
but this spoke he of the spirit which they that believe on him should receive:
Can any man excuse himself can we say I believe in Christ and it is enough,
no, this Living water must drop from us or else we are not true believers in
this we may see the charge which our Lord gives unto those which have received
gifts from him to share them unto others I speak not here of those which have
charge or government over the Church, but of the duty of those which are
peculiar or private, for touching the government of the Church, none ought to
insinuate himself therein unless he be called there unto, nor yet speak
against it, unless it be with a good and sound judgment, to know if Gods word
gives leave at the Galatians S. Paul. 1. Chap: 8. verse.
does command us that if he himself or an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed St.
Paul speaks not here of him self only but of all the Apostles when he says
(which we have Preached unto you) having Read, or perused what the Apostles
have written I find that there is preached among us an other Doctrine by one
of our Preachers or Ministers upon Diverse points, but before I come to prove my
saying. I will produce the example of a woman at the second book of Samuel
when the City Abel was besieged by Ioab a woman of the said City demanded of
him if he would destroy a Mother in Israel some will wonder that a woman
speaks here, Chap: 20.19. verse.
but seeing that it concerns not only a mother, but a daughter and a mother
together, I call faith and charity so, for the faith is the mother, and
charity is the Daughter, but the daughter is oblidged and bound to keep and
entertain the mother, and this entertainment cannot be done but by forgetting
ones self following as St. John speaks in his first epistle hereby perceive
we the Charity or Love of the son who laid down his life for us, Chap:
3.16. v.
and we ought to lay down our Lives for the brethren, hereby we see, that it
stould be distroying the mother and the daughter to cause Charity to begin at
ones self as one will make us believe, this is the first point, yet has he
others that are very dangerous and strange, as when he does preach that we
must bear with the wicked until such time that God gives him repentance
wholly contrary unto the Doctrine of St. Paul, who commands expresty to put
away from among you the wicked person Corrintians first epistle, Chap: 5.13.
verse.
is it not a lamentable thing when he does preach unto us that God was angered
against his Son, altogether against the section of the 10 Sunday als Sabbath
of our Catechism, if Father had been angered against the Son it must follow
that the Son must have bin a sinner, Isaih: 53. c. v. 4.
a doctrine contrary and Erroneous against the stay of our faith, our God was
angered against the charge that his Son has taken upon him to wit, our
sins, I speak now of the 4 point upon the Natures of our savior Jesus
Christ, he has preached unto us two natures but not three, and being assembled
with the people to examine those which were to answer touching their faith they
were warned, to keep them selves from them which attribute 3 natures unto the
Son of God (as if it had been an execrable thing) this happened by reason
Another Minister through his great prudence and knowledge for the safeguard and
salvation of the people, had made a distinction and difference touching the
nature of the soul and that of the body I speak not touching the divinity for
I believe, there is not such an Athiest among us which would deny it, but I
speak of the nature of the dying body, and of the nature of the soul
scuffleing and striving without Dying those that will either deny the one or
the other put them selves in great danger of their salvation, for we must have
had the one and the other to be fully redeemed, he does preach unto us also
that one must confess all kind of truth altough it should be against ones own
honor upon pain of eternal damnation, yet Gods word does give us knowledge
what kind of truth we must confess, a truth for the advancement of his Glory
and the good of our neighbor, also when charity does require it, but there
is such truth that would be hurtful if it wear known, and also the word of
God does forbid it this comes near the Oricullar confession, we have
understood in one of his prayers that our sins do offend God but they do not
endanger the king, Chap: 12.25. verse.
against which we read in the first book of Samuel the Prophet warns the
people saying but if ye shall still do wickedly ye shall be consumed both ye
and your king, I will yet set down a thing, which unto my thinking is
blasphemy in saying that God is a Robber, Chap: 1.21. verse.
Job uses an other manner of speaking, in saying the Lord gave and the Lord
has taken away blessed be the name of the Lord, in the Proverbes the wise does
show us that he that robs the poor and afflicted the Lord will plead their
cause and will spoil the soul of those that spoil them, Chap. 22.23. verse.
by which words he does give us to understand that the wicked shall not remain
unpunished, and as such measure with he measures he shall be like as wise
measured with, but shall our God be called a Robber therefore, has he not at
his command, both the Robber and their Robberry, without being called by that
name a fearful thing to understand these are the points which I have put
forth to the end one should not mistake ownes self so I will end and return
to my beginning which is unto the good deed of the woman because it derived
from thence that Judas took occasion to commit his abominable deed if on these
days a woman should commit or do a good deed it should not be the cause that
Christ should be betrayed, Mark: 14. c. v. 10.
for he is no more subject unto such treason neither could that miserable Judas
do it for he is in his place, it should be the woman then, that should bear
the punishment, but what should be that punishment, even the privation of the
Sacrament and afterward excommunication, but all this is not hurtful unto the
faithful soul, the corporal hand will find some hindrance therein, but I will
say with an Ancient Father. wherefore make thou thy teeth and mouth ready,
believe only and thou shall eat Christ, it shall be the faith then, which
shall benifite her self therein, I say that poor faith although weak and
feeble being sustained by the spirit of fortification will be ready for this
action, she will keep her 2 hands clean the one to receive Christ unto her
and the other to give her self unto him those two hands will have as much
freedom as that which did write upon the wall, I have here written what I
have said if one does say more they are false accusations but one must have
patience, to these things is the faithful Christian bound, these things have
bin done unto the green wood what will be done unto the dry, those that do
Read this, I entreat them to excuse me until the time of my Excommunication
of the which I am threatened and then I will write more if my God does permit.

What I have written is not to dishnour the holly Ministeri to whom I am bound
in dutyfull respect and obedience but I say that the word of God does command
us not to hearken unto the Ambassador that publishes not the message that his
King has enjoined him. By me the Wife of MICHAEL le CLERCQ.

The Wallons CONSISTORY and their SUSPENTION.
COnsidering that my opressions and greevances do increase from day to day by
the fury of those that have taken me in hatred without a cause, I would not
fail of my promise, because a while ago I had given to understand the
occasion of my troubles with promise to write more at the continuation of them,
but it seems unto some, that what is written by a woman should not be of any
value nor credit, because the Apostle in his Epistle to the Corinth: the 14
Chapter does not permit the woman to speak in the church, the same Apostle in
his Epistle to Titus, the second Chapter does command the Aged woman to give
instructions, shall we find here any contradiction (no) the holy Ghost does
not contredict himself, he will have the Aged woman to teach, the Apostle by
this word Aged does not mean the woman shall have any charg or office in the
Church (no) but we must understand it is for the age or judgment now being I
am coming near the age our poor nature can come unto, I hope that God will
give me the grace to follow that command as near as I can possible, but one
will as^ke me in what manner I could do it finding my self in such Ignominy
and reproach I will make it appear in manner of complaint and lamentation in
the second Chapt: of Salomons Song the spouse commands to take the foxes that
spoil the vines there is a Kind of foxes which are in woods, but they have
four feet, it is not of those that the spouse complains, but she speaks of
those that spoil the vines to the end it should bear noe good grapes, but
even wild grapes what shall when do in this extremity we must have our
recourse and refuge unto the true vine dresser as it is spoken in S. John the
15 Chapter, Mat. 12. ^. 8.
or else unto the true Heir who has been dryven out here tofore by such kind
of foxes, to the end they might spoil the vine at their pleasure, now to give
more plainly to understand the occasion of my lamentation I will bring the
complaint of that spouse in Solomon's song the 5 Chapter she being in great
misery to find out him whom her heart did lone, I sought him but I could not
find him the watch from me they smote me and wounded me and took away my veil
from me (she says here the watch) there is much to be considered here, this
spouse being called by the name of a woman, in the revelation of S. John the 12
Chapter she is persecuted by the Dragon, but that is not strange, as also so
many Martirs, and likewise women and maids that God has given them strength
and grace to suffer for his name, but this was done by the Babylonians by the
watch, those that ought to conducted her in the have seeking out of her spouse,
was this woman found in any evil action, in seeking for her whoredom or in
any other wicked or scandallous work, no, but this does bring us unto the
consideration of these present times, and well to understand the conformity
thereof, we must call those watch, by the name of watching aliter overseers
then we shall hear Christ speak in S. Matthew the 10 Chapter and in the
Gospel of S. Mark the 13 Chapter speaking unto his Disciples and unto all
true Christians in their name ye shall be brought and delivered to their
Consistory and they will scourge you in their sinagogues and ye shall be hated
of all for my name sake, but our Lord and savior does say this to give us to
understand that it shall not only be the Turks Pagans or Idolateres that
shall torment the true Christian, but also they which are called by the name
of Consistory the fury of which folks is yet greater for having understood
the rebellion and disobidience of any child, against Father and Mother, they
lay hold at the same Justant of that occasion they run they trot to have
witnesses or accusations either true or falcse it is all one unto them, so
they may have them, o that it wear good for those children if they have
received any benifite or money to carry it back again with tears then should
we hope a better conversion of life the which I have Desired a long time this
now enough spoken of that corruption for they are capable to melt our hearts
with the abundance of tears in regard they are entered unto the holly place,
now we will return unto the spouse, do you think my friends she has found
him out whom her soul loved, in this equipage and case being beataen wounded
and her veil taken away, Salomons song 6. v. 1.
ye she has found him it is here that lies our comfort and consolation, for
all Christians may say the same chiefly those which are persecuted for
rightenosnesse sake, unto this present we have spoken but of the crosses and
tribulation of beating and wounding but what is all that, seeing the holy Ghost
calls it a light affliction at the 8 Chapter of S. Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans, who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall tribulation or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, as it
is written, for thy sake we are Killed all the day Long, we are accounted as
sheep for the slanghter nay in all these things we are more then
conquerours through him that loved us will this seem unproper to speak in
this kind persecution for among us they do not persecute unto death, but it is
more dangerous and closely carried, one does not close the eyes of those that
wear borne blind, but one will blind them spiritually, in casting them out of
the sinagogue, they will not cut of the ears, but they will stop those that
are fittest to hear, you shall not be excommunicated because you are a
Calvinist or Protestant but you shall be suspended by reason you will maintain
the truth, one shall not Bar your mouth, but you shall be forbidden to
speaked if your speech tend to edification, you shall not be subject unto
ceremonies, but it may be they will cause you to worship an Idol, what I have
written until now, cannot be taken but for a fore warning, in regard of those
which seemed among us to be the most forward, touching the points of true
doctrine, now seems to stand back feareing some rigorous Article, but that
Article is contrary unto the Ecclesiastical Discipline, for the
Ecclesiastical Discipline is contented with the Key of S. Peter but this
Article will have the sword of S. Paul never the less S. Paul would not use it
him self, Mat: c. 16.8.19.
but he says that it belougeth unto the Magistrate, for my part is seems
unto me those folks have not bin so Ill advised as to fear so much that
Article, Kings c. 13 v. 4.
it is rather that they would sheuwt hem selves peaceable and that it seems
they were called to some disputet, and would not be found there, and wherefore
should we dispute might these good folks say we know that our Lord Jesus
Christ does command us that if we bring our gift to the Altar and if we
remember that our Brother has ought against us, we must leave there our gift
and first be reconsiled to our Brother, Mat. 10.5. v. 23.
therefore if we dispute we have ought against our Brother, and so remain,
but I hope that at other times they will show their zeal to maintain the
truth some fear had fezed them, seeing the rigor that was used toward those
which did maintain it, until now, I remain oblidged unto the command of the
Apostle which I have spoken in the beginning to wit, I direct my speech unto
women and do Entreat them not to reject my Instruction seeing the Apostle
does command me, O women have you never read the 4 Chapter of the Gospel of S.
John? I pray you to read it heedfully and you shall find a mavelous
consolation from the sacred mouth of our Lord speaking unto the woman that was
a Samaritane and all others that shall believe in him: you do not find that
the Lord misuseth this woman because she took pleasure in his word, but to
the contrary he takes occasion to ask drink, of her because he would give
unto this woman, the water of life, o good God who would believe such a thing
of thine own word should not say so, that thou should confer so friendly
with a woman, a woman that was not of his people, she was of a mean condition
for she came to draw water she was a great sinner, for the Lord said unto
her, thou have had five husbands and him whom thou now have, is not thy
husband, but above all to be noted, that the Lord said unto her, woman believe
me, the woman then ought to believe she ought then to speak when one will
wrong her faith, at the 10 Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans the Apostle
says that one believes of heart unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation, the woman also ought to write in such an
occasion, It is the practice of a true martyr and also of the feminine sect
those pore and weakest vesels having bine sustained, and strengthend by him
that has made unto them all that promise, that their enemies are often fled
all ashamed and confused, O women seeing then that at this present one will for
bid what the word of God does command, Mat. c. 25. v. 9.
one will put out our light or lamp let us not suffer it, for at the coming
of our spouse we should be without light, let us remember that there is
nothing more exalted in the word of God, then the woman's faith, for Jesus
Christ speaking unto the woman of Canaan, said unto her, Mat. c. 15. v. 28.
O woman great is thy faith be it unto thee even as thou will. O what a
marvelous thing it is that the Son of God suffered him self to be overcome
by the faith of a woman for he has granted her request, we ought not to find
it strange that the Son of God loves so much that faith, let us rather
Worship that infinite love with joy and comfort, let us not be afraid of the
greatness of the combats, for the victory shall be so much the more glorious,
let us remember that this combat had his beginning ever since the world began,
witness that lamentable shipwreck of our first Mother, do you know where this
Ancient serpent made his entrance to begin this war, he entered in Eden,
that place was the celestial Paradis, there was in that place but Justice and
all hollynesse, Gen: 3.2.6.
shall we marvel now that this serpent is entered in our Eden that is to say
in the Church, where there is but sin that reighneth, if one will do you any
shame it is is because you desire to live in the fear of God I know one does
make some sign as if they would follow the Discipline, the same they do among
the Scribes and Pharisees that Renouned consistory did not crucify Christ
alone but crucified 2 thieves with him, Mat. c. 2.9. v. 38.
this has some color toward the Ill advised and brutall world this is the
subtilty of the Devil, to cause more reproach to be done unto the faithful
they will find out an evil liver causing them to have like punishment, it is
easy to know in what form Satan made his entrance into the Church it is in a
human form according as I have perceived, but the worst I can perceive is
that he will have his Reign there not only in a Corner but in the Chair
seeing hereseis are to be established, it is now more then time that the
faithful should make a cry like unto the cry of the Prophets sons,
according as we read in the fourth Chapter of the second book of Kings o man
of God death is in the Cauldron, but we must say o God death is entered in thy
Church o my God may not I say death seeing that by my condemnation I should
have deffamed a doctrine, but my writing shows faithfully that I have but
only spoken against eronious Doctrine, but not against the true Doctrine.
Never the less it is from thence that my condemnation was drawn, then may I
very well say death, seeing one must believe in hereseis to remain in the
Church, for him that does believe in Heresies can hope nothing but death, O
lamentable thing to understand, o if that holy woman has had so much occasion
to lament and cry for the taking of the Arc, 1. Sam: 4. v 19.
and for this thing she demanded, where is the Glory, o that we have at this
day a great deal more occasion to cry O Lord, for thy Glory is goeing into
Captivity O Hanna Mother of Samuel wherefore did thou weep so much to have
a Son, 1. Sam: c. 1. v. 19.
if thou were in these present times and that one would hinder thee to be the
Mother of the Son of Glory wear it not to say, I am descended into the
Gulf, and never the less we are brought unto that extreanuty, that Some says
him self at the 3 Chapter of the Gospel of S. Mark and at the 12 Chapter of
the Gospel of S. Matthew, whosoever shall do the will of my Father the same is
my Brother and my Sister, and my Mother to do thee will of God to be Mother of
Christ now all that which is done without faith is sin, then it must befaith
which must work this conception. Let us then pray the Lord, that he may give
us the grace to the end we may hear that gracious word the which he has
pronounced him self unto that poor woman which was Diseased with an issue of
Blood, thy faith has made the whole.

O that the Mother of Samuel had occasion to Answer mildly unto the high Priest
for he spoke upon her Person, but here the truth is oppressed, o what grief it
is unto me to hear the gown spoken of, for I fear that it will be found in
this particular full of sin: I hope I shall make it appear in time I pray
unto the Lord he may please to be judge and witness altogether. By me the Wife
of MICHAEL le CLERCQ in my opression.

The Wallons CONSISTORY, AND EXCOMMUNICATION.
Having spoken until now upon their threatenings and upon my condemnation, now
it shall only be upon my Excommunication, the first news I heard of was
uttered unto me with grief and dolor, but their desolation was not for the
deed of my cause, which they did know to be very just, but upon him which has
pronounced that unjust condemnation never the less when I understood those
words proceeding from a heart pierced with grief, saying it is done it is
done, and seeing their pale colur as persons stricken by death I was taken with
an inward qualme, but outwardly joyful, umwilling to add more grief unto
their Infirmity, but I had also great weakness withim me, in so much that I
found my self like unto that woman which we read of in the second book of
Kings, the 4 Chapter, This woman's hunamite being in agony for the death of her
Son she said unto the Prophet did I desire a Son of my Lord, did I not say
do not deceive me I was in that case at that time, it seemed unto me that God
had deceived me, but the Lord by his mercy did not suffer me long thus, for I
recovered an other she mate, which is hope of an other woman at the 13 Chapter
of the book of Judges it is Manoahs wife, Mother of Samson her husband being
frighted seeing the Angel to ascend with the flame, he said we shall surely
die because we have seen God, his wife said unto him if the Lord wear
pleased to kill us he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat
offering at our hands neither would he have showed us all these things nor would
he at this time have told us such things as these, so having received new hope
I have revoked my vicious thoughts and submitted my self unto the will of God
assuring my self that he has not deceived me, but has caused me to see
great things, when he has received the offerings of my soul this makes me
remember an other woman. The reason I shall speak of her is because chastety
was so much oppressed by the elders judges of the people. This woman is
Susanna as we read it, in her History altough it is not Cannonicall yet from
thence may be drawn comparisons sit for my cause, for they were elders and
judges and the People was subject to obey them altough these Elders wear very
wicked touching this woman. But this must be noted that her combat was upon
her corporal chastety, and my cause is for my spiritual chastety can one say
where this woman was when she was thus assaulted, her History tells us she was
in her husbands garden, a like place was. I in according as the spouse of our
soul had commanded me at the 5 Chapter of Salomons song, come into my Garden
my sister my spouse I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, it is most
certain that all the time I have bine persecuted by this kind of folk the
which I have spoken of by my meditations I did enjoy the pleasure of that
Garden, we will leave now the wrongs done unto women, by reason our perticulas
hindrance is light unto us, but the wrong done unto the disadvantage of the
truth, is in supportable unto us, yet noe remedy, here we should have a
miraculous work, for the salt has lost his savor, how can we shall, any body
may see unless he be quite blind that there is here a represensation. of
what, our Lord Jesus Christ has fore told us, in the 24 Chapter of S. Matthew
when he spoke that before the great and terrible day of this second coming.
The Sun shall be darkened and the Moon shall not give her light, and the
Stars shall fall from heaven, now I pray you tell me, if that Sun of
righteousness as Malachy calls him in his 4 Chapter, with healing In his
wings, could it be more darkened when the truth is taken for an untruth and the
untruth for the truth, the Moon can get light unless it be borrowed from
that Sun, then must it be darkened, and touching the Stars, must we not
say to our great grief that we see them sall from heaven as we have seen
some years ago, when our Ministers with the elders have offered our children
unto Baal, without the consent of their Father and Mother, and since occasion
are carried worse and worse, seeing they will offer the Fathers and Mothers and
this they carry in form and manner of Inquisition in forbidding them to
maintain the true Gospel, by Excommunications, and it is for that purpose
that there are none of Christ's Disciples among us, and if there be any it is as
Nicodemus by night or secretly for they think there is too much danger, it was
in the same manner of the crucifying of our Lord Jesus Christ the men were
amazed and afrighted but their were poor woman that followed him weeping and
lamenting, and also at the sepulcher Christ being risen directs his speech unto
a woman, for there wear no men to be found. O what an honor is this for us
that a woman should be the first messenger of the glorious resurrection of our
Lord, they are set by him in such an honorable degree that he makes them to be
has if it were the Apostle of the Apostles, one may say unto me, why should one
speak at this time of the death of Christ and of his sepulcher for he is in
his glory, it is certain, but let us see if his truth is not in such a place,
O you conductours of this Church it is you which have placed a great stone at
that sepulchers door, so that the truth cannot come out, that stone is your
Excommunication, and the weight of it, is your tyrannical act, tear out that
Article and cause no more to lament for your poor gouvernment, take again
your Discipline which you have put in oblivion, and it does give you power
enough, it commands you to open heaven and to shut it again, by it also may
you cast out of your Church the evil livers, and those also which continue in
their vices, but yet not those whom God has given his fear, do not cause the
uncircumcised Philistines to rejoice: do not cause the beast to live again,
for you must know, that such sort of excommunications comes near unto hers,
Remember what happened unto those elders in Susannas just cause, which I have
spoken of, comparing the spiritual unto the corpotall, I hope God will give
you the grace to look after these things Amen.

The woman has written these things chifely because the good English people
those who have the fear of God should not take her to be Excommunicated but if
they should happen to see her receive the holy Sacrament among them, that they
should not say unto her as Naomy said unto her Daughter in law, according as
we read, in the first Chapter of the book of Ruth: My Daughter return unto
thy people the woman would then answer humbly in in mildness as Ruth did, my
People is your People and my God is your God therefore send me not unto the
People of my nation, for they have forgotten the truth. This has bin done to
the great grief of the Wife of Michael le Clercq.

FINIS.

