A DIALOGUE Concerning WOMEN, Being a DEFENSE Of the SEX.

Written to EUGENIA.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Russel Street in Covent Garden, and I.
Tonson at the Iudge's- Head in Chancery Lane. 1691.

PREFACE.
THE Perusal of this Dialogue, in defense of the Fair Sex, Written by a
Gentleman of my acquaintance, much surprised me: For it was not easy for me to
imagine, that one so young, could have treated so nice a Subject with so much
judgment. It Is true, I was not ignorant that he was naturally Ingenious, and
that he had improved himself by Traveling; and from thence I might reasonably
have expected that air of Gallantry, which is so visibly diffused through the
body of the Work, and is indeed the Soul that annimates all things of this
nature: But so much variety of reading, both in Ancient and Modern Authors,
such digestion of that reading, so much justness of thought, that it leaves no
room for affectation, or Pedantry, I may venture to say, are not overcommon
amongst practiced Writers, and very rarely to he found amongst Beginners. It
puts me in mind of what was said of Mr. Waller, the Father of our English
Numbers, upon the sight of his first Verses by the Wits of the last Age, that
he came out into the World Forty Thousand strong, before they ^ad heard of him.
(Here in imitation of my Friends Apostrophe's, I hope the Reader need not be
told, that Mr. Waller is only mentioned for Honor's sake, that I am desirous
of laying hold on his Memory, on all occasions, and thereby acknowledging to
the World, that unless ^e had Written, none of us could Write.) I know my
Friend will forgive me this digression; for it is not only a Copy of his Stil^
but of his Candor. The Reader will observe, that ^e is ready for all ^ints of
commending merit, and the Writers of this Age and Country are particularly
obliged to him, for his pointing out those Passages which the French call Beaux
Endroits, ^herein they have most excelled. And though I may seem in this, to
^ave ^y own interest in my eyes, because ^e has more than once mentioned me, so
much to my advantage, yet I hope the Reader will take it only for a
Parenthesis, because the Piece would have been very perfect without it. I may
be suffered to please my self with the kindness of my Friend, without valuing
my self upon his partiality: He had not confidence enough to send it out into
the World, without my Opinion of it, that it might pass securely, at least
amongst the fair Readers, for whose service it was principally designed. I ^^
not so presuming, to think my Opinion can either he his Touchstone, or his
Passport: But I thought I might send him back to Ariosto, who has made it the
business of almost Thirty Stanza's in the beginning of the 37th Book of his
Orlando Furioso, not only to praise that Beautiful part of the Creation, but
also to make a sharp Satyr on their Enemies; to give Mankind their own, and to
tell them plainly, that from their envy it proceeds that the Virtue and great
Actions of Women are purposely concealed, and the failings of some few amongst
them exposed with all the aggravating Circumstances of Malice. For my own part,
who have always been their Servant, and have never drawn my Pen against them, I
had rather see some of them praised extraordinarily, than any of them suffer by
detraction: And that in this Age, and at this time particularly, wherein I find
more Heroines than Heroes. Let me therefore give them joy of their new
Champion: If any will think me more partial to him than really I am, they can
only say I have returned his Bribe: And the worst I wish him, is, that he may
receive Justice from the Men; and Favor only from the Ladies.

John Dryden.
A DIALOGUE Concerning WOMEN. Written to EUGENIA.
IT IS a dangerous thing, Madam, it must be confessed, this Conversing with fair
Ladies; and it draws us into Inconveniences, of which we do not at first see
the Consequences. I little thought, when I talked with your Ladyship, of the
Virtues of your Sex, that you would have commanded me to have given my
Sentiments upon that Subject in Writing. I grant you, Madam, you might have
spoken to several of your Acquaintance, who would have undertaken the business
at first word, with all the Courage imaginable; But to me, who never durst take
Pen in hand to write any thing beyond a Billet, the Enterprise seems very
terrible. I confess, when you spoke to me of it first, I was well enough
pleased with the Design; for I thought a Defense of the Sex, would be a means
of obliging all of the Sex, who were worth defending; and therefore looked upon
it as the writing a Circular Love-Letter to all the fair Ladies in the Kingdom.
But as Men generally mix Interest with Honor, so, upon second thoughts, I
considered what I should get by it, besides Fame, if it should succeed; and I
found, if I persuaded all Men to be as passionate Servants to the Ladies as my
felf, I should make but a very indifferent hand of it: Thus, Madam, you would
engage me in a Controversy, where it would be a Scandal to be vanquished, and a
disadvantage to overcome: For I, who could never succeed in an Amor where
there was any Fool pretended besides my self, should have great hopes indeed,
when I had persuaded all Mankind to be my Rivals. After all, Madam, there were
your Commands to encourage me to it; and the Commands of a fair Lady are to me
beyond all the Arguments in Nature; I therefore resolved upon the undertaking.
But as it is no new thing to see people undertake a Business that they are
altogether unable to perform, so I must own, I found a thing of this nature
quite beyond my strength: You may believe, Madam, I was very melancholy at it,
and 'twas then that a Friend coming into my Chamber, asked me the occasion. As I
never love to conceal any thing that afflicts me from a Friend, so I presently
told him the Business, That a Lady had commanded me to write her a Treatise in
defense of Women. If that be all ( said he briskly) I am come to your
deliverance; for this very morning have I been at a Conversation, where the
Question concerning the Virtues and Vices of that Sex, has been handled as
fully as can be desired. Thou appear'st to me, my dear Friend, ( said I,
embracing him) like my better Genius, and therefore, without any farther
Ceremony, sit down, and give me an account of the Conference.

Taking a walk ( said he) this Morning in St. James's Park, with several of my
Acquaintance, there was one amongst the rest who was all the while, either
gazing upon the Ladies as they came by, or speaking with that indifference to
us, that made us very plainly see, he did not mind the Subject of our
Discourse, though we talked of all the most considerable things that offer
themselves in such Conversations. ( A very strange Man, this, Madam, who was
thinking upon some Mistress, I warrant, when they were r^ising Taxes, and
beating the French.) A^nother, who was a pers^^ of excellent Sense, and had a
particular Friendship for this, though they would often dispute about their
several though^s of Women, in which point they could never agree; ( I wonder
they should dispute about that, Madam, for the greatest disputes in those cases
(...), when they do agree) began to rally him upon this Subject^ which he did
so handsomely; that he pleased the rest of the Company very well, without
displeasing his Friend in the least. Philogynes^ (which was the Name of the
first as Miso^^nes was of the other) ( Here, Madam, I must confess, I fancied
my Friend put false Names upon me; for besides, that I remember neither of
these Families in England, the one you must know, signifies a Woman-hater, and
the other, a Woman-lover) cried to Misogynes, Though I allow you to rally me as
much as you please, and am glad of any occasion I ^an give you, to exercise a
Talent you possess in so eminent a degree, ye^ I hope you do not in earnest
think the Conversation of Women so ridiculous as you would make us believe. Ten
times worse, said Misogynes, than I can represent it; and since we have often
had slight skirmishes upon that occasion, and we have now time enough to fight
it out, if you have the Courage to lose one Morning's gazing at 'em, I
challenge you to the private Walk by the Canal-side, to defend their Cause; and
these Gentlemen, if they please, shall be our Judges. Though I am very unwilling,
answered Philogynes, to lose a Morning that has called out all the best Company
of the Town, yet since it is in defense of the Ladies, and you so boldly
challenge me, I take you at your word, upon condition, that if I get the better
in the Judgment of these Gentlemen, you shall engage to be in Love by to morrow
morning. Upon condition, that if I overcome (said Misogynes) you will engage to
be out of Love by the same time, I agree. That is no equal stake, replied
Philogynes, for it is to lay Happiness against Unhappiness; however, I am so
well satisfied of my Cause, that I will undertake you, even upon those odds.

Upon this agreement we walked all to the other side of the Park, full of
expectation of the event of the Debate; when we were come thither, we found we
had the whole Walk to our selves, and so Misogynes, who gave the Challenge,
began in this manner.

The Propagation of Mankind being the only way to preserve it from Extinction;
and the Copulation with Women being the only means that Nature has ordained to
that end; there is no doubt but all Commonwealths ought to give any reasonable
Encouragements to it; I have therefore always admired the Wisdom of those
Governments that incited, or compelled their Subjects to marry, as a thing so
much more necessary to Mankind in general, than pleasing to any one in
particular; but that a man should, out of a mere act of Judgment, run after
Women, that he should find delight in their company, is so very extraordinary,
that the wise men of old thought it hardly possible, otherwise they had had no
need of making such severe Laws to force 'em to it, as they did.

Your Ladyship, who is so well verst in Greek and Roman Authors, knows, that
amongst the Plutarch in V. Licur.
Spartans, they who lived long Batchelours were condemned to ignominious
punishments, and debarred the privileges of other Citizens. That the Strabo
Lib. 10.
Cretans had a Law to compel all the handsomest young Men to marry; as the
Diod. Sicul. L. 1.
Thurians had to invite 'em to it, both by Honors and Rewards. That Lib. 4.
and again L. 6.
Plato ordains, that whoever lived a Batchelour to the five and thirtieth year
of his Age, should be capable of no Honor in his Commonwealth: And that the
Aul. Gell. l. ^. c. 6. Sueton. in vit. August. Dion. in vita e^usd. Lucius
Florus. Livy L. 59.
Romans did not only take all care imaginable, to encourage People to Marriage,
but frightened 'em into it by punishments, if they refused.

Notwithstanding this, had you a design of marrying 'em, I should not
altogether so much condemn you; nay, had you but a design of enjoying 'em
without it, there might be somewhat still alleged in your excuse. How
unjustifiable soever such a design may be, as to the Moral part, the action it
self is very agreeable to the Natural. But to pick'em out only for the benefit
of their Conversation, to fall in love with their Understandings, and to leave
the company of Wisemen for Handsome Women, is just the same thing, as if you
should choose rather to eat Jays and Par^ots, than Woodcocks and Partridges,
because the Feathers of the former make the finer show.

It is a very good, as well as a very general way, to guess at People by the
Company they keep; and thus we may give a great Judgment of the Female Sex, by
a view of those with whom they are the most pleased of our own. Well, let 'em
appear then; what do you find? Fine Coats, large Cravat-strings, and good
Perriwigs I must own, but for any thing else, they, and their Perriwig Blocks
are Critics alike. It Is true, to do 'em justice, they talk most learnedly of
Points and Ribons; have most Mathematical Heads for the erecting of Ladies
Topknots, make as considerable Figures, talk as loud, and laugh more than any
in Drawingrooms, and Play Houses; and those who know nothing of their Language,
would take 'em, by their Gestures, to be the wittiest persons in Christendom;
but if unluckily you understand 'em, you will find it only false Fire, and that
all this violent laughter is produced by no jest. Then take 'em out of their
own Element, begin a Discourse of any thing that is worth knowing, they are
dumb; out of Modesty? No; but they hate to talk of things that are grossier;
and the Pedantry of Scholars, and Gravity of Men of Business, is utterly unfit
for a Gentleman.

Were it nothing but the company of such sort of Creatures as these, it would
be enough, I should think, to frighten a Man of Sense from 'em. Can you see
these Fops, as much as you are used to 'em, without laughing? except it rather
makes you blush to think you should bring your self into competition with such
Tools as they are: I am far from blaming them for following the Ladies: They
avoid the company of Men who despise 'em, for that of Women who admire 'em: Nor
do I find fault with the Ladies, for being pleased with them; for since
Likeness, they say, breeds Love, what wonder is it they are fond of those Men
whose Follies make 'em most like themselves; but for a Man who has some
pretenses to Wit and Learning; for one who might be acceptable to men of Sense,
to run after 'em; nay, for a man who spends all the Morning in the study of
Homer and Aristotle, to spend the Afternoon amongst the Impertinencies of
Women; puts me in mind of the Mountebanks Stages in Naples, where the Jesuits
and Jackpuddings entertain the Spectators by turns

It Is possible, you will say, that all this makes for you; that the faults of
your Rivals render your Virtues the more remarkable, and that there is no
doubt, but a man of Merit may succeed in any place where a man of no Merit may
pretend; but, alas, Sir, you deceive your self very much, if you encourage that
Opinion. Had you fit Judges, there is no doubt but you were in the right: But
if the fairest Lady in Christendom were amongst the Indians, where they paint
the Devil of her Color, do you expect they should do her Beauty Justice? Or if
a slender man were amongst the Muscovites, do you think they would admire him
for being well shaped, where they thought none but big-belly'd men to be so?
Credit me, Sir, a man who leaves his Parts to the Judgment of Women, is very
near the same Circumstances: Will you not believe me in that case, because I
profess an enmity to 'em? You do well: but will you believe themselves? View
all the Town, take good notice: Amongst all the young Heiresses who run away
from their Guardians, is there any one who does it with a man of Sense? Amongst
all those Widows who ruin themselves by second Marriages, is there any one who
does it with a man of Sense? Amongst all those Ladies who Cuckold their
Husbands, is there any one who does it with a man of Sense? We see 'em do these
things every day, with Chaplains, Dancing-masters, Butlers, and Footmen. Who
are the men that show the tender Billets received? What are they who boast of
the Favors of all the finest Women in Town? Are they not the most despicable
of Mankind? Are they not such whose Conversation is the jest of men of Sense?
And have they above one thing about 'em, that distinguishes 'em from the other
Sex?

After all, Sir, are not the Women in the right in this point? Or do they ever
show more Judgment, than when they pitch upon such men? What do they look for
in a Husband, but one who will admire 'em, who will be governed by 'em, and
upon whom all their little tricks will pass? And who but Fools are fit for
that? What do they propose in a Gallant, but giving 'em Pleasure without
Scandal? And to the former part they have a received notion of the Ability of
Fools: Then for the Scandal, who so likely to give none as those men, whom the
World will hardly believe were favored by 'em, though they took their Oaths upon
it? For notwithstanding Experience teaches us the contrary, yet People are apt
to fancy, a man of Sense must succeed before a Coxcomb; and will rather believe
the former are favored, though they swear they are not; than the latter, though
they swear they are.

But alas, Sir, men of Sense they think know 'em, and that they take, as well
as I do, to be a sure means to hinder their being in Love. 'Twas upon this
account that Chap. 7. and in several other places.
Solomon gives such severe Characters of 'em in his Proverbs; that V. Stobaei
Senten. cap. de Vituperio Mulierum.
Euripides represented 'em so faithfully, as to get the name of the Woman
hater; that V. Stobaei Senten. cap. de Vituperio Mulierum.
Simonides has distinguished 'em into so many sorts of evil things; that See the
Dialogues of the Curtisans, and that of Love.
Lucian has so naturally described their tricks; that Homille upon the
beheading St. John Baptist.
St. Chrysostom has made such a severe invective against 'em; that Sixth Satyr.
Iuvenal has given his Friend such Counsel against having any thing to do with
'em; and, in fine, it is upon the same account that all the Epigrammatists,
Comic Poets, and Satyrists are so continually exposing 'em to the World,
making their Follies ridiculous, and their Vices odious. It Is upon the same
account likewise, that to call a man Effeminate, has always been reckoned such
a reproach; and that to say a man is governed by a Woman, has been one of the
worst Characters you could give of his Understanding.

See here a dreadful Army, Madam, against us^ I asked my Friend what these
Gentlemen had said upon this Occasion; he told me, Juvenal had written a very
severe Sa^^^ against Women, which I should see very much to its advantage, if I
would ^wait^ for a Translation of it, with which Mr. Dryden is ready to oblige
the World. For Simonides, he told me, he had written lambicks against 'em, in
which he divides 'em into ten sorts. The first he said was descended from a
Sow, (you will find very Noble Families amongst 'em, Madam) and she was
sluttish: The second from a Fox and she understands every thing, and has a
great deal of good in her, and a great deal of ill too: The third from a Dog,
and she is prying about, and snarling at every body: The fourth is made of the
Earth, and she understands nothing but how to fill her Belly, and sit by the
Fireside: The fifth of the Sea, and she is changeable and inconstant;
sometimes in a calm, and then on a sudden in a storm: T^^ sixth is made of
Ashes and a Labouri^g Ass, (An odd Composition you will say) and she is scarce
driven to her business with threatenings or force, but crams her self night and
day, and lies with every one that comes; (now whether she takes this Quality of
lying with all who come, from the Fathers-side, or the Mothers-side, I cannot
absolutely determine.) The seventh was descended from a Polcat, and she is
nauseous an^ stinking: The eighth from a Mare, and she never cares do to any
work, and minds nothing but appearing neat and fine: The ninth from a Monkey,
and her ugliness is a jest to every body: The tenth from a Be, and she makes
an excellent Wife. Camerar. Hist. Med. L. 3. C. 1^.
There is a Story also of this Simonides, that being asked about a Wife, he
said, she was the Shipwreck of Man, the Tempest of a House, the Disturber of
Rest, the Prison of Life, a daily Punishm^^^^ a sumptuous Conflict, a Beast in
Comp^^^^ a necessary Evil. And Upon the 19 th. Chapter of St. Matthew.
St. Chrysostom, besides the Homily upon the beheading St. John Baptist, which
is almost all an Invective against Women, says in another place, What is a
Wife? The Enemy of Love, the inevitable Pain, the necessary Evil, the natural
Temptation, a desirable Calamity, a domestical Peril^ a pleasing Damage. Thus
you see these Ancients, Madam, had a very commendable faculty of calling Names:
What think you, might not the Matrons of Billinsgate improve in their
Conversation? But it is natural, when People cannot convince our Reason, to
endeavor to move our Passions.

I know you will object against these, Anacreon, Theocritus, Catullus,
Tibullus, Ovid, Horace, Propertius, and all those Poets and Wits, Ancient and
Modern, who pleased themselves whilst they lived in the pursuit of Women, and
have rendered themselves immortal after their Death, by the Trophies they
raised to 'em. It Is confessed, that spending their time upon the Sex, they ought
to know 'em best; but on the other side, to excuse their own spending their
Time, ought to represent 'em as favorably as possible; and yet, pray what is
the account they give us of 'em? Do they not all with one consent complain,
either of the Cruelty, or Falsehood of their Mistresses? Are not their Books
full of Quarrels, Piques, and Jealousies? And do they not show the Levity,
Perjury, and Lewdness of the Sex? Does not Od. 44. (...)
(...)
(...)

Anacreon, and a hundred more, tell you, they mind nothing but Wealth? ( This
Complaint of the Love of Wealth, and Invectives against it, has been very
ancient, and very general amongst the Poets; besides this Greek^ -- fore enim
tutum iter and patens Converso in pretium deo. Lib. 3. O. 16. speaking of
Jupiter and Danae.
Horace, L. 3. El 8. Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiosius auro;
At n^nc barbaria e^t grandis, habere nihil.
Ecce recens dives, parto per vulnera censu,
Praefertur nobis, sanguine factus, eques.
Curia pauperibus clausa est. Dat census ^onores.
V. Amor. etc.
Ovid, L. 2. El. 4. Ad dominam faciles aditus per carmina quaero;
At mihi per caedem, and facinus sunt dona paranda.
Sed precium si grande feras, custodia victa est,
Nec prohibent claves, and canis ipse tacet.

Tibullus, and L 3 El. 11. Nulla est poscendi, nulla est reverentia ^an^i,
Aut si qua est precio, ^^llitur ipsa mora.
Aurea nunc vere sunt saecula, plurimus auro^
Venit honos, auro conciliatur amor.

Propertius make 'em amongst the Romans; Da te chi se defend?
Qua pensier fermi, e casti
Non atterri, e non guasti?
Chi teco unqua contend?
Chi vinto non se rend^^
Qual non cade, o non cede
Forte cor, salda voglia, intera feed?
Anch' egli amor lo str^l^
Gia d'oro, e d'or lo cocca
Onde qual honor lo scocca,
E beila Donna assale,
Stamp^ piaga ^ortal^
La dove ogni altra punt^
D'impiombate quadrel fi spe^za, e spu^ta.
Mar. Rim. par secunda Canzon. ^^. L'oro.
Marino, Le Richezze, li Tesori Son insensati Amori Past. Fido. Chor. del^ Atto
2 do.
Guarini among the Italians; De tus flechas por ser d'oro
Ninguna lei se deffiende.

Conde de Villa mediana, and El Rico esta en t^da part,
Siempre a proposito viene,
No ay cosa que se le esconda,
No ay puerta que se le ^^^erra.
Quev. Thal. Romans 37.
Quevedo amongst the Spaniards; Celuy devroit mourir del'Eclat du Tonnerre
Qui premier descouvrit les Mines de la Terre.
Ronsard. El. 8.
Ronsard among the French; and It Is all against the love of Money.
Cowly amongst us: For you must know, Madam, these Poets were a sort of People
who were never very remarkable for their making large Iointures; their Estates
generally lie upon Parnassus, where Land setts worse than it does in Ireland:
Nor do I remember to have read in any History, of Poets who deferred the
enjoyment of their Mistresses for the drawing of Writings.) Does not Idyll. 3.
10, 11, 14, 20.
Theocritus make continual Complaints of the Cruelty of his Mistress? Does not
Illa Lesbia quam Catullus unam
Plus quam se atque suos amavit omnes,
Nunc in quadriviis, and angiportis
Glubit magnanimos Remi nepotes. Catul. 59.

Catullus tell you, that his Lesbia lay with all the Town? and -- mulier cupido
quod dicit amanti,
In vento, and rapida scribere oportet aqua.

that what any Woman says to her Lover ought to be writ in Wind, or running
Streams? Does not Lib. 1. El. 7. Ipse miser docui quo posset ludere pacto
Custodes, eheu nunc premor art m^^.

Tibullus complain, that he had taught his Mistress to deceive her Guards so
long, that she learnt to deceive him too? Does not Lib. 3. L. 11. Ergo ego
nescio cui quem tu complexa tenebas
Excubui clausam servus ut ante domum.

Ovid lie at his Mistresses Door all night, whilst an inconsiderable Fellow is
got into her Arms? Does not Horace complain of the Lib. 1. Od. 23. L. 3. Od.
10. 26.
Cruelty of two Mistresses, and the Lib. 1. Od. 13. Lydia Lib. 2. Od. 8.
Barine. Lib. 3. Od. 9. Lydia again Epod. 15. Neaera.
Perjury and Inconstancy of three or four more? And does not Lib. 2. El. 18.
upon Cynthia's falsehood. Lib. 3. El. 17. De incontinentia muli^rum.
Propertius, besides his own Cynthia's falsehood, cry out of the Incontinence of
the Sex in general? I know not what your success in Love may have been; but
till you tell me the contrary, I can hardly believe it better than these men's.
For what Qualification can there be to make a Woman kind and constant, that
they had not? Anacreon appears to be one of the gayest humored men that ever
was born; Theocritus the most t^nder and natural in his Poems; Catullus was
without a Rival the great^st Wit of his Age; Tibullus was not only the
smoothest, and delicatest of the Roman Poets, but also the most beautiful
Person of his time; Ovid and Propertius, as neither of 'em wanted Love, so
never had any a more soft and tender way of expressing it; and Horace, besides
the talent of crying up his Mistresses, and pleasing their Vanity that way, had
the pleasantest manner of exposing the Follies of his Rivals, and the severest
of revenging the Sea Lib. 1. Od. 25. Lib. 3. Od. 15. Lib. 4. Od. 13. Epod. 8.
12.
Falsehood or unkindness of his Mistresses, of any man in the World. And yet
none of all these could, by their own Confession, keep a Woman to themselves,
or even teach 'em cunning enough to jilt 'em so, that they should never find it
out; which Non ego ne pecces cum sis formosa, recuso;
Sed ne sit misero scire necesse mihi.
Lib. 3. El. 14.
Ovid tells us frankly, was all he desired from 'em.

From this, Madam, you may please to observe, that Iilting is no such new thing
as some people would make us believe, though methinks these Poets are dangerous
persons to jilt, since it is remembered against their Mistresses, near two
thousand years after.

And in effect, what but Ruin and Desolation proceeds from 'em? Who was the
Betrayer of Judges Chapter 16.
Samson, but Dalilah? Who was the cause of the Destruction of V. Homer.
Troy, but Helen? Of Velleius Lib. 1. Eusebius. Chron. Soph. in Electra. Euripid.
in Oreste.
Agamenmon's Death, but Clytemnestra? Of Ovid. Metam. L. 8.
Hercules's, but Deianira? Who advised the burning of Quint. Cur. Lib. 5.
Persepolis, but Thais? Who ruined Livie Lib. 3. Dec. 3.
Hannibal's Army, but the Capuan Women? Who lost Plutarch in Vit. Anton.
Mark Anthony the World, but Cleopatra? Why should I burden you with Instances,
when every Country can furnish Examples enough of their own? What made such
Confusion in Procop. Ar^c.
Iustinian's Court, but Theodora? What caused the Revolt in the Low Countries,
but the Government of the Strada. Bentivoglio. Garnier, etc.
Princess of Parma? Who made such dreadful disturbances in Buchan. Knox.
Scotland, as their Queen Mary? And who raised the greatest Persecution for
Religion, that ever England saw, but our own Queen of the same Name?

But certainly they must have some very great Perfections to make amends for
all these Faults: Well then, let us see what they are? Let us view these
pleasant Confits that are to make the Poison go down: Let us enjoy a little of
that Conversation, that is diversitive enough to make People neglect all their
Danger. Sit in one of their Drawing-Rooms all day; observe the Discourse that
passes; is it not a t^dious Repetition of the same Impertinencies over and over
again, to every new Visitant? and is not one half of that spent in censuring
all the Town? and the other half in railing at those who Censure? Do they not
inveigh against the Lampooners, and at the same time talk as scandalously as
they can write? The horrid^ Affection, the ridiculous Vanity, the gross
Dissimulation, and the inveterate Malice that appears in all their Discourse,
are things for which I should think all the paint on their Faces could not make
amends. For m^ own part, I confess, I have been Fool enough to be in Love too,
and have followed Women upon that account, but to another sort of End, than you
say you do: But when that End was once satisfied, to talk with 'em afterward,
was as great a penance to me, as it would be to sit in a greasy Cooks Shop,
when my Belly was full.

This Misog^nes is a very rude Fellow, and I am sure your Ladyship will be of
my Opinion, that his last simile was very fulsome. It Is a sign he hates Women;
for had he conversed with them, they would have taught him better manners.

But there are doubtless, you will say, Women of Understanding: Pray where are
they? Is it your Prudent Woman, your good Houswife, who is plaguing all the
World with her Management, and instructing every body how to feed Geese and
Capons? Or is it your Politician, who is always full of Business, who carries a
Secretary of State's Office in her Head, and is making her deep Observations
upon every^ days News? Or is it your Learned Woman, who runs mad for the love
of hard words, who talks a mixed Jargon, or Lingua Franca, and has spent a great
deal of time to make her capable of talking Nonsense in four or five several
Languages? What think you, Sir, do you not wish for your Visitant again, as the
more tolerable folly of the two? Do not you think Learning and Politics become
a Woman as ill as riding astride? And had not the Duke of Essays de Montagne L.
1. C. 24. Mad. Gournay L'Egalite des deux sexes.
Britain reason, who thought a Woman knowing enough, when she could
distinguish between her Husband's Shirt and his Breeches?

Do not you, in answer to these, fetch me a Sappho out of Greece; a Cornelia,
the Mother of the Gracchi, out of Rome; an Anna Maria Schurman out of Holland;
and think that in showing me three Learned Women in three thousand years, you
have gained your point; and from some few particular Instances, proved a
general Conclusion: If I should bring you half a dozen Magpies that could talk,
and as many Horses that could dance, you would not, I suppose, for all that,
choose out the one to converse with, or the other to walk a Corant.

But would you see 'em to their best advantage? Would you have their Wit,
Courage, and Conduct displayed? Take 'em upon the business of Lust^ That can
make Sappho witty, Aloisia Eloquent, a Country-wife Politic; That can humble
V. Iuvenal. 6. Sat.
Messalina's Pride to walk the Streets; can make tender V. Iuvenal. 6. Sat.
Hippia endure the Incommodities of a Sea-Voyage, can support the Queen of 1
King. 10. 2 Chronicles. 9.
Sheba in a Journey to Solomon, and make Quint^ Cur. L. 6.
Thalestris search out Alexander the Great: In this particular, I must confess,
we ought to submit to 'em, and with shame allow 'em the preference. I cannot
reflect upon the Stories of Diod^ Sicul. C. 2.
Semiramis's lying with all the handsomest men in her Army, and putting 'em to
Death afterward; of her offering her Son the last Favor; of Iuven. 6. Sat.
Messalina the Empresses prostituting her self in the public Stews; and of
Queen This Bath is now shown in the ruins of her Palace, a little way out of
the Town of Naples.
Joan of Naples providing a Bath under her Window, where she might see all the
lustiest young men naked, and take her choice out of 'em, without such an
admiration as their Heroic Actions de^erve. Lilius Giraldus Dial. 9. de Po^tis.
Sappho, as she was one of the wittiest Women that ever the World bred, so she
thought with Reason it would be expected she should make some additions to a
Science in which all Womankind had been so successful: What does she do then?
Not content with our Sex, she begins Amors with her own, and teaches us a new
sort of Sin, that was followed not only in See his Dialogue between Cleonarium
and Leo^na.
Lucian's time, but is practiced frequently in See Tavernier's Travels.
Turkey at this day. You cannot but be sensible, Sir, that there is no
necessity of going so far for Instances of their Lewdness, and were it civil to
quote the Lampoons, or write the Amors of our own Time, we might be furnished
with Examples enough nearer home.

Here, Madam, I could not forbear telling my Friend, that his Disputant grew
Scurrilous. He told me, considering him as a Woman-hater, he thought 'twas no
more than his Character required; and that if I compared his Discourse with
what others had said against 'em, I should think him a very well-bred Man.

After this to talk of their Levity or Babbling, what were it but trifling? All
the Lovers and Poets who have had any thing to do with 'em, can furnish
themselves with Instances enough of the first; and any man who will give himself
the trouble of reading any one History, shall find Instances enough of the other,
if his own Wisdom has hindered him from making 'em at his own cost. Plutarch de
Garrul.
There being a Senate called in Rome, upon some very extraordinary occasion,
one of the Senators was desired by his Wife to tell her what it was; he
replied, he was obliged to Secrecy; she swears it shall never be known to any
one by her means; upon that promise he informs her, that there was a Lark seen
flying over the Senate House with a Golden Helmet on his Head, and a Spear in
one of his Claws, and that they had thereupon called the Southsayers together,
to know what it portended. No sooner was the Husband gone, but the Wife tells
it, under a Vow of Secrecy too, to her Maid; she to another who was her fellow
Servant, who told it to her Lover; so that, to be short, it ran so fast, that
as soon as the Senator came into the Marketplace, one took him aside, and told
it him for a great Secret; away goes he, and tells his Wife she had undone him,
in divulging what he had trusted with her: She denies it with a true feminine
Impudence: How could it come to be known then? says he. Alas ( replied she) are
there not three hundred Senators, and might it not come from any of 'em, as
well as you? No, says he, for I invented it on a sudden to satisfy your
Curiosity, and thus had I been served, if I had trusted you with the Secret.
It Is such another Story they tell us of young Papirius to his Mother, who
asking him what had been debated that Morning in the Senate, told her, they
were making a Law for men to have plurality of Wives. But it is somewhat a more
Tragical Relation Plutarch gives of Fulvius. Augustus complained to him, that
he was dissatisfied with what he had done, in adopting Livia's Sons, and
disinheriting his own Nephews; Fulvius goes home, and tells it his Wife, she
tells it to the Empress, who upbraids the Emperor with it. Augustus, when he
saw Fulvius next, checked him for it; by which he perceived himself ruined, and
therefore went immediately, told his Wife what she had done, and that he
resolved to stab himself; But certainly the Wives answer was very sufficient;
Nor did you deserve less, said she, who having lived so long with me, did not
know I could not keep a Secret.

But omitting these, whose Actions are recorded to their Infamy, let us see a
little of those who are quoted as the Glories of their Sex. And who more cried
up amongst 'em than Iud. C. 13.
Iudeth? What Action more celebrated than her murdering Olofernes, when he had
treated her with all the Kindness and Respect imaginable in his Tent? For my
part, I must own my Virtue does not arrive to so high a pitch; and should
rather have suffered my Town to have been ruined, than have been guilty of an
Action that appears to me so barbarous; but I confess that of Judges C. 4. v.
17.
Iael is yet worse, to invite a man into her Tent, promise him Protection, and
when he had trusted his Life in her Hands, to murder him whilst he was asleep.
What shall we say to Penelope, who is instanced as a Pattern of Chastity, and
Conjugal Love? I will not with Penelope vires juvenum, tentabat in arcu,
Qui latus argueret, corneus arcus erat.
Ovid Amor. L. 1. El. 8.
Ovid and Ad vetulam tamen ille suam ( speaking of Ulysses)
properabat, and omnis
Men's erat in cunno, Penelopea tuo.
Quae sic casta manes, ut jam convivia visas,
Vtque fututorum sit tua plena domus.
E ^uibas ut scires quicunque valentior esset,
Haec es ad arrectos verba locuta procos:
Nemo meo melius nervum tendebat Vlysse,
Sive illi laterum, seu fuit artis opus.
Qui quoniam periit, modo vos intendite: qualem
Esse virum sciero, vir sit ut ille meus.
Priapeia.
Virgil (if the Priapeia are his) make malicious Reflections upon her trying
her Lovers strength in a Bow; but take the Story as it lies in the Odysses, I
am sure she would hardly pass for such a Saint in our days; and if a Lady had
her House full of Lovers for twenty years of her Husband's absence, and if her
Husband were forced to fight all these before he could have his Wife again,
it is possible the Lampooners of the Town, would not have represented her Case
so favorably as Homer has done. But what shall we say to V. Domin. in Ovid.
El. 8. L. 1. See also Seneca's Epistles.
Lycophron even amongst the Greeks, who speaks of her as a most profligate sort
of Woman, or to Lilius Giral. Hist. Deorum Gent. Pan.
Duris Samius who asserts her to have been so very common as to have lain with
all Comers during her Husband's absence, from whose promiscuous Copulations Pan
was born, and therefore took the Name. ( Pan, your Ladyship knows in Greek
signifies All.) For Lucretia I shall not insinuate, as a Sir Charles Sidley in
the Translation of the 8 th. Elegy of the 1 st Book of Ovid.
great Wit seems to do, that she stabbed her self, rather than return to the
Embraces of a Husband, after having been so much better pleased by a Gallant;
but if she were one who valued her Chastity so much, and her Life so little, as
they would make us believe, it is somewhat odd that she should rather let
Tarquin enjoy her alive, than a Slave lie in the Bed with her when she was
dead, and that she should choose to commit the Sin, rather than bear the Shame.

But let us forgive 'em all these things I have mentioned; and since L'Art. de
connoistre les Hommes. Chapter 1.
Le Chamber assures us, that there is no Beauty in a Woman, but what is a sign
of some Vice; let us attribute it to Nature's fault, not theirs; and reckon
that the more vicious they are, the nearer they come to the perfection of the
Sex; and indeed, not spending much time in their Conversations, I will pardon
'em all their Levity, Babbling, Malice, and Impertinence; and, being unmarried,
shall not be so severe upon their Lusts and Adulteries; provided they will stop
there. Let Helen run away from her Husband with a handsomer man; but let her
not suffer all Troy to be ruined for the keeping her there: Let Clytemnestra
lie with another man, during her Husband's absence; but let her not murder him
for it when he comes home: Let Diodor. Sicul. L. 2.
Semiramis make use of all the handsomest Fellows of her Army; but let her not
put 'em to death for fear they should tell tales: and though I would forgive her,
yet her own Sex would never pardon her being the first maker of Ammian.
Marcellin. Lib. 14.
Eunuchs; Let Phaedra and Fausta invite their Husbands Sons to supply their
Fathers defects; but let 'em not accuse 'em, and have 'em put to death for
refusing: Let Joan of Naples make use of all the men in her Kingdom; but let
her not strangle her Husband for his imperfections in a point that he could not
help: That Cruelty and Barbarity, I confess, is what provokes me so much
against the Sex: I can see Tibullus's Mistress jilt him, for a Fool who is not
half so handsome; I can see Ovid waiting all night at his Mistress's Door,
whilst another man is in her Arms; and I can see half a score Impertinent Women
plaguing you with non-sensical Stories, and be very well diverted all the
while: but I confess I cannot hear of Medea's cutting her Brother in pieces,
and strewing his Limbs in the way to stop her pursuing Father, without horror
and dread; nor of her treating her own Children after the same manner, to
revenge her self upon Jason, without a like emotion: I know not how other
People may bear such things; but for my part, when I see all the Murders and
Barbarities they commit, to revenge themselves on their unconstant Lovers, to
get rid of their Husbands for some one they like better, or to prevent the
discovery of their Lewdness; but my Hair stands on end, my Blood shrinks, and I
am possessed with an utter detestation of the Sex. Go but one Circuit with the
Judges here in England; observe how many Women are condemned for killing their
Bastard Children; and tell me if you think their Cruelties can be equaled; or
whether you think those who commit such Actions fit for your, or for any Civil
Conversation. But I see by your looks you are convinced, I see you abandon your
Cause, and I shall cease to expose any farther a Sex, of whose Patronage you
seem already ashamed.

Here Misogynes left off, and Phylogynes began to answer him; But I must beg
your pardon, Sir, said my Friend, for my time is come, and I must necessarily
be gone. The Devil you shall, said I; you would engage me in a pretty Affair; I
promise a Lady a Defense of her Sex, and you will make me send her a Satyr
against it. Truly, my dear Friend, said he, I designed to have told you all,
but it is later than I thought, and I have Business waits for me. No Business,
said I, can be so considerable to you, as the satisfying a fair Lady is to me,
therefore sit down, and bring me fairly off what you have told me already, or
you and I shall be Friends no longer. After all, Madam, to tell you the truth,
though there is no great matter in this speech of Misogynes, yet I can hardly
believe he made it upon a sudden; it is possible though they two having discoursed
the matter as they told us before; might have provided themselves each with
Arguments. But supposing that, I can scarce believe, one man would be suffered
to talk so long without interruption; at least I am sure, some who we know were
none of the Company. But it is possible, that he who told me, might leave out
all that was spoke by others, for brevity sake, being as you see in haste.

If you are as apt to be mistaken in your Judgment of Things as of Looks (
replied Philogynes) it is no wonder you should make such strange Conclusions.
Whatever seriousness you may see in my Face, does not, I Will assure you, proceed
from any distrust of my Cause, but an astonishment at what strange Arguments
the Invention of man can suggest against the best things that are. I say, The
Invention of man, for I am far from believing you in earnest in this point; I
have too just an opinion of Misogynes to think he does any thing but put on
this humor for a trial of skill; and I no more believe you a hater of Women,
for the Invective you have made against 'em, than I believe Erasmus a lover of
Folly, for the Encomium he has writ upon it. If you have therefore any thing
more to urge, forbear it not upon any supposed Conviction you see in my
Countenance; for, notwithstanding that I think you have handled the Subject as
fully as any one who has undertaken it, yet I Will assure you I cannot submit to
your Arguments; and therefore am very ready to hear any thing you have further
to urge. No, says Misogynes, I am sensible I have troubled the Company long
enough about a trifle, and it is very fit you should have your turn of speaking
now. Part of the Company was already convinced by his Arguments, the other part
thought he had said as much as the matter would bear, and therefore both agreed
in desiring Philogynes to speak what he had to say, which he did in this manner.

I confess, Sir ( said he smiling) when I saw the Associates you allotted me at
first, I began to despair of my Cause; I own I was ashamed of my Company, and
resolved to pack up Baggage instantly, and quit a Trade in which none but Fops
and Fools were engaged; but when I saw the Anacreons, the O^ids, and all the
Wits, Ancient and Modern, in the same circumstances, I even took Heart again.
Courage, said I, the Business is not so bad as I thought, and (...) possible
his Heart may relent, and allow us some better Company than he condemned us to
at first. At least, thought I, if it is a Folly to converse with Women, it is
some comfort that he owns it to be a Folly of which the greatest Wits of the
World have been guilty before us; And when I saw all Greece, and the greater
part of Asia venturing their Lives for one Woman, I thought I had somewhat the
advantage of them, whilst I ventured nothing but my Rethorick for 'em
altogether. And when you named Samson, Achilles, Annibal, and Mark Anthony, I
inquired who those Gentlemen were; for certainly, thought I, if they were such
brave men, and great Soldiers, as I have heard 'em represented, we have no
reason to despair of the Victory when we have them to lead us on.

You might have spoken more generally of 'em ^oo, if you had pleased; you might
have told us, that there never was a great Soldier who was not as famous for
his Amors, as his Battles; that a Cowley's Preface.
Poet was scarce thought free of his Trade, who had not paid some Duties to
Love; and you might have added to these all the Wisemen and Philosophers of
the World; You might have informed us, that David, though a man after God's own
Heart, was not contented without some share in the Women's. That Solomon, who
knew the Virtue of every Plant, from the Cedar of Libanus^ to the Hysop that
grows upon the Wall, took as much pains to have as general a knowledge of the
Ladies. That For these three Philos. see Diog. L^^^tius in their Lives.
Socrates, who was the ugliest as well as the wisest man of his time, would in
spite of Nature aim at Love too, and, not terrified by one ill Wife, would try
to mend his hand in another. That For these three Philos. see Diog. L^^^tius in
their Lives.
Plato, whom Antiquity has called Divine, did not spend all his time in
erecting Commonwealths, but that some of it was bestowed upon the Xantippe's
and Archeanassa's. That For these three Philos. see Diog. L^^^tius in their
Lives.
Aristotle, whom Philip made Governor to Alexander, made himself a Slave to
his Mistress; that this was not an effect of his Passion alone, but of his
Reason; (...): Diog. Laert. in Vit. Arist^t.
That he said Love was not only upon the account of Copulation but Philosophy;
and commands his Wiseman to be in Love, before he bids him meddle with the
Commonwealth. And in fine, that this great man, who fathomed all Arts and
Sciences, who has given us the best Rules of Philosophy, Politics, Poetry,
etc. did also not think it unbecoming his Gravity to write one Treatise of
Love, and four Amatory Theses. You might have mingled Sacred Story with
Profane. You might have told us that St. Peter was married, that St. Paul
defended the leading about a Sister; that we owe one of the most celebrated St.
Austin converted by his Mother.
Fathers of the Church to the Endeavors and Conversion of a Woman; and that
St. Ierom had so great an esteem for the Sex, as to dedicate a great part of
his Works to some of 'em. You might have added to these a thousand more, which
you see I purposely omit to avoid Prolixity, and mention none but whom you will
allow to be the most celebrated of their profession, without doing your Cause
any injury in the least; for after all, it is but showing us a Drawing Room of
Fops, reading a Dialogue out of Lucian, seeing a Scene of a Play, quoting a
Sentence out of Solomon's Proverbs, searching all History for two or three ill
Women, and the business is done, the Cause is gained, let the Trumpets sound,
and Io Paean be sung for the Victory.

I am sorry, Sir, that I cannot be as civil to you, as you have been to me; It
goes against my Conscience to place you with so bad Company, considering with
what you have obliged me; and of those few great men whom you have seduced to
your Party, I am concerned that I must take the better part from you. I fancy,
after what I have already said of Solomon, after reflecting upon his History,
you cannot think him a true Friend to your Cause; and therefore will not I hope
depend too much upon him. I shall say nothing of his Wives and Concubines, I
shall not as much as mention his Canticles, which Est autem -- It is a Dialogue
between Solomon and the King of Egypt's Daughter; two Chorus's, one of young
Men, the other of Virgins, who lay near the Bedchamber, speaking between. The
Nuptial Secrets lie hid here under modest words, which was the Cause the
ancient Hebrews would not suffer this Book to be read, but by those who were
near Marriage. Grotius upon the Canticles
Grotius, as well as I, affirms to be a Love-Poem, and which Rapin de Carmine
Pastorali.
Rapin reckons both the first and best of Pastorals; but I shall attack you at
your own Weapon; I shall oppose Proverb against Proverb; if he has been severe
in 'em upon ill Women, whose Cause I do not undertake, he has spoken as
favorably of the The last Chapter of Proverbs, and in several other places.
Wise and the Good, for whom we appear; in like manner, if Euripides has
represented Women so in his Tragedies, as to get the Name of the Woman-hater, I
appeal from his Writings to his Life and Conversation, which show him far
otherwise. If Simonides gives you severe Characters of several Women, he gives
you one at last that makes amends for all; one in whom no fault can be found;
and if you think that is not enough to take him off from your party, if you are
still so very fond of him, we will tell you, that Men who are deformed and
ugly, as Girald. in vit. Simonidis. Plutarch in vit. Themistoclis.
Simonides was, naturally declare themselves Enemies to Women, because they
fancy Women are Enemies to them; and upon that account, not upon the account of
his Wit, we will allow him to you. As for St. Chrysostom, though we have all the
respect imaginable for a Father of the Church, and upon that account shall not
enter into the Merits of the Cause betwixt V. Socrat. Schol. Sozomen. Evagr.
him and the Empress Eudoxia; yet this we shall say, Sir, that as Fathers of
the Church are Subject to Passions, as well as other men; so it is no wonder
that a man, who is used very ill by one Woman, and converses with few else,
should conclude 'em all alike. Thus after having taken two of your Patriots
from you, and if not taken, at least disabled the other two from being very
credible Witnesses, you are reduced to Lucian and Iuvenal. For the former, if I
should quote you what the old Fathers say of him, if I should tell you, that he
did not only abuse the Christian Religion, but even his own; that he rallied
all the Philosophers, Orators, and Historians of his time; that not content
with that, he falls foul upon those his own Religion taught him to worship as
Gods; I fancy you would not think what such a man says of any great weight; but
truly, Sir, there is no need of that in this case; What does this Lu^ian do,
pray? Why See the Dialogues of the Curtisans.
he describes the Bawds Griping, Covetous, and encou^aging their Daughters in
Lewdness; ^is: Curtisans False, Jilting, and true Curtisans throughout. And
what of all this, pray? what does this make for you? It Is not the Cause of
Bawds, or Curtisans that we undertake; though even amongst them he represents a
great part Easy, Loving, good-natured Fools, and used accordingly by their
Lovers. But does Lucian pretend that there are no good Women? Does he fall upon
the Sex in general? or does not he bring in In the Dialogue of Love.
Charicles in one place defending 'em, and does not he make the greatest
Encomium that can be of Panthaea in another, and speak with abundance o^ esteem
of several other Women in the same? And if he does introduce Callicratides in
one of his Dialogues railing at the Sex in opposition to Charicles, h^ does it
in the defense of a Sin, which ^ am sure you will scarce think it civil to
name. What shall we say to Iuvenal, but what Plato did to Xenocrates, bid him
Sacrifice to the Graces. He is always Violent, always Declaiming, always in a
Passion; and what wonder if he falls upon the Women in one of his Fits? After
all, you will make no great matter of him; for if he has writ one Satyr upon
the Women, he has writ fifteen upon the Men. For the Comic Poets and
Satyrists, whom you mention in general, when you name 'em in particular, I
shall give 'em particular answers. And now truly, Sir, see your self reduced to
a miserable Equipage; some old Husbands, and jilted Lovers; some men with ill
Faces, and worse Meens, may possibly stick to you still; but that is all; I am
sorry to see a man so well made, of so much Wit, and who has been so successful
amongst the Ladies, rank himself with such a Tribe; but you do it, I suppose,
by way of variety only; and so let Misogynes appear, at the Head of his
Regiment, that makes a worse Figure than Sir John Falstaffe's; let 'em be
encouraged with stumm'd Wine and muddy Ale; let 'em give Fire to their
Mundungus, and so let the battle begin, whilst we with all the Heroes, Wits,
and Philosophers, see how we can defend the Cause we have undertaken.

I am sensible, Sir, that I have broken the order of your Discourse, and I beg
your Pardon for it; But I thought it was necessary to dististinguish our
Enemies from our Friends, before the Armies joined, that so we might know whom
to attack, and whom to spare; and having done that, I shall now confine my self
to your Method, and follow the Course that you please to lead me.

Though I perfectly agree with you in the esteem of the Laws made for the
encouragement of Marriage, and consequently cannot but regret the want of 'em
amongst our selves; yet I must beg your Pardon, Sir, if I wholly dissent from
you, in the inference you would draw from it; For ^tis very apparent to me, and
to any unbiased Person else, I suppose, that those Laws were never made, as
you fancy, for the forcing men to the Love of Women, to which all Coun^ries
were naturally enough inclined; ^ut for the restraining 'em to particu^ars;
that whilst they followed the ge^eral pleasures of the Sex, they might ^ot lose
the useful part, which was the ^rocreation of Children. Had there ^een so few
Virtues amongst 'em, as ^ou please to imagine, there had been ^o need of this;
When we have but one Dish of Meat that we like, we fall upon that without any
deliberation; but when the fancy is distracted with variety of Dainties, we
often lose more time in the making our choice, than would otherwise be
requisite to the satisfying our Appetites.

It Is true, Sir, it is a very good way to judge of People by the Company they
are fond of; but it is not a certain way to judge of People by the Company that
is fond of them. There was a Tailor in love with Queen Elizabeth, but it does
not necessarily follow that Queen Elizabeth was in love with a Tailor. If there
are Fops, if there are ridiculous Fellows who follow the Ladies, before we run
down the Ladies for it, let us see if they do not laugh at 'em, as well as we
our selves. And I cannot think their pursuing 'em an^ reason at all for Men of
sense to avoid 'em. You would think it very hard, that Alexander and Caesar
should quit the Art of War, because some Thrasoes and bragging Bullies
pretended to it as well as they; and Virgil and Horace would take it very ill,
that you should damn all sorts of Poetry, because of the Bavius's and
Maevius's, who set up for it; and whatever reason you would give against the
being a Minister of State, I dare say Sir Politic Woudbee's aiming at it,
would be none. ( Here Philogynes ^seems to me not to understand the right use
of that considerable part of Mankind called Fools; For it is only the Half Wit
that is intolerable, and a true Fool, is next a true Wit the best Company in
the World; for as a Noble Author has extremely well observed, Wit, like Terce
Claret, when it begins to pa^^,
Neglected lies, and's of no use at all;
But in its full perfection of Decay,
Turns Vinegar, and ^omes again in Play.)


After this I need not tell you, Sir, that it is very ill judging of People by
their outside; and as I laugh at those who like a Man only for his being well
dressed, so I fancy you will allow them to be as ridiculous, who run him down
only for the same reason. It was objected against Diogenes Laertius in vit.
Aristot.
Aristotle and Plutarch in vit. Ciceronis.
Cicero, that they were too sumptuous in their Apparel, and overcurious in
their Dress; and without doubt there were deep See Verres's Iest's upon Cicero
for his Effeminacy. Plut.
Critics in those times, said they minded nothing but making themselves fine;
who yet, without any offense to their Learning, we may suppose could not give
so good an account of their Studies, as these two great Men have done of theirs.

(Courage! there are two good Precedents for the Beaux.)

After all, Sir, I know there are a great many of these gay Coxcombs, of these
eternal pretenders to Love; and I have nothing to say in their behaves; let 'em
e'^n shift for themselves amongst the Thrasoes, and Bavius's. But they do not
only pretend (you say) they are successful too; It Is very possible, Sir; I do
not know but there may be Fools enough of the other Sex, to like the Fools of
ours. But it is with the best sort of Women too (you say) that they succeed.
And who tells you so, pray? They themselves. I swear, Sir (though I have a very
great esteem for those Gentlemen) yet I must beg their Pardon for my faith in
this point; I can never think a Woman whose Wit we all allow, can be fond of a
Man whose Folly we all see: On the other side, I know how natural it is, for
every one to avoid contempt; and when a man is despised in one place, what so
reasonable as to make you believe he is esteemed in another. And I hope the
Gentlemen themselves will take it for a Compliment, when I tell 'em I do not
believe a word they say in this point; since certainly a Man of Honor would
rather of the two, tell a Lie to the prejudice of a Woman who uses him ill,
than a truth to the utter ruin of one who grants him all the favors he can
ask.

But let us judge 'em by their Actions say you! Do not most of the young
Heiresses run away with pitiful Fellows? If they do, Sir, it should rather
deserve your Pity than your Anger; or if you must be angry, be angry with the
Guardians whose severity frighten 'em away, and yet hinders 'em the sight of
any Men of merit to run away with. It Is no wonder that one who has never seen
any Town, but where he was born, should think that the finest in the World; and
you cannot blame a Woman for being in Love with a Man who does not deserve her,
if she never saw any who did. All that we can reasonably expect in that point
is, that she should make some satisfaction when she see^ the World better; and
if she shows her contempt of her Choice then, it is as much (if not more) than
can be required. In like manner you cannot say a Widow makes an ill Choice,
except you prove she was offered a better. If a Man, who is obliged to ride a
Journey, does it upon an ill Horse, you will be very well satisfied certainly,
when he tells you, it is the best he could get. ( I confess, Madam, this seems
to me but a very indifferent excuse for the Widows; for he would make us
believe, it is but next Oars with 'em; and so I told my ^riend; but he replied,
I must consider, it is only those Widows who make an ill Choice, about which he
is to speak; and as he cannot say of them, as of the young Maids^ that it was
for want of seeing the World; so they must be contented with this excuse, or
make a better for themselves.) For the Wives, who you say Cuckold their
Husbands, there may be somewhat more to be said. Modesty being almost an
inseparable Quality of wit, there is no wonder that a Man who is possessed of
that, should so seldom succeed in these Undertakings. Whilst Fools, by their
natural impudence push on the thing; and Married Women are a sort of Forts that
are sooner taken by Storm than Treaty. So that this shows rather the great
confi^ence of the Man, than the little judgment of the Woman; who it is forty to
one had much rather a Man of sense was possessed of her, if he would take the
same methods to gain her as the ^^her had done.

(After all, Madam, I think no^e of these Excuses Extraordinary; theref^re if I
were worthy to advise the Ladies, they should rather make use of Men o^ Wit in
all these Capacities, than put their Friends to the trouble of inventing such
pitful defenses for 'em.)

Now, Sir, as I cannot see any reason why Women should naturally love Fools,
more then Men of Wit, so I shall very hardly be brough^ to believe they do. In
a Husband I suppose they propose a Man whose Conversation shall be agreeable as
well as his Person; and who shall have wit to entertain 'em, as well as wisdom
to direct 'em; and in whom can this be found, but in Men of the best Sense? If
in a Gallant, as you say, they propose Pleasure without scandal, it is very hard
the heat that warms a Man's Brain, should so entirely settle there, as to
render him incapable of pleasing'em otherways; though it is possible, by reason
of his having variety of thoughts to divert him, he may not give himself so
entirely up to those pleasures, as People less capable of thinking do: and for
the scandal, who so proper to hinder that, as those who have prudence to
manage things so as not to be found out, and wit enough to turn it off if they
are? Whilst a Fool by his want of Sense shall quickly make the thing public,
if there be an Intrigue, or by his vanity brag of one, though there be none.
Add to this, that when a Woman seems pleased with a Man of wit, every body is
apt to attribute it to the pleasure of his Conversation; whereas, when she is
fond of a Man, in whom we can see nothing to be liked, we naturally suppose she
likes him for something that we do not see: and though it is possible it may be
only want of Judgment in the Lady, yet the world is apt to Compliment her
Understanding in that Case, to the prejudice of her Reputation. And to
conclude, Sir, though I do not believe all those Men successful who say they
are not, yet I am very much inclined to believe all those Men not to be
successful, who say they are.

For your Examples of Women Haters, I have sufficiently I think replied to them
already; and for your other Arguments, if it be an affront to call a Man
effeminate, I hope you do not think it any great Compliment to tell a Woman she
is Masculine; and had that Argument been urged against you, I dare answer for
you, you would have said, that that only proved the Perfections of the Sexes
diff^rent; and as Man was made for the ruder Labors, it was requisite he
should be strong and course; and the Women, being made for the easier things,
ought to be soft, tender, and delicate: And as for Men's being governed by their
Wives, though the being hectored by 'em is not so commendable; yet it V. Alex. ab
Alex. L. 4. C. 8.
was observed by Plutarch in vit. Cato.
Cato of the Romans, that they governed all the World, and that their Wives
governed them: Amongst the V. Leges Connubiales.
Assyrians it was a Custom introduced by Semiramis, (who had Ruled that Kingdom
with so much Glory) that the Wives should have Dominion over the Husbands; The
same Custom prevailed likewise among the Nicholaus (...), and from him
Stobaeus. Sermon. 42.
Sauromatae; and the Diodor. Si^ul. L. 1.
Egyptians had an Express Law to that purpose. We know how much the Aristot.
Politic. L. 2. Cap. 7.
Spartans (the bravest Men of the world) were Commanded by their Wives, and
that all the care and management of Domestic Affairs was committed to them. So
that I can not imagine how a thing should be so very scandalous, that was
practiced by most of the bravest People under the Sun.

Here are very good Precedents for Married Women, which it is to be hoped they
will lay up in their hearts, and practice in their Lives and Conversations.

I have as great a veneration for those Poets you mention, as any Man can; and
upon that account I shall not believe all the ill they say of their Mistresses,
because I suppose they would not have me: As I have been a Lover my self, so I
know very well that People are apt in those Cases to take suspicions for
realities, and surmises for matter of fact. Does not See the Tragedy by Mr.
Dryden.
Aureng-zebe call Indamora Faithless, and Ingrate? and yet I believe he would
be very angry that you should call her so too; and would not any one who came
in when he was in one of his rants, conclude, a Man who loved so well, would
not be enraged against a Mistress at that rate, unless her falsehood was very
apparent? And yet when we come to examine the Cause of this disorder, what is
it, but Morats giving him his Life at her request, or his leaning upon her Lap
when he dyed. I rather mention this than any of the Poets you spoke of, not
only because all the motions and Passions of a Lover are described with as much
Art and Delicacy, as in any of those Ancients, but also, that seeing the whole
business before you, you may judge of every little cause of his disorder, as
well as he himself, which in Odes and Elegies you cannot do; You see the Lover
there in a fury, but what cause he has to be so, there is no body to tell you,
but he who is in it. Add to this, that a Man often feigns jealousy of his
Mistress, to hinder her from being so of him, and will upbraid her falsehood to
defend his own. ( That is a thing now I confess, Madam, which I can hardly
believe.) And it is evident, they had not really any such bad Opinion of Women,
since with all this they did not cease to run after 'em. However, if you think
these general Answers not sufficient; let us see what we can say to
particulars. For the Complaints of Cruelty and Scorn; I look upon 'em as things
of course, and therefore shall say nothing to 'em. If Anacreon's Mistress did
ask him nothing but money; why did he choose one whose necessities drove her
upon it. And if other Men have made complaints of the Women's minding wealth
more than Love; I desire to know whether Women have not as much reason to make
the same Complaints of the Men. And for those who talk of their Mistresses
inconstancy, let us see first whether they were Constant to them. For Ovid, he
does not pretend to put it upon you, but complains in Eleg. 1 L. 10. 1.
one place of his being in Love with two at once, and tells you frankly in
Eleg. 4. L. 1.
another, that he was in Love with all the Town. For Horace, Suetonius, (or who
ever it was that writ his Life) informs you that he was intemperately given to
Women; and what wonder then, that a Man who tried so many, should find one or
two false. Tibullus had two Delia. Nemesis
Mistresses whom he Celebrates by name, and there are some more Elegies that it
does not appear whether they are writ to them or others; and though he tells, us
the Rumor ait crebro nostram peecasse putam,
Quid miserum torques Rumor acerbe ^ace.

Report was that his Mistress was kind to other men; yet the Report gave him so
much torment, that he desired it should be stifled; if therefore you have any
friendship for him, endeavor to fulfill his desire in that point. For
Propertius, besides his Aspice uti caelo modo Sol, modo Luna ministrat,
Sic etiam nobis una puella parum.
2 Lib. El. 18.
intemperate Love of all Women, he tells you his Lib. 4. El. 9.
Mistress caught him with two Wenches at the same time; and confesses that he
rails at the incontinence of Women, only because she upbraided him with his.
Thus whatever qualifications those Great Men had, Constancy you see was none;
and though we allow you, each of 'em had merit enough for any one Woman, yet one
Man can hardly have enough for half a score.

Now if Ruin and Desolation has come to Great Men, and States, from Women, it
showed they had a good Opinion of the Sex in general, that they would suffer
for 'em; and had they not been sensible the greatest part were good, they could
never have been imposed upon by the bad. Then as for those Ill Women whom you
have mentioned, as I suppose you will not undertake to defend all the Actions
of Tyrants, and Murderers; so I do not think my self at all obliged to defend
all the Women who have been guilty of some of their Crimes. The Dispute is not
whether there have been any Ill Women in the world, but whether there are not
more Good. And when I have told you that the same Book that condemns Dalilah,
cries up Deborah, and Iael; That if Homer has represented Helen guilty of some
faults (for you will see that Homer does not represent her Cause so violently
bad) he tells us of Hecuba, and Andromache, and a thousand others who were very
good ones; That if Clytemnestra was false to Agamemnon, Penelope was as Famous
for her Truth to Ulysses; and so put you Example against Example, which I
forbear to do, only because it is so very easy; should I, I say, do but this,
you could not complain that your Arguments were unanswered. But truly, Sir, we
might carry the thing much farther; we might defend some of those Women you
mentioned, and excuse the rest. For Dalilah I shall say nothing, out of respect
to the Scripture, that represents her as an Ill Woman; it is possible, were she
alive, she might tell you in her own defense, that what account you have of
her, is from her professed Enemies: That however taking the thing as they tell
it; if she did commit a piece of treachery, it was against an Enemy of her
Country; and that it was very hard she should be so much run down for the same
thing they have so much admired in Iael and Iudeth, as well as every body else
did in Marcus Brutus; she would perhaps push her defense further, and tell you,
that tho she delivered Samson to the Philistines to be kept Prisoner, yet she
neither drove a Nail through his head, nor cut it off. But for Helen, give me
leave to tell you, it is a great dispute amongst the Historians, whether she was
forced away by Paris, or went by her own consent; several are of the former
Opinion; and Prologom. ad Apollon.
Hoelztzim says plainly, he wonders Homer will put such a ridiculous Story upon
the world, as to make her the occasion of the Trojan War. (Menelaus, it must be
confessed, Madam, if the Story be true, was a very easy good natured Husband,
who would be at so much pains and charge to fetch back a Wife who run away with
another man. I do not remember, in my own memory, to have known above Five or
Six Examples like it) And In Phaedr.
Plato speaks as if the belying her were the cause of Homer's blindness, as
well as of Stesichorus's; but that the latter understood the way of expiating
his fault better, and made his recantation, to this effect: That there was not
a word of truth in the Story of her going to Troy. If Clytemnestra was
consenting to her Husband's death, yet it was Egisthus, a man, who gave the
blow: And if Tha^s did advi^e the burning Persepolis, yet it was not less a
Person than Alexander the Great who put it in Execution. And as for Deianira
and Cleopatra, whatever fatality arrived to their Lovers from 'em, may
certainly be very well excused upon the innocence of their Intentions, and
their punishment of themselves afterward, the one Hanging, the other Poisoning
her sel^. I^ the Capuan Women destroyed Annibal's Army, they destroyed a Body
of Enemies that all the men in Italy could not. In like manner, for your other
Instances we might tell you that Procopius, who tells those terrible Stories of
Anecdota.
Theodora, is so very passionate all along, and mixes such ridiculous Fables
with what he tells, that there is no great credit to be given to him. ( This
Procopius was a Soldier under Justinian, and has writ amongst other things a
Secret History of those Times; In this he repre^ents the Empress Theodora more
like a Devil than a Woman; he makes her and the Emperor converse frequently
with Spirits, and makes her put 'em to an Employment, that savours more of the
Flesh than the Spirit) Though granting she was as lewd as he represents her;
what wonder is it, that one who had been a stroling Play-wench, and common
Strumpet before the Emperor married her, should not turn Saint after? If the Sea Bentivoglio, Strada, Garnier.
Princess of Parma embroiled Flanders, she did it by the command of Philip, for
whom she governed. And as for your two Queen Mary's, In the Holy Court.
Caussin you know makes a Saint of the one, and Parsons of the other, with whom
I leave you to fight it out, not thinking our dispute very much concerned in it.

Then, Sir, if there are impertinents, if there are ridiculous Persons of the
other Sex, I hope you do not think they are all Plato's, nor all Aristotle's of
our own; And I will undertake, for every Woman who plagues you with her
business, for every Woudbee Politician, and for every Pedant amongst them, to
bring you double the number of the Men. If Olivia is impertinent in the
Plain-Dealer, I hope there are Novels and Plausibles who keep her Company; And
if I should carry you to a City Coffee-House, and there show you a parcel of
People talking of things that they understand nothing at all of; and settling
the Governments of Countries, which they never saw as much as in a Map: From
thence to a Playhouse, and show you the pert and insipid raillery of the
Sparks upon the Vizard Masks: From thence to a New Market Course, and enter you
at a Table, where you should hear nothing talked of but Dogs and Horses: From
thence to a Tavern; and show you a set of men in their Drunken Frolicks: I
fancy you would wish your self in your Drawing Room again, as a more agreeable
^olly than any of those I have mentioned. And I appeal to you whether Lucian in
his Timon, Boileau in his Eighth Satyr, and my Lord Rochester in his upon the
like Subject, say not as much against Mankind, and make 'em as ridiculous as
you can do the Women. And I Will assure you, Sir, I am far from being of the Duke
of Britanie's mind, that Learning is unfit for a Woman; and shall, without any
offense either to him or you, continue of the same Opinion^ 'till you have
answered Anna Maria Schurman's Arguments in their behalf, and 'till you have
taken away her ^elf, who is one of the best Arguments.

This Anna Maria Schurman was ^ Dutch Lady of Utrecht, of whom yo^ will hear
more anon. There was a long Dispute between her and Rivetus, whether Learning
was fit for Women? It Is Printed in her Works in Latin. Here, Madam, there
follows a tedious Chapter, of Women who have been famous for Wit and Learning;
which though it may be convenient for those who question their Abilities that
way, yet I do not see of what use it can be to your Ladyship, or to any who
have the honor of being acquainted with you; therefore if you please, Madam,
we will cast off here, and take hands again at the bottom.

Nor need you fear that I should search three several Countries, and three
several Ages, to furnish me with a Learned Woman apiece. No, Sir, even Greece
it self, to go no further, had Nine Muses, Nine Sibyls, and Nine Lyrick
Po^tesses, if you are delighted with the number Nine, which is three times
three. And if you have more mind to particulars, we will show you there Vossius
de Poet. Grecis.
Megalostrate the Mistress of Alcman, who had a gift of Poetry as well as he;
the Daughters of Lilius Gira^d. in Vit. Stesich.
Stesichorus who were as good Poets as their Father. We have also an Eretrian
Sappho, as well as she who was in Love with Phaon; Erinna, and Demophila, the
first the Mistress of Sappho, the other equal to her, who flourished all four
in the same time. After these we have Theano, the Wife of Pythagoras, who
undertook his School when he was dead, with two others of the same name (if you
will believe Su^das) whereof one was a Lyrick Poetess, the other a Thurian, who
writ of Pythagoras. We have also about the same time Cleobulina (the Daughter
of Cleobulus one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece) a Poetess, and Corinna who
had the Surname given her of the Lyrick Muse. We have presently after
Telesilla an Argive Poetess, not only Famous for her Wit, but for her Inspiring
her Country Women with so much Courage, as to make 'em put to Flight the
Spartiates, who came upon 'em in the absence of their Husbands. At the same
time lived Praxilla one of the nine Lyricks, and of whom we have a Copy of
Verses to Calais yet extant; What will you say to Aspatia Milesia, who is
Celebrated as a Sophistress, (you know the word Plutarch in Vit. Themistocl.
Sophister was not then abused) a Teacher of Rethorick, and a Poetess? There
was also Hesti^ea, mentioned by Strabo, Anyte by Tatian, and Nyssis by
Antipater Thessalus, of the two last of which there are some things yet extant;
if you have a mind to see what they did after they turned Christians, we will
produce Eudocia the Wife of Theodosius, instructed in all sort of Learning, and
who writ several Treatises, very much cried up by Photius. I have not said a
word here of Lasthemia the Mantinaean, nor Axiothea the Phliasian, though they
are mentioned amongst the Disciples of Plato by Diogenes Laertius; and I own I
forgot Hipparchia, whose Life he writes, and commends both as a Philosopher and
a Writer of Tragedies, and Hedyle the Poetess, whom Athenaeus quotes, and
Vossius mentions neither of these two in his Book de Poetis Grecis.
Vossius it seems has forgot 'em as well as I. I question not but there are
several others, whose Names we want, and I question not but that there are
several named whom I remember not: However this is enough to let you see we are
not so hard put to it as you imagine, since one little Country can furnish us
with all these. What say you, Sir, are you yet satisfied there are Women of Wit
and Learning? or shall we fetch you the Quintil. l. 4.
Cornelia you mentioned, Salust. Bell. Catil.
Sempronia, Vossius de Poetis Latin. for the rest.
Cornificia, Polla Argentaria the Wife of Lucan, and who assisted him in his
Poem; Sulpitia, Proba Falconia, Helpine the Wife of Boethius from amongst the
Latins? Or if these are not enough, shall we bring up our Reserves of I^alian,
Spanish, French, German, and English? And if you are not yet contented, because
I fancy every body else is, I shall refer you to Iacobus a Sancto Carolo's
Library of Women, Illustrious for their Writings; or to Anna Maria Schurman,
who was indeed a Library her self, since you mention her. Pardon me, Sir, if I
detain you a little longer than ordinary with this Woman; and though you may
think it lost time, because you knew it before, yet it is possible every body
does not know, that she was very well skilled in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack,
Arabic, Turkish, Greek, Latin, French, English, Italian, Spanish, German,
Dutch, and Flemish Languages; that she had a very good ^aculty at Poetry and
Painting, that she was a perfect Mistress of all the Philosophies, that the
greatest Divines of her time were proud of her judgment in their own
profession, and that when we had this Character of her she was not above Thirty
years of Age. What think you, Sir, is not this Woman sufficient of her self? Or
shall we refer you to Mademoiselle L'Egalite des Deux Sexes.
Gournay among the French, or Nobilta delle Done.
Lucretia Marinella among the Italians, who have both writ in defense of their
Sex, and who are both Arguments themselves of the Excellency of it? I shall not
as much as mention any of those Ladies whose Wit Balzac and Voiture so much
admire; I shall say nothing of the Mesdemoselles Scuderie and Le Fevre, to the
first of which we do not only owe several excellent Treatises published under
her own name, but who is said also to have had a great share in those that
appear under her Brother's; and to the latter of which we are obliged for so
many admirable Versions, and judicious Observations upon most of the Greek and
Latin Poets. I shall not as much as trouble you with our own Country Women. I
shall say nothing of Sir Thomas More's Daughters, about whose Education Epist.
ad Bude^m.
Erasmus has written; I shall pass by Sir Nicolas Bacon's, who were as learned
as they; shall say nothing of Sir Philip Sidney's Lady Pembroke, nor as much as
mention Mrs. Philips, or any of the rest of our English Poetesses; but I can
hardly forbear saying something of the Lady Jane Gray, of whom all Nations else
speak, and whose Fame is more celebrated in Italy, both for her Learning and
Piety, by the account that Michael Angelo has given 'em of her, than it is here
at home. Should I reckon up all those Ladies whose Wit and Learning has been
Celebrated by our own Poets; should I but enter upon the praises of Queen
Elizabeth of England, or Mary of Scotland, in that particular^ I should never
have done. But I can hardly omit two Ladies who are strangers, and however I am
straightened for room, yet methinks I ought to be just to those who were civil to
me, since therefore I received particular favors from the Procurator Cornara,
during my stay at Venice, let me not pass over in silence his Daughter, for
whom most of the greatest Princes, and Learned Men of Europe have testified
such an esteem. This Lady, besides her Skill in Rhetoric, Logic, Music, and
Astronomy, writ and spoke perfectly well Seven several Languages; and made the
course of all the Speculative Sciences with so much success, that She might
very well profess her self a Mistress of 'em; and all this before she was
thirty Years of Age. Her Sister, whom I had the honor to see (she her self
being dead some time before) is likewise a Person of very singular Endowments;
and all this whilst they are one of the best Families of a Town, where the
Nobility seem almost as proud of their Ignorance, as their Liberty. The other I
shall mention, is Christina Queen of Sueden, a Princess whose Accomplishments
are so generally known, that it is enough to have named her; a Lady of that
true Judgment, that she knew how to esteem Wit and Learning at the same time
that she despised Crowns; and seemed to be Born as a sufficient recompense to
the Commonwealth of Letters, for all the mischiefs her Predecessors the Goths
and Vandals had done it before; I am satisfied it is impossible for me to add
any thing to a Glory so established as that of this Princess is; yet as I never
past any time either with greater benefit, or greater satisfaction, than what I
past in her Conversation; so I am very well pleased methinks with any thing
that gives me occasion to call it to my remembrance. There might be as
advantageous Characters perhaps given of some Ladies of our own Country now
living, did not their Modesty, that inseparable Quality of Wit and Women, deter
me from it.

We might tell you further, Sir, that this Modesty too often hinders 'em from
making their Virtues known; That they are not of those eternal Scrib^ers who
are continually plagueing the World with their Works; and that it ^s not the
Vanity of getting a Name, which several of the greatest men of the World have
owned to be the Cause of their writing, that is the Cause of the Women's. Had
not Sappho been so much in Love, it is possible we had never heard any mention
of one of the greatest Wits that ever was born; had not Cicero and Quintilian
given us accounts of Cornelia, and the Daughters of L^lius, and Hortensius,
they had never done it themselves; had not Jane Gray been put to Death, her
Virtues had never been so much taken notice of; Had not the Portugueze Nun been
deserted by her Gallant, we had mist some of the most passionate Letters that
these latter Ag^s have produced; and had not Anna Maria Schurman's Works been
published by a Friend, without her consent, we had lost the benefit of 'em. We
may tell you too, that 't^^ no^ only in respect of their own Sex that they are
admired, but even of ours. That of those two Odes we have yet of Sappho, we owe
one to Dionys^us Halicarnassaeus, the other to Longin, the two best Critics of
Greece, who cho^^ 'em out for Examples to their Rules, before any of the Men's;
That the Epistle of Sappho to Phaon, which is esteemed the most delicate of
Ovid,'s is supposed to be taken out of her Writings. That Corinna was five
times victorious over Pindar the best Ly^ick Po^^ of our Sex. And were we here
in England as forward in Printing Lette^s, as they are in France and Italy, we
might furnish Volumes of 'em written by ou^ own Ladies, that would make all the
Women-haters blush, or make all Men else blush for 'em.

Here, Madam, I must own to you I grew je^lous, for I could no^ imagine that
Philogynes would have said this, without having seen some of your Ladys^ips
Letters.

We may tell you too, that granting the equal Capacities of both Sexes, it is a
greater wonder to find one Learned Woman, than a hundred Learned Men,
considering the difference of their Educations. If you should go into Greece,
and, seeing the ignorance is amongst 'em at present, tell 'em their Country men
were incapable of Learning, would you not be very well satisfied, when they
told you of the Plato's and Aristotle's of Antiquity? And that if they had not
as Famous Men now, it was because they have not the same Advantages they had
then? And pray why may not the Women be allowed the same excuse? Will you by
all your Laws and Customs endeavor to keep 'em ignorant, and then blame 'em
for being so? And forbid all Men of Sense keeping 'em Company, as you do, and
yet be angry with them for keeping Company with Fools? Consider what Time and
Charge is spent to make Men fit for somewhat; Eight or Nine Years at School;
Six or Seven Years at the University; Four or Five Years in Travel; and after
all this, are they not almost all Fops, Clowns, Dunces, o^ Pedants? I know not
what you think of the Women; but if they are Fools, they are Fools I am sure
with less pains^ and less expense than we are.

Upon second thoughts I hope, Sir, you will allow, that Women may have Wit and
Learning; for their Courage and Conduct we may possibly say more anon. But for
Heaven's sake, do not aggravate their faults always at that rate; for whatever
Sappho's Life and Conversation were, there is nothing in her Writings, but what
represents the most tender, and delicate passion in the World: And as for
Aloisia Sigaea (I give you thanks for putting me in mind of Vasaeus Chron.
Hisp. Thuanus.
Aloisi^ Sigaea, who was as remarkable for her Wit and Learning as any of the
other) I am very well assured you do not believe that infamous Book which goes
under her Name, to have been written by her; V. Eloges ^es homnes Illustres de
Monsieur de Thou.
all who speak of it assure us the contrary; and that she was so far from
writing it, that she V. Biblioth. Hispan.
never published any thing; On the other side, all Historians represent her as
remarkable for her Virtue, as her Learning. For the Queen of Sheba, there is no
mention in Scripture of her Traveling for any thing but to be satisfied with
the wisdom of Solomon; however, if you will believe she went to him, for the
same reason that V. Quint^ Curtius, L. 6.
Thalestris did to Alexander the Great; it was no such great matter, in
Countries where it was thought no Sin, if the one had a mind to have a Child by
the wisest man in the world, and the other by the bravest. After all, we must
own if there are l^wd Women, they endeavor to conceal their lewdness they do
not brag of it, nor fly openly in the face of Religion; and if they once come
to be publicly discovered, they are rendered infamous to all the World, and
their nearest Friends and Relations avoid their company: Whilst there are
several Men who boast of their iniquities, value themselves upon their being
thought lewd, and what is worse, find others to value 'em upon it too; nay by
their incitements and encouragements to wickedness, often bring themselves to
that pass, that the least part of the Sins they are to answer for, are what
they have commit^ed^ themselves^ But not a word more I beseech you of Sappho,
nor her new Crime, le^ Lucian be forgotten for putting us in mind of it, and
let it be Cloistered up within the walls of a Turkish Seraglio; I speak not
this in behalf of the Female Sex, but of our own; for if they should once hear
of this Argument, and fall upon us with Socrates was in Love with Alcibiades.
Socrates, Plato writes Verses to After a Boy, with whom he was in Love.
Plato, and all those Heroes of Antiquity, whom Plutarch and Lucian produce in
defense of a like Sin in our Sex; should they mention Anacreon, Tibullus,
Martial, and all those Poets who have eternized their Infamy in their writings;
and after that show you what progresses this Crime has made, not only in the
Turk's Dominion, but even in Spain and Italy, I am sure, Sir, you would wish
you had said nothing of a point, that may be so severely made use of against
our selves.

Now though you are pleased to quote the Lampoons, yet you think as well as I
that such things are not worth any bodies taking notice of; we both know there
are a sort of people about this Town, who please themselves with Defamations;
One of these, if they see a Man speak to a Woman, make their little signs,
their politic winks, and possibly when they meet him, in their insipid way of
Rallery, tax him with it: If he is angry at 'em, then he is pique'd, and afraid
the Intrigue should be found out; If he says nothing (as it deserves nothing)
then he is out of Countenance^ and cannot say a word; and if he laughs at 'em
(which is all the answer a man would make to such stuff) then he is pleased
with the thing; so that every way the poor Ladies Reputation suffers; and these
Sparks shall no^ fail to blow it about Town, that there is an Amor; not that
they think so of you, but that you may return the Complement, and say so of
them, when they speak to any Lady themselves.

For their Garrulity, if you would see things which are against you, in that
Treatise of De Garrulitate.
Plutarch, from whence you bring two of your Instances, you might have been
furnished with enough of the men's. But though it is lawful to forget Stories that
are not for you, yet methinks you ought to tell out those you do mention; and
when we have heard that the Wife of Fulvius, seeing what she had done, showed
her Husband the way to avoid the Consequences of it, by stabing her self first;
we must certainly own, that such a Woman had Virtue enough to make amends for
all her faults. And if in answer to the instances you bring, I should mention
the Plutarch de Clar. Mulierib.
Melitish, or the Saxon Women, who though they were all engaged in Plots with
their Husbands, yet not one discovered it; If I should show you P^in. L. 3.
Plutarch de Garrul.
Leaena at Athens, or Tacitus Annal. Lib. 15.
Epi^haris at Rome, who being both engaged in Plots, one against the Tyrant
Pisistra^us, the other against Nero, yet could not by all their Tortures, be
brought to discover 'em; and that the former for fear her Torments should make
her reveal it, bit off her Tongue, certainly, Sir, you would have a better
Opinion of their Taciturnity. But we need not go so far for Instances; our own
Country, and our own Time, will furnish us with ^now. In all the Plots we have
had continually on foot, though we have had Women engaged and accused; though there
was One Pilloried in the first; Three Executed in another; and Sixteen or
Seventeen excepted in a General Pardon; though there have been several seized
upon like accounts since, yet you see there has not been one of 'em who ever
made a Discovery. Give me leave, Sir, to commend 'em for their Virtues at the
same time that I am far from defending their faults, and though I have a very
good Opinion of those Men who discover a Conspiracy upon remorse of Conscience,
yet I must take leave to believe that there are some at least, who do it upon
another account; and without any sorrow at all for their design, except that it
did not succeed, think to save their own Lives, by the Sacrifice of other
Peoples; and make amends for their Treason against the Government, by their
Treachery to their Friends.

But no wonder you are so severe upon the faults of Modern Women, when you fall
upon those whom all Antiquity has reverenced. It Is hard that Iael and Iudeth,
whose Actions have been so long admired, should be called to account for them
so many Thousand years after. It would be an injury to their Cause, to say any
thing in their Defense; and a presumption in me to justify Actions, that the
Scripture has Celebrated so much. But must poor Penelope fall under your
displeasure too? I am sensible how much she is like to suffer, who is defended
by so dull a Fellow as Homer, against those most ingenious Gentlemen, who are
the Lampooners of our Age: However as their Ability in scandal needs no foreign
aid; and as I am satisfied they would think it a disparagement to 'em to be
reckoned with Virgil and Ovid, let us free 'em, pray, from such unworthy
Companions. For the former I believe you are fully satisfied the Priapeia are
none of his; and as fully satisfied that the authority of such ^ort of Verses
is not extremely much to be depended upon; And for Ovid, if in the person of a
Bawd, who he tells you was a Liar, he gives you a reflection upon Penelope, yet
he makes her very sufficient amends, when Penelope mansit, quam vis custode
remoto,
Inter tam multos intemerata procos.
Ovid. Amor. Lib. 3. El. 4
he speaks in his own person. And taking the Story as it lies, that her House
was always full of Lovers whom she could by no means get away; Laertes being
too Old, Telemachus too Young to encounter 'em; it certainly shows her Virtue
so much the more: For as there is no great Courage required to keep a Fortress
in the time of Peace, so a very little Virtue is sufficient to preserve that
Chastity which no body ever thought it worth his while to attempt. Now if
Lycophron and Duris Samius represent her as a lewd Woman, as I understand not
how they should come to know it, all the Writers who lived before 'em giving so
very different an account; so for Lycopron, it is no great wonder a Greek and a
Poet should lie; or that Duris Samius, seeing the Etymology of the word Pan
come so pat, should feed us with a story upon it, of his own invention. (Pan
you remember, Madam, in Greek signifies All, and who would no^ tell a Lie for
so pretty a Conceit?) You may observe also, that this Author was not of so
established a Reputation as Cicero would make us believe, since In Vita
Alci^iades.
Plutarch who quotes him once, does it only to contradict him in a point of
History, that he ought to have known better that this. For Lucretia, observe of
Sir Charles Sedley, as of Ovid before, that he only makes the Bawd say it, and
if you consider the fear in which she was, you will find that that passion
often makes People run into a greater danger to avoid a less, of which you have
instances enough in our own Plantations, of the Ligon's History of the Barbados.
p. 50.
Slaves who hang themselves, to avoid their being beat.

After all this, Sir, if you still think with Le Chamber that Men have a
greater natural inclination to Virtue than Women, yet I hope you will grant
they have taken a very becoming care to overcome that Inclination; and if
Nature has not given so large a Talent to the other Sex, yet they have improved
that Talent much better than we have done ours. Then for your Instances of some
few Ill Women, I tell you, as I did before, that the Cause in general is not at
all concerned in 'em; and when I show you an Atreus cutting his Brother's
Children in pieces, and giving 'em to him to eat; a Phalaris roasting people
alive in a Brazen Bull; a Busyris murdering all his Guests; a Nero ripping open
the Womb of his Mother, to see the place where he had lain^ and so for every
Crime of that Sex, show you how far they have been outdone by some of our own,
as that Lucretia Marinella. La Nobilta e Peccellenza delle Done, con deffetti
e mancamenti degli Huomini.
Italian Lady I mentioned does in her Treat^fe upon a like occasion, I am sure
you will find a very great disadvantage of your side. But I take you at your
word, let us go a Circuit with the Judges, and if you find not six Men
condemned for one Woman, I Will pay the charges of the Journey; It Is true,
indeed, as most of the Women who are condemned, are so, for a Crime which they
commit to prevent their Shame; so the care of that, and Hypocrisy, are two
faults of which our Sex is not so generally guilty. Now though I do not think my
self obliged to say one word for any of those Women you have condemned; and
shall therefore leave Phaedra and Fausta to your Mercy, though neither of 'em
expected the Cruelty of their Husbands should have carried things so far; and
shall not argue much for Semiramis, though certainly her having all the Bravery,
Wisdom, and Virtues of our Sex in the greatest perfection, might move you to
forgive her the having some of our faults; and for her putting men to death, I
am contented that every one who boast of Ladies Favors should be served in the
same manner; ( Here, Madam, I cannot at all agree with Philogynes, because it
might be severe upon some honest Gentlemen, whom all the Laws against Adultery
and Fornication would never reach.) Yet methinks I have an Inclination to say
somewhat for Queen Joan of Naples, because she is generally represented so very
ill. The common Essais de Montagne. L. 3. C. 5.
Story is, that having married Andreossa an Hungarian, and her Kinsman; and not
finding him so capable of satisfying her, as his Youth and Beauty promised, she
caused him to be strangled in a Silk Cord of her own making. The first and
chief Author of this Story is Villani a Florentine (for Istoria di Napoli. L. 5.
Collenuccio takes it from him, though, as such things use, it has lost nothing
in his Hands) who tells you that he had it from a V. Annotazione e Supplimente
al Istoria di Collenuccio per Costo.
Relation made to his Brother by a certain Hungarian who had been a Servant of
Andreossa's; and in his return to Hungary past through Florence. Now the Author
of this Story being an Hungarian, one of those of whom Petrarch writes so much
ill, and also a Servant of the dead King, he ought to speak passionately
against the Queen, of whom they were professed Enemies; You may observe also,
that the Inordinata vit a praecedens, retentio potestatis in regno, neglecta
vindicta, vir alter susceptus, and excusatio subsequens, necis viri tui ^e
probant fuisse participem and consortem.
Letter which Lewis the Brother of Andreossa writes to her at the time that he
came with a Potent Army to revenge his Brother's Death, speaks of her being
privy to it, as a thing that was suspected, rather than a thing that did
plainly appear. On the other side, Casi degli Huomini Illustri.
Boccace, who lived a great while in that Court, throws all the blame of the
Action upon the Conspirators, and none at all upon the Queen. After all,
believe as you please, and do as you please with all these Women who have
offended you; If Helen runs away from Menelaus, let all Greece arm, and fetch
her back again; If Clytemnestra consents to the killing Agamemnon, let Orestes
kill her for it; If Semiramis puts the men she has made use of to Death, let
her own Son serve her in the same manner; If Joan of Naples causes Andreossa to
be strangled, let Durazzo cause her to be strangled in the same place; Let not
your Severity stop there^ but let their Infamy live when they themselves are
dead^ and let the Euripides's, the Iuvenals, and the Misogynes's, set out their
Actions in their true Colors. But let the business go no farther, I beseech
you. Let not Hecuba nor Andromache suffer, because Helen is a Wanton Woman; nor
Penelope be run down, because Clytemnestra is an ill Wife; and if Joan of
Naples strangles her Husband, let not all those who have died for theirs, fall
under the same condemnation. It Is one of the chiefest Ends of Punishments to
distinguish the Good from the Bad, do not you therefore by Punishments confound
'em. If Tibullus and Ovid's Mistress's jilt their Lovers, let it be remembered
against 'em two thousand years after; and if Misogynes's serve him so, let him
show his Resentment in as severe a manner as he pleases. Let him disdain the
mean revenge of malicious Whispers, and nameless Lampoons, and the much meaner
way of railing at all, because one has injured him; but let him boldly hunt her
out from the Herd; let him publish her Infamy in lasting Characters; though she
is free from Conscience, let her be plagued with the Stings of Shame; and let
all Women be terrified by her Example from being false to men of Wit, or kind
to Fools. But let him have very full satisfaction of the Matter of Fact first;
let him not go upon dubious Grounds, nor jealous Surmis^s; let him not believe
the Vanity of some, nor the Malice of others; let him consider the Stories of^
Orlan. Furioso. ^ant^^ 32.
Bradamante in Ariosto, of Aurestilla in Consalo de Cepedes, of Othello in
Shakespeare, and let him see how far Jealousy may seem reasonable, whilst
nevertheless the person of whom they are Jealous may be innocent. After all, I
give you even in that greater power than I should care to take my self; I would
rather by other peoples Faults correct my own, and should think the noblest
Revenge a Man could take upon a Woman who injured him, would be the doing some
Action ^^at would make all the World admire him; I would have every body
upbraid her with my Wrongs whilst I my self was silent: It Is true, if by the
Injuries she did me, there were any Aspersions cast upon my Reputation; there
Justice to my self would oblige me to make the Story public: But I would
certainly endeavor to reclaim her by Mildness, before I made use even of that
Severity; and as I should scorn any Favor that was the effect of Fear, so if I
once broke into an open War, all the Submission she could make should never
bring me to an Amity again, tho perhaps my own good Nature might in time
prevail upon me for a Forgiveness.

This, Sir, is what I thought necessary to reply to what you said; in which I
see we have quite exceeded the bounds of a Dialogue, and turned that into
Declamation, which was intended only for Conversation. I have troubled the
Company so much already, that I dare trefpass no farther upon their Patience,
and shall therefore omit some other things, which I intended to have said upon
this Occasion.

You are like those people, cried Misogynes, who when they have provided all
the Dainties they could get, make an Apology at the end of the Treat, for
their having got no more; If I am not altogether convinced of the goodness of
your Cause, yet I am very well convinced that you have said all that the Cause
will bear.

Tho perhaps I should have no great Mercy upon you, replied Philogynes, yet I
have too much for these Gentlemen, to detain 'em so long, as to hear all that I
could say upon so glorious an Occasion. Should I make a Collection of what is
written by the best Authors of Antiquity in their praises; should I but refer
you to what Stobae^s has Collected for 'em, since you mention what he has done
against 'em; should I but transcribe what De claris Mulier.
Plutarch, De Famina Christian.
Lodovicus Vives, Dial^ghi delle Done.
Speron Sperone the most Learned of his Countrymen, De la Gloire Imm^rtelle
d^s Dam^s Illustres.
Ribera, Eloges des Dames Illustres.
Hilarion de Cost, Femme Heroique.
Scuderie, and a thousand others have said of 'em in Treatises written expressly
in their Praises; should I but search all the Bibliotheques for a Catalogue of
those who were famous for their Writings; Should I afterward tell you of those
who were remarkable for their Piety, Conjugal Affection, Penitence, and
Contempt of Worldly Vanities; should I but repeat the Names of those who have
died for the preservation of their Chastity; should I show you a See Bernier's
History of Indosthan. Tavernier's and Mandelso's Travels.
Country even at this day, where they cannot by any severity hinder Women from
burning themselves with the Bodies of their deceased Husbands: Should I mention
the Women of Plutarch de Clar. Mulieribus.
Cios, among^t whom for Seven Hundred years there never was the least mention
of any Adultery, or Fornication; should I tell you that the first of those Sins
was so little known amongst the Spartans, that they did not think it worth
their while to make any Law against it; (Now, said my Friend, whether this were
not as good an Argument of the Men's Chastity as the Women's, I leave you to
judge; but really I think not, Madam; for besides Intrigues with their own Sex,
which were common enough amongst the Men in those Eastern Countries; I do not
doubt but the Men being Men of Honor would ask, though the Women being Women
of Honor would deny.) Should I but give you a List of the Martyrs of that Sex,
from those who suffered under Tiberius, to those who suffered under our own
Queen Mary; I fancy I should make you ashamed of your Simonides, your Iuvenal,
and all your Satyrists put together. Should I after this defend 'em in the
Virtue to which they are thought to have least pretenses, which is Courage;
should I but name those who have been famous for their Warlike Achievements;
should I tell you of Deborah, Penthesilaea, Thalestris, Camilla; should I show
you a Country See Acosta's History of the W^^^-Indies.
of Amazons, even in our own Time: Should I carry you into France, and show you
a Warlike Virgin (at least an Unmarried Woman) whose Memory is still annually
Celebrated by one of their Chiefest Orleans.
Towns, and who, besides her Fame in their Chronicles, has given a Subject to
one of the most Famous La Pucelle de Monsieur Chapelaine.
Heroic Poems which that Nation has produced; Would you not after all confess
they might very easily be defended, even in this point too? But I shall wave
that; I am satisfied with the Care Universal Custom has taken of 'em; and as
Seamen in a Storm, to preserve their things of greatest value, throw away those
of less; so I am very well pleased that Mankind should be exposed to the
hazards of War, whilst the Fair Sex is preserved in safety at home, whose
Smiles are the Noblest Reward a Brave Man can desire for all the hazards, and
fatigues he has endured in a Campaign.

But it is generally agreed that all Virtues are requisite for those who Govern
well; and since there are some Countries where Women are Excluded from the
Throne, and no Country where they are not postponed, it would be convenient
methinks to see what they do, when by accident they are placed upon it. I shall
not trouble you here with Deborah, nor Esther, nor as much as mention
Semiramis, though you have mentioned her upon another occasion; and yet
certainly the bravery of most of her Actions ought to make us forget the faults
of some few; but I shall confine my self within the bounds of our own Country.

Tacitus in Vita Agr. and from him Sammes in his Brittania. Illustrata.
At a time when the Britains groaned under the Servitude of the Romans; when
the King, by thinking to Oblige the Emperor, gave him an Opportunity of
pillaging his Country; and that their patience under their Sufferings, was
only a means of making them more; When their Houses were robbed, their Wives
and Daughters Ravished, and their Sons taken away from 'em; then Boadicia
aro^e, and by her Courage, as well as Eloquence, inspired her dispirited
Contrymen with a Resolution of throwing off that Yoke which was grown
intolerable to be born: It Is true, indeed, the End was not answerable to the
Successes of the Beginning; nor to the Glory so Heroic an Undertaking
deserved; however as it was neither want of Courage nor Conduct in her, so we
ought to render her that veneration which is due to so resolute an Enterprise.

But as one of the greatest attempts the Britains made for their Liberty was
whilst they were led by a Woman; so we must own the greatest Glory our Nation
could ever boast, was under the Government of one of the same Sex. It was in
the time of Queen Elizabeth that this Island arrived at that pitch of
greatness, to which it had been ascending for several Ages, and from which it
has been declining 'till very lately ever since; It Is the Name of this Princess
that is dearer to all Englishmen, than the Names of all the Monarchs since the
Conquest besides, and the only one whose Birth-D^y has been Celebrated after
her Death, by the voluntary gratitude of the People.

But however we may forget things that are past, let us not oversee that which
lies before our eyes; and since the occasion is so very fair, I know not how we
can omit the showing our Sense of those Virtues, of which the whole Nation has
demonstrated so grateful an acknowledgment by the Body of their
Representatives; and never were they more truly their Repre^entatives before.
Yes, Sir, without going to foreign Countries, without ^earching the Histories
of our own; we have even in our own Time, and our own Country, a Princess who
has Governed to their general satisfaction, a People the most curious to pry
into the faults of their Governors, of any People under the Sun. A Princess,
who though she never showed any fondness of Vainglory, or Authority, yet when
the necessity of the Kingdom called her to the Helm, Managed Affairs with that
dexterity which is very rarely found in those who are the most ambitious of
Command. Every thing during that little time of her Government, was ordered
with that Courage, Conduct, and Prudence, that her greatest Friends cannot find
Eloquence enough to commend, nor her greatest Enemies the least pretenses to
condemn. Though she had a Husband venturing his Life in another Country, with
a Bravery equal to what has made us suspect the Stories of Antiquity; Though our
Fleet, the Bulwarks of the Nation, was managed in a manner the Courage of the
English Seamen was utterly unacquainted with; Though a Monarch, who thinks
himself able to contend with all Europe together, seemed to make his utmost
Efforts against a Princess, who had nothing but the Universal Hearts of her
Subjects to defend her; Though all Christendom was in suspense to see the Event
of the Undertaking; and every little Prince had forgot his own danger, to
contemplate hers; Even at this time did we see her look with all the unconcern
imaginable, and whilst every body else was alarmed for her Safety, she only
seemed to have known nothing of the Danger. Not that this unconcern proceeded
from any ignorance of her Condition, or unreasonable Contempt of her Adversary;
No, she provided against their Attempts with all the prudence could be wished
for, at the same time that she looked upon the Danger with all the Courage in
Nature.

But however great these Virtues may appear, when they are set off by the
Luster of a Public Command, yet they are in effect much greater, when they
teach People to despise all such dazzling Trifles. Here it is, Sir, that we have
a fresh Field for Eloquence, when we see a Lady dissatisfied at that Glory
which she had to every bodies satisfaction beside, and grudge her self that
Authority, which she owed to the absence of a Husband whom she loved so much
better than that. What think you, Sir, of that alacrity, of that joy with which
she resigned up the Government? Does it not put you in mind of the Old Roman
Generals, who quitted their Plow to Command an Army, and when the Victory was
gained, retur^^d with greater content to their Plow again? This is that Wisdom
which we should admire; this is that Virtue which we should adore; and we ought
to despise all those little Pretenders to Business, who thrust themselves into
the Management of Affairs against every bodies will but their own; and h^ving
neither Virtue, nor Prudence enough to retire from it at the Universal Murm^rs
of the People, are generally made Sacrifices at last to the just Resentment of
an Enraged Nation.

These are those Blazing Comets, whose fatal Glories portend Destruction to a
Government, whilst the Virtues of the others, like those of the Sun, give it
Life and Heat, by their benign influence. Much more, Sir, might be said in
defense of the Sex, which I shall purposely omit, because I am satisfied I can
never conclude with a more Illustrious Example.

FINIS.

