ROOM FOR THE Cobbler of Gloucester AND HIS WIFE: With several Cartloads of
Abominable Irregular, pitiful stinking Priests; AS ALSO A Demonstration of
their Calling after the manner of the Church of Rome; but not according to
Magna Charta, the Rule of the Gospel.

Whereunto is Added, A PARALLEL Between the Honor of a Lord Bishop, and the
Honor of a COBBLER; the COBBLER being proved the more Honorable Person.

Printed for the Author, 1668.

The Epistle Dedicatory:
To my Dear and Loving Wife.
WIFE, in my Epistles to my two former Books I was very large; the Porch was
too big for the House: you shall have that fault mended in this, and I shall
only entreat you to accept of the Dedication of it; not knowing any Person whom
I love more than your self; nor any to whom I am more indebted. Thus in few
words I take my leave, and rest

Your Assured Loving Husband, R. Wallis.

Room for the Cobbler of Gloucester and his Wife.
WIfe, being willing to have a little more discourse with you, I think it not
amiss, if we and our Children sing a Tantrum.

Wife. What do you mean by a Tantrum, Husband?


Husb. Wife, I borrow that word of a Welchman, who made this request to his
wife; Market, thee go me to Quire Einsome, and hear my Poy Ropin sing two three
Tantrums: from whence in Herefordshire they call Anthems Tantrums.

To the Tune of Room for Cuckolds: It will be thought a strange tune, but it
will be as suitable to us, as the tune of Tory Rory Betty, which they played
upon their Organs at Oxford: A sweet Tantrum!

Room for Prelates, here comes a Company;
Room for Prelates, and every Coat-Card;
Arcbishops and Bishops, Archdeacons and Deans;
Room for Prelates, and for the Black Guard.
Cathedrals and Chapters, with Authems and Raptures,
And all the Hierarchical Rabble,
With all of that sort, that make as good sport
In the Chore, as a Fool with his Babble:
Priests, Patrons, and Rectors, with all such Church-Hectors,
Which in the wide Synagogue roar it;
Clerks, Curates, and Viccars, that drink off all Liquors,
And then bid their Hostesses score it.
Prebends and Chanters, and Choristers, Ranters,
That sing by the Rule of Sol Fa,
Officials and Doctors, and Chanc'lors and Prectors,
And room for Et caetera.
Room for the chief Singers, that with foot and fingers
Do bleat it like Oxen and Calves;
For Priest and for Clark, that grope in the dark.
And sing all their Catches by halves:
Those Lack-Latin Drones, and Learned Sir John's,
That dash it with Blur and with Blot,
Surrogates, Registers, Notaries, Paritors,
And all the Knaves of a Knot.
Bellmen and Sextons, with whom we were vexed once,
That live by digging and begging,
With all the Church-Rabble belonging to Babel,
That run just like Witches a hagging.
Exorcists with Crosses, which come to our losses,
And leave poor Souls in the lurch,
By which men are scared to run with the Herd,
For comp'ny, as Dogs go to Church.
By night and by day, at small Games they play,
Pick Peter Pence rather than fail;
Brave Merechants they are, of great and small Ware,
And will deal from the Head to the Tail.
Room for Physicians of Rome's Inquisitions,
And all that is grown over with moss:
Room for Confession, and holy Procession,
And the Devil that carries the Cross.
Room for Prelates, and for their company,
Room for Prelates, and for their Spawn;
Room for Dumb Dogs, and all Croaking Frogs,
And Vermin hid under the Lawn.
Room for Prelates, here comes a Company,
All Brethren of the Black Robe and Region,
That with the Herd run as right as a Gun,
Like Pigs possessed with a Legion.

Wife. Husband, you know that you and I have had some Discourses formerly, but
among others, two especially; one was by the fire, as many times poor folks do;
the second was when we went to bed for want of Coals and Candles: we thought no
hurt to any, yet you, see what came of it, you were a Prisoner first in
Westminster, and brought before Noble Persons at White Hall; four Sessions you
lay Prisoner in Newgate, once in Bristol, four Assizes at the Bar in Gloucester,
once before the Lord Winsor: and in all Courts of Judicature, and persons
before whom you have been, you have been blamed still for disparaging and
disgracing the Kings Clergy, and the Kings Ministry. I could willingly ask you
some Questions privately, but I would not have you speak so loud that all
England may hear you; I would willingly whisper a word in your Ear.


Husb. And I shall as willingly answer you Wife, provided, that you do not ask
me any red hot Questions; which if you do, I shall be afraid to answer you, for
fear of burning my Lips.


Wife. Husband, I would have you be as careful as I am, and then I dare warrant
you there will no hurt come of it: What was their meaning by saying you did
disgrace the Kings Clergy? How did you disgrace them?


Husb. Wife, Because I brought some of them upon the Stage for their base
fordid Carriage, as Drunkenness, Swearing, Whoring, and the like: My answer was
to them, that they did more disgrace the Kings Government, by Acting such
things, then I did by Speaking of it. But Wife, I can tell you of such a parcel
of Fellows which still disgrace the Kings Government and Ministry, as they call
it.


Wife. In your last Book Husband, you told me that you had six times ten which
you would Load another time, what kind of fellows were they?


Husb. Wife, for your satisfaction I Will tell you: Let the Cart be set nearer:
We will begin with the Pillars of the Church. And,

First of all, with my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that Titularly
Spiritual, and Practically Carnal Father, and his irreverend unbeseeming words:
Who when he went to visit a young Lady of his Acquaintance, that had been newly
Married, Addressed himself to her in words to this effect.

Madam are you with Child? She answered, No my Lord. The Archbishop replied,
Then Madam you cannot be saved; for Women are only to be saved in Childbearing.

But Madam, are you willing to be with Child, says the Archbishop? Do you do
your best in order to it? The Lady replies, She could be glad of a Child: Then,
said the Archbishop, you may be saved; God will accept of the Will for the
Deed: Here is a Cobling piece of Divinity puts me down quite: Here my Lord,
turns Cobbler.

What Metropolitanus primus totius Angliae turn Cobbler? I could willingly
bestow two or three Stitches on him, to set him upright: But I doubt it will be
but lost labor, he is gone, so much aside: But what will become of all Barren
Women in this case? Why their comfort is, That if they do but desire to have
Children, they may be saved.

The Bishop of Worcester, at a Visitation in Warwick the last Summer, in his
Speech to the Clergy, affirms, That all Children Baptized are undeniably saved.
And that The presence of Christ in the Sacrament is not symbolical, but
realiter (really) and that upon that account we give adoration.

Doctor Cross, Dean of Norwich, in a Sermon at Yarmouth, said, That it had been
better that the Gospel had not been Preached these twenty Years past, for now
the People had so much knowledge, that when the Minister does reprove them, or
endeavor to persuade them, they are presently able to Convince him by
Scripture, which is not so set for Lay People.

Doctor Cre^on Dean of Wells, that Court-drolling Preacher, preaching at White
Hall out of this Text [ Show us a Sign] said, That it was not the Papists that
burned London; at which words he was struck dumb, and, as it is conceived,
choked with a Lie in his throat, and could not speak for a time: The Lord in
that, as it were, showed a sign from Heaven.

Wife, these Pillars are enough to make the Axletree crack, we'll drive away,
and endeavor to make another load.

The Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, being a most notorious Swearer, one in
Coventry came to an intelligent man to know whether he might not indict the
Bishop for swearing: How many Oaths did he swear, said his Friend to him?
Threescore: In what time was it? Was it within the compass of three weeks, said
his Friend? He answered, It was: was he ever convicted before a Justice of
Peace, said his Friend? He answered, (...). The other answered, Then you cannot.

There came certain Feoffees who were intrested for a School at Nun-Eaton in
Warwickshire, where the Bishop was only to have the trial of the Schoolmaster,
whether he were a sufficient Scholar, but he would have the full power to place
the Schoolmaster, and so quarrels with them: Said the Bishop to one of them,
Had thou a hand in placing this man here? I had, said the man: A plague of
God on the heart of thee, said the Bishop; and swore so fast, that one blind
man who was a Feoffee, did desire him that brought him in to lead him out
again; For, said he, the Bishop dorth swear so fast. I am afraid that the
House will fall upon my head. Yet such is his commendation, that if at any time
be swear by his Faith and Troth, as commonly he does, that he will not give a
poor man or woman a penny, he will keep his word.

The said Bishop preaching against Covetousness at Tamworth in Warwickshire,
although as covetous a fellow as the Country affords, said to his Hearers, Ye
are covetous, and will be covetous, and so you will remain; or words to this
effect, concluding with this wish, The Devil scald you.

Being also on a certain time requested to preach for one of his
fellow-Schollars in Oxford, he swore by his faith and troth, he could not spit
Sermons. So that we see what is bred in the Bone, will never out of the Flesh.

Wife, did not our Bishop say once in his Sermon, We are your Spiritual
Fathers? These are some of them.

Doctor Pearce, Bishop of Bath and Wells, a most notorious Swearer, coming into
a Barbers shop in London, where there sat one Makerness; who when he saw the
Bishop, rose up to give him the place: Do thou know me, said the Bishop? Yea,
said Makerness you are my Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells: What Is thy Name, said
the Bishop? He answered, My Name is Makerness: Gods wounds, swore the Bishop,
thou art a Pillar of the Church. This has been printed already by another
Author.

The same Bishop long since said, He thanked God he had not left one Lecture
standing in all his Diocese.

The Mayor of Wells not long since walking abroad on the Lords Day, went to the
Bishop (part of the Town being in the Bishops Jurisdiction or Liberty) and
desired the favor of him that he might have his good will to suppress the
disorders that were there committed: Go your ways for a Jackanapes with a Pox
to you, said the Bishop, who put that into your head?

Doctor Fafield of Berkin, preached, That whatsoever the King commanded, the
People were bound to obey; though it were a sin against God. At another time,
not long after, he went up into the Pulpit to preach, but could not speak a
word, and so came down again: Which was looked upon as the hand of God upon
him, for what he had formerly delivered.

Doctor Reeve Dean of Windsor, being at the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard,
swore by him that made him that he had done what he could about the delivering
of such a Petition, and by Gods wounds he would do what he could again.

Several persons, and one amongst others who was a Merchant at Lime, told me
that at Bridport alias Beauport, a mile from Lime, the Parson was catechizing
some of the young People, and among the rest a Maid, and asked her this
question, What will be the punishment of Hedge-Breakers and Hedge-Stealers?
(it is conceived his had been broken) To which the Maid answered, Hellfire I
think: God damn me, said the Priest, thou have more grace than all the Parish
besides.

Doctor Sherborn, Prebend of Hereford, his man having brought his Horse to a
place called The Cabadge Lane in Hereford, cursed his man because his Horse
looked no better, saying, A plague of God on the heart of thee, how does my
Horse look!

The said Doctor being sent for by an Alderman of the City, to assist him in
the examination of one Edward Bourn a Quaker, and another of his Judgment, he
convinced the said Edward Bourn by two knocking arguments; for when Edward
Bourn spoke to him in the language of Thee and Thou, he gave him two good boxes
on the ear, which the poor man was not able to resist. A very learned
Confutation.

Doctor James Buck, sometime Parson of Stradbrook in the County of Suffolk, but
before the burning of the City of Garlic Hill, and Gregory's near Paul's; and
now Preacher at the Temple, formerly delivered as follows:

That the Pope is head of the Church, and Head of the Spiritualty; and that
there would never be any Conformity in the Church, until a Patriarch should be
above a Bishop, a Bishop above a Priest, a Priest above a Deacon, and the
Bishop of Rome above them all. And that This is my Body, in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, is to be understood in a literal sense; and that there is a
Transmutation of the Bread into the Body and Blood of Christ, as in John 2. the
substance of Water is turned into Wine: And that the words, Do this, are spoken
to the Priest to create the Body and Blood of our Lord; affirming the Priest to
have power to create the Body and Blood of Christ; and that it is lawful to
invocate Saints and Angels: That Infants dying after Baptism, become
Intercessors for their Parents; and that Auricular Confession to a Priest is
absolutely necessary once a year, or at least once in a man's life. And that the
Church of Rome is as honorable a Church as any is in the world: And that he
uses as low obeisance at the mentioning of the name of the Virgin Mary, as he
does at the name of Jesus; and does not only bow thrice at his going to the
Altar, and thrice at his return from the Table set Altar-wise, but also
teaches that adoration is due when the holy Mysteries are absent: and that it
is as lawful to worship the Altar, as for the woman that touched the hem of his
Garment to worship Christ, and as it was in the Revelations to worship before
the Throne: and that he has denied the Cup to those unto whom he gave the
Bread: and has often preached, That if a Child die being baptized, it is
undoubtedly saved; but if it die before it is baptized, undoubtedly damned.

Thomas Johnson of Newington-Thistle (in the Country of Salop it is as I take
it) affirmed, That the King had done more in pardoning the Rebels, than God
either would or could do.

Mr. Moore of Leak in the County of Leicester, swore in the Chequer on the
behalf of a young Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Smith, but the business being referred
to a Trial at Leicester, he swore on the behalf of Mr. Hyland, the adverse
party.

The said Mr. Moore being at a Knights house in Nottingham, where there was a
man that personated a Jesuit, he enquired what Gentleman that was, it was told
him he was a Jesuit; the people all withdrew, leaving Mr. Moore and this
supposed Jesuit together; Mr. Moore courteously salutes him, telling him that
he had a great respect for men of his Order; and that there might be a better
correspondency between them, were that obstruction of the Law removed.

Wife, part of these before spoken of, we may save the labor to lay them on
the Cart, but send them to Black wall, and ship them for Rome.

And now Wife, we have another sort to carry, and they for their parts, may be
sent over into Germany to that Bishop of Mentz that Luther speaks of in the
beginning of his Colliquies; where he tells us, That at a Diet at Ausbourg,
which is a Convention of Princes, the Bishop of Mentz took up a Bible which lay
upon the Table, and having read two or three leaves in it, asked what book it
was? One of the Princes told him 'twas the Bible: The Bible, said the Bishop! I
cannot tell what Book it is, but I Am sure here is that which makes against us.
Wife, as wife as this Bishop will our next Load be. And the first man in this
Cart shall be

Mr. Blundal of Worcester, who told some friends of his of some hard questions
which the Dean put forth to himself and three other Ministers: What questions
were they, said his friend? He asked us, said Blundal, How we could prove that
there was a God? And I can tell you, said he, we were never so put to 't in our
lives. You should, said his friend, have made use of that Scripture in Romans 2.
For the invisible things, etc. That we did man, said Blundal, and that would
not do neither. What shift did you make then, said his friend? He answered, We
were fain to beg longer time of him. But how came you off at last, said his
friend? How, said he? Why we met with an old Author, and made his words ours,
and so we came off at last; but I can tell you, we had much ado first. O that
ever four men should profess to be Ministers of the Gospel, and yet not able to
prove that there was a God!

A Maid in the City desired Mr. Blundal to maket it out to her how he could
prove himself a Minister of the Gospel. Said he, Come to me next day when I am
in my Pratling-Box and I Will tell thee.

There is, as I was informed at Worcester, within eight miles of the City, an
old man who never said Sermon in all his life, and has been blind a great
while; but an able man for reading common Prayer, and serves a Curacy, and gets
a little Boy to read the Chapters. See what an able Ministry here is!

The Bishop of Worcester lately Ordained one Mr. Moore sometime a Lieutenant in
the late war; he is a distracted man: And getting up into the Pulpit at
Burford, he read a Psalm, and then said, Here Is a Psalm I can commend to you;
my Grandfather taught it my Father, and my Father taught it his Children, and I
would have you teach it your; with other words to this effect: and then
concluded thus. But the weathers very cold, and I have a pretty good stomach to
my Dinner; and therefore I Will come down into the Pew, and read a few Prayers,
and then you shall go home, and we'll leave the rest till another time.

Mr. Piper of Chomly, a man in holy Orders, was Ordained by the Bishop of
Worcester; what his Calling was, I know not, though some say a Fiddler, but I
cannot affirm the truth of it; he starved at Chomly. Some of his old companions
getting him into a Cellar in an Alehouse, would there have him exercise his
Gifts, where he staid so long, that he could hardly get up the stairs. And
having read Evening Prayer on a Sunday, as they call it, he went to refresh his
tired spirits at an Alehouse not far off, where he continued some time; at
last, as he himself confesses, he went to an Holly-Tree, or Holly-Bush, to
make water, and certain Frogs appeared, and transcrub'd him through the
Holly-Bush, and carried him to a place called The Green way, and there set him
down; and up with him again, and carried him to a Village called The Rock, and
set him down in the Churchyard; and up with him again, and brought him and fet
him down in the Highway in the dirt, and thence his wife came and fetched him
home. And yet in the judgment of charity, some think he lay drunk under a Hedge
or in a Ditch, all the while.

At Marshfield in Gloucester shire, one of the Parishioners came to the Priest,
desiring him to speak with a poor woman who had lately buried her Daughter,
being her only Child, for which she was exceedingly grieved; and desired him to
speak as comfortably as he could to her, and if it were possible by his counsel
he might help to support her drooping spirit: at last they met together, and
the woman began to relate her grief; and telling in what manner her Daughter
lay linguishing in her sickness, the Priest said, Could not you blow wind in
her Arse? Which was all he would say to her.

One Mr. Giles Thornbury, a Prebend, coming to visit a Gentlewoman that was
sick, she desired him to pray with her, but not common, but conceived Prayer:
He answered, That he could pray no other but common Prayer. Can you tell, said
the Gentlewoman, who can pray any other prayer? None that I know, said he, in
Worcester, but Will. Warwick.

The Parson of Shorditch near London, meeting the Curat of Bishopsgate, asked
him how he did? Who (complaining of the hard service that he was put to the day
before, in preaching twice) said he was not very well: Why, quoth Shorditch,
that is the easiest thing in the world, or words to that effect. But says
Bishopsgate. Do you then Read Prayers? No, quoth Shorditch, I don't Read
Prayers: There Is the Devil on it, quoth Bishopsgate, I Read Prayers too:

So much for this Cartload of ignorant Sots, which with many of our Bishops and
Doctors, those Reverend Fathers, I shall refer to a Book of my Brother How the
Cobbler, for further instruction.

Our next Load shall be Cheaters: And we will begin with two Swop-Souls: One
Mr. Dale of Stanlat, five miles from Abingdon, in the County of Berks, the
other Mr. Ingram of Longworth, four miles from Abingdon, whose Living by
estimation was worth 200 l. per annum. This Mr. Dale had a Living likewise in
Yorkshire, worth, as was said 400 l. per ann. These two Parsons met together,
and after some acquaintance each with other, to trading they fall about
swopping of Livings and Souls: Dale will part with his Living in Yorkshire of
400 l. per annum, for Ingrams of Longworth, though but 200 l. because of the
convenience of it, being near Stanlat; Ingram buys a Pig in a Poke, and like a
good fellow takes the others word, resigns his Living to Dale, and goes down
into Yorkshire to see his bargain; but when he came there, he found it a poor
barren cold Country, and not worth above 80 l. per annum. Ingram returns again,
exclaiming against Dale; and the better to be revenged on him, would have the
young men make a Play of it, and call it, The Divine Cheat.

Mr. William Coulbourn Parson of Melcomb Regis in Dorcetshire, adjoining to
Waymouth, and Parson of Sudbury in the County of Suffolk, about 150 miles
distant from Melcomb Regis, going to the Bishop of Norwich for a License to
preach, the Bishop granted him a License, being a man of great parts, and
particularly a good Orator, and one in good esteem, and much admired by all
true Sons of the Church. In his Journey home from Norwich, he was guilty of a
gross miscarriage, the relation whereof take as follows:

As he went from Norwich to Sudbury, his occasions led him about twenty miles
out of the way, to a Town called Holt in the County of Norfolk, where going by
the Name of Mr. Williams, he went to an Apothecaries in the Town, and would
have changed some Gold for Silver, only desired that he might deliver the Gold
sealed up in a Box; but the Apothecary refused to trade with him upon those
terms, telling him, he should have his Silver loose, and so he would have his
Gold: Whereupon they parted, and Mr. Williams goes to one Francis Games, a
Mercer in the Town, pretending to buy some Stuffs and Silks of him, to the
value of fourteen or fifteen pounds; then after they had agreed as to price, he
told him that he could not pay him at present, but set a day wherein he would
send his man to pay for what he had bought, and to fetch the Stuffs; and
withal he told him he had one request to him, which was that he would let him
have 20 l. in Silver, and he would leave him 20 l. in Gold as a pawn for it;
and that when he sent his man for the Stuffs, he would send money to redeem his
Gold: Upon these terms Games helped him to 20 l. But Mr. Williams desired that
in regard the money was given him by a special friend, for whose sake he was
unwilling it should be changed, Mr. Games would give way to the sealing of it
up in a Box, which Mr. Games assented unto, and it was accordingly done; and
when the Gold was sealed up in the Box, the Box was set down upon the Table,
and, as it is conceived, whilst they were taking a Pipe of Tobacco, he slipped
that Box into his pocket, and set another upon the Table just like it, sealed
up as that was. At parting he desired Games that when he sent him the 20 l. he
would send him the Box sealed up as it was. After he was gone out of the Town,
the Apothecary came to see Games, and after some discourse about Mr. Williams,
told him it was a Cheat; Games told him it could not be a Cheat, for he saw the
Gold put into the Box; whereupon the Apothecary snatched the Box out of his
hand, and opening it, there was nothing in it but a piece of Lead and Pindust:
Upon which, making enquiry which way he was gone, they followed him to
Fakenham, where he was endeavoring to play the like prank. Understanding him
to be there, they went to a Justice of Peace, one Mr. Clifton, fetched a
Warrant, and brought him before the Justice, and upon examination he confessed
that his Name was William Coulbourn. He was tried at the Sessions, and fined
fourteen pounds to the King.

He also lent a Butcher 60 l. and taking Bond for it, professed it was burnt by
accident, and desired the Butcher to give him another; telling him withal,
That he would lend him 20 l. more, and take a Bond for 80 l. which was
accordingly done, and the former Bond not being burnt, be has two Bonds for
one sum of Money.

He also persuaded a young man to borrow money, and give a Bond written with
white Ink, which in a weeks time would not be seen. With many other things of
the like nature, which would take up a sheet of Paper to recite: But because
the Cart's already heavy laden, I shall pass them by, and away with this Load
to the Pillory.

And now Wife, we must load one among another, Drunkards and Whoremongers.

Mr. Ashton the Parson of St. Andrews in Hartford, and Mr. Manning a Tanner,
meeting together at the Bull in Bishopsgate-street London, went and drank
together first in the Bull-Cellar, until the Parson was almost blind, and from
thence they went to several places, till at length he had got his full dose. He
was to have gone home in the Coach, but so loved his company and his good
Liquor, that he prevailed with the Coachman to leave him a horse, because he
must go home to preach at the Funeral of the Mayor of Hartford on the morrow;
and so late at night they set forward toward Hartford, but being so exceeding
drunk he fell off his Horse several times; but at last the poor Beast, as
disdaining to carry him farther, ran away home, and left him to shift for
himself; but his companion Mr. Manning, taking more pity of him, set him upon
his own Horse, and led him; but yet he could not fit the Horse, for Mr. Manning
going a little aside to escape the dirt, not far from the Towns end, down falls
the Parson again in the dirt, and away runs the Tanners Horse home. His Wife
hearing the Horse coming in, called her man to rise and let his Master in, and
take care of the Horse; the man rising and going out, found nothing but the
Horse: and telling his Mistress that the Horse was come, but not his Master,
she cried out and said that her Husband was robbed and killed, and so raised
the Town, and many of the Neighborhood went to go look after him, some with
Lanthorns, and some with Weapons; but by that time they got to the Towns end,
they met the Tanner with the Parson upon his back: but being tired with
carrying such a load, he was fain to leave him at a little house at the farther
end of the Town, because none else of the Neighborhood would take any pity, or
be at any pains to carry him home. But the Parson thinking to cover all, got up
into the Box the next day, but could scarce hold up his head; nor would he go
to the Mayors House.

I went through a Village in Somersetshire, where there was a Priest, whose
Name was Franklin, lay drunk in open view; and a merry fellow passing by, held
up his hat and sang, O hone, O hone, Franklin is dead and gone.

A Parson in Essex, and his Curate, sat a drinking all night on the Saturday
night, and the next morning the Clerk came to the Curate to Read Prayers; but
he being very drunk, and having not slept, took a Ladle in his hand out of the
Kitchen, and run into the Church with it; and going into the Reading Pew, cried
to the people, Must you have some Porrage? Come, I Will give you some Porrage.

Mr. Smith Vicar of Montacute in Somersetshire, went to Yeovil on a Friday,
being market day, and there being drunk, attempted to ride home, and going the
upper way toward Odeomb, fell off his horse, and lay as dead; but some Country
people coming by, thought it had been a man murdered, and durst not come so
near as to touch him, till they had gone to the Town, to call more Witnesses;
whereupon many people coming in, found it to be Parson Smith, and had him down
to Yeovil again, where he lay at the Ship that night; and the next morning he
was yet so unsettled in his head, that he rides to Stoke Cross, half a mile
beyond Montacute, and then at last with much ado got home.

It is notoriously known, That the Grand Jury in Somersetshire presented the
whole Clergy of that County, at which Judge Keeling was angry, there being no
particular instance; whereupon the Foreman of the Grand Jury instanced in the
Parson of his own Parish, who coming to his house drunk, affirmed the Pigeons
that were then at the fire to be Geese.

The present Parson of Naring-near Epping in Essex, is notoriously known to be
a frequent Drunkard, having the convenience of an Alehouse in his Churchyard,
where he has spent so much with one Chapman a Farmer hard by, that the Farmer,
what with neglect of business, loss of time, and expense of money, is broke and
undone. Yet he put several of his honest Neighbors into the Bishops Court, and
prosecuted them there; where being demanded why they went not to the Communion?
They answered they could not receive it at the hands of such a wicked man.
Being required then to exhibit Articles, they did, but the man that received
them was quickly turned out, and his Successor required them to retain a
Proctor to put their Articles in Latin, etc. Whereupon the countrymen being
fed with nothing but delays and charges, gave it over; and so that Parson
drinks still.

One Mr. Fletcher, Parson of Bow near London, being in an Alehouse very drunk,
and swearing sufficiently; a Brewer came in there to receive money for Ale:
after greeting one another, says Mr. Fletcher, Sir Why do you not come and hear
me? The Brewer promised him he would; Faith, says Fletcher, I Will preach you a
good Sermon. The Brewer according to his promise goes, and finds the Parson
like an Owl in an Ivy-Bush. A while after, Fletcher meets the said Brewer again
in an Alehouse, and said to him, Sir, you promised to come and hear me: Why,
says the Brewer, so I did, but I could scarce see you, you were so bedect with
Holly and Ivy. Aye, says the Parson, you may see what a blessed Reformation I
have brought them to! The said Parson loves his drink so well, that if any of
his Comrades do but come into the Church whilst he is preaching, and cry Hem,
and hold up their finger to him, he presently turns them off, and goes to them
to the Tavern, which is just over against the Church.

Febr. 25. 1667. Matthew Leeson a Seaman, going with his Wife from White
Chapel to Wapping, found in Ratcliff-Highway, over against old Gravel Lane,
one Mr. Peacock the Priest of the New Chapel at Ratcliff, tumbled into the
Cart-Rut; and after he had gotten him up, he swore by God he was down. But
whether the wet within or without made him reel as he went, is left to the
Judgment of the Learned Bishops.

The Priest of Cropthorn, by name Whitefoot, two miles from Evesham in
Worcester shire, was so drunk at Evesham, that the Mayor set him in the stocks
twice in that condition. Welfare my Countryman for his courage! I shall prefer
him before the Mayor of Bath; who when there was a bafe Priest taken in a
shameful manner in the company of Whores, where he had spent a night, brought
before him, he turned him up, for fear of the Bishops displeasure, because for
sooth he was a Clergyman.

Parson Clark of Bromyard in Herefordshire, ten miles from Worcester, having
two Wives and two Livings, ran away from them all, and (as I heard) left his
Neighbors 200 l. to pay for him. And lest he should come into another Country,
and change his Name, and so cozen any other woman or man, take this brief
description of him, He is a fat corpulent man, pretty tall, his hair inclined
to red or yellow, especial his face, and aged about fifty.

Parson Fly of Hunslow was so drunk at the Kirsning of a Child, that when they
gave the Child one name, he kirsned it by another, and presently fell down upon
his breech in the place. Yet he agrees lovingly with his wife, for he will get
in one end of the Chimney-corner, and she in another, and drink Alestifly.

The Parson of Sawford two miles from Chipping-Norton in Oxfordshire, was so
drunk that he fell off his Horse, and mistaking the Horses Head, got up again
with his face toward the Horses Tail, and so down he fell again.

The Parson of Edmonton in the County of Middlesex, was so drunk, that when he
came to bury a dead Corpse, he read that which was appointed to be said at the
Churching of a Woman, instead of what was to be read at a Burial. A Butcher
being present, told him that he was mistaken, and that he was burying of a dead
man. You Flabberchops, said the Priest, I know what I have to do: Call me
Flabberchops again, said the Butcher, and I Will give you a knock on the pate:
Said the Priest, Thou art a Flabberchops: With that the Butcher took him a
knock on the pate, and made the blood run about his ears; and so the man was
buried with blood.

This Priest was formerly ejected for scandal; and one thing, among others, was
this, That sitting in an Alehouse there was a Health began, at which he threw
his hat in the fire, and burned it; at the second Health, off went another
garment, at the third Health another, until he had left nothing but his shirt.

One thing by the way is very observable, which is, That there is not any man
that was formerly vomited out for scandal, were it ever so notorious, in
Doctrine or Life, but has been since licked up again.

The Priest of Conford near the Isle of Purbeck in Dorcetshire, having been at
Pool market, was so drunk that he fell into a Ditch, where he lay all night;
and having some Bottles of strong-water in his pocket, after he had slept a
little, he fell to work with them, and so kept himself so drunk, that on the
morrow about two of the clock, one coming that way called to him, and asked him
what he did there? He answered, That he was very busy in his study.

A Priest dwelling near the Lord Paulets in the County of Wilts, being asleep
in the Pew or Pulpit, and being awakened by one to begin his Sermon, swore a
fearful Oath That not a man of my Lord Paulets should pay a penny there.

Mr. Forby sometime of Hindon in the County of Wilts, coming to a market Town
in the same County, and being somewhat elevated, began to scrape acquaintance
with a Gentleman: Do you know me, said the Gentleman? I cannot remember you;
but now I call you to mind, added the Gentleman, I saw you, with two or three
more of your Brethren, lie drunk in Sir James Thinn's Pigscoat, when the King
was there.

Jarvis Smith of Brinsop, Mansel, and Wormsly in Herefordshire: Wormsly (it is
confessed) is too little to buy Ale; the other two Livings, considering what a
good stomach he has, is little enough; for his Neighbors say he will eat as
much as two or three men: And a very merry Preacher he is, for he will tell his
Hearers such stories in the Pulpit, as will make himself break out into great
laughter. And as he is merry in the Pulpit, so he is as crabbed a Knave when he
is out; for there are but few of his Parishioners that are in a capacity to
fight, but he has been together by the ears withal, when he has met with a
little angry Ale. An old man leaning his head against the Pulpit, being hard of
hearing, he bid him lean off the Pulpit; but the man being hard of hearing
understood him not; Whereupon the Priest gave him a Box on the Ear, and away
went the man out of the Kirk. One time preaching a Sermon at a funeral, out of
these words, -- All is but vanity; and using some light expressions therein,
whereat some young men fell a laughing; O you Cakoons (said he) you have so
filled your bellies with brown Bread and Bacon, that the Word cannot enter into
you. A Gentleman who came into the Church a little before, with his Hawk upon
his fist, his Spaniels hunting about the seats, and his Horses tied in the
Churchyard, laughed at his silly carriage; which when the Priest saw, he said,
Hood up your Kites, and couple up your Curs, and rid off your Jades, for all is
but vanity. At another time, being in the Pulpit, John, (said he to his Clark)
go to John Hands's, he has the best Ale in the Town, and bid him send me a pot
of the best Ale he has; which was accordingly done, and so having drunk up his
Ale in the pulpit, he fell to his preachment again. One of the most sufficient
men in his Parish, told me that he met him coming out of an Alehouse in his
stockings without his shoes; What Is the matter, Mr. Smith, said he, that you
are without your shoes? The Priest fell a villifying his Neighbors, saying,
They kept him so bare of money that he was fain to leave his shoes behind him
as a pawn for Ale. Come, said his Friend, go back with me, and I Will redeem your
shoes, and so he did.

Mr. Boam of Harding, three miles from Henly upon Thames, in his Sermon said,
That the Name of God was not used in the English Tongue until Henry the VIII's
time, and then not by any but by the Priests, when the Service was in Latin:
But now men can go and run into corners, and commonly in their Meetings use the
Name of God, and say O God, and O Lord: at which he held up his hands, and lift
up his eyes in admiration, with O Jesu! and further said, That Paul was
superfluous in his Epistles, concluding them with The Grace of our Lord Jesus,
etc. But Paul (said he) had his infirmities; we must allow Paul his Grain. He
has also said, He did not care to preach to those that were born in the times
of Rebellion. And if he sees any of the Boys of Henley come to his Kirk, he
will bid them go home again, and look Birds-Nests.

A certain priest with his Cu -- Rat near Taunton-Dean in Somersetshire, sat up
until twelve a Clock at night drinking and gaming; and on the morrow as he was
preaching, and pulling out his Handkerchief to wipe his face, he pulled out a
Pack of Cards, which scattered upon his Neighbors heads.

The Parson of Welsh Bicknor, and Vicar of Walford in Herefordshire, by name
Adams, being led home in the evening from Ross market, by two of his loving
Neighbors, who were his Supporters, and seeing a Glowworm near or in the
bottom of a hedge, and having a pipe of Tobacco filled, pulled it out, kneeled
down, and went to light his pipe of Tobacco, saying, Fire I hope, fire I hope.

The Parson of Steventon in Hampshire was so drunk at the Visitation, that in
Sermon time he muttered out some words as he sat in the seat; and rising to
come out of the seat, fell down in the Alley.

Wife, I prithee tell the story about Confin Kate; I had almost forgot it, till
you put me in mind of it the other day.


Wife. Husband, I remember it well, it was when we were at Bristol together;
they were very substantial men who told us of it, and assured us of the truth
of it:

A Bishops Granchild, who was either a Parsonor Vicar, having a Maid Servant, a
very civil young woman, and somewhat Fanatic; he and his wife combine how they
might defame, or rather undo her: wherefore they begin to speak how ere long
their Cousin Kate would come to see how they aid; and would often be talking in
the Maids hearing of their Cousin Kate: AT last Cousin Kate comes, (which was a
very smooth young man in a Gentlewomans habit) and very welcome was Cousin
Kate; when night drew on, the Maid enquired where Cousin Kate should lie: Lay
on a clean pair of sheets on your bed ( said her Mistress) we will make bold
with Cousin Kate. To bed they went, and after some word which the Priest should
give, or cry hem, Cousin Kate must fall to work with the Maid; which when the
Maid found, she leaped out of the bed, cried out upon them for their baseness,
packs up, and away she goes. This is the truth of it.


Husb. Wife, your memory is very good, you have it as right as may be.

A Gentleman now living within the Lines of Communication, was led by one of
the Prebends of Chichester into a Whore-house, where the Prebend desired the
Gentleman to choose what Lass he liked best, and he would pay for it, upon
condition he would lie with her in his sight: For (says the Prebend) I am old,
and lame, and past it, but I love to see it still. But his motion was detested
by the Gentleman, being a civil person: Who also does assure the World, that
the Prebends of Chichester have debauched many hopeful young men.

Doctor Johnson (for so I think they call him) dwelling near Ashby in
Leicestershire, meeting two or three of his Neighbors coming from Ashby,
enquired of them whether they had bought Ashby? One of the men answered, What
we bought, we paid for; but you took the possession of such a man's ditch at
such a time, and never paid for it.

The said Doctor is a frugal man, and going to buy Ale at the best hand, being
drunk he fell upon his knees; which a Neighbor seeing, said, What shall we
have prayers now? But his wife made a shift to pluc khim into a Chamber.

Hill, Brogden, and Gilbert, three Priests in Buckinghamshire, met within three
miles of Henly upon Thames in an Alehouse, where meeting with a man that had
been gathering of Nuts, they asked him for some; the man calls for a Dish to
put them in, and pulled them out of his pocket, and they began to take of them:
Hold (says one of the Priests) let us say Grace first: What (says the other)
is there any Grace for Nuts? Yes (says he) I will say Grace; and so put off
his hat, and holds it over the dish, and lifts up his eyes, and with one of his
hands in the mean time takes up a a good handful: Nay hold, says the other,
you don't say Grace right; and so off goes his hat, and he lifts up his hands
and eyes, and makes as if he would say something, and at last lays down the
brims of his hat upon the dish, and turns the dish of Nuts into his hat,
saying, You said Grace for some, but I say Grace for all.

These three Priests will undertake to bowl, drink and fight with any three in
the Country; and one of them using this imprecation, Damn me, and one admiring
at him for it, O (said one of his Neighbors) this is nothing to him when he is
at home.

Parson Jones of Cundicot, about two miles from Stow in Gloucestershire, went
to Burford market, where he was so drunk, that he mistook a gray horse for his
own, which was of a sorrel color, and brought him home with him about seven
miles, and the Owner of the horse followed him. He is known to be a common
Drunkard, yet this is his commendation, that if at any time he be drunk in the
Pulpit, if any of his Neighbors do but hold up a finger and becken to him, he
will come down.

Parson Cook of Suckly in Herefordshire, has another Parsonage called Estnor,
where he has a Cu-Rat whose name was Speak, whose wife the Parson (as she her
self says) attempted to commit uncleanness withal; and said, He would give her
five pounds to buy her a Silk Gown; And we will to bed, said he, and have a
Cook or a Speak immediately.

Mr. Heyward of Shrewsbury being at a meeting where there was Dancing, he was
requested also to dance by a Gentlewoman; off goes his holy Garments, Cirsingle
and all, and to dancing he fails: When it was ended, he puts on his Garments
again; Now, says he, I am as I was before.

There is one in the same Town to whom they give the title of an Esquire, who
as he was eating Brawn and Mustard at a Barbers shop in Shrewsbury, protested,
That as true as that was Brawn and Mustard, he took Heyward between his wives
legs.

Judge Keeling, at Taunton-Assizes, fined the Bishop in ten pounds, for sending
an Ordinary drunk to the Bar.

The Vicar of Berlingham in the County of Worcester, swore by him that made
him, he would lay 20 pounds that he would prove the Church of England to be a
true Church. And indeed showed himself a true Son of the Church: for he was so
wanton with one Scarlet's wife, pulling and haling her so hard that he broke
her apron-strings, and played such horse-play to have her serve his lust, that
her Husband sued him, and at the Assizes recovered five pounds of him at a Nisi
Prius.

The Vicar of Alciter in VVarwick-shire, a notorious Drunkard, drank a Health
to all Women's -- -- -- I Will tell you no more of it; and his wife coming into
the room, he would have taken up her coats, but she fell down upon her Knees to
save her self. This I had from his Neighbors in the same Town of Alciter.

A Parson within two miles of Gloucester, I am loath to give you his name,
because he is a Neighbor; would needs give his Farrier half a dozen of Ale;
but before they parted, he with another, were fain to lead him almost home,
with his Breeches in a sweet pickle. At another time he pist in the Pulpit, so
that it ran down upon one of his Neighbors.

At Arle in the County of Salop, the Priest had drank so hard, that he pist in
the Pulpit; which the Lady Littleton perceiving, sent for a Chamber Pot, and
caused it to be set down by him in the Pulpit.

At Bath Easton, two miles from Bath, one that is called by the name of blind
David, that ran his head against a crabtree, in his Sermon uttered what my pen
with modesty may not relate, That there was nothing more pleasing to a Woman
quam Sperma -- But no more of that.

Mr. VVanley, a Priest of Coventry, Successor to Doctor Brian, having married a
young man and his wife, sent to him for five shillings for marrying of him; the
man sent him half a Crown, and said, Go tell thy Master I will pay him the
other half Crown when he pays me for brushing his back, when he sat up all
night with Mary Abel, at the Red Lion.

He is a common Drunkard, and the second of December 1665. having been abroad
drunk, the Watch took him.

John Ryland of Spernal in Warwickshire was so drunk at a Village called
Coughton, at the house of one John Hopkins, that the women tendering his
condition got a man to lead him over a Bridge at Canbrook, and on the other
side of the Bridge he fell down dead drunk, where he slept until he recovered
himself, many Carts and Wagons in the mean time passing by him.

This Ryland was formerly questioned before the Commissioners sitting at
Coventry; for insufficiency; where they demanded of him what a Sacrament was,
but he could not tell; whereupon a Gentleman standing by, desired a fortnights
time for him to answer the question. Yet now he will pass for current Coin.

Mr. Drinkwater of Aberton in Worcestershire, having been at Tewksbury in
Gloucestershire, was so drunk that he fell off his horse twice, in riding half
a mile,

Mr. Clarkson of Bradwell in Oxfordshire two miles from Burford, scored thirty
shillings in one day (as I am informed, though it be something hard to believe)
in an Alehouse, at a penny a flaggon: He uses frequently to be drunk, and
Dam'im and sink'im are familiar terms with him.

Coming through the Town of Burton on the Water, I was informed, That one
Coverdale (a Cu-Rat under a Doctor there) was so usually drunk with his
Landlords drink, that they were forced to make their Beer smaller and smaller;
and that he pist his Bed, as commonly as he was drunk; insomuch that his
Landlady changed his lodging from a feather-bed to a flock-bed, and was going
to turn him out of the flockbed to a bed of straw, he had so rotted and spoiled
them with pissing. And so wanton, he would have kissed his Landlady, but she
would not be kissed by him; and once striving with her, her mother took a
Bucket, and laid him about the back and pate. He used to be drunk so often,
that he complained he was aweary of being drunk; which inclines me to believe
that he could freely have joined with that Roman Priest who made the
follovving Prayer:

Omnipotens and sempeterni Bacche, qui humanam societatem maxim in bibendo
constituisti; concede propitius ut istorum capita quae hodierna potione
graventur, hodierna sanen-tur, per Pocula Poculorum. Amen.

In English thus:

Omnipotent and everlasting Bacchus, which have appointed humane Society
chiefly to be spent in Drinking; mercifully grant that we, which were burdened
with yesterdays drink, may be kept with this days drink in good health, through
all Cup and Cups. Amen.

His Landlord at last gave him warning to provide himself at Michaelmas; and
the Curate's request thereupon was, That a Barrel of good Beer might be
provided him, against he went away.

I could tell you something of one Nicolson of Wapley in Gloucestershire, but
take this jest for a full explanation of the matter:

One of the Prebends of Gloucester told me that the Bishop had a great favor
for me: What Is that, said I to the Prebend? There is (said he) an Apparitors
place void in the Deanery of Stone-house, and the Bishop says you shall have
the place if you will; for he says you are a notable Knave, very fit, and well
qualified for the place, and you shall have it before any one. In conclusion,
thanking his Lordship for his good will, I returned this answer; Pray tell the
Bishop that there is one -- Nicolson, his own Namesake, his near Kinsman, his
Brothers Son, Vicar of Wapley within a mile or two of Sadbury in
Gloucestershire, who had his Wife with child, and his Maid Servant, and both
brought-a-bed in his own House; he is too very a Knave to be a Priest, but he
would make a notable Knave to be an Apparitor: He is the Bishops own flesh and
blood.

And now whilst I am speaking of the Bishop of Gloucester, a passage comes to
my mind of one of his Neighbors, who hearing one of the Bishops Clergy praying
for him in his prayer before the Sermon, (which was very usual) as they went
from the public Place asked one of the Priests Servants why his Master prayed
for the Bishop so often? He had more need (said he) pray for the Family, for
they are bad enough. This he spoke because the Bishop had three Bastards born
in his house: But the Bishop himself might be an honest man for all that. I
shall say little to prejudice him in his Reputation, although he has been my
Adversary as much as possibly he could, and so I expect he will be again: For
he caused a tender-witted Alderman, Mr. W. to lay Treason to my charge for my
Book, after I had given Engagements to a Justice of the Peace of the City to
answer it at the next Assizes; and having got me out of the Liberties of the
City, into another County, the Constables also pursuing me out of the Liberties
without warrant, and the Captain of the Trained Band, who said he had a note
from the Bishop for that purpose; who haled me by violence to prison again,
contrary to a course of Justice: When the King, Nobles, and Lord Mayor of
London (having been in all their hands) had set me at Liberty. He also caused
George Evans his Secretary (surnamed the Bishops Ape) to follow me to Evesham
in Worcestershire, 18 miles, to arrest me there; but I escaping his hands, he
fell a swearing so fast, that Sam. Carver convicted him for swearing, before
the Mayor of the Town, and made him pay ten groats, to the great credit of his
Master; whom he also credited in like manner at Dursly, in protesting, That all
the Dogs, Pigs, Cats, Rats, Mice, Pleas and Lice in Dursly, were Presbyterians.

A Priest in his Sermon used this expression, That when the Panaticks were
exterminated, the Beasts of the field, and the Fowls, would sing Hallelujahs,
and the Stars would come down and dance the Canaries.

Another Priest being in his Sermon, and seeing the Dogs together by the ears,
called to his Neighbors, saying, Make a Ring, Neighbors, I Will lay a Wager on
the little Dogs side.

One coming to a public House to borrow a Lanthorn, the man who kept the house
told him that he had never a Lanthorn at home: But now I call to mind, said he,
here are three Dark Lanthorns in the house, and brought him where three Priests
lay drunk.

One Alesgood, lately Priest at Ashton Ingham in Herefordshire, seven miles
from Gloucester, gave out words to this effect, That there was not an honest
woman to his knowledge in the Town of Ashton, nor in the Parish of Vpton.
Whereupon one Farmer Giles got him down, and would have gelded him, had not a
Gentleman rescued him out of his hands.

A Constable dwelling about Charing Cross, or at least at that end of the City,
[for I cannot exactly tell the place] seeing Light in a house justly suspected
for a Bawdy House, takes two or three of his Neighbors with him, and goes and
knocks at the door; the Maid comes to the door in the dark, and asks who is at
the door? The Constable having told her who he was, and that he must come in,
up she goes again; and staying somewhat long, at last comes down and lets in
the Constable, who walking up stairs with his company, found a Gentlewoman in
Bed; but turning the clothes down a little way, found that she was in her
clothes; and finding a Relic on the Bed, viz. a Cirsingle, went into another
Room where there were two Priests in bed with their clothes on: and not being
able to give any good account of their being there, the Constable told them
they must go to the Round House; but they begged very earnestly they might not
go thither, for then they were quite undone: whereupon the Constable told them
that if each man would give a Noble to the Poor, they should be excused; but
both of them could make but half a Crown: At last, they both having two pair of
Stockings on, each of them pulled off a pair, and so they were dismissed A
Justice of Peace afterward hearing of it, questioned the Constable, but how he
came off I know not.

Thomas Cleaton, now drawing Beer at the Bell in Aldersgate Street, formerly
lived at the Three Cups, where a Parson told him that he had a wife and five
children at home, but his present condition was such, that he wanted a wench,
and that he would give him ten shillings to help him to one, putting five
shillings into his hand; but he scorned his base motion, and only made him
spend three shillings of the money, giving him the other two again.

Mr. Heart, a Parson in Northamptonshire, having got a young woman with Child,
sends her away to London, and writes a Letter to one there to entertain her,
for she was his wife: But this Letter must not come from Mr. Heart, but from one
Gardner, who was gone to Sea. Well, the Creature is entertained by the man to
whom she was sent; and having money in her purse, lay there until she was
brought-a-bed. But now Gardner is come from Sea, Heart makes to Gardner, telling
him that if he will own such a Letter, there was an hundred pounds for him;
Gardner accepts on it, puts himself into the Lifeguard, and keeps her company.
But one night coming home late, he saw a Cloak and Cirsingle hanging not far
from the bed, and finds the Priest in bed with her again: Gardner falls a
swearing at the Parson, and will cut off his privy Members, and an hundred
pounds shall not serve his turn now. The Priest gave him good words, and
pretending that he must go to the house of office, he got away.

Mr. Jackson of Kimham, two miles from Burford in Oxfordshire, coming to
Burford drank so hard, that standing to talk with a Gentleman, he spued upon
him; and afterward went into the Inn, and spued upon the Table as he leaned
upon it; and going into the Court to call for his horse, fell down, but the
Hostler with much ado got him into the Hostlery, where he lay until he had
beshit himself.

Mr. Rowles, one that lives within four or five miles of Gloucester, who
carries the Arms of Cambridge in his face, Lucem and Pocula, Fire and Cups,
being in Gloucester at a Mercers shop, enquired how he might know Ralph Wallis;
I have heard much of him, said he, and I would fain see him. As soon as he had
spoke the word, I came into the shop: Said the Mercer, This is Ralph Wallis:
Mr. Rowles thereupon desired me not to put him in my next Book among the Deans,
Doctors, and Prebends: No, said I, not I Sir, they will be ashamed of your
company: But said I, you eat too much Ale: Ale, said he! give me a cup of Sack,
that which will bring a man into the same estate that Adam was in in Paradise.
He is a frequenter of Alehouses; and as some of of his Neighbors inform me, he
was once foully mistaken, for being drunk, and only letting down his Breeches,
he shit in his Drawers. But this was not so bad as his common frequenting of
Bawdy-Houses both at Burford and Shipton, before he came to live in
Gloucestershire.

At a place called Lurgashal in Wiltshire, (as I have been informed from very
good hands) the People having sung a Psalm, expected the Priest would begin his
Sermon; but staying somewhat long, a Gentleman, one Mr. Possain, sent to him to
begin his Sermon; but the Messenger found him in the Pew, where he had beshit
himself, and was wiping his breech (as was conceived) with his Sermon-Notes;
and in that condition would have got up into the Pulpit to have preached, but
the people would not let him.

At Heydon a Chapel of Ease in the Parish of Staverton, four miles from
Gloucester, the Priest being in the Pulpit did so beshit himself, that it ran
down out of his breeches into the Pulpit; and after he came out of the Pulpit,
he might have been tracked by it which way he went.

The Priest of Homelacy in Herefordshire, having a Communion (as they call it)
on the Lords day, went in the afternoon to a Chapel of Ease called Boulson, to
preach; but when he came there, he only went up into the Pulpit and so came
down again, saying, The Pulpit stinks, and no more. But his Parishioners do
vindicate the credit of the Pulpit, and also affirm that the Priest, having
made himself drunk with the Wine that was left at the Sacrament, beshit
himself, and slandered the Pulpit.

We will conclude with Parson Laurence of Didmarton, who will be a Cartload
himself; first for Swearing, I my self having heard him swear many Oaths in a
very short time, upon a very small occasion. And once sitting at the Table
after Dinner, in the presence of his fellow-Ministers, who were his only
Companions at that time, he swore so fast that one of them reproved him
sharply. And for a Drunkard, match him and hang him; he was so drunk at
Gloucester, that he was not able to speak a word, but swear; yet was so wise in
that condition, that he could point with his hand, and make signs to the
Hostler to carry him to bed: Up the Hostler takes him on pick-pack; you may
remember, Wife, you cried out, Throw him on the Dunghill, or lay him in the
Gutter: But being laid on a Bed, I heard him swear Dam'im at the Hostler, when
he plucked off his Boots. And there he continued drinking on the morrow, and
was all day drunk again. A Farmor told me, that he was once his bedfellow at
Tetbury, where the Parson, being drunk, had so beshit himself that his
bedfellow was fain to take his knife and cut off the tail of his shirt, and
throw it in the fire; and there, said he, it did fry like Grease. A leaf in
quarto, would be too little to describe his sordid carriage, and usurious
grinding of such as borrow Money of him.

Wise, I am afraid this last load has almost turned your stomach; and therefore
I Will drive it away to Tom Turd's Pond, and there leave it.

Wife, I have many more such fellows, and I could name the Chancellor of
Worcester and Hereford, Timothy Baldwin; who when one told him he could not
receive the Sacrament at his Ministers hand, he was so deboist a fellow; the
Chancellor told him, he might receive it from a Yurk or an Infidel; nay, he
might receive it from the hands of the Devil, if he would administer it; for
(said he) the Ordinance is the Ordinance still. I could with Mr. Tombs were
his Chaplain, till the Lord Chancellor returns again: But now I am speaking of
Chancellors, Wife, If all our Chancellors were Babers, and all our Prebends
Viners, it would be more for their credit. Wife, I cannot yet tell that Bishops
name (But I hope I shall give you an account of it shortly) who entered one
that was a Barber into Holy Orders; and being told that he had formerly been
Arrainged for Sheep-stealing, he replied, I had rather see a Sheep-stealer in
the Pulpit, than a Presbyterian.

And now Wife, Let Us compare these Porrige-Priests with our Ejected Ministers,
and see what a vast difference there is between them: The former guilty of all
the aforementioned Abominations; the latter, free from all just suspicion of
such things, even in the Judgment of their very Enemies. And if that Kiss which
the Great Constantine gave to the hollow of Paphnutius's Eye, lost for the sake
of Christ, be justly reckoned amongst the Trophies of his honor; how
illustrious would it render his Majesty, both to the present and succeeding
Ages, to give Liberty to those who are as Instruments in the hand of Christ to
open eyes of the Blind!


Wife. But Husband, I hope all these Cartloads have no relation to the best of
our honest Conformists.


Husb. Yes Wife, they are all Brethren, Members of the Mystical Body; these
Swearing, Cheating, Ignorant, Drunken, Whoring Priests, are all their Brethren;
as much as those that both beshit and pissed their Breeches, Pews, and Pulpits.

Why Wife, do you think the honest Conformists you speak of, will disown their
Arch Spiritual Father Canterbury, their Swearing Father Lichfield and Coventry,
or their Papistical Father Worcester; and the rest of that Mungrel Crew? They
can never be true Sons of the Church, if they disown these Fathers.


Wife. But Husband, after all your Cartloads, what do you think of the Body of
this Clergy?


Husb. Why Wife, many of them, of the old Topers, are like the old Boots, and
Shoes which we Cobblers do Vamp; they have many of them new Soles, new
Preferments, three or four Livings and Prebendaries, but the old Leather is
still the same: only now they drink Sack, whereas Ale before would liquor the
Boots very well. A Lady asked one of them some years since, Where they had all
been during the time they were turned out of their Livings? He answered, We
have lain among the Pots, (abusing the Scripture.) To which the Lady answered,
I thought so, by your Red Noses. But indeed, Wife, there are but two small
Objections against them, two little Faults in our Clergymen.


Wife. What are those two Exceptions, Husband?


Husb. Why they can neither Preach nor Pray; otherwise they are as well
qualified, both for Drinking and Swearing, (and some other Virtues, that you
and I must not talk aloud of) as any that ever came out of the Popes Belly.


Wife. Pray Husband, what do you think is the true reason why the People are so
generally set against the Bishops?


Husb. Truly Wife, I Will tell thee; As they all see they do no good, and have no
care of their Souls, so their business is to vex and torment the people under
them; by their Appariters summoning them to their Courts, that they cannot be
quiet in their Callings, nor at their Ploughs. I am informed by such as have
heard it from those that know it, That three thousand at one time stood
summoned at the Bishop of Lincoln's Court: Wife, this is one great reason of
the miserable poverty that is in every Country. I tell thee, Wife, if our
Gracious King would but take theirs and the old Droans of Deans and Prebends
Lands into his hands, to defray the Public Charge of the Kingdom, the whole
Body of the People would keep a Jubilee for it.


Wife. Husband, let me ask you one question more; What do you find is the
reason why the Non-Conformists will not comply with the Bishops?


Husb. The reason is plain, because they cannot say the old Mumpsimus, the
Service Book; which I have told you before is word by word the old Mass Book in
another Tongue, one Pope making one part of it, and his Successors the rest:
Now they can pray better than the Popes can teach them; but as for our
Clergy-S^^s, if their Books should be burnt, there must be no praying: And
secondly, the Non-Conformists cannot swallow the Old Whores painted silly
Ceremonies, because by the Bishops own Confession they are not Written. So that
their great sin is, that they can Pray and Preach without an old moldy
Mass Book, and would worship as God commands them; which makes the people to be
generally for them.


Wife. I hope then, Husband, the King will give them their liberty to Preach,
to satisfy his People.


Husb. I will tell thee a true story, Wife; for you know I read Histories: In
the Kingdom of Persia, about the year 500. the Magitian-Priests (such as ours)
came to the King, and told him, that there was a voice heard in one of the
Temples from under ground, That if he gave liberty to the Christians in his
Kingdom, he would certainly be destroyed: Which the King believing, a wise Man
went to him, and desired him to go and hear the voice, and then to search under
ground if there were not a person there; which the King did, and found a Priest
in a hollow place, which spoke, and so the cheat was discovered. Just such an
Oracle is the Priests counsel now. But --


Wife. Pray Husband stay there, I think you have said enough for a Cobbler.


Husb. No, Wife, I have something else to say yet; which is, That the Bishops
persuade my King Charles the Government of the Church is laid upon his
Shoulders; and that they will study the Truth, and he shall maintain it. But
seriously Wife, if God the Father had seen that any Migistrate on Earth, or all
the Angels in Heaven had been capable of so great a care and trust, he had
never laid it upon the shoulders of his own Son: For the Prophet Isaiah tells
us, The Government shall be upon His Shoulders; and the Apostle tells us, We
have one Lawgiver (and but one) Christ Jesus: So that if Christ Jesus be that
one Lawgiver, then my King has no Power to make Laws for the Conscience, to
bind men to what form of Wonhip the Bishops please. But what they are not able
to make good by Scripture, they would have my King make good by his Laws; and
so make him their Sword Bearer, which is none of his work, and so I would tell
him, if I might have admission to his presence. But Kings and Cobblers are no
meet Companions.


Wife. But Husband, I have heard you say, That the Ministers of the Church of
England are not called according to Magna Charta: Pray how then are they
called?


Husb. Why Wife, (as the Pear-monger, when his Pears are green puts them into
hot Horse-dung to ripen them apace, so) first the Bishop of the Diocese enters
men into holy Orders; which holy horse-dung Orders makes them ripen as fast for
the Ministry, as the Pears do for the Market. And this entering them into holy
Orders, makes them first Deacons, and then Priests, and so puts them into a
capacity to become Cu -- Rats, Vicars, or Parsons, as soon as they can get
Livings: Which Livings were (formerly) some at the Popes dispose, which in
Harry the VIII's time fell to the King, and are generally now at the Lord
Chancellors disposal; some were at the Abbots disposal, which were given to the
Senior Fellows at Oxford and Cambridge; some were at the disposal of the Bishop
of the Diocese, and so continue still. Now if my Lord Chancellor has a
Kinsman, or a Friend, for whom he has a favor, then it is his Jure Divino. And
usually if the present Incumbent lie sick, there are two or three, like Carrion
Crows, are ready to seiz upon the Careass of the Living, attending the death of
the sick man: and many times, before the breath is out of his Body, put foot in
Stirrup, spur, cut, and away they ride post, as fast as they can; and he that
the Lord Chancellor finds the best Scholar, able to decline the Latin word
Bribo, Bribe-Ass, Bribe-bravely, is well qualified, and ipso facto inducted.

If the Bishop of the Diocese has a Kinsman, or a Contemporary, or a Daughter;
then pin the Daughter upon the Parsons sleeve, and let them go together. If you
are ignorant in this Trade, go to old Tomkins of Worcester, he can inform you
how to get Livings, a Prebendship, and several good Parsonages, provided always
you have money, although as very a Dunce as himself; whose stock of Sermons
(though but small) are (...) put off without a form of Prayer: Indeed he tells
the People they shall pray for such and such, but never prays himself for any.

If a man be the Senior Fellow of a house, although as very a Dunce as the
Vice Chancellor, (who is Dunce enough, witness his speaking Latin to young
Scholars, who say he often breaks Pritian's pate; and witness that Cringing,
Bowing, Hodg-podge, Pie-bald Worship, wherein I saw him so busy an Actor when
I was last at Oxford in the House of RIMMON; and witness also the Discourse he
had with a Tanner, whose Parts he not being able to deal with, confessed he
admired that such Parts should be found in a man of his quality: And as the
Tanner tanned him, so I could as willingly cobble him, for his Worship that I
saw in Oxford: But his Worship is as good as the Bishop of Oxford, Dr.
Blanford's Divinity, who told William Gregory, when he demanded of him why he
kept him Prisoner so long, That he punished his Body to do his Soul good. I
would knock my Aules in a post, and burn my Last, if I left him not as mute as
the Quaker-Woman at Witney. But to return from this Digression; if a very Dunce
be Senior Fellow of a house) the first Living that falls is his, Jure Divino,
as they account it. As is evident in Cox, late of Slimbridge, a Living worth
250 l. per annum.) who being Senior Fellow of Mandlin in Oxford, and so having
that Living fallen into his hands, was fain to hire a Rat, because he did not
love the Trade of Preaching 'twas so tedious to him: And Dr. Diggle his
Successor, is as able for the work as Cox was; who tells the people before
Sermon, Ye ought to pray for this and that, but cannot pray himself.

If the Lord of Manner have two Sons, he may make one of them a Priest, and a
Parsonage will be a good Portion for a younger Brother. Or if he has a
Chambermaid who has been his Servant diverse years, the Priest must take her,
and he shall have the Living for her Portion. A Parson may buy the next
Presentation of the Patron; and if he have no Son that is capable of the place,
yet he may have a Daughter, and though she be a Tapstress, or a Sempstress, yet
she has right to make what Priest she pleases Parson of that Parish.

If a Papist be a Patron, he may present what Priest he pleases; So did the old
Earl of Worcester, who procured Holy Orders for the Clerk of his Iron-works;
and sent him to Woollaston in Glocestershire; where the Earl slit the Parsonage
in two pieces; making his Clerk contented with forty, and keeping fourscore
for himself. But it is conceived the Priest was of his Patrons Religion, and
only read our English Mass Book, but never attempted to say Sermon in all his
Life. The present Bishop of Glocester's last Predecessor (Dr. Goodman) a
confessed Papist, bestowed a Stock of Holy Orders upon his old Servant Charles
Harcott, who married the Clark of the Iron-work's Daughter, and drives a
Service Book Trade to this day.

The old Lord Windsor being Patrimus to the late Dr. Warmstrey, at his Kirsning
gave him the Parsonage of Hampton in Glocestershire: So that the Doctor had a
Call e Cunabulis, from his Cradle, And such are the Calls to the Ministry of
the Church of England; which are Romano more, after the manner of the Church of
Rome.


Wife. But Husband, how are Ministers called according to Magna Charta?


Husb. Wife, The least Officer in the Church was not to be made choice of
without Prayer; though it were but a Deacon, which was to look after the Poor.
When Judas fell by Transgression, the Church went to Prayer, and cast Lots, and
the Lot fell on Matthias: And so when they had fasted and prayed, they laid
hands on St. Paul and Barnabas, and sent them forth: And though Paul had an
extraordinary Call, he went not forth till the Church sent him away with
Fasting and Prayer. But Wife I can give you a Book whose business it is to
treat of the Discipline of the Churches of the New Testament, which will save
me a great Labor.


Wife. But Husband that Government wont consist with these times?


Husb. Wife, Must the will of Christ submit to the times, or the times submit
to the will of Christ? I think I have stitched you there, Wife: And is not this
the ground of all our present Differences? For the Eyes of the Nation being so
much opened by the preaching of the Gospel these late years, the Worship and
Clergy of the Church of England are rendered contemptible in the Eyes of the
Common People: As may appear by One who coming into the Cathedral of Gloucester,
with two of his Companions; and hearing the Organs play, fell a Dancing,
saying, Come, let us Dance, here is Good Music: And when the Organs stood still,
Play on Good Fellows, said he, I like your Music well, it is good Music. And
they have oftentimes been prodigiously disturbed in their Worship, by Hens,
Magpies, Owls, Cocks, Foxes, Piggs, Rats, and Birds; concerning each of which,
take a relation as follows.

I was told in the County of Somerset, that a Hen coming into the public
Place, flew upon the Common Prayer Book in the time of their Devised Worship.

At Wilby in Northamptonshire, a Hen flew into the Public Place, and sat down
checkling upon the Common Prayer Book, And shit upon it, and flew away again:
And the next Lords Day doing the like again, she there lost her life.

At Norwich the Dean being preaching, and among many other things uttering
these words, That some men made Prayers of an Ell-long, which were of no Divine
Institution; An Owl flew over his head, and hemmed him up with a note of
Admitation; crying, Hoo! hoo! hoo!

The Dean of Hereford being in his Sermon, and having hanged up his Canonical
Cap upon a Pin in the Pulpit, a Magpie flew into the Pulpit, and never gave
over Frisking and Whisking, till he had thrown it down, and afterward came and
sat down by him, and he civily put him away with his hand.

Another Magpie came into the Public place, with red Stockins on, and a red
Collar about his Neck, and sat down by the Priest; who was also in his red
Hood, reading Devised Service.

Richard Stevens of Nurent, having been at a Cock-fighting at Gloucester, and
going into the Cathedral with the Cocks in a Bag upon his arm, the Singing-men
(being at their Worship) invited him into the Chore; and when the Choristers
began to sing, his Cocks began to Crow: But which Service was most acceptable,
the Cocks or the Coxcombs, I leave to better Judgments to determine.

I was told by an honest Quaker, That one Parson Bomfield near Yarmouth, going
to Dine with a Friend of his in the next Village, stole a Cock by the way, and
put it in his Breeches; and that the Cock fell a crowing in the Parsons
Breeches, as he sat at Dinner with his Friend.

At Norwich, a Fox came into the Public Place in the time of their Worship,
probably to find some Prey there; but seeing they were only Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, he departed; and the like he did at Gloucester.

Wife, You know what Goodwife Edwards told you about her Sow, That having been
admonished to keep her Sow at home, she could not for her life when the Bell
tolled, but away would the Sow run to their Worship.

Mr. Marley, Preaching at Norwich upon this Text, Behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom there is no guilt; and saying the Conformists were the true Israelites,
at that word, a Sow came into Public Place; and standing before the Pulpit,
grunted out Woogh! woogh! woogh! whereupon the Parson repeated his Sentence
again, and the Sow replied in the like manner; for which he is by the
Inhabitants thereabouts, Surnamed Hog-Marley.

Two Pigs coming into the Cathedral of Norwich near the Eagle, in the time of
Worship, they endeavored to drive them away, but the Pigs would not go; and so
they were forced to carry them out. And their Owner being warned to keep them
at home, shut theminto a Yard; but the Pigs, leaping over the Pales (which were
as high as a Dog could ordinarily leap over) ran to the Cathedral the second
time in the time of Worship; and were again fain to be carried out. And the
Owner of the Pigs being again warned and threatened, was fain to kill them, not
knowing how to keep them at (...). These were the first that ever suffered
Martyrdom, for coming to hear Common Prayer.

I think, Wife, it is needless to mention the Rats that eat the Leather off of
the Organs at Gloucester, and made the Common Prayer go down without Music for
almost a quarter of a year together, because the Church was so indulgent
toward them, that they were never Excommunicated.

Wife, I am sure you know Dr. Horwood our Neighbor; Mr. Jones, formerly of
Easton-gray in Willtshire, told me the following story of him: That about the
beginning of the late Troubles, Dr. Horwood being preaching at Mary's in
Oxford, and in his Sermon blaming the Rusticity of those that were against the
Bishops, and magnifying the then Government of the Church, a Bird sat upon the
Canopy of the Pulpit, and shit in his mouth; or rather (said Mr. Jones) upon
the corner of his Cheek, which ran down into his Mouth: I and Dodderige (said
he) sat under the Pulpit, and saw him take his Handkerchief and wipe it out of
his mouth. Which proved very Ominous, for suddenly after the Bishops had a fall.

Now if (as Tertullian tells us) not a hair from a Saints head, nor a bristle
from a Sows back, falls to the ground, without the will and pleasure of God:
Surely then these things aforementioned ought not to pass unrainded by us.

But Wife, I formerly made you a Promise to show you wherein a Cobbler was more
honorable than a Lord Bishop, and I think I had best perform it now.

A Cobbler is ab antiquo, ever since Shoes were made of Leather, and he is a
Gentleman of the Gentle Craft.

The LORD Bishop is but from William the Conqueror; and their honor was
damnatus antequam natus, condemned before *it was born, as they profess
themselves Ministers. And a Magistrate professing himself to be Christ's
Substitute, cannot confer true honor, where his Master has prophibited it. His
honor must be a natura, ex merito, or ab officio. From nature it cannot be,
for so every man is as good as he; and as for their desert, were it not for the
Kings favor, the Multitude would do by them, as the Prentices did by the
Whores in Moor-fields, and set them up against the Walls for Dogs to p -- --
at. Nor can their honor arise from their Office, as Prelates, which is to
persecute; for so they are Whelps of old Lilly, that Bitch-Whore, and some of
the first Litter; the Devil was their Sire, and they are as like him as ever
they can look, they have Dad's own Nose; from him they learn to persecute, like
Nimrod.

The Cobbler lives by his honest labor, and seeks not to be burdensome to his
Brethren* and part of his Livelihood is by paring of old Shoes.

The Lord Bishop is much like that Hog, that, when some Children were eating
Milk out of a Dish that stood upon a Stool, thrust his Snowt into the Dish, and
drank up all; not regarding the Children, who cried, Take a Poon, Pig, take a
Poon: So these hungry Hogs, though they have hundreds, nay thousands per annum,
must have Procurations, Synodals, and Pentecostals from their poor Brethren*
Procurations to bear their Charges when they ride a Vexation, which was decreed
by Pope Boniface and other Popes. Synodals had their rise from the Offerings
which were brought at the Dedication of Churches. The Pentecostals are
Pentecost-Farthings, arising from the Oblations which were brought by the
Parents of such Children as were baptized; which was then only at Whitsomide;
as that great Antiquary Mr. John Stevens in his Book de Procurat. shows. All
which are as base as (to use the Country Proverb) the parings of the Divils
(...).

The Cobbler is always mending, and making better.

The Lord Bishop is always marring, and making worse.

The Cobbler endeavors to set men upright.

The Lord Bishop turns them aside to Superstitious Vanities.

The Cobbler has more Love and Honor in his Country, than the Lord Bishop:
When Ralph the Cobbler comes to our Town, pray send him to our house, says the
Countryman: But when the Lord Bishop goes a Vexation, they never say Pray send
Him to our Town.

The Cobbler will be in Request while Men are born with Feet.

The Lord Bishop, with the whole Litter of Romish Whelps, are already quite out
of request with the generality of the NATION.

And for true Spiritual Wisdom and Learning: I may send the best of them to my
Brother How the Cobbler. Upon whose Book, Entitled The Sufficiency of the
Spirits teaching, One long since wrote the following Verses:

What How! How now! Has How such Learning found,
To throw Arts Curious Image to the Ground!
Oxford and Cambridge may their Glory now
Vail to a Cobbler, if they knew but How*
Though big with Art, they cannot overtop
The Spirits Teaching in a Cobblers Shop.
Reader, if thou a humane Artist be,
Let Humane Learning be no Judge for thee;
But leave thy Arts, and try this Cobblers End.
And see if it be by the Spirit penned.
Mean time adieu, ye Arts and Artists all,
The Spirits Teaching may attend the Aull:
And thou brave Cobbler, Blow another Blast
Upon their Learning, though thou Blow thy Last.

Husb. ANd now Wife, I have made this Piece ready for the Press, I must get you
to go to Madam Bennet's, and get a Lady or two of hers to go with you to my
Lord of Canterbury's to get it Licensed.


Wife. Pray Husband don't ask me to do such a thing: I Will hear a better Report
of my Lady Bennet, and my Lord of Canterbury too, before I Will go near either of
them. License it your self if you will.


Husb. Why then, Wife, since you are so coy of your Credit, I Will even do it my
self, and save you a labor.


PErlegi hunc Tractatum cui titulus, Room for the Cobbler of Gloucester and his
Wife; In quo nihil reperio veritati, aut malis m^ribus contrarium: Imprimatur.

Ralph Wallis.


