The Resurrection Asserted: IN A SERMON Preached to the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,
ON EASTER DAY, 1679.

By JOHN WALLIS D. D. Professor of Geometry in the said UNIVERSITY; One of his
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary; and a Member of the Royal Society.

Tudor Rose Scottish Thistle

OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL for JAMES GOOD. 1679.

A SERMON Preached on EASTER DAY, 1679. TO THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD, At St.
Peter's in the East.
1. Cor. 15.20. Christ is Risen from the Dead; and is become the First Fruits
of them that Slept.


THese Words (without farther Preface) contain Two main Articles of our
Christian Faith; (Both proper for this Occasion:) The Resurrection of Christ;
and That of Ourselves.
The former, in these words; Christ is Risen from the Dead: The latter in those
that follow; And is become the First Fruits of them that slept.

Both which, are argued at large in this Chapter: And are now to be the subject
of our Discourse.

As to the Apostles manner of Arguing these Points; We are to consider, That it
was an usual Practice of our Apostle, (as it was also of other holy writers,)
in asserting the Trueths of God, to acco^modate his Arguments to the Princip^es
and Concessions of those with whom he did discourse. Which though, to persons
of other Principles, they might seem less significant; were, a^ lest to Them,
Cogent Arguments.

For it is true in other Sciences, as well as Mathematics; That, till there be
some Data, some Concessions agreed upon; there can be no Demonstration. To him
that Owns nothing, we can Prove nothing. And he that Knows nothing, can be
Taught nothing. For it is, by the Help of what we Know, that we are to be
Taught what we Know-not.

When he had to do with those at Athens, Acts 17. Act. 17.28.
Inciting them to the Worship of the True God; (the God that made Heaven and
Earth:) He makes use of a Concession of their own Poet, (Aratus,) to that
purpose; (...). -- ( For we are also his Offspring.) Not by ordinary
Generation: But in a like sense with that (Luke 3.) which was the son of Adam,
which was the son of God.

Luke 3.38.
And in the same sense we are to understand that of Orpheus, to the same
purpose, (...). ( There is but One that Is of himself; and All things else are
the Progeny of this One.)

For though they had their Demons, and Middling Gods (Deos medioxumos,) as the
Papists have their Saints and Angels, (for particular purposes;) For the Sheep,
Virgil*
for the Cow, for the't Anthony Pig, ( Pan curat Oves, oviumque Magistros:)
Yet, beside these Deasters, they did acknowledge one Sovereign Deity, who was
Superior to all them; ((...):) And, That, from Him, all Mankind, Homer.
(as well as other Creatures,) received their first Original: And, That Him,
therefore, they ought to Worship.

And Aratus (in the place cited by St. Paul, Arati Phenomenon.
) owns the consequence. (...). --
(...). --
(Let us in the first place, make our Application to Him: For, from Him it is,
that we have our first Original:) With much more to be there see the place of
Aratus, at large, at the end of this Sermon.
seen of like import.

Which St Paul sums up to this purpose; That He made the World and all things
therein; Act. 17.24.
That He is Lord of Heaven and Earth; That He gives Life and Breath and All
things; ver. 25.
That He Orders and Disposes of Tim^s, Persons, and Places; Of one Blood He
made all Mankind; and Determined their fore-appointed Times; ver. 26.
and the Bounds of their Habitations; That, ver. 28. ver. 27. ver. 28. ver. 27.
ver. 25.
in Him we Live and Move and have our Being; and That he is not far from every
one of us; That we are his Offspring; And That Him, therefore, we ought to
seek, and serve.

From whence the Apostle does farther infer, (as well he might from those
Principles,) That we ought to have more Reverent Thoughts of so August a Deity,
ver. 29.
than to think Him confined to Temples made with Hands; or standing in Need of
our service: or, Likened to Gold, ver. 24. ver. 25. ver. 29.
or Silver, or Stones graven by men's Art, and according to their Devise, or
Fansy: And, that it should not be thought Unreasonable, that He should one day
Judge the World in righteousness, by that Man ordained thereunto; Of whom he
has already given good Assurance, ver. 31.
in Raising him from the Dead. Thus he argues (for the Resurrection and a
Future state) with them at Athens.

When he had to do with the Jews, in the Epistle to the Hebrews; (for I take
St. Paul to be the Author of that Epistle;) From the Jewish Worship and
Ceremonies, he argues the truth of the Christian Doctrine. Which, to those at
Athens, (who did no more own the Jewish, than the Christian Doctrine,) would
have been insignificant.

Like as on all occasions, where he has to deal with the Jews, he argues from
Testimonies of the Old Testament, to prove the Doctrines of the New: And, that
of the Resurrection, among the rest.

Gal. 4.26.
The New Jerusalem that is Above, typified by that Below; Heb. 12.22.
The Heavenly Jerusalem, by that on Earth; And Heaven itself, Heb. 9.24. Heb.
12.24. and 9.15. Heb. 8.6. and 7.22. Heb. 5.6. and 6.20. Heb. 4.14. Heb. 7.11.
ver. 23, 24. Heb. 9.26, 28. and 7.27. Heb. 10.1, 2, 11, 12, 14. Heb. 9.24, 25.
Heb. 10.12. Heb. 6.20. Heb. 10.20. Heb. 6.20. Heb. 5.9.
by the Holy places made with hands, (which are the Figures of the True;) And
Jesus the mediator of a new Covenant; of a Better Covenant than that delivered
by Moses; but typified thereby; A Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedek; Our great High Priest who is Passed into the Heavens; typified by
the Levitical Priesthood; This One, by those Many; And his Perfect oblation
once for all, by those Manifold Oblations; which were therefore Repeated,
because Imperfect; And his entering into Heaven once for all, (there to sit down
at Gods right hand,) by theirs into the most Holy Place once a year; Whither we
also are to enter within the vail, (by the new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us,) Whither our Forerunner is For Us entered; and, being
himself made perfect, is become the Author of Eternal Salvation to those that
obey him. The Law being but a Figure for the time present; Heb. 9.28. and 10.1.
Col. 2.17.
A shadow of good things to come; whereof the Body is Christ.

In like manner, to the Jews at Antioch in Pisidia, Act. 13. Act. 13.35.37.
He does, by undeniable Arguments, drawn from Testimonies of the Old Testament,
evince the certain^y of Christ's Resurrection; And that, of Him, was principally
intended, what was said of David but in Type, Thou will not leave my soul in
Hell, nor suffer thine Holy one to see Corruption. Psalm. 16.11.


As St. Peter had also done, to those at Jerusalem, Act. 2. Act. 2.29.31.


And our Savior himself, Mat. 22. Mat. 22.29.
Argues with the Sadduces, for the Doctrine of the Resurrection, from a
Testimony of Moses; (who is writings the Sadduces did admit, though perhaps not
those of the other Prophets;) I am the God of Abraham, Exodus 3.6. Mat. 22.32.
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Now God is not the God of the
Dead, but of the Living.

Where also he contents himself to prove the Existence of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, (that they were then in Being, Exodus 3.6.
when this was said to Moses;) and, consequently, That the Soul survives the
Body.

For, though the Souls Immortality, do not necessarily infer, the Resurrection
of the Body; (many of the Heathens admitting the one, who never thought of the
other:) Yet, to the Sadduces, it was a good Argument; who did not deny the
Consequence of it, but the Antecedent, He lays, therefore, Mat. 3.10.
the Ax to the Root of the Tree; and strikes at the Foundation of their Opinion.

For the Ground of their Opinion concerning the Resurrection, was, Act. 23.8.
because they held There is neither Angel nor Spirit; (being of a like opinion
with a late Writer of ours, That whatsoever is, is Body; and that an
Incorporeal Substance, is a like Solecism, as an Incorporeal Body;) and,
consequent hereunto, they held, That there is no Resurrection.

Whereas, had they been convinced of the Souls Separate Existence; that ^f its
Reunion, would as easily have passed with them, as with the Pharisees: Both
admitting, That they were to Stand or Fall together.

When St. Paul was arguing the same Point before Agrippa, Act. 26.. Act. 26.2.
He could not take the same measures, as when he was disputing with the Jews.
He could not, as to him, take for granted, and conclude peremptorily from, the
Authority of the Old Testament. Which Agrippa did not Believe; or at lest, not
Profess so to do.

And what St. Paul there says, King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? ver.
27.
I know thou beleevest: I ^ake to be rather a Rhetorical Insinuation, than a
direct Assertion.

The first step he could there make, was but to show it Possible. ver. 8.
Why should it be thought a thing Incredible that God should Raise the Dead?
(That God, who at first made Man out of the Dust of the Earth, should, out of
the same Dust, Recover a Body which once had been?)

And, if not Impossible, it need not, to him, seem strange that it should be
Defended: who, though not a professed Jew, ver. 3.
was yet expert in all the Customs and Questions amongst the Jews; and could
not but know This to be no New Doctrine, but, what their Twelve Tribes, ver. 6,
7.
instantly serving God day and night, were in expectation of, as a Promise made
to their Fathers: And therefore, at lest by them, he was unworthily A^cused for
it. ver. 2.7.


That there might be somewhat of Surprise in i^, to King Agrippa, as to the
Person; He does admit. For so it was to himself, at first: Who verily thought
with himself, ver. 9.
that he ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus; ver. 12.
and, accordingly, did so: Till, by an unexpected Vision from God; ver. 13.
ver. 11, 12
as he was going to Damascus, with a Commission to Persecute those who thus
Taught; he was directed to Preach, what he did before Persecute: Which he did
accordingly; ver. 15, 16. ver. 19, 20. ver. 22.
Witnessing both to small and great (what Moses and the Prophets had before
said should come to pass,) That Christ was to Suffer, and to be the first that
should Rise from the Dead. ver. 23.


So that, What, by Agrippa, was not to be thought Impossible; should not, by
the Jews, be thought Untrue; nor he, by them, be Persecuted for it.

Which was said with so much evidence to King Agrippa, ver. 21.
well acquainted with the Jewish Doctrine, (though, to Festus, who knew it not,
ver. 7, 26.
it seemed Madness;) And the matter of Fact, ver. 24.
which had then happened being (at that time) so Notorious, as that it could
not in reason be denied, (for I am persuaded, says he to Festus, that none of
these things are hidden from King Agrippa; for this thing was not done in a
Corner: ver. 26.
) That Agrippa professes himself almost persuaded to be a Christian: ver. 28.
The matter of Fact being so Evident: and the Argument, so Convincing.

In the Chapter before us, we have our Apostle, from other Grounds, arguing the
same Point, with Christians, at Corinth. 1 Cor. 15.


Not as if the whole Church of Corinth did disbeleeve the Resurrection: But
only, Some amongst them ( How say, Some amongst you, that there is no
Resurrection? ver. 12.
)

Nor did they so much doubt of the Resurrection of Christ, (which seems to have
been, then, a thing so notorious as not to be called in question;) as of Our
Resurrection, pursuant of it.

Which, it seems, they did either directly Deny; or did otherwise Elude, by
putting some Allegorical sense up ^n it; Like that of Hymeneus and Philetus; 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.
who said, That the Resurrection was already past. As if we were to expect no
other Resurrection than such as the Apostle speaks of, Col. 3. Col. 3.1.
If ye be Risen with Christ; seek those things that are above: That is, A
Dying to Sin, and Living again to Righteousness, or Newness of Life. Rom 6.4,
11, 18.


It Is much, I confess, that Any, who professed them selves Christians, should
be found to Deny so Important an Article of the Christian Faith, as is that of
the Resurrection.

But it will appear less Strange, in those who, from Gentilism, (not from
Judaism,) were lately converted to the Christian Faith; (which was then but
New, in comparison of what now it is:)

If we consider; That, in our own days, (when Christianity has been planted,
and spread throughout the World, for more than Sixteen Hundred years;) we find
those, who, (retaining to themselves the name of Christians,) do yet leave no
stone unturned, to Undermine, and (as much as in them lies) to Overthrow, the
most Fundamental Points of Christianity; even the Divinity of Christ; and his
Satisfaction to Gods Justice for the sins of Men: (on which Hindge, the whole
Doctrine of Christianity depends.)

Others; who turn the whole Christian Worship, into a kind of Pageantry, and
ridiculous Gesticulations: such as are many Fopperies of the Romish Church;
(more Absurd than those of the more sober Heathens.) Setting to Sale, both
Heaven and Purgatory, for sums of Money: And Bartering, not only for Pardon
of sins, but for Leave to sin: (as if, of them, it had been said, My House
shall be called, an House of Prayer; Mat. 21.13.
but ye have made it a Den of Thieves.) And fill their Legends with such
Ridiculous Stories, as would tempt a modest Heathen, rather to reject the
Trueths of Christ, than to admit such Fooleries. And, in the mean time, make no
scruple of Murders, and Massacres; of Treasons, and Rebellions; of
Assassinating Princes, subverting Governments, and turning the World upside
down; to propagate their Devises: Which, we can hardly have so much Charity as
to think, that themselves do seriously Believe.

Others; who make but Rallery of the most serious things in Christianity; of
Heaven, and Hell, and the Day of Judgment; of the Souls Immortality; of the
very Being, and Providence of God himself. Psalm. 49.12.
As if they were but one degree above the Beasts that perish; or rather, a
degree Below them.

But we need not wonder, That the Devil should have Impudence and Wiles enough,
to turn himself into as many Disguises for the Interest of Hell; as a Jesuit
for that of Rome.

It Is, therefore, the less strange, that Some, of these New Christians, should
(at Corinth) Doubt of the Resurrection.

Now, of these Christians who so Doubted, we are next to consider, What Method
St. Paul uses, to convince them of it.

He does not deal with them as with mere Scepticks, (that would admit of
Nothing:) Nor, as with Heathens, (who owned nothing of Scripture; nothing of
the Jewish or Christian Doctrine:) Nor as with Jews, (who, though they admitted
the Jewish, denied the Christian:) But, as with Christians. And therefore takes
for granted such Concessions of this kind, as they did, or ought to, admit of;
And argues from thence; That they ought to admit of this also.

1 Cor. 15.1, 3.
He tells them, It is that Gospel, which he had Preached to them, which they had
Received; wherein they Stand; ver. 2.
and whereby, if they persist in it, they are to be Saved.

It had been delivered to them, by the same Apostolic Authority with the rest
of their Religion: ver. 3.
Which they ought not easyly to slight. It had been, in like manner, Received
by them: And they should not (like Children) without just Reason, part with
what, upon good Advise, they had once Received. That, as Yet, they stood fast
in that Religion; (without seeing cause to quitt it:) And should therefore in
this Branch of it, as well as the rest: As being the Noblest part of that
Salvation, which they did expect.

He urges the Authority of the Scriptures; that is, those of the Old
Testament, (which the Christians admitted in common with the Jews;) That, it
was according to the Scriptures that Christ should Dye for our Sins; ver. 3.
And, according to the same Scriptures, that, being buried, he should Rise
again the third day. ver. 4.


He urges the Authority of credible Witnesses, (whom, in matter of Fact, they
had no reason to disbeleeve;) That, what had before been Prophesied, was now
Actually come to Pass. He was seen of Cephas; ver. 5.
Then, of the Twelve, (that is, those of the Twelve who persisted, when Judas,
one of them, was fallen from them:) He was, after, seen by more then five
hundred Brethren at once; ver. 6.
whereof the greater part were yet surviving: He was seen of James: Then, of
all the Apostles: And, last of all, ver. 7.
by himself also. ver. 8.


The thing was Notorious; of which they could not be ignorant. It was seen, and
owned, at diverse Times, and at diverse Places, and by a multitude of Persons,
and by many of them more than once. Who could not be imagined to be All
Impostors, or All Imposed upon; or Contriving to abuse the whole World; and,
Themselves most of all. (Exposing themselves, without any prospect of
advantage, to Persecutions, and Martyrdomes, and a world of Miseries, not only
as the most Wicked, but as the most Simple people that ever were, if they had
known those things not to be true.)

To which I may add this also; That this was professedly Avowed, and publicly
Declared (throughout the World,) in a Learned Age: when there were a multitude
of Writers, Greek and Latin, who is Works remain ^o this day. And yet none of
them, how averse soever to the Christian Religion, have made it their business
to con^radict the History.

Which they would certainly have done; (and were much concerned so to do;) had
not the matter of Fact been, then, evident beyond Dispute.

Nor do I see how an Historical Truth, can well be capable of greater Evidence.

Against which; Mat. ^8.12, 13.
that sorry shift of Bribing the Soldiers to say, His Disciples come and stole
him away while we slept; does sufficiently Confute itself; and rather Adds to
the Evidence. The particulars of which are so obvious, and so often noted on
these occasions; that I shall need the less to insist on them.

Mat. 27.62, 63,
That it was before Suspected, and that his Enemies Feared, (that either he
might Rise indeed, or at lest be Pretended so to do,) is evident by their
setting a Watch. ver. 64.
And that it would be Mischievous to them, if believed; themselves allege, as
the reason why they set it. And it cannot be thought, they would then be so
careless, as to set such a Watch as would be All Asleep.

Nor can it be thought, That the Disciples, (being now in a posture to shift
for themselves, and Runaway, Mat. 26.31.56. Joh. 20.19.
rather than venture on such an Exploit,) durst undertake such a thing, when
the Watch was set. (For, if the Watch were indeed so Sleepy; 'twas yet more
then they could know before, or had reason to Presume upon. And therefore, as
to such a Design, it was all one as if they had been Awake.)

And, in case they durst Attempt it: yet the Rolling away so great a stone;
Mat. 27.60, 66.
(whereon also, in likelihood, the Soldiers might be then sitting;) and
Removing the Body, (with all the Circumstances attending it;) could hardly be
done with so little Noise, as not to Wake some of them.

Nor would the Disciples have been so Careful, to Stripp the Body, and Fold up
the Linen, and Lay all in order, Luke 24.12. Joh. 20.6, 7.
before they went; being every moment in Fear of the Soldiers waking.

Or (if the Soldiers were indeed so fast asleep, as that nothing of all this
could waken Any of them;) How could they tell, Who took him away? He might,
indeed, be Risen (for ought they knew,) as was pretended.

Which was much more Likely, than that he should, so, be stolen away. (A
thing so improbable; that the Soldiers, without a good Bribe, and good
security to save them harmless, Mat. 28.12, 24.
durst not venture on a Lay so Unlikely to be believed.)

And, when all is done, (allo^ing it the greatest advantage that may be,) it
can amount to no more but this, That the Body was gone they knew not how, and
(for ought they knew) the Disciples might have stolen him away while they
sl^pt. Which could be of no consideration, against the Positive Testimony of
such Persons (as was before said) who saw him Alive after his Resurrection.

And even that Allegation, as weak as it was, it seems the Soldiers were
rather Passive in, than Active That is, they suffered the Highpriests (without
any great contradiction of theirs, ver. 12.15.
) to publish such a story.

Yet not so Silently, but that the Truth also brake forth, notwithstanding this
subornation.

For from them also it came to be known, That there was a great Earthquake;
ver. 2. ver. 4.
and the Appearance of an Angel, who Rolled away the stone, and Frighted the
Keepers, that they became as Dead men; (with other circumstances thereun^o
appertaining:) And, That They told this to the Chief-Priests; ver. 11. ver. 12.
ver. 15.
and were by them Hired with large money; to say as they we^e Taught, rather
than what they knew.

It Is certain therefore, (so far as an Historical Truth can be made certain,)
That Christ is Risen from the Dead. Which is the First Branch of the Text
before us; Concerning the Resurrection of Christ, as to his own Person.

The second Branch, concerns, the Effect of Chri^^s Resurrection, in that of
Ours. He is become the First Fruits of them that Slept.

The term of First Fruits, is Metaphorical: Alluding to the Oblation of the
First Fruits, Lev. 23 9. etc.
in the Levitical Law; As an acknowl^dgemen^, that the whole was Gods; and,
that of his Bounty they did receive it: And, by Offering of which, the rest was
Sanctified to their use, (according to that, Romans 11. Romans 11.16.
If the First Fruits be Holy, the Lump is also Holy.) For which cause it was,
that they were not to Eat any of the Harvest, (Bread, or Parched Corn, or Green
Ears, Levit. 23.14.
) till the First Fruits had been first offered.

And with a like Allusion, He is elsewhere called, The Firstborn from the
Dead, and The First begotten from the Dead. Col. 1.18.
For as the First Fruits, in lieu of all the Crop: Rev. 1.5.
so, the Firstborn, in lieu of all the Brethren, was Consec^ated unto God;
Implying his Title to all the rest.

But, when he is called, the First Fruits of them that Slept; it is not so to
be understood, as if he were the first that Slept; (as if he had been, simply,
(...):) But, (...), (the First Fruits from the Dead, of them that slept: Col.
1.18. Rev 1.5.
) As he is elsewhere called (...), the Firstborn, from the Dead.

For I take the words (...), in the Text, to have an Aspect both ways: (...).
From the Dead he is Risen, the First Fruits (from the Dead) of them that slept.
That is, The first that should Rise again, of them that slept: or (as Act. 26.
Act. 26.23.
) The First that should Rise from the Dead.

Yet not, Absolutely, so neither; 1 Kin. 17.21. 2 Kin. 4.35. and 13.21. Joh.
11.44. Mat. 9.25. Luke 7.15.
as if he were absolutely the First that was Raised. For we read of one raised
by Eliah; another, by Elisha; And Christ himself raised Lazarus, and some
others.

But these were so Raised, as to Die again. 1 Cor. 15.53, 54.
( Their Corruptible had not putt on Incorruption; nor their Mortal,
Immortality.) He was the First that was Raised to Life Immortal.

If it be said, That Enoch, Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5.
who was Translated that he did not see Death; And Eliah, who is Body was taken
up into Heaven in a fiery Chariot; Did, before the Resurrection of Christ,
enjoy, 2 Kin. 2.11.
what is Equivalent to the Resurrection of the Body. (According to what is
here, after, employed, We shall not all Die, but we shall all be Changed: The
Trumpet shall sound, 1 Cor. 15.51. ver. 52.
the Dead shall be Raised, and we shall be Changed.)

Yet (without disputing, how far forth they enjoyed a Glorified Body;) even
that, though Antecedent, in time, to the Resurrection of Christ; was, in
nature, Consequent to it, and an Effect of it.

For though, in a Physical Causality, the Effect is never, in time, before the
Cause: Yet, in a Moral Causality, it may be. As, when a Debt is Acquitted, a
Captive Released, an Inheritance Purchased, and accordingly Enjoyed, upon
prospect of a Price or Ransom, to be paid, by the Surety, somewhile after.

And, in this sense, may Christ be said to be the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. Rev. 13.8.
If, at lest, those words, from the Foundation of the World, relate there to
that of the Lamb, slain; and not rather to that former clause, written in the
book of Life. Who Is names are not written (in the book of life of the Lamb
slain) from the foundation of the world: That is, who is names were not written,
from the foundation of the World, in the Lamb's book of Life. According as the
some is again repeated Rev. 17. Rev. 17.8.
Who Is names were not written in the book of Life, from the foundation of the
World, without mention of the Lamb slain.

But, whatever be the construction of those words; sure it is, that the
Efficacy of Christ's Death and Resurrection, did as well look backward, to the
Beginning of the World; as forward, to the End of it.

And we are expressly told, Heb. 11. Heb. 11.5.
That it was by Faith, that Enoch was translated that he should not see Death.
Even by the same Faith which he there describes to be the Substance of things
hoped for, ver. 1.
ver. 2.
and the Evidence of things not seen; By which the Elders obtained a good
report: and of which he had said, a little before, The just shall live by
faith; and, Heb. 10.38.
by which We believe to the Salvation of our Souls. ver. 39.


'Twas by Faith therefore in Christ, who Died and Rose again, that Enoch was
Translated so as not to see Death; as well as We, from Death are Raised, so a
Life Immortal: And Christ, at lest virtually, the First Fruits of both.

Now, the notion of First Fruits, implies two things: a Possession of so much;
and a Title to the rest. Romans 11.16.
If the First Fruits be Holy, the Lump also Holy: If God has right to the one,
he has to the other also.

It is in the nature of an Earnest-penny, (a similitude often used by our Apostle
to the same purpose;) which is both part of Payment, and an Engagement to pay
the rest,

And what, in one place, he calls, the First fruits of the Spirit; (Our selves
also, Romans 8.23.
who have the First Fruits of the Spirit, wait for the Adoption, to wit, the
Redemption of our Body:) the same he calls; elsewhere, the Earnest of the
Spirit; 2 Cor. 1.22. 2 Cor. 5.5. E^h. 1.13, 14.
(Who has Sealed us and given us the Earnest of his Spirit in our hearts; And
again, Ye were Sealed with the holy Spirit of promise; which is the Earnest of
our Inheritan^e until the Redemption of the purchased Possession.) The
First Fruits of the Spirit, which they had then received, was not only a part
of the Purch^se; but was an Earnest penny, to bind the Bargain, for what was
af^erward to come.

And such is the Resurrection of Christ, as to Our Resurrection. Not as a
thing, wnich, being once accomplished, was to rest so: But as that which was to
draw more after it. Heb. 6.19, 20.
We have hope (says the Apostle) which enters within the vail, whether our
Fore runner is entered, For Us; (as it were, to take Livery of Seisin in Our
stead.) And I go (says Christ) to prepare a place For you; that, Joh. 14.2, 3.
where I am, you may be also.

And that other Phrase, Col. 1.18.
The Firstborn from the dead, implies, that there were more to follow. ( That
he may be the Firstborn amongst many Brethren. Romans 8.29.
)

And, when St. Paul called Ipenetus, Romans 16.5.
the First Fruits of Achaia unto Christ; he intimates a larger Harvest. And the
like of Stephanas elsewhere. 1 Cor. 16.15.


The word First, being an Ordinal, is spoken with respect to others that are to
follow.

In what respect Christ is Singular; he is not called (...), the
First-begotten, (as here, the First begotten from the Dead: Rev. 1.5.
) But (...), the Onely-begotten (of the Father.) Joh. 1.14, 18.


1 Cor. 15.20.
And that, in this place, he is called the First Fruits from the dead, with
respect to a larger Crop; is evident from the words next following, where the
same is further amplified. For since by M^n came Death; ver. 21.
by Man also came the Resurrection of the Dead: For as in Adam all Die; so in
Christ shall all be made Alive: ver. 22. ver. 23.
But every man in his own order: Christ the First Fruits; afterward they that
are Christ's, at his coming.

Like as that sentence on Adam, In the day that thou Eatest thereof thou shall
surely Die, Genesis 2.17.
was intended with respect to those that are His, (by Natural Generation:) so
that of Christ, Thou art my son, this day have I Begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7.
(expounded of his Resurrection, Act. 13. Act. 13.33.
) do influence also those that are Christ's (by Spiritual Regeneration.)

And therefore, Heb. 1. where the same is, again, so applied to him, (Thou art
my son, this day have I Begotten thee; Heb. 1.5.
) he is not called (...) (the Only-begotten;) but (...), the First begotten;
(when he brings his First-begotten into the World;) Because this had an
aspect on those that are his Brethren; ver. 6.
and were, on that account, so called: (as it after follows, For which cause he
is not ashamed to call them Brethren. Heb. 2.11.
)

And this I have the more insisted on, because it is the Apostles great
Argument, (for proving Our Resurrection from that of Christ,) That he Rose, not
only as a Single person; but, as the First Fruits of those slept: and, That, in
pursuance thereof, those that are Christ's are likewise to expect a glorious
Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.49.
For, as we have born the image of the Earthy, (dying a natural Death as Adam
dyed;) so shall we bear the image of the Heavenly* (in a glorious Resurrection
like that of Christ.) And he who raised up the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.14. 1 Cor.
6.14.
shall raise Us also by Jesus.

There is yet one thing more, very considerable, for the explication of this
place. To wit, That the Apostles Argument and Discourse, (both in this verse,
and the whole Chapter,) extends only to prove the Resurrection of the
Righteous; not that of the Wicked. It Is, of Christ the First Fruits, 1 Cor.
15.23.
afterward those that are Christ's: (of those who are not Christ's, he says
nothing. ver. 49.
) As we have born the image of the Earthy, so we shall bear the image of the
Heavenly; (which can be meant of the Righteous only.) It is sown in Dishonor,
it is raised again in Glory; or, It is sown a Vile Body, ver. 43.
it is raised a Glorious Body; (which cannot be understood of the Bodies of
Wicked men)

And it is agreed, for ought I find, by all Expositors, (and, amongst the r^st,
by Grotius and Dr. Hammond,) That, this whole Discourse, is not at all to be
understood, of the Resurrection of the Wicked; But, of the Glorious
Resurrection of the Righteous only. And, That, in those Words, As in Adam all
Die, so in Christ shall All be made Alive, the word All is not of the same
extent in both Clauses: But extends, in the first clause, ver. 22.
to All that appertain to Adam; that is, to All Mankind: in the l^tter clause,
to All that are Christ's; that is, to All the Faithful. (For it is those only
that are made Alive by Christ: That of the Wicked being an Eternal Death: As
our Savior himself distinguishes, Joh, 5. Joh. 5.29.
They that have done Good to the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done
Evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation.) And, That the Parallel is thus to be
understood; As All that are in Adam, do Die in Him; so All that are in Christ,
a^e by Christ made Alive: (j^stified, sanctified, and saved.)

And this Grotius parallels with that of Romans 5. Romans 5.18.
As by the Offense of One, (that is of Adam,) Judgment came upon All men to
condemnation: so by the Righteousness of One, (that is, of Christ,) the
Free-gift came upon All-men, for Justification of Life. Where, by All-men in
the first clause, Grotius understands All Mankind; by All-men in the second
clause, All Believers.

Making this the adequate sense of both places; As all that are in Adam, that
is, all the Race of Adam, do by Adam come to Die; So all that are in Christ, are
Justified by Christ, and by Christ Raised to a Life of Glory.

But what must we then say? That the Wicked are not also to be Raised? Or, that
St. Paul did not Know it?

No: we must s^y neither of these.

That the Wicked shall be also Raised by Christ; himself tells us expressly,
Joh. 5. Joh. 5.28.
All that are in the Graves shall h^ar the voice of the Son of Man, and come
forth; ver. 29.
They that have done Good, to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
Evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation.

And, That St. Paul Knew it so to be; himself assures us, in his Discourse to
Felix, Act. 24. Act. 24.14.
(not as his Own Faith only, but that of the Fathers also.) So worship I the
God of my fathers; Believing all things which are written in the Law and the
Prophets; And have hope toward God (which themselves also allow) that there
shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, ver. 15.
both of the Just and Unjust. Than which nothing can be more express.

For though the Wicked, by reason of their Impenitence and Unbelief, do not
enjoy the Benefits of Christ's Redemption to the Resurrection of Life: Yet are
they subject to Christ's Dominion (as the Judge of the World,) and shall be
raised by his Power to the Resurrection of Damnation. Which though it be not
the business of this place before us, is proved by diverse others.

But why then (you will ask) does St. Paul say nothing of it in this place,
where he speaks so copiously of the Resurrection?

To which I make this Answer. We are to take notice of St. Paul as a Close
Disputant. It was his manner of arguing (here and elsewhere,) to keep himself
close to the point in question: Both as to the Conclusion he was to prove; and
as to the Topics from whence he fetched his Arguments.

Now the matter in question, with these Corinthians, was not, What should
become of those that were out of Christ, and not to expect Benefit by him: (and
therefore, of that, he says nothing.) But, What are the Benefits, which they
that are in Christ, receive from him. Amongst which, that of Eternal Life was
the main; and, of which they doubted. To this therefore he applies his
Arguments, (not to the other,) selecting such as were most proper for this
Conclusion. (Waving the other; but, not Denying it.)

In like manner as, in our Creed; We profess to Believe the Resurrection of the
Body, and the Life Everlasting; without mentioning that of Eternal Death, or
the State of the Wicked after this Life. Yet this we Believe also: According to
what our Savior tells us, Math. 25. Math. 25.46.
These shall go into Everlasting Punishment; but the Righteous into Life Eternal.

The same is employed also in the word (...), of those that Slept. 1 These. 4.16.
That is, of those that are Dead in Christ.

For, to the Death of the Righteous, the Scripture does usually apply the soft
term of Sleep. Joh. 11.11. 2 Kin. 2.10. and Act. 13.36. Act. 7.60. 1 Cor. ^5.6.
Lazarus slepeth. David slept with his Fathers. Stephen fell A-sleep. And (ver.
6. of this Chapter,) He was seen of five Hundred Brethren at once, whereof some
are fallen Asleep. Whereas the Wicked are said to Perish, to be Cut off, to go
down to the Pit; with other the like hard expressions.

And, in a parallel place to this, (1 These. 4. 1 These. 4.13.
) it is expounded by those that are Dead in Christ. I would not have you
ignorant concerning them which are Asleep; to sorrow as others that have no
hope. ver. 14.
For if we believe that Christ Died and Rose again: even them also that Sleep
in Jesus, ver. 15.
will God bring with him. I or we that are Alive and Remain at the coming of
the Lord shall not prevent them that are Asl^ep. For the Dead in Christ shall
rise first: ver. 16.
Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them;
ver. 17.
and so shall we be ever with the Lord.

Hence it is, that the place of Christian Burial is wont to be called
Coemeterium, (...), a Dormitory or place to Sleep in; From whence, at the
Resurrection, (as the phrase is Dan. 12. Dan. 12.2.
) they that Sleep in the Dust shall Awake.

And the word (...), in the Former clause, fitly answers to (...) in the
Latter. For (...) (suscitari,) does properly signify to be Awakened or Rise
from sleep. (...). Christ is (Awakened, or) Risen from the Dead (as from a
sleep,) the First fruits of those that Slept;. That is, of the dead which Die in
the Lord. For of Their resurrection it is that the Apostle is here discoursing.
Rev. 14.13.


Now as for the Persons, with whom he does here dispute; and the Arguments
suited to those Persons; (for This Branch, as well as the Former:) We are to
consider, that they were Christian Gentiles. Who had before learned the Heathen
Philosophy, but did now embrace the Christian Religion, and Acknowledged most
of the Doctrines thereof. Only this they doubted of (as not consistent with
their Philosophy,) That the Dead should Rise again.

And therefore the Arguments he makes use of, are drawn from Principles of
Christianity.

If there be no Resurrection, then is not Christ Risen: (Which yet is a matter
of Fact, 1 Cor. 15.13, 16.
so notorious and fully testified, that you Christians cannot doubt it.)

And, If Christ be not Risen; our Preaching is vain, and your Faith is vain;
And, ver. 14, 17. ver. 18. ver. 15.
those that are fallen asleep in Christ are perished; And, we are found false
witnesses of God, who have testified that he raised up Christ. (Which
Consequents were things unworthy to be admitted, by any who professed
themselves Christians.)

And, If in this life only we have hope; ver. 19.
we are of all men most miserable. (We Apostles, and you Christians; who, upon
this account, are exposed to a multitude of Miseries in this Life; and do
therefore most egregiously play the fools, if in another life there be not a
Compensation.)

All which Arguments, though to one who is not a Christian they would be very
Insignificant, are very Cogent to one that is.

And good Reason the Apostle had to argue at this rate. Not only, as being the
part of a good Disputant, to take advantage of the True Concessions of those
with whom he disputes; as good foundations of a concl^sive Argument: But
especially, Because these are the True Topics in Disputes of this nature.

For, the Truths of Religion being of ^wo sorts; some discoverable by Natural
Light; Others by Revelation only: Those of the later sort are not to be proved
Conclusively, without admitting that Revelation, by which alone we can come to
know them.

Thus; That there is a God that made the World; and, That this God is to be
Obeyed and Worshipped; and, This in such Manner as himself would have it; Are
things which may be argued from Natural Light.

And, that of the Souls Immortality also; at lest with a great deal of
Probability; if not with so much Evidence as to convince a wilful Sceptick; who
therefore Sees not (not for want of Light, but) because he shuttes his Eyes.

But, the Doctrine of the Trinity; of Salvation by Faith in Christ; and the
Resurrection of the Body; Are purely matters of Faith; and their Certainty
depends only on Divine Testimony.

That God is Able to raise the Dead* and that there is no Inconsistence in the
thing; may be discoursed from Natural Light.

But, That he Will do it; and, in what manner; we can no otherwise know than as
He has Declared to us: (either by himself immediately; or, by such as, we have
good reason to believe, are sent by him.)

Thus Christ, arguing the same point with the Sadduces: Ye err (says he) not
knowing the Scriptures; nor, Mat. 22.29.
the Power of God. Had they well understood the Power of God; they would not
have doubted its Possibility: And, had they well understood the Scriptures;
they might thence have learned, that it must be so.

And, in St. Paul's discourse with King Agrippa, Act. 26. Act. 26.8.
As to himself, he had no more to say, but Why should it be thought a thing
Incredible, that God should Raise the Dead? But, as to the Jews, (who owned the
Scripture then extant,) he pleads, ver. 6, 7.
The Promise made to the Fathers; to which Promise their Twelve Tribes,
instantly serving God day and night, hoped to come. To him who did not admit
the Scriptures; he could only argue, That the thing was not Impossible, not
Incredible; But, to them that did; he argues the Certainty, and that they ought
to Believe it.

And, in this Chapter, he argues it yet further: 1 Cor. 15.
As having, here, greater Concessions (from Christians) than from the Jews.

As to the Possibility; he argues (ab Esse ad Posse) Christ is Risen;
therefore, the thing is Possible. ver. 4, 16.


Which matter of Fact (that Christ is Risen) He argues, from the Notoreity of
it, and from the Testimony of so many Eyewitnesses as themselves could not but
believe: ver. 5, 6, 7, 8.
(the proper Topics to prove matter of Fact.) And, what was Actually done in
him, was no^ Impossible as to others.

But, as to the Futuriti^n, (that indeed it shall be so,) He argues from Divine
Revelation: Not only as testified in the Scriptures, (of Moses and the
Prophets;) but also by Christ himself; and his Apostles, ver. 3.4.
by commission from him.

It Is (says he) the Gospel which I have preached to you; and which you have
re^eived; ver. 1.
and whe^ein you stand; and whereby, if you persist in it, you are to be saved
ver. 2.


Nor is it a Forgery of my own Fansy; But what I delivered, I first of all
Received, ver. 3.
That is (as chap. 11) I received of the Lord, Chap. 11.23.
what I delivered unto you: And, what I taught, was taught also by the rest of
the Apostles, chap. 15.9.
according to such directions as they received from Christ. ( Whether I, or
They, so We preach, and so Ye believed. ver. 11.
)

And if, as to the rest of the Christian Doctrine, you receive our Testimony;
you have no reason to think, that in this we prevaricate, ver. 15.
as false Witnesses of God.

Thus arguing, with Christians, from the Doctrine of Christ; as elsewhere, with
the Jews, from that of Moses and the Prophets.

And thus much for the Explication of the Text, and the Doctrines thereof.

I shall now, by way of Corollary, observe Three Things.

First, that this Method of the Apostles arguing, may be a good Direction for
Us in like cases. When we are preaching to Christian Auditories (such as this;)
it is not prudence to quit the Principles of Christianity, and divert to those
of Reason and Natural Light only: As if we were Preaching to Heathens, not to
Christians.

Much of our Religion, depends on Revelation: And, though not Repugnant to
Reason, is yet much Above it; and not discoverable by it, without the
Scriptures, where those Revelations are recorded.

We do but too much gratify men of Atheistical and Unchristian Principles, when
(to comply with their Cavills, 1 These. 5.21.
) instead of Holding fast what is good; we let go our Hold, and dispute our
Principles: As if we were now Planting Christianity amongst Heathens; and not,
Edifying a Christian Church.

It Is true, that, in Building, great care is to be taken, Luke 6.48, 49.
that the Foundations be well laid; otherwise the Building cannot be Firm.

But there is a time, when, Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
Heb. 6.1.
and laying again the Foundation; we are to go on to Perfection, and Build upon
the Foundation so laid. Not like Children; Heb. 5.12, 13.
Who when for the time we ought to be Teachers, have now need to be Taught,
what are the First Principles of the Oracles of God; as having need of Milk,
not of strong Meat

And, When will this time be, if, after more than sixteen Hundred years
possession, we do yet admit the Foundations of Christianity, for matter of
Doubtful Disputation. Romans 14.1.


If, out of a needless scrupulosity, to satisfy the Cavils of those who do not
desire to be informed; we be always Digging at the Foundation, upon pretense
of Searching it: We do thereby weaken, rather than strengthen it; And (like the
foolish Builder) having laid the Foundation, shall never be able to Finish it:
Luke 14.29. 2 Timothy 3.7.
Ever Learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth.

The Being, and Providence of God; The Authority of the Scriptures, his written
Word; The Divinity, and Incarnation of Christ; his Satisfaction for the Sins of
Men; and our Salvation by Faith in Him; The necessity of Holiness, and a Godly
life; The Immortality of the Soul; and the Resurrection of the Body; and the
Judgment to com^; A Heaven for the Righteous; and a Hell for the Wicked; Are
Fundamentals in the Doctrine of Christianity, well settled long ago.

And, if any go about to shake these Foundations; Psalm. 11.3.
we are not therefore, in compliance with their humors, to admit for
Disputa^le, what ever they please to Cavil at: But to hold Fast the Truth;
Prove. 23.23. 2 Timothy 1.13.
to hold Fast the Form of sound Words; as well settled, and long since agreed
upon: And, If any man list to be Contentious, (says the Apostle) we have no
such Custom, 1 Cor. 11.16.
nor the Churches of God.

If they demand New Miracles, and New Revelations, of what has been
sufficiently Revealed and confirmed already: Our Savior tells us (in the
Parable of Lazarus and the Rich Glutton,) They have Moses and the Prophets;
Luke 16.29.
let them Hear Them; (And we have, moreover, Christ and his Apostles:) If they
hear not These; ver. 31.
neither would they be Persuaded, though one should Rise from the Dead.

Now, if the Miracles and Revelations, in the time Moses and the Prophets, were
sufficient for those who lived in the days of Christ; (notwithstanding that
they lived not in Moses days:) much more may those also of Christ and his
Apostles, suffice for those that live in Our days. And, if a sufficient
Evidence, (such as would be enough for a Sober person, that is Willing to be
Taught,) prevail not with them: neither would they be persuaded, though they
should be gratifyed in what they now demand.

Our Savior did not think fit to gratify the Humors of the Scribes and
Pharisees, whenever they listed to Ask a (new) sign. Mat. 12, 38, 39. Mat.
16.1, 5. Mat. 7.6. Tit. 3.10, 11.
But refers them to that of the Prophet Jonas.

Nor are We to be always casting our Perls before Swine: But, (after a
competent instruction,) they are to be Neglected, as (...), self-condemned
persons: Who Is error lies more in their Will, than in their Understanding.

'Twas, Because they did not Like to retain God in their Knowledge, (Romans 1.
Romans 1.28.
) that God gave them over to a Reprobate sense, ((...),) a mind void of
judgment.

And, it was not so much, because they could not Believe the Truth, as, because
they did not Love it, 2. These. 2, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
(because they received not the Love of the truth that they might be saved,)
that God sent them strong Delusions to bel^eve a Lie, that they might be
Damned. Because they did not Love what they should Believe, God left them to
Believe what they Loved: And, because they did not Love those Trueths by which
they be Saved* he left them to Believe those Lies, by which they should be
Damned.

In the last times (we are told) there shall come scoffers, walking after their
own Ungodly Lusts; 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Jude 8, 18.
and therefore Mocking at the Promise of Christ's coming. 2 Timothy 3.8.
Men of Corrupt minds; and therefore Reprobate concerning the Faith: Mockers
and filthy Dreamers; Jud. 8, 18. 2. These. 2.12.
who therefore Believe not the Truth, because they take Pleasure in
Unrighteousness: Who do not so much Doubt of it, as Cavil at it to their own
Destrction.

To those that are Contentious, (says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.16.
) and Obey not the Truth; Romans 2.8.
(to those who out of Contention, or a spirit of Contradiction, Cavil at the
Truth sufficiently discovered;) Indignation and Wrath. And, If our Gospel be
Hid; it is hid to those that are Lost.

It may, perhaps, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
pass for a piece of Wit (not of Wisdom) amongst Debauched persons, (with
whom Atheism and Ribaldry pass for Wit;) to be able to speak Plausibly,
against those things which the common sense of Mankind admitts for True. (And
it is very Easy, for any man, that will allow himself to be Profane, thus to be
Witty:) But St. Paul gives it a truer Character, Romans 1. Romans 1.22.
(speaking of Wiser persons than these are,) Professing themselves to be Wise,
they became Fools; ((...),) while they pretend, to be Witty, they play the
Fool. And, 1 Timothy 6. reduces it to its true cause, Pride and Ignorance. If any
man consent not to wholesome Words, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.
and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness: He is Proud, (or Foolish,)
and ^noweth nothing: Doting upon Questions and strife of words, or idle Cavils
((...),) from whence come Railing and Perverse Disputings of men of Corrupt
minds, and d^stitute of the Truth, ((...), Blaspemies, and ^dle Discourses, as
of Crack-brain'd men, and void of Sense:) from whom Turn away; Have nothing to
do ^i^h them.

While we are taking pains to Satisfy such (who Resolve, not to be satisfied;)
we may sooner raise new Scruples in the minds of well-meaning persons, than
satisfy those who are Wilfully ignorant. 2 Pet. 3.5.


Be not deceived (says our Apostle here) Evil Communications corrupt good
Manners: 1 Cor. 15.33. Menander.
(...). Or, Latter edit of his Paraphrase on the N. Test.
(as Dr. Hammond chooses to render it) good Dispositions Such corrupt
Discourse ((...) are apt to seduce or work upon ((...)) good Dispositions, or
well-meaning people. Expounding (...), by (...), or (...), good-natured persons
and easy to be imposed upon. Like as in that other Verse Tit. 1.22. Epimenides.
(...). The words (...) (slow-bellies) are usually interpreted (as (...)) by
(...), Gluttons.

Canterus.
We are not therefore to Hold Parley with them, (as Eve with the Serpent: Genesis
3.1, etc.
) But rather (as the Apostle directs) they are to be Rebuked sharply, that they
may be sound in the Faith; Tit. 1.13. ver. 11. 2 Timothy 3.6, 9.
their Mo^thes to be stopped, that they subvert not whole Houses; and, that
their Folly proceed no further.

A second thing that I here observe, is this; That the Promise of a glorious
Resurrect^on, concerns not Us only; But the Fathers also before Christ.

We are not to think, that They had only Promises of Temporal things; but of
Eternal also. Christ is the First Fruits of those that Slept (for the time
past, 1 Cor. 15.^0.
) as well of those that were to sleep for the time to come.

It Is true. The Mystery which had been Hidden from Ages and Generations, is now
made Manifest to the Saints: Coll. 1.26. Ephesians. 3.9, 10.
It is now more clearly Reveiled, then before it was. And Christ is the
Mediator of a Better Covenant (than that delivered by Moses) established upon
Better Promises: Better, as to the way of Administration, Heb. 8.6.
and the clearness of Discovery; but the same, as to the Substance of the
Things Promised.

Christ, as to this, is the same Yesterday, and To day, Heb. 13.8.
and for Ever. It Is the same Faith, by which the Elders obtained a good Report;
and, Heb. 11.2. ver. 5.
Enoch was Translated that he did not see Death: Heb. 10.39.
By which We believe to the saving of our souls. And St. Paul proves (Romans 4.
Romans 4.1, 6.
) that We are Justified by Faith; Because Abraham, and David, were so Justified.

Nor was this unknow'n to the Jewish Church. For, Mat. 22.23.
though the Sadduces denied the Resurrection: Yet they were herein Singular;
The Pharisees Professed it; Act. 23.8.
with the rest of the Jews. Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.29.
(says Christ to the Jews,) for in them ye think to have Eternal Life.

And St Paul frequently, from Moses and the Prophets, Act. 13.17, 32. Act.
24.14, 15. Act. 25.8. Act. 26.9, 7, 22, 23. Act. 28.17, 23. Luke 24.25, 26, 27,
44, 46, 47.
and from the Promise made to the Fathers, argues the Point of the Resurrection.

And our Savior himself, (after his Resurrection,) first to the Two Disciples
going to Emmans; and then to the Eleven at Jerusalem; does from Moses, and the
Pr^phets, and the Psalms, and all the Scriptures, make it Evident, That thus
it behoved Christ to suffer, and to Rise from the Dead the third day; and that
Repentance and Remission of sins should be prea^hed in his name among all
Nations.

And (before that) he proves to the Sadduces, the Doctrine of the Resurrection,
Mat. 22.29, 32. Mat. 12.24, 26.
from that of God to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob; and that they did therefore Err, because they Knew not the Scriptures,
nor the Power of God. Which he would not have said, had not the Doctrine of the
Resurrection been taught in the scriptures that then were; that is, those of
the Old Testament.

So that the Socinians, without allowing that Christ is God indeed; if at lest
they will but allow, That he is a Good Man, and a Wise man, (one who did
understand the Consequence of an Argument, and did not design purposely to
impose upon us;) must needs acknowledge, That the Doctrine of the Resurrection
was taught in the Scriptures of the Old Testament; (for sure it is, that Christ
thought so:) and That the Promises made to the Fathers, were not only Promises
of Temporal things, but of Eternal Life.

They may as well say, That the Threatening to Adam, In the day that thou Eatest
thereof thou shall Die the Death, Genesis 2.17:
was meant only of a Temporal Death; (and then surely God would not Punish,
beyond what he Threatened;) Contrary to which, St. Jude tells us, that those
Before Christ, (as well as since,) do suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire.
Jud. 7.


The Third and last thing which I here observe, is this, That the Rewards and
Punishments of another Life, do concern us, not only as to our Personal
capacities; but, as to our Relative and Politic capacities also, As we are
Incorporated into Kingdoms, Cities, Families, and other Societies.

We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to
the things done in the Body, 2 Cor. 5.10.
whether Good or Bad. Whatsoever is done in the Body; in whatsoever Capacity.

It may be Objected, That Kingdoms, and Cities, and Bodies Politic, shall not,
in that Capacity, rise again: And therefore cannot, in that capacity, be
Punished, or Rewarded. And, consequently, God being equally obliged to punish
the sins of Societies, as of single Persons; he is obliged, in this World, to
punish the sins of Societies (and to reward their good acts;) since that,
hereafter, it cannot be done.

But this Argument, I take to have more in it of Wit and Rhetoric, than of
Logic, or sound Divinity: and would do better in a Poem or Panegyric, than in
a Sermon.

For, by the same reason, we may as well say That the sins of Father and Child;
of Master, and servant; of Husband, and Wife; must be Allways Punished in this
Life, (and in this only;) Because that, in the Resurrection, they do neither
Marry, Mat. 22.30.
nor are Given in Marriage. For Oeconomical Relations shall then cease, as well
as Political.

If it be said, That, these Relations, are but Relations between single
Persons, (not Societies;) and therefore the Sins thereof may, in those Persons,
be Punished.

I say, that this does not alter the case at all. For, beside that this is not
Universal; (For a Father may have many Children, and may sin against his whole
Posterity, to the Third and Fourth Generation; and a Lord or Master may have
many Servants, Exodus 20.5.
and may Sin against his whole Family; and a man may be Servant to a Society,
as well as to a single Person:)

Beside this, (I say,) If this Exception were cogent; we might thence as well
conclude, That Kings because single Persons) may, hereafter, be punished for
Oppressing their Subjects, (and that Eternally;) but the States (in an
Aristocrary) are punishable only in this World, (and but with Temporal
Punishments,) because These are a Collective Body.

And it would hence follow likewise, That the greatest Villainies of Societies,
are at lest one degree below that of the Papists Venial sins. For, I presume,
the Jesuits themselves will not say, that their whole Society; shall, in that
capacity, be punished in Hell, not yet in Purgatory, for the greatest Villainies
by them committed, as a Socie^y. But, Venial Sins, they acknowledge to be
punished, at lest in Purgatory, though not in Hell.

And, by this means also, the greatest number of Sins, and those the most
Heinous, would, as to another World, remain Unpunished, (and good Actions,
Unrewarded.) For much the greater number of Actions, and the most considerable,
are those of persons in their Relative Capacities; (as Parents, Children;
Masters, Servants; Husbands, Wives; Friends, Enemies; Neighbors, Strangers;
Pastors, People; Princes, Subjects; Societies, and Combinations; Not of single
Persons only, in a mere Personal Independent Capacity.

I add also; That, on this account, No sins of Societies could ever be
Pardoned. For it not Societies, but single Persons, that are Regenerate and do
Believe in Christ; without which, there is no Remission.

We say therefore; That (as Societies are but made up of single Persons, so)
the Acts of Societies, and of persons Related (in such Relative capacities,)
whether Sinful, or Virtuous; are indeed and in Gods account, the Acts of
Particular Persons (in such Relations and Societies:) And are, in those
Persons, punished and rewarded, according to their deserts; both in this World,
and in that which is to come.

And thus the Cities (of Sodom and Gomorrha with those about them, Jude 7.
) are said to suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; when indeed it is the
Persons of those Cities that so suffer.

It Is true that, in this World, God does many times punish the Sins of men, in
a way suitable to those capacities wherein they are committed: (the Sins of a
Father, by loss of Children, or by a disobedient Child, or unhappy Children;
the Sins of a Prince, by loss of his Dominions, or Rebellion of his Subjects;
the sins of a Nation, by a common Calamity, wherein the Innocent do many times
Suffer with the Guilty:) God by this means, pointing out the Sin in the
Affliction or Punishment.

But he does not Always do so: (the Sins of a Parent, may be sometimes
punished by the hand of the Magistrate; and the sins of a Prince, by the hand
of a Traitor, whom he had not offended:) much less is he Obliged so to do.

And when he does so: He does not Therefore do it because he cannot otherwise
reach them: Nor is this the adequate Punishment of those sins; but only a part
of it. The greatest part of their punishment, even for these sins, being that
of another World.

And though the Sins of men combined in societies, are, in the Judgment of
Men, accounted as one Joint Act; (wherein the Innocent are often involved with
the Guilty, and suffer accordingly: Romans 2.2.
) Yet the Judgment of God, is according to Truth. He will distinguish between
the Innocent and Guilty in a mixed Society; Mal. 3.17, 18. Psalm. 119.71, 75. 1
Cor. 11.32. Gen 18 23, 25.
and Spare the one, or but Afflict them (for their good,) while he does
properly Punish the other: (And, as Abraham speaks, not destroy the Righteous
with the Wicked:) And, those that are Guilty, each according to the Proportion
of his Guilt.

Not always in this World: (where, some times, all things Fall alike to all;
and One event to the Righteous and to the Wicked: Eccl. 9.2. Eccl. 8.14.
or where, sometimes, it happens to the Righteous, acording to the Work of
the Wicked; and to Wicked according to the Work of the Righteous:) But, 2 These.
1.10. Romans 2.5. ver. 6.
at lest, at that Day; At the day of the revelation of Gods righteous
Judgment; when he shall render to every man according to his deeds; when he
shall bring every Work into Judgment, Eccl. 12.14.
and every Secret thing.

In that day; the sentence of Go^ ye Cursed; for I was Hungry, Mat. 25.41, 42,
43.
and ye gave me no Meat; I was Sick, and ye Visited me not; Will as well
reach the sins of Societies, Psalm. 41.1. in the Communion Service.
in not providing for the Sick and Needy; as of those Persons who do not
Relieve them.

It is a Righteous thing with God (says St. Paul) to recompense Tribulation to
them which trouble you; 2 These. 1.6.
(whether they be Societies or single Persons;) in that day; when the Lord
Jesus shall be reveiled from Heaven; ver. 10. ver. 7. ver. 8.
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel: who shall be punished with Everlasting destruction. ver. 9.


And St. Jude tells us expressly, that Sodom, and Gomorrha, Jud. 7.
and the Cities about them (as well as single Persons) do suffer the vengeance
of Eternal Fire.

And our Savior ( upbraiding the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were
done) tells us of Chorazin, Mat. 11.20, 21, 23.
and Bethsaida, of Capernaum, and the Cities against which the Disciples should
shake off the dust of their feet upon refusal to receive them; Mat. 10.11, 14.
ver. 15.
That it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrha,
Math. 11.22, 24.
in the Day of Judgment; than for those Cities. And thou Capernaum, which art
exalted unto Heaven, ver. 23.
shall be cast down to Hell.

And what is said of Cities; may be equally understood of Kingdoms Nations,
Towns, Families, and other Societies. Mat. 11.24. Mat. 10.11, 12.13, 14.15.


There be many Practical Uses, which be proper Consequents from this Doctrine
of a Glorious Resurrection to Eternal Life.

As, that of St. Peter; Seeing all these things must be dissolved; what manner
of persons ought we to be, 2 Pet. 3.11.
in all holy conversation and godliness; Looking for, and hasting to, the
coming of the day of God. ver. 12.


And that of St. Paul; Having these Promises, 2 Cor. 7.1.
(dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all Filthyness of flesh and
Spirit; perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God.

And that in the close of this Chapter; Wherefore, beloved brethren, be ye
Steadfast and Vnmovable, 1 Cor. 15.58.
allways abounding in the work of the Lord; For as much as ye know, that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord.

But, of these things, I shall say nothing at present; that I may not anticipate
the following Discourses on subjects of this nature.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father (who has raised up
Christ from the dead; These. 2.16. 2 Cor. 4.14. Col. 2.12. 1 These. 2.16. ver.
17. 1 These. 5.23. and 2 Pet. 3.14. and 1 Cor. 1.8. 2 Timothy 4.18. Tit. 2.13.
Phil. 3.21.
) who has loved us and given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
Faith; Confirm and stablish us in every good Word and Work; And preserve us
(blameless,) unto his Heavenly Kingdom; and to the Glorious appearing of the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; Who shall change our vile Bodies, and
make them like unto his Glorious Body; according to the working whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself: To whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.
2 Timothy 4.18.


FINIS.
Arati Phenomenon: Initio.
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
............. (...),
(...).
ERRATA.
REad. page 5. l. ult. of its. p. 14. l. 21. as if it had. p. 16. l. 26. to a.
p. 29. l. 9. might be.

In English thus.
BEgin we, first of all, with God on high:
(Men as we are!) By no means pass him by.
His Presence fills all places, far and near.
Where ever Men Assemble, He is there.
The Sea is full of Him: and Havens Wide.
And all Mankind His Influence abide;
Need his Assistance; All, in Every thing.
His Progeny We are: from Him we Spring.
He Is Kind to Man: affording Seasons good.
He stirs them up to Labor: gives them Food.
He tells the Husbandman, When Earth is made
Fit for the Plough; when, fitter for the Spade.
He points out proper Seasons: How to know,
What time, to Plant; What time is fit to Sow;
And, what for every Seed. It Is He set fast
His Signs in Heaven; His Stars in order placed.
And, by the Stars, He measures out the Year:
Pointing, by them, what proper Seasons are
For every man's Affairs: that All things may
In Steady Course proceed, without decay.
That, with His Favor, He would us Befriend:
With Him we first Begin; with Him we End.
O Thou, so highly Wonderful! O Thou,
The great Support of Man! to Thee I bow.
And humbly make address. While I repeat
(By Thy good leave) the Stars in order set;
Vouchsafe me Thine Assistance all along;
With thy successful Aid, direct my Song.
FINIS.

