The Controversial Letters, OR THE Grand Controversy, Concerning The pretended
Temporal Authority of POPES over the whole Earth, and the true Sovereign of
KINGS within their own respective Kingdoms.

Between two English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of England: The other of
the Church of Rome.


The first two Letters.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, and Benjamin Took, at the Gun, and at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXIV.

E. Libris Beblioth. Eccles. Cathedr. Petribur


SIR,
I Fear the heat of our last Encounter may have done me some prejudice in your
good opinion, and would justify to you, if I can, both my zeal and my
friendship. Permit me therefore with a more settled calmness to give you the
Reasons which swayed with me then, but which the promptness of my nature
possibly might so disguise, that they might not then appear reason to you. As
this is my only, so I hope 'twill be my full justification; for though we ow
much to friendship, we ow more to Truth, and that Friend who bars the use of
reason in his Friend, does, in my judgment, ill deserve that Name.
Notwithstanding let me add what I think you are already sufficiently persuaded
of, that I am far from the blind zeal of those who think Popery an imputation
so scandalous and contagious, that it destroys all correspondence with those
who own it. I have met with several, besides your self, of your judgment in
Religion, accomplished men, and so qualified, that I cannot but wish either that
all such men were Protestants, or all Protestants such men. I think so well of
some parts of your Religion, that there are who think the worse of me. I read
your books always without hatred, and sometimes with pity at the unequal
combat betwixt the Knight and the Giant, though I make no doubt you are even
with us in this particular, and are all Knights in your own Countries When I
hear People cry out Papists, and Popery, I have sometimes the bluntness to ask
what they mean; for having heard them applied both to Prelatics and Fanatics,
they must needs be words of a strangely large size, and magical comprehension,
if they can fit parties so different, and what know I but they may be so
explained, that you may own them no more than other folks? In fine, I look upon
my reason as one of the greatest gifts I have received from God, and am
persuaded it is a duty I ow him to use it as well as I can. Wherefore I as
little approve the passionate zeal of our side, as I understand the sublime
perfection of blind obedience on yours; but where I see you have reason, I am
content to allow you have so. Yet after all, Friend, I must continue constant
to what I maintained at our last meeting. I love my King and my Country as I
ought, and can neither believe that can be a true Religion which teaches
doctrines inconsistent with Government, nor believe otherwise but that yours
does teach such doctrines. And though I know their pestilent influence does not
always work, for you have in the late times of trial approved your selves
honest men, yet I cannot think that Commonwealth safe in which they are either
tolerated or connived at. Of this I will make your self Judge, and in this
Paper produce my evidence, which shall be the very words of the most famous
Authors amongst you, who if they be sufficient for number, and considerable for
learning, and plain in expression, and owned for yours, I see not what more can
be expected from me, nor what at all can be replied by you or any else.

To begin then, there are I must confess some modest men amongst you, Bellarm.
de Romans Pon. l. 5. c. 2.
who speak sparingly of the Pope, and affirm Princes are not the Popes Vicars.
These exempt from his Sovereignty the greatest part of the World, for they make
Infidel Princes true and supreme Princes of their own Kingdoms, and say, the
Pope is not Lord of those possessions which Infidels hold. Nay they go so far
as to dare say, He is not, JVRE DIVINO, Lord so much as of the whole Christian
world. Id. c. 3.
And that all his power to depose Princes, and dispose of their Kingdoms is
only indirectly, and in ordine ad spiritualia, which alas! is a matter of
nothing, and he must needs be a very scrupulous man who boggles at it. For this
opinion are cited besides two Cardinals, Bellarmine and Cajetan, abundance of
other famous men with hard names, Henricus and Joannes Driedo, Turrecremata,
Pighius, Waldensis, Petrus de Palude, Franc. Victoria, Dominicus Soto,
Sanderus, Aspileveta, Covarruvias, and so many others, that Bellarmine affirms
it is communis sententia Catholicorum Theologorum, though in that particular,
as you will presently see, he was a little out. But these, as many and as
learned as they are, are but dow-bak't men, and scent strongly of wicked carnal
policy, and heresy too, as an honest Gentleman fairly insinuates by the title
of his Book, Alex. Carrerius.
adversus impios Politicos, and nostri temporis Haereticos, design principally
against this opinion. And so Bellarmine escaped fairly; for Sixtus Quintus, if
the information I had from a very good hand deceive me not, had a great mind to
have burnt his book: Though he escaped more narrowly at Paris for giving too
much to the Pope, than at Rome for giving too little. His fellow Suarez had his
book burnt there by the common Hangman, and he was found guilty of the same
fault: but he was a Cardinal, for which respect I suppose they dealt more
mercifully, and only condemned and forbid him. But this by the by. Your hearty
men, whom the bugbears of carnal policy cannot fright from the defense of
truth, tell us another story* and say plainly what we must trust too. Unless,
says Franciscus Bozius, Fr. Bozius de Temp. Eccl. Monarchia praef. ad Clem. 8.
there be one supreme Monarch in the Church in all things, the unity of the
Church cannot be preserved: for seeing the Church by divine institution does
consist of a Kingdom and a Priesthood, if it were otherwise, there should be in
the same absolutely one Monarch of the Kingdom, and another of the Priesthood:
That if for avoiding dissentions about sacred causes, one supreme Head is
appointed; why not in the same manner of the Kingdom, that there should be one
and the same Head both of the Kingdom and Priesthood, lest in like sort there
should happen dissension betwixt them? that therefore it is the rather to be
held that Peter does supply Christ's place, not only in the Priesthood, but in
the Kingdom, that he might be a King, and likewise a Priest according to the
order of Melchisedech, who was both a King and Priest. The famous Cardinal
Baronius says the same: Baron. Ann. Tom. 1. An. 57. p. 432, 433.
That David did foretell that the Priesthood of Christ should be according to
the order of Melchisedech: That when Christ being a King and a Priest received
all judgment of the Father, that is, most full, judicial power; He joining the
same with his Priesthood did institute in the Church a regal Priesthood,
translating in suos (I conceive he means St. Peter and his Successors) all the
power he had of his Father. This new coronation of King Peter so long after his
death, and the mystery of King and Priest meeting in Melchisedech, which St.
Paul never dreamt of, though he treat the subject particularly, and something
to better purpose, and the admirable expedient to avoid dissentions by taking
away Regal power are pleasant matters, and deserve to be reflected on, but that
I have so much of this divertive stuff to produce that I cannot stay every
where. Thomas Bozius tells us, Tho. ^ozias de jure stat. praefat. ad Aldobrand.
that if Christ be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; in like sort the Church
must be Queen and Lady; that all temporal Regal power does reside first in the
soul of Christ, and then in the Church his Spouse, the Queen of the World, and
from her is derived to others (Faithful or Infidels) as out of a fountain.
Isid: Moscon. de Majest. militant. Eccles. P. 96.
Isidorus Mosconius says to the same purpose, That not only all faithful
people, but likewise Infidels, and every natural creature is subject to the
commandment of the Pope; he is to be worshipped of all men; and for this cause
he receives of all the faithful, adorations, prostrations, and kissing of his
feet. What pretty truths there are in the World which negligent men overslip by
inadvertence? who would have thought the Mogul, and King of Pegu, and Chinese
Tartar had derived their little streams of power from the great Channel of the
Church? Ungrateful men, who so little acknowledge their Benefactors! But since
all natural creatures are subject to his commands, I wish some body that has
credit would prevail with him that Lions, and Bears, and Adders, and such
naughty natural creatures might be forbidden to do us any harm for the future.
For as simple as he seems to sit at Rome, and though he is pleased to make but
little show of any such power, he can stop the mouths of Lions, and quench the
violence of Fire. So that had we not been Heretics, he might have done us a
greater kindness here at London in the time of the fate dismal Fire then we are
aware of. I warrant you he could have whispered down the wind, and with one
grave Nod have cooled the courage of the Fire. But let us return to Mosconius,
P. 91,
teaching us farther, that the Pontifical and Regal power, and all other powers
are most plentiful in the Pope, and do reside in the Pontifical dignity. That
all dominions whatsoever depend upon the Church, P. 656.
and upon the Pope as Head of the Church. That in the Pope Authority is
considered, in Emperors and Kings power, P. 670.
and thence it is that power does depend upon Authority. P. 27.
That the Pope is called universal Judge, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. P.
677.
That Emperors and Kings may be compelled to keep their oaths taken in their
Coronation and Confirmation, in that by virtue of such oath they are made the
Popes Subjects. P. 80.
That all temporal Jurisdiction must be exercised, not at the Popes command,
but at his Beck. Princes will charge, command; God who is Lord of all does by
his beck command, according to that, Dixerat and nutu totum tremefecit Olympum.
That Christ had full Jurisdiction over all the world and all creatures, P. 85.
and therefore the Pope his Vicar has so. In truth these Authors of yours are
considerative men, and as careful as they are able. They reflect that Popes are
generally old men, and have often weak lungs; and 'twas charitable to exempt
them from the painful trouble of commanding, and make a nod serve the turn.
Carrerius in his zeal against impious Politicians and Heretics, teaches us,
That true, just, ordained by God, Alex. Carrer. de Potest. Romans Pont. p. 9.
and mere dominion, as well in spiritual things as in temporal, was brought
forth by Christ, and the same was committed to St. Peter and his Successors:
That Christ was Lord over all Inferiors, P. 111.
not only as God, but likewise as man, having even then Dominion in the earth,
and that therefore as the dominion of the world was in Christ both divine and
humane, so it must be confessed that it was in the Pope his Vicar. That the
mystery of Redemption being accomplished, Christ as a King gave unto Peter the
administration of his Kingdom, and St. Peter did execute that his power against
Ananias and Saphira. That Ghrist as he is man is directly Lord over all the
world in Temporalities, P. 124.
and that therefore the Pope is so likewise, in that he is Vicar: That the
supreme power of judging all, and the top of dignities, P. 126.
and the height of both powers are found in Christ's Vicar: That as the divine
and humane dominion were in Christ, P. 150.
so in Christ's stead the dominion of the world in the Pope is both spiritual
and temporal, P. 151.
divine and humane. That the unremovable Truth does design, by Peter's only
coming by water to Christ, that the whole dominion, which is signified by the
Sea, is committed to St. Peter and his Successors. ('It Is quaint that and
surprising; but yet this water me thinks is something an unstedy foundation)
That as the Pope cannot say he is not Christ's Vicar, so he cannot deny but that
he is Lord over all things, because the earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof, whereby all things, heavenly, earthly, and infernal are subject unto
Christ the Lord; and thence it is that he did commit unto the Pope, who does
supply his place upon earth, the right of the Heavenly and Terrene Empire. That
he should forget the infernal Empire, the famous Purgatory power! which for all
it be under ground, time has been when no glebe above ground has been more
fruitful. Elsewhere he teaches that there are diverse Powers of men given by
God, P. 142.
and diverse Authorities, all which do depend upon the highest Authority
(meaning I suppose the Popes) and thence as the stars from the sun receive
their light. That the Imperial power concerning the administration of temporal
matters does proceed from the Pontifical power, P. 145.
as the light of the Moon from the light of the Sun: P. 161.
That the Empire of Rome before it was converted to Christ, was a dominion
usurpt and tyrannical, because the true dominion was in the line of Christ:
That the Emperor is the Popes Minister; for God did appoint him tanquam summi
Sacerdotis Ministrum. That no King or Emperor has jurisdiction or dominion but
from Christ, and by consequence can have none at all but from his Vicar. I
understand now the reason St. Peter commands Christians to be obedient to the
Authority of Heathen Princes and Governors, because he knew very well how they
came by it: For though all their power before was usurped and tyrannical, yet
after they had derived it from him it became a lawful Authority. If our wicked
Politicians be not confounded with this I know not what will do it; I am sure I
am to meet with such stuff in a Church which boasts of purity of her doctrine;
and which cherishes the Authors not only as good Christians, but learned men
and Masters of Christianity. Lael. Zecch. Tract. Theol. P. 81.
Laelius Zecchius tells us, that the Pope by the Law of God has power and
temporal dominion over the whole world: That the same is proved by the words,
Luke 22. Behold here are two swords, which signify the power, spiritual and
temporal: and because Christ, whose Vicar the Pope is, has both powers
according to the words Matt. ult. All power is given me in heaven and in earth;
that thence it may be deduced that the Pope is absolutely Lord of all the
Christian world; and Kings and Christian Princes are to acknowledge that they
hold of him their Empires and Kingdoms, and all, that are faithful, ought to be
subject unto him: and that as often as such Princes do any great hurt in the
Church, the Pope may deprive them of their Kingdoms, and transfer their right
to others. Franciscus Bozius, Fran. Boz. de temp. Eccle. Monarch. l. 1. c. 3.
p. 52. C. 7. p. 98.
That the supreme temporal Jurisdiction throughout all the world does belong to
S. Peter's Successors: so as one and the same is the Hierarch and Monarch in
all things. That Christ left the Church to be governed by the best form of
government, but the best form of government is absolute Monarchy, even in all
temporal things, therefore Christ left his Church to be so governed. That the
Keys of Heaven were given to Peter, L. 2. c. 14. L. 3. c. 1. p. 894.
therefore of all the earth. That the right of dominion and relation of
Infidels may justly, by the sentence and ordination of the Church, be taken
away; because Infidels by reason of their infidelity deserve to lose their
power over the faithful. C. 14. p. 530.
c. 14. p. 530.
That the Church has received that power over Nations, which Christ according
to his humane nature reciev'd of his Father: but Christ received absolutely of
his Father all power in temporalibus, therefore the Church likewise received it
by participation of his fullness. c. 16. p. 537.
That the supreme coactive power in all temporal things belongs to
Ecclesiastical persons by divine Law, revealed and expressed in the Scriptures.
That Kings, P. 676.
anointed with holy Oil, are called as Vassals of the Church. That by reason
of the supreme Monarchy in all things, L. 5. p. 823.
temporal laws may be made, and Kingdoms taken away for just causes. Henricus
Gandavensis, if Carrerius cite him truly, Car. p. 28.
That by the Law of God and nature the Priesthood does overtop the Empire, and
both Jurisdiction over Spiritualties and Temporalties, and the immediate
execution likewise of them both, depend upon the Priesthood both by the Law of
God and Nature. Carr. p. 130.
Antoninus, That they who say the Pope has dominion over all the world in
Spirituals, but not in Temporals, are like the Counselors of the King of
Syria, who said, the Gods of the Mountains are their Gods, and therefore they
have overcome (...): let us fight with them in the Plains and Valleys where
their Gods dwell not, and we shall prevail against them, Carr. p. 130.
3 Reg. 20. Augustinus Triumphus, That the Son of God has declared the
altitude of the Ecclesiastical power, being as it were founded upon a Rock, to
be above all principality and power; that unto it all knees should bend, of
things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, or in hell. It Is come at last,
this infernal power, 'twas only long of a bad memory we had it not before. P.
131.
That Secular Powers were not necessary, but that Princes might perform that
through terror of discipline, which the Priest cannot effect by power of
doctrine: and that therefore if the Church could punish evil men, Imperial and
Secular principality were not necessary, the same being included potentially in
the principality Apostolical. And why cannot the Church punish evil men, if
both Jurisdictions, and the immediate execution of both be in her? But we
understand him well enough; when time serves the conclusion shall be, that
Princes are unnecessary, because the Church by her double power can do the
business of the world without them; And so farewell useless Princes. Aug. de
Anc. de Potest. Ecc. Q. 39. a. 2.
Farther he tells us that Imperial or Regal power is borrowed from the Papal or
Sacerdotal, for as much as concerns the formality of dignity, and recieving
the authority. Pretty formalities those. Q. 45. a. 2.
That the Pope has Jurisdiction over all things, as will temporal as spiritual
through the world. That he may absolve Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance: Q.
46. a. 3.
That upon just cause he may set up a King in every Kingdom; L. Conr. in templ.
om. judic. l. 2 c. 1. S 4.
for he is the Overseer of all Kingdoms, in Gods stead, as God is the
Supervisor and maker of all Kingdoms. Lancecelot Conradus. That He may appoint
Guardians and Assistants to Kings and Emperors when they are insufficient, and
unfit for government. That he may depose them, and transfer their Empires and
Dominions from one line to another. Celsus Mancinus, Cel. Manc l c. 1.
That in the highest Bishop both the Powers and Jurisdictions are spiritual and
temporal; and that as he is the most eminent person of all men in spiritual
power, Th. Boz. de jur. stat. l. 1. c. 6. p. 37. P. 52.
so he is in temporal. Thomas Bozius, That Kings and principal Seculars are not
immediately of God but by the Interposition of Holy Church, and her chief
Bishops. That warlike and military compulsive power is given to the Church over
Kings and Princes. That if it be found sometimes that certain Emperors have
given some temporalities to the highest Bishops, as Constantine gave to
Silvester, this is not to be understood that they gave any thing which was
their own, but restored that which was unjustly and tyrannically taken from the
said Bishops. Ap. Carrer. P. 132.
Rodoricus Sancius, That there is one Principlity and one supreme-Prince over
all the world, who is Christ's Vicar, according to that of Dan. c, 8. He has
given him power, and honor, and rule, and all people and tongues shall serve
him: and that in him therefore is the fountain and spring of all principality,
and from him all other powers do flow. P. 131. and 132
That the Bishop of Rome in place of Christ is set as a Prince over the whole
world in spirituals and temporals, and that it is naturally, morally, and by
the Law of God to be held with a right faith, that the Principality of the
Bishop of Rome is the true and only immediate Principality of the whole world,
not only as touching things spiritual, but likewise temporal, and the Imperial
Principality is depending upon it, as being mediate ministerial and
instrumental, ministering and serving it; and that it is ordained and instituted
by it, and at the commandment of the Papal Principality is moveable, revocable,
corrigible, and punishable. I marry! Here Is a man speaks to purpose. Hang this
squemish faint-heartedness, which serves for nothing but to cover an ugly face
with a vizor as ugly. We know well enough what the mincing indirect in ordine
ad spiritualia power would be at, and it is a great deal better to speak
plainly, for Orthodox truths, such as concern the Law of God and right faith,
should be spoken so that people may understand them and know their duty; As for
Kings they are likely to boggle as much at the mask as the face. If they be
turned out of their Kingdoms and reduced to beggary, the beggary will be direct
beggary whatever the power is which brought them to it, and this fine
distinction but uncomfortable alms. One would think this fellow were not to be
matched: and what think you of him who says in downright terms, Alvar.
Pelagius de planctu Eccl. l. 1. a 37.
That the Pope has the propriety of the Western Empire, and the rest of the
world in protection and tuition. He bids fair this man; but of all commend me
to Jacobus de Terano, who, explicating that scurvey text, Tract. Monarch^
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, tells us, It was spoken but for
a time, not for ever; that it was to hold only til the Ascension of Christ; and
afterward that should come to pass which was spoken, when I shall be lifted up
from the earth I will draw all things after me; that is, I will recover all the
Empires and Kingdoms of the world, and will take them from Caesar, from Kings
and Princes, to give them to the Pope. I have not met with any who bids fairer
for the purple than this man; And so I leave him and the rest of your learned
Authors; for though more men might be alleged* and more from these men, yet in
truth I am weary, and must pass over sundry passages of profound learning, and
useful knowledge, as that Papa is derived from the Interjection Pape! Moscon.
p. 22.
because his dignity and power is admirable to all men, and is, as it were, the
amazement of the World, according to the Gloss in the Proeme of the
Clementines, Papa, stupor mundi, non Deus, non homo, sed utrumque. That he is
God, best defined by negation, Manch. l. 3. c. 1. Carrer. p. 132.
so that if one ask whether the highest Bishop be a Duke, a King, an Emperor,
to answer warily we should, by denying, affirm the Pope to be quid
praestantius, quidve eminentius. So that we may hope one day to see a mystical
Theology made for the Pope, and the inaccessible mystery of his power declared
by negations. Moscon. p. 92.
That unto the Pope, as Pastor of the Church, Lanc. Conrad. l. 2. c. 1. S. 4.
and Bishop of that holy Sea, and by reason of his dominion and excellence is
given Adoratio Duliae, such worship as belongs to Saints and Relics. Besides,
I have seen cited, That he is holden to be Christ's Vicar not only in respect
of things in earth, August. Triump. q. 18. a. 2.
in Heaven and in Hell, but even over Angels both good and bad. That he is
greater than Angels as touching dominion, not in respect of himself merely, but
by Authority from God; and may be superior to any Angels concerning recompense
of reward, art. 5.
and may excomunicate them. That he is equal to God, and can make something of
nothing, and wrong to be right, and such pretty matters, which if the ears of
you Catholics were not as much hardened as the hearts of us Heretics, would
sound a little odly. But to our purpose. The method of discourse requires now
that I should apply these sayings to the matter in hand, but the application is
so easy and obvious, that to spend time in it must needs be equally tedious
and needless. For pray tell me, can any Commonwealth be safe, or subsist at
all, if Princes have no dominion but what they receive from the Pope? If they
hold their Empires and Kingdoms of him? if they may absolve their subjects from
allegiance, and transfer their rights from one line to another? If they be his
Ministers, his Vassals, his Subjects? If their power be ministerial and
subservient to the Papal, to be exercised at his beck, and be at his command
both corrigible and revocable? If any thing be plain in the world, this is,
that either Princes must be taken out of the world, or these Maxims. For
without more ado he that makes a Prince be a Subject, makes him no Prince,
speaking as I do of absolute Princes. Wherefore leaving these things, and their
application to your consideration, I turn my self to reflect on what I concieve
you may reply.

Two things there are which I have heard alleged in your behalf with some
appearance, but not much substance. First, that notwithstanding all this,
Catholic Princes do live safely, and govern quietly, and therefore to conclude
these doctrines are inconsistent with government, is to conclude that cannot be
done, which we plainly see is done. Next, that while men are men there will be
quot capita tot sententiae; that nature is not furnished with means to confine
the fancies of private men to the limits of strict reason; that these are
problematical Questions which particular men dispute into probabilities, but
for which the Church is not responsible, having never either defined, or
otherwise engaged her authority for them. To the first I reply that a certain
King took poison so long that it became food to him, and yet I think poison for
all that a very dangerous thing, and very inconsistent with health. The Princes
you mention have Antidotes undoubtedly with which I am not acquainted; but let
the Antidote be never so good, poison will be poison still. And truly I think
Sir Thomas Moor did honestly, when finding some passages in the book which
Henry the 8th. writ against Luther, of which by the King's command he had the
perusal, and in which he thought the Pope was complemented a little too far, he
represented to the King that one day possibly they might fall out, as
afterward they did, and that then He might wish some things unsaid. While
those Princes and the Pope continue friends, they need not much apprehend, and
possibly are not much accquainted with what passes amongst Scholars, for they
are sure enough that, for his own sake, He will not use his power against those
who maintain his interest. It may be too with Princes as with other men, who to
compass some end upon which they are passionately set at present, value not a
mischief, much more considerable than the loss of their present pretenses,
which is farther of. If the Pope can assist either French or Spaniard, the
Divines of that King whose part he takes may say any thing freely; and Stasemen
who have little esteem of Shoolmen, will think the Pope sufficiently
over-reacht, when for a few pleasing words they have got peradventure a Town or
Province. So that your Princes seem to be always playing with the Pope at Vy
Politics; in which game they think their steel to his quils advantage enough;
though I should think the advantage is clearly on the Pope's side: for as he
cannot make stakes, he hazards nothing; but if Trump ever turn of his suit he
bids fair for all. Defend me gladio, and ego te defendam calamo, peradventure
was no such unequal offer. Besides, they may possibly have the art to turn his
credit to their advantage, and make use of it to keep their Subjects more
obedient and more in aw. It may be they have some of them no better original
Title to all, or part of their dominions than his Authority, and then a blind
man may see what reason they have to uphold it. It may be these, it may be
other reasons sway with them; but whatever they are or may be, I think it is
plainly hatching a serpent in their bosoms. For let us suppose the Pope and a
Catholic Prince at ods, a thing so far from impossible, that it is not unusual.
It Is in his power, you will say, to continue Catholic whether the Pope will or no,
and then He Is safe, for he gives the Pope no hold, it being only Heresy upon
which he can fasten. But is this true, that nothing will do it but plain
Heresy? Has not Zecchius taught us that the Pope may deprive Princes of their
Kingdoms as often as they do any great hurt in the Church? And will not the bad
example of contrasting stubbornly with the supreme Pastor be interpreted a
great hurt in the Church? Has not Fransciscus Bozius informed us, that by
reason of the supreme Monarchy in all things, temporal Laws may be made by the
Church, and Kingdoms taken away for just causes? If we ask what these just
causes are! Santarellus answers, That Princes may be punished and deposed, not
only for Heresy, but for other causes; for their faults, if it be expedient;
Ant. Sant. in Her. Schis. Apostas. etc. c. 30. and 31.
if Princes be negligent, if their persons be insufficient, if unuseful. How
few Princes are there who fall not under some of these qualifications, or at
least may not be judged to do so, when the Pope, and He their Enemy, is to be
Judge? As certainly it were a crime greater than the greatest of these, to seek
the determination of these things from any else. This negligence, though,
stumbles me a little, for it seems a general, and something a captious word;
and I think it would be to the satisfaction of those who are concerned, if it
were defined as soon as might be, how many hours a day a King is to give
audience, that he may not pass for negligent. But the man for my money is
Thomas Bozius, who tells us plainly, That the Church the Spouse of Christ, De
Jure Stat. l. 1. c. 6. p. 6.
and Queen of the world, may as often as the order of the whole does require,
etc. transfer the proper rights of one to another, as a secular Prince may cast
down private men's houses for the beautifying the City, or impose tribute for
the weal public; That he may thus justly do, although he has not erred from
whom such rights are transferred to another; so the Pope gave the Indians to
the Spaniards. It Is an honest fellow this Bozius, and cares not for mincing
matters. Give me the man that speaks out. But what think you, is Heresy the
only unkinging crime, when you see any great harm; negligence, insufficiency,
unusefulness will do it? When innocence it self is no security, and the best
King of the world may be turned out of his Kingdom, and that justly, if another
be thought able to govern more handsomely? What handsome work will these Maxims
one day make in the world, if they be suffered to take deep root? For my part I
cannot see but Catholic Princes, as secure as you make them, are no less
concerned then Protestants to beware of them, and weed them up quickly and
effectually. But is it so easy to escape the crime even of Heresy? I doubt
not, and am filthily mistaken if this word Heresy have not as comprehensive a
sense, and be not of a nature as pliable as Popery amongst us; and if managed
with equal dexterity may not prove equally serviceable. The late King was the
honor of Protestant Religion, and certainly had never a Subject more
unmoveably fixed in it than himself: And yet malice made him pass for a Papist,
at least inclined to Popery, do what he could, and by that imputation
principally undid both him and the Kingdom. Henry the third of France was
possibly as hearty a Catholic; yet all his industriously affected bigotteries,
his great beads, and Friars weeds could never clear him from the stain of
Heresy maliciously fixed upon him, till he fell with a fate different from that
of our glorious King, in this, that his Kingdom suffered more no longer, his
own end was more private, being execrably murdered by a private Paricide,
whereas the barbarous injustice done to our King was heightened by the
formalities of public justice. So that as far I see Heresy is as dangerous as
Popery with us, and as hard to be avoided. But let us consider a little.
Sancius has told us that it is to be held with a right Faith, that the
Principality of the Bishop of Rome is the true and only immediate Principality
of the whole World, etc. If this be right, L. 4. c. 1. p, 319.
the contrary sure is wrong Faith, and wrong Faith I think is Heresy. Thomas
Bozius, who never fails, will tell us that Christ committed to St. Peter (the
Carrier of the keys of eternal life) the right both of the Terrene and
Celestial Empire, as Pope Nicholas says; from whom we have it, that he is
without doubt an Heretic who takes away the rights of the Terrene and
Celestial Empire, committed by Christ to the Church of Rome, and says it is
lawful so to do; and for that he shall be an Heretic in such his assertions. P.
152.
And Carrerius, that the Bishop of Rome is the highest Father and Man of the
world. and the universal Vicar, and Lord of the world, and that all others
depend upon him as their builder, and that otherwise if one should place the
Emperor by himself in respect of his temporalities he should grant two
beginnings, which were Heresy. In good Faith Sir, I cannot think otherwise,
but if these men say true, your Catholic Princes, let them keep as fair as they
will with the Pope, are all Heretics in their hearts. And then what follows?
Hark what a Cardinal, and, which I grieve, an English man has published to the
World: Card. Allen against the execution of justice p. 87.
The Cannon Laws, says he, being authentical in the lawful Tribunals of the
Christian World, do make all Heretics (not only after they be namely and
particularly denounced, but by the Law it self ipso facto, as soon as they be
Heretics, are de jure excommunicated for the same) to be deprived of their
Dominions. Philopater p. 154.
Another tells us, The whole School of Divines and Canonists do hold, and that
it is certain and of Faith, that any Christian Prince whatsoever, if he shall
manifestly deflect from the Catholic Religion, and endeavor to draw others
from the same, does presently fall from all power and dignity by the very force
of human and divine Law, and that also before any Sentence of the supreme
Pastor or Judge denounced against him, and that his Subjects whatsoever are
free from all Obligation of that Oath which they had taken for their Allegiance
to him as their lawful Prince: and that they may, and ought (if they have
forces) drive out such a man, as an Apostate, or Heretic, and a Backslider,
from the Lord and Christ, and an enemy to the Commonwealth, from all Dominion
over Christians, lest he infect others, or by his example or command avert
others from the faith, and that this certain definite, and undoubted opinion of
the best learned men is wholly agreeable and consonant to the Apostolical
doctrine. Upon these grounds it was publicly maintained that Henry the third
of France was lawfully murdered before any sentence of excommunication past
against him, because, though in hidden crimes formalities be required, yet
evidens notitia facti sententiae locum tenet, and non percipit formam publicus
dolor. And that he had long lived as an excommunicate person de facto, de justa
abdic. Hen. 3. l 4. c. 2
though the law had not past sentence upon him, for favoring Heretics, for
Simony, for entering into league with Heretics (the Queen of England, and King
of Navar) for seizing the goods of the Church without the Popes privity, and
other offenses against the Bulla Caenae. Upon these grounds I have seen that
execrable Villain Chastel, who attempted upon Henry the Fourth what Ravillac
after performed, defended by a public Apology; and I see no attempt can be so
barbarous and inhumane which may not be defended by them So that, by your
favor, your Catholic Princes are not secure; Quiet they may be, but never
safe, and for their quietness they may thank the lucky conjuncture of those
stars which have influence upon the times of their government, and restrain the
malignity of these Doctrines; Otherwise if they be not very cunning in school
subtilties, they may chance forfeit their Kingdoms, and all their power per
triccum de lege without ever knowing when or how, live all their life time in
the erroneous belief that they are very Kings, and those who obey them their
very Subjects and be deceived all the while. But be it as it will, this answer
which would justify the innocence of these doctrines, by the security of
Catholic Princes comes pitifully off; when instead of securing it takes them
quite away, which is a fine kind of security; for it is plainly a much easier
task to maintain by these doctrines that there is never a true Prince in the
Christian world, no not in those whom you call Catholics, than it is to
maintain the doctrines. And yet when all is done, it is nothing to purpose
neither. For our Prince and People are of the number of those whom your Church
takes for Heretics, and can expect no other treatment from you, than what you
maintain belongs to Heresy. Wherefore however your Catholic Princes satisfy
themselves, I neither see how he can be satisfied of the fidelity of such of
his Subjects, as approve of these opinions, nor with what face they can pretend
security and protection from him, Pray think of this, while I pass to what I
put for a second answer, and what I have sometimes heard alleged.

These opinions, will you say, are moot-cases probably disputed amongst private
men, in which the Church is neither engaged nor concerned. Pray God this Church
be not as slippery a word as either Heresy or Popery, These men who thus
magnify the Pope certainly are not of our Church: and I believe Presbyterians
and Fanatics of all sorts will disown them too, so that even for pity, and
not to make Infidels of them, you must needs take them into yours. But they who
speak so kindly of the Pope need not fear disowning. We see they are both
acknowledged and esteemed, and are all Capita alta ferentes. Now it is strange
your Church should be unconcerned in men whom you account Orthodox and learned,
and whose books come out with the approbation, of those whom your Church
commissionates for that purpose. Me-things the Act of her Officers, acting by
her Authority, should be taken for the Act of the Church; Unless you will have
the Pope pass for one of those careless Princes who deserve to be deposed for
negligence, and be ignorant that his Officers abuse their trust, and license
unsound doctrines, and this at Rome it self, where a body would think
sufficient care is taken that nothing pass which is not esteemed Orthodox.
Bring me a Book printed at Rome, wherein the contrary doctrine is maintained,
and I will acknowledge there is some sense in this answer. In the mean time let
me give you a few instances, and those at home, by which it may appear the Pope
is so far from ignorant and unconcerned in these positions, that he approves
and countenances them, and that both ^hotly and constantly.

In the reign of King James, upon the occasion of the execrable Powder Treason,
the Oath of Allegiance was enacted by the pious wisdom of the Parliament, to
secure his Majesty and Successors from the like attempts for the future. The
Superior of the Catholic Clergy, at that time was one Blackwell. He, after much
and long debate of the matter with his fellow Priests, at last resolved the
Oath according to the plain and common sense of the words, might with a safe
conscience be taken by the Catholics; and afterward both took it himself, and,
by his admonitions to Clergy and Laity recommended it to them as a thing both
lawful and fitting. The greatest part of the Clergy, who repaired to London
upon that occasion, followed the resolution of their Superior; and had the Pope
been either a little more ignorant, or a little more negligent, I think it had
been better for you. But he was more vigilant than stood with your profit.
Cardinal Bellarmine was then alive, and he writes a letter to Blackwell,
persuading him to make amends for his fault, which he compares to the falls of
St. Peter and Marcellinus, whereof one denied Christ, the other committed
Idolatry. The Pope himself sends a Breve to the English Catholics, and forbids
the Oath; and when they remained yet unsatisfied, and made some exceptions of
some wrong information, and the like, usual in such cases, justifies the first
Breve by a second, and so utterly dashes the Oath, that ever since the
generality of Catholics have refused it; and those few, who continued constant
in defense of the lawfulness of it, were looked upon little better than
Apostates The great maintainer of it Withrington, a learned and honest man, was
so briskly prosecuted, that he was fain to take sanctuary in a Prison, and glad
he escaped so. If after this these things must still pass for probabilities,
probabilities are things in which I have been much mistaken; for I thought a
man had been at liberty to take which side he pleased; but I see a man may as
safely maintain Heresy, as that side of these probabilities which displeases
the Pope. Neither can I see how the blame can be taken from him, and cast upon
private men. For private men would have gone right enough, if He would have let
them alone, and had not oversway'd them by his authority, and an authority so
absolute and merely such, that neither He alleges, nor I could ever see any
reason to conclude that Oath unlawful even in your own grounds.

In the year 47, when upon the interposing of the Army, under the command of
the then Sir Thomas Fairfax, it was hoped the difference betwixt King and
Parliament, and disorders of the Kingdom might have been composed, and
Catholics comprehended in the general settlement, in case they could vindicate
their principles from inconsistency with civil government. Three Propositions
were framed by the Catholics to that purpose, importing that the Pope or Church
had no power to absolve from obedience to civil Government, or dispense with
word or oath made to Heretics, or authorize any to injure other men upon
pretense of their being excommunicated, etc. The Priests were consulted about
the lawfulness of these Propositions. They met some of most orders amongst
them, and all agreed they were lawful. The Laity rested in their judgment, and
the most considerable of those who were at hand subscribed them. This was not
very public, and at a pretty distance; and if it were known a body would think
there was no great harm in it, unless it be made prejudicial to Christianity
for men to live with their neighbors as honest men and good subjects should
do. But they thought otherwise at Rome. The vigilant old Gentleman there, who
must be pretended ignorant of what passes in Italy and at Rome, got an inkling,
condemned, whether the proceedings or propositions I know not (for he was so
wise as to keep his censure to himself, and never let it see light) and punished
such of the Actors as were willing to be punished. I know of one, a principal
one too, who was sent beyond sea, and there did penance in a house of his own
Order for the grievous fault of having been honester than the Pope would have
had him, and I presume made good resolutions of amendment; and becoming a new
man and a pious knave for the future: And I suppose the rest did the same,
unless chance, or peradventure stubbornness excu^^d them. Unhappy Catholics!
amongst whom it is punishable even to be honest. How truly has a learned man
observed, that you have the choice of being thought either bad subjects at
home, or bad Christians at Rome; But you must feed upon the fruit of your own
ways. In the mean time pray lay the blame of these things no more upon private
men, when the Pope so manifestly and industriously takes it upon himself, and
He may reserve you know what he pleases.

But take yet another instance, and that even at this time upon the Stage. Upon
the restoration of his Sacred Majesty, the Catholic Irish Clergy hoping to
obtain the effect of some agreements made in the time of the troubles which the
then Lord of Ormond the King's Lieutenaut there, commissionated a certain
person now living, and sent him over into England to solicit those pretensions
in their behalf. And finding a profession of Allegiance necessary to their
business, they framed one which they sent to their Procurator to be made use of
in their names, and is now in every bodies hands, and generally known by the
name of the Irish Remonstrance. This Profession not appearing sufficiently
authentic, the Procurator causes a meeting of such of the Irish Clergy as were
then at London, and informs them of the necessity of a general subscription to
it. One Bishop, and three and twenty other very considerable men subscribed it,
some seven or eight held back, professing yet the thing both Catholic as to the
doctrine, and lawful as to the action; but asking what they should get by it?
But the game being once a foot it was presently and hotly followed by the Popes
Ministers, Cardinal Francis Barbarin at Rome, the Nuntio at Paris, and
Internunce at Bruxels interpose with all concern imaginable. They speak, they
write against it, pretend it condemned before hand by two Popes (meaning the
Brief of Paulus V. about the Oath of Allegiance, and the censure of the three
Propositions by Innocent X. which never saw light) and prevail with the Divines
of Lovain to censure it. They countenance, they encourage, they promote he
Dissenters, and brand the Subscribers with the odious names of Seditious, and
Schismatic, and Heretic, and Apostate. One, and he a venerable man, was told to
his face, He had better have died than subscribed. But the greatest bustle was
about the Procurator himself. Him they set upon with all Arts they tempt him
with fair offers, and the promise of very considerable preferments: That
failing, they persecute him all they can; they make his Superiors (for he is a
Religious man) cite and excommunicate him, all diffame him, and at last have
brought things to that pass, that few believe him a Catholic, and those few
keep their charitable thoughts to themselves for fear of being infected with
the dangerous Contagion. So that so far as I can percieve, if the Subscribers
were the honester men, the Dissenters were the wiser. If these opinions must
still pass for probable, about which Divines may busy themselves without
interresting the Church, you have a strange and unintelligible way of
government amongst you. Methinks probabilities should have equal dealing, and
Divines left to scuffle about them, as well as they can, without partiality on
either side. So I think it is with your other Probabilities in the hot disputes
betwixt the Jesuists and Dominicans, Scotists and Thomists and the rest. Let
them beat the Pulpits as hard as they will, the Pope looks quietly on, lets
them cool and take breath, and to it again, and this is fair play. But to
depress one side, and cherish the other, and this vigorously and constantly, is
something odd for probabilities. In the name of wonder are Schism and Heresy
probable amongst you, into which one side of your probabilities always runs?
Or is it an approved custom amongst you to excommunicate for probabilities? In
fine, say what you will, I cannot think otherwise but that these probabilities
of yours are as improbable as any thing in the world. Then for your other
pretense, that the Church all this while interposes not: either all words
universally have conspired together to abuse us, and make us understand
nothing, even of the plainest, or there is no sense in it. One would think that
Church in Spirituals, is as state in Temporals. Now if two Princes fall out,
and the King of France for example, assist the one with council, and forces,
and the endeavors of his Ministers, we say usually, and I think pertinently,
that the State of France is engaged on that side, and he who should deny it,
would be thought deficient either in his language or his wits. For can a more
pleasant paradox be invented, than that an Army marching by commission of the
King of France, owning his orders, and He their actions, were all the while but
a company of particular men in whose doings the King and State are unconcerned?
Now for King say Pope, and for State say Church, and where is the difference?
Notwithstanding as I am not much acquainted with quirks, and fear the subtle
Distinguo, and the triccum de schold as much as the triccum de lege, I will not
undertake but that amongst so many school Physicians as you have, some Logical
plaster may be found out, which you may apply to this sore: But this I see
that whatever effect a distinction may have in the Schools, it will do no
manner of good in the world. For if the men of your Church persecute other men,
they will be no less persecuted whether your Church do this as a Church, or
under some other formality. The world is a material thing, and formalities
alter not its settled course. Discredit, and want, and pain are material
things, and when they fall upon a man, he will be ill at ease in spite of all
the belief formalities can afford him: And if material Subjects rebel against
a material King, and drive him out of his material Kingdom, I think it matters
not much what formalities there were in the case. I suppose he will be little
the better by learning his Subjects did not act as Subjects, nor treat him as a
King, and his new acquaintance with those subtle empty forms I fear will yield
him small comfort. If your formalities can preserve or restore Kingdoms, if
they can make honest men of Traitors, if they can restore the credit of private
men, and relieve their wants, and ease their distresses, I shall acknowledge
they are worth harkening after: But if they can do none of these things, the
Schools that invented them, had even best keep them to themselves, and much
good may they do them. The world has neither need nor use of them, for real
mischiefs are not cured by verbal distinctions. We complain that the material
Governor of your Church arrogates to himself a power dangerous to Princes, and
that the material men of your Church maintain him in it, and both together
hotly prosecute All who are not as hot as themseves. Tell not me the Church
indeed does this, but not as a Church; for as a Church, or not as a Church, she
does it; and if the mischief be done, what matter is it how? Withrington ended
his uncomfortable days in prison; Walsh is in a fair way to the same
preferment: Thousands of people were ruined, thousands destroyed in Italy and
Germany upon the contests betwixt the Pope and Emperor, in France upon the Holy
League, and what happened in those places may happen every where. It Is a remedy
for these mischiefs which I look after, and security that they shall not one
day happen here, not the formality by which they were done: For in fine a
formal plaster to a material wound, is but good words to him who is hungry. We
had our formalities too, and our distinctions in the late war, and heard enough
of the politic capacity, and the personal capacity; but they neither abated any
thing of the public misery, nor the deserved punishment inflicted on the witty
Authors. Our Pagan Juries found them guilty for all their acuteness, and their
sophistry had no effect with the illiterate Hangman and undistinguishing
Halter. We had the formalities of Justice to boot, but they served for nothing
but to render a fact execrable in it self more barbarous and more inhumane. You
may have more and other formalities, but after all they will be but
formalities, and not a jot more useful than ours. You shall permit me to
conclude with a Dilemma, which I would recommend to your serious thoughts.
Either your Church it engaged in these Positions, or she is not; if she be, she
is unexcusable for holding them; if not you are unexcusable for not renouncing
them, when without injury to her authority or your own consciences you may.

I would gladly receive an answer to this Paper, or rather a return, for I do
not think any answer can be made. However I entreat you by all our friendship
to let me know what you can say. Having found you both rational and ingenious
in other points, you must needs satisfy the curiosity I have to know whether
you will disclaim your Church or your reason: for certainly you must make bold
with one, and the best I suppose will be but a bad choice. As you are all
brought up in a wonderful reverence to your Church, I know it will be hard for
you to acknowledge any thing amiss in Her; and yet on the other side I think it
will go against the hair of your temper to part with your reason, and, that you
may be thought a good Son of your Church, be content to be thought no good man,
as certainly he is not, whose actions are not warranted by his reason. Pray
think not the worse of my friendship that I put you to so hard a choice. Reason
is the measure of friendship as of other virtues, and we cannot sin against
friendship by acting according to reason. Besides, Friend, you live in a
Communion disapproved by Law, and unmaintainable by Reason; and I think it is
the part of a friend to tell you so. Wherefore once again pray think not the
worse of me, and be assured that whatever you think I truly am

Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

SIR,
I Received your long Letter, with the obligation you lay upon me to answer it,
and heartily wish you had made use of the power you have over me in some other
occasion. This subject is a kind of Candle to Flies, with which if they happen
to play, they have great luck if they do not burn their wings. You are at your
ease, and may freely talk at pleasure, secured by the Laws, and at defiance
with the Pope. The case is otherwise with us, who believing of the Pope as we
do, and subject to the Laws as we are, can neither be without respect for him,
nor apprehension of them, and though we could speak even clearness it self,
it is all to nothing but we fall foul on one of the Rocks. Notwithstanding,
since I ow much to your friendship, I would gladly preserve, if I can, your
good opinion both to my self, and Religion, of which you speak so charitably,
and nothing like an enemy, and besides, would not be guilty of her shame by
confessing she has nothing to answer, nor of my own by continuing in an
unjustifiable communion; I obey you with this request, that you will take care
to preserve me from the hazard I run by serving you, and let this Paper be seen
by none but such as mean as well as you and I. First then I am so far from
thinking our friendship shockt by your free proceeding, that I take my self and
Religion both obliged to your candor, and wish from my heart I may as well
justify her, as you have your friendship. And for my Church, there are so few
who look upon her with equal eyes, that this pity of yours, as just and
charitable as it is, is yet more rare, and I cannot see it without as much
acknowledgment as satisfaction. And yet, as strongly as you discourse every
where, I think you have reason no where more than in this particular. For so it
is: if we say nothing, and, when we are often and loudly provoked to speak,
still hold our tongues, we have a bad cause, and such, for which nothing can be
said; if we speak, we are insolent, and cannot keep our selves quiet when we
are well. And after all, it is the Combat betwixt the Knight and the Giant
still, as you have rightly observed. But the world is the world, where Reason,
as much our nature as it is, cannot hinder, but Chance, and Interest, and
Passion, and several humors to which men are subject will have their share in
the conduct of things. Wherefore without complaining farther of what complaints
are not likely to remedy; I think it best to address my self to my defense.

And the first point of it shall be to declare I mean not to defend any of
those opinions which you have alleged with so much sharpness, for in truth I
think them not defensible, and that there is not more sharpness than justice in
what you say. Not but that to own, who would take the pains to peruse the
Authors you have cited, some of those Sayings possibly might not appear so ugly
as they do in your Paper. For there is a great difference betwixt words taken
as they lie in the whole Context, and singled out from their fellows, who might
peradventure to some of them afford some tolerable explication. But besides
that I conceive that labor not necessary for my purpose, I have no kindness at
all for the Doctrines, and not enough for the Authors to prevail with me to
undertake it. I have heard from those who meddle with Controversy, that their
greatest difficulty often is to preserve the credit of private men, whom,
because they are of the same Communion, they are so unwilling to affront, that
they have much ado to preserve the Church from the contagion of their Errors.
As my nature is a little more blunt, I have no such difference for them, and
think it but just, that Qui pergit quae volt dicere, ea quae non volt audiat.
Let them shift for themselves on Gods name, or let those defend them who
approve their Maxims. For my part I hate them heartily, and think it but a
preposterous Charity to be so tender for the credit of those who betray the
credit of the Church. Allowing then for reason all you say against those
opinions; of which I think as ill as you can do, I yet conceive your reason
fails in the inference you draw from them. That true Religion cannot teach
Doctrines inconsistent with Government; That a Commonwealth is not safe in
which such Doctrines are either tolerated or connived at; (that is, when they
come to be instilled and get credit with the People; otherwise while they
remain in the Schools, I should think the danger not very great, for Kingdoms
are not overturned by Syllogisms:) Farther if you please, that the Doctrines
you have produced are such Doctrines, I freely grant you: But that our Church
does teach such Doctrines I deny, and notwithstanding all you have said, if you
still preserve your unbiased candor, hope to make the contrary very evident.

And first, because with you I think my authority may signify something, for
you know I will not tell you a lie, you shall permit me to say something of my
own knowledge. I was born you know of Catholic Parents, bred up in Catholic
Religion, and have lived some part of my time in Catholic Countries. I have
been at their Schools, heard their Catechisms, their Sermons, their Discourses;
and by the care of my Friends, and some pains of my own, think few of my
condition more fully instructed in that Religion. I assure you faithfully I was
never taught any such Doctrine, nor ever heard the Church taught it. On the
contrary, I have been bred up in this belief, that obedience to my King is not
only truly a duty, but, a duty truly required by Religion, and this persuasion
was so well settled in my heart, that I yet remember how great and surprising a
horror the late Rebellion caused in me, when I was too young to judge otherwise
of it, or any thing else, but as I found it contrary to the sentiments which
had been instilled into me. I have heard indeed of the opinions you cite, but
as of extravagancies of bold men, and when I came to the age of judging of
things my self, found, that though they were held by men living in Communion
with the Church, they had yet no warrant from the Church to hold them, nor any
better ground than their own mistaking reasonings, and so continued to detest
them by judgment as I did before by Education. Now this answer, which it seems
you foresaw, you have endeavored to prevent, making use your self of an
Artifice of Rhetoric, to bar me the assistance of Logic; for you would persuade
me, that to distinguish the material Church from the formal, or the man from
the Churchman, is an idle airy nicety, which is of no use in the World. But
truly one of us is much mistaken, for I think on the contrary, that nothing is
more obvious, nothing more familiar, let me add, nor more necessary, and that
even to your material world as you call it, which without such distinctions
would quickly run into confusion. The World is made up of men, and men of
several qualities. The same person is both a man, and a Rich and Proud man, a
Powerful and an Angry man, and we see Wit and Ambition, Goodness and Ignorance,
Learning and Fantasticalness often coupled together, and a hundred several
mixtures of several qualities united all in one material Man. Now consider what
fine work there would quickly be, if every one of these useless formalities, as
you call them, must be chargeable with all actions; if Riches must be taken
away because the Rich Proud man has scorned, and Power because the Powerful
Angry man has wronged his Neighbor: if Wit must bear the blame of Ambition,
and Goodnes^ the miscarriages of Ignorance; and Learning the Errors of
Fantasticalness. Reason is our very Nature, and yet I think there are few to
whom Nature has not given Logic enough to see that we do not always act as
reasonable, and who are not learned enough to separate the Animal from the Man.
To speak yet plainer, a severe Father, a harsh Master, do they not sometimes
use their Children and Scholars unreasonably, and so as utterly to spoil them?
A corrupt Judge, does he not pervert Justice, and render those Tribunals, from
whence men expect the relief of Injuries, the seats of Oppression? What then?
Must the Father, and the Master, and the Judge be condemned for the faults of
the Man, and none of these powers left in the world because they have been, and
daily are abused? I think you and every body will confess that this were
unreasonable, and yet your Argument spares none of them. For it is all one to
Children and Pleaders, if they be materially oppressed and misused, whether this
be done by the fault of the Office or the Officer; and small comfort it is to
tell them that their Judges and Masters acted in their case as passionate men,
not as Judges and Masters, for they remain oppressed still, and the formality
relieves them not. Kings themselves are men too, and not exempt from the
failings of Mortality. Our Country indeed has this, amongst other things, to
thank God for, that she has been extraordinarily blessed with good Kings: but
History affords examples of such elsewhere, as have been unjust, and cruel, and
tyrannical; And if you will not allow the King, and his sacred Function to be
free from the aspersions to which the Man is sometimes liable; let me tell you,
Friend, your Doctrine will be more dangerous and more inconsistent with
Government than the Papal pretensions. Now as in all these cases, and a hundred
more which happen every day, and every where Nature teaches us to examine the
formality from whence the mischief proceeds, and endeavor to provide against
that, and let the rest alone, so I think it ought to be in the case of the
Church. We condemn not Learning, because some learned men are fantastical, nor
Riches for the pride of rich men, why must the Church be condemned for the
fault of Churchmen? Authority, and Goodness, and Wit are not blemished by the
errors of those who have them; the Power of Fathers, and Masters, and Judges
is, and must be preserved in the world, however Severity and Covetise daily
abuse it: and if this be so in all the rest of the world, can you think it
reasonable the Church alone should be exempted from the general rule, and be
more answerable for the faults of those who live in her communion, than
Authority for the faults of bad men in Authority? The faults indeed should be
taken away, but the Church let alone. And truly had your Reformation as you
call it, gone no farther than to retrench abuses, such as these you mention
(and who knows but there may be other?) I might peradventure have called it so
too: But instead of abuses to take away Office and all, and defy the supreme
Pastor of the Church, and alter the whole face of Religion, there by your
favor you reformed a little too far. For the same Logic which makes the Church
responsible for the errors of Churchmen, makes the Office responsible for the
faults of the Officer, and that is to take all Offices out of the world, where
men will be men, and liable to be reduced from the path of virtue in spite of
all preventions possible in such a nature as ours. I hope by this time that
distinction does not appear so airy, and useless as you imagined: you shall
permit me to add, that possibly you are no less concerned in it than We. For we
are not the only men; amongst whom Principles inconsistent with Government may
be found. Remember who they were that ruined England by the late War, and were
guilty of things, which to dilate were as unsavory as needless. They were so
far from Popery these men, that fear of Popery was a chief Engine employed in
the mischief. Sad fate, by the way, and preposterous wisdom! to destroy our
selves for fear of being destroyed, and run into Fire and the Sword for fear of
Ink and Paper. Neither is England the only example: Scotland, and the
Netherlands, and Germany, and France have felt lamentable effects from the
Doctrines of men who would take it for an imputation to have learnt any thing
of the Pope. So that it is very plain, that the Papal is neither the only, nor
the only dangerous King-deposing power in the world. It Is as plain that these
men are neither Infidels, nor of our Church, so that you must even exercise
your Pity too, and take them into yours. Or if pity will not prevail, I hope at
least you will take care so to defend your Allegiance, a not to overthrow your
Church; And unless you make your Creed consist but of Eleven Articles, I see
not how you can disown the Communion of these men; for 'twill be a strange
Catholic Church which communicates neither with the Church of Rome, nor her
Adversaries. Wherefore if your Argument be good, and Religion must answer for
the faults of those who profess it, there is no remedy, but Princes to be
secure must banish all Religion, and People turn Atheists to be honest men and
good Subjects. Now whatever answer you would give to one who should charge such
wicked principles upon your Church, because they are maintained by numerous,
and learned, and famous men amongst you, the same I give for mine. I believe
for all your Pique to formalities, you would go near to distinguish your
Church, or Believing men from the Erring men, and say you communicate with the
Men but not with the Errors: So you shall permit me to say for mine, and this
farther, that whatever you say, you must of necessity either condemn your
selves, or absolve us.

It Is not that the force of your Argument drives me to that way of answer which
I have chosen; it being easy to show the Churches innocence even in your own
way, and without the help of your disliked formalities. Your Argument in short
is this: Learned men in the Church hold wicked Doctrines, therefore the Church
holds them* If that Argument be good, this likewise of necessity must be good:
Learned men in the Church hold those Doctrines false and wicked* therefore the
Church does so too, for the same authority cannot but have the same force
either way, and the Deniers have as much power to remove the imputation from
the Church, as the affirmers to fix it upon her. You have cited, if not all,
yet, the most considerable of those who maintain them, and they make some ten
or twelve. It Is pretty odd that the judgment of ten or twelve men must needs be
taken for the judgment of the Church: But let that pass; by the same rule, the
judgment of ten or twelve of the contrary must conclude the judgment of the
Church for the contrary. Wherefore if I produce as many and as famous men for
the Negative, as you have done for the affirmative, it is without more a do a
drawn match, and nothing being proved either way the Church is absolved by the
Law of nature, by which every one is innocent who is not proved nocent. But
what will become of your Argument if for one of your side I produce two, if
ten, peradventure twenty on the contrary? Either you must confess the Argument
has no force, or the Church innocence efficaciously proved by it, unless
peradventure you can find some subtle formalities by which you will maintain
your single man is stronger than my ten or twenty. Now all this is not only
possible, but already done to my hand by Caron the learned defender of the
Irish Remonstrance, who in his Loyalty asserted. what betwixt Canonists and
Divines, Schoolmen and Fathers, Popes, Councils, Universities, Kingdoms, etc'
has made a Catalogue of more than two hundred and fifty Defenders of the
contrary Doctrine. You see then I had no necessity of flying to Formalities to
answer your Argument: For by your own Rule and Method the Church is proved not
to hold the Doctrines you mention, and not only so, but plainly to hold the
contrary; nothing being more unreasonable in the world than to give it with the
ten against the two hundred; or to think that ten is a sufficient number to
engage the Church one way, and two hundred not sufficient to engage her the
other. But looking a little nearer unto it, me thinks it is of kin to
Boccalin's Age, pargeted four fingers thick with appearances. Strip off the gay
Jacket of pretty smartness in which you have dressed it, and there will remain as
little substance, and less soundness. Learned men, say you, say such things,
therefore the Chureh says them. What if you be as much mistaken in your
Antecedent as Inference, and that they prove not learned who say them? Words,
you know, are slippery things and you have well exemplified in diverse. I fear
this term, Learned men, and Learning, is no less slippery, nor less abused than
those which are most so. But not to be too severe, a Divine is a Learned Man,
can he therefore prescribe Physic? The Metaphysician, the Natural, the Moral
Philosopher, the Mathematician, the Physician, the Lawyer, are all esteemed
learned men, but their learning is confined every one to his proper profession;
out of that, their authority is of no moment, and they may with all their
learning be very ignorant in matters which belong not to them. Now consider a
little, The men whom you have cited are, excepting one or two, all Canonists,
and esteemed able men in that profession, but every one knows their profession
consists in declaring what the meaning of the law is, and what the intention of
the Lawmaker, and if they go beyond this, they exceed the bounds of their
profession. Our Question now, whether the Pope have, or have not, such a power,
to what skill does it belong? To the Law? Plainly nothing less. What the Pope
has Commanded, and what he meant by the words in which he has expressed his
commands, is as far as the Lawyer can go; but what power he has to command, and
how far that reaches, is quite out of his Sphere. If I mistake not, for it is a
study in which I have no skill, the power of the Lawmaker is a Principle
supposed, not proved in the Law; for if a Lawyer go about to prove it, keeping
without the limits of his own Art, he argues a posteriori thus, He has
commanded, such and such things, therefore he has power to command them. And
this is a proper, and good law proof, where the first Maxim is, that the Law is
just, and the power of the Lawmakers still supposed. If the Lawyer venture upon
other proof, he intrenches upon another skill, in which possibly he may be
very ignorant. And he that will not be satisfied with this, nor admit his other
Maxim, Lex non facit injuriam, but excepts against Law and Power, and all, has
no remedy but to seek satisfaction elsewhere. In fine, what the Pope claims
from Christ, belongs to the Divine; what from Reason and the force of Nature to
the Philosopher: only what he claims to the agreement of men belongs to the
Lawyer, and in this he ought to be heard, in other things he is Suitor ultra
crepidam. Your discourse therefore, which appears so trim and gay in the dress
you have given it, has no more strength than the authority of a few men in a
matter wherein they have no authority, and if they had, is overpowred by a
greater, and this methinks you needed not have thought so unanswerable.

Were you now an Adversary with whom I should think fit to use the Right
established by the Laws of disputation, I should say no more; for an Answerer
has fully discharged his part, who has shown his Opponents Argument concluding.
But since we are Friends, and write, not to convince, but inform one another, I
shall return to my old way, which I take to be the way of Nature, and endeavor
to show you more minutely how unreasonable it is the Church should be charged
with those errors. Church signifies a Congregation of Faithful, and Faithful
Men who have Faith, And since Men, cannot be without Reason, nor Reason without
working in them, it is unavoidable that besides the persuasions lodged in them
by Faith, men will have others which proceed from their Reasons; to say nothing
of Passion, and the Animal Nature. which has its efficacy upon the Faithful as
well as all the rest of mankind. Now as in the rest of the actions of men,
Nature forces us to look into the Principles from whence they proceed, and
attribute every one to his proper cause, which if we did not, all would
presently turn into confusion: So we must here, and consider in the actions of
the Faithful. Whether they act as Faithful, or as Men. And those Actions which
proceed, not from Faith, but Reason or Passion, are no more to be charged upon
the Church, than the Covetise, or Cruelty, or whatever faults of men in office
upon their Offices. And in all this there is so little subtilty, that every
body does the like almost in every occasion. There remains only to examine upon
what Principle those who assert these errors proceed, whether upon Faith, or
some other: Faith is a reliance upon some Authority, and in our case, the
Authority of Christ, who alone is acknowledged the Author and Revealer of all
which we are to believe. Wherefore of any point in question, it must either be
pretended that it was revealed by Christ or it cannot be pretended that it
belongs to Faith; and if any maintain it upon other grounds, so far he acts,
not as a believer, but as otherwise qualified. Now there are in the world two
principal ways, by which claim is made to the Authority of Christ; for that
which we maintain is Faith, and that wherein we do not engage his Authority,
neither of us say is Faith, or that they act as faithful, who upon reason, or
experiment, for example, maintain any thing. The World hopes from the learned
industry of the Royal Society the sight of many truths yet hidden from her: but
all their endeavors can never make Faith of them, nor concern your Church in
them, as considerable members of it as some of them are. For they go not your
Church Way of Faith; They look, not into Scripture, but Experiments, and act as
Learned, not as Churchmen. What they shall discover to the World will be
revealed not by Christ, but by them; and if any believe them, they will have no
Christian, but Society-Faith. Such is the case of our Church. Tradition in her
known method, by which she pretends to the Authority of Christ. If any will run
upon their own heads, and discourse and maintain things, and never look into
her Rule; She can be no more concerned in their proceedings than the Church of
England in those of Gresham College. For since Faith is that by which she is a
Church, and Tradition that by which she comes to Faith, people must engage
Faith if they will engage the Church, and Tradition if they will engage her
Faith. Wherefore whoever goes about to prove any thing otherwise than by
Tradition, uses not the method to come to Faith I mean, the method approved by
our Church, and this conclusion, whether true or false, neither reaches Faith,
nor aims at it, and by consequence cannot belong to the Church or Congregation
of the Faithful. Now reflect a little upon your Authors, and see if they go
this way to work, and the first thing is the consent of the present Age; for
Tradition signifying the consent of all Ages, it is a madness to pretend it for
that which is not believed so much as by the present. Do they, or can they even
offer at this while they see themselves contradicted, by men as learned, and
far more numerous? While all the Universities of a great Kingdom disapprove
and condemn their Doctrine, and their Books are burnt in the face of the World
by public Justice, and the men who do this acknowledged good Catholics all the
while? Do they, or can they pretend the consent of former Ages, while they know
all Antiquity agrees, that for many Ages Popes were so Supreme in Spirituals,
that in Temporals they were Subjects? Such they acknowledged themselves, and as
such the Emperors treated them. When and how, and upon what occasion they came
to be temporal Princes is known to all who are, knowing in History: A
condition, by the way, which he who envies them, little understands, or little
loves the good of the Church, with which 'twas much worse when Popes were
hindered from doing their duty by the unjust violence and oppression of powerful
men amongst whom they lived, Do they alledg the undoubted Testimonies of the
Fathers of the Church assembled in a general Council? Nothing of this appears
in what you have produced. The men themselves are most of yesterday, All, many
Ages since Christ; and there needs no second Argument to prove any thing that
it is not Faith, if it can be proved that it began in any Age since the first,
as these opinions plainly did. But consider their Arguments. They are either
grounded upon some odd interpretation of Scripture, as the order of
Melchesedech, the two Swords, St Peter's walking on the water, and the like; or
else upon some deduction and reasoning as weak as the water which they mention.
And this methodt though per impossible, it could prove the thing true, yet
could never prove it to be Faith, There are many things in the world which are
so acknowledged to be true, that they are withal acknowledged not to be Faith.
Was it taught by Christ; Was it believed by Christians, Semper, and ubique, and
ab omnibus? Till this appear, it neither is, nor can be Catholic Faith: But
that which I insist upon is, that this method is plainly resolved into Reason,
and can no more engage the Church of Rome, than the experimental learning of
the Royal Society the Church of England. The Authors you produce rely not upon
the Authority of Christ, testified by an uninterrupted conveyance down to us,
but upon the strength of their own discourses, which if they be weak and fail,
the Church never undertook that all in her Communion should discourse strongly;
Neither can she herself do more then testify of the truths delivered to her,
and they are such, and were so delivered. This testimony is all which can be
expected from her as a Church, (speaking of what concerns us to speak of; her
power to make Ecclesiastical Laws, and the like, are no part of our case.) if
she fail in this, and either testify that to be delivered which was not so, or
suppress any thing which was delivered blame her; but for this, that some
Members in her Communion have weak Reasons, or strong Passions, if you blame
her, consider the confusion you will bring into the World, which I have so much
dilated before, that to repeat it would be tedious here.

But will you have a taste of the Churches sense of these things? Consider the
Hymn made in the first Ages of the Church, inserted since by public Authority
into her solemn Office, received by all the Faithful, and used on the Feast of
the Epiphany. Non eripit mortalia qui Regna dat coelestia. Can the Church,
which prays thus, be thought to favor the deposing power? Or can her sense
appear more plainly, than in the consent of an universal practice? But let us
look upon her in a Council. Wickleff amongst other errors had advanced this
Proposition: Populares, etc, The people may at their pleasure correct their
offending Lords, Con. Constable. Sess. 8.
And this amongst the rest was condemned by the Council of Constance. To the
same Council was offered another Article worded in this manner: Quilibet
Tyrannus, etc. Every Tyrant may and ought lawfully and meritoriously be killed
by any of his Vassals or Subjects, even by secret plots and subtle insinuations
or flatteries, notwithstanding any Oath or League made with him, not expecting
the Sentence or command of any Judge whatsoever. This they condemned too, and
hear if you please in what terms: The Holy Synod, desirous to rise up against
this Error, Sess. 15.
and to take it wholly away, declares and defines this Doctrine to be erroneous
in Faith and Manners, and rejects and condemns it as Heretical, Scandalous, and
giving way to Frauds, Deceits, and Lies, Treasons, and Perjuries; Moreover it
declares, and decrees that those who pertinaciously assert this most pernicious
Doctrine are Heretics, and as such to be punished, according to the Canonical
Decrees. Behold the most exorbitant of your Doctrines directly and
authentically condemned: And though I am not ignorant that some of them may
find in the expressions as they lie in the Council, wherewith to evade her
Censure, yet I conceive her sense so clear, that those evasions can appear no
better than evasions. For it is a plain case, She takes Duty to Princes to be a
direct point of Faith, since she condemns the contrary of Heresy; and since
she allows not even Tyrants to be killed, I conceive she declares plainly
enough against the deposing power, whose chief ground is, that deposed Princes
are no longer Princes but Tyrants; for without doubt of all sorts of Tyrants,
those are the least such, and have most title to the protection of the Council.
(I beseech you mistake me not, as if I thought my self, such Princes indeed
were Tyrants, but I speak in the Language of those who think so, and I maintain
they are Condemned by the Council, even though their impossible ground were
supposed true.) And if her expressions are not so direct and formal as to avoid
all cavil; The reason is obvious: Councils do not make Propositions to be
condemned, but condemn such condemnable ones as they find made to their hands.
She condemned that Doctrine in the terms in which is was proposed to her, and
by her carriage shows what it is to expect from the Church in whatever terms it
be proposed. People may talk at random in the Schools, where it is
proposterously thought a piece of learning to be able in the morning to defend
one thing, and in the afternoon the quite contrary: but let these men and their
learning appear in a Council, and they will go near to be asked, since they know
that to give obedience Prepositis etiam discolis, and that not only for fear,
but for Conscience, was taught by the first Masters of Christianity, and
evidently believed, and practiced ever since, and ab omnibus, and ubique, and
semper, by what warrant they bring in an exception to a Rule established by
Christ, and tell us it is to be understood if the Pope command not the contrary?
They will be urged to produce their authority for this exception of theirs, to
name the Father, that taught it, and Children that believed it: to make out its
Universality both in Time and Place; and if they can do none of all this, as
plainly they cannot, it is well if they escape the censure of Heresy themselves,
who are so forward to fix it upon others. Subtilties, and the knack of talking,
and the opinion of learning will avail them little where the constant Rule is
Tradition, and not delivered, and not to be believed is all one. But I go too
far, it being neither my business nor intention to dispute the Question. Thus
much, when I was once in, I could not choose but say, and I cannot but add, that
if the contrary to your doctrine be not sufficiently defined already, it may be
when Princes please, and in such terms as they please, when ever they think fit
to use their interest for the calling of another General Council. In the mean
time I conceive there is never a King in Christendom, who has not credit enough
with the Clergy of his own Dominions to cause them to condemn those opinions.
All the Universities of France have done it already, and I presume no Catholic
Churchmen, if they were required by their Prince would refuse to follow their
example. Mean time what belongs to me is, that those opinions are not Doctrines
of the Church, since they do not so much as pretend to the only Rule by which
she judges of Doctrines, and their only grounds are private deductions of
private men, with which if the Church should be charged, and Faith made
responsible for the miscarriges of Reason, it would be an injustice whose
consequence would quite invert the order of the World, and leave neither
Church, nor Prince, nor Magistrate, nor Policy, nor Economy on Earth.

But if this be so, how come so many men esteemed learned to assert such
extravagances, the Pope to allow them, private men to endure them? I answer,
how can it be otherwise, while men are men, and the World the World? Popes are
men, and have long time both been, and lived in the State and splendour of
Princes. Can it be thought strange, if Flattery have found access to a Court,
and amongst so many, if some have given ear to it? They are generally very good
men, but of late better versed in Polities, that Divinity. For the most part
they are well skilled in the Law, especially the Canon, an useful knowledge for
Church Government, but for Divinity they use or rely on others. And if men who
pass for able Scholars, and great Divines flatter them with an addition and
power, and tell them it truly belongs to them* and that they can and will
maintain it; Can you, who think Miracles are ceased, wonder they should be
content it be thought true? They see many who oppose it, are their professed
enemies, and if it be perpetually incultated to them, that the rest have got a
tang of that enmity by conversing with them, how can it be but they will be
persuaded of it at last? We see the often repetition, even of known lies,
cheats the teller at last into a belief of them. And if once they come to be
persuaded the thing is true, it were wonder they should not discountenance
those who oppose it, and cherish those who maintain it. Then if one Pope
declare any way, the rest will all go on the same road, unless some very
extraordinary action stop their journey. They understand the Art of Governning
very well, and see that if one Pope should undo what his Predecessor has done
things would soon fall into disorder. So that they are slow, but very tenacious
in their resolves, and it is the hardest thing in the world to get them to alter
their course, And all this is so far from strange, that it were strange it
should be otherwise. Then for learned men; consider how much Ecclesiastical
Promotions depend upon the Pope, and what plenty of means he has to gratify
all who appear for his interest. While one hopes for a Canonry, another a
Bishopric, another has the dazzling purple glittering in his eyes; They will all
be apt to say what they think will please him in whose power it is to satifie
them all. And as the Schools go now it is not hard to say almost any thing, As
men are of several tempers, I will not deny but some may be truly persuaded of
your Doctrines and defend them with an upright conscience, thinking that to
exalt the Pope is truly advantageous to Religion, and beneficial to the World:
But I believe you will not find many so qualified. Those you have named, are
some the Popes own Subjects, most Italians or Spaniards, upon whom He is known
to have particular influence, and if we judge that in this exalting the Pope,
they might have an eye to the preferment of themselves, I think it will be no
rash judgment. Of latter times those have appeared the chief sticklers in this
quarrel, who are thought to have the greatest dependence upon Rome, So that of
all produced and produceable in behalf of those opinions, I deceive my self if
the number be not shamefully inconsiderable, against whom there lies not a just
suspicion of interest, and of whom it may not reasonably be judged that Hopes
or Fears, or something besides pure Conscience swayed their judgments: And
Interest, you know, is a just exception against a Witness in all Courts. As for
private men, what would you have them do? Consider that all Catholics look upon
the Pope as the chief Bishop in God's Church, and supreme Pastor of the whole
Flock. If they hear any thing said over-lashingly of him, can it be expected
they should be forward to speak what they think, til a due occasion urges them?
Or have less respect for him, than common civilitie uses to every body? For
when any thing is said advantageous to a person with whom we converse, if we
believe it not, we keep our thoughts to our selves, and think it rudeness to
oppose it to their faces. Besides, as I said at first, this meddling of private
men with the concern of Princes, is the Flies playing with the Candle.
Withrington quite burnt his wings; Walsh has fairly singed them; and if people
learn wariness by the harms of other men, I conceive they are not blameable. As
frightful and threatening as the Idea is, which you have made of this danger, no
Prince, that I know, thinks it great enough to deserve that they should
interpose, and I think the man very foolishly wise who will pretend to
understand their concerns better than themselves, or better know what is fit to
be done. People of our private Sphere, see but one thing; Princes see that one
thing in likelihood better than we, and a hundred more of which we never dream,
and till they stir themselves, for private men to obtrude their politic
Ignorance upon them is so far from laudable, that it is well if it be
pardonable; neither will their forwardness signify more than an over busy
diligence, and peradventure saucy unquietness. The old Monks wise counsel,
Sinere res vadere ut vadunt, is as necesiary in the world as a Cloister.
Besides, for English Catholics in particular, they have somewhat more reason to
keep silence, while their speaking is sure to be discountenanced on the one
side, and not sure to be protected on the other. You may perceive by Caron's
Collection that Catholics are, so much mealy mouthed men toward the Pope when
there is fit occasion to speak what they think, and God forbid that Forreiners
should be better Subjects than English men. I am sure they were Catholics who
declared in Parliament, that the imperial Crown of England is, and, at all
times, has been free from all subjection to the Pope. And provided the Statute
of Praemunire against such abuses as were then found inconvenient, And they
were Catholics who refused to repeal this Statute in the days of Queen Mary,
when other Laws made against the Popes Authority were taken away. But if you
will have a touchstone of the fidelity of English Catholics, look a little upon
the year 88. The Pope had stretched his Authority as far as it would go, and
proceeded to Excommunication, Deposition and Absolution of his Subjects from
Obedience to her, down right Commands to assist her Enemies; and this Authority
was backed by the Power of a great Prince, in their thought and language,
invincible. Besides, the Title of the Queen born in time of a Marriage declared
lawful by the Pope was not free from dispute, which carried the inclination of
Catholics to the Title of Scotland, since happily introduced, and which I hope
will long happily continue; and this was, if I mistake not, the true reason of
the jealousy and severity of those times against them. Notwithstanding the
unusual concurrence of so many and so great temptations, They stood firm in
their Allegiance; and both our own and foreign Writers testify, that neither
the subtle Arts of the Politic Spaniard, or the enforcement of the Popes
Authority could prevail to make any Party here; but that the most learned and
esteemed of the Priests, by a solemn and authentic Writing, acknowledged the
Queen, notwithstanding she was excommunicated and deposed by name, to have
still the same Authority and power as before, and as much as any of her
Predecessors; and the Layty cheerfully and universally offered to hazard their
lives in defense of their Prince and Country, and that as private Soldiers,
there being too much suspicion in the jealousy of those times to pretend to
commands. In fine the Spaniards were so ill satisfied with them that the Duke
of Medina, Admiral in that expedition, at his return, plainly told the Duchess
of Feria, an English Woman of the Family of the Dormirs, that had he prevailed,
no difference had been made betwixt Catholics and others more than what the
Sword could have found. Of later times the whole Nation is obliged to bless God
for the happy fidelity of some of them, and we had still been groaning under
our late miseries, if this traitorous Religion had not principled, even poor
men into a fidelity stronger than the temptation of Gold. And it is not like the
men, who act thus, would refuse to speak in fit occasion. Things have been
written, even since the return of his Sacred Majesty which have been
peradventure more zealous than seasonable, but however which sufficiently
discover the inclination of Catholics to say all that can be expected with
reason from them, when the conjuncture is proper. In the mean time to consider
the Dilemma you so earnestly recommend to me, I must tell you it concludes not.
We are inexcusable, say you, if we renounce not those Positions, when without
injury to the Churches Authority, or our own conscience we may. Why so F A! is
there no excuse for an action but this, that it is unlawful? People before they
do any thing use to consider the Why as well as the What, and examine not only
whether the action be allowable, but whether it be convenient. But not to
insist on this, I will offer you a fair bargain. Do you your part, and I will
do mine, make it reasonable, make it fitting to do what you desire, and I will
do it. And that you may be satisfied I am in earnest, I promise you faithfully
to renounce these Positions as fully and solemnly as you can desire, whenever
you shall make it come to pass that so to do is my duty, and not only a bare
gratification of your curiosity; and, in the mean time, assure you I heartily
abhor them and always did. The Child lies now at your door F. A! If you truly
desire the thing should be done, provide a good Why we should do it. For my own
part I tell you truly, I shall take it very unkindly if after this I pas^ still
undistinguisht among those whom you think deserve suspicion and distrust; and
since you have urged me to this Declaration, conceiving you are obliged to take
care that it be not wholly useless. Pray let me put another Dilemma to you.
Either your credit is great enough to preserve us from the inconvenience of
speaking plainly, or it is not: If not, we are blameless, who are not forward
to run into inconveniences to no purpose; if it be, it is you are blameable, who
urge us to an inconvenience which you can, but will not, remedy. Mean while to
be ill looked upon and ill treated, if we make our selves appear honest
Catholics, and not so much as have protection for being Catholics, is to be
acquitted of Burglary, and found guilty of Felony. Methinks it is something
unreasonoble to make the maintenance of pernicious Doctrines the ground why we
should be liable to punishment, and keep us every jot as liable if we disclaim
them. Not but that we are very sensible of our present quiet, and bless and
pray for the merciful Authors of it: But yet the Law is the Law still; And it
is very uneasy to have no better security either of Estate or Life than a bare
stop to the course of the Law, which may be removed at pleasure. For my own
part, as I am but John Porter, so I hope it is a modest and pardonable ambition,
if I wish to continue so with security. And since an extravagance in others,
which I cannot help, may make you jealous even of my Frock and Cords, I shall
gladly Endeavor to cure that jealousy by any remedies which Reason can
prescribe, or Honesty take. But till you can procure thus much favor, to urge
a testimony of honesty so ungrateful to him, to whom we owe, and must pay a
fitting respect, and when we have given it, to continue us still in the
condition of Knaves, is hard in it self, and harder from you who have professed
so often that you punish not for Religion, but Treason. Religion indeed is the
most comfortable cause of suffering, and that which if I must suffer, I would
choose; But yet suffering is suffering still, let the cause be what it will; And
though I esteem Patience very much, and desire the Virtue with all my heart, I
know not why I should desire the occasions to exercise it, and believe it is
better not to need live Pigeons than to have them.

Coming to review what I have writ, I find the hasty course of my pen, intent
upon the main body of the discourse has past over several branches, which
deserve to be particularly taken notice of. As when you say, that so the
mischievous Doctrines be allowed, it is all one whether they be allowed by the
material Church, or the formal. To which I reply, the difference is very great.
For were the Church truly engaged for them, there were no remedy, but either to
own the Doctrines, or disown the Church. But if she be not engaged for them, as
she is not, one may detest the Doctrines, as I do, and yet remain in the
Church. Again, when you make Church and State equivalent, I conceive the
difference appears sufficiently in what has been said. State signifies a body
of men united under such a Government and such Laws; and what the Governors
do, the State is said to do, for to the Governor it belongs to command in
public concerns, to the rest to obey. Church signifies a body of men living
according to Doctrines and Laws established by Christ; and because, as men, they
cannot but have an act upon other Principles too, those actions only and
Principles which are derived from Christ, can properly belong to the Church, in
the rest they are to be looked upon as men, not as faithful, Besides, you have
produced some few who have the boldness to entitle those Errors, as gross as
they are, to Faith and make the contrary Heresy: To which I answer, There are
a great many strange things in the world, and peradventure few stranger than
that men should get the reputation of learning, and yet not know so much as
what Faith is, or at least the means by which it has come to us. The Regia Via,
as Councils call it, of Faith, is both plain in it self, and plainly recorded
in the Monuments of the Church, and that people should think to come to it by
their own little by-ways, and make Faith of that which is publicly and
unreprovably contradicted by the far greatest part of the present Church, and
has no footsteps at all in Antiquity, and yet pass for learned men, is a thing
I have more disposition to admire than unriddle, farther then in the short hint
I gave of the abuse of that term by a wrong application. If ought else have
escaped my observation, by what I have said, I presume you will easily guess
what I would say to it. Give me Leave to end with reflecting a little upon the
difference there is betwixt these opinions maintained by the Adversarys of the
Church of Rome, and maintained by her Members, For to flatter neither side,
Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra. You communicate with
deposing-principled men, as well as we; though, thanks be to God, neither true
Protestant, nor understanding Catholic communicate with the Principles. Now for
our Church I have shown why this extravagance of some of her members is not
imputable to her, and hope you perceive how unreasonable it is that she would
answer for the deviations of those who will not walk in her way, nor make use
of her Rule. Some Popes indeed have behaved themselves otherwise than I wish
they had: But since they are Princes as well as Bishops, I conceive it will not
be thought strange if all great men are not Saints, and if Humane Policy, and a
desire to increase their greatness sway with them as with other Princes. If
they attempt upon the rights of others, Kings I hope know well enough that they
bear not the Sword in vain, and can as well tell how to defend themselves, and
their Subjects from wrongs incident from them, as from other men; and sure I am
that Catholics are so far from being restrained by their Religion, that it
obliges them to stand by their respective Sovereings, in defense of his just
Rights against the Pope as effectually as against any other. I could allege
that of those Popes who have gone farthest, none has defined any thing
concerning these matters in those circumstances, which even those Divines, who
attribute most to them, require as necessary to make it believed, or ex
Cathedra, as they call it. But I conceive it needless, it seeming to me
sufficiently evident by what has been alleged already that our Faith and
Church are not to suffer by these exorbitancies; and commonwealths can secure
themselves by their own power. But Friend! the case is otherwise with you. Your
men allege Scripture for these errors, and engage your Rule of Faith, and how
the honest Protestant (who in this case undoubtedly has the true sense of
Scripture on his side) can handsomely disengage his Church from a scandal to
which is pretended the authority of her Rule, is difficult to apprehend. If
people come not to their journies end who refuse to take the right road, it is
no wonder to any, nor blame to the Guide, whose office it is to show men the
right way, but cannot make them follow it. But your men pretend they keep the
way your Church shows them to Truth, and yet arrive at Error. And when Error
and Truth pretend both to the same Rule, and that the Rule of your Church, I
should think your Church deeply concerned to consider by what means it may be
decided which is Heresy, and which Faith. In short our erring men, since they
pretend not our Churches Rule, can never fix their errors upon the Church, nor
advance them to Faith, nor beyond the degree of opinions: Yours, since they
pretend to the very Rule owned by you, must needs, till a certain way of
proceeding upon that Rule, or interpreting Scripture be settled, render it
doubtful to those, who truly desire to be guided by your Rule, which of the two
is the doctrine of Christ and are therefore wonderfully more dangerous to the
Church than ours. Farther, abstracting from Passion or Interest which may be
equal in both; ours, because they have no firmer ground than their own
deductions, are more reclaimeable, and may at any time relinquish their errors,
without offering violence to their Faith and Religion: Yours, because they
pretend to your Rule of Faith, are apt to mistake their misguided Fancies for
Religion (as we have seen in the late confusions the title of Saints
appropriated to wicked men) and so become fixed and unalterable in them? for
which reason they are also much more dangerous to the State, as they were
before to the Church. In this inequality of cases, I do not know the Church of
England has proceeded so far as ours in the Council of Constance, or condemned
these Errors by any Authentic Censure, though in my opinion it were proper for
her to consider how much her Rule, upon which depends her own stability, is
concerned in them. Mean time, instead of reproaching our several Churches with
the errors of their several Members; It were I think more to purpose. I am sure
more charitable, to endeavor that all Errors might be taken away on both
sides, that by one Faith and one Baptism we may all serve our one Lord and God,
and reunite into one Holy, and Immaculate, and Glorious Church, free from those
spots and wrinkles which our unhappy Divisions have too too much, and too long
brought upon her. This is what the desire to obey your commands has suggested
to me in answer to your Letter: You will pardon the length of it, which, as it
is beyond my expectation, so it is beyond my power to remedy, and give me leave
to hope it may prevail with you not to abate either your Charity to my
Religion, or kindness to.

Your very humble Servant.

THE THIRD and FOURTH OF THE CONTROVERSIAL LETTERS: OR THE GRAND Controversy
Concerning The pretended Temporal Authority of POPES over the whole Earth, and
the true Sovereign of KINGS within their own respective Kingdoms, Between two
English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of ENGLAND, The other of the Church of
ROME.


LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom and Benjamin Took, at the Gun and Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXIII.

FRIEND,
FOR all the thanks I owe you, and all the Complements 'twere fit I made you,
take this acknowledgment, that you have answered beyond my expectation; and
this assurance, that I will consider very seriously what you say, and make such
use of it, that you shall have cause to think your labor not unprofitably
spent. But yet I cannot but complain of the secrecy which you enjoin me. I for
my part am so well satisfied of your way of writing, that I cannot but think
others will be so too, and that this shiness of yours is injurious both to your
self and the World; and because unjust commands are not to be obeyed, let me
tell you frankly I mean not to confine your Papers to my closet. They shall be
seen if it please God, by more Eyes then mine; but yet not to fall absolutely
out with you, I will divide stakes, and so communicate what you write, that
there shall be no suspicion of the Writer. This I promise you very faithfully,
and to do it with more exactness, lest your name should be discovered, I engage
my self to conceal my own. Then if John a nokes get all the praise from you,
the fault be upon your own Head. For the rest to deal plainly with you, I find
my self I know not how. Things will not settle with me, and though out of the
mouth of a good Protestant, I believe what you say would have past good reason;
yet when I reflect you are a Papist, that is, if you will pardon my Freedom, of
a crafty insinuating Generation, I have still a kind of grumbling.

This Papist marrs all; and though I think my self as free from prejudice as
other men, I find t'wil not do. I can not but fear being trapan'd. You have I
must confess said many things very well, and more then I thought you had been
allowed to say, but you are reserved still. It Is true you give Reasons for your
reservedness, which I can not answer; but whether it be that my plain nature
would have every thing as plain as my self, or that curiosity be like Love
where too much reason is thought blameable. I could wish in this occasion you
had used less Reason and more Freedom. Speak out the whole truth, man, and be a
good Protestant; otherwise own the whole Falsehood, and be a Papist of the first
magnitude. I fear your half Catholics are in as bad a Case as Montaltos half
Sinners, who shall be damned for not sinning enough. For my part if I would be
a Papist, I would be a Papist to purpose. Hang this motly Religion, this half
Rome, half Geneva Faith, which gets a man neither credit nor security. I would
be as good a Catholic as Bellarmin for his heart if I would be one; and if I
thought your Catholic Faith would save me, I would take order mine should be
Catholic enough sure, and never boggle at any thing should be offered me. But
to leave Jeasting, let me tell you, though I know not how you will relish the
Complement, you write so well that you must needs write again. I may possibly
hereafter give you more trouble upon this Subject, when these fluttering
Fancies of mine are settled into a steady Judgment. I know not how satisfactory
your Answer may prove when I have fully examined it: If it do not, I reserve my
self the liberty to tell you so; and in the mean time conceive you could not
choose a more useful Argument, then this of the Popes power. He was a man famous
for wisdom who, E. Salisbury Treatise of mitigation, p. 20.
as I find cited in one of your own Authors, was long troubled that some clear
explication of the Papal Authority had not hitherto been made by some public
or definitive Sentente; and this both that those Princes, who acknowledge it,
may be secure from the fear and suspicions of continual Treasons and Attempts
of Assasins; and those Princes who do not acknowledge it, and yet desire to
think favorably of their Subjects, may certainly know how far they may rely
upon their fidelity in temporal matters, who differ from them in what concerns
their Conscience. Consider besides what confusion, what Wars and Bloodshed we
find in History upon the contests betwixt the Spiritual and Temporal Power.
People distracted betwixt the fear of making Shipwreck of their Faith or their
Fortunes, know not how to avoid either Heresy on the one side, or Rebellion on
the other. If the World were once well informed of the just bounds of those two
Powers, and knew wherein they consisted, and how far they extended, such
contests would either not happen, or if they did People would readily know
which part to take. However it be, pray satisfy me at least in this
particulars. The s^^^stance of your Answer consists in this, that the Doctrines
I objected belong not to your Faith or Church. But does not this belong to your
Faith, That the Pope is the Vicar of Christ upon Earth? I think you would not
take him for a Catholic who should deny it. Now if Christ gave to the Pope the
Power he had himself, since He without doubt had all both Spiritual and
Temporal Power, how can you avoid being obliged, and that by an Article of your
Faith, to acknowledge that the Pope likewise has all manner of Power, and may
justly and lawfully do all those things which your Letter calls the exorbitant
fancies of private men. This Friend exceeds the bounds of probable opinions,
and intrenches strongly on your Faith. Wherefore you shall not deny either my
friendship or importunity an Answer to it. But answer so, if possibly you can,
that these doubts or umbrages, or what you perhaps may find a better name for,
then I can give a reason of, may trouble me no longer. Will you permit me to
deal plainly with you? I suspect you have said more then you are allowed to
say, and more then I should be allowed to hold if I were of your Communion. The
Jews ware not more zealous to make Proselytes then you are; and what know I but
you may have a design upon me, and say more what you think may induce me to
think favorably of your Religion, then what your Religion gives you warrant to
say. Let me therefore entreat you to say nothing but what a good Catholic may
unreprovably say, and what I may be secure shall not be he disallowed by your
Church. And since I can promise you no other fruit of your labor, for I do not
think you hope in earnest to make a Proselyte of me, accept the assurance I
give you, that you shall at least firmly bind to your Service,

Yours, etc.

FRIEND,
YOU know the power of your friendship over me, and you make use of it. For
ought I see mine is just the case of handsome-handed Tom Fool, whom that praise
betrayed to so much labor, that he complained his dexterity had almost cripled
him. Pray God my easiness, or your importunity give me not one day more cause
of complaint then he had. But since you will not be denied, it is best to obey
you without more a do. For your unquietness I could laugh at it, if its deeper
root did not give me too much cause of grief. As sincere as you are you are
prejudiced Friend, and this unquitness of yours is the struggling betwixt
reason, which you plainly see, and a passion so secret that it is hid even from
your self, which hinders you from entertaining freely what you see. Not but
that I know your candor well, and am enough persuaded you are not conscious of
opposing reason wilfully, and would be your Compurgator of sin against the Holy
Ghost. But thus it happens: Ever since the change of Religion, and the bad
attempts of some Catholics in the days of Queen Elizabeth, heightened by the
horrid Powder Treason, it has been perhaps the direction of the State, however
the employment of Pulpits, to give bad impressions of Catholics and their
Religion. And this has been done so long, and so universally, and so
vehemently, that since you find the effect of it, I may reasonably judge there
is none who has not his share, and who has not found an Idea of Catholics more
according to what they have been represented then what they are. As the Nature
and circumstances of men are different, and some are framed to a sweet
uprightness, others to an unwayward crosness. Again some converse much with
good Catholics, some with bad ones, some with none, and who have no other
knowledge of them, but as they hear of strange animals in Afric or the Indies,
so men are differently affected toward them: But I believe there is none who
has not more or less of the bad Idea so much endeavored to be fixed upon them,
and that no hearty Protestant can hear things said to the advantage of
Catholics or their Religion without that unquietness at least which you find
in your self. It were to be wished, and perhaps expected from the Charity of
Pulpits, that the example of that wise and merciful King, against whom that
Treason was plotted might have been followed, and the Innocent distinguished
from the Guilty. But whatever might or should have been, we see what is done,
and you find the effect in your self, whereof that you may not think reason the
cause, consider a little that while we pass generally for ignorant stupid
people, led blindly into all the follies to which our blinder Guides our
Priests conduct us, you object craft and subtlety to me. Reason, Friend, is
more uniform and more of a piece, and objects not so crosly. For what you say
of our Jewish zeal of gaining Proselytes, I must avow to you I am of St. Paul's
mind, and wish non tantum se, sed etiam omnes qui audiunt hodie fieri tales
qualis ego sum, exceptis vinculis his. I am taught to love my neighbor as my
self, and because I am satisfied the way in which I am is the way to Heavean, I
wish every body would choose it. But if you think me a dangerous person for
this, you must think Reason a dangerous thing, which he that fears to be
trapand, let me tell you is more trapan'd by his own fears. You talk pleasantly
of half Catholics, and motly Religion, but I think you expect no answer, and
need not be put in mind, that Religion as sacred as it is cannot hinder men
from using their weak apprehensions, and disorderly fancies, and irregular
deductions as well upon it as every thing else; and he that shall take all that
for Faith, which every even faithful man offers him, may too truly say inopem
me copia fecit, and find perhaps at last that too much Religion has left him
none at all. For the new trouble with which you threaten me, I hope the more
you examine my answer, the less cause of exception you will find against it.
Nevertheless if you do prove dissatisfied, I will endeavor, when I know why,
to satisfy you as well as I can.

The noble Person cite was unquestionably a wise man, and his saying is a wise
saying, and I am of his mind, and wish such an Authentic definition made in
this matter with all my heart. But Friend, I am no Pope to make one, and though
I am persuaded an Authentic definition of truth might produce very good
effects, I fear an unseasonable dispute might do as much harm. Those two Powers
like two boundless Seas, have sometimes strugled together, and in their
unresistable Waves buried multititudes of unhappy People. We may bless God we
live in a calm; disputes might raise the billows again, and who knows when they
would be laid. I could speak with Freedom to you, but since you talk of
communicating what I say to others, consider that one will mistake ignorantly,
another pervert wilfully, a third deduce rashly, and in a matter of this
consequence where our duty required by the Law of God is concerned, all
interpose eagerly, and the most ignorant being still the most forward and full
of noise; the great good you fancy by setting bounds to the two Powers, would
prove clamor, and bustle, and inextricable confusion, and if any
miscarriage-happen all will be imputed to the Author, who as innocent as he may
otherwise be, can never yet acquit himself of meddling with what he has nothing
to do. No Friend, let us preserve the Majesty of Supreme Powers in an awful
distance, and submit to them with the reverence of a quiet obedience, and not
make them cheap by unseasonable disputes. Princes and Bishops are both sacred,
let what belongs to them be so too, and not touched without the excuse of
necessity or obligation of duty. But People should know how to behave
themselves when the two Powers are at odds. For my part I conceive this is a
Case which may safely be left to Gods providence, and that those who do amiss,
sin more by Passion then Ignorance. Let a man truly mean to do well, and bring
an upright Conscience to he Action, and I believe he will not want as much
knowledge as is necessary for him. This I see, that God being Author of both
Powers, it is not possible they should enterfare, but by an abuse of the one,
and that abuse will be visible enough; and when the case happens those who do
not want honesty will not miscarry for want of knowledge. In the mean time I
should be very sorry to see the case happen, I will not contribute toward it
so much as even to mention it. Obedience is the duty which God and my condition
require from me, and in the performance of that I will endeavor to be found
unblamable, and leave disputing to those who value the praise of a witty or
subtle man, above that of a faithful and quiet subject. Besides though I might
possibly hit of something more then is usually said on the argument, which in
my Opinion uses to be treated lamely enough, yet I take it much to exceed the
sphere of my ability. In two words it is a question which I neither could
sufficiently handle if I would, nor would if I could. But for your second
question, since it trenches as you say upon Faith, and we are taught to be
ready to give satisfaction to any who demands an account of the hope in us, I
shall obey the Apostle and you to my power. You tie me nevertheless to pretty
severe conditions, for what is there, or can there be so plain which mistaking
zeal will not reprove? or what other remedy can I bring to settle your
quietness then Reason, which yet I conceive to be be the very thing which
causes it? The only expedient I can find to speak as you would have me is to
say nothing at all, I mean of my self, farther then to deliver, upon occasion,
may sense of what others say, but answer your objection in the words of such
men of whom you may be secure they will run no hazard of reproof from our
Church; and if your Reason can as well rectify your self as their Authority
will justify them, I hope you may at last be satisfied. Remember then if you
please that I take not upon me to determine dogmatically what is true, and what
false, but only to acquaint you what may by a Catholicek unreprovably be said.
Peradventure I have no reason to be displeased with the bargain, for
dogmatising being so much out of Fashion in this age, it is a great deal more
easy as well as more fashionable to deliver what other men say to the point,
then to handle and conclude the point it self.

But to your difficulty. The Pope, say you, is acknowledged by Catholics to be
the Vicar of Christ on Earth; and I acknowledge that he is so. From this you
frame such an Argument; What power Christ had, the Pope has; Christ had all
power, therefore the Pope has so too, and this by an Article of our Faith.
Before I answer, let me entreat you to consider what work 'twould make if it
were applied to Princes instead of Popes, which I think it may as well be. For
if the Pope be the Vicar of Christ on Earth, Princes are the Vicars of God on
Earth; and that I think is as good and reaches as far: And if his Vicarship
import a power to dispose of Kingdoms, why will not their Vicarship import the
power of the Keys? and why may not he, who purely upon the score of Vicarship,
comes to the Pope for a Title to a Kingdom, as well go to his King for
Remission of his sins? If the Pope must be said to have the temporal Power as
well as spiritual, because Vicar includes both, I see not how Princes can be
denied to have the spiritual, since they have the temporal, and are Vicars as
well as he. This Doctrine would make brave work, and introduce a very pleasant
Reformation into the World. But I forget that I am to say nothing of my self. I
must therefore undertake a needless labor, and show from other men that
Princes are the Vicars of God; and though the unanimous consent of every body
might well excuse me, for none that I ever heard of either doubts they are so,
or boggles to call them so when the phrase comes in their way, yet I must not
break my bargain. Let us then consider what this word Vicar signifies, and in
such plenty, or rather such a multitude, for I wish the plenty were as great as
the number as we have amongst us, we cannot sure be ignorant what a Vicar is.
We see he is one who supplys the place of another, who not able for other
respects to attend to his proper employment, delivers it over to be executed by
him whom we call his Vicar. Kings we see govern the World, and the Government
of the World being the proper work of Providence, they do the business which
properly belongs to God. But the nature of God being of that unsociable
excellence, that we are not able to bear the immediate Rays of divine
brightness, and converse with him whose Face none can see and live, our nature
requires he should do this by such substitutes to whom we may address our
selves, and have recourse for what we need. Since Kings then supply the place
of God, or do that which he should do, and which he truly does by them, they
want nothing to the perfect notion of his Vicars but this, that they be
appointed and empowered by God for that end: With this difference
notwithstanding, that Vicars are necessary for other men, from the imperfection
of their natures who make them, because they cannot attend to two employments
at once; but are necessary for God from the superexcelling perfection of his
nature, and imperfection of ours, which cannot bear an immediate converse with
him. Now that they are immediately substituted by God to govern the World under
him or in his place, since it is not likewise to be denied, I hope a few
Authorities will serve to prove. And yet I cannot tell whether that hasty word
Immediately will down with all. For some Divines put this difference betwixt
the Spiritual and Temporal Power, that the first is immediately from God, the
second by mediation of the People, subjecting themselves by way of Election,
Succession, or such other means by which Governments are either introduced or
established. And for my part, though I were not tied from dogmatizing, irritare
crabrones is a thing from which I have much aversion, especially in a question
which I conceive of an extraordinary importance. For whether the power be from
God immediately or mediately, so it be from God, I conceive it extends as far
and is as much to be obeyed. Saul and David were immediately appointed by God,
and yet I think as much obedience was due to Solomon as either of them, and
that St. Peter's Successor, whether Clemens or whoever else, was as much Pope
as he. And if election made the power mediate, we see Popes are not Popes till
they be elected. There are indeed who by this mediation understand a reserve in
the people to reassume in certain cases the power which they have given: But
this I must needs think very abominable, and shall not stick to say whoever
reproves me for it, is himself more reprovable. St. Paul has taught there is no
power but from God; so I believe: and if any think they have found better
Masters of Faith, I for my part mean to stick to those which Christ has given
me. But let us see what is said by those whom no Catholic I suppose will
reprove. The Council of Paris speaks methinks to purpose, when it says: L. 2.
c. 5.
No King must think his Kingdom left him by his Progenitors, but truly and
humbly believe 'twas given him by God: And that earthly Kingdoms are not given
by men, but God, the Prophet Daniel testifies, Dan. 4.14. and 5.25. and Hierom.
27.5. But to them who think their Kingdoms given them by Succession from their
Ancestors, and not rather by God, agrees that which God reproves by the
Prophet, They have reigned, but not by me; Osee 8.4.
they have been Princes, and I knew them not. -- Wherefore whoever Reigns
temporally over other men, L. 5. l. 21.
let him believe his Kingdom was given him not by men, but by God. St. Austin
de Civit. Dei; Let us not attribute the power of giving Kingdoms and Empires to
any but the true God. Tertullian; They (Empeperours) know who gave them the
Empire; Apoleget. adv. Gent. c. 30.
They know 'twas he who made them men, and gave them souls. They are sensible
'twas God alone, under whose power alone they are, second to him, and after him
first before all men. Again; From thence is the Emperor from whence the man
before he was Emperor, from thence the power from whence the spirit or breath.
I am not good at subtletys, but methinks it is hard to make that power mediate,
which is not from Ancestors and Succession, not from men, but from God alone.
More refined wits perhaps may make it hang together that Kings have their power
from God alone, and from something else too, and that their power is mediate,
in which none interposes but himself; and prove a gift from the people of that
which God himself gives, as if his power were under Age, and could not make a
valid donation without them: and when they have done such fine things, we are
still just where we were; for it is acknowledged of all hands, even by those who
least favor the temporal power, that it is from God; and if it be so, those
who have it from him are his Vicars. But yet you shall not take my word even
for so much. He was a Vicar of Christ himself, who speaks thus to the Emperor:
Anast. 2. Ep. un.
The breast of your clemency is Sacrarium, the sacred depository of public
felicity; that by you whom God has commanded to preside as his Vicar on Earth.
And before him Eleutherius in an Epistle to King Lucius our, and I think the
Worlds first Christian King, preserved in our Antiquities, tells him 'twas
needless to send him the Roman Laws, which the King desired, but wishes him to
take the Law of God, and the advice of his own Nation, and frame such as were
proper for his Country, as being himself the Vicar of God. After him another
uses these terms to the Emperor: Steph. 6. ap. Baron. an. 885. n. 11.
Although you similitudinem geras, which I know not how otherwise to English
then represent the person, or are the Vicar of the Emperor Christ himself. The
same phrase is found in Pope Hermisda. In Ep. ad Romans c. 13.
St. Ambrose speaks plainly; Let them know they are not free, but under the
power which is from God, for they are subject to their Prince, qui vicem Dei
agit, who is the Vicar of God, as to God himself. S. Tho. of Aquin. If he be
Author of the work attributed to him, De Regim. Princ. l. 2.
says a King is obliged with all care and diligence to look after Religion, not
only because he is a man, but because he is a Lord and a King, and Dei vices
gerit, is the Vicar of God, on whom he chiefly depends. To omit Nicolaus de
Lyra, Fevardentius, and more then a Letter would hold, or you have patience to
read (for I think you are furnished with a sufficient stock of that virtue, if
you can forgive the folly of saying so much as I have done, which seems to me
not much wiser then to go about seriously to prove there is such a place as
Jamaica, or has been such a Man as Harry the 8th.) I shall only add the
Authority of the Roman Pontifical Printed at Rome 1595. where the Prayer
appointed for the Consecration of Kings ends thus, That you may glory without
end with our Redeemer Jesus Christ, cujus nomen vicemque gestare crederis,
whose name you bear, and whose Vicar you are. This being so, consider now what
a pleasant Argument you have light upon, by which Kings may as well absolve
Penitents, and confer Sacraments, as the Pope dispose of Kingdoms.
Notwithstanding let us look a little nearer upon it. Christ, say you, gave all
the power he had; He had all, both Spiritual and Temporal, therefore the Pope
must have it too. If you will not be too hasty in your censure, but delay it
till I have time to explain my meaning, I will answer you a Catholic may be a
very good Catholic, and believe all a Catholic is bound to believe, and yet
believe never a one of those two Propositions. Not that I mean to be guilty of
the blasphemy of denying to the Son of God all power in Heaven and Earth, but
that Son of God being man too, I do not know a Catholic is bound to believe
that man, purely as man, was a temporal King. But of this more by and by when
your second Proposition comes into play; in the mean time let us consider the
first, viz. That Christ gave to the Pope in St. Peter all the power he had
himself. Pray how does this appear? it is included say you in this, that he is
his Vicar. I beseech you consider again, for I cannot readily think of an
inference which seems to me more wild, and more palpably contradicted by the
open course of things with which we daily converse. A Judge represents the
Kings Person, a Constable does it, all Officers both Civil and Military supply
his place in their several employments. Can every one of these therefore do as
much as the King? Can a General coin money, or a Judge call a Parliament, or a
Constable make War and Peace? We see their several Powers are bounded by their
several Commissions, and the privilege of representing his person gives them
no more power then he is pleased to confer upon them. How can it be otherwise
with the Pope? He indeed is the Vicar of Christ, and represents his person, and
so the Judge does the Kings, but what power he has we are to learn from his
Commission, not his Title.

Let us now consider what a good Catholic may say to this point. And first I
believe no man can reprove him if he say he finds no temporal power included in
any Commission recorded in Scripture, Tradition or the Fathers; and if he
refuse to believe more then he finds there, I think none will reprove him for
that neither. In Scripture we find Saint Peter commissionated to teach, to
baptize, to feed the Flock, to confirm his Brethren; we find the Keys of Heaven
promised and given him, and what those Keys signify we find there declared to
be this, that what he should bind or loose on Earth should be bound or loosed
in Heaven. But of deposing Kings, or disposing of Kingdoms, we read no word.
That his Commission extends only to Spirituals, is a thing so notoriously
known, and universally received amongst Catholics; none denying it but some
Canonists who meddle ultra crepidam, and a few Divines who handle their crepida
unskilfully and follow them, that to be serious and earnest in the proof of it,
is a labor as little needful and perhaps less pardonable then that which I
have newly ended, of showing Princes to be Vicars of God. However because I am
to say nothing of my self, hear what others say. De Anath. Vinc.
Gelasias speaks very clearly: Fuerant haec ante adventum Christi, etc. Before
the coming of Christ, figuratively, and remaining yet in carnal actions, some
were both Kings and Priests, as the H. History delivers of Melchizedeck. Which
thing too, the Devil, striving always with a Tyrannical Pride, to usurp to
himself those things which belong to divine Worship, has imitated amongst his
Followers; so that amongst Pagans the same men have been Emperors and chief
Bishops; but when we were once come to the true King and Bishop (Christ)
neither has the Emperor any longer assumed the name of a Bishop, nor the
Bishop the regal dignity. For although his Members, that is of a true King and
Bishop, are magnificently said according to the participation of his nature, to
have assumed both in a sacred generosity, that the Regality and Priesthood may
subsist together; yet Christ mindful of the frailty of humane nature, tempering
with a glorious Dispensation what might conduce to the salvation of his People,
has so distinguished the Offices of both Powers by proper Actions and distinct
Dignities, desirous his Followers should be saved by wholesome Humility, and
not again betrayed by humane Pride, both that Christian Emperors should need
Bishops for eternal life, and Bishops in the conduct of the temporal things
should use the Imperial Laws, that the spiritual action might be distant from
carnal assaults, and he who militat Deo is a Soldier of Gods, should not
embroil himself with secular business; and on the other side, he who is
entangled in secular business should not preside over divine matters; both that
the modesty of both degrees might be provided for, lest he who had both should
be puffed up, and a convenient profession be particularly fitted to the
qualities of the Actions. This man was a Vicar of Christ himself, and you see
he is so far from thinking his Commission extends to temporal things, that he
plainly teaches Christ distinguished them, and left the spiritual Power so alone
to him, that for temporal Laws he was to be beholding to the Emperor. I might
peradventure have run the hazard of reproof, if I had said that to join those
two Powers is an Artifice of the Devil, but I suppose that saying will not be
reproved in so ancient and so holy a Pope. Symmachus succeeded as to his Chair,
being the next Pope but one after him, so to his Doctrine. You, says he to the
Emperor, receive Baptism from the Bishop, the Sacraments, Penance, desire
their Prayers, their Benediction; lastly you administer humane, he dispenses
divine things to you. Greg. the 2d. Ep. 13. to the Emperor Leo; As the Bishop
has no power to look into the Palace, and meddle with regal dignity, dignitates
regales deferendi; so neither has the Emperor to look into the Church, etc. --
Bishops are therefore set over Churches, abstaining from the business of the
Comwonwealth, that Princes in like manner may abstain from Ecclesiastical
matters, Leo 4. 2. q. 7. c. Nos si incompetenter. It is to be noted that there
are two Persons by which the World is governed, the Royal and the Sacerdotal.
As Kings preside in the affairs of the World, so Priests in what belongs to
God. It belongs to Kings to inflict corporal, to Priests to inflict spiritual
punishment. -- He (Judex) carries the Sword for punishment of the bad and
praise of the good: these (Priests) have the Keys to exclude the excommunicate,
and reconcile the penitent. Nicolas 3d. C. Inter haec 32. q. 2. The holy Church
of God is not governed by worldly Laws, she has no Sword but the Spiritual,
with which she does not kill but quicken. Adrian the first in the Council of
Franckfort seems to me with one little word to explain very well the Commission
given to St. Peter: Peter, said he, in reward of his confession was made Porter
of Heaven, and had power to bind and loose; so much we already know, it is
recorded in Scripture, but what was it he could bind and loose? Souls says the
Pope. These Popes understood and used their power as well as most of their
Successors, and they knew nothing of Temporal power, but confined what was
given them to spiritual and divine things, and care of the Soul. And that this
too is the sense of the Church, I think will appear by the Prayer used on the
Feast of St. Peter's Chair, which anciently ran thus; O God, who by giving the
Keys of Heaven, have delivered to Peter the Pontifical dignity of binding and
loosing Souls. This last word Souls is left out of the latter Editions, I
suppose to render the Prayer more conformable to the expressions of Scripture,
and peradventure to keep more close to antiquity, of which they are very
tenacious at Rome: for Platina in the Life of Leo 4th. delivers the rude
draught of this Prayer, whence it is likely the Prayer was taken, without that
word: But the meaning with the word and without is the same; Words may alter,
but the Churches sense alters not. But let us hear some other of the Fathers.
Hosius Bishop of Corduba, who presided in the Council of Nice, and was counted
in his time the Father of Bishops, writes thus to the Emperor Constantius: God
has committed the Empire to you, Vid. Athan. Ep. ad Solicitarios.
and entrusted us with what belongs to the Church: And as he who looks upon
your Empire with envious Eyes contradicts the divine Ordination; so do you take
heed that by drawing affairs of the Church to you, you incur a great crime. It
is written, give what is Caesar's to Caesar, and what is Gods to God. Wherefore
neither is it lawful for us to take an Empire on Earth, neither does the Power
of Sacrifices and holy things belong to you. S. Jo. Chrysostom. hom 4. in verb.
Isaiae; Bodies are committed to Kings, Souls to Priests. -- He has material,
those spiritual Arms. S. Hierom. in cap. 16. Mat. The Spiritual Key extends not
it self to Temporals without Arrogance. Theophylac. upon John 21. Our Lord
makes Peter not a Prince, not a King, but commands him to be a Pastor. --
Feed, says he, not Kill, etc. S. Anselm. upon Mat. 26. There are secular
Officers by whom Temporal things, and Spiritual Officers by whom Spiritual
things are managed. Wherefore the material Sword is given to carnal, and the
Spiritual to Spiritual Officers; and as what belongs to the Church is not
proper for Kings, so neither ought the Bishop to meddle with what belongs to
Kings. Which because Peter (who represents spiritual men) did, when he used the
material Sword, and cut off our Servants Ears, he deserved to be reprehended by
our Lord. Hugo de san. Victor. de sacr. fid. l. 2. p. 3. c. 4. Earthly Power
has the King for Heads: Spiritual Power the Pope. Earthly things, and all
ordained for earthly Life, belong to the power of the King; Spiritual things,
and all belonging to Spiritual life, to the Pope. Again l. 2. p. 2. c. 3. It is
given to the faithful Christian Laity to possess Temporals, to the Clergy only
Spirituals are committed. St. Bernard speaks thus to the Pope: De consid. l. 1.
c. 6.
Your Power is not in Possessions, but in Crimes; and for these, not for them,
you have received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Consider Hugo's only
Spirituals, and St. Bernards not for Possessions or Temporals, and judge
whether a Catholic is like to be reproved for not extending the Popes power
beyond Spirituals. And in his 2d. Book speaking of Temporals; Be it, says he,
that you may some other way challenge these things, but not by the right of
Apostleship, for he (Peter) could not give what he had not himself, what he had
that he gave: the care, as I said, over Churches. Rupertus Abbas upon these
words nor a Rod, Mat. 10. speaks thus; But now there are two Rods, one of the
Kings of Gentiles, another of the Disciples of Christ: The Rod of of the Kings
of Gentiles is the Rod of Dominion, the Rod of the Disciples of Christ is the
Rod of Direction, the Rod of Pastoral duty solicitously watching over the cure
of Souls: The Rod which is of Dominion, is not granted to the Ministers of the
Gospel of Peace, and that is forbidden here, nor a Rod, etc. Cardinal Damianus
L. 4. Ep. 9. ad Olderic. Episc. Firman. Between the Kingdom and Priesthood the
proper Offices of each are distinguished, that the King may make use of the Arms
of the World, and the Priest be girt with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God. -- If any Object that Pope Leo engaged himself often in War, who
nevertheless is a Saint; I say what I think, that neither Peter obtained the
Apostolical Principality because he denied Christ, nor David deserved the
Oracle of Prophecy because defiled another man's Bed. Schoolmen as they speak
more plainly, are a little more severe. Almain de Authorit. Eccles. c. 2. puts
this difference betwixt Ecclesiastical and Lay power, that by this only
corporeal punishment is inflicted, by other Spiritual precisely. Joan. de
Parisiis c. 10. de potest. Reg. and Pap. Granting that Christ had temporal
authority and plwer, yet gave it not to Peter. c. 15. Answering the Objection
from Quodcunque solveritis, etc. I answer with Chrysostom and Ravanus, by this
is not understood any power given but Spiritual to absolve from the bond of
Sins: and it were foolish to understand a power given to absolve from the Bond
of Debt. Again c. 14. To Peter was given spiritual power only to remit sins,
nor can be do any thing in temporals, but in foro conscientiae. Aegid. Romans Q.
de utraque potestat. art. 3. It is to be understood that Christ had a threefold
power over bodies, souls, and temporal goods. The first he used by curing
infirmities, etc. The second, viz. Spiritual, he both used and delegated as
much as is necessary and expedient for the good of Souls. The third He neither
used nor gave, but rather forbad both to Peter and the other Apostles as is
said: And concludes; In the Commission given to Peter his Vicar, we read not
temporal, but only spiritual power committed to him. I will give Thee the keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, he said not, and Dominion over worldly things:
Wherefore he presently adds, as explicating himself to mean only spiritual
power, Whatever you shall bind, etc. Ambros. Catharin. upon Romans 13. That the
pope is Vicar of Christ, is nothing to purpose to make us believe he has power
given him to rule all the World in temporals. It rather persuades us such power
was not given him, because Christ refused it, and as he was man had it not in
the World; for after the Resurrection 'twas said all power is given me, etc.
But in this World he was subject to secular powers. Wherefore he left the Pope
Vicar of that Kingdom which was given him by his Father while he lived on
Earth; namely, the spiritual Kingdom over his Sheep, etc. Otherwise if he be
the Vicar of Christ absolutely according to all the power which Christ had, he
should have power over Angels and the Blessed, which is ridiculous. And again,
These powers are different from one another, and no man can usurp either at his
pleasure; and to think and teach otherwise is most seditious and most horrible.
Anton. de Rosell. de Protestat. Imp. and Pap. p. 1. c. 38. Whence I conclude
it is Heresy and Madness, to say that the universal Administration of Temporals
is or can be in the Pope. Greg. Haimbarg. de prim. Pap. Whence it appears it is
a fable, and invention that is writ in the Decretals, that Popes have the
plenitude of power givem them, and such a Dominion that they are over Kings and
Princes in Temporals. They are smart fellows, these Schoolmen, and speak home,
and yet are good Catholics for all that, and acknowledged to be so; neither
are they otherwise reproved or reprovable, then as Scholars take the freedom to
censure one another. Mean time since a Catholic may unreprovably hold that the
two powers were distinguished by Christ, and joined by the Devil, the temporal
committed to Princes, and the spiritual to Bishops, who if they be Soldiers of
God are not to meddle with secular business; that while Bishops dispense
divine, Princes are to administer humane things; that to the Clergy belong
only spirituals, and the Popes power has nothing to do with possessions; that
dominion is forbidden him, and only the Rod of direction granted, etc. I hope
you may quiet your fears, and not suspect I shall either be disowned or
reproved by my Church, if upon the security of so much Authority I deny your
first Proposition, and affirm the Popes Vicarship is confined to spirituals,
and that it hinders not Princes from being Gods Vicars as well as himself; who,
if they manage all their trust, are accountable only to him, second to whom
they are, and except whom they have none above them, I mean in their own kind.
Only I would not have you boggle at this, that the Pope is not every where
expressly named. For though the Order of Government require that the Head should
have more power then an inferior Member, as the Commission of a General must be
larger then that of a private Captain; yet I think none will doubt but the
power of the Pope and the rest of the Clergy is all of the same kind, and the
more which belongs to him as Head of the Church, signifies more of the same
sort of actions, not power of another nature. But because I am to say nothing
of my self, let St. Leo tell you this and more in a Sermon inserted into the
Churches Office on the Feast of St. Peter's Chair at Antioch, where speaking of
the Confession of St. Peter, and the promise made him upon it: The force
indeed, says he, of this power past into the other Apostles, and the
Constitution of this Decree (of the keys) descended to all the Princes of the
Church; but it is not without cause that what is intimated to all is commanded
to one. For this is therefore particularly entrusted to Peter, because the
example of Peter is proposed to all the Governors of the Church. And so much to
the first Proposition, which though I have abstained from treating dogmatially,
yet I have said, or rather showed you that others say what may abundantly quiet
your fears, and that a Catholic who confines the Popes power only to
spirituals, is so far from contradicting my principle received amongst
Catholics, that he has the warrant of great, I had almost said all Authority
on this side, at least so much that is not well consistent with Catholic
principles to oppose it. But I pray mistake me not, for though I have said
nothing of my self, yet I would not be misinterpreted so much as to have
alleged ought which might be thought to question any, not only spiritual, but
even temporal power which may justly belong to the Church, and which when it
does, she may without doubt justly use. But it is one thing to have power by
agreement of men, and another by Commission from Christ, and I would say no
more then St. Bernard has said before me, that however such things may belong
to the Church, yet not by right of Apostleship. Your Argument assumed that a
Vicar had the same power with him whose Vicar he is; what I have alleged was
only to answer that, and as I am not obliged, so I meant not to go farther.

What I shall add in examination of your second Proposition you will perceive
is more to satisfy your Friendship then your Argument; for whether Christ had
temporal Dominion or no, if he gave it not to the Pope, the Pope is never the
near, and your Argument sufficiently cleared. Notwithstanding since I would not
give you cause to complain I neglect any thing you proposed, let us consider
how far this is true, that Christ had all temporal as well as spiritual power.
But, Friend, I hope your feud to formalities is abated, for I must tell you
beforehand, there is no discoursing on this subject without distinguishing the
God from the Man. You know in Christ the distinct properties of both Natures
were so united, that they both made but one Sacred Person, to which person
nothing can be denied which can with truth be affirmed of God, and none I think
will be so madly blasphemous to question the absolute Sovereignty and
Omnipotent power of God over all things. But the same person was man too, and
it is from that formality the Pope claims; for suppose it is no less impiety to
affirm, that what belongs to the Divine Nature is not communicable to any to
whom that Nature is not communicated, then it is to deny of the Divine Nature
that which truly belongs to it. And this Bellarmin well understood when he
argues thus: De Romans Pont. l. 5. l. 4.
Christ as man while he lived on Earth neither had nor would have Dominion
merely temporal over any Province or Town: But the Pope is the Vicar of Christ,
and represents Christ to us as he was while he lived amongst men; Wherefore the
Pope as Christ's Vicar, and consequently as Pope, has not Dominion merely
temporal over any Province or Town. Speaking now of Christ precisely as Man,
those who attribute temporal power to him, and make him a secular King, go one
of these two ways. They either allege right of Succession by descent from
David, or a particular grant from God the Father, in whose power it being to
dispose of all Kingdoms, they affirm he has transferred this Right upon his Son
as Man. Of these two the first is hard to prove, and in my opinion signifies
nothing when it is proved. The descent indeed of Christ from, and that by two
several beanches is recorded in the Gospel; but descent gives a tittle to none
but the nearest of the descent, and that Christ was the nearest, is so far from
appearing, that I know not how it possibly should. It Is true, that Solomon and
his Posterity Reigned to Jeconias, but of him the Prophet, Hier. 22.30.
Foretold there should not be of his seed a man who should sit upon the Throne
of David, and have power longer in Juda: So that the Succession of that Regal
Line of David seems ended in him. It Is true Zedechias or Mathanias Reigned 11
years after him, who was not of his seed, for he was his Uncle; but from him to
Aristobulus of the Race of the Machabees, who first reassumed the Regal Diadem,
there was not any King at all amongst the Jews. That Nathan or any of his
Posterity either Reigned or had right to Reign nothing appears, and much less
that Christ was the nearest of the descendents from either that or the other
branch. In so much darkness I think it is evident there can be no clear title.
However I conceive another thing is clear, which, even supposing that Christ
were next in descent to David, would quite take away all Title to his Kingdom,
and that is, that in his time the Kindom was legally and justly translated from
the Family of David, to the Asmoneans. For certainly to affirm that the
Machabees, and their Successors, who with excellent virtue recovered the lost
Scepter, and settled it in their own Family, were all Intruders and Usurpers and
Tyrants, would be a wild and preposterous assertion, and such an one as would
unsettle all the translations of Empires which concur in the course of History,
whereof few perhaps have been made with greater virtue or more justice. What
King can be secure of his Title if the Asmoneans were no Rightful King? And if
they were, descent from David gives Christ no more title to the Throne of
David, then Signior Paleologo (far be all irreverence from the comparison) has
to the Empire of Greece, or Goodman Plantagenet to the Crown of England. A
title therefore by descent seems very hard to prove, but though it were proved,
I think there is so little got by the bargain, that it might have been even as
well let alone. For right to the Kingdom of David is but right to the Kingdom
of David, and I suppose the Pope will not agree to have his Authority confined
to the Guetto at Rome and be put to the trouble of Assembling the dispersed
Jews, that he may have over whom to Reign, and wringing out the ancient Kingdom
of David from the present Possessors, that he may have where to Reign. He knows
well enough the strength and stability of long possession, and I dare say will
not change his spiritual title at Rome for the best and fairest temporal title
which can be made him to Jerusalem, and where else the right of David can give
him any interest, it is hard to imagine.

The other Plea is a Grant from his Father, who may undoubtedly dispose of
Kingdoms, and every thing else as he pleases. But his usual way of giving
Kingdoms is to put those to whom he gives them into actual possession by
Election, Succession, the Sword or other secondary means. To give bare titles
without other fruit is a course not suitable to the method of his proceeding.
Lawyers indeed have invented a distinction betwixt the Dominion and usus
fructus of a thing, and the distinction is useful here below, but I suspect
distinctions are strangers in Heaven, and that plain dealing providence deals
little in Chican. However it be, being resolved not to penerrate into the depth
of the question my self, I shall only observe to you what people say on both
sides, and leave you to judge. This short reflection by the way I suppose I may
irreprovably make, that if the Father made any such grant, the Son was not
ignorant of it. And if he knew such power was given him, and yet refused to use
it, I perceive not how he will be excused from the blame of not doing what
belonged to him to do. A King certainly is as much obliged to govern, as a
Subject to obey: and since it is manifest blasphemy to say Christ was deficient
in any point of duty, this in reference to my dullness is unavoidable, Christ
did not perform the duty of a temporal King, therefore he was no temporal King.
But these are only my thoughts by the by, what people say on both sides is
this. Those who would have Christ a temporal King, allege in proof these
places of Scripture which speak of his power in general, and expressly apply the
name of King to him in particular. Such as Heb. 1.2. Whom he made Heir of all
things, by whom also he made the Worlds, Heb. 2.7. Thou have Crowned him with
honor and glory, and set him over all the works of thy hands. For in that he
subjected all things, he left nothing not subject to him, 1 Cor. 5.24. When he
shall have evacuated all Principality and Power and Virtue, Mat. 28.18. All
power is given me in Heaven and in Earth, Jo. 23.3. Knowing that the Father had
given all things into his hands, Jo. 5.22. For the Father judges no man, but
has given all judgment to the Son; he has given him power to judge, because he
is the son of man, Apoc. 17.14. They shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb
shall overcome them, because he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. And again
19.16. And he has written in his garment and on his high, King of Kings and
Lord of Lords. Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our King, he will save us. Psalm. 2.6. I
am made by him a King over Sion his holy hill, and a great many more of the
same nature. These say they and the like places, are both plain in themselves,
and plainly expounded of a temporal regal power by the Fathers. To which
purpose they bring Theophylact expounding that to the Heb. whom he made Heir of
all things; that is, made Lord of the whole World; but how did he make him
Lord? Namely as man, in the second Psalm he speaks to him, Ask of me and I will
give thee the Gentiles for thy Inheritance. And St. Anselm upon the same place;
Whom the Father appointed according to the humanity the immutable Heir of all
things; that is, possessor of all creatures. And Haymo upon the same place too;
God the Father appointed his Son Heir of all things, that is of the whole World
or all creatures, not only according to the Divinity in which he is coeternal
to his Father, and coequal in the Omnipotence of the Deity, and in which he
eternally possesses all things with his Father; but rather according to the
humanity assumed by the word he is appointed Lord and Heir over all creatures,
as God the Father promised him saying, Ask of me, etc. And the Son himself
rising from the dead speaks thus in the person of the humanity; All power is
given me in Heaven and in Earth. Eusebius Emissenus; He who according to his
Divinity had always with the Father and Holy Ghost power over all things; now
also according to his humanity has received power over all things as Man. He
who lately suffered let him Rule both in Heaven and in Earth, and be believed
the God and Lord, not of the Jews only but of all Nations. L. 2. Cont. Parmen.
Optatus against the Donatists: Why do you break such a promise, and confine to
a kind of Prison the vast extent of Kingdoms? why do you strive to hinder so
much goodness? why are you against our Saviors merits? Permit the Son to enjoy
what was granted, permit the Father to perform what he promised. Why do you set
bounds, and fix Limits, when the whole Earth was promised by the Father? There
is not any thing in any part of the Earth which seems exempt from his
Possession. The whole Earth with its Nations were given him. These and the the
like places are the chief supports of the affirmative opinion; for I omit their
Reasons, not only because a man who were strongly bent upon it, may invent
specious pretexts almost for any thing, and they seem to me no other, but
because I take questions of Faith not properly to belong to the decision of
mere Reason. I mean in this manner, that People should rashly determine by
their ill grounded reasonings, what is fitting or not fitting for God to do. We
are to learn of our Fathers and the Church what he has done, and not by Airy
speculations determine what he should do. If this Doctrine has been delivered
to our Forefathers, we shall sure enough receive it from them; but if we do
not, it will hardly belong to Faith, even though it could be proved true. In
the mean time, those who maintain the negative, bring particular Answers to all
these places, the substance whereof devolves to this, that the Kingdom and
Regal power attributed to Christ in the Scripture, is to be understood of his
Spiritual Kingdom the Church, unless where his person is spoken of as
comprehending the divine as well as humane nature, in which Cases, Regal power,
and all that can be attributed to God, may justly be affirmed of him. 'Twere to
write a Book instead of a Letter to dilate them all particularly, and when all
is done, this is the substance: But then on their side they allege Scripture
and Fathers, in my opinion much more convincing. And first they affirm the
question is expressly and plainly decided by Christ himself, Joh. 18.36. When
being asked by Pilate if he were a King, he denies it not, but withal affirms
his Kingdom is not of this World: And methinks people might take his word, and
cease to dispute of what he so plainly determined, for I cannot think otherwise
but this Answer meets the difficulty in the Face, and so reserves whether the
right of omnipotence or spiritaal Regality, as very positively to exclude
Temporal power. They allege again Luke 12.14. Who has made me Judge or Divider
betwixt you? Our blessed Savior was moved by one who heard him, and perhaps
believed in him, to cause one Brother to divide an inheritance with the other.
And he not only refuses the motion, but says in a phrase usual in Scripture of
denying by interrogation, it was a matter in which he had nothing to do. Now if
Christ were truly a Temporal King, it is hard to imagine how rendering Justice to
his Subjects, who demanded it at his hands, and determining emergent
Controversies, in which the very Office of a King does in a great measure
consist, should not belong to him. I hove nothing to do with Possessions, and I
am no Temporal King, to seem equivalent. They allege besides, Jo. 6.15. where
Christ perceiving the multitude were resolved to make him King, fled from them
and hid himself. Put him to have received temporal Dominion over all the World
from his Father, and 'twill be hard to unriddle why he used it not in this
occasion. His Subjects more disposed to obey him, they were willing, they were
forward to do their parts; what can be said why he did not do his, and govern
them? I said before, and I cannot but repear it, It Is as much the duty of a
King to govern, as of Subjects to be governed; and I cannot for my life imagine
any other reason, why he should refuse to govern, then this, that he was no
temporal King. If it may be permitted me to speak freely, this position of
temporal regal Power in Christ seems to me to include both nonsense and
blasphemy. For Nonsense it is to put a Power in him to no purpose, an useless
Metaphysical potentia never reduced into Act; and blasphemy it is to say he was
deficient in his duty: and how that position will get clear of either of these
absurdities, I can by no means understand. Other places of Scripture they
bring, but these are the most material. Now because a Catholic cannot be a
Catholic, who maintains a position directly contrary to Scripture, for neither
he nor his position would be endured, those of the other side have invented
several Senses which they give to the places alleged; and though those Senses
seem to me full of Nonsense, yet I cannot but commend in the Authors that they
choose rather to contradict common Sense then Scripture. But do you Judge; My
Kingdom is not of this World, that is, say they, it is not by way of Election or
Succession, nor governed as Worldly Kingdoms are by Treasuries, and Officers,
and Armies. To omit that a Kingdom of this World, though received and governed
another way then usually Kingdoms are, is still a Kingdom of this World, for
the World is the World let it be governed how 'twil; this seems to me to say
that the Kingdom of Christ is no Temporal Kingdom. For temporal Kingdoms can
not subsist nor go on without such things; and he that says his Kingdom had
them not, says plainly his Kingdom was such a Kingdom which needed none of
those things. Which in other words I think is to say it was not a Temporal
Kingdom. Again, say they, the Kingdom of Christ is therefore said not to be of
this world, because at that time most worldly Kingdoms were got by injustice,
and governed by wicked and idolatrous Laws, and such the Kingdom of Christ was
not. But pray, the Kingdoms now a days established with Justice and governed
with equity, are they not Kingdoms of this World? Or did Constantine forfeit
his worldly Empire, by abolishing those Idolatrous Laws, and making better in
their places? Strange Interpretors of Scripture! Who would make worldly
Kingdoms inconsistent with virtue, and Kings cease to be Kings when they turn
good men and most deserve to be so. Besides, if the world were divided into
Kingdoms, however unjustly got and wickedly governed, it was yet divided into
Kingdoms, and what Room was then left for Christ? Would they have him a King,
and give him no Kingdom, or a Kingdom no where? Farther what can be said why
he did not establish his just Kingdom in the place of those wicked ones, and
take so much injustice out of the World? I think nothing but only this, that
his Kingdom was of another nature, made to take away injustice from all,
Dominion from none. I say nothing of the impertinence of alleging injustice in
the beginning of Empires, a position which would shake the Foundations of the
most settled Governments, and leave few Princes secure of their Titles. A third
answer is, that his Kingdom is not of this World, because not only of this
World, but of Heaven and Earth and all Creatures, as if this World and more
were not this World. Besides it mistakes the question too, which is not of the
extent of his Power, to which every Body knows that every thing is subject, but
of the manner, whether besides the omnipotence of his divine nature, and the
spiritual Regality of his humane, there were in him a Temporal power, and he
were appointed by his Father as Saul to judge the People, and go before them, 1
Reg. 21.8.
and fight their battles. This is what the Scripture tells us People expect
from their Kings, and who speaks not to this speaks not to the question.
Farther they say that Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, because worldly
Kingdoms are over Bodies, his over Souls; worldly Kingdoms require obedience
to a Temporal Prince, his knowledge of, and obedience to the Prince of Heaven:
worldly Kingdoms are extinguished by death, or War etc. his is perpetual and
immortal, etc. And this is to say as plain as can be said, that it is spiritual
and not temporal. For Temporal Kingdoms are over Bodies, and if Christ's Kingdom
be only over Souls, it is not temporal; again it is not temporal if it can not be
extinguished, for no temporal thing is immortal. Farther to contra-distinguish
the temporal Prince from the Prince of Heaven is directly to yield the question
and change sides. That prejudice should be so strange a blindness, and men
think to answer by saying the very same with their Adversaries! To that of the
division of the Inheritance, they answer that what Christ refused was to be
made Arbitrator betwixt the two Brethren. But besides that, to understand the
place of Arbitration seems a little violent; for Arbitration requires the
Consent of both Parties, and there appears nothing but the complaint of one
against the injustice of the other. His answer imports, that meddling with
Inheritances was a thing with which he had nothing to do, and that, whether he
thought fit or no to become an Arbitrator, temporal Matters belonged not to
him. Again they say, his signified he was no Ordinary Judge, whose Duty and
Obligation it was to determine civil Controversies, but that his Jurisdiction
was Voluntary and Arbitrary: And if this be not to say he was not a temporal
King I understand nothing; for a temporal King, is obliged by his Office to do
Justice and determine civil Controversies, and his power is not Voluntary and
Arbitrary, but Coactive and Obligatory.

Thirdly, They answer, that Christ meant his judicial power was not by humane
concession; as if he could not have done the business as well by Authority from
Heaven as from Earth, and had not been that way more empowered, and more
obliged to perform his duty.

Fourthly, That Christ came not into the World to judge temporal things, though
he had full power so to do; which is just what the other side says, that he was
not sent, or empowered by his Father for that purpose, though as God he might
do what he pleased. What a pleasant folly this unresolvedness to maintain a
thing is, which makes people bring for answer the very position they oppose.

Lastly, He is said to have refused dividing the Inheritance, because Division
is the work of the Devil. Division of hearts indeed is so, but division of
possessions is a work of peace, and a necessary means to Union of hearts; it is
a command from God, and a duty in Kings.

This is chiefly what is said on both sides; you will judge as you see cause. I
for my part believe none better acquainted with the truth then Christ himself,
and I mean to take his word and believe his Kingdom is not of this World, and I
care not who knows it. If I mistake his meaning, and that the Kingdom which he
says is not of this World, prove yet to be a worldly Kingdom, I shall at least
have the comfort to err in very good Company, and good Company you know is a
thing I love sufficiently. St. Cyril of Alexan. speaking of the Hyacinth in the
Mytre of Aaron; The Hyacinth says he, De ador. in spir. l. 11.
signifies Heaven; remember therefore Christ saying my Kingdom is not of this
World, for Christ is not an Earthly, but a Heavenly King, and has all creatures
under his feet, St. John Chrysostom; Christ, says he, Hom. 87. in Mat.
acknowledges himself a King, but a Heavenly King'; which elsewhere answering
Pilate, he says more clearly, my Kingdom is not of this World. And in another
place, Hom. 39. in 1 Cor. 15.
Stripture knows two Kingdoms, one of Adoption and Familiarity, another of
Creation by the Law of Making and Creating he is King of all, Jews, Pagans,
Devils, Adversaries; by familiarity and care (he is King) of the Faithful, and
those who willingly commit and subject themselves to him. This Kingdom too is
said to have a beginning; for of this in the second Psalm, Ask, says he, of me
and I will give thee the Gentiles for thy Inheritance: and to his Disciples,
all power is given me by my Father. St. Hierom. In Hierom. c. 22.
shows the prophecy concerning Jeconias was not contrary to the promise of the
Angel, because, says he, Jeremy speaks of a temporal and carnal Kingdom,
Gabriel of a spiritual and eternal one. St. Austin; Hear you Jews and Gentiles,
hear Circumcision, Tr. 115. in Joan.
Prepuce hear, hear all you Earthly Kingdoms, I hinder not your Dominion in
this World, my Kingdom is not of this World. And again, What would you more?
Come to the Kingdom which is not of this World; come by believing, and be not
cruel by fearing. The prophecy says of God the Father, but I am appointed by
him a King over Sion his holy hill: But that Sion, and that Hill is not of this
World. For what is his Kingdom, but those who believe in him? To whom he says,
you are not of this World, as I am not of this World, etc. Again, It is plainly
said of the Kingdom of Christ, not according to that in the beginning, where
God the Word was with God, for there none ever doubted but he is King for all
Ages, but according to the Assumption of Humanity, and Sacrament of Mediator,
and Incarnation of a Virgin, that it shall have no end; where the Angel
speaking to Mary says, and he will give him the Kingdom of David his Father,
and he shall Reign in the House of Jacob for ever. -- But this Kingdom in the
House of Jacob, and on the Throne of David, can it be understood otherwise then
in the Church, and that People which is his Kingdom? of which dlso the Apostle
says, when he shall have delivered up his Kingdom to God the Father, that is;
brought his Saints to tne Contemplation of his Father. And L. 17. de Civit. Dei
C. 7. Speaking of the passage betwixt Saul and Samuel, when Saul tore the Cloak
of Samuel: He represented figuratively the people of Israel, which people were
to lose their Kingdom, our Lord Jesus Christ by the New Testament being to
Reign, not carnally, but spiritually. And what says he, was not he a King who
feared to be made a King? plainly he was, T^act. 25. in Joan.
but not such a King as could be made by men, but such a King as could give
Kingdoms to men. -- He came now not to Reign now, as he will in that Kingdom of
which we say, let thy Kingdom come. He always Reigns with his Father,
according as he is the Son of God, the Word of God, the Word by which all
things are made. But the Prophets foretold his Kingdom also according to this,
that he was made Man, and made those who believe Christians. For there shall be
a Kingdom of Christians, which is now a gathering, now making, is now burying
with the blood of Christ. This Kingdom will one day be manifest, when the
brightness of the Saints will be manifested after the judgment by him made,
which judgment he said before that the Son of Man should make: Of which Kingdom
also the Apostle says, when he shall have delivered up his Kingdom to God his
Father: Whence also he says himself, Come you blessed of my Father, possess
the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World. But his Disciples
and the multitude believing in him, thought he came now to Reign. This is for
them to take and make him King, to prevent the time which he kept secret to
himself to declare seasonably at the end of the World. St. Hilary; In Psalm. 2.
This therefore is the King set over Sion the holy hill of God, declaring the
Command of the Lord, not over that hill of the Earthly City, that deplored, and
homicide, and parricide Jerusalem but that Jerusalem, which is in Heaven; that
which is our Mother, the City of the great King, whose Inhabitants, as I
conceive, those at this day are who rose in the Passion of our Lord. St.
Bernard; That our Lord Jesus was descended from David, no man doubts: Hom. 4.
sup. Mis.
But I ask how God gave him the Throne of his Father David when he Reigned not
in Jerusalem; nay, consented not to the multitude which would have made him
King; besides protested to the face of Pilate, my Kingdom is not of this world.
-- But we know a Jerusalem was signified different from that which is now, and
in which David Reigned, much more Noble and more Rich, and this I conceive was
meant here, by a manner of speech usual in Scripture, where the Sign is often
put for the thing signified. God did then give him the Seat of David his
Father, when he was by him made King over Sion his holy hill. And he seems more
plainly to declare what Kingdom it is of which he speaks, by this that he says,
not in Sion, but over Sion. For peradventure it was therefore said above, that
David Reigned in Sion, but his Kingdom is over Sion, of whom it was said to
David, of your seed I will place upon your Seat. Of whom it was said by another
Prophet, He shall sit upon the Throne of David, and over his Kingdom. You see
it is every where over, or upon. Over Sion, upon his Seat, upon his Throne, over
his Kingdom. Our Lord God therefore will give him not the typical, but the true
Seat of David, not a temporal, but an eternal, not an earthly, but an heavenly
one. -- Farther, And he shall Reign in the House of Jacob for ever, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end. Here too, if we understand the temporal House of
Jacob, how shall he Reign for ever in that which is not for ever? We must
therefore seek an eternal House of Jacob, in which he may Reign for ever, of
whose Kingdom there shall be no end. St. Anselm, according to this that the
Word was made Flesh, he began to Reign in Believers by Faith in his Incarnation.

These in my Opinion (for I intend here to end, and think I have done pretty
fair for a Letter) speak much more to purpose then those alleged on the other
side, who talk of Christ's power in general, and at most according to his
humanity; but what kind of power he had they express not; the extent of his
power, which no body denies, they assert very plainly, but are silent as to the
quality of it, which is the thing in question: Whereas these positively declare
it not to be carnal, and temporal, and earthly, but Spiritual and Divine. They
tell us plainly besides what his Kingdom is: namely, the Faithful, his Church,
and the plenitude of Saints now a gathering, and to be completed in the
Resurrection when he shall deliver his Kingdom to his Father. For my self,
though I have enough declared my Opinion; yet I declare withal I mean not to
tie you or any man to it. Neither do I believe those who are of a contrary
judgment will be convinced by what I have said, neither did I go about to
convince them. My business was to satisfy you, not to dogmatize. And I hope
you will perceive your Argument so answered, that if those unquiet Spirits of
fear and diffidence continue still to hant you, the blame is not to be imputed
to me. Of two propositions which you assumed to fix a power Paramount in the
Pope upon our Faith; I have showed a Catholic may safely deny either of both.
It Is at his choice to take either way, and any one does his business. If he
will deny a temporal Regality in Christ, the difficulty is cut up by the root,
since a Vicar can not with any shadow of pretense challenge more then was in
the Principal himself. If not willing to meddle with that question, he will
take the other way, and affirm that whatever power Chrit had, he left only
Spiritual to Peter and his Successors, the difficulty is as fully cleared. A
Catholic, take my word, may unreprovably hold either or both, and that you may
have better security against your fears then my word can give you, I have
showed you both maintained by those whom Catholics are not permitted to
reprove. If all this be not enough to quiet your suspicious, let me add, that
if you consider well, you will find that of all men the Principles of
Catholciks can least endure the contrary Doctrine. Ask of your Forefathers,
walk in the ancient Paths, avoid novelties and the like, are Maxims so known
and universally receieved amongst them, that who is known to contradict them,
is known so far to swerve from the acknowledged grounds of Catholic Religion.
Now when the authority of unquestionable antiquity is of the one side, and on
the other, that of Authors both late and few, and of no extraordinary credit, a
Catholic who knows what he does, can so little doubt which part to take, that
I think he is not excusable if he so much as doubt, or at least not otherwise,
then as zeal is excused by blindness. None have that veneration for antiquity,
and Fathers, which Catholics pretend, for they look upon them as the men who
have begot them in the Gospel; from whence they give them the name of Fathers,
as the most considerable Pillars of the Church, as the principal Persons on
whose attestation the Rule of Faith and Stability of Religion depends. After
the sacred Books of Scripture written by Divine Inspiration, to which no
writing of Man can be equaled, nor so much as compared, we Reverence in the
next place the Writings of the Fathers, which we think useful too, and the most
useful of any to the understanding of the Scripture, of which we hold them the
best Interpreters. We universally blame those of other Communions for
preferring the obscurity of private interpretations before the clear light of
Tradition. And all these things are known and acknowledged by every body:
Wherefore since the great Lights of the Church St. Agustin, and St. Hierom, and
St. Cyril, and St John Chrysostom, and St. Bernard, and the rest shine clearly
out, and with a joint consent unanimously conspire into the same Doctrine, none
are so blamable as Catholics if they oppose it. And such men as Comitolus and
Sermarinus and the like put into the contrary balance weigh so little, that
it is shameful even that they should enter in. The truth is, the world goes
otherwise then sharp-sighted men would think it should or could; else it is not
easy to conceive how it should be possible there should be found amongst those
of our principles, who should stand in opposition to the Fathers. All that can
be said is that worldly policy sometimes makes a little too bold with Christian
simplicity, and that preposterous zeal is very blind, and therefore a very
dangerous Guide. And I shall take the liberty to tell you that understanding
Catholics, who consider the way they take, see, if it were followed in other
things, it would mine Catholic Religion; and that the men indeed, perhaps by
the privilege of well meaning ignorance are Catholics, but the way is not a
Catholic way. Thanks be to God there are not many who walk in it, and those
who do, I believe consider not what they do. For sure I am that knowingly to
slight the Reverence due to Sacred Antiquity, and set up new Masters in
opposition to the Fathers of Christianity and Doctors of the Church, agrees
very ill with a Catholiek Spirit. In fine, as men will be men, and God must
make the World another thing then it is, if we expect that all should do as
they ought, you will find among Catholics some who hold the contrary Opinion,
but none who hold this reprovable. And this I say the more confidently, because
I mistake very much if it be reprovable even amongst the Jesuits themselves;
who yet are thought the greatest Favorers of the Papal power. At least I know
they cannot reprove it, without reproving their own best and most famous
Authors. Read Bellarmin. de Romans Pontif. the fourth Chapter of the fifth Book,
and Maldonat. upon 27 Mat. and see if they do not both expressly hold and
strongly prove the Doctrine of the Fathers, and so far that the latter says
people would make Christ a temporal King whether he will or no, etc. against
his express declaration, and that before a Court of Justice. They are too long
to be transcribed. But if you take the pains to read them, since that is safe
enough from being reproved which there is no body to reprove; I hope your
suspicions will be at quiet. However I think it but seasonable that I should,
and be permitted after so long a journey to rest

Yours, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 13. read particular. l. 36. r. were. p. 7. l. 5. r. you cite. p.
8. l. 1. for he. r. his. l. 5. r. enterfere. l. 32. may, r. my. p. 10. l. 37.
r. no extraordinary. p. 17. l. 29. r. the Servants ear. p. 18. l. 26. r.
because he defiled. l. 33. r. yet he gave. l. 35. r. Rabanus. p. 21. l. 6. r.
dogmatically. l. 9. r. any principle. l. 11. r. his side. p. 22. l. 8. r.
suppose. l. 28. r. branches. p. 23. l. 22. r. Kings. p. 24. l. 16. r. penetrat.
p. 27. l. 22. dele to. l. 28. r. were disposed. p. 30. l. 18. r. his answer
signified. l. ult. r. resolvedness. p. 31. l. 28. r. Creation. By.

The Fifth and Sixth OF THE Controversial LETTERS: OR THE Grand Controversy,
Concerning The pretended Temporal Authority of POPES over the whole Earth, And
the True Sovereign of KINGS within their own respective Kingdoms.

Between two English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of England: The other of
the Church of Rome.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom and Benjamin Took, at the Gun; and at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

FRIEND,
I Must confess I am something better at ease, at least I know not where to fix
my jealousy. I cannot say but the cause you assign may have had some influence
upon me; for to hear men spoken against perpetually and universally, and not to
think there is some fire to all that smoke, is hardly possible. Yet let me tell
you, I think you have no great reason to complain; for, if I mistake not, you
owe a good number of your Proselites to this very cause, and believe, that of
those who come over to you, far the greatest part have been wrought upon by
this persuasion, That you are ill represented. When you truly are so, as I
cannot deny but sometimes you are, it is no hard matter for you to show it to
candid people, whom nature has so disposed to favor persons wrongfully
traduced, that this bad Idea, where of you complain, makes you at last
sufficient amends. There is such a charm in injured Innocence, that I am very
confident it brings you in more Converts than all your Arguments. If some be
hardened, others are gained; and peradventure fair play were more for the
Interest of both sides. However it be, I acknowledge I was my self something
mistaken in you, and not so well acquainted as I thought with your Religion,
where things I perceive go otherwise than I apprehended. I thought there had
been an Oraculous kind of luster in this power of the Popes, which had either
dazzled you into a blindness of not seeing ought against it, or awed you into a
fear of saying what you saw, if you saw any thing, and for ought I perceive you
are as clear sighted as other men, and speak bold truths as freely. I must
confess we are a little out when we impute blindness to you, at least I Am sure
you saw more in this particular than I. But hark you Friend! while you
discourse of one thing, my thoughts insensibly carry me to another. I begin to
conceit this Tradition of yours which makes such a noise, and passes for such a
bugbear, may prove less frightful than our apprehensions make it. And I cannot
tell whether the Pope has not as much reason to be jealous of it as
Protestants. For methinks, if that be made the Test of Doctrines, and nothing
imposed upon our belief but upon the warrant of the constantly conspiring
attestation of all Ages; This deposing power of the Popes, which from its
inconsistency with Civil government I so much abhorred, must needs be excluded
from the Articles of belief, and Protestans eased of a great deal of pains in
pulling down that which your own beloved Principle pulls down to their hands.
For ought I know, it may do as good service upon other occasions; however I
avow to you, I am more friends with it than ever I was, and think Protestants
have no reason to look unkindly upon a Principle which takes their part so much
in a question of such importance. I wish with all my heart it were looked into
more thoroughly, for I mistake extremely if it would not cut off a number of
those things of which we complain, and though peradventure it be no discretion
to speak so freely to you, reduce things to that pass, that while you labor to
bring us over to you, That very instrument which you use to that purpose, may
force you over to us. But rather than such a thing should happen, I presume the
Pope would disown it, and after he has used it as long as it would serve his
turn, turn enemy to It as soon as he finds It turn enemy to him. But to tell
you truly, I am something in a better humor for Tradition, because you speak
of Scripture with that reverence which is fit, and which pleases me so much the
more by how much the less I expected it from you. For you know how ill you hear
(pardon the pedantry of the phrase) for failing in the respect due to that
sacred pledge of the Divine Love, which the fear, or rather consciousness how
clearly those undimmable lights would discover the abundance of tares you have
sown amongst the wheat of the Gospel, makes you shut up from the Vulgar, and
exclude from the Test and Judge of Controversies. And after this, to profess
they are divinely inspired, and that no other writings can be compared to them,
is a thing which pleases indeed, but surprises me too. Do you forget, or have
you a mind to condemn your self? For the Spirit of God must certainly be Gods
best Interpreter, and where that is to be had (as in books divinely inspired,
the Divine Spirit must certai^ly be,) to seek another Judge is to refuse him
now by whom we must one day be judged whether we will or no, and should do well
not to provoke in the mean time by contempt. To tell you my thoughts freely, If
you would give a little more to Scripture than you do, and we to Tradition, I
think things might be better betwixt us. For you pretend to hate Novelties, as
I am sure we do; All our whole Reformation being nothing else but the rejecting
what you have introduced. Let us have but Gods Law pure as he gave it, and free
from the mixture of erroneous additions or diminutions, and we have no more to
desire. And if I understand Tradition rightly, and that it signify what
Vincentius Lirinensis has long since delivered for the test of Sound doctrine,
viz. what has been held ever, and every where, and by all, methinks you should
like Novelties no more than We: for novelty and this cannot consist together,
and there needs no farther confutation of novelty, but only to show that it is a
Novelty. Which if it be so, in the name of God how fell we out? We all know
that Christ was our only Lawgiver, and that upon the observation of the Law he
gave us, all our hopes of Salvation depend; that since him there has been no
new Lawmakers, and whoever teaches any doctrine contrary to what was taught by
him is long since declared Anathema by the Apostle: that profane Novelties are
to be avoided, and those who broach or abett them are in the words of the
Psalmist, wicked men who tell us stories, but not as thy Law, O God: And while
we both agree in this, how is it possible we should disagree in ought? and what
magic is it which thus sets up Altar against Altar, and divides the seamless
coat of Christ? In the darkness of Barbarism and Ignorance, things might more
easily be obtruded upon us, but in an age shining with so much wit and
learning, and so clear sighted in Antiquity, methinks it is no such hard matter
to find out at least which is the Novelty, and then if Vincentius say true, we
know without more ado which is the Truth. Seriously Friend, I am at a strange
loss and cannot possibly unriddle this Mystery. But my zeal transports me, and
I have almost forgot what we were talking of. To return to your Letter: It is I
must confess long enough, yet I wish it had been longer, and that you had
insisted a little more upon some Points there. Particularly that of the Princes
power, Whether it be immediately from God, or only mediately? It Is true, you
say what those who hold it mediate I conceive will have much ado to answer; but
yet you say it shortly, and determine not the point. I confess it was not
necessary you should; mediate or immediate was enough for your design, but not
for my curiosity. And because I judge the point of importance enough to deserve
a little more pains, I beseech you resume it, and show me a little more at
large that the Tenet of immediate power is unreprovable amongst you, if it be
so. Another is the Spiritual power, which you say was only committed to the
Pope; but what that Spiritual power is, you say not, and by that forgetfulness
or reservedness, or haste of yours, leave me much at a loss. This Spiritual
power of yours, for ought I know, may do all that Temporal power can do; and
then we are never the near, and Princes as unsafe as ever. If their work be
taken out of their hands, and they peradventure out of their kingdoms by this
which you call Spiritual power, you might even as well have kept the Temporal
power too for any kindness you have done us. For it is the Power of which we
complain, and whether you call it temporal or spiritual, if it be a power to do
mischief, it is alike grievous to us. I am the more sollicitous of this for
Bellarmin's sake, and the strange descant he runs upon that plain ground Feed
my sheep; a place he handles almost as odly, as he that on the word
Confirmavit, made this gloss (i.e.) Abrogavit; This Feeding, as he orders
matters, amounting to little less than Destroying. A Shepherd, says he, has
to do with Wolves and Rams, and Sheep; and Princes, as he contrives it, are all
Three. If they leave your Communion, or in his language, turn Heretics, they
are Wolves, and to prevent the mischief they may do the flock, your Shepherd
at Rome is empowered to drive them away by excommunication, and command the
flock not to follow them, for sheep you know naturally run after wolves; but
yet I perceive no great necessity of excommunicating those who have refused
communion before. Then if retaining your Communion, They govern wickedly and
wrong the Church by unjust Laws or actions, they are Rams, and your Shepherd
is again empowered to shut them up, and reduce them to the condition of Sheep:
Weathers methinks he should have said, for Rams seem to be a kind of Sheep, and
Deposing is his way of Gelding. Lastly, all Christians being Sheep, and Princes
amongst the rest, your Shepherd may command and force them to do their duty;
and the duty of Kings being to defend the Church and punish Heretics, if they
fail in this, he may punish and force them by excommunication and other
convenient means; which convenient means is to depose them, and turn the
Commonwealth topsy turvy, and fill the Country with rapine and blood, and such
conveniences as War, and the worst of wars, the Civil uses to produce. And all
this is to feed the sheep still. In truth Friend, a little more would incline
me to believe too, that the Bible is of too keen an edge for every body to
manage; but I am not for all that of your Churches mind, for methinks 'twere
better to keep it shut from the learned, and leave it to the simple, who at
worst would but cut their own fingers, and not their Neighbors throats. A
plain man would never have found out, that feeding should signify putting
folks into a condition of starving. Fighting certainly is a new way of feeding
and sure Christ did not mean his Sheep should be fed with knocks. But to leave
Bellarmin to his speculations, if this be what you understand by your Spiritual
power, your Doctrine is inexcusable. Carerius, or whoever flies highest can
give the Pope no more than all, and I see not that Bellarmin goes less. For if
the Pope can command, and force Princes to obedience, and take them away, and
set up others by his Spiritual power, I understand not what all the Temporal
power in the world can do more. Wherefore either show me a real difference
betwixt these two Powers, and such an one as leaves them at peace one with
another, and each quiet in his own sphere, or confess your Church teaches
Doctrine incompatible with the security of Princes and quiet of the world; and
that all you can do for her credit, is to raise a mist of words, which may
serve to hide her shame a while, and steal your self from the difficulty, but
when it breaks up, every body sees plain enough how things go.

Your very humble Servant.

FRIEND,
THIS is and ever will be the fate of Disputers. While they are intent upon one
thing, some casual expression which they heed not, occasions a new difficulty,
and that many times diverts, sometimes loses the former inquiry. You have now
started new game by your reflections upon Scripture and Tradition, which,
though the Quarry peradventure be as good as that we had before us, yet is not
the same; And as they require as much labor and diligence, twenty to one, we
shall meet with fresh game in the pursuit of them, and tire our selves with
variety of change and catch nothing. Permit me therefore to refer you for those
points to those Writers of ours who have handled them professedly and exactly.
The Objections are so ordinary and so often answered that truly I expected them
not from you, and doubt while you so much lay to heart what is said against us,
you consider little what we reply, which methinks is not so agreeable to your
candor. Otherwise it is easy to meet with information of what we say to those
things. But for your fears the Pope will not suffer us to stand to Tradition,
let me briefly assure you they are vain. The Church has stood almost seventeen
ages by it, and we shall not leave it till we have a mind to leave the Church.
Popes are not the men you take them to be. It Is true they are men, and that a
mixture of worldly considerations should not sometimes enter into their
counsels, cannot be expected: but for all that they are good men, and so good,
that you will not often find Princes more virtuous. It is so far from entering
into their thoughts to assume to themselves things prejudicial to the Church,
that on the contrary it is the good of the Church which has been pretended to
gain admittance for these things which indeed are prejudicial, but which if
they had not been thought otherwise had never gained admittance. And if you
think He who owns himself Father of the Church will not rather cast off these
pleasing flatteries, when he discerns them to be so, than hazard the good of
the Church, allow him yet to understand Policy, and have wit enough to perceive
that his well-being depends upon the well-being of the Church, and the
constancy of his power, and greatness, and whatever you envy him for. Take away
the Church, and He is no body. O Friend! could that clear sight of yours look
upon things without the Spectacles of prejudice, and consider the office
without the impossible to be avoided faults of some persons, you would
peradventure wonder at the aversion you have to a thing, so beneficial to
Mankind, that the Divine Providence has left us few more signal testimonies of
his constant care over us. At least for my part, I cannot but find my self
obliged to a grateful acknowledgment of His love to the Church, as often as I
consider he has appointed one whose office and duty it is to take care of her
good, and placed him in such circumstances that to the efficacy of virtue and a
good Conscience, Interest and the preservation of his own Concerns, and those
great ones, and all the considerations which sway with men, are added to make
him execute this Office well. A Common Father of Christendom obliged by
Conscience and interest to procure the good of the whole, and disabled by want
of the Material Sword which is committed to Princes from doing any great harm,
(Power disarmed you know, cannot be much mischievous) is so great a good, that
if the wisdom and goodness of God had not provided it for us, I am confident
those who love Christianity would have wished, and perhaps, fruitlesly
endeavored to have set it up themselves.

But let us suppose the Popes as bad men as you will, suppose them to design
the destruction of the flock they have undertaken to feed, to be careless of
the place they hold in this world, and the account they are to give in the
next, suppose them wicked, senseless and mad, To make the Church abandon
Tradition is a thing beyond all the plenitude of His power. Hopes of happiness,
and Fear of misery; Love to posterity, and the Force of Nature, and
Inclinations of Mankind, are things too deeply imprinted to be subject to any
Awes or violence. But I have no intention to meddle with Controversy,
wherefore pray take it well that I refer you for more satisfaction, if you
desire it, to those who do.

Then for the Reverence, which from the natural dictate of my thoughts, you
find in my unheeded expressions concerning Scripture you wonder at it, and I
more wonder at your wonder; Yours I say, who, if I mistake not, use not to give
your self blindly up to the conduct of other men's Prejudices; but desire first
to see Reason, and then to follow it. In the name of God what have Catholics
ever said or done, that you should fancy them to have less respect for
Scripture than is due to it, or than other men have. We hear ill indeed as you
say; but alas! it is because other men speak ill. Sure I am, it is we preserved
the Scriptures for fifteen hundred years, and if we had not, you had not had
them to have reproacht us withal. You received them from us, and it is by our
Attestation you know there are Books of Divine Inspiration, and which they are;
otherwise I know not where you would have had them, nor how have known them.
If you think we read them not, and take no care to understand them; examine
well the several Expositours, and see if the Protestants equal the Catholics
either in Number or Learning. But we keep them sealed up from the Vulgar; and
this for fear those clear lights should too plainly discover the bracks of our
Doctrine. I know not how charitable you think that Comment, but I am sure I
find it very irrational. If they be against us in Latin it is a wise piece of
policy, a deep reach of subtle craft to keep people from reading them in
English; as if you had not learning enough to urge them against us in Latin, or
we to understand you unless you spoke English. But thus stands the Case,
whoever understands Latin needs no permission to read the Scripture, and who
does not may have it for asking, provided he be not of the number of the
unlearned and unstable, who deprave them to their own perdition. Such there
were in St. Peter's days, and we have but too much cause to fear the number
is greater now; and if you think that to hinder the Perdition of men be to
want Respect for Scripture, you may think as your Charity and Judgment serves
you; but I think we shall endeavor to show ours by procuring their Salvation.
The truth is, we do little more in that particular than the Law, I think still
in force, obliges you to do. Look into the Statute, Hen. 8. and see with what
limitations the Reading of the Bible is permitted. If you observe them not; we
indeed are more obedient to our Laws, than you to yours; but the Laws of both
are much alike: for all this while numbers of you read the Scriptures, and
show your respect to them in contempt of the Law, which is a fine kind of
respect. But we refuse them for the Judge of Controversies, Conscious, say you,
that they would give sentence against us. Methinks men who impute want of
Charity to us, should be a little more wary in making such Constructions of
things. But I beseech you, What do you mean by Judge of Controversies? If no
more but this, that whatsoever is contained in those Sacred Books is Truth,
and Truth divinely inspired, and such as ought to be received by all with a
submission so absolute and entire, that no Authority on Earth is permitted to
oppose or question the least title of it; and that, when of any point in
Controversy, or not in Controversy, the verdict of Scripture appears, there
is no more to do, but immediately leave off disputing, and receive it with the
reverence and submission due to Divine Oracles. If this be all you mean, as I
think it is, What Catholic ever denied, or questioned, or doubted of it? We
hold him neither Catholic nor Christian that does. And as little as you think
our Vulgar people acquainted with the Scriptures, I believe you will find
few, who knows not thus much of them. Whether all this makes the title of
Judge belong with propriety to Scripture, you may, if you please dispute with
our Controvertists. But for the substance of what we hold, if this which I
have expressed be that which you hold, Catholics hold the same, and as fully and
as firmly. I conceive, when you affirm, and we deny Scripture to be the Judge
(peradventure it might have been more proper to have said, Rule) of
Controversy, we mean not the same thing. For since all the excellent
Prerogatives belonging to that Book, hinder it not from being a Book; and a
Book must be made up of Words, and Words, and what is signified by the Words,
are different things; we think it may be permitted us, without contempt of
Scripture, to think that difference is found in the Words of Scripture, as well
as in all others. For certainly to forfeit our Reason is a very preposterous
kind of respect. Now as far as I am acquainted with Controversy, I conceive
that when we deny it to be the Judge or Rule of Controversy, we mean the Words
abstracting from the Sense; and when you affirm it is, you mean the Sense
abstracting from the Words: For methinks, you should not hold your selves, or
pretend to persuade us, that material Sounds, or strokes of the Air, or Lines
drawn by a Pen, are that very Word of God to which so much Respect is due:
especially when after so long a course of time, we have not the Original Words
neither, at least that we know to be such, which the first Penmen used; but
Translation upon Translation, and such variety of Copies, that there is no
small difficulty in the choice. Pray enquire, and satisfy your self, whether
this be not the truth of the business; for if it be, I see not that you give
more to the Words than we, and that we give as much to the Sense as you. For
nothing can be plainer than that this Position, The Sense is the Rule, is no
contradiction to ours, The Words are not the Rule; which two are so far from
irreconcilable, that they have no opposition, and may, for ought appears in
the Terms, be both true. The Terms in which the Controversy is stated,
Scripture is, Scripture is not the Rule, are indeed contradictory; but what we
mean by these Terms has no opposition. For you mean that the Truth contained in
Scripture, is without exception, to be indisputably believed by all; so that no
Authority, whatever it be, on Earth, whether Pope or Church, can pretend any
way to be exempted from entire submission to it; and this no Catholic denies.
We mean the Words of Scripture, because we see them daily wrested to several
Senses, are not alone able to give us certainty which the true Sense is. And
this I conceive no Protestant bound to affirm. For you consult the Fathers in
difficulties where you are unsatisfi'd, and by their Authority either find, or
justify the Sense in which you understand the Words. Wherefore it is very
evident, that we deny not what you affirm, and you affirm not what we deny, and
that our only contradiction in this Point, is the Contradiction of Words which
we both so understand, that there is no contradiction in what we mean by them.
For you say, We must believe what Scripture says; and we say so too, We say,
we cannot sufficiently know by the bare Words alone, what Scripture says, and
we must believe; and you, I think, say not the contrary. Rule then with you,
signifies Rule of Belief; or that which is to be believed; with us, the Means
by which we must know what we are to believe. Which two are as different as may
be, yet both being confounded in the same word Rule, make a shift with the
assistance of the peevish animosity, and stiff crosness of our unhappy times,
to keep us still at odds, and expose us to the reproach of being disrespectful
to Scripture, for denying it to be the Judge or Rule of Controversy, when all
the while we agree to what you mean by Judge of Controversy. Heu quantum est
in rebus inane! In short, give us the true Sense of Scripture, and if we submit
not to it, with all the ready Obedience due to it, you shall not need to
condemn us: Our public Professions, besides the self conviction of Conscience,
will condemn us to your hands: but if we refuse, to accept for Gods Word, a
wrong Sense of those words in which it is expressed, I think, we show more respect
to the Word by desiring a true one, than those who would impose a false one.
For it is only the True sense which is indeed Gods Word; and there is nothing
farther from respect to it, than to accept a False one instead of it. Pray,
when a Presbyterian Interprets Scripture to the destruction of Episcopacy, or
an Arian to the overthrow of Christ's Deity, or a Socinian of the Trinity; Are
you disrespectful to Scripture for rejecting their Interpretations, or they for
making them? This we take to be the Case betwixt you and us, and that you offer
us wrong Senses of Scripture, and then blame us for want of Respect to
Scripture for not accepting them. Whereof, whatever be the truth, which I will
not meddle with, this is plain, that we do no more to you, than you to
Sectaries; and therefore cannot be thought to have less respect for Scripture
than your selves. I have read somewhere, and I cannot but think it true, that
for all these scandalous imputations, there are none who show that true respect
to Scripture, which Catholics do. For besides the Reverence we bear to the
Sense, we have also an Authentic Copy of the words, to which we tie our selves,
and cannot refuse in D^sputation; whereas others take the liberty to fly from
one Copy, and one Language to another, as best serves their turn: which a body
would think, were a proceeding savored more of a desire to justify
themselves, than Reverence to those Sacred Oracles. The truth is, the
Controversy betwixt us concerning Scripture, is not about the Word of God; in
which we both agree; but of the Means to know it, and that plainly shows the
true Word of God is submitted to of all hands. For otherwise, we need not much
trouble our selves to find it out, or care what it said, if we did not
acknowledge it obliged us to Belief. And since you will not, I presume, say,
that a wrong Sense of the material words, is the true Word of God, or Divinely
inspired; all this hideous contempt, wherewith we are reproacht, amounts to
no more, than that we will not vvilfully contradict our eyesight, but think
the words both may, and are too often wrested to vvrong meanings; that is,
that the Material words are not what they signify: which is just to say, A
man must needs despise the Grape if he think the Bush is not the Wine. It Is
strange an Objection of so little substance should be, or so obstinately pressed,
or so universally entertained. You too talk gravely for Company, and admonish
us of refusing a Judge, to whom we must one day submit our selves weather we
will or no; as if true desire to know his Sentence, and true submission to it
when we do know it, were to refuse it. I do not know we refuse any thing of
Scripture, but your Interpretation, where we think you are in the vvrong; and
I trust you will not say, your Interpretation is the Judge, who at the last
day shall sit upon the quick and the dead. But the Spirit of God is Gods best
Interpreter, say you, and since that is to be had in Books Divinely inspired,
we should seek no farther. How prettily does this sound? and yet, how little
does it signify? To have the Spirit which is in those Holy Books can mean
nothing, that I know, but to know and believe the Truth contained there. And
then consider what work your zeal makes of it. This Meaning is the thing
about which we differ, you understand it one way, and we another. That
then, which is to be Interpreted is the Meaning of Scripture; that which you
assign for Interpreter, is the Spirit, and this Spirit is the very Meaning. Is
it possible you should not see, that this is to make the Interpreter, and the
thing Interpreted all one? That it supposes the same thing, both understood,
and not understood at once? Understood as Interpreter, not understood as
Interpreted. Nay, that it makes one thing the same, and not the same with it
self. For to Interpret, is to declare another thing, and yet this, which to be
Interpreted must be another, you make the Interpreter it self. Pray persist not
with your fine Language to persuade us, that is to be the Interpreter, which
when we once have, there is nothing to be Interpreted: for when we once
have the Meaning, which you call to have the Spirit, there needs no more any
to tell us what we know already. Again, make us not despair of an end of our
differences, by assigning such a method to end them, as supposes them first
ended before it can be applied. For the meaning being once known, there is no
difference for your Interpreter to end. Besides, since while we differ, one of
us has not the true meaning of Scripture, it is a strange method to reconcile
us, to refer us to what one of us has not, nor can have while we differ. I
examine not with what propriety you speak, though to be the Spirit, and to be
dictated by the Spirit, seem different enough. But this is plain, that since
the Spirit in the Books is to be interpreted, the Spirit interpreting must be
out of the Books. And this our Controvertists will tell you is to be sought for
in the Church, to whom was promised the assistance of the same Spirit with
which the Books were written. And to them I refer you, if you desire to dispute
the Point farther, for I intend not to meddle with Controversy. For the rest
of what you say of the mystery of our disagreement, who both agree in what we
would be at, both condemn novelties, and desire the Doctrine taught by Christ
and his Apostles, it is a thing I must confess I wonder at as much as you, and
can as little unriddle. Inimicus homo hoc fecit, is all I can say to it, and
think our best remedy is to fall heartily to our prayers, and solicit the
powerful goodness of God, to throw down at last that wall of division, whose
foundation we are so far from being able to overthrow, that we cannot find
where it is laid, nor upon what ground so mischievous a building stands.

To come then at last to our purpose; I did I confess speak but little of the
first point, the Power of Princes immediately from God, and the little I said I
thought was more then needed, and must think so still, it seeming to me a
question of so little importance either way, that what I shall add is only in
obedience to your commands, which in my opinion might have employed me in
something more useful. But since your curiosity will not otherwise be
satisfied, let me tell you there are in this matter several opinions of learned
men, and all opinions only, and only of learned men, for the Church has not at
all interposed, and I believe either the same or at least as great variety is
to be found amongst you. Some hold that the Civil Power is given by God to the
Community first, which afterward chooses the form of Government most pleasing
or most proper, and the persons to manage it. So that they make it derived from
God immediately to the whole, and by their mediation to the Magistrates. There
are who affirm as much of the Church, and say, that as God and Nature intend
first and more immediately the whole then any part thereof, as sight is given
principally to the man, and to the eye as the instrument by which the man
exercises it, so Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is given principally and properly
to the Church, to the Pope and Bishops as instruments, and those who are to
execute it. Again, When a Prince is said to have his Power immediately from
God, some distinguish this word immediately, and granting that the Power to
command their Subjects is immediately from God, which they say none denies,
they affirm that to have these, and these Subjects, for example, the King of
France, the French, of Spain, the Spaniards, etc. is not immediately from God,
but by one of the four humane ways by which Governments are introduced,
Election. Inheritance, Gift or just Conquest. In which, say they, the case of
the Pope and Secular Princes is different, for to St. Peter, and in him to his
Successors, all Christians of whatever Nation or quality were immediately
subjected by Christ, but for other Princes obedience to them when they are
Princes, is immediately commanded by God, but where and over whom they shall be
Princes, depends upon humane means. Others think this acuteness alters not the
case, and say, that the Power of a Prince is one thing, and the Title which he
has to this Power is another: that the Power is as immediately given Princes as
to the Pope, and that the Title to it is by humane means in both. For he has no
Power but by the means of humane Election, more the Princes by Election,
Inheritance, or the rest. And so they make the designation of the person to be
by humane means, but the collation of Power immediately from God in both. And
thus every one speaks freely as his humor or learning serves, and I for my
part see not that this freedom is prejudicial any way, for while we all agree
we are to obey our Princes, and if we do not, we disobey God, these subtleties,
I conceive, are not much material. One thing there is, and but one that I can
perceive which is of moment, and which I hinted in my former Letter, and that
is, that Position, which makes the Power of the Prince derived from the People,
seems liable to this pressing inconvenience, that they seem not to part so
wholly with it, but in some cases they reserve a right to reassume it again,
as when Princes prove tyrannical, when the line fails, and the like. And this
is a mischief of which great care is to be taken, for one cannot easily find a
greater. For if the People retain any Power, they must retain Judgment when to
use it, and if they be Judges, when it is lawful to oppose the Prince, when
not, there is a gap opened to all manner of Sedition and Rebellion, or rather
there can be no such thing as Sedition or Rebellion in the world, at least of
the People. For when they oppose the Prince, it is a plain case by doing so they
judge he is to be opposed, and if they be the Judges, they are no longer
Rebels, but exercise a Power due to them; then which nothing can be more
pestiferous, and destructive of Government, and ruinous of the advantages
mankind receives by it. Of which people may think as they please, but I believe
the private men are they who reap the greatest benefit by it, and are more
happy then Princes whom many crosly envy, and might peradventure more justly
pity. For certainly to be tied to perpetual labor and care, and un-intermitted
solicitude for the benefit of others, is a condition not much to be envied;
and he, who secure of his life and fortune by the pains of other men, has
nothing to do, but freely to pursue that course to which his inclination or
advantage leads him, is in a condition much more desirable. Wherefore not only
Princes, and all honest men with them, but all who are not stark fools, ought
seriously to join to the preventing a mischief so ruinous. Now as it is obvious
and easily foreseen, so there are several remedies which men have provided
against it. Some affirm that when the People have once parted with their Power,
and chosen to themselves a Form of Government and Governors, they part with it
for ever, and have no more to do but obey for the future, without any right of
intermedling in any case with commanding; and this is pretty well, and renders
the Government stable, and the Governors secure. Others think that they make
all safe, by excluding the People from a capacity of being their own Judges,
and reserving that Prerogative to the common Father of Christendom, who, they
think, will take that care to which he is obliged for the good of his Children.
But this is a little more, and in truth too much suspicious, and does not take
away the harm, but transfer the power of doing it into other hands. For the
same Inconveniences may be feared from the Pope, as from the People; especially
where Princes are his enemies, as many professedly are, and all may be, even
those of his own Communion: And comes so near that universal Temporal Monarchy
which some have attributed to him, that I do not think, that any of his
Adversaries will adm^t it, or that his Friends will know how to maintain it. At
least for my part I do not. Others, and I think the most, both in number and
Authority, take away all interposing of the People farther than to design the
person as in Elections, or however they concur, but make the Princes power flow
immediately from God, and so make it Sacred, and exclude both Pope and People,
and all, but God himself from meddling with it. And because, this is the thing
of which you desire I should discourse, to those Authorities already mentioned
in my former Letter, I shall add as many more as I think may serve for your
satisfaction.

In the first place, those words of S. Paul seem decisive of the question, Romans
13.1. There is no power but from God. For certainly it cannot consist with
them, that Power should be from the People, or any else, but him. That
exclusive word Nisi excludes all besides. Conformably speak the Fathers. Some I
have mentioned before. I add Epiphanius Haeres. 40. You see that this Worldly
power is by God; or rather ordinata ex Deo, orderly and from God, and has the
power of the Sword, and not, etc. from any other but God to revenge. S. Greg.
Naz. de Beatid. Absolute Empire, and highest, full power subject to no other
pleasure or dominion, belongs to Kingdoms. Optatus L. 3. cont. Parmen. Above
the Emperor is only God who made the Emperor, etc. Bruno Carthus. in Romans 13.
There is no power, whether good or bad, but from God. Hincmarus Ap. Bochel. in
Decret. Eccl. Gall. speaking of King Lotharius, He ought to be subject to the
principality of God alone, from whom alone he could be placed in his own
principality. These more ancient Authors speak all, as the Apostle with a
phrase of exclusion, plain enough; yet later speak plainer. Card. Cusanus L. 3.
Concord. C. 5. First, I presuppose what is known even to the Vulgar, that the
Imperial Cessitude is independent of the Sacerdotal power, having an immediate
dependence on God. Dantes Aligh. de Monarch. has a whole Book to prove this
position, and concludes, Wherefore it is plain, that the Temporal Authority of a
Monarch, is derived to him without any mediation from the fountain of Universal
Authority. Joan. de Parisiis de Potest. Regal. and Papal. Both Powers proceed
from one Supreme power, viz. the Divine immediately. Anton. de Rosell. Monar.
part 1. p. 37. Whence is inferred, that Caesar depends of God immediately.
Theodoric a Niem. de Schism. L. 3. c. 7. That Empire depends principally and
immediately of God, appears by evident reasons. de Offic. Princ. c 5. If the
People were obliged to Obedience only in virtue of the consent to the Prince,
their Disobedience would be said to be a breach of their agreement and promise;
but not properly and directly of the Divine Ordinance, which, according to S.
Paul, by Resistance is properly and immediately broken. For the Power which is
resisted is ordained by God; so that now Rebellion ought not to be looked upon
as against Man, but against God. Tho. Waldensis Tom. 1. l. 2. ar. 3. c. 78.
after a whole Chapter to this purpose concludes thus. This we say that the
Power of a King is only of God, given him immediately by God. Victoria Relect.
de potest. Civ. n. 8. Kings have Power by Divine and natural Right, and not
from the Commonwealth. Those who write in behalf of the Venetians, in the
Quarrel betwixt them and Paul the Fifth, laid this Doctrine for a groundwork,
That the Power of temporal Princes, the Pope too amongst the rest, as he is a
Temporal Prince, is given them by God immediately, and without exception.
Bellarmin Answers, and reprehends that word immediately, but is pretty severely
reprehended himself for his pains, and the expression justified by the
Authority of diverse Catholic Doctors; as, Navar, Durandus, Joan, Paris, Almain,
Gerson, etc. In fine he was so Answered, that he thought it better to have
recourse to the Inquisition than to more Arguments, and so caused the Authors
to be cited to Rome. But his Patrons deserted him not, and the Inquisition of
Venice protected him against that of Rome, and the Doctrine remained not only
unblemisht, but countenanced by the Protection of a very wise Commonwealth.
Permit me to conclude this Point with an Authority, which with an English man
may peradventure sway more than all the rest, It being a Declaration of
Parliament, and that in Catholic times, That the Crown of England is, and
always has been, free and subject immediately to God and no other, in all that
concerns the Regality thereof. 16. Ric. 2. Foreigners may talk as their fancy
or Interest leads them, but I suppose a true English man will not easily be
induced, to swerve from a Doctrine delivered him so Authentically by his famous
Ancestors.

I hope by this time your Curiosity is at an end, I am sure my patience is, for
I am quite tired with talking so long of a matter, which seems to me to afford
little more advantage than to know, which of those Authors who treat this
Subject, is the best Scholar, and talks most rationally. For as I said before,
the Church has no ways interposed in the business, and possibly it is a thing
not very proper for her to meddle with. She has received from Christ, and
delivers to us, That Obedience to our Princes is commanded by God, and to be
performed, not only for Fear, but for Conscience. And this being agreed by all,
and acknowledged for unquestioned and unquestionable Truth; The rest of the
speculations may serve for entertainment of those who delight in them, and for
the rest seem of little concern, till people speculate themselves into
opposition to that so certain, and so certainly known Doctrine; and then they
turn not only bad Scholars but bad men, if they see what they do, however
dangerous and as such are to be treated.

For my part, I cannot guess what use you would make of this Immediate Power of
which you are so curious, unless perhaps, you think the security of Kings not
sufficiently provided for without it, and that they may otherwise be obliged to
render an account of their actions, not only to God, but to those by whose
mediation they have received their Power, and so a principal and necessary
Prerogative taken from them. But this is so positively and expressly settled by
unquestionable Authority, that it is very needless, and rather prejudicial, to
have recourse to a ground which some question, when the thing it self is so
unanimously agreed that none questions it. Witness S. Cyril Alex. in Joan. L.
12. C. 56. None offend the laws of Kings without punishment but Kings
themselves, in whom this crime of prevarication has no place: for it was wisely
said, that he is an impious man who says to the King, You do wickedly. S.
Ambrose Apolog. David. c. 10. To Thee only have I sinned; for he was a King
subject himself to no Laws, because Kings are free from the bonds of
delinquency. For no Laws punish them who are safe by the power of their Empire,
and he sinned not to Man, to whom he was not accountable. And Cap. 4. They who
are subject to Laws dare to deny their sin, and scorn to ask pardon, which he
asked who was subject to no humane Laws. Again, L. 2. Ep. 7. For supported by
his regal dignity, as Lord of the Laws, he was not guilty to the Law; he was
accountable to God alone, because he is Lord of Power. Again, upon Psalm. 118.
Sermon. 16. He who had not man to fear, says, I have sinned to Thee alone, etc.
A King, though he have Laws in his power, and may sin without punishment, is
nevertheless subject to God. S. Hierom, Ep. 46. ad Rustic. I was a King and
feared no other man; for he had no other above him. V. Bid upon Psalm. 50. To
Thee alone have I sinned. For a King if he sin, sins only to God, for none else
shall punish him for his sin. Agapet. ad Justinian. in Paraenet. Impose upon
your self a necessity to keep the Laws, since you have not on earth who may
correct you. Isidor. Hispal. Sent. L. 3. C. 50. People that sin fear the Judge,
and are by the Laws restrained from their own harm. Kings, unless they be
restrained by the only fear of God and Hell, run headlong on, and from the
precipice of Licentious liberty fall into all sorts of Vice. Arnob. in Psalm.
50. Whoever lives under the Law, when he offends, sins against God, and also
against the Laws of the World. But this King being under none but God alone,
and only fearing him above his own power, sinned to God alone. Didymus Cat.
Aurea in Psalm. 50. As he was a King he was not subject to humane Laws,
wherefore he sinned not against them who made the Laws, nor committed this evil
against any of them: but as to his Regal dignity, if he would be Virtuous he
was subject to the Divine Law, and therefore sinned to God alone. Lactantius de
Justit. L. 5. C. 24. Let not bad Princes, and unjust Persecutors, who scorn and
scoff at the Name of God, think they shall escape without Punishment -- for they
shall be punished by the Judgment of God -- He commands us patiently to expect
that day of Divine Judgment, in which he will honor or punish every one
according to his deserts. Gregory of Tours. L. 5. Hist. c. 17. If any of us, O
King, will stray from the path of Justice, he may be punished by you. But if you
leave it your self, who shall reprehend you? We speak to you, and if you please
you hear us: if you will not, who shall condemn you, but He who has declared
himself to be Justice? Hincmarus apud Bochell. Decret. Eccles. Gallic. L. 2.
Tit. 16. c. 2. goes farther, and I know not, whether not too far. Wise men, say
this Prince, is subject to the Laws and Judgment of none but God, who made him
King in that Kingdom which his Father allotted him: And if he will for this or
any other cause, he may at his pleasure go to the Synod, and if he will not, he
may freely dismiss it. And as he ought not, whatever he do, be excommunicated
by his own Bishops; so by other Bishops he cannot be judged, since he ought be
subject to the principality of God alone, by whom alone he could be placed in
his own principality. For my part I cannot agree to the denial of the power of
Excommunicating in Bishops: and yet St. Austin is cited, Gloss. in 13. Math. to
say, That the multitude is not to be Excommunicated, nor the Prince of the
people. Euthimius in Psalm. 50. Being a King, and having you alone for Judge of
the sins I commit, I seem to have sinned to you alone; that is, I am subject to
you alone as my Judge; of all the rest I my self am Lord, and in respect of my
power, it seems, I may do whatever I list. Haymo in Psalm. 50. I have sinned to
Thee alone: because being a King, none is to punish my sin but you alone. St.
Thomas 1, 2. Q. 96. Art. 5. making this Conclusion, That all are subject to the
Laws; and this Objection from the Law, That the Prince is free from the Law,
Answers, That the Prince is free from the Law, for as much as concerns the
Co-active power -- because none can pronounce sentence of Condemnation against
him. Wherefore the Gloss upon Psalm. 50. says, That the King has no man who can
judge his actions -- But is subject to the Law, as to the directive power, by
his own proper will, etc. And so without doubt, good Princes are, and will
observe what themselves command. But if they will not, and become bad, there is
none according to S. Thomas who has power to condemn them. Alex. Alensis in
Psalm. 50. I have sinned to Thee alone: because there is no other above me who
can punish me. For I am a King, and none is above me but you alone. And Part.
3. A King is above all, and therefore to be judged by God alone, since he has
not any man who can judge his actions, nor is to be punished by man. But if any
of the People sin, they sin both against God and the King. Nicholaus de Lyra. I
have sinned to Thee alone as my Judge, and who has power to punish: for he had
sinned against Vrias, and others slain upon this occasion. Yet because he was a
King he had no superior Judge to punish him but God. Otho Frisingens Ep. ad
Frederic. before his Chronic. Whilst no person is found in the world who is not
subject to the Laws of the world, and by that subjection kept in awe; Kings
alone, as being above Laws, and reserved to the Divine Judgment, are not awed
by the Laws of the world. Witness that both King and Prophet, I have sinned to
Thee alone. Joan. de Turrenm. in Psalm. 50. I have sinned to Thee alone as my
Judge, and who has power to punish me, because Thou alone art above me who
can judge my Crimes. Dio Vega in conc. Vespert. super Psalm. 50. con. 2.
Wherefore leaving them, we must go the common way with the Fathers of the
Church, Hierom, Austin, Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Cassiodorus, who say, that
David therefore used these words, because, being a Sovereign King, he was
subject to none but God, accountable to the Laws of none, and none but God
could punish his sin. For a King though he be subject to the Directive power of
the Law, yet is not to the Coactive. Joan. de Pineda upon 34. Job. For if a
King or Prince will not willingly obey the Law, who can oblige, or by force
constrain him? -- Yet let Princes understand at last, that if they do not of
their own will keep the Law, they shall render an account to the Supreme King,
and be punished for the Violation of Justice. I conclude with a Jesuit, Lorinus
upon Psalm. 50. I have sinned to Thee alone, viz. as alone knowing, or having
power to punish his sin who was a King, and had no Superior --. None can say
Apostate to a King, or call Judges wicked, unless he will be thought wicked
himself, as Chrysostom and Nicetas, and Cyril in this place note.

I hope by this time you will acknowledge it was a superfluous care of yours
for the security of Princes, if that were your reason, which made you so
sollicitous for the immediate power. For, whatever become of that, this is
universally fixed, That Kings are accountable to none but God. And I think you
need not much care what people say in a question disputed amongst Learned men,
when that for whose sake you desire it should be resolved, is it self so fully
resolved to your hand.

To deal with sincerity, I should acquaint you, what shifts they make to escape
the weight of this Authority, who undertake to abett a Power paramount in the
Pope. But they are such plain shifts, that in truth, I have not patience to
insist upon them. Some say this held among the Jewish Kings who were above the
Priesthood, but holds not among Christians who are subject to it; as if
Christian Princes were less absolute than those of the Jews, or Christianity
took away the Right of any body, much less Princes. I always thought, that
much good had come to the world by Christian Religion, and the concerns of
Mankind went on more sweetly and more strongly; but that it should be guilty of
so great a mischief as to shake the foundations of Government, so beneficial
and necessary to humane Nature is a scandal, which methinks, a Christian ear
should not hear with patience. And Bellarmin, give him his due, as much a
favourer of the Pope as he is; in this yet is more a friend to Truth, and tells
us, De Romans Pont. L. 1. c. 29. That the Gospel deprives no man of his Right and
Dominion, but gets him a new right to an eternal Kingdom: Nor have Kings less
power in the New Testament, than they had in the old. And yet He, with his
distinctions betwixt Fact and Right, Power direct and indirect; with one
whereof he still endeavors to ward all blows, makes as mad work, and reduces
things to as much confusion. I shall say nothing to them more than to entreat
you to be Judge your self, and consider whether, in what I have alleged, there
be any room for those Inventions, and whether the Doctrine be not delivered too
plainly to be put off with such evasions.

And so I come to your Second Point; and for the fear you have of Bellarmin's
Argument, peradventure it were Answer enough to say, That S. Bernard understood
what was meant by the word Feed, as well at least as Bellarmin, and he,
notwithstanding all the Cardinals acuteness, tells Pope Eugenius, L. 4. c. 3.
that to Feed is to Evangelize. Perform, says he, the work of an Evangelist,
and you have fulfilled the duty of a Pastor. Again, Sermon. de Resurrect. Feed
with your Mind, with your Mouth, with your Actions; feed with prayer of the
Mind, exhortation of the Word, proposal of Example. I suppose no good Catholic,
but will side with S. Bernard rather than Bellarmin; for as great a Scholar as
Bellarmin was, he is not yet thought a match for S. Bernard. But neither is he
alone of this mind. Petrus Blesensis says almost in the same words, Ep. 148.
What is to Feed the Sheep, but to Evangelize, to render the People acceptable
to God by Word, by Work, by Example. And thus Innocent III. and a great many
more are cited by Caron, to interpret this word Feed; so that all the
Cardinal's subtle speculations upon the metaphor used in the Gospel, hinder not
the Argument from being as insignificant as you, and more besides you to my
knowledge think it. And if I have not yet said enough to it, hearken a little
to S. Chrysostom. de Sacerd. L. 2. It is not lawful for a man, to cure a Man with
the same Authority with which a Shepherd cures his Sheep. For here it is free
to bind and restrain from pasture, and burn and cut; There the Medicine and
power of the cure is not in him who Administers, but in him who is Sick. But we
shall hear more of him anon.

Mean time, since the Point you have proposed, besides your recommendation,
deserves in it self more consideration than this Argument. Let me tell you for
your satisfaction, That those who treat these things put many differences
betwixt the Spiritual and Civil power, from the manner of Institution, the ends
at which they aim, the means they use to their several ends, etc. That which I
conceive most to your purpose, is either grounded upon, or warranted by the
Instruction left by S. Peter to his fellow Pastors, in these words, 1 Pet. 5.
Feed the flock, of God which is among you, providing not by constraint, but
willingly according to God, neither for filthy lucre sake but voluntarily,
neither as overruling the Clergy, but made Examples of the flock from the
heart. From these words some gather this difference betwixt the Spiritual and
Temporal Power, that the one is accompanied with the power of Constraint, the
other not; I know the word Coacte is sometimes expounded otherwise; and that
some, and in particular V. Bid, understand by it the exclusion of that
Mercenary interest, which in service some propose to themselves, while others
serve for Love. And this sense is without doubt a good and a true one; but I
know not whether the Apostle meant it, though peradventure he, or rather his
Inspirer might, according to S. Austin's Rule, That all the Truth was meant by
God which is contained in the words he Inspired. Otherwise, that seems to be
the import of the Second Branch, Not for lucre but voluntarily; and this
Interpretation, with a needless tautology, makes the two branches signify but
one thing, which the Apostle seems nevertheless to distinguish. However it be,
considering that before S. Peter Christ himself puts Dominion and non-dominion,
for the difference betwixt Secular and Spiritual Power. The Kings of the
Gentiles have dominion over them -- but you not so. Luke 22.25. And that S.
Paul tells the Corinthians, The arms of his warfare are not carnal. Cor. 10. I
conceive that whatever S. Peter meant, this doctrine is very true, that Force
and Constraint belong only to the Civil Magistrate, and not to the Spiritual: I
mean in virtue of his being a Spiritual Magistrate; for these Formalities, of
which you professed so much dislike, return again in spite of my teeth, and
there is no discoursing without them. Otherwise, the man who is a Spiritual
Magistrate may upon other accounts justly have, and justly use Constraint; nay,
it may be his due in consideration of his Spiritual Magistracy, but not
originally deduced from thence, but annexed to it, or accrued by other means.
According to S. Bernard, mentioned in my last: Not by right of Apostleship. Now
if I can make out to you, that it may irreprovably be held in our Church, that
this Spiritual Power, of which you are so jealous, cannot use Force or
Constraint upon any man, I hope you will have no cause of complaint against it,
nor fuel for those fears which still disquiet you. For certainly, a Power
which cannot use Force is a little dangerous. If it can persuade you to what it
would, you then act by your Inclination or Choice; but if it cannot, you are
free to do what you will: And I think, you would not wish to be more safe.
Consider then, what men they are whom they must reprove, who will reprove this
Doctrine. And first, S. Hierom delivers it very plainly, Epitaph. Nepot. Ep. 3.
We must obey the Bishop as the King, nay the Bishop less than the King, for he
is over the unwilling, the Bishop over the willing. One subjects by Fear, the
other is given to Service; One imprisons the Body to death, the other preserves
the Soul to life. S. Greg. Nazian. Apologet. We ought not to constrain by Force
or Necessity, but persuade by Reason and Example of our lives. Again, Our Law
and Lawmakers have especially provided, that the flock be fed not by
constraint, but freely and willingly. And, Orat. 1. cont. Jul. Apost. These
things Julian had in his mind, as those who were privy to his secrets
discovered; but he was restrained by the clemency of God, and the tears of the
Christians, whereof many, and by many had, now been shed, since this was their
only remedy against a Persecutor. S. Jo. Chrysostom. in Act. Hom. 3. comparing
the care of a Bishop with the care of a Father, makes that of a Bishop much
more heavy, as having more Children and less Power. What, says he, will not
the Bishop endure who has so many not of his household Family, but whose
Obedience is in their own power. Again: The Emperor has command over the whole
world, the Bishop is Bishop only of one City, and yet he has as much more care
as there is difference betwixt a River stirred with the wind, and the Sea
swelling and raging. Why so? because there are there more helps, since all
things are performed by Laws and Commands, here is no such thing; for it is not
lawful to command by Authority. Hom. 10. in 1. Thessalon. A Father both by
Natural and Civil Laws, uses his Child with much freedom. If he instruct him
against his will, if he strike him none hinders him, nor dares the Son himself
look up. A Priest has much difficulty: for first he must rule those that are
willing to be ruled, and whom by his government he is to please. Again, We
domineer not over your Faith, Beloved, nor order these things by the right of
command and dominion. To us is commended the speech of Doctrine, not the
Authority of Power and Principality. We hold the place of Counselors and
Exhortors: He who counsels when he delivers his opinion, forces not the hearer
to accept it, but leaves in his power the free choice of what is to be done.
And Hom. 1. in Ep. ad Tit. I omit to say that a Bishop cannot with truth be
called a Prince. Why? Because it is in the Power of their Subjects to obey, or
not. Again, De Sacerdot. L. 2. External Judges when they find wicked men who
have transgrest the Laws, show themselves endued with great Power and
Authority, and force them to change their manners whether they will or no. But
here we must not use force but only persuade, and by that means make him become
better whose cure we have undertaken. For neither have we any Power given by
Law to force Delinquents, and if we had, we have not whereon to exercise this
force and Power, since Christ gives an eternal Kingdom to those, who not by
force but by a firm resolution of the soul abstain from sin. Wherefore there is
need of much art, that Christians who are ill-affected will persuade themselves
that they ought submit to the cure of Priests. Again, upon these words in the
last to the Heb. Hom. Ult. Obey your Prelates, that they may do this with joy,
not lamenting, etc. You see that when an Ecclesiastical Prince is contemned, he
ought not return revenge, but all his revenge is to weep and sigh. And upon
Isa. 6. Hom. 4. The King forces, the Priest exhorts; He with necessity, this by
counsel; He has sensible, this spiritual arms, etc. S. Aust. de fide and oper.
C. 2. says, The material sword used in the Old Testament by Moses and Phinees,
was a figure of the degradations and excommunications to be exercised in the
New, when in the discipline of the Church, the visible sword should cease.
Origin Tract. 12. in Mat. Jesus taking occasion from the two Brothers, who
sought to be advanced above the other Apostles with indignation of the rest,
settles the Rule of justice to the faithful, how a man may obtain the first
place with God. The Princes of the Gentiles not content only to Rule their
Subjects, seek violently to Command them. But with you who are mine, this shall
not be. Least they perhaps who seem to have Principality in the Church, should
domineer over their Brethren, or exercise power upon them. For as all Carnal
things are by necessity not willingness, and Spiritual by willingness not
necessity; so the principality of Spiritual Princes ought to be placed in the
Love, not Corporal fear of their Subjects. And after he had spoken much of the
Humility befitting Prelates, least he should be thought an enemy to their true
Power, he so Answers that Objection that withal he explicates wherein that
Power consists, Adding, This I say not to debase the Ecclesiastical
Principality. For it is sometimes fit, according to the Apostolical
Instruction, publicly to rebuke sinners that the rest may be afraid. It is
sometimes fit he should use his Power (What is that?) and deliver the Sinner
over to Satan to the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit may be saved in
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yet this is seldom to be done. For the
Unquiet are to be reprehended, the Pusillanimous to be comforted, the Weak to
be sustained, Magnanimity showed to all. Reprehension then, and
Excommunication, are the things in which Origin thought the Spiritual Power
consisted. S. Ambrose Orat. in Auxent. Against Weapons and Soldiers of the
Goths I may grieve, I may weep, I may sigh. My Weapons are my Fears: for such
are the defense of a Priest. To resist in any other manner I neither ought, nor
can. S. Bernard. de Consid. L. 2. S. Peter could not give what he had not, what
he had that he gave the care, as I said, over the Churches. Did he give
Dominion too? Hear himself; Not domineering, says he, in the Clergy, but being
made the Example of the flock. And that you may not think this was said only
for humility, not for truth: it is the saying of our Lord in the Gospel, The
Kings of Gentiles have dominion over them, and who have Power upon them are
called beneficial, and infers, but you not so. It Is plain Dominion is forbid to
Apostles, Go you now and dare to usurp either with Dominion the Apostleship, or
with the Apostleship Dominion. Aut Dominans Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus
Dominatum. You are plainly forbid the one. If you will have both together, you
will lose both. Otherwise think not your self exempted from the number of those
of whom God complains; so they have reigned but not by me. They have been
Princes, and I knew them not. Now if you will reign without God, you have glory
but not with God. Dominion is forbidden, Ministry is commanded. Again, Girt
your sword to you, the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. And L.4.
Set upon them with the Word, not the sword. S. Anselm in 26 Mat. Note that
there are two swords in the Church, one material, the other spiritual, but the
spiritual constrains only the willing, the material the unwilling too. And note
withal, that the Saint by Church means materially not formally, that is, that
amongst Christians and the faithful, as well as Infidels, there is the power
of life and death, and they are of the Church who have it, not that it belongs
to them as they are of the Church. Pet. de Aliaco de Resumpt. Concl. 1.
answering some Arguments brought to prove, that the spiritual Power extends it
self to Temporals: To all these things may be said, that they are to be
understood not of the judgment of Coaction, but the judgment of Discretion;
nor that they belong to the Clergy, not by natural and divine Right, but humane
Laws, and concession of Kings or Emperors. And Concl. 4. To those who teach the
Clergy may make Laws in Civil matters and Rules, according to which Princes are
obliged to judge and govern, I insist not upon it, because they say it purely,
voluntarily, and without alleging Authentical Scripture. Again, C. de Reform.
Laic. and Princ. Consi. 6. The Church cannot temporally constrain Princes to
reform these things. Gul. O^hum. Dial. Par. 1. L. 6. C. 9. The Pope as Vicar of
Christ has Power of Excommunication, but not to inflict any greater punishment.
Joan. Ferus L. 3. Comment. in Mat. 16. I will give Thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven: These are not material Keys, but signify metaphorically Power.
Peter therefore received Power, not any earthly Power that he could give or
take away, or alienate Kingdoms, etc. but the Power to bind and loose, to remit
and retain sins, to open and shut, and this not arbitrarily neither, but as a
Minister to execute the will of God. This Ferus by the way is in the Index of
prohibited Books; but these Commentaries printed at Rome are excepted out of
the prohibition, which because I have not, I thought convenient to tell you so.
Anton. de Rosell. de Potest. Imp. and Pap. Par. 1. C. 38. Whence is gathered
that Secular Power never was in Christ nor his Successors; which is confirmed
by the Authority of Bid, when upon that of St. Mat. he says, Amongst you who
are mine, violent dominion shall not be. For as all carnal things are placed in
necessity, spirituals in voluntariness, so spiritual Princes have their
principalities in love not fear: But those who have carnal Coercion should fear
that of the Apostle, Romans 13. If you do ill, fear, namely, the Secular Power,
because their weapons are wars. The sword therefore is not permitted to the
Pope. This Rosellis is got into the Index too, Donec expurgetur; of which if I
had reflected when I writ my last, I had told you so much: But because he cites
V. Bid, who it seems had learnt his Doctrine from Origin and St. Ambrose, I
put him in. I see these Authors freely cited by Catholics, and while they
speak conformably to the Fathers and Popes themselves, know not why they should
be rejected. You have in the former Letter from Leo 4, that corporal
punishments belong to Kings, spiritual to Priests. From Nicol. 2. That the
Church of God has no sword but the spiritual. I add Joan. 8. Cap. Porro 16. Q.
3. The Church unacquainted with corporal Arms, patiently expects mercy from her
only Lord and Defender when he pleases. And Calestin. 3. C. cum ab homine.
Extrav. de Judiciis teaches us, that if a Clergyman remain after Deposition
and Excommunication still incorrigible, since the Church has not Power to do
more, he is to be restrained by the Secular Power, and banishment or some other
lawful punishment inflicted. And this seems to me very evident from the Custom
of the Church even at this day, when if a Clergyman be found guilty of a crime
which deserves death, they deliver him degraded over to the Secular Magistrate
to receive him. I know that some would have this to proceed only from the
prohibition of the Canons, which for decency forbid the Clergy to meddle with
blood. But by their favor, considering the unanimous Doctrine of the Fathers
before delivered, I cannot think but the true indecency is the want of power,
or in St. Bernard's language, their thrusting their Sickle into other men's
Harvest. Otherwise an action truly virtuous seems far from indecent, and to
purge the Commonwealth of a bad Member is not only a virtue, but a necessary
one too, and such as the Commonwealth cannot subsist without. Not only the
Judge, but the Executioner too may be Saints for all the severity of their
Offices, and I should think that things which consist with virtue ought not be
thought mis-becoming, and what are necessary cannot, So that I must needs
believe this Custom of the Church implies her sense, that her Power is at an
end when she has used her spiritual rod, Excommunication; and if any more be
fit to be done, she must have recourse to temporal Power, which if it think not
fit to proceed, I know not why they are not at their liberty.

This is what occurs to me in Answer to the point you proposed. I hope it will
prove satisfactory, and fully quiet the jealousy you have of the spiritual
Power. For certainly there cannot be a more unreasonable fear in the world,
then to fear that which you know can do you no harm. That men should be in the
world empowered to declare to us the commands of God, and way to Heaven, and
press them by efficacious persuasion upon us, and take all opportunities in
season and out of season to that purpose, is so far from prejudicial to
mankind, that we cannot fancy a greater nor more needed Good. And if you will
take it away, you must take mankind away too. For if our nature require we be
governed by reason, it requires too that men be permitted to show it us when we
see it not of our selves. If persuasion and exhortation be thought harmfull to
men, our nature is framed very ill upon which those harmfull things are in
proper means to work, all commerce and all society must end when these things
are forbidden. For what use is there of conversation, if it become unlawful
for me to persuade another man to his own or my good? If it were not folly to
dilate a point so plain, what might not be said of it? Farther, if men become
obstinate, and will not hear reason, it is very natural and very fit they
should be reclaimed if it may be, by openly showing them their fault, and
making them sensible they are in the wrong, which if they be, it is fit they
should amend, if they be not, the company before whom the reprehension is made,
will see it, and take their parts. And he who reprehends them wrongfully will
incur the shame intended for them. So that by this Power none will run the
hazard, so much as of shame, but those whose obstinacy in sin truly deserves
it. Indeed, I have not known this Power put in practice, whether we owe the
discontinuance of it to the Laws or Confession; but it is plain it is in the
Church, and good for Mankind, it should be so. After this, if the Sinner remain
yet obstinate what remains, but that virtuous men and the Church should have no
more to do with him, who will not do good to himself, and may do harm to
others; but look upon him, in our Saviors language, as an Ethnic and Publican,
and have no Commerce and Communication with him, till Repentance restore him to
his former condition? In which I take the substance of Excommunication to
consist. And this I conceive is so far from harm, that, I suppose, you will
make no difficulty to allow it all; not only ours, but all who pretend to the
title of a Church, claiming thus much Power at least. For, that which you only
do, and only can fear, that this Spiritual Power should go too far, and look
upon the disposing of Kingdoms and altering Commonwealths, as things within her
reach; I hope I have brought you sufficient evidence to make you see, that the
All foreseeing Providence of our Wise Lawmakers has provided abundantly for
your security, in distinguishing the two Powers, and putting them into several
hands; and committing the Spiritual Sword to the Church, the Material to the
Prince. For if the Spiritual Power cannot use Force, and be only over the
Willing, and such as may choose whether they will obey or no; which you see the
Fathers plainly affirm, there is no possible fear from it. If any encroachments
be made to the prejudice of other men's Rights, we have the same security
against them as against all Injuries, the Protection of our Prince obliged to
defend us, and armed with Power to do it. We are taught, He bears not the Sword
in vain. And we see by experience he does not. For, notwithstanding these
flattering Positions, which you make so terrible, Princes know well enough how
to preserve themselves and their Subjects from receiving any harm from them. So
Catholics have done in all times, and so they do still. It Is true, they are
generally willing enough to gratify the Pope, with permitting any thing to be
said in his favor; and show that respect to the Common Father of Christendom,
as to let him, and those who are addicted to him, say even what they please.
But yet they do as they think fit: And make no difficulty to Assemble National
Councels, and settle even Ecclesiastical Affairs with their own Bishops; nay,
to make War upon the Pope himself. And while they use the Sword, are justified
still by the Pens of Learned men who take their parts. For all this, they leave
not off their respect to their Church, but so prosecute their Civil concerns,
that they leave the Rights of the Church untoucht; and make Peace with so much
reputation to the Pope, that they refuse not sometimes to ask pardon, even when
they are the persons wronged. But while they give this respect to the Vicar of
Christ, they leave not for all that to do their business, and preserve their
own Rights. And while they keep the Sword in their own hands, let the Pope talk
as he pleases, think themselves secure enough, They apprehend no great danger
from Solligisms, which they can use at any time, as Alexander did the Gordian
knot. Notwithstanding, since it may be dangerous to a Prince, that the minds of
his Subjects be possessed with false Doctrines, especially in matters concerning
Religion, which men generally prefer before Allegiance, according to that,
Aequum est Deo magis obedire quam Regi (though in truth, Religion and
Allegiance can never interfare,) it might concern the prudence of Princes to
take that care in these matters which is fitting. But I am no Counselor, and
my condition obliges me to think they do. I have showed you what the Sentiments
of the Fathers, and the Church are; for the rest it belongs not to me. This
which I have done, being only to obey your Commands, and testify the power you
have over

Your, etc.

The Seventh and Eighth OF THE Controversial LETTERS, OR Grand Controversy,
Concerning The pretended Temporal Authority of POPES over the whole Earth, And
the True Sovereign of KINGS within their own respective Kingdoms.

Between two English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of England: The other of
the Church of Rome.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom and Benjamin Took, at the Gun; and at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

FRIEND,
I Know not how it happens; but the more you show me, methinks the less I see.
While I read your Letters I find not what to except against; yet when I look
off I remain still unsatisfi'd. That there should be a Spiritual Power distinct
from the Temporal, is plainly necessary in it self, and owned by us. We go not
to Westminster Hall for remission of our sins, or to hear the Word of God
preached, or receive the Sacraments. These things belong to Spiritual
Magistrates, amongst whom the Chief with us is the Bishop of Canterbury, as
with you the Bishop of Rome. And since for Orders sake, and the nature of
Government, a Chief there must be, It matters not much whether, as one wittily
said, the top link of the Spiritual Chain be fastened to the Chair of
Canterbury, or of Rome. So the Temporal Primacy be undisturbed, and
undisturbable by the Spiritual, it seems all one whether have it; I mean in
point of Safety, for true or false is another question. And truly, I neither
see how your Spiritual Primacy should disturb it, if all be true you say, nor
why I should doubt of the truth of what you say, while I consider you say
nothing of your own head; but bring such Vouchers for every thing, that I think
your Church cannot say otherwise, unless she throw off that Reverence which,
with so much ostentation, she professes to have for Antiquity. And yet of
necessity there must be more in it. The mischiefs, against which I would be
secured, have actually happened* Princes have been deposed, and the world has
been too much concerned in the effects of this Power to be ignorant of it. Our
own Princes have not been exempt from attempts of this nature, and the hazard
the nation ran in 88. is not yet out of our memory. So that manifestly, either
you believe one thing and do another, or you have not informed me truly, but
covered an ugly face with a handsome vizar. Truly I believe better of your
candor, than to suspect you deceive me by design; yet certainly things are not
so clear and smooth of your side, as you would make me believe. To read your
Papers, one would think nothing could be more innocent than your doctrine in
this Point; yet the world is witness of doings far from Innocent. I must
confess, I was sometime sufficiently perplexed to unriddle this mystery. But at
last I remembered Bellarmin, and when I reflected on his Indirect and in ordine
ad Spiritualia Power, methought I had found the clew to guide me out of this
Labyrinth. That distinction does it Friend, and in truth, I never so well
understood the virtue of Distinctions before; for by the help of this, I
perceive you may say enough to pass for honest men, and in the mean time
reserve as much liberty as heart can vvish to play the knave. Pardon my
bluntness, it is without malice I assure you; but I am too much intent upon the
Question to be choice of my words, especially to you: and consider a little.
You have told me the Spiritual and Civil Power are distinct; that the Popes
Power is Spiritual, and is not Coactive. Why Bellarmin, and any that follows
him, will grant all this. But, if we conclude thence, That the Pope has
nothing to do with Temporals, they will not suffer us, but say, His Power is
indeed of its own nature Spiritual, and directly regards only the good of
Souls, but if Temporals concern that good, His Power is extended to them too;
not directly, as if they were its proper object: but indirectly, as they
collaterally fall in, and are joined to that which is its proper object. So
that they intend not, that any part of that Authority, which I conceive
prejudicial to Princes, and inconsistent with Government, should be taken from
him, but plainly seek to establish it, though another way; and whereas, Others
go plainly to work and tell us, without more ado, That the Pope is the only
Supreme Monarch of the Earth; These go a little about the bush, and say indeed,
He is not directly Lord of Temporals, but come at last to the same, and tell
us, He may as uncontroulably dispose of them as if he were. If this be true,
all you have said is to no purpose, and all you can say, while you stick to
this, will not absolve you from inconsistency with Civil Government. For it is a
plain case, If the Pope may interpose in the disposition of Temporals as often
as they have relation to Spirituals, that He may interpose always: Since of
necessity they must, and cannot but, be always ordered either well, or ill;
and both cases belong to the concern of the Soul. And then it is all one, as
some body in this case handsomely said, whether my eyes be put out by a direct
stroke of a Tennis Ball, or by Bricol. William Rufus was as mortally wounded by
the Arrow which glanced, as if it had been shot directly at him. If Princes may
lawfully be deposed, and their Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, and
obliged to obey the commands of another; and that in Temporals, they are no
longer Sovereign, nor absolute even in Temporals; and whether the Power above
them be Direct or Indirect, Spiritual or not Spiritual, so it be a Power and
can act, they are always unsafe. Pray Friend let me have no dodging. Tell me
plainly, Is this the Doctrine of your Church, or is it not? If it be, unless
you can show me, That those can be good Subjects, and true to their Prince who
acknowledge another Power, which they are to obey against their Prince; and how
that Prince is Supreme in Temporals, who has another above him, whose Commands
he is to obey in the disposition of those Temporals; or if he do not, his
Subjects are not to obey him, I must, for all you have said, continue in my
first thoughts, and not believe you tolerable in any Commonwealth. If it be not
true, I think you would deserve very well of your Church, to free her from the
scandal which the credit of those who hold this, and the countenance she gives
them, brings upon her. In all events, I beseech you, speak plainly, for else I
must needs think, either that your Church teaches you to hold what you are
ashamed to own, or, which is worse, obliges you to conceal the Mischief she
teaches, that by the reputation of a fair Outside you may preserve your selves
in a condition to appear to purpose, when time and opportunity make it
seasonable for her to discover her injust designs. If this happen, I must needs
profess I shall have a worse opinion of your Church than ever I had. For to
maintain a false or bad Doctrine, which you think to be true or good, is but
Error, a fault, which, unless other Circumstances aggravate the case, is very
pardonable, because very natural. Men were not men, if they were not subject to
it. But to teach Wickedness, and keep this wickedness concealed from those who
are not as wicked as themselves; to pretend a sound Outside, and carry a rotten
heart, has so much Malice joined to the Error, that it is abominable in a
private man, and I have not a name abominable enough to say what it is in a
Church. After all your brags of Sanctity, I hope you will not fall into the
woe, which the Gospel pronounces against Whited Sepulchers, beautiful without,
but within full of dead men's bones and filthiness. In fine, if you think
Bellarmins Doctrine true, you have the liberty to make it consistent with Civil
Government if you can. I Will promise you to consider what you can allege as
fully and impartially as you can desire, and give every Argument its full
weight. But if you say nothing, or dodge it off, which is as good as saying
nothing, being well enough acquainted with your nature, to know you are not
backward to communicate any thing you can to the satisfaction of your Friends,
especially when it tends to the justification of your selves, I shall know how
to set the saddle upon the right horse, and without putting you to the
confusion of revealing the shame of your Mother, conclude you are forbidden to
speak; and, though you were not, allow you do wisely to say nothing, where
nothing is to be said that can make for your justification. The Jesuit Fisher
was commanded by King James, to deliver his Sense of this amongst other Points
proposed to him: And he Answered the rest, but past this over with this plain
Confession for his excuse, That he was forbidden to speak of that Subject. If
you follow his Example, I shall believe you have one Religion which you
publish for your Reputation, and another which you conceal for your Interest.
I shall expect your Answer with impatience, and in the mean time remain

Your, etc.

FRIEND,
I Must confess I should have thought my self obliged to you, if you had
dispenst with me in the Question you now propose so pressingly. Hitherto I have
said nothing but what the Fathers have said for me, and hope if any man dislike
any thing, he will consider before he condemn it, what it is to slight and
oppose an Authority so venerable. But now I am not only without the support of
Authority (for it is not to be expected a peremptory decision should be found in
the Fathers, of a Question which entered not into the world till a good while
after they had left it) but the face of Authority is on the other side: not,
but that I conceive the Question fully decided to those who mind Sense, not
Words. For it appears very plainly in what I have already produced, That the
Temporal Power moves in its own sphere, both Supreamly and Independently; which
is in truth the whole business. But yet, because this word Indirect is not
found in the Fathers, it is still pretended that the Question is not decided by
them, and those who have appeared against that Power are for the most part
discredited by Censures, and rendered so unfit to support others, that they have
not been able to uphold themselves: In my judgment not without partiality. For
they were Men of Learning and Virtue, nor is any thing, that I know, laid to
their charge, more then that they thought otherwise in this Point than they
think at Rome. And yet they at Rome at the same time freely communicate with
some, who think the same, and publish their thoughts, and own them in the face
of the world. However it be, I so much value the content of thinking my
thought quietly to my self, and letting others think as they please; of going
unregarded on my own road, and let others stray as much as they will, without
thinking my self bound to set them right, that I know not any task you could
enjoin me, to which I have a greater aversion. And I must tell you frankly,
that were there no more in the case than the bare satisfaction of your curious
humor, I would entreat you to satisfy it at some other rate than the quiet of
your Friend, and putting him out of his easy road, and setting him to strive
against the stream. But, since with a kind of malicious importunity you profess
to interpret my Silence to the disadvantage of the Church, I must run the
hazard of being perhaps traduced my self, rather than suffer her to be so, and
think my self obliged to sacrifice my Humor and inconsiderable Concerns to Her
honor and service. Wherefore, since there is no remedy, but I must swallow
this ungrateful Pill; I pray God make it as wholesome, as I find it bitter.

To begin then, It Is too much known that there is a Power attributed to the
Pope by some, more than is thought due by others, and more than some Popes
themselves believe; for it is written of Pius Vth. that he blamed the groundless
flattery. These Favorers of the Pope are divided into two branches, Some
giving him an absolute Direct Power over all, both Spirituals and Temporals:
Others restraining his Direct Power to Spirituals, but extending it to
Temporals too, in as much as they have reference to Spirituals. The former is
called the opinion of the Canonists, they being most of that Opinion who hold
it: the later is the opinion of Divines who generally go this way. Now if there
were nothing in the case, but the Authority of the Maintainers, and strength of
the Reasons by which they maintain it, People might dispute with freedom, and
let the strongest Argument carry it. But Popes have taken part, and owned this
Power; and though they have not determined either the way or the thing, yet
they take it for granted they have it some way, and proceed upon it. By this
means it has got the face of Authority, and the universal Reverence we bear our
Chief Pastor; as it inclines many to think well of all that is favorable to
him, so it awes the rest, who do not, into a shiness of contradicting it. So
that of Learned Men, those who write of this Subject write generally in favor
of it, those who think otherwise, choose other Subjects to write of; as in
truth, there is but little reason to disgust Higher Powers merely to show there
Learning. But this reservedness has been so much taken notice of, that long
since it has been thought necessary, Learned Men should be constrained by Oaths
and fear of Penalties, terribilibus comminationibus, to declare their thoughts
of this matter. Possibly Interest may have had some share in this backwardness.
Men of this sort of Learning belong most to the Church, and may peradventure
consider, that, If they displease him who carries the Keys, he may perhaps make
use of them to shut the Gates of Ecclesiastical preferment. Besides, they have
been diligent to discountenance and suppress all Books written against the
Popes Power, so that a Private man cannot write without the hazard of a Censure
on his Book, and possibly on his Person. These I think are the true Reasons, I
am sure they are good ones, of the backwardness which you fancy proceeds from
a prohibition of the Church, and with a great deal of injustice; and no truth,
heighten into malice, and the execrable hypocrisy of teaching two Religions,
one to be published, the other concealed, and I know not what; when all this
while, I assure you, there is no such thing as a Prohibition of the Church, at
least that I know of, for any man to speak what he thinks (what Fisher mentions
was a private Order made amongst the Jesuits, and concerns only themselves,)
but wise men are not forward to speak what may turn to their prejudice, nor
quiet men to interpose in the concerns of higher and the Highest Powers, as I
conceive, they are not therefore blameable. However it be, He, who from the
Sense of those who have writ, would infer the Sense of all Learned Men,
concludes, in my opinion, very fallaciously: Those who Write not, and whose
Sense we know not, being much more Numerous, and every jot as Learned as those
who Write.

But to let that pass: this Doctrine has found a different reception in the
world. The French, as their natures are frank and open, without more ado
plainly deny it; and besides, a great many reiterated Arrest of Parliament,
have solemnly condemned it in all their Universities. In other Countries they
are more reserved, and rather oppose, the Execution of the Power; than, the
Power it self. They let the Pope, and any for him, talk as they please, but
when it comes to Practice, it always proves unjust in that particular, and, I
believe, always shall do. In Brabant the Custom is, That all Bulls are
understood of course to be Subreptitious, till they be approved by the Prince:
In other places; they have other expedients: but as far as I see, by several
means they all compass the same end, and admit no more than they think stands
with their Profit: Only the French bluntly tell the Pope, You cannot; others
use softer words, but their Actions say, You shall not, farther than we think
fit. Now for the Opinion of the Canonists, since Divines universally reject it,
I may without more ado reject it with them. Of the other it may be inquired,
Whether it be of Faith; and, Whether it be True, which are very different
Questions. And for Faith, I positively and freely disclaim it, both because the
Maintainers of it themselves confess it is not, and though some are unwary
enough to heighten it to that degree, yet they are but few, and their rashness
is generally condemned as ill grounded, and carried too far. And besides, I see
the contrary is openly maintained by as numerous and considerable a Member as
any belongs to the Catholic Church; and while at Rome they condemn Withrington
and Barklay, at Paris they condemn Bellarmin and Suarez, The Pope and the rest
of the world knows and sees this, and yet Communicate freely with them, and
account them all the while good Catholics. Which is plainly to acknowledge, it
is no point of Faith in which they differ, for if it were, they could no more
Communicate with them, than with Arrius or Pelagius; neither is any
consideration of their Power, or concern of Policy, able to justify or
dispense with acknowledging him a Catholic, who persists to maintain an
Heresy. All the difficulty is, Whether it be true or no. And who am I, that I
should undertake to dogmatize in an Age so Antidogmatical, and where no vanity
is thought greater than that of Dogmatizing: and this in a Question which has
exercised the Wit and Learning of Men esteemed so great, that to oppose them
may chance be counted Arrogance? The most I can do is to tell you what I think*
and what I think is, even in my own judgment, so inconsiderable, that I think
it a great deal better to play the Historian, than the Disputer; and hope you
will be satisfied, if I inform you as much as I know of this Question, and
relate the Arguments hitherto produced on both sides; at least, as far as I am
acquainted with them, and leave you to judge as you see cause. By this means,
as you will have all the Information I can give you, so none can rationally
blame me for barely relating what every body either knows already, or may know,
that will take the pains to look upon what is publicly and every where extant.

But before I begin the Arguments, it will not be amiss to look a little into
the Origin of this Dispute, and consider when, and how it came into the world.
Gregory the VIIth. was the first that brought it on the Stage. Till his time
the Independent Power of Princes was never questioned. They not only quietly
disposed of Civil matters without control, except where any notorious
Injustice happened (and then both Popes, and other zealous Prelates took the
liberty to reprehend, and sometimes Excommunicate them) but had no small share
in Ecclesiastical matters, so far as to make Laws concerning them, to invest
the Persons duly chosen to Benefices, and confirm the Election even of Popes
themselves, which was not held valid without their approbation. Take it in the
words of Onuphrius, no enemy to this Pope. Onuph. de var. Creat. Romans Pont. L.
4.
Though formerly the Bishops of Rome were respected as the Heads of Christian
Religion, the Vicars of Christ, and Successors of Peter, yet their Authority
extended no farther, than either to assert, or maintain the Doctrines of Faith.
For the rest, they were subject to the Emperors, all things were done by Their
appointment; Themselves were Created by them; neither did the Pope dare to
judge, or determine any thing concerning them. Gregory the VIIth was the First
of all the Bishops of Rome, who relying on the Arms of the Normans, and Wealth
of the Countess Mathildis, a Woman of great Power in Italy, and inflamed by the
discord of the Princes of Germany oppressed with Civil Wars, contemning, contrary
to the Custom of his Predecessors, the Imperial Power and Authority, after he
had obtained the Pontificate, durst, not only Excommunicate, but deprive the
Emperor (by whom he had been if not Elected, at least Confirmed) of his
Kingdom and Empire. A thing to that Age unheard of; for, as for the Fables
which go about of Arcadius, and Anastius, and Leo the Iconoclast, I value them
not. Thus then stood things in the world when Hildebrand, Archdeacon of the
Church of Rome, was chosen to the Papacy in the year 1083, and called Gregory
the VIIth. The Contests, which in his days began betwixt the Spiritual and
Civil Power, are the reason, I suppose, why he is so differently represented by
those who write of him. His Enemies give him the Character of an Imperious,
Tyrannical, and several ways Wicked Man: his Friends on the other side praise
him as much, and affirm he was a man of great Prudence and Virtue, and so far,
that it has been attested by several Miracles. And for my own part, I must
confess, I incline to believe well of him. For he had been the support of the
Papacy during the time of several Popes, his Parts and Industry having drawn
upon him the greatest weight of all business, and was so far from aspiring to
that dignity, that, if Baronius say true, He treated with the Emperor not to
consent to his Election, assuring him before hand, that if he did, He would be
very severe against the Abuses practiced in his Court. Besides, if Sigonius may
be believed, and the passages he relates, which can hardly be read without
horror, the Emperor was a very Wicked Man: but that which concerns this
matter was, That all Benefices were, with all the Licentiousness of a depraved
Court exposed to sale, and He that could Fee a Courtier was without Merit, or
even Capacity, possessed of the most considerable Preferments of the Church. As
this was a mischief palpably destructive to all Goodness, so it is not
incredible from the irregularity of a debauched Court. And if the Pope desired
to have it remedied, the end he proposed was but what became him, if the means
had been so too. I am the more inclined to believe this true, because the
Germans in a great measure took part with the Pope, forct the Emperor to
comply, and after several Traverses, at last took the Crown from him, and
placed it on his Son. However it were, the Emperor, notwithstanding the Popes
Remonstrances, gives consent to the Election and confirms him; and the Pope was
as good as his word. And first Excommunicates those who should receive
Investitures of Benefices from Laymen, afterward the Laymen who should grant
them, and lastly, provoked by the Emperor, who in a Synod at Worms had
forbidden Obedience to him, Excommunicates and deposes the Emperor himself.
And this i^ the first unquestionable Example of this kind, which has appeared
in the Christian World. Bellarmin indeed, and his Followers, would make us
believe there are Examples more Ancient; but in my opinion he proves them not
well, and you see Onuphrius counts them but Fables: and those of that Age, at
least those who favored the Emperor, exclaimed against it as a Novelty
unheard of; not to call it Heresy as one faies. But though the thing were now
done, it appears not yet in virtue of what Power 'twas done. As that Age was
not, I think, extraordinary subtle, the distinctions of Direct and Indirect
Power were not yet found out, and the Pope himself speaks in common, That the
care of the Christian World, and Authority to bind and loose was committed to
him; confiding in the Judgment and Mercy of God, and Patronage of the B.
Virgin, and supported by the Authority (of SS. Peter and Paul) etc. but
descends not to particulars. So that it appears not whether he acted in virtue
of a Spiritual or Temporal Power, Directly or Indirectly, and it is likely he
speculated not so far. One thing is pretty remarkable in his second Sentence,
for he made two, which ends in this manner: After he had commanded all
concerned, to withdraw their Obedience from Henry, and yield it to Rudolphus,
speaking as he does all along to the Apostles SS. Peter and Paul: You then, See
the words in Platina.
says he, most holy Princes of the Apostles confirm what I have said by your
Authority, that all men at last may understand, if you can bind and loose in
Heaven, we likewise on Earth may give and take away Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, and whatever mortals can have. -- Let Kings, and all Princes of
the World understand by his Example what you can do in Heaven, and what power
you have with God, and hereafter fear to contemn the commands of the Holy
Church. And show this Judgment upon Henry quickly, that all Sons of Iniquity
may perceive that he falls from his Kingdom, not by chance, but by your means.
This nevertheless I desire from you, that by Repentance he may, at your
request, find favor of our Lord at the day of Judgment. For my part I cannot
imagine, but a man who speaks thus must needs mean uprightly, and think at
least he does well. Notwithstanding the Apostles did not do as he desired them.
For this Rudulphus, after he had fought twice upon equal terms with the
Emperor, was overthrown in the third Battle, and so wounded in the right hand
that he died of it, and died full of Repentance and acknowledgment of his own
fault, and the Justice of God, who had deservedly punished him in that hand with
which he had formerly sworn Fealty and Service to his Lord. So, that though I
believe the Pope thought himself much in the right; yet the Court of Heaven
thought not fit to grant his Request, but ordered things quite contrary to his
expectation and desire.

The next famous Example is of Frederic the IId. a Prince of great Power and
Parts, who falling out with several Popes as resolute as himself, after several
breaches at several times made up, and several Sentences published, and
recalled, and renewed again, was at last, with the astonishment and horror of
all present, says M. Paris, solemnly Excommunicated and deposed in the Council
of Lions. And this made both Princes and Prelates begin to look about them,
foreseeing, that if this deposing Power should go on, a slight Pretense might
at last serve turn to unthrone perhaps an Innocent Man, and bring the world
into confusion; which possibly was the cause, the Popes Sentence was not
executed. For this Frederic, notwithstanding those proceedings, kept the Empire
till his death, which happened long after. But still I see not any ground to
judge, whether the Power were yet thought Direct or Indirect; and in
likelihood, People had in common a great Veneration for the Supreme Pastor,
and his Decrees, and thought them wicked men who submitted not to them, but
what kind of Power he had, and how far it extended, as far as I can perceive
they little considered. It Is observable both in this Sentence, and the former
of Gregory VII. that the Emperor is first Deposed, and afterward
Excommunicated, in aggravation as it were of the former Penalty.

The business was a little more discust in the Contests betwixt Boniface the
VIIIth. and Philip the Fair of France. As this Pope is Recorded for a man of
more mettle than Virtue, his proceedings were Violent; but having to do with a
Prince both Resolute and Prudent, he found but bad success. The Pope persuades
the King to an expedition into the Holy Land: to promote which business, He
exacts the Tithes of Church Livings in France, and reserves the Collation of
all Benefices there to himself. The King excuses the one, and plainly denies
the other. The hot Pope sends the Bishop of Apamea to threaten him with
Censures, and Deposition, unless he yielded to him. The King calls the States,
and upon Consultation with them, resolves the Legate deserved to be imprisoned;
but for reverence to the Sea Apostolic, banishes him, and for his Threats
contemns them. The Legate not content to escape scot-free, falls a new to
Threats, which the King resenting commits him to custody to the Metropolitan.
The Pope complains of the breach of Ecclesiastical Immunity, and commands his
Legate should be immediately returned. These Letters being read in an Assembly
of the States, the Count of Arras, as hot every jot as the Pope, throws them
into the fire. This put the Pope quite out of patience. Wherefore he Cites both
King and Bishops to Rome, where he had appointed a Synod, and in the mean time
declares the Kingdom of France, for Contumacy, Felony, and Violating the Law of
Nations devolved to the Apostolic See, writing thus peremptorily to the King;
We would have you to know, that you are subject to us both in Spirituals and
Temporals -- and who thinks otherwise we repute Heretics. The King, upon the
receipt of these Letters, calls the States again, and by their Advice frames an
Answer every jot as smart, and something more homely. We would have your
foolishness know, we are subject to none in Temporals -- and who thinks
otherwise we take for mad men: And withal appeals to a future General Council,
and objects several Crimes to the Pope, to be made good when the Council should
sit, and in the mean time forbids all intercourse with Rome. This Answer being
brought to Rome by three Bishops deputed for that purpose, the Pope began to be
startled, and at last confesses, That to usurp the Kings Jurisdiction belonged
not to him; nevertheless that in respect of Sin, the King could not deny but he
was subject to the Pope. This put them to examine, how far, and in what manner
he was subject to him; and one of the Cardinals in a Consistory, in which the
French Ambassadors were present, resolves the case in this manner: That
Supreme Dominion belonged properly to the Pope, but the Administration to
Kings; and therefore all Christian Kings were subject to the judgment of the
Pope even in Temporals, in regard of his Supreme Dominion. But this satisfied
not the Ambassadors at Rome; and the States in France, resuming the Debate,
declared positively the King in Temporals was subject to God alone, and owed
his Crown and Power only to him. Nevertheless, this Subjection on the account
of Sin, seems to be the ground of the distinction betwixt Direct and Indirect
Power, though I conceive it borrowed from Innocent the IVth. some time before,
upon occasion of a Contest betwixt John King of England, and Philip Augustus of
France; who prosecuting the King of England for default of Homage for some
Dukedoms in France, etc. King John appeals to the Pope; Philip maintained, that
being a Temporal business he had nothing to do with it. The Pope was vvilling
to favor the English, and therefore assumes cognizance of the Cause, upon
pretense that there was an Oath in the case, the violation of which, being
Sin, belonged properly to his Tribunal. And this Resolution having been put
into a Decree, and that Decree into the Canon Law seems the principal
foundation of Indirect Power.

I must confess, I do not well understand how either this Canon which is in the
Decretals, C. Novit Ille. de Judiciis; or the other, C. per Venerabilem. Qui
filii sint legitimi, which are the two usually cited both of Innocent III. make
to the purpose. The former was made upon the occasion now mentioned, and in it
the Pope speaks thus: We intend not to Judge of the Fee, whereof the cognizance
belongs to him (the King) -- but to decree of the Sin, whereof the Censure
without doubt pertains to us, which we may and ought to exercise on every one.
-- None of sound Judgment is ignorant that it belongs to our Office, to correct
every Christian for any mortal Sin, and, if he despise Correction, to constrain
him by Ecclesiastical punishment, etc. Where the Pope says Correct, the Gloss
adds Indirectly, which single word, and that not explicated, is the main
Authority for the distinction of Direct and Indirect Power now in question. The
other Canon per Venerabilem was made upon this occasion. Philip Augustus of
France had put away his Wife, and taken, as I remember, the Countess of Anjou,
and had Children by her. These Children, at his request, the Pope Legitimates,
while the suit yet depended of the validity of his former Marriage; For the
King alleged it was invalid. But as the Example of Kings is apt to be
followed, Some body leaves his Wife too, and has Children by another Woman, and
then sollicites the Pope to Legitimate them as he had done the King's, The Pope
refuses to yield his Request, but withal owns a Power to have granted it, if he
had found it reasonable, and proves it by several Arguments; and amongst other
passages has these words: We exercise temporal Jurisdiction, not only in the
Patrimony of the Church (where we have full power in Temporals) but in other
Countries also, casually upon inspection of certain Causes. These certain
Causes the Gloss interprets to be when He is required. Now both these Cases
seem to me far enough from the inferring the Deposing Power, which was not at
all in question, but Legitimation in the one, and Cognizance of a Temporal
business in the other: And though the Pope assume both, yet he is very
sollicitous to prove they are within his Sphere, as both may be, and yet
nothing follow in behalf of his Indirect disposing. For he may Legitimate
Children, in order to Spiritual capacities, and leave them in the same
condition in which they were before as to Inheritance, and other Temporal
concerns. Again, He may Judge of Sin, and punish it in his own Court with
Spiritual punishments, and let Temporal punishments alone to whom they belong,
the Temporal Magistrate. And since he expressly limits himself to Ecclesiastical
punishments, methinks it is to strain Logic a little to far to infer out of
them, a right to Punish by Deposition.

However, in my opinion, this difference in the manner of Explicating this
Power sometimes Casualiter, sometimes Indirecte, sometimes Ratione peccati,
which differ sufficiently, though they Cite the Authorities indifferently as if
they were all one, is a sign they were at first not very clear in this
business, in Explicating which they hit it no better. Notwithstanding, the
Indirect Power has at last got the Vogue, and most of the Learned Men who Write
in favor of the Pope stick to that way. As Bellarmin is the most famous
amongst them, and most at hand, I choose his Arguments, believing as he was a
Man of great Reading, he failed not to make use of all that was considerable in
those who Writ before him, and seeing, those who Write since borrow most from
him. He has Five in his Book, De Romans Pont. and Four in his Answer to Barklay.
The First are Answered by Barklay, and better by Withrington, and every one who
Writes of this Subject takes notice of them. In Answering I make use chiefly of
Withrington, inserting only upon occasion what I find in others. Only to
indulge something to my fancy, and ease it of the grievous pain of
Transcribing, I neither tie my self to the order, nor preciseness of the
Arguments, but make entire Arguments of themselves, what the Author meant
sometimes a proof of some part of an Argument going before. While you have the
Substance I hope you will allow me a little Variety for my own ease.

Bellarmin then, After he had taught against the Canonists, That the Spiritual
and Civil Power are in themselves distinct, and have different Offices,
different Ends, etc. yet when these two meet together, then he affirms they
make but one Commonwealth, in which the Spiritual Power is superior to the
Temporal: For, says he, there cannot be two Heads, and therefore one Power
must of necessity be subject to the other, when they both Club into one
Commonwealth. But this they do where the Law of Christ is received, For we
being many are one Body in Christ, Romans 12. And in one Spirit we were all
baptized into one Body. 1 Cor. 12. And because the Members of the same Body
must depend one of another, and Spirituals cannot be said to depend on
Temporals, Temporals must depend on Spirituals, and be subject to them.

To this they Answer differently. Some granting the Spiritual and Temporal
Power make but one Commonwealth, affirm the Members independent one of another;
as the Hand depends not on the Foot, nor the Foot on the hand, but each free
and absolute in their proper Functions, are subject only to the Supreme Head
Christ. Others, in my opinion more rationally, deny the Two Powers club into
one Commonwealth, and say, The Spiritual makes one, and the Temporal another,
and to many others as there are Independent Heads of this Power: That the same
men in different respects make both these Bodies; and that as Clergy, and
Laity, and all, not excepting the Prince himself, in as much as they are
Faithful, are subject to the Spiritual Power, according to the nature of
Spiritual Subjection; so the same Laity and Clergy, not excepting the Pope
himself, in as much as they are Citizens and parts of the Temporal
Commonwealth, are subject to the Temporal Power; that is, for as much as
concerns the Law of God purely, and abstracting from Humane Constitutions, and
such Changes as time has brought into the World. For now the Pope is himself an
absolute Prince, and other Clergy Men have Privileges and Immunities justly
belonging to them. When therefore it is assumed that the Church is one Body,
they distinguish this word Church, and say if it be taken Formally, that is,
the Faithful under the notion of Faithful, then indeed they make but one Body;
but neither does this Body include both Powers, for it is only the Spiritual to
which they are subject as Faithful; as Citizens, they belong to the Temporal.
But if the word Church be taken Materially, for the Men which make up the
Church (an Acception something improper, but yet such as comprehends both
Powers) then say they, In this sense the Church is not one Body but two, or if
you will twenty, as many as there are several Supreme Temporal Powers in
Christendom; One Spiritual in relation to the Spiritual Power, and which is
properly the Church; The rest Temporal in relation to their several Temporal
Heads. And this Answer, as it seems fair in it self, and justified by the sense
and apprehension of Mankind (for France and Spain, for example, both
acknowledge the Pope, and are both parts of the Church, and that one Body of
which the Apostle speaks; but he that should therefore think them not to be Two
distinct Bodies, and Independent Commonwealths, would be thought something
extravagant.) so it is a little more strongly enforced against Bellarmin by
other parts of his own Doctrine. For he teaches elsewhere, That Churchmen,
besides that they are Churchmen, are also Citizens and parts of the Civil
Commonwealth, and that all Members of every Body must be subject to their
respective Head: That the Civil and Spiritual Power are in their nature
distinct Powers, and have distinct Offices and Ends, etc. and that Christ did
distinguish the Dignities and Offices of Pope and Emperor, that one should not
presume upon the Rights of the other; That Christian Princes, as well as
Infidels, acknowledge no Superior in Temporals, since Christ took not away the
Rights of any, and a King by becoming a Christian loses no Right he had before,
and the like. Besides, this Answer seems wonderfully strengthened by some
Authorities mentioned in the former Letters. Such as Gelasius to the Emperor
Anastasius* The Prelates of the Church owe you all Obedience. And again: The
Bishops themselves are to obey your Laws, and that, because there are Two
principal Powers by which the World is Governed, the Sacred Authority of
Bishops, and Regal Power. Likewise Pope Anastasius to the same Emperor.
Bishops are subject to the Laws of the Prince in what concerns Public
Discipline, and Princes to Bishops in the dispensation of the Mysteries and
Sacraments, according to the famous Canon of Leo the IV. Nos si incompetenter.
It is to be noted that there are Two Persons by which this world is governed,
The Regal, and Sacerdotal: as Kings are Chief in Worldly, so Priests in Divine
matters. -- Therefore David, though by his Regal Unction he were over Priests
and Prophets in affairs of the World, yet was under them in those of God. Much
more might be alleged on this Subject, but this I conceive is enough to show
the Answer given to Bellarmin, has the support of Authority as well as Reason.

A Second Argument is from the ends of both Powers, whereof one being Eternal,
the other Temporal happiness; because the Eternal happiness is the Supreme and
Last end of all things, Temporal happiness must be subordinate to it: And
because, according to Aristotle, where the Ends are subordinate, the Faculties
likewise are subordinate, the Civil Power which aims only at Temporal happiness
must be subordinate, and subject to the Spiritual, which looks after Eternal.
This Argument they Answer likewise two ways; First by granting the whole,
which they say concludes nothing against them. For admitting the Temporal Power
to be subordinate to the Spiritual, nothing follows more than than it is under
the other according to the Order which the other has over it, which is by the
way of Instruction, and Persuasion, and Direction, not by way of Compulsion;
For that belongs not to Spiritual Power. Let the Prince, say they, in Gods
name, be Instructed by the Prelate to do well, and Admonisht, and if it be
seasonable, even with Spiritual Censures be Corrected if he do amiss: all this
may be, and is done by zealous Prelates without prejudicing the Authority of
the Prince. But if they proceed to Authorize his Subjects to throw off their
Obedience, then they exceed, say they, the bounds of their Spiritual Power, and
entrench upon another which belongs, not to them, but the Prince, and in which
he is subject neither to them, nor any body, but God. Another way they Answer,
by denying the Ends of those Two Powers to be subordinate one to the other. For
the Last end of every Power is its proper act, as Sight is the last end of the
power to see, and Relish of the power to taste, and so Temporal Happiness of
Temporal Power. Indeed he who has Temporal Power, ought to have, and has if he
be a Christian, a farther end and aim at Eternal happiness, both in the use of
his Temporal power, and all the Actions he does. But the end of the Power is
one thing, and the end of Him that has the power another. Wherefore though the
Man be subject, his Power is not. Eternal happiness is indeed his own last end,
but the last end of Power is Peace, and the quiet security of his Subjects, nor
is there any other end to which his Power is ordained. Bellarmin against
Barklay endeavors to make this Argument good, by the Subjection which all Arts
in a Commonwealth have to the great Art of Governing; where the Painter, the
Musician, the Mariner, and the rest, are all directed, so to use their several
Arts, as is most fitting for the end of the Prince, and good Government, which
is Superior to them all: And as these are subject to the King, and must obey
what he prescribes even in the Use of their Arts, so King and all, says he,
is subject to the Pope as He who professes the highest of Arts, the bringing
Souls to Heaven, by which all inferior Arts, and their Use, is to be
regulated. They Reply, that this rather confirms than opposes what they say.
Those Artists are indeed all subject to the Supreme Artist the Prince, but as
Citizens, not as Artists. The Men are subject to him, and obliged to obey his
Commands even in the Use of their Arts, but their Arts have not therefore any
subordination to his Art. The Ends of Arts or Faculties, say they, are then
subordinate when one is designed for the service of another. As the Brick-maker
to the Mason, the Sadler to the Horseman, and the like. For if there were no
Houses, nor Riding, Bricks and Saddles would be useless. In these cases the
Faculties are subordinate because the Ends are so, and the Brick-maker must
receive directions from the Mason how to make his Bricks, and the Sadler from
the Rider, what kind of Saddle to make. But that a Painter should be instructed
by the Governor how to manage his Colors, or a Musician his Proportions, or
that these things have any dependence on the Art of Governing, they think a
fancy a little unsuitable to Bellarmins Learning. Aristotle's Rule then, say
they, is very true; And Faculties are subordinate, where the Ends of them are
ordained one for another: but where the Ends are Ends of the Men, and not of
the Faculties, there is no color to allege it. And so it happens in this
case, For though Eternal happiness be the Last end of all men, yet it is no more
the end of Temporal Power, than Taste is the end of seeing, or Sight of
tasting, both which the man makes use of to his own good, but they are
independent and unsubordinate one to the other. So as the Painter and Musician
are subject to the King as Citizens, not as Artists; so the King is subject to
the Pope, not as King, but as Christian, and no otherwise subject than as
Christianity obliges him, with which it may very well stand, That while He
is subject to the Pope in Spirituals, the Pope may be subject to him in
Temporals.

Another Argument is, from the Perfection of Commonwealths, and consequently
the Church in as much as it is a Commonwealth. Every Commonwealth, says
Bellarmin, must have Means sufficient to attain its end, and the End of this
Spiritual Commonwealth, which we call the Church, being the Salvation of Souls,
the Church were not perfect in her kind if She wanted sufficient Means to bring
men to Salvation. And because Wicked Princes may be a great obstacle to the
Salvation of Souls, the Church would want sufficient Means to attain her End,
if She had not Power to remedy this inconveniency, and Depose them when they
are Incorrigibly obstinate. This Argument, to say the truth, they handle a
little severely. And first they make Bellarmin himself answer it, putting
instead of Wicked Princes, Wicked Popes, and then making use of it with as
much efficacy to conclude that the Church has a Power to Depose Wicked Popes.
But this he will by no means admit, and can therefore tell us, L. 2. de Council.
c. 19.
It is no wonder if in that case there be no efficacious Humane remedy in the
Church, since its safety principally depends, not on Humane industry, but the
Divine protection, Its King being GOD; Wherefore, though the Church cannot
Depose the Pope, yet it can, and ought, pray that God will provide a remedy.
And it is certain that God will take care of her safety, and either Convert, or
take away, such a Pope before he have ruined the Church. Now, they conceive
People may as well have recourse to God for remedy against a Wicked King, as a
Wicked Pope, and that He can as well hear them. However, want of efficacious
Humane remedies in some eases, is acknowledged by Bellarmin to be no Argument
of Imperfection in the Church, and therefore they think he might well have
spared his pains in this particular. And, since the safety of the Church
depends on the Protection of God, they conceive it in very good hands, and that
there is no great danger the Wickedness of any Prince will prove more powerful
than his Goodness, to which the safety of the Church may very securely be
trusted, without any necessity of a Remedy worse than the Disease. But they go
farther, and ask, if this Power of the Church be so fully sufficient to bring
men to Salvation, how it happens that there is so much Ambition, and so much
Covetousness, and so much Gluttony, and so much Concupiscence of the Flesh, and
of the Eyes, so much Pride of life still left in the world? For these things
are great hindrances to Salvation, and the Church seems deficient in her Duty
if She take them not away when she can: Again, Why does not the Church, with
her sufficient Power, clear the World from Mahumetism, and Infidelity, and
Idolatry, which likewise are main obstacles to Salvation, and provide for the
safety of so many Millions as are lost by them. Farther, Amongst Christians, A
man commits a mortal Sin, and runs mad upon it. Has the Church sufficient Power
to restore this man to his Wits, that he may Repent and be saved? Can She
hinder Abortions, and bring all Children alive to Baptism? And twenty other
such Cross Questions they put. But to Answer the Argument more precisely: They
consider this sufficient Power in the Church, either in order to it Self, or in
order to all things necessary to the Effect. Considering the Power in it self,
it is abundantly sufficient for as much as is required on that side; but,
because to the Effect many things are required besides sufficient Power, or
Efficacy in the Cause, as that the Subject be fitly disposed, the Cause duly
applied, etc. they say, a Defect in these things argues no insufficiency in the
Power, and the Power may be very sufficient for as much as belongs to the
Nature of Power, and yet the Effect not follow for want of some disposition in
the Subject. For Example, The Sun has sufficient Power to enlighten the whole
World, the Fire has sufficient power to burn that stack of Wood, though the Sun
cannot level a Mountain, which intercepts the course of his beams, nor the Fire
has hands to bring the Wood to it, or legs to carry it to the Wood. Wherefore,
they say, The Church has Power abundantly sufficient to bring Men to Salvation,
for as much as is requisite on the part of Power, but it is a wild conceit to
think She can remove all obstacles which Nature or Chance casts in her way to
hinder the exercise of that Power. And if one of those Obstacles happen to be
the Wickedness of a Prince, the Churches sufficient Power to Save men can no
more take Him away, than the Suns sufficient power to shine level a Mountain.
What her sufficient Power, or Means to Save men are, we may learn from those
who certainly best know the end of the Church, and Means to attain it, the
first Planters of Christianity; who by there Example have instructed us, That
efficacious Preaching, and more efficacious Living according to the Holy
Doctrine they Preached, Charity, and Patience, and humble Zeal are the
sufficient Means which have prevailed upon the Converted world, and when they
are in Gods fit time duly applied, will be as sufficient for the rest. In the
mean time we may learn of Bellarmin, that God will have a care of his Church;
and, whatever he think, must think our selves, That Prayer is as good a remedy
against a Bad Prince as a Wicked Popes: And therefore that Proposition, which
assumes that a Deposing Power is necessary, or that the Churches Power would be
Insufficient without it, they flatly deny.

From the same Head Bellarmin Argues again. Every Commonwealth, because it has
Power sufficient to preserve it self, and bring its Subjects to Temporal
happiness, may command another Commonwealth, which is not subject to it, to
cease from doing injury to her, and hinder her from the prosecution of her just
Ends, and if it refuse to Obey, may Depose the Prince of it, and set up another
who will be more Just, in case there be no other way to avoid wrong from it.
Therefore much more may the Spiritual Commonwealth command the Temporal, which
is subject to it, and Depose the Prince, in case She cannot otherwise compass
Her End, the Salvation of Souls. And this Argument they treat not more
favorably than the former: For they say first, It assumes plain Contradiction,
when it puts two Commonwealths both independent and free, and yet puts a Power
in the one to command the other, which is to make that other Subject, and not
Free. Again, It assumes without any reason, and against all Truth, That the
Temporal Commonwealth is subject to the Spiritual, which they will by no means
admit, unless perhaps of a Spiritual Subjection, and that too of the persons as
Faithful, not as a commonwealth, in which respect every absolute Commonwealth
is absolutely free from all Subjection to any but God. Farther, they retort it
as the former, and say, It concludes as well a Power in the Temporal
Commonwealth over the Spiritual as in the Spiritual over the Temporal. For, say
they, The Temporal is a perfect Commonwealth too, and has Power sufficient to
attain its End. Wherefore, if the Spiritual hinder her in the prosecution of
Her ends, She may command the Spiritual Commonwealth to surcease; and if the
Spiritual Prince prove Disobedient, depose him and set up another, since the
Spiritual Commonwealth is as subject to the Temporal in Temporals, as the
Temporal to the Spiritual in Spirituals. But, to Answer the Argument more
directly, they deny that this forcible proceeding, of one Independent
Commonwealth with another, argues any Superiority or Subjection in either. What
they do in this kind, if it be well done, being justified by the force of
Nature, and light of Reason, and lawless Law of Necessity, which teaches Force
to be then fitly used, when nothing but Force will compass an End, otherwise
necessary. Otherwise this kind of Power, is no other than a Strong man has to
take away the Purse of a Weak one: and there is no doubt but whoever has it,
may, if he will, make use of it, and so the Pope, if he be strong enough, may
certainly Depose a Prince, as a Prince may a Pope. But, they wonder Bellarmin
should be so little considerative, as instead of a Power of just Authority, to
talk of a power of Strength, in which they think he has done the Church but
little service; for if She come to vye with Princes in this kind of Power; the
Material Sword, which belongs to them, will, in all likelihood, wound the
Spiritual Outward-man more sensibly, than the Spiritual Sword will the Carnal
man. Mean time, they conceive he take a bad Method to conclude an Authoritative
Power in the Church, by the example of a Power in Commonwealths, which is not
Authority but Strength.

Another Argument Bellarmin makes from the obligation of Christianity, in this
manner. It is not lawful for Christians to endure an Infidel or Heretic Prince,
of that Prince endeavor to draw his Subjects to Heresy or Infidelity. But it
belongs to the Pope to judge whether he be guilty of so drawing them or no,
wherefore to the Pope it belongs to Judge whether he ought to be Deposed or no.
Because he could not but foresee his first Proposition would be denied him, he
provided Proofs, which before I meddle with I must inform you what they say to
thus much of the Argument, for they are no where smarter. This, say they, is
without more ado, to put all Kingdoms into the Popes hands, and make him as
Absolute as the most extravagant of Canonists can fancy him. For since there
are but two things considerable in the case, Whether an Opinion imputed to a
Prince be Heresy or no? and, Whether he hold it or no, and would introduce it
among his Subjects? If both these depend on the Popes Judgment, and his
Judgment be irrafragable, the safety of all Princes lies in his breast, and no
Prince can be longer secure of his Crown, than he is of the Popes favor? For
the Pope may proceed to Judgment when he pleases, and if he be to be obeyed let
him Judge how he pleases, No Prince can be a Prince longer than he pleases. For
put the case, say they. To deny in the Pope a Power to Depose Princes is an
opinion, which may, by this Rule, be declared Heresy, whenever the Pope thinks
convenient. The King of France, for Example, himself holds that Opinion, and
endeavors his Subjects should do so to. This King therefore, and I believe it
will go as hard with all the rest, is Deposable if for no other reason, yet for
thinking himself not Deposable. And so, all Kings are without more ado at the
Mercy of the Pope. If they acknowledge themselves Deposable, they grant the
Power, and are beholding to him that he puts it not in Execution, if they deny
it, for that very reason they are to be Deposed, and are again more to thank
him that he does not Depose them, when they deserve it. To this particular then
of the Popes Judgment, If it be understood of a Natural Judgment, others, say
they, may Judge as well as the Pope whether the Prince deserve to be Deposed or
no, and those who live upon the place better, as having better information from
their Eyes and Ears, than he can have from the Report of others. But if it be
understood of an Authoritative Judgment, such whose Sentence obliges People to
the Execution of it, they deny the Pope, or any else, has any Authority to
Judge, in that manner, of the Behavior of Princes. For, say they, the
Authority of every Judge, is confined to his proper Tribunal; a Judge of Assize
is no Judge in the Spiritual Court, nor is a Bishop a Judge of Assize. Now the
Pope's is a Spiritual Tribunal, and in that he may, in fit circumstances, judge
even of Princes, and condemn them, if they be faulty, and award Spiritual
Penalties against them. But if he proceed to Temporal Punishments, he passes to
a Tribunal in which he is no Judge, nor his Sentence so given more to be obeyed
than that of a Court Marshal in the Common Pleas: And to say otherwise, were to
take all Judges, and all Tribunals out of the world, besides his own. For
there is no Action but if well done belongs to Virtue, if ill, to Vice; And He
being as much Judge of Virtue as Vice, as of Heresy and Faith, there is no
Action nor can be, which by this account does not belong to his Tribunal, and
so all other Judges are useless. For the rest, they flatly deny the first
Proposition, and affirm, Subjects are so far from being obliged not to endure
an Infidel, or Heretic Prince, that they are obliged to Endure and Obey him
too, not so far indeed as to turn Infidels or Heretics for his sake, nor so far
as not to represent his Errors or Miscarriages to him in that dutiful manner
which is allowed by the Law, and their Allegiance; but, for the rest, let him
be never so much an Infidel or Heretic, He is still their Prince, and as such
to be obeyed.

Bellarmin proves he may not from Deuteron. where the Jews are forbid to choose
a King who is not a Jew: And this seems a little far off. For if in Poland, for
Example, the Law were to choose only a Polander, or in Germany a German; this
might very well be true, and withal be little to purpose. But yet he brings it
nearer. The Reason of this Law, says he, was, least by choosing a Stranger,
they might be brought into Idolatry. But there is the same danger, and the same
mischief in choosing a Prince who is not a Christian, and remaining subject to
one who becomes no Christian, therefore Christians are bound to Depose a Prince
who deserts Christianity, and endeavors to pervert his Subjects after him.
This Argument, says the other side, makes nothing for the Pope: It may seem to
countenance the pretensions which Rebellious People make to a Power over their
Kings; for those are they who Choose, and by Consequence are to Depose, if this
Argument hold; but the Pope has no more to do with the one than the other, or
if he have he has as much right to Choose as Depose. For the Law then, they
acknowledge the Reason, assigned by Bellarmin, is in likelihood true: but when
he assumes that the case of not Choosing, and not Obeying a Prince already
chosen, or otherwise in Lawful possession of the Principality, is equally
mischievous, they think him wonderfully out. Before he is Chosen, he is no
Prince, nor have the People any tie to him, and while they are at their Liberty
they will not do well to Choose ill, and subject themselves to a Bad Man. But
when he is once Chosen, or otherwise established, they are no longer Free, but
Subject, and that for Conscience, neither have they any other part in the
disposition of the Commonwelth but Obedience. This Prince, though Election were
the means by which he got his Principality, yet has it now, and that by Divine
Right, and is truly the Vicar of God, whose particular Commission for his
Deposition unless it can be produced, those who resist him resist the Ordinance
of God, and acquire Damnation to themselves. A Man does ill who chooses a Bad
Wife, and is bound by the law of Reason to choose a Good one: But can he
therefore cast her off when he has her, and because he did amiss in taking a
Scold, do worse in leaving her? The Cardinals are bound to Choose a Good Man
for Pope; if they choose a Bad one, or he become Bad after his Election,
Bellarmin will not therefore allow them to Choose another. And yet his Argument
is every jot as efficacious in that case, as in that of Bad Princes. A Bad Pope
may do as much mischief as a Bad Prince, and if the danger and mischief be
equal to Choose him, and Obey him, the Pope is as fully confuted as the Prince.
But that Bellarmin should impose upon them that the mischief of Choosing, and
not Deposing is equal, and make it a kind of known Principle too, and such as
needs no proof, they take very unkindly at his hands. For if they refuse to
choose a Bad Man, there is no mischief at all, nor injury so much as to him who
is refused. But if a Prince once lawfully Established be afterward cast out,
there follows Bloodshed, and War, the Hazard, perhaps the Ruin of the
Commonwealth. So that his equal Cases put the greatest mischiefs that can be on
one side, and none at all on the other, which is a very partial, and something
unequal equality: or else, they make the Disturbance and Hazard of the
Commonwealth no mischief, which, that Bellarmin should go about to persuade
them, argues, he had more confidence in his Logic, than they have Opinion of
his Judgment. It Is great pity this Doctrine, if it be true, was not in fashion
a little sooner, the Ignorance of it cost the life of many a good Christian,
and the Blood of abundance of Innocent Men, shed in Ten Persecutions, might
have been saved, if the first Masters of Christianity had Instructed People a
little better, and made them understand the convenient use of their Power. For
it had been but Antidating a little the course of Providence, and setting up a
Christian Emperor in the place of Nero or Dioclesian, and all had been well:
And it is a little strange those Primitive Christians, whom none suspects of
want of Zeal, either understood, or practiced their duty no better.

Neither the one nor the other says Bellarmin: but the Reason why they Deposed
not Nero and Dioclesian, and the Apostate Julian, and Valens the Arian, was,
because they wanted Force. For that they wanted not Right nor the Knowledge of
it, is apparent by the Apostle, who, 1 Cor. 16. bids the Christians appoint New
Judges, and if they could make New Judges, they might as well have made New
Kings if their Force had been equal to their Justice. But certainly some body
is extremely out, Bellarmin or his Adversaries; for they affirm very
confidently, that the Primitive Christians were not so weak and helpless as he
pretends. S. Peter himself lived in Nero's time, and he had power to restore
the dead to life, and cast the living into sudden death. A body would think
this was Power enough in conscience, and that Nero with all his Guards and
Legions was not more secure of his Empire against this miraculous and
unresistable Force, than Ananias of his life. It was not then for want of Power
that he taught Christians to be subject to the King as most excelling, etc. and
choose to lay down his own life amongst the rest, rather then practice an
expedient which Bellarmin thinks so necessary, and which to him had been easy
enough if he had been of Bellarmins mind. But to speak only of Humane Power,
Tertullian lived in those days, and Writ what he saw and knew; He affirms the
contrary to what Bellarmin thinks very plainly, Apologet. C. 37. Should we want
Numbers or Forces if we had a mind to be open Enemies, not secret Revengers?
Are the Moors, and Marcomans, and Parthians, and whatever Nations of one place,
and confined to their own Limits, more than those of the whole World? We are
but Men of yesterday, and yet have filled all the places you have, your Cities,
Islands, Castles, Buroughs, Councels, and Camp it self, your Tribes, Courts,
Palaces, the Senate and the Market. We have left you only the Temples. For what
War are not we fit and ready, even though we were Inferior in Number, who
endure death so willingly, if in this Discipline it were as lawful to Kill as
to be killed, etc? Eusebius, L. 8 c. 1.
Writing of the times before Dioclesian: Who shall describe, says he, the
numerous Congregations and multitudes of meetings in every City, and the open
concourse to Oratories, for which not content with the Ancient Buildings, they
in every City set up spacious and Large Churches from the very Foundations. A
thing testified by Maximinus himself, who says to Sabinus, that Dioclesian and
Maximinian commanded Christians to be proceeded against because they saw Omnes
fere mortales, All men generally, leaving the Worship of the gods, Eusebius. L. 9.
C 9.
unite themselves to the Christians. The Army of Julian too was almost all
Christian, say Historians, in so much that when Jovinian chosen Emperor after
his death, showed a backwardness to his Election, as being himself a Christian,
and unwilling to take the Command of Men accustomed to Wickedness under Julian,
Theodor. L. 4. C. 1.
they all cried out, He should not doubt, and refuse a Command not Wicked. That
he should be an Emperor of Christians, and Men brought up in Discipline and
Piety, which the Elder of them learnt of Constantine, and the Younger of
Constantius, and that if Julian had circumvented some, he lived not long enough
to settle the Mischief. S. Austin too testifies of them, In Psalm. 124.
that They could at their pleasure have deposed Julian, but would not, because
they were subject for Necessity, not only to avoid Anger, but for Conscience
and Love, and because our Lord so commanded. And abundance more they allege in
this kind.

To the Proof which Bellarmin brings from 1 Cor. they Reply, That since the
Christians had Force enough to Create New Judges, they see not why they had not
Force enough to Create New Kings too. And the truth is, if the Judges meant by
the Apostle, were such as could claim and exercise the Authority, invested in
those who were appointed by the Prince, it was little less than to set up New
Kings, or at least deprive their Old of a good part of the Subjection due to
them. For he that refuses to submit to a Magistrate Commissionated by a Prince,
makes more bold with the Prince himself than is consistent with the duty of a
Subject. For since the Inferior Judge has his Authority from the Prince, to
refuse it is in plain terms to refuse the Authority of the Prince. Which the
Apostle, they think, was far enough from Authorizing, or even persuading,
Christians to do. They conceive then, that what the Apostle did in this case,
is no more than what Good Judges ought to do at this day, it being no unusual
thing for them to wish the parties not to expect the Rigor of the Law, but
compound their Differences fairly amongst themselves, to which purpose they
either Assign, or leave them to choose Umpires themselves. Yet, all this while
never intend, by their Charitable Compassion, to forfeit their own Right, or
debar the Parties from having recourse to them again, if the other Method
proves not to their satisfaction. Such, say they, was the Apostles meaning in
that place. He desired to prevent, as much as might be, all Contentions among
the Faithful, at least the Scandal of their breaking out, and being taken
notice of in the Courts of Heathens. To this purpose he wishes them to keep
their Frailties from becoming public, and if they could not avoid Contentions,
at least to end them by the Judgment of Men chosen amongst themselves; but
never intended to invest the Men so chosen, with an Authority any way
prejudicial to that of the lawful Magistrate. Even now, say they, the Apostles
whether Counsel or Command is still in force, and People do ill who expose
their Frailties to the knowledge of Public Courts; notwithstanding, if they
will needs go to Law, Courts have their full Power now as they had then, and as
much as if S. Paul had never written any such thing. By the Judges then
mentioned by the Apostle, they understand Vmpires chosen among themselves to
prevent the Scandal of Public Suits, but without any Authority derogatory to
the Public Magistrate, and allege from S. Thomas, That if the Faithful had
been forbidden to appear upon Summons before the Tribunals of Infidels, it had
been against the subjection due to Princes, and contrary to the Command of S.
Peter, Be subject to every humane Creature, to the King as precelling, and to
the Rulers as sent by him. Bellarmin cannot digest this Vmpirage, but persists
against Barklay to maintain they were True Judges, yet withal confesses they
had no Coactive Power as to the External Court, and that Christians were
obliged, when ever Cited at the Suit, either of Infidel or Christian, to answer
before the Legal Magistrate; because, says he, they were not Chosen by consent
of the Contending Parties alone, but appointed by the Church. But this, I
think, makes them no other than bare Umpires; for such they are, and are so
esteemed among us who are often appointed by our Court; to decide particular
Differences. And all the obligation to stand to their Award, was, for ought
appears, the obligation of doing what became Christians, whom S. Paul in that
place, and our Savior before him had instructed Not to contend in Judgment,
but part with the Cloak too to him who would take away the Coat. And this
Obligation, for ought I know, continues still, and Law Suits are a blemish to
the perfection of Christianity even at this day, where men should do a great
deal better to decide their differences by a Friendly Composition, than lose so
much time, and undergo so much Trouble as is required to follow the Law. But if
either We now, or They then, are not so perfect as we ought, but will have
recourse to Magistrates, there is nothing in S. Paul which hinders their
Jurisdiction. Mean time I conceive, the difference betwixt a Judge and an
Umpire, is, that one has Power to execute his Sentence, the other not;
wherefore Bellarmin may call them what he pleases, but if they had no Coactive
Power, as he confesses they had not, they were not what our, and I think all
Languages, properly call Judges. This Argument then seems to come off lamely
enough, while it supposes the Primitive Christians wanted Force, against the
plain testimony of Primitive Christians themselves; and would prove a right to
set up New Kings, by setting up New Judges, which Judges had not that Power
which is necessary to a Judge, and makes his proper distinction from an
Umpire; however, which did not prejudice the Authority of the Legal
Magistrate. In short, it amounts to this, Christians are now free from
Subjection to their Princes, because S. Paul advised them heretofore to do
something which did not take away their Subjection to Inferior Magistrates:

Peradventure a second Proof may be more lucky, which Bellarmin makes in this
manner. To tolerate an Heretical Prince, is to expose Religion to most evident
danger. For such as the Ruler of a City is, such will be the Inhabitants.
Ecclesiastic. 10. But Christians ought not to tolerate an Infidel Prince with
evident peril of Religion, because where Divine and Human Laws are opposite, we
must obey the Divine Law. And the Divine Law obliges us to preserve the true
Religion, Human Law only to have this, or that Man for King. And to say truth,
Bellarmin is a little more lucky than ordinary; for his Adversaries, besides
what he Cites from Scripture, grant him at least one Proposition, namely, That
the Law of God is to be preferred before the Law of Man, and they hit it so
seldom, that it is well they agree in any thing. But then they deny all the
rest, and affirm, that to tolerate an Infidel King, is not to expose Religion
to evident danger; That Christians ought be subject to the Prince God has set
over him, whatever he be; That there is no Contrariety betwixt the Law of God,
and the Law of Man in this case; and lastly, That our Subjection to Princes is
not only by Human Law. And while they are in such an humor of Contradicting,
'twas great luck that Bellarmin could get any thing granted. For the first,
they say, Bellarmin forgets himself and his Doctrine elsewhere. When 'twas for
his purpose he could acknowledge, that The safety of the Church depends, not on
Human Industry, but, the Divine Protection, and that he will be sure to take
care of her, and provide Remedies against all mischances which may befall her.
And they think, if Bellarmin be forgetful, there is no great fear that God will
be so too, or danger that any Wickedness will prevail against the Power of
Omnipotent Goodness. For what greater danger is there in these later days,
more than in the former, when for Three hundred years together Princes, not
only were Infidels, but employed all their Power and all their Industry to root
out Springing Christianity out of the World. Notwithstanding which, the Church
continued, and increased, and prevailed at last. So that, if a King happen to
persecute the Church, to think, as Bellarmin seems to do, that all is presently
lost, is to rely on the Arm of Flesh a little more than becomes a good
Christian, and to distrust either the Power or Goodness of God, and besides,
manifestly to contradict the Evidence of History. And for the second, That
People may not tolerate an Infidel Prince, because that would expose Religion
to evident Danger. This Tolerating of a Prince seems something an unmannerly
phrase for Subjects. A Prince may, when he sees fit, Tolerate the unwaywardness
of his Subjects, and not punish all the faults he sees. But for Subjects to
Tolerate their Prince is an expression hardly tolerable. They are to obey him,
not in his Infidelity, which it is permitted them even to oppose by all the
dutiful means consistent with the Fidelity of good Subjects, but in the rest to
refuse Subjection, is no less than to acquire damnation. However, Tolerating,
say they, signifies not Acting, Exposing signifies Acting; and that not-doing
should be thought Doing, they apprehend very strange. Yet, if any Inconvenience
follow from not Acting, it is then only imputable to him who Acts not, when He
is otherwise obliged to Act. And no man can be obliged to Act, but where the
Action is Just and Lawful. Now Rebellion, and Tumults, and Murder, and such
Actions as those of necessity must be, by which a Lawful Prince is resisted by
his Subjects, till Bellarmin have proved Just and Lawful Actions, they think,
they may safely deny, any apprehended danger of Religion will justify those
who do them. If any harm come, they are all accountable to God who do it; the
People who do Nothing have nothing to Answer for, unless it be blamable to
trust Gods Providence, and not to intermeddle without sufficient Cause, a
sufficient cause of Condemnation. If the Laws of God did warrant the
Interposing of the People, something might be said for them; but since they do
not; their part is to do their Duty in what concerns them to do, and rely upon
God for the rest. Then for the Contradiction between the two Laws: The Divine
Law, says Bellarmin, obliges us to preserve the True Religion, Human only to
have this or that Man for King. Where is the Contradiction, say they? Cannot I
keep this Man for my King, and keep my Religion too? A body would ^kink that
this is very possible to be done. The contrary to that Divine Law is, You shall
not preserve the True Religion; and if any Human Law command this, Disobey
freely in God's name, for Aequum est obedire Deo magis quam Hominibus. But
while you disobey this Law, which you cannot without offending God obey, do not
refuse to acknowledge your Prince, and obey him there, where you offend God if
you do not obey. Again, the contrary to what he calls the Human Law is, You
shall not have this or that Man for Prince, or, which is all one, You shall not
obey him in just Commands. Bellarmin has not yet produced any Command of the
Divine Law which says this, nor will, till Rebellion become a part of Gods
Law. In fine, Whoever persists to put a contradiction betwixt Fearing God and
Honoring the King, will be Confuted by all the Bells in the Parish. Lastly,
Whereas he makes it only by Human Law that this or that Man is King, they
Reply, what you have more at large in a former Letter, That He becomes King,
as the Pope becomes Pope, by Human means; but when he once is so, Obedience to
him is by Divine Right, and so; if there be any contradiction betwixt
Preserving our Religion and Obeying our Prince, the Divine Law contradicts it
self. For as Preservation of Religion is Divine Law, so Obedience to Princes is
Divine Law too. If Bellarmin be not pleased with these Answers they leave him
to make better himself, retorting, as they are very good at Reparty, his
Argument against a scandalous Pope; for he, say they, exposes Virtue to evident
danger; For such as the Ruler, such will be the Inhabitants. And Gods Law is to
be observed when it is contrary to Human Law, and Gods Law obliges us to
preserve Virtue, and it is by Human Law only that this or that Man is Pope, etc.

And so we come to another Argument from the parity betwixt an Infidel Prince
and an Infidel Husband, whom the Apostle allows the Faithful Wife to leave, and
therefore, Why are not the Faithful People as free in respect of an Infidel
Prince? In Answer to this they Dispute several things with exactness enough,
and examining the particular Cases where, and how far, and why Divorce is
lawful, find several Disparities, and several Reasons why the Argument
concludes not. But to leave those Considerations, which are not without their
perplexity, this Reply of theirs seems very plain. Bring, say they, a
Permission from the Apostle for a Subject to desert his Prince, as plain as
this is for a Woman to leave her Husband, and we will acknowledge the case is
equal. The Apostle plainly derogates from the general Rule, and brings an
Exception wherein the Law of Marriage binds not. He that was so careful of
Private concerns, cannot be imagined unmindful of Public and greater. Had he
known any Exception from the general Rule of Obeying Princes, it is not to be
suspected he would conceal it, and testify more care for Private Families than
Commonwealths. So that the Argument amounts to this: We are free from the Law
in cases where the Law is dispenst with, therefore we are free likewise where
it is not dispenst with. Again, say they, the Woman is only then free when the
Man refuses to live with her, for if he stay S. Paul wishes her to stay with
him. Now if any Prince refuses to Govern his People, unless they will become
Infidels like himself, I think they will allow the People are not obliged to
turn Infidels for his sake, but may get them another in case he leave them. But
if the King will stay with his People, since the Woman is to stay with her
Husband who will be with her, they think the very parity concludes the People
obliged to stay with their Prince. Otherwise the parity stands in this manner:
Even as the Faithful Woman is not to leave her Unbelieving Husband who will
continue with her; even so, the Believing People are to leave their
Unbelieving King who will stay with them. Or, even as the Believing Woman is
free from an Unbelieving Husband who casts her off, even so the Beleiving
People are free from an Unbelieving King who does not cast them off. Which
methinks are something unlike for Parities.

The next Argument is of great esteem with Bellarmin. He made it in his Book De
Romans Pont. and repeats it in Tortus, and urges it largely against Barklay. This
it is: Princes are received into the Church with this either express or tacit
bargain, to submit their Scepters to Christ, and preserve and defend their
Religion, and this under penalty of forfeiting their Kingdoms if they fail.
Wherefore, if they become Heretics, or an obstacle to Religion, they may
without injury be Judged and Deposed by the Church. For he is not fit to
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, who is not disposed to serve Christ, and lose
all he has for his sake, according to S. Luke 14. If any one comes to me, and
hates not Father and Mother, etc. he cannot be my Disciple. And the Church
would err too grievously if She admitted a King who without Control would
cherish Heresy, and overthrow Religion. C. 24.
Thus Argues Bellarmin in Romans Pont. But against Barklay more largely. Let us
imagine, says he, an Infidel Prince, desirous to be received into the Church,
should speak in this manner: I desire to become a fellow Citizen with the
Saints by Baptism, and promiss to submit my Scepter to Christ, and defend his
Church to my power, and never to break my holy purpose. Nevertheless, If I
happen to break my Word, and become an Heretic, or Apostate, or Pagan, I will
not be punished with Temporal Punishments, either by the Church, or its
President, or any but Christ; and if the Chief Governor of the Church separate
me from the Communion of the Faithful, I will nevertheless that the Faithful
Sons of the Church continue Faithful Subjects to me, and may not be absolved
from the bond of their Obedience by any. Such a King, says he, if Barklay
think fit for Baptism, wise men would laugh at him. For if a man should desire
to be incorporated into any City, and should protest that if he had a mind to
betray that City, he would not be judged by the Magistrates of it, but by the
King who dwells far off, every body would laugh at him. And truly He that,
according to the Gospel, ought be prepared to lose his life for the Faith of
Christ, ought more to be prepared to lose an Earthly Kingdom. But it is
ridiculous to say, I am ready to be deprived of my Kingdom, if I renounce my
Faith, but not by any Sentence of Man, but will have Sentence pronounct against
me by the Angels in Heaven. The Church would be very imprudent to receive into
her bosom a Man who would, without control, afflict the Members of the Church,
and not suffer the Faithful to be freed from his Tyranny by any Authority on
Earth. Thus Bellarmin; more zealously than wisely say his Adversaries. Such
fine discourses never were, nor are ever likely to be made but by the King of
Vtopia. Kings who receive Christianity think not of such subtleties, nor
imagine they are to treat with their Spiritual Instructors with those nice
Cautions, which they use in making Leagues, and Treaties of War and Peace with
their fellow Kings. To make Protestations, and other provisions of Security,
against Chances they never do, and none but a man cunning in Chican ever would
think of, as if Baptism were a bargain made in Law, wherein, if by misfortune
the Writings be not exactly drawn a man forfeits his Title to his Purchase, or
a man becomes liable to Eternal damnation for the fault of a Scrivener, is a
conceit of a more subtle reach than is like to proceed from the simplicity with
which men deal in the concerns of Eternity. However, if Bellarmin do put such
thoughts into the head of a Pagan, he may very justly protest: I desire to be
made a Christian, and intend to live like one, and submit to the Discipline of
that Law which I am going to embrace: but I mean to keep my Regal dignity and
Prorogatives inviolate, and do not intend to be put by Baptism into a worse
condition than now I am in. My Subjects are now my Subjects, and I intend they
always shall be so. For my self, if I deserve it, I refuse not to be expelled
from that Society of which I shall have made my self unworthy; But as I had my
Subjects before Baptism, I will not that Baptism shall take them from me. I am
a King while I am no Christian, and if I cease to be a Christian, will not
therefore cease to be a King. God, not Baptism gave me a Crown, and none but
God shall take it away. A Pagan, say they, may warrantably declare thus much,
and warrantably even according to Bellarmin himself, who teaches that the Law
of Christ deprives no man of any right, and when a King becomes Christian he
loses no Right or Dominion, but gets a new right to the Kingdom of Heaven, for
else the Benefit of Christ would be a prejudice to Kings, and Grace destroy
Nature. As for the Comparison betwixt him who pretends to the Freedom of a
City, and him who pretends to Baptism, the Protest which Bellarmin enters in
his behalf is indeed ridiculous, and overthrown by his very pretense; for a
Member of a City must, by his very being a Member, be subject to the Laws and
Magistrates of that City; And so a King, if he become a Member of the Spiritual
Commonwealth, becomes subject to the Laws, and Magistrates, and Punishments of
that Commonwealth, which are Spiritual, and may be inflicted on a King as well
as other men (considering their own Natures purely, and abstracting from
Circumstances, which in the case of Kings are generally such, that, if it be
lawful, it is seldom expedient to use them) but for Temporal punishments, He is
himself the Head of that Commonwealth which should inflict them, and must
either punish himself, or cannot be punished but by God; So that to say, by his
becoming a Member of the Spiritual Commonwealth he makes Himself liable to
Temporal punishments, is to say, in the Case of him who pretends to be made a
Citizen, That by making himself a Member of that Corporation he subjects
himself to the Laws of another.

But to leave these speculations to them who Write of New Atlantis and the Isle
of Pines; The Argument, say they, is doubly faulty, for it assumes what is not
true, and concludes what does not follow though the Antecedent were true.
First, they deny any such bargains are made in Baptism. There is indeed an
express, whether Promise, or Purpose to Renounce Satan and his Pomps, but of
Renouncing the Right of Kings, there is not any expression which sounds like
it; and for secret bargains, they are so secret, if there be any, that they are
known to none but Bellarmin. They have lain hid for many Ages, and do so still,
for any credit they give this Argument. He would infer it out of the
disposition which our Savior, in S. Luke, requires in him, who will be his
Disciple. And this disposition of preferring his Love and Service before all
things, they acknowledge is necessary in Baptism, and that Man unfit for it,
who does not firmly purpose so to do. But the Question is, If the King chance
to break his good Purpose, is He therefore liable to this particular punishment
of being Deposed? This particular Condition must enter into the bargain, or
nothing will come of it. Otherwise our Godfathers and Godmothers have
undertaken for all of us, that we shall do all that the greatest King Promises
in Baptism. And we all forfeit the Surety they have given, and break the
Promise solemnly made in our behalf, and sin daily and grievously. Can we
therefore without injury be turned out of our Estates? We must be prepared as
well as any King, to lay down our lives for the Faith of Christ; if for Fear,
or other frailty, we fall even to Idolatry, is it therefore lawful to knock us
on the head, or if it were, Can the Church or Priest, before whom we made
this Promise which we have broken, give Sentence of blood against us? How
justly soever we deserve to be punished, yet this punishment is not just,
because we never submitted to it in Baptism, or any other way; and if we did,
the Church, of all the world, can the least inflict it. But the truth is, no
such punishment was ever thought of, either by the Givers or Receivers of
Baptism. If we do not continue constant to our Renouncing of Satan, Satan
will take possession of us again, to whom the Church may, when there is just
occasion, by her Power deliver us. And, if Satan be not punishment enough even
for a King, and the Wickedest King that ever was or will be, I am mightily
mistaken. Bellarmin therefore was less considerative than would be expected,
when he talks every where as if Kings, unless they were liable to be Deposed,
would be without punishment. Methinks Excommunication might serve turn,
Excommunication which as himself says, L. 3. de Laic. C. 2.
is a punishment greater than Temporal death. It being more horrible, as
himself Cites S. Austin to be delivered to Satan by Excommunication, than to
endure the Sword, or Fire, or be devoured by Wild Beasts. Death is the last of
punishments with us of the Temporal form, and if a Wicked Prince may be punished
by the Church with a punishment worse than Death, I know not why the
charitable Anger of a Churchman may not be satisfied with it. However it be,
according to Bellarmin himself, De Eccles. C. 6.
Excommunication is the most grievous punishment which the Church can inflict:
when she has proceeded so far, She has no more to do, says Coelestin. 3.
Wherefore if Deposition be a thing with which the Church has nothing to do,
Bellarmin may be content, if that be not done which cannot be done, and even
subscribe to Pet. Gregorius, teaching as learnedly as honestly, L. 26. de
Repub. C. 5.
that Rebellion against Princes, upon pretense of their Vices, cannot escape the
Crime of Treason and Indignation of God, and those who reign wickedly are
rather to be left to the Judgment of God, than the hands of Subjects be
polluted with Sacrilege and Parricide. God wants not Means when he pleases
either to amend, or take away such Bad Princes. But to return to the Argument,
They positively deny any bargain at all made in Baptism, unless you will call
the Purpose they make to live Virtuously an express bargain, and a submission
to the Law which the Baptized embrace, and consequently to the punishments of
it, an implicit one; as indeed, who is once Baptized, whether Prince or
Private man, may upon occasion be Admonisht, and Reprehended, and Censured by
the Church, but if Human frailty, and the Temptations to which our Nature is
subject, make a Prince break either this Bargain or Purpose, that he should
therefore be content to be Deposed, or that he Bargains to submit to any such
Penalty, they flatly deny, and say, that by the same Reason, since every
Private man makes the same Bargain in Baptism which any King does, every Man
that Sins might presently without injury Done him, have his Estate Confiscated,
or be sent to the Galleys or the Gallows: Which would make strange work in a
World so frail as ours. And for this Reason they deny the Consequence, as well
as the Antecedent of this Argument. For, say they, although a Prince should
bargain to forfeit or Crown or Life, if he forfeit his Faith, unless he bargain
expressly that the Church or Pope be Garranty of this Treaty, and give them
power to proceed to Deposition in case of Failer on his part, nothing is done,
and they have otherwise no power to do it. For all the Power they received from
God is Spiritual, and is not to meddle with matters so Temporal. So that a King
must not only submit to the Churches Power, but create in her a Power which
God gave her not, or nothing will come of it.

Upon the whole they say two things which seem remarkable enough. First, that
this claim from Bargain or Promise, whether express or tacit, plainly evinces
there is no Internal proper Power in the Church to Depose Princes, for then
there were no need of this External Right by bargain; besides, that if such
Power accrue to her, as it cannot be other than according to the express Terms
of the Contract, so it would not be Indirect, as Bellarmin pretends, but as
Direct as can be imagined; there being in the World no Power more Direct than I
have over those things for which I have bargained. Next, they say, that
Bellarmin manifestly contradicts what other Divines, and himself with them,
teach of the Nature of the Promise made in Baptism. Suarez observes, that this
Promise is not to be understood a proper Promise or Vow made to God, but only
an Obligation which the very Profession of Christian Religion made in Baptism
induces, by reason of the Divine Law, and Power granted by Christ to his
Church. Which I take to signify, Whereas in things in which we are otherwise
free, we can oblige our selves by Vow or Promise (as when I Vow to give Alms,
or do any other good Work) and this Vow induces an Obligation which otherwise
I had not; but in things where we are otherwise obliged, if I Vow to perform
them, I am obliged to no more by my Vow than I was before; that the Promise
made in Baptism is of this second sort, and People were obliged to the
performance of the Christian Law then received, although they made no promise
so to do. De Monach. C. 19.
So Bellarmin elsewhere teaches, That the promise, made in Baptism, is nothing
but a testification, or acceptance of the Obligation, which the Law of God
brings with it -- Neither are the Baptized bound to any, either Explicit or
Implicit intention of obliging themselves farther, than as they are obliged by
the Law of God. And farther, That Baptized Christians are forced by the Church
to keep the Laws of Christ, not so much in virtue of their Promise, as out of
this that they are become Members and Children of the Church, and every Member
is subject to the Head, and every Child by the Law of Nature to his Parent.
Wherefore manifestly, either the Law of God obliges Princes to submit to
Deposition without any bargain of theirs, or this Bargain he talks of leaves
them as free as they were before. If the Law obliges them, it is to no purpose
to mention Bargains; if it do not, it is to no purpose neither, since their
Bargain signifies nothing, for they bargain no farther than to observe the Law.
And the Argument amounts to this; They bargain to be Deposed, because they
bargain to observe the Law which obliges them to no such thing. Besides, if we
examine a little more narrowly, and ask by what Law of God Princes become
liable to Deposition, Bellarmin Answers it is by Bargain, which is not to be
liable by the Law of God: And if we ask again where any such Bargain appears,
He tells us, it is not an Express, but a Tacit Bargain, implied in the Law of
God; which is plainly to prove the Bargain by the Law, and the Law by the
Bargain; and, that is such a kind of Argument as, I think they call a Circle,
but sure it is none of the best, nor needed have been so much esteemed by
Bellarmin.

There follows an Argument which you had light upon, and proposed to me with
so much smart Rallery in a former Letter, from the Comparison of the Chief
Postour in the Church to a Shepherd. Which in short is this. When it was said
to S. Peter Feed my Sheep, all Power was given him which is necessary to a
Shepherd in regard of his Flock. But a Shepherd must have Power against
Wolves and Rams that they hurt not the Sheep, and Power to provide, as is
convenient, for the Sheep themselves. Then applying the Notions of all Three by
similitude to Princes, as you have formerly observed, he concludes The Pope has
Power over them in respect of every one. They Answer, there is more wit than
solidity in this discourse, Similitudes of all other being the worst Topies,
and which affords the weakest Arguments, as seldom running, in the School
Phrase, of all Four. The Metaphor is generally, and more fitly understood, so
that by Wolves are meant Persecutors, by Rams the Prelates of the Church, and
by Sheep the rest of the Faithful. But allowing him to use the Similitude as he
pleases, and apply it after his own fashion; to talk with him in his own
language, they observe many differences betwixt a figurative and real Wolf, a
figurative and real Sheep, and many defects in the Similitude, and Reasons why
the Argument concludes not, even keeping within the terms of the Metaphor. But
to consider the Thing; Here, say they, the Church is compared to a Flock, as it
was before to a Commonwealth, and may to be a City, or Family, or Ship, or
Army, or twenty things more. All these several Comparisons make no difference
in the things compared: For, whether you consider the Pope as Prince of a
Spiritual Commonwealth, or Shepherd of a Spiritual Flock, his Power as Prince
is not different from his Power as Shepherd, but the same, and if you consider
it according to all the Comparisons, of which it is capable, it is still one and
the same, and that a Spiritual Power. Wherefore all the Similitudes, that are
or can be, will never make it other than it is; and the Pope, whether he be
looked upon as a Prince, or a Shepherd, or a Pilot, or however he be
considered, can do no more than a Spiritual Prince, and a Spiritual Shepherd,
etc. Now when Bellarmin Argues, the Pope is a Shepherd, and a Shepherd may
drive away or kill a Wolf, and an Infidel Prince is a Wolf, all this, say they,
even allowing the Comparison, is to be understood of Spiritual driving away,
and Spiritual killing. But when he infers, Therefore he may Depose him, he
passes from Spirituals to Temporals, and leaves his Allegory and the truth too.
The Pope may Admonish and Command the Flock not to follow the Wolf in what he
is a Wolf, but in what he is not a Wolf, but a Shepherd himself, what ever the
Pope say to the contrary, they are bound to obey the Power which God has set
over them. It is by Divine Law that Subjects obey their Prince, and Princes
cease not to be Princes by turning Infidels, nor Subjects to be Subjects by
becoming or remaining Faithful: And that all the Similitudes in the World
should dispense with the Law of God, Bellarmin may talk as long as he will, but
they will not believe him.

For the rest these kind of Arguments, if too much credit were given to them,
would make mad work. Every Bishop, and every Curate is as truly a Shepherd as
the Pope. Their Flocks indeed are not so large, but they are truly Flocks, and
suffice to denominate their Governors with propriety Shepherds, If this
quality enable him who has it to Depose a Prince, there is no remedy but every
Bishop has Power to Depose the King who is of his Diocese, and every Curate him
who belongs to his Parish. And since Private men have something less Title to
their Estates than the King to his Kingdom, if Kings be subject to this Power,
Private men are much more; and so, because the Argument with a little more
stretching would reach to every Sin, within a little while every Sinner might
be dispossessed of his Estate at the pleasure of his Bishop or Curate; which in
time would make such work, that People would go near to hate all Arguments, and
all Scholars for Bellarmins sake, and as the Turks do, Forbid all Learning that
they may live in Peace and Security. Besides, if the fancy should take a man to
apply this very Allegory to Princes; for if it were said to S. Peter, Feed my
Sheep, it was of Cyrus, I say to Cyrus, Thou art my Shepherd. Isay 44. and of
David, Thou shall feed my People Israel, 1 Paral. 11. and then apply this
Notion of the Wolf, and furious Ram, to a wicked scandalous Pope, over whom he
must have Power if he cannot otherwise preserve his own Flock; Bellarmin must
either unravel all he has weaved here, or Princes will have more Power over Bad
Popes than he will think fit to allow them. In the mean time, of the two ways
by which he says in Romans Pont. his Doctrine may be proved, Reasons and
Examples, These are all he produces of the first kind. You will judge of them,
while I pass to the other.

He brings in all Twelve, Two in the Old Law, and Ten in the New. Those of the
Old are Ozias deposed for Leprosy by Azarias, and Athalia by Joiada for
Idolatry. Of these two, one was never Deposed, and the other never a Queen, but
by Usurpation. Ozias for his Presumption was miraculously struck with Leprosy,
and by the Priests according to their duty, and the command of the Law, put out
of the Temple, and separated from the People: but, for the rest, continued King
till his dying day, his Son supplying his place in what his Disease permitted
him not to interpose himself. Athalia endeavored to settle her self in the
Kingdom by the Murder of all the Children of Ochozias, but was mistaken. Joas
was saved by his Aunt Jeboseth, and, by the honesty and credit of her Husband
Joiada, put in Possession of the Regal Dignity, whereof the Right had been in
him all the while. So that the Argument from this Instance stands thus. The
High Priest amongst the Jews was instrumental in placing his true Sovereign in
his Throne, therefore the High Priest among the Christians may tumble a lawful
Sovereign out of his Throne, which for a man of Bellarmins Vogue is something
odly Argued.

His Third Example, and First from the New Law, is, the dealing of S. Ambrose
with the Emperor Theodosius, whom, after a Cruelty commanded by him in a
transport of Anger, he admitted not into the Church, till he had Repented, and
make satisfaction. I know not, but methinks he makes the most unpromising entry
into his business that may be. In the former Instances, one had no Deposition,
the other, no Lawful Prince to be Deposed, and in this there is neither
Deposition, nor Pope to make it. S. Ambrose was Bishop of Milan, not of Rome,
and I hope he will not extend this Deposing Power to every Bishop. However,
what he did, not only every Bishop, but every Ghostly Father, may do both
lawfully and laudably. It is the Office of Churchmen to induce Sinners to
Repentance if they can, and persuade them to those Remedies which may hinder
them from relapsing into the same faults; And they have here the Zeal of an
excellent Prelate, successful with an excellent Emperor, for their
encouragement; and this is all I can perceive in this passage. The Fourth is a
Privilege of S. Gregory the Great to a certain Monastery in which there is
this Clause; If any King, Bishop, Judge, etc. violate this Decree, of what
Dignity or Degree soever he be, let him be deprived of his Honor. This they
take to be a form of Imprecation, not a Legal Decree, as when he says a little
after, And let him be damned in the lower Hell with Judas the Traitor, etc. or
as the style of Bulls now is, Let him know he shall incur the Indignation of
God, etc. For they think, that for the Pope directly to command People should
be damned, is not very commendable in him, nor very wise in any who should
think he does so. Wherefore to look upon these kind of expressions as other
than Threats, by which men may be frighted from Wickedness, they conceive is
both against S. Gregory's Sense, and Common Sense too. The next is the Example
of Gregory the Second, who forbad Tribute to be paid to Leo the Iconoclast; and
this is one of those Stories which Onuphrius reckons amongst Fables, and
Platina expressly denies, for he says the Italians were so exasperated against
the Emperor, that the Pope was feign to interpose his Authority to keep them
from choosing another Emperor. So that till the matter of Fact be agreed, it is
an uncomfortable and useless Employment to busy our selves with thinking what
will follow out of it. There follows the Deposition of Childeric King of France
by Pope Zachary, with which they make quick work, and positively deny it; not
that the King was Deposed, but that he was Deposed by the Pope. The French
indeed consulted him (as they might have done any other, whose Credit they had
thought useful to their purpose) whether were more truly King, He who managed
all the Affairs of the Kingdom, or he who had the bare Title, but meddled with
nothing: And He answered the former. And this was all he did, for the rest,
what was done, was done by the French themselves. Not but that it is likely, he
understood well enough the meaning of the Question, and was inclined to favor
Pepin all he could, but he did no more; and those who did, have long since
given account to God of their action. I know not of what humor the French were
in those times, but he that should at this day maintain in France, The Pope has
Power to Depose their King, would go near to be confuted with a Halter. The
Seventh and Eighth Examples are, The Translation of the Empire to the Germans,
and settling the Electours who are to choose the Emperor. This is a Question of
which Bellarmin has written Three entire Books, and is of more both importance
and labor than to be treated with any exactness in a Letter. That which
Withrington Answers is in short, That the Pope concurred to the Translation of
the Empire, and Nomination of the Electours, not as acting by his own sole
Power, but as one who, for the place he held, had much, and perhaps more
Interest in the business than any other. To which purpose he Cites Mich.
Coccinius, saying, that The People of Rome, and the rest of the Nations of
Italy oppressed by barbarous People, and not only not protected by the Grecians,
but ill used too, and afflicted by their Avarice and Imperious humor,
transferred the Empire from the Grecians to the Germans in the person of Charles
the Great. And it is not to be doubted, says he, that this Translation was
made, and had its force and efficacy from the Consent and Authority of the
People of Rome and the rest of Italy. And whereas Innocent the Third Writes to
Bertoldus, That the Apostolic See transferred the Roman Empire from the Grecians
to the Germans; We do not grant the Apostolic See transferred it otherwise, than
by Consenting to those who did, or by declaring it ought be transferred, but the
Translation had its force and strength from the Consent of the People. To which
purpose he alleges also Card. Cusanus, speaking in this manner: Whence the
Electours ordained in the time of Henry the Second by common Consent of all
Germans, and Others subject to the Empire, have their Radical Power from this
common Consent of all, who by the Law of Nature could choose themselves an
Emperor not from the Pope, in whose Power it is not to give a King or Emperor
to any Country in the World, without its Consent. But to this concurred the
Consent of Greg. the Fifth as of the single Bishop of Rome, who for the Degree
in which he is, has an interest in Consenting to the Common Emperor. And
rightly; as in General Councels His Authority concurs in the first place by
Consent with all the rest who make the Council; the force nevertheless of the
Definition depends, not on the first of all Bishops, but on the common consent
of all, both of him and the rest. This is what they say, How far it is to be
allowed is another Question. The Origin of Empires, and Rights of Princes, are
things I have more disposition to admire and reverence, then Dispute. In the
mean time here are Eight of his Twelve Examples, which you see are all
Contested, how rationally you will judge. Those which follow are of Gegory the
Seventh, who Deposed the Emperor Henry, and Three Popes more who followed his
Example; to which he might have added several other, it being acknowledged that
after Gregory the Seventh had once begun, many have imitated him, and almost
all claimed a Power to do so. But as He was the first unquestionable Author of
that till then unknown Fact, so they maintain, that Fact was unjust in him, and
not allowable in any of his Successors. They Answer then first with Jo. Paris.
That Arguments are not to be drawn from such singular Facts, which proceed
sometimes from Devotion to the Church, or from some other Cause, and not from
Order of Law: And with Greg. Tholos. From hence I gather only, that it is a
difficult Question, Whether Popes can Depose Emperors or Kings, who formerly
had Power to make Popes? Besides, there are found diverse Depositions of Popes
by Emperors, as well as of Emperors by Popes, so that there has been a great
Vicissitude in these things. Whence it is a bad way of Disputing to argue from
Fact, and the Examples of Deposition. -- Out of all which, Ambitious disturbers
of the Commonwealth, Usurpers of Kingdoms, and Rebels to their Lawful Princes
may gather first, That every Deposition of Princes is not therefore Just,
because it has been done, for all Facts are not Just; and secondly, That no
such Consequence ought to be made, there is an Example of such a thing,
therefore the like may be attempted again. And in the words of Bellarmin
himself, De Romans Pont. L 2. C. 29. speaking to the Instances in which Popes
have been Deposed by Emperors. Such things, says he, have been done, but how
justly let them look to it. -- It Is plain that Otho the First Deposed John the
Twelfth with a good Zeal, though not according to knowledge, for this John was
one of the worst Popes that ever was. And therefore no wonder if a Pious
Emperor, as this Otho was, but not so skillful in Ecclesiastical Affairs
conceived he might be Deposed, especially since many Doctors thought so as well
as he. For it is one thing, says he in Tortus, to bring Examples of Kings
(says he, of Popes, say they) and another to prove their Power and Authority.
Secondly, They Answer, that if it be a good Proof that a thing may lawfully be
done, which has been done before, the Wickedest things in the world may be
proved Lawful. People may lawfully Rebel, Public and Private Faith may be
broken, Commonwealths may be overturned, etc. for all these things have been
done. And without more ado Popes may be Deposed by Emperors, as well as they
by Popes, for that has been done too. Lastly, and with a little more smartness,
They say this way of Proof plainly begs the Question, and assumes the very
Point in Dispute. Bellarmin affirms, and his Adversaries deny, the Pope may
justly Depose Princes; now to Argue, He has Deposed them therefore He justly
may, assumes, That what he has done is Just, which is the very Point they
Contest with him; and therefore think it had been something shorter, and
altogether as much to purpose, to have said, It Is Just because it is Just. Every
body knows Popes have both challenged and used a Deposing Power, but every body
is not satisfied that this Power is justly due to him. Bellarmin undertakes to
prove it is, and brings for an Argument, That he has used it, which no body
denies, and would have that conclude, That therefore he justly may, which if
his Adversaries had thought a good consequence they had not put him to the
trouble of making it. For they knew and acknowledged the Antecedent enough
before. But they think the Popes did amiss who did so, and if barely saying
that they did the thing, be proving they had right to do it, they confess they
are in the wrong; but if it be not, Bellarmin is so, and should have considered
that barely to say his Tenet over is a kind of Proof which takes with none but
very good natured People, and as far as I see his Adversaries are a little more
stubborn.

I am so weary with long Writing, that I must entreat your permission to refer
what remains to another opportunity. I will hope I have said enough to quiet
your suspicions, and am sure I have said so much that I need some quiet my
self, and must take leave, after so long a Journey, to rest a while.

Your, etc.

The Ninth and Tenth OF THE Controversial LETTERS, OR Grand Controversy,
Concerning The pretended Temporal Authority of POPES over the whole Earth, And
the True Sovereign of KINGS within their own respective Kingdoms.

Between two English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of England: The other of
the Church of Rome.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom and Benjamin Took, at the Gun; and at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1674.

FRIEND,
I Expect that which you say remains with much impatience, and it is only to tell
you so, that I now write; for I do not intend to give you my thoughts of your
last, till I receive your next. Only let me tell you it wambles in my stomach I
know not how, and works not kindly: but because your next possibly may fully
settle me, I will not yet complain. But methinks this next opportunity of yours
is long a coming. Have you been sick? or diverted with business of greater
consequence then clearing your self, and your Church from an aspersion, of
which I take no joy to tell you, the suspicions are more pregnant than I wish
they were. For it is undeniable that Tenets inconsistent with Government are
maintained among you. You say they belong not to Religion; and that indeed is
something, but not enough. This may serve in some measure to justify your
Religion; but nothing at all to clear your selves: For what matter is it
whether your Religion be innocent, if all that profess it are guilty, though
upon another account. If you think these Tenets true, you will be apt to
practice them at one time or other, although they do not belong to Religion.
Religion indeed is the strongest Principle of action, but not the only one. It
is no part of Religion that two and three make five; but yet if you do think to
pay a debt of five pounds, with twice forty shillings, no body will deal with
you. And if all the Papists in England adhere to these Doctrines, whether this
adhesion of theirs proceed from Religion, or any other motion, the men will be
unsafe and irreconcilable to the security of their Country, let the Religion
be what it will. But if there be any who think them false, it were convenient
both for the satisfaction of their Prince and Fellow subjects, and the interest
of the thinkers, People should know who those any are. We cannot know your
thoughts unless you acquaint us with them. And because we have reason to
believe, that some do hold them, and no reason to believe of any particular
man; but he is of the number till he disclaim them, what can we do but involve
you all, guilty and innocent, if there be any such, in the same condemnation of
diffidence.

You tell me the French plainly and openly condemn them: The honester men they;
and the more shame for some body that there should be more honesty found in
France then England. You should do as they do though it were but to be in the
mode. In all their airy toys, their Feathers, their Perukes, their Pantaloons
you can follow them fast enough. But when they play the men, and set you
examples of prais-worthy actions, there you are content to be out of fashion;
as if it were an honor to be as light as they, and a shame to be as wise. But
pray what security is it to England, that they are good subjects in France? If
they were knaves all over the rest of the world, and we all honest at home, it
were a great deal better for us than that they should be honest abroad, and we
knaves at home. I perceive indeed by what they do, that you tell me true when
you say these Tenets are no points of your Faith: But then methinks you should
have the less difficulty to disclaim them. Unless perhaps you think them true;
which if you do, either make them out to be consistent with government, or you
will not be consistent your self. I tell you plainly I shall think ill of you,
if you think well of these Doctr^nes, unless you can show them innocent and
safe: which as far as I perceive you do not go about to do, and when you offer
at it, may, I believe, with as much hope of success offer at the Philosophers
stone.

In other Countries you tell me; They are more reserved, and will not say you
can not, but you shall not. And I believe you have lived in those other
Countries, and sucked their Polities with their Air. But for my part I must
confess I am for the mode once in my life, and would be of the French fashion
in this particular. It Is true as long as there is good intelligence betwixt
Prince and subject, and the Peoples affections carry them to their Sovereigns
interests, this shall not may do pretty well. For no effect can follow from a
Power which is hindered to work, and 'twill be always easy enough to find a
pretense for not doing what we are before hand resolved shall not be done.
Neither did I ever think the Pope's Power so stong, that it was likely to
prevail where Prince and People both join against it So that in this case your
Can not and your Shall not are two lines which meet both in the same center, no
deposition. But what becomes of a King, if his subjects be not affected as they
should? A mule is not more humerous than the Multitude, nor can boggle more
extravagantly, and upon less occasion. And though they be well disposed, are
subject to be wrought upon by the artifice of those who are not, and easily
possessed with a thousand jealousies and fears, from which even those who possess
them perhaps are free enough themselves. If upon any capricious toy of their
own, or crafty suggestion from abroad they come to wish the Prince less Power
then he has, and that he stood in awe of some body, 'twill be the easiest thing
in the World to persuade them that what they desire should be true, is so, and
that he is subjected to the Pope, whose claim is as fair as any, if they would
have him subject at all. And where is your Shall not then? I fear he will go
near to repent the modesty of his Polities, and find too late that by delaying
to fix the Pope's Can not in the minds of his subjects, he has brought a worse
Cannot upon himself, a Can not avoy'd being turned out of his Throne. If in
such a posture of things he would but go about to persuade the People of the
Pope's Can not on all likelihood it would incense them more, and make them think
it yet more just he should be deprived of his own right, who would invade the
right of another For if it be not truly the Pope's right, why did he suffer it
to pass uncontrolled so long, and now begin to question it when it makes
against him? But let them do what they will in other Countries, and follow such
Maxims as they conceive fittest for them. Plain dealing suits best with the
English Natures, and will I believe prove the best Policy. If they think good
elsewhere to let their security depend on tricks, much good may their Policies
do them: I should be sorry it should be taken for good Policy here. However I
recommend plain dealing to you; for why should you go beating about the bush
when your mark is fair before you? But I forbear to press you now; If your next
please me not you are like to hear more. I have nothing to do at present but to
entreat you would dispatch it away by the first, and to assure you I am

Yours, etc.

FRIEND,
I Have been neither busy nor sick, but only of the lazy disease, Idleness;
which is sickness and business both, or as bad; and should perhaps do better to
continue idle still, then be longer busy with this subject. Your silence made
me hope my last might have served turn, and excused me from dealing farther in
an argument to which I have no fancy. But it seems you are not satisfied. When
I know what it is you stumble at, I will do the best I can to keep you upright.
But when you talk of plain dealing, I know not what you would have. To acquaint
you plainly with what People say, is plain dealing in my judgment; One can
hardly dogmatize without some subtilty, but the Historian is a plain man. I
hope you have no just cause of exception against my relation hitherto, and I
shall endeavor to give you as little in the progress, which since you so much
desire to know, take it without more ado; and take this consideration along
with you, that we are now come to the Triarii. The Arguments which made up my
last Letter were such as occurred to Bellarmin when he had no opposition to help
his fancy, and expected none, at least from those of his own communion.
Afterward Barclay in France and Withrington in England write both against him.
And as opposition is the best whetstone of wit, the sight of what can be said
against us on the one side enlarging wonderfully our prospect of things, and
representing them in a clearer view, and on the other, the shame of being
worsted, and pleasure of victory streining our abilities, and pressing from
them all they will afford. We cannot but look upon these later productions of
his as the uttermost he was able to do. For certainly, he omitted nothing which
he thought could be said in his defense. You will therefore observe these
Arguments with more attention, while I relate them with the same fidelity. They
are principally four, all in his Book against Barclay. Schalkenius has the very
same, sometimes a little differently worded, sometimes not all. So that I
perceive they are what they finally bide upon.

The first is this. That it is certain and manifest that the Pope upon just
cause may judge of temporals, and sometimes depose temporal Princes, we prove
first from the common consent o^ Writers whose words I have related at the
beginning of this disputation (where he had alleged no fewer than 70) For what
Doctors teach with a common consent in different times and places, that the
Universal Church is believed to hold and teach. For God therefore placed
Pastors and Doctors in the Church. Ephesians. 4. that the people should follow them
as their guides, and not reeede from them, unless perhaps they see some one
bring in some novelty against the common doctrine, as Barclay at this time has
done. This is the first Argument which speaks big, and makes a magnificent
show, engaging no less than the Universal Church it self. But sure Bellarmin
either forgot himself, or thought his Readers would, when he objects novelty to
Barclay. Novelty was the very thing objected against his opinion when it first
broke out in the world, in the time of Gregory VII.

This Novelty (not to call it haeresy) was not yet crept into the World, Vin.
B^ll.
etc. says one. That (the indepency of the two supreme Powers) was the true
opinion of all the ancients, and if doubts be newly started by a sinister
desire of pleasing in many, let the old be recalled says another. Cusan.
And does he now pretend antiquity? He who of all the men in the World, a body
would think, has the least reason, when the most ancient Author himself can
alledg in prof of this old doctrine of his, is Greg. VII. the man who began
this bustle, and was charged with novelty for doing so, and after all lived but
in the 11th. age. Since Christ 's time what is once new in the Church is
always new. For it is not with doctrines as with fashions. A new doctrine can
never grow old, nor an old doctrine new. To fix antiquity on what was not heard
of in the Church for ten ages, is with the confidentest, and he must trust much
to his Rhetoric, who goes about to persuade it. In the mean time John Barclay,
in defense of his Father, has reason to say that this leaving the common
consent is not to be objected to him; but to those who spring up in later ages,
teach against the torrent of the Ancient Church.

But to his Argument. Of the 70 Authors which he produces out of Italy, France,
Spain, Germany and Britain, and all since Greg. 7. with whom he begins, a great
part are Canonists, many such Divines who go their way, and only use their
Arguments; some are not for him, and others plainly against him. At least John
Barclay says so, who examines them all particularly. For my part I intend not
to take so much pains. To read threescore and ten depositions and sift them one
by one, is beyond my patience. A man would sooner loose an ordinary cause then
carry it at the expense of so much toil. But if I mistake not, satisfaction may
be had at a cheaper rate. The Topic is Authority, and that to my apprehension
is efficacious but in two cases. One, when the point in question is beyond the
reach of reason, as in Mysteries of Faith, which because the shortness of human
understanding cannot comprehend, there is no means for men to lay hold of but
by relying on such an understanding as can and does. Thus Religion is believed,
because much of it cannot be seen, and our security is the Authority of our
first Teacher God and Man, who we are sure saw himself what we could not, and
brought good evidence that he did so. And so upon the matter we see with his
eyes what we cannot with our own. The other case which requires Authority is
from a contrary ground, not from the abstruseness of the points proposed, but
weakness of the understanding to which they are proposed. As when I press
something upon another, whereof I could bring proof good enough, but his
dullness cannot take it. Here again Authority is all the Argument which can be
used. If I have not credit enough to persuade him to believe me, there is
nothing to be done. You may say, if you will, there is the same reason in both
cases, viz. Weakness of Understanding; only in the first, the weakness is
general, and extends to all mankind; in the second particular, and belongs but
to some. But which soever you say, I do not remember that Authority is
otherwise conclusive. Wherefore this point of the Pope's Power must either be
of a Nature too sublime for any understanding to reach, or it cannot be pressed
by Authority but only upon the weak and dull. I know not which of the two
Bellarmin fancied, when he chose this Argument, but in my opinion they are wild
fancies both. If he thought it so sublime, how came he by it himself? And to
what purpose does he bring so many reasons to prove what is above reason, and
not attainable by it? There is no way to climb to such a height but by
immediate steps of one to another, whereof the first had it with the rest of
the Mysteries of Religion, from Christ himself. But as this way is neither
endeavored nor pretended, so it would place the point in the same degree of
obligation, with the belief of the Trinity, Incarnation, and the rest; which,
to omit the known untruth and what else might be said, would leave no excuse
for communicating with those who openly disavow it. Then to think all men weak
and dull, and none able to look upon the dazzling luster of those reasons by
which the point may be proved, and upon that account descend to Authority, is
as much on the bow hand on the other side, and a fancy which seems hardly
credible in so modest a man as Bellarmin was. And yet one of the two must be
said, or I know not what place there is for Authority. Of a thing which can it
self be seen, and to those who can see it, it seems to as little purpose to
talk what others say of it, as if, to persuade men that this ribond is green,
and the other blew, I should spend time in numbering how many thought so, when
it is but showing the ribonds and every body can tell what their color is.

To my apprehension therefore the whole Topic seems improper and ill chosen.
Notwithstanding let us see what it will do. And in the first place methinks it
were convenient to take along with us what Authority means, and how they ought
be qualified who can pretend to it. And because I intend not to make a common
place of it, and swell my Letter by delating farther then is necessary, I shall
mention but one qualification; but such an one as in my opinion is very
requisite, viz. That those by whose authority others are to be persuaded, do
themselves know that to which others are to be persuaded. For I observe the
world is a little resty and unwilling to be led by those whom they account weak
and shallow. And then this Authority is an Argument, which does not render the
truth apparent to the eyes of those who accept it upon Authority, but suppose
it seen by Authority, and in virtue of that sight to be believed by other
folks. But if it be not seen by those whose Authority is pressed upon me, I can
not imagine what title they can pretend to Authority, nor in virtue of what I
can be pressed to follow it. For certainly if I be blind my self it is very
unreasonable I should take for a guide one who is as blind as I am. When one
blind man leads another, we know what becomes of both. Now because a conclusion
is not seen till it be rightly proved, among those seventy men of Authority
whom Bellarmin alleadges, there must be some one or more, who has severely
proved the point in question, or neither he nor any man else can say that any
of them saw it. If there be no full proof among them all, there can be no
Authority, nor reason why others should take them for Guides, who for any thing
we know are themselves blind, as well as those whom they would lead. If there
be, show the ribond without more ado, and never amuse us with what other people
say of the color. It is a much shorter and much easier way for him to produce,
and us to see one good proof, then to stand sifting the depositions of 70 men
whereof 69 perhaps speak little to the purpose. And after all too, this proof
must needs appear at last; for till it do, as I come from saying, there is no
reason we should believe those who, for ought appears, know no more than we who
are required to believe them.

But to make this matter as plain as I can, what is the reason, when a man
affirms a thing without proof, there is so little obligation, that on the
contrary it is lightness to believe him? I suppose, because bringing no proof
(and by no proof I mean no sufficient proof) he may for ought appears be
mistaken, and we with him. Why then instead of one put twenty that say it, or
if you will a hundred, or as many as Arithmetic can number; and put them to
bring no more proof then the single man, in what is their case different from
his, or how am I excused from lightness or secured from error if I believe
them? Wherefore, either produce the man who brings sufficient proof, and let us
see that sufficient proof of his, and let alone the 69 Ciphers which stand
before him; or if none can be produced, it is a clear case they are altogether
so many insufficient proofs, and to think that number is sufficient, when every
particular is insufficient, is to think that a great many nothings will make
something.

And this is the case of Bellarmin's Authority, which yet has something
particular in it. Of his 70 Witnesses half are either Canonists, or such who
professing other studies, rely in this point on the Arguments of the Canonists.
These Arguments Bellarmin himself thinks faulty, and has taken successful pains
to confute. Now would I fain know what great necessity there is of believing
those, who I know before hand have themselves no reason to believe what they
tell me? To offer me these, is plainly to offer me error for security against
error, and to make me believe that I shall not be deceived if I follow those
who are, and that the way to go right is to go after those who stray. I know
Bellarmin thinks them right in the main though they mistake in a circumstance;
for example, that they think well of the power, though they are out in thinking
it Direct. But if they miss and mistake all in the circumstance, how can I know
but they do so in the main? It Is plain they all mistake when they say it is
direct; therefore their consent in saying a thing, does not make that thing to
be true; wherefore neither can the other, in which he thinks they say true, be
therefore true; because they say it, and this even in Bellarmin's Judgment. And
that he should press that on another which he does not value himself, seems a
little unreasonable. Then for the other half who go upon other grounds then the
Canonists, I will take the liberty to suppose they go upon the same with
Bellarmin, or worse. For he was too judicious a man, to back good arguments,
and choose bad in their rooms. Now what his are, (besides what you will find
here) you know by my last. If any man think them good, he may for me. But this
is clear, that no number of men persuaded by these arguments can add more
strength to the conclusion then those arguments give it. And so we are just
where we were. If the Arguments be sufficient to prove the conclusion, the
business is done, and Authority superfluous; if they be not, what he calls
Authority is but a number of insufficient proofs, or of men led by them, which
infufficiently proofs I am desired to take for sufficient proof. And this in
plain English is to desire me, because those who are deceived are a great many,
to believe they are not deceived; as if by adding black to black and laying on
black enough the wall would become white. I know that number generally carries
with it a fair persuasion (especially where the men are otherwise considerable)
that they are not all mistaken. But of the one half of these, Bellarmin assures
us they actually are mistaken, notwithstanding their number; and whoever does
not approve Bellarmin's Arguments can not but think as much of the other half.
Wherefore it must of necessity rest upon proof at last, and this Topic of
Authority might, in my opinion, have very well been spared. For if any can see
the conclusion proved, he needs no Authority, but is obliged in virtue of that
sight to stand to what he sees, though there were none in the world of the same
judgment with him. But to those who cannot, this Authority is a bare saying
without proof, that is no Authority.

However Bellarmin tryes to make it up, and entitle the Church it self to the
sayings of his 70 men. What Doctors teach, says he, with a common consent in
different times and places, that the universal Church is believed to hold and
teach. For God therefore placed Pastors and Doctors in the Church. Ephesians. 4. that
the People should follow them as their Guides, etc. I think, to make this
Argument look any thing like, to his common he should have added universal
consent. For if Doctors teach differently, many one way, and many the quite
contrary, I hope the Church ought not to be believed to hold and teach what
both teach; or if she do, she must plainly be believed to hold and teach
contradictories. Now for Bellarmin's 70 Canon has alleged more then twice 70
on the other side. How then is it possible to find the Churches doctrine by the
consent of her Doctors, when they are so far from common consent that they
teach direct contraries? Again, to universality of consent there goes
universality both of time and place. Bellarmin either thought of no more, or
could produce no more than out of the Western Church. I hope he does not think
the Church confined to the West. In all controversies of Faith, others and he
himself uses to produce testimonies from other places. We hear of S. Cyprian,
and S. Austin, S. Basil, S. Cyril, S. Jo. Chrysostom, Origin, Tertullian, etc.
whereof none belong to the West. Can that consent be universal to which there
concur none of these once so famous parts of the Church? Then for time he
begins with Greg. 7. and he lived but in the 11th. age. Are 10 whole ages so
inconsiderable, that they make nothing to universal consent? These links can
never hang well together that have such a gap in them, nor is it possible to be
believed the Church should universally teach what none of all her Doctors in
ten ages mentioned. Alas! how little substance there is in these great words
common consent and the Church: But God therefore placed Pastors and Doctors
that People should follow them, very true. But when God placed those Pastors
and Doctors, he put into their mouths the Doctrine which they should preach and
teach. So far as they deliver that doctrine, they have his Authority for their
warrant, but no further. If they will teach any other truth, they may without
doubt, provided they can make it appear to be Truth; in which case the evidence
by which they can make it appear is their warrant, not the Authority of God;
and provided farther that what they teach in this manner be neither pressed by
them, or accepted by others as part of the Doctrine which they are
commissionated by Christ to teach, but as found out by their own or other men's
whether industry or luck. For these Pastors and Doctors cease not to be men by
becoming Pastors and Doctors, and men cannot be hindered from doing like men,
and using their reason, and discoursing as well as others, and now and then as
ill. In which cases, though the material men be Pastors and Doctors, yet now
they act not as Pastors and Doctors, but barely as men. Daily conversation
furnishes us with a hundred examples of the like nature. A Judge for example is
a Judge as long as his Commission lasts; but how few of the man's actions belong
to the Judge? He governs his Children as a Father, his Servants as a Master, he
discourses as a Scholar, he eats and drinks and sleeps as a mere man. It Is the
Judge who does all these things. But certainly if he have a bad palate, for
example, and choose unwholesom food for sophisticated wine, none will think he
makes that choice in virtue of his Commission, or that the Prince or State are
concerned in the errors of his Palate. So it is with Pastors and Doctors. In
what they act by virtue of the Commission given them by Christ, so far they are
Pastors and Doctors, in other things mere men; which men are indeed Pastors and
Doctors; but extend not that Authority to things not included in their
Commission. When they tell us this Doctrine we have received from our
Predecessors, and they from Christ, and tell us this with an universality of
consent both for time and place, we must hear and obey Christ in them whose
commission they execute. But when they discourse, lay down their assertions,
and bring their proofs, by Bellarmin's favor, we have no more obligation to be
led by them then the strength of their proof lays upon us. For now they are no
more Pastors and Doctors, then the Judge is a Judge when he tells a story, or
delivers his opinion in a point of Law by way of discourse, and without giving
sentence. For my part, I conceive the Church so far from being engaged by the
opinion of 70 men, though they be all Pastors and Doctors, that I believe it
very possible, that all the material Pastors and all the Doctors in the Church,
and all the Sheep and Scholars too, may be persuaded of a thing which the
Church taken as a Church, neither believes, nor has any thing to do with. And I
think that such a case not only possibly may be, but actually has happened; as
in the belief of the Antipodes, the motion of the earth, and perhaps twenty
such things even at this present. The truth is, if any one should put me to it,
I do not well know how to prove it. But let us for once suppose, there was a
time when there was no man in the Church more knowing than S. Austin, and that
the consent against the Antipodes was so common and universal, that there was
not so much as any one who held otherwise. I conceive it would be a very false
inference, if any should from thence conclude that the Church at that time held
there were no Antipodes. For it is a plain case that Church imports Faith, and
Faith a derivation from Christ; and since it is known that he taught nothing of
the Antipodes, it is clear that no opinion concerning them can belong to Faith,
or the Church. Whoever they be who hold for or against them, or however they
may belong to the Church in other respects, in this particular she has nothing
to do with him, nor they with her. For now they act not as believers, but as
Scholars, and it is only as believers that they belong to the Church, for the
Chuch is a Congregation of faithful. It Is true these believers are many of them
Scholars too, but when they play the Scholars have no privilege, nor security
against error from Christ or the Church, but must look to their discourses, and
stick to their Learning; in which if they fail, as they very well may and often
do, it is at their own perils, for the Church is no farther engaged than in what
they take from her, and she warrants to be received from Christ. But this point
is already discourst at large in my first letter, and the little I have said
here peradventure is more then needs. For this Authority, which Bellarmin would
pin upon the Church, is no more then the sayings of so many men, whereof one
half he recites and disproves himself, the other half depend upon the strength
of their Arguments, which are the only means by which other men can judge
whether they deserve more credit then their fellows, and when all is done are
contradicted by twice as many as learned and as famous. And this I should think
so far from the Authority of the Church, that it is well if it be any Authority
at all. And so much for the first Argument.

The second is this. We prove it secondly by the Extrav. Vnam sanctam de Major.
and Obed. Where we are taught, the sword is under the sword, and temporal
authority subject to the spiritual power, and that if the earthly power
deviate, it shall be judged by the spiritual, an inferor spiritual, by a
superior; and the supreme spiritual only by God. Neither does it make against
this, that the definition of this Decretal seems revoked by Clemen. 5. in the
Extrav. Meruit. de Privileg. For Clement did not revoke the extravagant of
Boniface, but informed us that it defined no new thing, but declared the
ancient obligation, which men have to obey and be subject to the Apostolic
Sea. Now I should think whether one Pope made a Decree, and another did not
revoke it, matters not much, unless this Decree determine the point in
question. And it is a clear case, there is not a word of deposition in this
extravagant of Boniface 8, neither has Bellarmin remembered to tell us how it is
employed, which yet seems a material circumstance. That which he says we are
taught by it, is that temporal authority is subject to spiritual power, and may
be judged by it if it do amiss, but the supreme spiritual Power by none but
God. All this may be very true, and the Doctrine of deposition very false. When
the temporal Sword is drawn by passion and strikes with in justice, as, to
instance in an example used by himself, when Theodosius caused a number of
innocent people to be slain at Thessalonica, a less man than the Pope had
spiritual power enough to judge and punish this temporal power, or in plain
English to shut the Church doors, and not admit the Emperor to a fellowship in
Christian duties, till he had done what became a good Christian, repented and
made satisfaction. Here the temporal Sword was under the spiritual Sword,
judged and punished by it, and all this while no deposition nor thought of any
such thing. Of all who had their share in that business, none was better
satisfied then the guilty and punished Emperor himself, who more loved and
honored S. Ambrose ever after. And it is likely if all spiritual Princes would
imitate the zeal of that excellent Prelate, and preserving the respect due to
the dignity of secular powers, strive only to redress the errors of their
frailty, that Temporal Princes would imitate the Piety of that excellent
Emperor, and there would be never any clashing betwixt them. But this by the
by. I have only to do with the Argument, and it is not the least I have to do to
find the force of it. For it is plain the bare words themselves, without a
comment will not do, and Bellarmin has here forgotten to give a comment. And so
there remains nothing but to rove at random; and hope, if luck serve, to hit
right. If Bellarmin understand this Decree in that manner in which he
understood it who made it, Boniface the 8, as far as can be gathered by those
who writ of him, was persuaded he was vested in a Power as unlimited and
absolute as the wildest of Canonists ever fancied, that he was the only
universal Monarch, and all Princes his subjects without more ado. You remember
how he writes to the King of France: We would have you know, you are subject to
us both in spirituals and temporals, and take for Heretics who think
otherwise. Now there is one, in my opinion, very good reason why Bellarmin
should not understand the Decree in this manner, and that is because he thinks
that sense not true, and maintains the Pope has no such power, and the
Canonists are out who give it him. If he will understand it as Clement 5 seems
to understand it (you must pardon me if I entertein you with seemings, we must
rove where we can do no better) it will amount to no more than bare spiritual
power, as indeed the words themselves carry no farther. We neither will nor
intend, says he, that any prejudice be done to the King or Kingdom of France by
the Decree in question, nor that the King, Kingdom, or Inhabitants be more
subject to the Church of Rome then they were formerly, but that all things be
in the same state in which they were before the said definition. Now one point
of the state in which things were before, was, if we believe the King of
France, as also Innocent 3, who had declared as much, that he was subject in
temporals to no man. And so there remains only subjection in spirituals, in
which Clement 5 understood the Decree, and challenged to the Church of Rome,
and this will freely be allowed to Bellarmin by a great many who for all that
will allow no deposition. Now because neither of these Comments will fit him,
as far as I perceive he will hardly find one ready made, but must take the
pains to make one for himself, if he will do any thing And yet when he has
done, a Comment is one thing and a Text another. One is not altogether so
current money as the other. Although in this particular his comment must be
better metal then the Text it self, or will hardly pass. The whole Canon Law,
the Decrees not only of particular Popes, but particular Councils, unless in
circumstances which happen not in this case, are freely and openly denied the
power to oblige to belief. But I will not meddle with this point, which would
draw on a new, and that controversial dispute, and I am no man of Controversy.
What I have said is answer enough to an Argument no better pressed. Yet I shall
make one observation more, and so take leave of it.

This Canon according to the declaration of Clement 5 defined nothing new, says
Bellarmin, but only declared the ancient obligation of being subject to the
Apostolic Sea. Now would I fain understand how we should know by this Canon
what that ancient obligation was. The question is whether the ancient
subjection were in temporals or spirituals. And the Canon is declared to define
neither the one nor the other, but only the ancient obligation; (and if it
define nothing in the question, it might very well have been let alone) of
necessity we must know what this ancient obligation is, before we can know what
this Canon has defined; and then it is a clear case we can know nothing by the
Canon, but must depend on another knowledge, and by that find out what the Canon
says. If things be left by this Canon, as the Pope says they are, in the state
in which they were before, it is not possible to know how this Canon left them,
but by knowing how they were before. See now how well this Canon proves in the
Pope a power over temporals, which says no more but that he has a power he
always had, but whether that power be temporal or spiritual is wholly silent.
It Is something a new way of arguing, to bring us in proof, that things are as
Bellarmin says they are, a Canon which says only they are as they were before,
and force us to a new search to know how they were before, of which we have no
intelligence from his Canon; but as far as we can have intelligence otherwise,
have reason to think they were quite contrary to what Bellarmin pretends. For
the French, who took themselves particularly concerned in this Canon, did
neither then nor since believe any obligation to be subject in temporals, and
were unsatisfied till they procured this Declaration from Clement 5 that things
were as they were before; and because this satisfied them it is in my opinion a
strong proof that it was then known there was no subjection in temporals due
before. However it be, the proof from the Canon stands plainly thus: You must
in virtue of this Canon believe the Pope has power over Temporals, because he
has a power which by the Canon you cannot know whether it be over temporals or
no; Or, you must know by the Canon the Pope has a temporal Power, which whether
it be temporal or no you must know from something else then the Canon: That is,
I must know in virtue of the Canon, what I cannot know in virtue of the Canon.
Which proof being that in virtue whereof I know, signifies the Canon is a
proof, which is not a proof.

The third Argument is from Councils, and is thus proposed by Bellarmin. We
prove it thirdly from the Councils before mentioned, whereof the two last were
general For how can that be brought into doubt, or depend on the opinion of
men, which general Catholic and lawful Councils approve? But these ten
Councils, and especially the two last of Lateran and Lions do most evidently
teach that temporal Princes may be deposed by the Pope, when the necessity of
the Church requires it, and consequently that the temporal Power of Princes is
subject, and subordinate to the spiritual power of Popes. In my opinion he
might have spared that consequently. If lawful general Councils evidently teach
Deposition, they teach enough of all conscience; we know well enough what will
follow, without the help of his inferences, and know that twenty worse things
will follow then subordination of powers. But is Bellarmin in earnest too? and
will he reduce the Catholic Church to the narrow compass of those who believe
his Doctrine? How! Lawful general Concils teach, and that evidently, that
Princes may be deposed! Why, what a hand has he made on it? His Friends, Coton,
Sonran, and the rest of the Jesuits, who by a public declaration disavow'd
and detested this doctrine, were no very honest men by his reckoning. The
French are all direct Heretics without more ado, and I fear it will go hard
with the Pope himself, who so freely and openly communicates with them. As for
my small acquaintance, they are all in as bad a case as Falstaffs old Hosts, if
sack be a sin. They Will be mall'd to my knowledge. If he do not make amends, with
the weakness of his proofs, for the confidence of his assertions, we are all
undone. But the comfort is that all Catholics are not of his mind. For this
very Book had the luck to light into a certain Catholic Country where it was
publicly condemned, and the men who did it, did not for all that think they
contradicted any thing evidently taught by lawful general Councils. But let us
see what those Councils say. The truth is, since of ten which he cites, 2 only
are general, 8 might have been spared. For particular Councils, according to
his own doctrine, are not so irrefragible, but what they determine may be
brought into doubt. But we must take his Arguments as they are.

His first Council is, 900 years old, under Greg. 2. wherein he would make us
believe the Emperor Leo Isaurus was excommunicated, and deprived of the
tributes which he used to receive out of Italy. And this is one of the stories
which Onuphrius takes for fables. Bellarmin alleges for proof (for the Council
is not extant) the testimony of Zonaras a Greek Historian, whose words are
these: Gregory, who at that time ruled the Church of old Rome, involved them
together with the Emperor in a synodical Anathema, and making a league with the
French, forbad the tributes (which till that time were paid) from thence to the
Empire. Barclay answers, that he mistook the meaning of Zonaras, thinking that
those 2 several things, because they are joined in one period, happened therefore
at the same time. It Is true that either this Pope, or his Successor Greg. 3 did
in a Synod excommunicate, not the Emperor particularly, but Iconoclasts in
general. It Is true that Greg. 3. made a league with the French, or rather fled
to their protection from the injuries of the Lombards, from which the Emperor
either could, or perhaps would not defend him. And therefore Writers who say
that after this league Italy* withheld their usual Tributes, though the matter
of fact be not altogether so clear, but none say they withheld them by the
authority of any Council. As far as can be gathered the exasperated people were
willing to keep their money for their own defense, and not by sending it into
Greece, expose themselves defenseless to those injuries which they either
suffered or feared. And thus far there is mention of the Pope's consent, and
even countenance at last; for he opposed the sway of the people a good while;
and by his authority preserved them in their allegiance to the Emperor, yet
sided with them at long run, in this keeping their money at home. But for
deposing the Emperor much less in a Synod, neither he nor any body else thought
of it, on the contrary to his dying day he acknowledged him his Emperor and
Lord. Whether the People, or he did well in doing so much as they did, is
another question which belongs not to me to determine. But I suppose it is no
wonderful thing, that a remote Province of a great Empire should upon some
dissatisfaction fail at some time in their duty, and the men of greatest
Authority among them join with them. This is standing upon their terms more
then becomes subjects; but it is not deposing, and much less deposing by the
Authority of those great men who take their part. One might as well say the
Prince of Orange by his Authority deposed the King of Spain from the Low
Countries, because he was the Principal Actor, with those who fell from him.
But to make short work with our case, there was in it, I think, no deposition
at all. But if this Tribute matter must be called deposition, to that concurred
no Council; and betwixt them both it is plain there is no Argument.

There comes next in play the famous business of Greg. 7 which takes up 6
Councils more. These because they belong all to one subject, you shall give me
leave to respit, till I have rid my hands of his next Council which belongs to
another. It Is the Council of Clerment. where, he says, Urban. 2. excommunicated
and deposed Philip. 1. of France for casting off his lawful Wife, marrying an
Adulteress, and refusing upon admonition to make satisfaction. For this he
cites M. Paris, and Sigebert. I have not seen Sigebert; but M. Paris, who
particularizes the Acts of the Council, and among the rest this
excommunication, makes no mention of deposing. I, but, says Bellarmin,
deposition must be understood to go along with excommunication. Marry I thank
him heartily. Understood quotha! Is our evident teaching come to understanding,
and understanding those things to be the same than which the world has none
more different? Excommunication is a pure spiritual censure, and deprives a man
of none but pure spiritual goods; deposition is quite contrary, and takes away
only temporal. It passes my understanding how one of these must necessarily
follow out of the other. Pray why must we understand it does? Because says he,
Historians testify the Pope forbad the Crown should be set upon the Kings head
while he remained excommunicate, and in particular Ivo Bishop of Chartres
writes to the Pope, that he would be threatened, unless he restored the Crown;
and took off the excommunication, that the King and Kingdom would fall off from
their obedience. Very well. Why then according to Ivo, there was a King still,
and that King had a Kingdom, and so much credit in it that 'twas not impossible
but he might cause it to revolt. These things do not hang together. A man may
as soon understand how excommunication and deposition infer one another, as how
a Crown can be restored to one who is a King, and has a Kingdom; or how the
Pope should forbid the Crown to be set on his head, who had been crowned long
before the Pope was Pope. It Is hard and not very wise to forbid things that are
past. If this mystery had not been unridled for me, I had been quite at a loss.
But if I may believe Barclay and Withrington, it was at that time the custom of
France for the King to wear his Crown at solemn Festivals, and for some Bishop
to put it on his head. The Pope forbad the Bishops to serve the King in this
Ceremony, it seeming improper that persons of their dignity in the Church,
should so far communicate with a man deservedly lying under the censures of the
Church, as to contribute to his honor, at the sacred Offices. And this is all
the Crown of which Ivo speaks and talks of restoring. 'Twas at most a matter of
pure ceremony, in which the Pope was not obeyed neither. For Ivo himself writs
that, notwithstanding his commands to the contrary, Bishops were found, who
performed that Office to the King. But for the rest, the Kings reign was
neither interrupted nor disquieted. France giving a very good example of the
duty of subjects in that case, when in the words of Paulus Aemilius, they
preserved inviolate the Majesty of a faulty Prince, and yet themselves
degenerated not from the holiness of their Ancestors. I mention not his
additional proof from Vignier, because he had better have let him alone, since
Barclay has caught him tardy, and showed that what Vignier says related to
another Philip who lived a hundred years after this Philip of whom Bellarmin
speaks. And I conceive He might as well have let alone the Council of Clermont
as Vignier, for there is no proof that the King was deposed by or in it.

To return now to Greg. 7. He says, Bellarmin, in a Synod at Rome publicly and
solemnly and ceremoniously, with the consent and applause of all present,
deposed and excommunicated the Emperor Henry 4. And to this Synod must be added
5 more held by his Successors, at Beneventum by Victor 3 Piacenza by Urban 2.
Rome by Paschal 2. Colen by Gelasius 2. and Rhemes by Calistus 2. in which the
sentence of Gregory 7 was confirmed. Of these six, if Jo. Barclay say true,
five are plainly nothing to the matter: For there is not a word of deposition
in any of them. There is mention of Excommunication sometimes of the Emperor
himself, sometimes of the Antipope set up by the Emperor and his accomplices;
but deposition not so much as once named. Besides Henry 4. with whom Greg. 7.
had to do, was dead before the times of Gelasius and Calistus; to make them
renew the sentence of deposition given first by Greg. 7. is a great
inadvertence. It Is true all his Successors kept up the quarrel about
Lay-investitures, and that occasioned all the Decrees he mentions, and some
more remembered by Schulkenius, till Calistus with a wise and successful piety
composed the difference. And I think it cannot be imagined he should depose the
Emperor with whom he treated and concluded Peace. There remains only the fact
of Greg. 7. himself, and that indeed past in a Council; but what share the
Council had in it, is something obscure. I suspect he was more beholding to his
Rhetoric for those flourishing additions of the consent and applause of all
present, then the warrant of any good authority. For Platina says expressly
there were some present so far from being fully satisfied, that they urged, a
King was not to be excommunicated so soon. And the Decree it self mentions
neither consent, nor privity of any besides the Pope, whose act the style makes
it, and that so entirely, that were it not known by other means, it could never
be discovered by the sentence, that there was any such thing as a Council then
in being. The truth is, the Pope was smartly provoked. For, besides that he had
been forcibly seized on, even at the Altar, and hurried into prison, from
whence he was the next day rescued by the people, a Synod of Worms called by
the Emperor, had little better then deposed him first. We denounce unto you,
say they, that as we have promised no obedience to you, so from henceforth we
mean to pay none. In consequence of this Decree one Roland a Clergyman of Parma
was sent to Rome, and there publicly forbad the Pope to act as Pope for the
future, and commanded the Cardinals to leave him, and repair to the Emperor, to
receive another Pope. Whether he had not begun with the Emperor is another
question. There are who think he had. But however to be so sharply dealt with
would make a man look about him. And it is clear, this business at Worms happened
before his sentence at Rome, where it is very likely they might think they had
as much power to to depose the Emperor; as they in Germany to depose the Pope.
If I may be permitted to speak with freedom I should think this
counter-authority of Councils one against another (for it was not only Pope
against Emperor, but Council against Council) is a more proper argument of
human frailty, then Catholic doctrine. One may perceive that Princes never
fall out, but there will be partakers on both sides, and that among those who
are least liable to the suspicion of being swayed to injustice, the wisest and
gravest and of greatest dignity. But how any thing should be efficaciously
concluded from Councils, which are opposed by other Councils, as many, as full,
consisting of persons, the Pope excepted, equal in dignity and reputation
whether for learning or virtue, is hard to conceive. Tumult and Bitterness and
Animosity are no very proper dispositions for the calm and gentle operations of
the H. Spirit; and such there were at that time, or else the world was then a
great deal more holy then now. There was among them that would have caused
passion among us, and things were done by them which passionate people do with
us; where we see the fruits we cannot but suspect the Tree. The Emperor for his
part had the Pope to countenance the Saxons against him, and by his spiritual
authority counterpoise the weight of his arms. This would vex a man of a high
spirit, ambitious of glory, and impatient of contradiction unless he were a
Saint, which is not written of that Emperor. On the other side, the Pope had
the Emperor averse to the liberality then intended, and after brought to
effect, of the Countess Mathildis, and unwilling so great an occasion should be
made to the Church of lands, to which, if I mistake not, the Emperor pretended.
He must be a very great Saint too if he could look upon the hopes of so great
an advantage without passion, and not be tempted to weaken a man whom he saw
would cross him as much as he could. These reasons for animosity, among others,
there were and if they did not work, they were the holyer men. But I think no
man is bound to believe that the pretenses used in matters of great
consequence, are always the true causes: neither is it hard when people are
resolved to fall out, and set the best face they can each on his several side,
by some means or other to draw in the pretense of Religion, which as it carries
the fairest show, is generally nearest at hand. But I rove too far with my
fools bolt. Those who were Actors in these matters, have long since given
account to an Impartial Judge, nor have I to do with their intentions, but
Bellarmin's argument; which in two words I conceive little efficacious, both
because the concurrence of the Council seems questionable, farther than as it
happens sometimes in consistories, where matters are proposed in some cases for
forms sake, and shall be executed as they are preresolved, however the
Cardinals vote. And though it were not, the Council at most is but a particular
Council, which according to Bellarmin himself is of no irrefragable and binding
authority. For the rest 'twere strange, if the Pope should not find Bishops
enough to join with the spiritual power, when the Emperor wanted not who stuck
as fast to the temporal. And so much to 8 of the 10 Councils.

We are now at -- Paulo majora canamus. The two Councils which remain are
proposed with more pomp, and in truth challenge a greater respect, as being
general Councils both. The first is that of Lateran under Innocent 3. out of
which is urged the famous Canon known by every one, and which for as much as
concerns us, runs Thus -- But if a temporal Lord required and admonisht by the
Church, neglect to purge his land from this Heretical filth, let him be
excommunicated by his Metropolitan, and Com-provincial Bishops. And if he stand
in contempt, and make not satisfaction within a year, let the Pope be made
acquainted that he may from that time declare his Vassals absolved from their
fealty to him, and expose his lands to be seized on by Catholics, who chacing
away the Heretics may without contradiction possess, and preserve it in the
purity of Faith, saving the right of the principal Lord, provided he bring no
obstacle nor hindrance to the Premises, observing nevertheless the same rule
with them who have no principal Lords. Bellarmin is wonderfully agog with this.
What, says he, would Barclay say here? If this be not the voice of the
Catholic Church where shall we find it? and if it be, as most truly it is, he
that out of contempt, as Barclay hears it not, is he not to be esteemed a
Heathen and a Publican, and in no manner a Christian and pious? If the Pope
have not power on earth to dispose of temporals, even to the deposition of
those Princes who either are Heretics themselves, or any way favor Heretics,
why, at the setting out this Canon, did none of so great a number make
opposition? Why of so many Ambassadors of Emperors and Kings not one who durst
so much as mutter? These Parasites to temporal Princes were not yet sprung up,
who under pretense of establishing temporal Kingdoms take away the eternal
Kingdom from those whom they flatter. I marry! here is a fit of triumphant zeal.
But I suppose if he had cast a little water on the flame, it would have been
hot enough for the occasion. This Parasites and Flatterers, Heathens, Publicans
and Impious are expressions a little too zealous. In what a case are they who
condemned all this zeal, and had they not had more respect to his Purple then
his argument, in all likelihood had burnt it too? and yet had as good ears in
the opinion of the world; as Bellarmin, and could hear the voice of the
Catholic Church as soon. But to be serious, what Barclay would have said here,
I cannot tell; but I suppose if Death had not stopped his mouth, he would have
said something: For this Canon is no such secret that he could be imagined
ignorant of it, or unprovided against it. At least his son did find something
to say for him, to which I can no more tell what Bellarmin would say, then he
could what Barclay would say to the Council. I shall have occasion to mention
part of what he says by and by. In the mean time as this Council never fails to
be laid in the way of all who travel this road, people have several turns to
avoid it.

There are who question whether any thing at all was defined there, at least in
a Conciliar way, or if any thing were defined that the world was duly made
acquainted with the business. For which, besides that some Historians expressly
say nothing was concluded, they have these presumptions. The Canons, which we
have, discover by their style that they were not made in the Council. They run
some of them in this manner: It was piously provided in the Lateran Council --
It Is known 'twas forbid in the Lateran Council, etc. which are phrases very
unlikely to have been used by the Council, if that framed the Decrees. Again,
the whole authority of this Council rests as far as I see upon one Cochlaeus
The Councils had been set out, and this omitted, either not known, or not
procurable by him, who managed the business. Against another Edition this
Cochlaeus furnished the Press with the Copy which we now have. Whence he had it
himself, I know not; but methinks the credit of a private man is a weak support
for a matter of this consequence. Besides how much time ought in reason be
allowed to a Conciliar discusion and determination of threescore Canons.
Carenza has threescore and ten, and somewhere I have heard of another number,
which disagreement by the way is a suspicious thing M. Paris tells us the
Council was summoned for the first of Nov. and met, I suppose, at the day. The
Pope first makes an exhortation, afterward causes 60 Chapters to be read, and
concludes with a second exhortation concerning the H. Land. All this, as far as
can be gathered by him, past in one day; which if it did, the Council could not
possibly contribute more than the hearing to any thing. Besides he plainly says
these 60 Chapters to some appeared easy, to others burdensome; which is very
far from a Conciliar approbation. Now he says not precisely when the Council
ended, but it is apparent by him that it lasted not long. The Pope in this
Council at the Kings instance suspends the Archbishop of Canterbury. This
suspension bears date pridie nonas or 4th. Nov. Besides he vacats the election
of his Brother Simon Langton to the Sea of York, and excommunicates the Barons
of England. These sentences are not recorded as the other, but in liklyhood
past at the same time. M. Paris mentions immediately the end of the Council.
Quo facto after which, says he, two of the three Agents which the King of
England had there, returned to bring him the good news. They found him at
Rochester, from whence he marched to St. Albans, and came thither time enough
to have the suspension of the Archbishop attested by the seal of the Convent
13 Calend. Jan. or 20 December. By this account how long could the Council last?
Or how much time could be spent in duly weighing so many Canons, some of such
importance, when men who had seen the conclusion of the Council which began not
before Nov. were in England by the 20th. of December? He has besides a second
sentence of the Popes against the Barons of England by name, wherein he speaks
in this manner. We would have you know that lately in a General Council we did
excommunicate and anathematize the Barons of England -- moreover we do
excommunicate and anathematize -- We aggravate our hand more strongly against
them, etc. This bears date 17 Calend. Jan. the 16 December. of the same year, and
it is clear by the Pope's expressions that before this time the Council was
ended, and it may be had been a good while. If these 60 Canons were all
examined with that maturity which becomes a Council, and so decreed, Councils
at that time were much nimbler then now a days. If proceedings then had one
quarter of the phlegm we use now their suspicion is not altogether without
ground, who think the consultations, then on foot were interrupted by the
breaking out of sudden wars, and nothing brought to conclusion.

Withrington takes another exception to this Canon, which he says comes not
home to the purpose, nor can by the rules of Law be interpreted to extend to
Sovereign Princes; because, as he says, in construction of Law such Princes, at
least in penal, or as they call them odious matters, are never understood to be
included in general words, as Lords, Magistrates and the like, no more then the
Pope when only Bishop is named, or Abbot by the word Monk. If it had been meant
of Sovereign Princes, it had been as easy to have named them expressly, as
temporal Lords, and they were so named in other Decrees even of this Council.
Besides this very Decree, in the very same words, changing only spiritual
punishments into temporal, was published within 5 years by the Emperor, and it
cannot be imagined he meant to make Sovereign Princes subject to his Laws, or
had power so to do though he meant it.

These and several other things may be said, but in my opinion they need not:
for there is another answer free from the intricacies whether of Law or
History, and which to my apprehension is both easy and plain. Every body knows
that Decrees of Councils are of two sorts. Some declare what is to be believed,
others prescribe something to be done. And every body knows that these two are
of very different natures. To refuse Decrees of Faith, is to renounce the
communion of that Church whose Representative the Council is, that is, the
whole Church, if the Council be general, unless there be a just exception
against their proceeding. For Faith is that by which a Church is a Church, and
if you be of a different Faith, you cannot be of the same Church. But for the
other sort of Decrees, when they concern civil matters, because those whose
business it is to manage them are supposed to be better acquainted with them
then spiritual men, whose business it is to attend to spirituals, neither
reason nor custom allows them any force, till they be received by particular
Countries, and by that reception made binding. For it were very unreasonable
one Law should bind all Countries, when that which is convenient in one place
may be and often is prejudicial in another. We in England acknowledge no Law but
by consent of Parliament. In France they require Verification, as they call it,
in their highest Courts of Justice. Every Country has its particular method;
but what has not past this test is current no where. And this is a notorious
thing, for default of which, there is none who knows not that these kind of
Decrees of the Council of Trent are not obliging in France to this day. Again,
it is equally notorious that the Canon in question is of this second sort.
Wherefore it is as plain as can be, that unless it can be made appear. It has
been duly received, and by such reception become binding, of itself it is not
binding any where, I mean where both powers are not united to command it For
where the Pope has the Authority of a temporal Prince there both powers concur.
I forbear to touch several things mentioned pertinently enough. As, how Bishops
in Council should order temporal penalties, who out of Council (unless they
have a share of temporal power communicated otherwise to them) cannot go beyond
spiritual. A Congregation of Bishops is but so many Bishops, nor is it easy to
conceive how their meeting together should invest them with an authority of
another kind and such as is not proper to Bishops. To which purpose a famous
Canonist upon occasion of temporal penalties, inflicted by a certain Canon,
inquires what the Pope had to do with temporals, and answers, truly nothing;
but he ordered that penalty in virtue of the Emperors consent, who was present
and approved it. So that when Councils make such kind of Decrees, 'twill be
hard to make out any other Authority by which they make them, than the consent
of Princes concerned. But these considerations, and several other I pass by,
the former being plain in it self and plainly doing the business. The Decree in
question is of that kind which all the world knows is not binding but where,
and only where it is received. Either produce this reception, or it is to no more
purpose to urg it, then to alledg the authority of a Bill thrown out of one of
the Houses, or not assented to by the King. Upon the whole, if there had gone a
little more knowledge to Bellarmin's zeal, 'twould have been so much the better:
He undertakes to prove that general Councils teach evidently that Princes may
be deposed by the Pope, and brings in proof a Decree which teaches nothing, but
orders that which none is bound to obey, unless he live in a Country who have
made it a Law to themselves, if any such Country there be. And if this be his
evident teaching, it will be concluded that his Doctrine in this point can be
taught no otherwise then by a teaching, which evidently is no teaching.

Bellarmin concludes with the Council of Lions under Innocent 4. in which there
was published a sentence of deposition against the Emperor Frederick 2. This as
Art requires at a close, he sets forth as gloriously as he can. Having related
the later part of the sentence; This, says he, is the sentence of the Sovereign
Bishop with approbation of the whole Council, that is with the consent and
praise of the Universality of Christian Prelates. And yet one, I know not who,
dares dispute against it, and publish his Book, and cast a mist before the eyes
of the simple; and so goes on to the end of the Chapter, amplifying the
boldness and rashness of standing in opposition to so many and so learned, and
so holy men, whom for the greater solemnity he gathers all into one great
Council, excommunicating and deposing by Apostolic Authority Heretical
Princes, or Patrons of Heretics; And upon this fancy of making one Council of
all ages he is so intent, that he quite forgets that Heretical Princes were no
part of the case in any Age, nor ever thought of by any of his Councils, save
only that of Lateran. To fancy them all into one Council is well enough: but to
fancy them doing there what, when they are assembled in reality, they dreamt
not of, has something too much of fancy. Then this favoring of Heretics is a
term so general that I know not how far it extends, but I think Princes make
alliances as they are guided by interest of State, and amuse not themselves
with these speculations of Schoolmen. The French never bogled to make leagues
with Princes of different Religions, which though it has been sometimes cast in
their dish, they left not for all that to do what they thought fitting. It Is
now come about, and the House of Austria does what heretofore they blamed in
the French, and the Pope is much belied if he quarrel with them for it. It is
not much more boldness and rashness to stand upon our terms with his Councils,
being such as they are, then to condemn to excommunication and deposition such
as are capable of it, all this part of the world. For sure Representatives are
not so much more considerable than the Bodies themselves. But I rove as well as
Bellarmin.

Before I speak to the to the Council, it will not be amiss to observe that the
case of the German Emperors has something not common with other absolute
Princes, and the cases of Frederic 2 and Henry 4 something not common with
other Emperors. For it is well observed by John Barclay that since the
translation of the Empire to the West, at least since the devolution from the
posterity of Charles the Great to the Germans, Popes have pretended a
particular superiority over those Emperors. Clem. 5. Clementina Vinc. de
Jurejur. Adrian Ep. ad Fred. 7.
One of them in a certain Canon will needs have the Oath which Emperors take at
their Coronation to be properly an Oath of Fidelity. Another taxes the Emperor
of insolence and arrogance for setting his name before the Popes, as being
contrary to the fidelity promised and sworn to S. Peter himself. In consequence
whereof there are who maintain the Pope may depose the Emperor, for this
reason, because he acknowledges his Temporalties from the Pope, and in plain
terms that the Empire and Emperor are subject to the Pope. I have nothing to do
with the justice of this pretense, let the Germans look to that, who, I
suppose, are not all of the same opinion: but it is manifest Popes have made
this claim, and if they act in consequence of what they publicly maintain and
treat as subjects those whom they took to be so, and deal with them as supreme
Lords with their Inferiors and Vassals, as it is not to be wondered at, so the
case is quite different from that of absolute Princes, over whom there is no
pretense of superiority. Again, this Frederick had positively sworn by
Ambassadors particularly authorized to stand to the Judgment of the Pope and
Church. Henry 4. had done as much in person at Canossa, upon the recalling of
his first sentence. How far this submission of theirs subjected those two
Emperors to the censures of the Church, at least how far it might be thought to
subject them, I cannot say. But certainly such an obligation makes their
condition different from those who never entered into such bonds.

It will not be amiss likewise to reflect a little upon the temper of those
times. As far as I can get a Prospect of them, they were less critical then
ours, and more led by nature than speculation. When a mischief happened they
thought 'twas fit there should be a remedy, and as drowning men think not of
the trespass, and whether the twig they catch at grow on their neighbors
ground, if the temporal Power wronged them, had recourse to the spiritual, and
if the spiritual to the temporal. So the Emperor Otho was solicited to relieve
them against John 12 and did so, causing him to be deposed, and a better chosen
in his room. And every body thought he did well, even Bellarmin himself (though
withal he thinks the action not so regular) because that Pope was a very wicked
man. Besides, the Pope was believed the Father and Head of all Christians, and
upon that account obedience due to him from all. How far and to what kind of
actions this obedience extended, they seem to have so little considered that
Greg. 7. himself answers, those who were not satisfied with his hasty sentence,
Plat. in Greg. 7.
as if it were all one to have power over all and to have all Power. It was
this Council of Lions which made men begin to look about them, and consider the
matter more deeply. For then, says M. Paris both Princes and prelates
foreseeing the consequences were exceedingly troubled. For though Frederick
himself did many ways deserve to be lessened and deprived of all honor, yet to
be deposed by Papal authority, would raise the Church of Rome to that height
and pride that abusing the Grace of God they might fall to deposing even
innocent and good Princes, and sooner Prelates, and this for slight causes, or
at least threaten to depose them, etc. But whatever they thought afterward,
when they reflected the Pope was a man as well as his Neighbors, and might
abuse an unlimited power; at the Council of Lions I conceive they were more
intent to consider who had right of his side, then with what kind of penalty
they were impour'd to chastise the wrong. The Emperors Agents were heard, and
notwithstanding all they could say in his behalf, and they spoke freely enough,
He was in the opinion of the whole Council manifestly guilty. Even those who
favored him at first, confessed he deserved to be deposed. And if the rest
thought no injustice done him, who had but what he deserved, I think the wonder
is not great.

However it be to answer more directly, diverse things they say, They question
the concurrence of the Council, and think Bellarmin a little more confident
then became him, to talk of the approbation and consent and praise of the whole
Council, when the Decree is so far from authorizing his confidence, that on the
contrary it affords just suspicion of the contrary. For whereas the usual style
of conciliar Acts, and elsewhere used even in this very Council, runs in this
manner, sacro approbante Concilio, it is changed here into this, sacro praesente
Concilio, which they think not done without a particular reason. Again,
Historians mention the horror and astonishment of the bystanders at the
pronouncing the sentence, effects not likely to proceed from an Act of their
own. In fine, several exceptions they take. But the best answer in my opinion
is afforded by Bellarmin himself. He teaches elsewhere, that in Councils the
greatest part of the Acts belong not to Faith, Lib. 2. de Council. c. 12.
neither Disputations, nor Reasons, nor Explications, but the bare Decrees
themselves, and those not all, but only such as are proposed for Faith. This
being admitted, as it is universally, the difficulty is plainly answered. For
it is as plain as can be, that here is nothing proposed for Faith. The Emperor
is deposed, his deposition is that which is decreed and that is proposed as a
thing to be done, not believed. To depose is one thing, to define they have
power to depose is another. Had they made such a Decree and obliged all
Christians under Anathema to believe, it had been to purpose to alledg it. But
as far as I can learn, there was no thought of any such thing in the Council.
Now for Acting, People may act, and sometimes very rationally upon probable
grounds, and such as none are bound to believe. And they may have very good
grounds for acting in one case, which themselves may not think sufficient in
another. It is very unreasonable out of a particular action to conclude a power
which shall extend to all cases, when from the bare action there is no
necessity of believing a power even in that case. The most that can be made of
it is, that the Council supposed, or took for granted they had power to do what
they did. And it may be they had. For the Emperor had sworn particularly to
stand to the Judgment of the Church: He pleaded in this Council by his
Procurators, who when they saw things go against them, made no exception to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, but appealed to a future Council more general,
pretending all were not present who had right to sit there. But why may not a
Council take for granted more then every body is obliged to grant? This
supposition of theirs was undoubtedly one of the Reasons of their Decree. And
Bellarmin assures us we are not bound to believe any of their reasons. So that
for his particular, he had no reason to expect this Decree should cause belief
in any. But whether he had or no, this is plain without him. That where there
is nothing to be believed there can be no belief, and where there is nothing,
in his languag, proposed for Faith, there is nothing to be believed. Here is
something commanded, but nothing defined, and as sure as no Mass no hundred
Mark, no Definition, no Article of Faith. Wherefore I cannot sufficiently
wonder to see learned men lay so blindly about them, some with great formality
citing the Council and heightning its authority by reckoning up the number and
quality of those who met there; others striving to diminish it by consulting
Historians, and carefully observing all exceptions they afford; when all this
while the Authority of it neither applys it self, nor can be applied to the
matter in hand. For it is evident they defined nothing, one way or other, and
afford us no more then a bare matter of fact, past indeed in, or by a Council,
but whatever be true, or whether the Fact were just or unjust, our belief is
not a jot concerned, and this even by the confession of those who most urg the
Council. The Fate of eager Disputers is upon us, with much ado we are where we
were again; and must either be taught this Doctrine by Decrees which teach
nothing, or which neither are, nor were intended for teaching Decrees, or not
to be taught it all, as far as I perceive For this is the sum total of his ten
Councils.

His fourth and last Argument is, He says, from Scripture; and if you will
pardon a scurvy pun, it is indeed very far from it, so far that one would not
readily perceive what Scripture has to do with it. As tedious as it is to
transcribe, I must submit to the pains of setting down, and you to the patience
of reading his whole Discourse; for fear I should be suspected of wronging it
by contracting. Fourthly, says he, We prove it from the divine writings, as
Greg. 7 proves it in 21 Epistle of the 8 Book. For we find the Ecclesiastical
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome most manifestly founded on Scripture and
Tradition, in which Primacy is contained most ample Power of governing, binding
and loosing whomsoever, even Kings and Emperors: and this neither Barclay, nor
any Catholic denies. But out of this principle is gathered plainly enough,
that there is in the Bishop of Rome a power to dispose of temporals, even to
the deposition of those Kings and Emperors. For by that spiritual Power the
Pope can bind secular Princes by the bond of excommunication; by the same he
can loose the people from their Oath of Fidelity and Obedience; he can oblige
the same People, under pain of Excommunication, not to obey the excommunicated
King, and choose them another. Besides, since the end of spiritual government is
the gaining eternal life, which is the supreme and last end to which all other
ends are subordinate; of necessity all secular Power must be subject and
subordinate to the spiritual power of the supreme Ecclesiastical Hierarch;
which (secular power) he is to direct, and if it deviate, correct and judge,
and in fine bring to pass that it hinder not the salvation of Christian people.
And this is the reason why both Greg. 7 and Innocent 4. when they deposed
Emperors, to show they did it justly, alleged the words of our Lord: Whatever
you shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatever you shall loose
on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Mat. 16. And feed my Sheep. Jo. 21. namely
to signify that their power to dispose of temporals, when the salvation of
souls, the safety of Religion, and preservation of the Church require it,
depends not on the uncertain opinions of men, but the divine Ordination of
Christ, the eternal King and highest Bishop, and who above all is God blessed
for ever, according to the Apostle, Romans 11.

This is every word of what he calls proof from Scripture; if you or any else
think it so, you shall find me reasonable. But indeed it sticks with me. Let us
see, The Ecclesiastical Primacy of the Pope, says he, is founded in Scripture
and Tradition, and this Primacy extends to Kings and Emperors, and contains
most ample power, of governing, binding and loosing, and this no Catholic
denies. Very well; and because I must acknowledge my self a Catholic. I must
acknowledge I think it all very true. Thus far we are right. Only I take this
most ample Power to mean no more then most ample Ecclesiastical power, for that
is all which Ecclesiastical Primacy imports; which Ecclesiastical Power, that
it extends to Kings and Emperors, no King nor Emperor, who acknowledges the
Ecclesiastical Primacy, scruples to admit. For they take themselves to be part
of the flock of Christ, and claim their share in the benefit of the Keys, as
well as others. But out of this Principle, says he, the deposing Power is
plainly gathered. The Controversy sure will quickly be at an end now. Scripture
is acknowledged on all hands, and what is plainly there, or may be plainly
deduced from thence, will find a ready submission from every body. And though I
suspect this Gathering will go near to take the business out of the hands of
Scripture; yet, since it is no great matter who does it, so the Miracle be
done, let us only observe at present how he gathers this plain inference of
his, and how it follows, if the Pope be invested with the Power belonging to
Ecclesiastical Primacy, he is invested likewise with the Power of deposing
Kings. It is worth while to attend a little to a matter of this consequence,
and a little attention will serve turn, where things are so plain. Pray, how
does this follow so plainly? why thus says Bellarmin; Because the Pope by his
spiritual Power can bind even Kings with the bond of Excommunication. Suppose
he can; what then? And by the same he can loose people from their Oath of
Fidelity and Obedience, and oblige them under excommunication not to obey the
former excommunicated King, but choose them a new one. How! He can absolve
subjects from the duty of Obedience, and oblige them to choose a new King. Why
this is the very thing called Deposing, and if he can depose, undoubtedly he
can depose. But whether he can do this, is the thing in question, and what he
undertook to prove by a plain collection out of Scripture, and does he offer us
for proof the very thing to be proved? This it neither proving nor gathering,
but saying twice over, what they, who deny once, will deny as often as it is or
can be repeated, till it be proved. It Is in plain terms to say, he can loose the
band of Allegiance, therefore he can loose the band of Allegiance, or he can
Depose, therefore he can Depose. In good earnest I should not easily have
believed that such a man as Bellarmin should have over-seen himself so much:
But I perceive the greatest men that are, are men, and have their failings. And
though I should not have run proud of my own wit, if I alone had observed a
defect so palpable, yet I must needs confess I am not the first discoverer. Jo.
Barclay has been before me, (and it may be as many as have considered the
Argument) as the truth is I say, almost nothing which I have not from others.
If you remember I engaged no farther then to acquaint you what others say, and
I am as good as my word. But it is so tedious and hobling a labor to be always
going over and over again with This man says that, and the other man the other,
that I cannot endure always to cite my Authors. But to return to our matter;
All we have here in proof of the deposing power, is that the Pope has it: which
he that will take for a proof, may; but I fear that who believes it for that
reason, had as good believe it for no reason at all. And how much soever there
may be of Reason, I verily think there is little of Scripture in it.

There follows the subordination of the two Powers, from the subordination of
their ends which is one of the 5 Arguments related in my former Letter, and
which to repeat again I suppose would be as ungrateful to you, as tedious to
me. But there Bellarmin alleged it as an Argument from Reason, and how he
comes here to entitle it to Scripture I cannot guess. The truth is I am wholly
to seek why these two together, and these two are all, which belong to this
Head, should be called proof from Scripture, when no place of Scripture is so
much as alleged. He assumes indeed that Ecclesiastical Primacy is founded in
Scripture and Tradition. But this is part of the question. No Catholic
disputes it with him. The question is whether the Scripture teach the deposing
Power is joined to that Primacy. I would fain see that place of Scripture which
teaches this. When Bellarmin undertook to prove his doctrine by Scripture, I
expected, as I think any man would he should produce some place which teaches
it either expressly, or so that it might plainly be gathered from it. And
instead of this he brings us one reason, such as it is, and another which is
not so much as a reason, but a bare saying over what he was to prove, and this
he calls proof from Scripture.

He cites indeed in the Process of his discourse. Mat. 16. and Jo. 21. but does
not go about to show how they are to his purpose; only by way of History tells
us that two Popes alleged them, to show that they dealt justly, and that the
power they challenged, is not founded on uncertain opinions, but divine
Authority. Undoubtedly these Popes had reason to desire it should be thought
they dealt justly, and that this power of theirs was not founded on uncertain
opinions. And every body knows they have alleged those places and more. But
every body is not satisfied with those allegations, nor can perceive by them
that divine Authority does indeed warrant their deposing claim, neither does
Bellarmin contribute any thing to their satisfaction. They find in S. Hierom
that the spiritual Key extends it self not to Temporals without arrogance; and
some body else from S. Jo. Chrysostom has told them, that by the Keys is not
understood any power given, but spiritual, to absolve from the bond of Sin, and
that it were foolish to understand it of a Power to absolve from the bond of
debt. And if they think it as wise to understand it so, as to understand it of
a Power to absolve from the bond of Allegiance, they may do so for Bellarmin.
But you have a great deal to this purpose cited formerly, and much more might
be added if it were necessary; by which it may be gathered, something more
plainly then Bellarmin gathers, that the Church understood not the power of the
Keys as those Popes would have us understand the 16 of S. Matthew. The like is
of the other place of Feeding: of which you observed unhappily that to
understand it of Deposing, is to think Christ meant his Sheep should be fed
with knocks. Upon that occasion you know I brought you S. Bernard, affirming
that to feed is no more then to Evangelize. Fac opus Evangelistae, and Pastoris
munus implesti. I could easily produce Authority enough for the right sense of
this place: But another of the 5 Arguments mentioned in my last being drawn
from hence, you see there are all that Bellarmin could make of it, which I have
no mind to say again.

Several other Arguments there are scattered up and down by several Authors.
But I take these to be the principal. At least they are those which Bellarmin
chose, and he being looked upon as the Principal Patron of this opinion, I
think it needles to look after more, and in his judgment worse. It is now time
to acquaint you with the arguments produced on the other side, and the answers
to them. You shall permit me to contract them into as little room as I can: for
my Letter swells, and I am weary both of writing and of the subject. I take
them out of Withrington and Barclay, who being the latest writers, I suppose
have seen what was said before, though the truth is I am forced to use them
more by necessity then choice, my library not affording me those former Books
whom I would gladly see.

The first, says Withrington, is like that which Bellarmine makes against those
who assert a direct Temporal Power in the Pope. If the Pope have, and that by
Divine Right, power to depose Princes in order to spiritual good, this must
appear either by Scripture or Tradition. Tradition is not pretended. Out of
Scripture, the two chief places are those now mentioned, Mat. 16. and Joh. 21.
both which he endeavors to show are meant only of spiritual power. To this
Schulkenius for Bellarmin replys, He labors in vain to prove these places are
meant of spiritual power for this they freely grant him. But, say they, this
power which formally is spiritual, is virtually temporal, or his the virtue to
extend it self to temporals, in as much as is requisite to spiritual good. And
therefore Bellarmins Argument is good, because he intended only to prove by it
that the Popes power was formally spiritual, which is true, and acknowledged by
Withrington. But Withringtons naught, because he does not prove that the Power
is not virtually Temporal, and cannot extend to deposition, etc. If I had a
mind to answer for Withrington, I should not think my self silenced by this
reply. For when he says the Arguments are unlike, the one good the other bad, I
cannot perceive by what reason one should believe him. Bellarmins Argument is
good, says he, because his Conclusion (that the Popes Power is spiritual) is
true: as if the Argument were a jot the better because the Conclusion is true.
The Argument is naught if the Conclusion follow not from the premises, though
it be never so great a truth otherwise. But what was the Argument? No direct
Power in Scripture, therefore no direct Power. This I take is Bellarmins
Argument; and by the favor of Schulkenius, no deposing Power in Scripture,
therefore no deposing Power is so like it, that they must be both good or
neither. That the Conclusion of the one is true, and the other false, is
voluntarily said, and nothing to purpose: for the question is whether they have
not the same dependence on their premises. If Bellarmin conclude well against
the Canonists, because they cannot show their direct Power in Scripture, I see
not why Withrington concludes not as well against Bellarmin, unless he can show
his deposing Power in Scripture; which as far as I see Schulkenius does not go
about to do. But I have nothing to do with Withrington, he has answered for
himself, though by ill luck I have not the Book now by me. I am only to observe
how the case stands betwixt the two parties; which in short is thus: Is the
deposing Power in Scripture, says Withrington? It Is virtually, says
Schulkenius. I fear this is no very direct answer, and suppose VVithrington
should ask again: Is this virtue apparent in Scripture? To which Schulk gives
me no ground to judge what he would reply. And so I must leave them as I find
them, and pass to the Second Argument. Coercitive Civil, and coercitive
spiritual Power being different and independent Powers, must have distinct
Courts and distinct penalties. Wherefore as the Civil Power cannot inflict a
spiritual punishment, so neither can the spiritual Power inflict a civil
punishment. And this he strengthens by two Considerations. 1. That the
distinction of the two Courts, since in the manner of proceeding, the persons
and causes brought before them, and all other formalities they may agree, must
be taken from the difference of the penalties, or nothing. 2. Because no
Commonwealth, looking only into nature, can deprive a subject of other goods
then such as are proper to that Commonwealth; the spiritual can only take away
spiritual goods, as the temporal only temporal. They answer. The two Powers are
distinct, but not wholly independent, when they club into one mystical Body,
viz. the Church, in which case the temporal is subject to the spiritual, and
therefore though the temporal cannot meddle with the spiritual, the spiritual
may with the temporal And for his additional Considerations, they slight the
first as being nothing but the conclusion of his argument repeated: yet say
however that Temporal punishments are not so proper to Temporal power, but they
may be inflicted by the spiritual. And to the second, that in Commonwealths
subordinate, the superior may deprive the subject not only of the privileges
proper to it self, but those also which belong to the inferior Commonwealth.
This answer relishes much better with me then the former, for it plainly denies
at least half of, what is assumed, namely that the powers are independent,
which is a direct and allowable answer for so much. But for the other half,
they deal not so cleverly. They allow the powers distinct even in their
penalties, and yet maintain that one may award the penalties of the other,
which looks as if they were not distinct in their penalties. Again, they say
they are distinct, but assign not in what they are distinct. They deny not what
Withrington assumes that they may use the same proceedings, take cognizance of
the same matters, convene the same persons; And if they may inflict the same
penalties too, by what shall they be distinguished? So that I think they had no
such great reason to slight his first consideration. For certainly distinct
powers must be distinct in something. But you see where it rests. Withrington,
since they deny it, is obliged to prove the Independence of the two Powers,
which whether he have done or no, I cannot tell. Shall I tell you my thoughts
freely. I suspect the old School-Proverb, An Ass may deny more more than
Aristotle can prove, may have some place here, and that the Answerer has still
the better end of the staff. When it was Bellarmins turn to prove the
dependence and subordination of the two Powers, and Withringtons to answer, you
may perceive by my last where you have the Argument, He could deal well enough
with Bellarmin. Now they have changed sides, and Withrington is on the proving
hand, how it will happen I know not.

The third Argument is from the multitude of inconveniences which follow from
the other opinion. As, that the Pope may as well take the life, as Kingdom of
any Prince, and driving it a little higher, authorize any private man to turn
Assassin, and kill the King by treachery, when he cannot be conveniently
deposed. To this they say they can answer easily enough: but yet as easy as it
is they do it not. All they reply is, let this pass as nothing to purpose: mere
bugbears to render the Papacy odious, when of so many Princes who have been
deposed, so many who have perished by violent deaths, what by the treachery of
their subjects, what by the force of their Enemies, not one has been killed by
any Pope or his command. Even Antipopes themselves their greatest enemies, have
found not only safety, but gentle and favorable usage from them when they have
fallen into their hands. This they amplyfy, and dress as handsomely as they can;
but methinks after all it is but a sorry dish. For sure it is no God-a-mercy to the
opinion, that Popes have been better men, then It would have made them. On the
contrary, since they were therefore good men because they did not do what the
opinion allows, what must the opinion be, which if they had followed they had
not been good men. That they did not do ill, they owe to their own virtue, but
that they might have done ill, makes the opinion naught. At least I conceive
so, and had I been in their place, would rather have given no answer then such
a one

For another inconvenience he urges, that Princes may be deposed and murdered
for any crime which in the judgment of the Pope deserves it; if he sell a
Bishopric, plunder a Church, fall into any sort of wickedness, nay, if he live
not according as his state and condition requires. To this last they except, as
a wresting of Bellarmins words beyond his intention; but for the rest, reply
again, that it is another odious amplification, and that it may be understood
for what causes Princes may be deposed by the sentences against Hen. 4. and
Fred. 2. In general, that the causes must be very weighty, and such that the
punishment be to edification not destruction. I must acknowledge my dullness,
and that I comprehend not the force of this answer. To my apprehension by the
sentences against these two Emperors can be known no more, then the reason why
these two Emperors were deposed; from whence it may be gathered that for the
same faults a Prince may become liable to the same punishment; but whether
there be any other deposing faults, and which they be, cannot, I think, be
understood by them. Then again these weighty, and to edification-causes may,
for any thing they say to the contrary, be any which the Pope judges such; Now
this is that which VVithrington objects; and I had thought that to say the same
with my Adversary, had not been to answer him.

The third Inconvenience is, that, not only the Pope, but every Bishop may
depose by this doctrine (and with a little more stretching, perhaps every
Curate too) where the Prince belongs to their Diocese or Parish. And this he
justifies by an argument of Bellarmins against the Canonists, which he puts
thus, If the Pope be the supreme Lord of the whole Christian world, every
Bishop is Lord of the Towns subject to his Bishopric; for what the Pope is in
the universal Church, every Bishop is in his own Diocese. They reply, that by
this argument it may perhaps be concluded, that a Bishop may excommunicate a
Prince as well as the Pope, but not depose him; because though he be in his
Diocese what the Pope is in the Church, as much as amounts to being truly a
Pastor, and truly a spiritual Prince, not a Vicar or temporary Delegate; yet
the Pope has more power over the whole, then a Bishop over his particular. For
which reason deposition was reserved to the Pope in the Council of Lateran.
Wherefore Bellarmins Argument is good, and Withringtons naught. He who
undertakes the defense of another must stand to it, that his man is still in
the right: but otherwise I see not why one argument should be thought good and
the other bad. If the Pope be a temporal Prince, the Bishop is a temporal
Prince, says Bellarmin, because he is in his part what the Pope is in the
whole: this is good, says Schulkenius. If the Pope be a virtually temporal
Prince, the Bishop is a virtually temporal Prince, says VVithrington, and for
the same reason, how comes this to be bad? because says Schulkenius, the Pope
has more power over the whole then the Bishop over his particular. This belongs
to Bishop-craft, which I understand not; but if it be true, first Bellarmins
argument is as bad as VVithringtons; for it may be replied to it, that it does
not follow the Bishop is a temporal Prince though the Pope be, because though
the Bishop be no Vicar, yet he has not the power which the Pope has. And then
again, though the Pope be a greater virtually temporal Prince then the Bishop,
yet the Bishop is a virtually temporal Prince too, and may proceed beyond
excommunication, and spiritual jurisdiction, and set his hand to temporals. For
if spiritual power be virtually temporal, and the Bishop have it, and this in
his own right as well as the Pope, not by way of delegation, I hope he may use
what he has, and dispose of temporal things in order to spiritual good. And
where shall this stop? To mention as he does reservations is to grant that it
belongs to the nature of the power, though the extent of it were afterward
confined by consent. Besides reservations are temporary and changeable things,
and what is reserved to day may not be so to morrow. However if the greater
virtually temporal Prince may depose Kings, sure the lesser may depose private
men: for this temporal virtue must be able to do something in Temporals. And
thus much is inconvenience enough in conscience, though I see not well how he
avoids the other. Were I to answer Sculkenius, I should except against his
understanding the Samenes which Bellarmin puts in Pope and Bishop, of being
both spiritual Princes not Vicars, which I verily think is to make Bellarmin
say what he never dreamt of, or if he did, was quite from his purpose: But that
is not my business. I am only to observe how matters stand, which are as you
see.

In the last place Withrington urges that this supreme power over temporals
delivered in such general and unlimited terms, not determining how great, or
what kind of spiritual good that must be, in order to which Deposition is
lawful, seems a just occasion of perpetual suspicion and jealousy in Princes,
and apt to disturb the public quiet, etc. They answer, Christ may as justly be
reprehended for delivering the spiritual power in general terms; as
Commonwealths for submitting in general to obedience of Princes whom they
create. Whereof I take neither to be true: for Commonwealths have things called
Laws and Customs by which doubts rising from general expressions are explained.
And for the general expression in the Gospel, whatever you shall bind, etc. I
hope he will not persuade us, but as general as it sounds to us, it was very
particularly understood by the Apostles. And as they understood it, so they
practiced and so they taught, and among other things, subjection to Princes,
notwithstanding the amplitude of that Commission. But if both were true, still
the inconvenience remains, for ought I can see; since whatever be the reason of
the general terms used in the Gospel and elsewhere, it abates nothing of the
jealousy and suspicion rising from the unlimited expressions of this doctrine.
Upon the whole, they seem plainly to grant all the inconveniences objected by
VVithrington; which is to confess that, as far as this Topic is effectual,
They are confuted. They slight the place as nothing to purpose,
notwithstanding, since it is the Gospel rule to judge of the Tree by the fruit
and since Logic allows the Topic, I think they were obliged to show either
that the inconveniences were not inconveniences, or else that they did not
follow, and in fine have answered better if they could.

The fourth Argument is from the practice of the Church, begun with the Church
it self, and continued for many ages: no mention in Scripture or ancient
Fathers of a power either in Pope or People to deprive, or kill even
persecuting Princes; but all is unanimous and constant exhortation to patience
and obedience. Now if there be any warrant in the Gospel for Christians, when
they come to be strong enough, to cast off such Princes as are enemies to the
Church, we must needs have heard of it, etc. VVithrington dilates, but this is
the substance. They answer two things: First, That the practice of the Church
varies according to different times. That for the first 300 years she practiced
patience because she could do no other, there being no Prince disposed to
protect her; afterward it became the practice by means of Catholic Princes to
resist Infidel or Heretic, or any way injurious to her, whether Princes or
People. And for this they largely instance in the several expeditions made for
the recovery of the Holy Land, all commanded, say they, by several Popes, and
their commands obeyed by Christian Princes. I begin to suspect I do not
understand what we are talking of: if I do, certainly this is nothing to it. I
thought the question had been whether subjects may lawfully desert their own
Prince, and refuse to perform the obedience due to them by Law and Oath, upon
the Popes command to the contrary, and Sculkenius talks of one Prince making
war with another. No man doubts, or if any do, our business has nothing to do
with his doubt, but that Catholic Princes may lawfully make war, and the Pope
lawfully persuade them to it to protect innocence, and hinder oppression
whether of Ecclesiastical or other right. But this is a case betwixt Prince and
Prince; ours, if I understand it, is betwixt Prince and Subject. For my life I
cannot understand what relation the holy war has to this matter: nor can I
imagine what share the Pope had in it, more then a man of zeal and credit to
persuade them, as any other might have done, to a good work. I do not believe
any Prince who went thither thought himself obliged by the Popes commands, or
that he commanded any to go, except in the case of Vow, or the like engagement
of his own. 'Twas zeal, not obedience which carried Princes thither. In short,
if Schulkenius mean this practice, which he says was introduced of resisting
force by force of Princes interposing for the relief of innocence as they saw
occasion, he speaks of another matter: If he mean that when subjects get force
enough they may use it against their own Sovereign, upon warrant of the Popes
authority, he teaches us a piece of Christiatity, which I would advise should
by all means be kept carefully concealed from those Infidels whom in the Indies
and elsewhere zealous men seek to convert. If ever they get any inkling,
farewell all hopes of the progress of Christianity. It Is in truth a position
extremely false, and extremely shameful. Their second Answer is, that
Withrington is out, when he affirms there is no mention in Scripture or the
ancient Fathers of deposing or killing Persecutors. For there is mention in
both of Saul deposed by Samuel, and David placed in his room: Of Agag killed:
Of ten Tribes taken by Ahias from the house of David and given to Jereboam: Of
Kings set up and pulled down by Elias both in Israel and Syria: Of Jehu made
King by a Prophet, and Joram both deposed and killed: Of thalia, and Ozias, one
killed, the other deposed for Leprosy: Of Hieremy placed over Nations and
Kingdoms, to pluck up, etc. Of the Macabees fighting successfully against
Antiochus. And it cannot be doubted but the High Priest among Christians has as
great, or greater power then the High Priest among the Jews: where they repeat
again the two places. Mat. 16. and Joh. 21. and that deposing power is
necessary to the integrity of the commission given by them: and conclude with
Lucifer Calaritanus, who says nothing to the purpose. Some think Bellarmin
wrote this book, and borrowed the name of Schulkenius to disguise his own.
Tenderdown Steeple had as much to do with Sandwich Haven, as this with the
Deposing Power. It were easy to show as much of every one of these examples, if
I would take the pains to run them over particularly: but since Bellarmin
himself slights them, I may be permitted to do so too, and save that labor. I
will only observe that the High Priest among the Jews intervened in few of
these examples, and to conclude a power in the Christian High Priest by a
parity with the Jewish High Priest from instances where there was no exercise
of his Power, is a shortness of which Bellarmin was too sharp-sighted to be
guilty. That which Lucifer Calaritanus says, is that Constantius was a wicked
man, and deserved death: which is Tenderdown Steeple again. A Prince no doubt
may be a wicked man, there have been more in the world besides Constantius, and
more have taken notice of their wickedness besides Lucifer Calaritanus. But
what then? Neither does he mention, nor do I know any tribunal, which can call
them to account for their wickedness but that of the last day, from whose
impartial Justice Princes shall be no more exempt then other men. And to that
we must leave them.

The last is rather a Transition then an Argument at least the force of it
depends on what follows. Withrington makes it in this manner. To subject
Princes to another power without sufficient reason, is plain injury to Princes,
and plain treason. But Bellarmins reasons, which are the best, are
insufficient, etc. And so goes on to examine and disprove them, as I have
already informed you. They reply by retorting the same Argument. As it is wicked
to subject the Power of Princes, so it is both wicked and sacrilegious to
diminish the Power given by Christ without sufficient reason; but the reasons
of VVithrington and Barclay are insufficient, etc. They farther deny either
that he has, or can answer Bellarmin's reasons, or that he has done his
business though he could, because another may have better. But unles they would
inform us where those better reasons are to be found, there can be no more
done, then to deal with those, which He who is most in vogue thought the best.
For the rest, these are florishes on both sides; The matter rests upon this
issue, which of the two has the best reasons, and he that has will carry it.
It Is time for me to leave it with you to stand for the Plaintiff or Defendant as
you see cause, and ease my self of this ungrateful labor.

You see what is said on both sides To tell you what the world thinks of their
sayings, is not so easy. The world is a politic world, they let the hot men
write and wrangle, and for themselves hear all, and see all, and say nothing.
The truth is, while one side talks of Treason, and the other of Sacrilege, it is
good to be wary. It Is not for private men to make an enemy either of Pope or
Prince, and as the case stands you cannot say I, or No, without displeasing
one. I must confess I am very sorry you would not let me play the Policitian
for company. Your importunity has drawn me into the list of those fools, who
disquiet themselves to please other folks, and take a great deal of pains to be
talked on, twenty to one, very scurvily. The quarrel is betwixt supreme Powers,
and they best know what to do in their own concerns. I fear it is little better
then sawcines for men of our form to interpose in things so far above us, and
perhaps madness, to thrust in bewixt two stones, and be crushed in pieces. I see
this, yet cannot avoid whether the charms of your Friendship or violence of
your importunity. It Is true I have endeavored to touch this tender matter as
tenderly as I could. What I professed at first, I repeat again, I do not
dogmatize but relate, and am sure you have no reason to be displeased, that I
would displease as few as I could. This is the reason, since you will needs
have it, why I beat about the bush, and do not shoot my fools-bolt directly at
the mark, I do not take the satisfaction of your curiosity to import me so much
as living quietly. It Is for Princes to resolve on the Can not, or Shall not or
what else they think fit* Private men till they be commanded to declare them do
best to keep their thoughts to themselves. This I can assure you, that, though
for these reasons I do not desire every body should know them, I have none in
this matter which do not become a good Christian and a good subject, and

Your faithful friend, etc.

The Eleventh and Twelfth OF THE Controversial LETTERS, OR Grand Controversy,
Concerning The pretended Temporal Authority of POPES over the whole Earth, And
the True Sovereign of KINGS within their own respective Kingdoms.

Between two English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of England: The other of
the Church of Rome.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom and Benjamin Took, at the Gun; and at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1674.

FRIEND,
OF all I have seen or heard you shall have it for Policy. Sir Wood-bee himself
is no body to you. The sum of what I asked was in two words: Are you a good
Subject? And the sum of your Answer is: Betwixt you and me I would have it
thought so, but make no words on it; private men must not meddle with things
above them. Here Is Ragion di stato for you. Things above them? Why! is Honesty
among you looked upon as a thing out of reach? Are you of kin to the Muscovite,
who being asked of his Faith in God, and hopes of Salvation, replied They were
things above him, which he should be glad were true, but could not think so
great a Majesty could ever think of so poor a man. Is it above you to be a good
Subject, and a thing which you dare not confess for modesty sake, and the
imputation of sawciness? Are things carried so among you, that you must needs
live unquietly, if your Neighbors know you deserve to live quietly? Is it
become a piece of interest and policy to be ill thought of; and if there be an
honest man among you, must he by all means make a secret on it, for fear of
exasperating Supreme Powers, and thrusting in betwixt two stones? How have I
been mistaken! I took you for a plain dealing man, and you are the very Pink of
Policy. But for mere shame I could find in my heart to quarrel with you, and
cannot for my life but tell you, you have taken a great deal of pains to little
purpose. Pray permit me to revenge your nicety by unmannerly bluntness, and to
carry it to the uttermost, ask you how far you are from Pedius in the Satyr?
Fur es ait ^edio. Pedius quid? crimina rasis
Librat in Antithetis --.
The question being of robbing no less than Sovereigns, Are you a good Subject,
is but in less homely Terms, Are you a Thief? And your Answers are as like as
the Questions. Only Pedius was for Rhetoric, and you for History. Some say
this, and some say that, which is all you tell me, is but Historical Antithesis.

You tell me I may judge as I please. I know I may, and I do judge as all men
of judgment do. But pray remember those that do not plead directly Guilty, or
not Guilty, cast themselves. Had I only desired to know what people say, it had
been no such hard matter to have got Books, and read them my self, and never
troubled you. I know the Arguments well enough, and I know what to think of
them; but I know not what to think of you, whom a man that were not, as I am,
very favorably inclined, would be apt to suspect you think something which you
are ashamed to own. No Friend! You escape not so. I would, and if you be not
very obstinate, will know what you are, and whether those of your Religion may
be trusted. If you believe what is publicly written, and owned by some among
you, you are not; if you believe it not, but yet will not disown it; as honest
as you are in your heart, since no body can tell but you are a knave, how can
you expect but to pass for one among the rest? Either deal frankly with me, or
I must with you, and tell you it is Guilt that fears the light. If you continue
still to make a secret, of what of all the world it most concerns those of your
Persuasion to publish, both for your own interest, and honor of your selves
and Church, he must be a very good natured man who will think well of you, who
make dainty to show why he should do so. You are charged with inconsistence
with Civil Government: You faintly deny it, and say you are traduc't, but are
shy to justify your Innocence. your Church it self is called in question,
where the Books are licenc't, the Authors cherisht, and the Doctrines put in
practice. You tamely hear all this, and would have us think your Church a good
Church for all that, a pure unblemish't Church: but, if we will not of our
selves kindly turn away our eyes and look off, you will not do so much for her
as wipe off those blemishes.

It Is true you have told me, and it is the only thing to purpose you have told
me, that That cannot be the Churches Doctrine, which is openly disclaimed by a
great part of the Church, and that part acknowledged Orthodox by all the rest.
But if your Chuch forbid any to profess their minds as freely as others, it
must needs be suspected She has more kindness for these Doctrines than is for
Her honor: and, however sound she may be, is yet a very injurious Church,
which obliges her Subjects to pass for suspicious and dangerous people, and be
thought to hold what they are not obliged to do, and what perhaps they do not
hold, but must not say so. Besides, I have already told you the Case is not
much different, whether these Doctrines belong to your Faith or not, if they be
thought true; for that is enough to make them practiced upon occasion. And if
your Church permit none to say they are false, who can think but she desires
they should pass for true, and that they will do so at last if they do not
already? And then truly we have great security from your Answer; as if, because
these Doctrines do not belong to your Church, as Church, they might not be made
use of by your Church as so many men.

I told you this before, and you saw well enough how much your Churches
reputation was concerned, notwithstanding what you say for her: and yet you
continue cold, and will say no more. Never tell me. This Lethargy of yours is
not for nothing. If you be grown careless of your own credit and interest, I
thought nothing could have quenched the Zeal you all have of your Church. How!
a Papist insensible when the Honor of his Church is in question? Deny it as
long as you will, either you are forbidden to speak, and let people know what
you harbor in your breasts, or you harbor something there which it is not for
your interest people should know. In short, this constraint which is upon you
must either be from abroad, or at home. You deny there is any from abroad: And
I hope you say true; otherwise, I know not what to think of a Church which
permits not her Subjects to approve their fidelity to their Prince. If it be at
home, it can be nothing but Guilt, and shame, and the Conscience of adhering to
bad Tenets. For, I hope, you do not think in earnest the State should take it
ill of any, who should profess as openly as he will, that he is an honest man
and a good Subject. If you fear nothing from your own side, it goes very ill
with you if you have to fear from ours. We know who they are to whom the
Civil-sword is a Terror.

Excuse not your self upon my curiosity, and think it inconsiderable and
unworthy of satisfaction. It Is true, I am curious, and if I were not, you would
make me so. But let me tell you, my curiosity is more a friend to you then your
squeamishness. For, pray consider, No Commonwealth, at least none of a
different Communion is safe, where those Doctrines are received, which are
current among some of you. Who Is the Friend? I, who give you occasion, and
press you to clear your selves? or you, who by your backwardness, will make it
shortly be thought you cannot be cleared? I know well enough, there is no great
Community, nor can be, whose Members are all free from fault. The nature of
mortality bears not an absolute perfection. But do you think it a small point
of friendship, that I offer you the means to make it appear, that whoever is
faulty, you are not? Every body can tell, and were it put to your self, I am
fully persuaded, you would not deny it, that he is not very well principled for
a Subject, who believes what some of you teach. While you make such a mystery
of it, no body can say you are not of the number, and many will suspect you
are. In fine, there is no choice; but either you do believe ill, and then I
must change my good thoughts of you; or you do not, and then either say so
plainly, or you are the most superlative Politic in the world, to take other
men's faults upon you, and entitle your self to a guilt which is none of your
own.

If you will give off the defense of your Church, and leave her to shift, as
well as she can, for her self; why, with all my heart: I have no reason to woo
you to a sense of your Churches reputation. If you will grow careless of your
own fame, and be content to have it thought you deserve the harsh censures
which some make of you, you may too, if you please, though, as a Friend, I
would advise you to do otherwise. But let me tell you, if you become forgetful,
we shall not. We remember, there was such a time as 88, and a thing called the
Invincible Armada, and which might have been so indeed, if the Commanders had
not been more careful to stick punctually to their Orders, then do their
business. We remember, the cause of all this was, what Sixtus the Fifth calls
Heresy of the Queen, which moved him to expose the Kingdom as a prey, and
Philip the Second to seize it. We know this cause remains, and hope it will do
so: If it have not wrought since, we may thank the want of opportunity, and
prospect of another Armada. But when occasion serves, we cannot but think, the
same cause will be apt to produce the same effect.

Now, pray review your Politics, and see whether they will counsel you to
settle this opinion among your Fellow Subjects, that in such a case, which may
happen, because it has happened, there are who would join with an enemy, and
help to enslave their Country; and that you are the men. If your Politics do
advise you to this, they are the worst natured, unkindest Politics in the
world. I am sure, let who will be the Politician, I am the Friend: But however
they advise you, we, who are no Politicians, should be glad to know there are
none such among us, or if there be, who they are. We value our own safety,
though you do not your credit.

Notwithstanding, if you will persist in your Politic diffidence, and think,
we Heretics are not to be trusted so far, as to be made acquainted that you
are not errant Knaves, I cannot help it. But I will convince you, if I can,
that there is something more then bare curiosity in the matter. Let me tell
you, in confidence, since this business must needs be made a secret, that I am
no such stranger to it, as you think: I (...) thought of it a whole Month at
least, and am deceived, if I do not see a little into the Millstone. At least, I
am sure, my eyes have one advantage, which, I suspect, yours may want, that
they are not dazzled with the luster of great Names. Bellarmin, or Calvin, or if
there be any of a more glorious sound is no more to me then his reason, and at
the hazard of being thought blunt, or rash, or overweening. I must needs avow
to you, I am for the what is said, and care little for who said it. If every
body were of my humor, I mainly suspect, this Indirect Power, which makes so
much ado, would have long since appeared neither better nor worse then direct
nonsense. Pray let us consider it a little.

The Question is, Whether there be in the Pope an Indirect Power to depose
Kings. He that would know, whether this be true or no, should do well, in my
opinion, to take along with him, what it means. It Is a Circumstance, I must
confess, which is often forgot, and that forgetfulness, I believe, is the cause
we find so much blind man's Buff in Books: But yet for once, it will not be
amiss to remember it. And because every body knows what Pope and Power means,
likewise what it is to Depose, and what a King is, there is only this Indirect
which needs unridling. Now we often hear of Indirect dealing, and Indirect
courses in the world, and it is hard if people do not know what they mean.
Indeed we are apt when we hear these words, to apprehend something shameful or
bad, because there is generally something shameful joined with them, fair ends
being ordinarily fairly pursued. But yet shameful is not the notion of
Indirect: For a good and commendable thing may be brought to pass Indirectly,
and if it be bad, the badness is one thing, and Indirectness another. The
Merchant who met with Pirates in the dusk of the evening, when they could not
discover his weakness, and frighted them off by a counterfeit confidence,
hanging out his lights all night, saved his Ship indirectly, or by indirect
means, when direct fighting or flying had lost it: And the Owner, I suppose,
did not think this Indirectness blameable. A Nuncio of a certain place is
reported to have published an Excommunication, thought unjust by the persons
concerned; they had no power to take off this Excommunication themselves, or
command the Nuncio to do it. Wherefore they took an indirect course, and set
Guards upon the Nuncio's House, and suffered no Victuals to be brought in, till
he thought it better to recall his Excommunication, then starve. These men too
compast their end indirectly, yet commendably, supposing the Excommunication
was indeed unjust. When David caused Vriah to be slain, the action was both
indirect and wicked, but yet for several respects: 'Twas wicked, because it was
the death of an innocent man, but indirect, because he did not himself kill
him, or command him to be killed, but ordered that out of which his death
followed. Wherefore when we say, a thing is done indirectly, we mean, as I
conceive, that something is done, which we would, or could not do, by
immediately endeavoring the thing it self, but which follows from some other
thing we do. And Indirect signifies, not directed immediately to that thing, in
respect whereof it is called Indirect, but to some other, out of which what
happens, whether by design or chance, we say, happens indirectly.

Now if this be the meaning of Indirect, I am something at a loss, how it can
with propriety be applied to Power. For Power seems as direct to every effect
as to any: Neither do I perceive how it can be directed otherwise, than by
being determined. When a man of the many things, he can do, resolves upon one,
the power he has becomes, by that resolution, determined or directed to that
one, which he chooses; what other direction there can be of power occurs not to
me at present. But if Indirect applied to Power signify undetermined, there is
plainly no room for the distinction of Direct and Indirect. For every Power is
undetermined till it become determined; and when it is determined, it is
direct, or directed, to that thing to which it is determined; neither can there
be such a thing as Indirect Power from which any thing can follow; for nothing
can follow from a power undetermined, and Power from which nothing can follow
is not Power. And the truth is, we do not give the name of Power to that which
goes indirectly to work. Not, but that the intended effect may follow, but we
call it not Power in relation to such an effect. We do not, nor can with truth
say, a King has power to take away the lives of innocent Subjects, although he
may, as David did Vriah, command them something by which their Death may
happen. The Merchant owed his safety not to power, but stratagem and luck: And
those who starved the Nuncio, had no power to take off the Excommunication, on
the contrary 'twas their want of power which made them act as they did. So that
I suspect those who first joined these two words Indirect and Power together,
did not much amuse themselves with considering the import of them: Indirect
seeming a kind of Destroying, or, as they call it, Alienating Term, and making
the Power to be not-Power. Wherefore I believe it is Action, or Effect which is
with propriety called Indirect, not Power. But, yet because it matters not, so
we understand one another, what words we use, Power to an Indirect effect may
with sense be called Indirect power. So a Prince who, to recover or preserve
his right, has direct power to make war, may be said to have indirect power
over his Subjects lives, which must be hazarded in the war. In this manner
Indirect Power is intelligible, and signifies Power to something out of which
follows another thing, which would not follow immediately from the Power it
self. This other thing may either be intended, as the Death of Vriah, or not
intended, as when one is slain in war whom the Prince is sorry to loose. And
from this Intention comes Wickedness or Innocence, not Indirectness, which
proceeds only from this, that the effect flows not immediately from the power,
but is joined to something which does.

But now Indirect Power is become intelligible, let him make it intelligible
that can, how the Deposing Power, said to be in the Pope, should be Indirect.
If he can command Deposition, and must be obeyed when he commands, and the
Prince deposed by force of that command, his Power is as direct as Power can
be. For when the Pope says, I Depose: I pray what is it which he commands? I
understand he commands Deposition it self, and not another thing out of which
he expects Deposition should follow. Again, when his command, as the luck on it
is, it seldom does, proves effectual, and a King is deposed: pray in virtue of
what is he Deposed? I understand it is in virtue of that command. Now, because
that Power is direct, which immediately commands an effect, which follows from
that Command or Power, there neither is nor can be any Indirectness found here,
but in the very notion of Direct. So that I told you 'twas a scurvy thing to
jabber words, and never mind what they signify. For there is nothing in all
this which Indirect power can mean, but Direct Power. In fine, there is no way
to make this Power Indirect, but by saying either that the Pope, when he
commands Deposition, does not command Deposition, which for my part I would not
do, because I fear I should tell a lie: or else, that Deposition does not
follow from that from which it follows; and if I should say this too, I fear I
should tell two lies. But however, since Indirect sure must be some way
opposite to Direct, The Popes Power to be Indirect must be some way not
directed to Deposition. Which way this should be, he must be wiser than I that
can tell. If Determination or Intention would do it, sure it cannot be thought
he is not determined, or does not intend to do that which he commands. And if
the Directness be taken, as it ought, from the immediate influence of the power
upon the effect, we see he precisely commands this particular effect, and it is
maintained this effect must follow in virtue of that command. Now if any man
can understand how a Power should be Indirect in respect of an Effect to which
it is directed all the ways by which Power can be directed; I would gladly be
directed to that man, to learn of him how nonsense may become sense. But till I
do meet him, I must needs think that this distinction of Direct and Indirect in
this case, is a mere sound of words which signify nothing, and by which the
Authors speculate themselves into nonsense, and abuse themselves and their
Readers.

I am not ignorant that those who maintain this Indirect Power speak otherwise
of it; but I think I speak as all men, besides themselves, speak, and know not
by what right they force upon words meanings proper to their purpose, and
contrary to what general custom has fixed upon them. To alter common and settled
Notions, is to perplex and embroyl things, and condemn the inquiries of men to
hopeless and endless confusion. For Truth is discovered by seeing the connection
of Notions; and Notions are known by Words: and if the Notions belonging to
words remain not steady and unchanged, our search after Truth must needs end
in uncertain noise, and inextricable blunder. He who has the liberty to alter
the notion of words, is empowred to maintain any thing. If he take a fancy to
defend that Jet is white, it is but by white meaning black, and the business
is done. Where I see Notions changed I am mighty suspicious there is a design
upon some Truth or other in the Changers. And so I fear it happens in our case.
For if Indirect Power mean, according to the apprehension of men, Power to an
Indirect effect, Those who will maintain in the Pope an Indirect Power must, to
speak sense, say, that, though he has not immediately and properly Power to
Depose, yet he has power to do something out of which Deposition will follow.
And this they would fain be at. For, give them their due, they are no enemies
to sense, while sense is no enemy to them. They offer therefore sometimes at
Excommunication, and would make us believe that from thence must follow
Deposition. Excommunication is without doubt a proper effect of Spiritual
Power, and so comes within the sphere of the Popes activity, and if it would
but follow, that an Excommunicated Person can have no Communication no way,
and with none; An Excommunicated Prince would by that means be Deposed. For
he could not govern those with whom he could have no intercourse, and if he
could no longer govern, he were no longer King.

This now is sense, and intelligible; but the mischief is, it will not do. They
find Excommunication, when they consider it a little better, hinders indeed
Communion in Spirituals, but if there be any temporal tie to the Excommunicated
person, as of a Wife to a Husband, a Servant to his Master, all Subjects to
their Prince, Excommunication leaves this as entire and strong as it was
before. Any that has business with him, may deal with him notwithstanding his
Excommunication. For it would be fine, if, when an Excommunicated person ows me
money, I should not require my debt of him because he is Excommunicated.
Wherefore no Excommunication will hinder a Prince from conversing freely with
his Subjects, and his Subjects with him. Nay, they are obliged to all the acts
of Duty to which they were before, and not to become faulty themselves, if
perhaps their Prince be so. Wherefore because this will not hold water, they
will not trust to it, but think it safer to make bold with a word and give it a
new notion, than venture the cause upon a foundation which they are conscious
will fail them. It Is a great deal better to talk a little nonsense, than by
obstinately sticking to sense, hazard the loss of a good Cause. That the Pope
shall have power to depose Kings, come what will, they are resolved. And
because the Canonists do not thrive very well with their extravagance of making
him sole and absolute Monarch of the World, they think fit to be a little more
modest, and allay the bold heat with sprinckling this Indirect upon it. But
then the notion of that word importing what they cannot make good, there is no
remedy but they must give it another. If they could have kept the sense too, it
would have been so much the better; but since that will not be, they think it
at least something, if their Tenet, let it signify what it will, sound not
altogether so harshly as the Canonists, with which they perceive the World not
very well pleased.

Bellarmine therefore applies this lenitive, and says the Pope disposes of
Temporals only Indirectly: but whether he forgot the impertinent Circumstance,
or had any other reason, never tells us what that word means in his Romans Pont.
where he first uses it, but leaving it to shift for it self; and us to guess
what it means, goes on to prove the power which he calls Indirect, never
offering to show that it is Indirect. Neither is there any mention, or use made
of the word, that I perceive, in the whole course of his Arguments. So that
it is manifest, Power was the thing for which he was concerned: For the
Indirect, he thought it no great matter what became of it, being perhaps in his
own judgment but an insignificant sound, without influence upon the thing.
Nevertheless against Barclay, when he had bethought himself, he kindly tells us
what he means. The Popes Power, says he, is per se, and properly spiritual, and
therefore has reference Directly to spiritual matters as the primary object:
but Indirectly, that is, in order to Spirituals, reductively, and by necessary
consequence, to use that phrase, looks upon Temporals as a secundary object, to
which it applys not it self but upon occasion, casu or casualiter, as the Canon
speaks. This is, if you will, consequential, or reductive, or secondary, not
Indirect Power. For I think all the world will say a King has very direct Power
to make War, and yet he does it not but upon occasion, and in order to peace,
and in consequence of his power to maintain peace, and establish plenty, and
security, and convenience, which is his primary object, and to which making war
is by necessary consequence reduced. But however it is a comfort to know what he
means: And now we know what we talk of, let us a little consider the import of
the Thing, and leave the Terms, which if he will use improperly, I have not so
much as indirect power to help it. It Is likely that to deal with words as he
pleases, is not the only Privilege of a Cardinal.

In the first place then, I would fain know what real difference this word
Indirect makes betwixt his opinion and the Canonists, which even he himself
disproves. And we will take the Canonists opinion, as he states it himself: De
Romans Font. l. 5. c. 1.
That the Pope has by divine right most full power over the whole World, both
in Ecclesiastical and Political matters. In this there are three particulars:
That the Popes Power is most full; That it is in Political and Civil, as well as
Spiritual matters; And that it is by Divine right. In one of these three he must
disagree with them, if he will disagree at all. Now his own opinion in his own
Terms is: That the Pope, as Pope, Ibid.
has not directly and immediately any temporal, but only spiritual Power: but
yet by reason of this spiritual Power, he has at least Indirectly, a certain,
and that highest (summam) Power in Temporals. I am unsatisfi'd with more then
one thing in this opinion, as you will perceive by and by. But for the present,
I only desire an Oedipus, to unriddle to me the difference betwixt the two
opinions. The Canonists say, the Popes Power is Plenissima; Bellarmine says,
Summa: They say, it is over Temporals as well as Spirituals; he says, it is
Spiritual, or over Spirituals, and over Temporals too. They say, it is by divine
Right, and in this you may be sure he will not quarrel with them; it is true, he
forgot to express it here, but he says it often enough elsewhere. They say no
more, and he says all this: Where is, or where can be the difference? Or shall
we once in our lives find an example of things different, which differ in
nothing? He puts indeed Direct and Immediate Power, as that which he would
deny: But if he have rightly expressed them, they mean by their Direct and
Immediate, if any where they use those terms no more then Plenissima, and he
understood they meant no more: And if his Summa, do not say as much as their
Plenissima, take in Direct and Immediate and all, I am much mistaken; neither
can I think, but Summa will abundantly satisfy them, or if it do not, they are
very unsatiable men. At least this is very clear, that all the difference he
can pretend, must lie in this word, Indirectly: And this he tells us at last,
imports respect to a secondary object. As if the Canonists ever denied
Spirituals to be the primary object of the Popes Power, or cared a jot which
was primary, and which secondary, so he had full power over both.

Because I do not love to see Friends fall out, I will answer for the Canonists
for once, and engage they shall not quarrel with him for putting in a word more
then they, as long as that word signifies but what they think as well as he.
They are men who will hearken to reason, and not fall irreconcileably out with
a man for expressing their mind in his own words. They have no quarrel to
Secondarily, and will make none for calling this Secondarily by the name of
Indirectly. Allow them but their Plenissima, and they shall keep the peace, I
warrant them. Here is then no difference but only of a word, which they that
use, and they that use not, both think the same. Sure Bellarmine was in a
pleasant humor, when he would go about to persuade the world, that full Power
in the Pope, is a great error, and contrary to Christian Doctrine, if you call
this full Power Direct: But if you call it Indirect, then all is well, and
Christian Doctrine safe. And all this while Direct full Power is no more then
most full Power, and Indirect no less. My Masters! We had need have a care of
our words. He that has the knack on it, may say unoffensively, and make good
Doctrine of that, which, if it be less luckily worded, may chance destroy the
Law of Christ, and undo the world. What difference betwixt this, and Montulto's
Pouvoir prochain? And which of the two is the more serious trifler? And yet to
see what a conceited world we live in! There are who make no difficulty to
disclaim the Canonists freely, and call their opinion extravagant and naught,
and what you will: But propose the very same opinion to them, with no other
difference in the world then this insignificant sound, Indirectly; and as if
there were charm in those four syllables, they become presently shy and
mysterious, and will rather hazard to be ill thought of themselves, then say
what they think. I know a certain Gentleman, who writ to me not long since of
this very matter, who, I think, was charmed for company; but I name no body.
Charms usually last but to a certain time, and when the term is past, the man
perhaps may recover.

But now I think on it better, it is good not to be too positive. These
Reductives, and Secondaries, and Consequentials, are crabbed words, and I am a
mere bungler at School-gibberish. I fear, it may be with that, as the Poet said
pleasantly, of another sort of canting; People must be mad before they can
understand it. Subtle men say, there is a difference betwixt five, and two and
three: And some such difference, for ought I can answer, there may be here. The
Pope may be said in one opinion to look straight forward, and in the other a
squint upon Temporals, which is a difference, such as it is, but which hinders
not, but the squint-eyed man may hit as surely and as strongly as the other.
Now because I am not concerned in the airy speculations of your
Ens-rationis-men, nor mean to be, I will not much stand with them for a
Cobweb-difference or two, which may pass with such as are mad enough to
understand it. But I look for a difference, which we dull men of the world may
be able to conceive: A substantial and useful difference, by which it may
appear, that whereas one opinion is naught and dangerous, the other is innocent
and safe. I would see how your indirect men are better Subject then the other,
and faster to their Prince and their Duty: how they are less guilty of wrong,
to the Sovereignty and Independence of Princes: in short, how they are not as
bad as those who are direct Knaves. These are the things, in which alone the
world is concerned: if the two opinions agree in these, let them differ in
inconsiderable niceties, as much as they will; they are the same in danger, the
same in inconsistency with Civil Government, and that, if you remember, was the
thing with which we began, and where, for ought I see, we still stick. Till I
see such a difference, I must needs think all you have said, no better then
pure illusion, and all you can say, till you say, where this difference is,
will be but to talk learnedly from the purpose.

For my part, I must profess, I can find none: But because I would be glad to
learn of any body, I will entreat Bellarmine to tell me, what difference he
finds, and what provision he makes, with his learned distinctions, for the
Security of Princes, and Fidelity of Subjects. The first, which comes in my
way, is in the state of the Question, That the Pope directly and immediately,
has not any temporal Power, but only spiritual; but indirectly at least, in
virtue of this spiritual Power, has highest or sovereign Power over Temporals.
And because Directly's and Indirectly's should break no squares, he leaves them
out against Barclay, Cap. 12.
when he had a mind to speak properly: When we speak properly, says he, we say,
the Pope has Power in, or over Temporals, but not Temporal Power, as Pope. Now
to acknowledge my ignorance, I must confess, I am quite gravel'd at very first,
and cannot for my life, imagine, what kind of thing this only Spiritual, and
not Temporal Power, should be, which yet is highest or sovereign, even in
Temporals. Without doubt, we men of the world are wonderful ignorant things,
and if we but offer to understand any thing, these Scholars say, it is odds we
mar all. Who of our lovv form, but would have thought, that Power over
Temporals had been Temporal Power? If I mistake not, I have heard from some
body, that had some acquaintance with these Scholars, that Powers are
specified by their Acts, which is indeed too high for me: It may be to purpose,
and it may not. But I had verily thought, that who could do temporal things,
had temporal power, and who could do spiritual things, spiritual. I was out it
seems, and perceive now that properly speaking it is otherwise. For all that, I
cannot but think there is such a thing as Temporal Power in the world, and if
Power in Temporals be not It, there remains nothing that I know, which can be
It, but Power in Spirituals; and for the same reason Power in Temporals must be
Spiritual Power; and so Kings, because they have to do with Temporals, have in
truth Spiritual Power; only we speak improperly in the world, and call it
Temporal. But this does not fadge neither. For then the Pope should be said to
have Temporal power, for this proper reason, because he has power in Spirituals.

Now I remember me there is a certain Pope who says, Kings have no Superior in
Temporals. Inno. 3. C. per Ven. Qui filii sint legit.
This Barclay objected to Bellarmin, and he answers that by Superior in
Temporals, is meant a Temporal Superior. Now I consider not how well this
answers Barclay. For let the Superior be a temporal, or a spiritual Superior,
so he be Superior in Temporals, The King has a Superior in Temporals. But
this is not to my purpose. I only observe that Bellarmin was of the mind,
when he vvrote this, that Superior in Temporals was all one with Temporal
Superior. And then I see no reason in the world, why power in Temporals
should not also be all one with Temporal power. Certainly, since Power makes
the Superior, there is as much sympathy betwixt the Superior and the Power as
this comes too.

But in the name of vvonder, what does Power in Temporals signify, and what
Temporal Power? Bellarmin means the Pope may by his power in Temporals dispose
of the temporal thing called a Kingdom. The Canonists mean some such thing by
their Temporal Power. By this account both signify power to dispose of
Temporals, and methinks it is no such mortal quarrel whether a dog must be said
to be beaten with a stick or a staff. Or, are they perhaps mere sounds, to
which belongs no sense, but what they give them as they find convenient for
their purpose; and so when we are asked what Temporal, or what in Temporals
signifies, we must answer with Montalto, What you please Father? Never believe
me if I can make more of this in Temporals, then an Enchanted Castle which
houses and entertains the Knight as long as he has use of it, and as soon as he
is gone vanishes into a pure Temporal Inn. Which way soever I turn me, I am
quite at a loss; so that I think it is best to give it over, and let Bellarmin
alone with his power over Temporals, and no Temporal Power; and speak to you
in a language which both of us understand.

Do you in earnest believe there is any such difference betwixt these two, that
the one makes a good, the other a bad Subject? And that a King is safe enough
as long as his Subjects speak properly. Marry, if their language once become
less exact, then let him look to himself. Good Schoolmasters are the only
Guards if this be true. I am afraid to meddle with Bellarmin again; for
whether I say I, or no, it is odds, but I shall be out still. But yet I guess
he meant his Power in Temporals is truly Power. If it be true Power, sure there
is true obedience due to it. And if all Christians are bound to obey him in
Temporals, Kings can have no Subjects but Infidels, unless to be even with the
Pope, they fall to commanding in Spirituals. For if they can command in
nothing, I do not see how they are Kings. But this is but shifting sides, and
leaves us still where we were. Let Bellarmin say what he will; He who has
power to command is to be obeyed; if the Pope can command in Temporals, I must
obey him in Temporals: And he whom I must obey in Temporals, is my King and no
body else. So that the Pope is universal Monarch without more ado, and there
is no King in the World besides himself. For it is not the proper name of Power,
but Power which does the business. Call it how you will, properly or
improperly, if there be a Power in the world which Kings themselves must
acknowledge, and submit their Crowns, and leave their Kingdoms when this Power
requires them, They are not Kings, I mean, Sovereigns of whom we only speak.
And they were mightily out who said Princes were solo Deo minores, that they
were accountable only to him, and had none else above them, and twenty other
such untrue things. For Bellarmin has found one that is above them, and I fear
above God too: at least he can take away what God gave, which is to make a
little too bold with him.

But I am out again, as I foresaw I should be. All this, says Bellarmin,
follows from the wicked direct Temporal Power of the Canonists, not from my
innocent Indirect power over Temporals. I told you there was no meddling with
Scholars. While we keep within our own verge, we may happily light upon a
little indirect sense, which may serve turn, and do well enough among our
selves: but if we go beyond our bounds, and tread the forbidden paths of
Schollership, it turns presently direct nonsense. I verily thought this had
followed! But it seems it does not. Bellarmin has stopped the Carrier with a
Distinction, which for fear of mistakes you shall have in his own words. If,
Adver. Barc. c. 5.
says he, there were in the Pope Spiritual and Temporal power directly, and he
were King of the World, as he is Bishop of the universal Church, and other
Kings did but merely execute temporal Jurisdiction; truly the Pope might at his
pleasure deprive whatsoever Kings of the administration and execution of
temporal Jurisdiction, and by this means take away Civil government, or
confound it with the Ecclesiastical; and would be greater then Christ, because
he could take away Powers which he willed should be, and be distinct. These now
to my apprehension are naughty things, and the opinion, out of which they
follow, a naughty opinion. And I must needs commend Bellarmin for choosing
another, out of which it may not follow, that Popes at their pleasure may
deprive any King of the execution of temporal Jurisdiction, and take away Civil
government, and be greater than Christ. This, you see, is what he says
follows from the other opinion, and what he makes us expect does not follow
from his. Let us hearken then to what he says of it, and understand it if we
can. But, goes he on, if we put in the Pope only Spiritual power Directly, and
Temporal Indirectly, that is only in order to Spirituals, it does not follow
that the Pope can take away, or confound Civil government. Once in my life I
was in the right. This is what I thought was not to follow. What is that which
does then? Why, It follows only, says he, that the Pope by his Spiritual and
Apostolic most eminent Power can direct and correct the Civil Power, and if it
be needful, to the Spiritual end take it away from one Prince, and give it to
another.

Pray assist me a little, for I am in again as deep, as just now with in
Temporals not Temporal. Was not this taking away Civil power the thing which
he said did not follow from his opinion, and does he not now say it does? Or
have I rendered him amiss? Let me see: his own words are; non sequitur posse
tollere -- sed solum sequitur posse adimere. O! it is tollere which does not
follow, and only adimere which follows. And here is a plain difference, for one
word has four syllables, and the other but three. The mischief is, those who
understand not Latin will not presently find it, and I hardly know how to help
them. For whether it be that Latin be the more proper language for
distinctions, or that he be better at Latin, then I at English, I am puzzled to
render it: And yet I have consulted my Dictionary, but there is but one English
word, to take away, for both. But methinks it sounds scurvily to say, it does
not follow he can take away, but it does follow he can take away. That looks
like saying and unsaying, giving and taking, which is Childrens play. To make
some difference then, we must say, It does not follow he can take away, but it
follows he can away-take: which, though it be to force the language a little,
yet it is better to make bold with that, then spoil the sense, and make no
distinction at all. Princes then were in a sad case if the wicked doctrine of
the Casuists were true, that their Kingdoms may be taken away, but as long as
they may only be away-taken, all is well enough.

But yet this is not well neither. Bellarmin loves to speak properly, and this
away-take perhaps would not please him; as indeed it has but an odd sound. To
be then both just to him, and not injurious to our language, we will put it
thus: It does not follow he can take away Civil power with a word of three
syllables, it only follows he can take it away with a word of four. This is
true English, and a true difference. For one kills on Tierce, and the other en
Quart, which though they may happen from the same hand, and the same sword, are
yet distinct killings. And so thanks to Bellarmin, we have mastered a deep
point of learning, and understand the Canonists opinion is a very wicked
opinion, because it exposes a Prince to the villainous thrust en Tierce, but
Bellarmin's very innocent, which lays him open only to the fair en Quart. Now
you may judge with your infallible judgment as you please, but I must needs
think that to take away, with a word of 4, or if you will 40 syllables, is to
take away, and to hit en Quart is to hit; and if any judge these things may be
practiced upon our sacred Sovereign; I must farther think, and plainly tell you
he deserves to be confuted by Judge and Executioner too.

But stay! May not Bellarmin say perhaps, that to take away Civil Power from
one Prince, and give it to another, is not absolutely to take away Civil Power,
but only to translate it; since the Power remains, only put into other hands.
Truly he may say this for ought I know, and twenty other things, of which I
shall never dream. But I think he could not mean it in this place. For here he
intends to speak contrary to the Canonists: and, as mad as they are, I believe
there is none among them so senseless to say or think, that Civil power can
absolutely be taken away out of the world, by the most direct and unlimited
Power that is or can be. They know well enough there must be Civil Power as
long as there is Civil Government, and there must be Civil government as long
as there be Cities and Men. So that Civil Power can no more, nor sooner be
taken out of the world then Mankind. For should the Pope take all Power into
his own hands, and appoint Lieutenants here and there, where he could not be in
person, these Lieutenants must of necessity have and exercise Civil Power, even
though they were Churchmen; As the Pope himself actually does. For when in his
own Territories he punishes Malefactors for civil Crimes, he does not do this
in virtue of his Spiritual power, but as a Temporal Prince, as one that has
Civil power as well as Ecclesiastical. Wherefore I conceive Bellarmin cannot
say he meant his taking away Power, of taking it absolutely out of the world,
taking from one and giving to another being not to take away Power it self, but
to translate it; because there is no way by which Civil Power can be taken
away, but only by translating; nevertheless, if he did, as this is not the
first time he has said what he had no great reason to say, I must tell him,
that this translating is every jot as unsatisfactory to us, because it is every
jot as unsafe to our Sovereign, as plain taking away. For if it be taken away
from him, whoever has it next, it is taken away from him. And whoever holds
this may be done, let Bellarmin speak never so subtly, I must hold is no good
Subject.

There is another distinction or two, or explication, or what you will call
them which stick in my stomach. To understand them the better, it will be
convenient to mention the occasion he had to make them. Barclay in his 12th.
Chapter objected against his opinion, that it makes Christian Princes Vassals
to the Pope, and hold their Kingdoms only at pleasure, or precariously. And
this he proves by this Argument: The Pope if it be necessary for the good of
Souls may take away a Kingdom from one Prince, and give it to another; but to
Judge and decree whether it be necessary or no, belongs to the Pope, and none
must judge whether his Sentence be right or wrong; Therefore he may at pleasure
Dethrone the one and Crown the other. Bellarmin Answers, that Christian Princes
must by no means be called the Popes Vassals, and much less be said to hold
their Kingdoms at pleasure, But are true Kings, and true Princes. This goes
well; but yet if his opinion make them Vassals, I hope they may without offense
to it be called so. But however Princes are to thank him for this confession
that they are true Kings and Princes, and may hope so much may, for his sake,
pass for true doctrine: Which if it once do, there is so much true fidelity due
to those true Kings, that what takes it but indirectly away, will be found
directly false.

Coming then to speak to Barclay's Argument, he says it is faulty every where,
major and minor and all. Still there is no meddling with Scholars. These two
premises of Barclay are two Propositions which he has borrowed from Bellarmin
himself, and were very good Propositions, as long as he had the handling of
them; but as soon as ever another but breaths on them, they fade and wither to
nonsense; and yet I perceive no alteration in them, but that before they came
out of Bellarmins mouth, and now out of Barclays. However he tells us, This
Proposition, The Pope may, if it be necessary for the good of Souls, take away
a Kingdom from one, and give it to another; needs explication: for it may be
well, and ill understood; it may be true, and it may be false. I make no
question but it may be, and is false: but I would fain see the Explication by
which it may be true. This it is: The Pope indeed may, if it be necessary for
the good of Souls, take the Kingdom from one; but, if he admonish him before,
if he give him time to repent, if he find him pernicious and incorrigible. May
he so? Why then your opinion, for all your Buts, and Ifs, is pernicious, and
you incorrigible, good Bellarmin. What Is this to say, but that he cannot steal
his Kingdom in the dark, but may rob him of it in broad day light? This
Admonition and Space of Repentance is in other words: The Pope must first say
to the King; look you, I deal fairly above-board, and give you notice before
hand, that if you do not do as I would have you within such a time, it may be a
month or two, it may be so many hours (for this space of Bellarmin's is for
ought I see, at the Popes appointing too) I will turn you a grazing, and
provide my good people another King.

I see no such matter of substance in these formalities, but that they might be
well enough spared, if conveniently they could. But they are a sort of impudent
things, which will thrust in whether the Pope will or no. For Kingdoms are no
such inconsiderable trifles, that they can be passed away in private, and none
know when or how. Except King Phys and King Vsh, none ever yet stepped into
another man's Throne without warning, and I believe, none ever will. Does
Bellarmine think it can happen in the world, that there should be a King so
tame, that without more knowledge of the matter, as soon as a sentence of
Deposition is brought, should quietly submit, and turn private man, and enquire
no farther. Kings are more inquisitive then so, and stand more upon their
terms, and look to be better satisfied. And though they did not, Subjects who
have sworn Fealty, have a little curiosity in them, and will be asking why, and
by what necessity they must change Lords, and obey Peter, who have sworn to
Paul. There goes time to all this, for nothing will come of it till all parties
be agreed. Now Bellarmine requires no more to make his sentence just, nor so
much, as nature will force upon him, let it be never so unjust. Of necessity
there must intervene more time in the change of Kings, then he requires to his
admonition and space of repentance. So that his Explication amounts in short to
this: The sentence were unjust, if it required things should pass in such a
manner, in which it is impossible they should pass; but very just, if things be
so done, as they must be done, in spite of sentence, or whatever else to the
contrary; which is certainly a very trim Explication, and alters the
Proposition wonderfully for the better. We cannot put so much as a Tenant out,
without warning, and he would persuade us, we are much beholding to his
Explication, for requiring as much Ceremony in the change of a Kingdom, as a
Farm.

And yet when all is done, I cannot tell whether he be in earnest or no, and
think these Formalities so indispensably necessary, that a King cannot be
deposed without them. It is hard to say, what Plenitude of Power may do, and I
doubt, he would not be well looked on, who should go about to fix its bounds.
But besides that, a Case may happen, where a King cannot repent, though he
would, or at least, make amends by repentance: A Case may happen, where he will
not repent, nor believe he has reason so to do. Bellarmine would persuade us,
Ozias in the Old Law was deposed for Leprosy. What! did the High Priest
admonish him to repent of his Leprosy, and not proceed to Deposition, till
after convenient patience with him, he found him incorrigible in his Leprosy?
Ozias might, and it is likely did repent the fault for which he was struck with
Leprosy, but unless his repentance could make him clean again, as to the
matter of Deposition, he had as good never repented at all; for he was,
according to Bellarmine, deposed, for what no repentance could cure. Again, in
the New Law, he would make us believe, Chilperick was deposed for
insufficiency. Did the Pope admonish him to repent the grievous fault of having
so little wit, and allow him time to provide himself of better brains, and
better organs, and when he found him incorrigible, and all persvvasion lost
upon him, and that, say the Pope what he could, he would not do what he
could not do, then at last after fruitless and long deluded patience cast him
off? Wherefore though Bellarmine do require such Formalities as cannot
conveniently be spared, yet possibly he may not think their necessity so
absolute, as that the Deposition should be void if they concur not. But let him
think what he pleases, while with all his insignificant Buts, he preserves
this substance, that a King may be deposed, if instead of three, be require
three hundred Ceremonies, the opinion is still inconsistent with Civil
Government. And for our Case in particular, our Sovereign does not think fit to
repent what Bellarmine calls Heresy and a deposing fault, for this reason,
because he does not think it a fault, and is for that reason very like to be
incorrigible in it too; and whoever thinks he may therefore be deposed, is
himself pernicious, and not to be endured in his Dominions.

And so much for the taking away But. For the giving But, he tells us, The Pope
may also give the Kingdom to another, yet not at pleasure, to whom he thinks
fit, for so indeed Kings were but precarious Kings. But He is tied to the order
of Justice, whether Succession or Election take place, or if there be none can
claim, then to him whom reason profers. I fear the truth of this may be
questioned. Sure I am that when Q. Elizabeth was deposed, and her Kingdom
given to the Spaniard, there were better Titles afoot in the world, then K.
Philips. Thanks be to God, the Throne of England has not been vacant, and the
Popes reason never troubled to fill it. When Kingdoms are exposed to prey, it is
catch that catch can. I see no great order of Justice in that. But suppose it
were true, what signifies this order of Justice? and what bar to the Popes
pleasure in Succession or Election? If the next Heir, or next Elect be a man,
who pleases not the Pope, I suppose he must be passed by, and so as many as
offer, till they come at last to some body who is rectus in Curia. For the
first might stand as well as any of these, who, I conceive, are all in the
number of those who cannot claim; and then what does Succession or Election
hinder, but the Pope still gives at pleasure, since none shall succeed or be
elected, but whom he pleases? Again, what difference betwixt giving a
Kingdom to whom the Pope pleases, and to whom Reason, meaning the Popes
Reason, prefers? Preference of Reason is nothing in the world, but that the
Pope pleases to think it fitter this man should be preferred, then the other. So
that Election and Succession and Reason, are nothing in truth but the Popes
Pleasure, and all that Bellarmine affords us, is a mere sound of words which
signify nothing, and if they did, were nothing to purpose neither. For we
are all this while beside the Cushion.

It makes nothing, I think, to the justification of a Robbery, that the prey
was equally shared; and when a King is dethroned, he is as much dethroned, if
he be succeeded by the next heir as by a stranger, neither do I believe, he is
much concerned who comes next upon the Stage, when his own part is ended.
Our Question at Present is, whether Kings in Bellarmins doctrine be only
precarious Kings. By the way Precarious is not very current English; I think we
should call it holding at will, or pleasure, or if you will coin a new word,
Tenure by Entreaty. But however let us keep our Authors word. Barclay objects
that Bellarmin makes Kings precarious, because he allows the Pope to take away
and give Kingdoms, and this whenever he has a mind, as being sole judge in the
case. Bellarmin answers, that Kings were indeed Precarious, if their Kingdoms
could be disposed of at pleasure, but because the Pope is tied to the order of
Justice in that point, they are not precarious. As if Barclay insisted on that,
or thought their being Precarious depended on that disposition. The Son in
defense of his Father laughs at that notion of Precarious, and rightly observes
that Precarious is not said with relation to him that gives, but him that takes
away. It Is the power of revocation, if that word fit him who never gave,
placed in the Pope, the power of deposing when the Pope thinks fit, which makes
a King precarious, let the Kingdom be disposed how 'twill afterward, the King
is still precarious, purely Tenant at will.

But pray tell me truly. Do you in earnest find any thing in these healing Buts
of Bellarmin, which makes his opinion a jot sounder then the Canonists; a jot
safer for Princes, or more dutiful for Subjects? For my part I profess
seriously I find nothing, unless nonsense will do the feat. There is a little
more nonsense in this opinion then the other, and if that be a security for
Princes, it would do well if the world ran mad as fast as it could. While men
are in their wits, they will go near to think never a Barrel better Herring.

Just such work he makes with Barclays next Proposition, which was this: To
judge, when it is necessary for the good of Souls, that a King be deposed,
belongs only to the Pope, and none is to question his Judgment. This he says
is like the former, and if it be ill understood, is false, but rightly
understood is true, but then concludes not what Barclay would have it. Now am I
terribly afraid that ill understood is as much in Bellarmins language, as truly
understood, or so as it truly signifies, and rightly understood means
understood otherwise then as it signifies. For else I cannot for my heart see
but if the Pope may depose when there is necessity, and judge when this
necessity happens, and none must call his judgment in question, and these words
mean as they sound, Kings are purely Tenants at will, and the Pope may depose
them whenever he pleases to judge it necessary, which is what Barclay would
conclude. What is the good meaning in which we must rightly understand it?
Why, It does indeed belong to the Pope, says he, to judge whether it be
necessary a King should be deprived of his Kingdom. Very well! So Barclay
understood it, and so Bellarmin himself understands it. Why does it not
conclude then, that Princes may be deposed at pleasure? Because of another But.
But, says he, it does not belong to the Pope to feign necessities at pleasure,
or serve his passions under pretense of necessity.

Bellarmin is as unlucky it his Buts, as Distinctions. Whoever said it belonged
to the Pope to feign necessities? and yet it may be said as truly as that
Deposing belongs to him. If Bellarmin could give good security the Pope should
never do more then belonged to him, there might be something in it: but if that
were so, we should not have heard so much of this Deposing power, for that does
not belong to him neither. But belong, or not belong, he may feign a necessity
by passion, or he may judge that necessary which is not so by mistake; and if
he does so, it is all one as if he did not feign, and not mistake, when neither
Prince, nor any body else, is allowed to judge whether he feign or no. Unless
the Pope be supposed infallible in sincerity too, and that he will always
declare, This man I depose upon a true, and that upon a feigned necessity. But
if we must take all he says is necessary, to be truly necessary, Kings may be
deposed at pleasure, for he may say so when he pleases. Marry if other people
must see this necessity as well as himself; all good subjects will tell him
there neither is nor can be any necessity why a King should be deposed. I, but,
says Bellarmin, because this is a matter of great importance, and the
necessity must be manifest and seen, therefore Popes ordinarily do these things
in Synods of Bishops, or Consistories of Cardinals, showing his reasons and
taking their consents. Yes sure,'it is a matter of great importance, too great to
be thus trifled with. Manifest quotha! I beseech you to whom must this
necessity be manifest? If to any besides himself; why it is manifest to all good
Subjects, that there neither is, nor ever was, nor ever shall or can be any
such necessity, and it is manifest they are not good Subjects who think
otherwise. But if He alone be Judge of the manifest as well as the necessary,
his command without more ado is evidence enough that it is manifest to Him, it
ought be commanded. And I hope he can as easily and as soon say It Is manifest,
as It Is necessary.

Then for his Synods and Consistories, I wonder what they are for. Does he
consult with them, tro, whether that be to be done of which there is a
necessity, and this necessity seen and manifest? He may consult the How, but
the Whether is a wise point of consultation, if it be already manifest. Or is
it perhaps to be made manifest by the consultation? If so, the case is not so
clear as Bellarmin pretends, and other persons, more concerned then his Synods
and Consistories, have reason to expect it should be made manifest to them too,
as well as the other. Besides, He who makes what Bishops and Cardinals he
pleases, and of such as he makes consults with whom he pleases, has wit enough
sure to choose such, of whom he may be certain beforehand, they will oppose
nothing which he shall propose. Indeed if by his Synods he meant General
Councels, there might be more difficulty. The Bishops of The Prince concerned,
and of those Princes who were leagued with him, would go near to speak in his
behalf. Else Synod in his language imports no more then a company of Bishops,
perhaps not so much, chosen according to the Popes pleasure. And yet even thus
much is more then he thinks necessary too. He says the Pope ordinarily does
thus, but if he will do otherwise, He may for any thing Bellarmin says to the
contrary. And the truth is it is not to be expected but he will. To depose a
King is not every days work. It Is an extraordinary case, and in extraordinary
cases there may be extraordinary proceedings. However the Pope is still Judge
of this, as of all the rest, and so when all is done we are purely at the Popes
pleasure for all.

There is a brace more of Volunteers, which though they be resolute enough, and
venture on any thing, let it be never so desperate, and let them have never so
little to do with it, yet Bellarmin spares them as much as he can, and keeps
them in reserve for dead-lifts, and then, which often happens, they never fail
him. One is De Facto, and De Jure. This is a distinction good enough in it
self, but as he uses it only at a pinch, and when he has nothing else to say,
it looks still like a piece of good stuff hung in a place which it will not
fit. For example, Gregory the Great writing of a certain Law, which for his own
part he dislik't, and thought unjust, but yet published, as he was commanded by
the Emperor; speaks thus: I being subject to your command, have caused the Law
to be sent into several parts, and because the Law agrees not with God
Omnipotent, I have by my Letter informed my Serene Lords. Wherefore I have in
both done what I ought, obeyed the Emperor, and not concealed what I thought
for God. Now I should think that to publish an unjust Law, and where the
Injustice concerned the service of God and liberty of the Church, as was here
the case, without the excuse which bears out a Subject, who is not to examine
but obey the commands of his Superior, is to do an unjust thing, and for which
now adays Force would hardly pass for an excuse. If any encroachment be
thought made upon the Church in our times, the language is presently, I will
die first, I will suffer Martyrdom, before the Cause of God, and Ecclesiastical
immunity shall suffer by my means. I take this Pope to have been a man of as
much zeal as those who use this language, and acknowledged to be so, and since
he submitted to a bare command, he either thought that command had power to
oblige him, or he acted against his Conscience without obligation. Wherefore
plainly he thought himself De Jure subject, or De facto he did very ill.

For all that, I, says Bellarmin, say this obedience was forced, de Facto, not
de Jure. Why then I think you may say any thing. Pray consider again good
Bellarmin. Does not he say, he did but what he ought? Vtrobique quod debui
exolvi. Does not what I ought, signify, what is my duty? and does Duty
signify Force with you? Sure as can be a Cardinal may do what he pleases. If
he will have words signify otherwise then they do, there is no contesting.
Otherwise, if the Pope were subject de Facto only, not de Jure, the Emperor
had no Right to command him, and if the Emperor had no Right to command, the
Pope had no obligation to obey, and then he ought have done quite the contrary
(for Force is no excuse for injustice) and what I ought signifies what I ought
not, which we dull men should never have suspected. Allow us but the same
liberty though, and it shall be shamfully hard for which we will not make a
shift to say some thing. That Chalk is blew, for example, which we will say is
white only de Facto, but blew de Jure. That the Fire burns de Facto, but only
warms de Jure. That Bellarmin is a great Scholar de Facto, but de Jure none at
all. I know I speak impertinently, but I meant to do so, and yet think I speak
as pertinently as he who says Duty is only duty de Facto, but de Jure not
duty. He might even as well have made use of his Indirect here too, and said
the Pope was subject only Indirectly, but was not subject Directly, or
contrariwise, for it is all one. Young Sophisters sometimes when they are put to
it, and, know not how to shift off an Argument, find something or other which
sounds like a distinction, no matter what it signifies, and whether any thing
or nothing, so it serve turn for the present, And I doubt he remembered the
trick a little too long.

But Subjection to Princes being proved by Examples, and Commands, This is the
Reserve for Examples, when they are ill-natured, and will not be turned off
otherwise. For Commands there is another common place, which now it is known is
nothing, but he was a very subtle man lure that first discovered it. It
consists in distinguishing the same man into a Prince, and a not-Prince, and
then interpreting all obedience we find commanded, belongs to the Prince only,
the not-Prince has no share in it. This distinction, because it is indeed a
little hard, they attribute to the Omnipotent power of the Pope; and say that
the Prince, till he be deposed, is a Prince, but afterward no Prince; and
because it still falls short, for the man governs and lives like a Prince
still, they etch it out with its fellow distinction, and say he is no Prince de
Jure, though he be de Facto. And now bring 'em as many and as plain places for
obedience as you will, it is the easiest thing in the world to get clear of
them; Bring Scripture, bring Fathers that a Prince is to be obeyed; True, say
they, while he is a Prince, but now he is no longer a Prince.

Princes in my opinion have hard luck to stand in the Popes way, and become the
first sad examples of his Omnipotence: otherwise there is no Law of God or Man
which may not be overturned as easily by the same engine. For he may as soon
and as well declare, That Wife to be no Wife, That Man to be no Man, and make
Adultery and Murder lawful, as that King to be no King, and make Rebellion
innocent. There would not want as likely pretenses for the one as the other, if
people would but look after them. For Example, A Man is a rational Creature,
who acts unreasonably disclaims his nature, and may be dispatched without
contradicting the Divine Law, which forbids men to be killed while they are
men, but he by the Popes declaration is no man. As much may be found out for
the Wife, as much for Estates, as much for every thing. For there neither is
nor can be any stronger title to any thing then the Law of God, and that the
King has to his Kingdom, and if that will not do, nothing will. This is just
Montalto. Sin but enough and you trapan the Devil, and become virtuous even by
being wicked. To refuse obedience to a King is with them a crime, and a crime
which deserves damnation; marry to Un-king him, and deny there is any obedience
due to him, is an innocent thing. As if taking his Power quite away, were not a
greater disobedience then to resist it. A particular disobedience may have a
particular, and sometimes excusable cause; but a general disobedience, such as
leaves them no longer any Power to command, is of all disobedience the
greatest, most inexcusable in it self, and most contrary to the Divine Law. And
yet he would persuade us, we sin, if we obey not a particular, perhaps trifling
Command, but if we take away Power and all, we are very honest men. Whereas in
truth, when I disobey a Power which I acknowledge, perhaps I wrong my self
most, for I do not my duty; but when I no longer acknowledge my Princes Power,
I do him as well as my self the greatest wrong I can; and yet this greatest
wrong with Bellarmine is no wrong.

These are the healing Distinctions which Bellarmine applies to his Doctrine,
and by which the sound Deposing is to be distinguished from the unsound
Deposing. If you find any such sovereign virtue in them, I shall be glad to
learn it. But for our part, we think Deposing an uncurable disease, a poison
for which there is no Antidote. Disguise it how you will, while it remains
Deposing, it is alike intolerable, and alike inconsistent with the safety of
Princes, and duty of Subjects. Call the Power indirect, call it in Temporals,
not temporal, as long as it is Power, and can do the feat, no honest ear can
hear it. Tell us of admonition, and space of repentance; tell us of Synods and
Consistories; of disposing the prey according to Justice; of not feigning
necessities; tell us what you will, while you tell us Deposing is good
Doctrine, we cannot believe you good Subjects. Bring a thousand Schoolmen, and
ten thousand subtilties, against them all we will stand by our honest
Parliament Doctrine, That the Crown of England is and always has been free,
and subject immediately to God, and none other, and who refuses his Fellowship
in that Doctrine, I know not, with what face he can pretend to a Fellowship in
any thing else.

But the truth is, I do not see that Bellarmine with all his art does so much
as guild the bitter Pill, or make it a jot less nauseous. For what is the very
worst the Canonists say? Take their opinion in his own expressions, and he says
all they say, and in terms as positive, and as comprehensive. Take Carerius, or
whoever is the highest flyer among those I sent you at first, and the worst is
but this: That the Pope has jurisdiction over all things both spiritual and
temporal throughout the world; that he may absolve Subjects from the Oath of
Allegiance; Depose Kings; and transfer their Dominions from one line to
another. And which of this worst does Bellarmine with his proper Distinctions,
and cautious Buts, deny? It Is true, they call his Power Direct, and Bellarmine
Indirect, but what matter is it how they are called, if one can do as much as
the other? And I would fain know, what they can do with their Direct, which be
cannot with his Indirect. It Is true, they make but one absolute Monarch of the
world, and all the rest but arbitrary Lieutenants; and Bellarmine calls them
true Kings, but makes them as much subject as if they were but Lieutenants.
Were Kings persuaded once it were their duty to resign at the Popes command,
they would themselves make no difficulty to call and think him their supreme
Lord. It Is only in consideration of the scurvy consequence which would follow,
viz. that being supreme and absolute Lord, he might dispose of his own as he
thought fit, that they refuse to give him that Title. Now Bellarmine sticks to
the consequence, which is all the mischief, and makes the Pope do all that a
supreme Monarch could do, and thinks all is well if he do not call him so, when
as if he could do what Bellarmine would have him, he truly were supreme
Monarch, and Bellarmine might make no bones to call him by his proper name.

The truth is, '^would anger any King at heart, to be put out of his Kingdom,
and not so much as know why, nay, while on the contrary he is fully persuaded
he cannot be dispossessed, even by those who dispossess him. If a Canonist come
and tell him, Sir, you must descend, the Pope your supreme Lord has so
commanded: If he believe the Canonist, he understands how a superior Power is
to be obeyed, and submits as a Lieutenant, when his Commission is recalled. But
if Bellarmine come and tell him, you are now a private man, the Pope has so
declared: Without doubt, he will reply, what if he have? Have not you your self
told me that I am a true King, no Vassal of the Popes, but supreme in
Temporals? Have not you told me, the Popes Power is only spiritual; and do you
tell me now, I must give up my temporal Crown, to the command of a spiritual
Authority? All this is true, quoth Bellarmine, but yet you must obey. What!
must I obey one who cannot command in such things? Yes; he can. It Is something
hard for you to understand who are no Scholar; you can understand what it is to
obey, and that is enough for you; the rest belongs to us of the Trade. In my
conscience, this would sooner put a man out of his wits, then out of his
Kingdom, and who kept his wits, I believe, would go near to keep his Kingdom
too.

In fine, the sum total of the Canonists account is but this: That the Pope by
reason of his absolute supreme Authority in all things, is not to be
questioned, but obeyed in whatever he commands. And if Bellarmine go less in
substance, whatever he do in words, I am mistaken. Nay, how much short is he,
even in words, when he tells Barclay, C. 17. That if the spiritual Prince happen
to abuse his Power, by excommunicating a temporal Prince unjustly, or absolving
his Subjects from their obedience without just cause, and so disturb the
temporal Commonwealth: This were sin in the spiritual Prince, but yet that
temporal Prince could not assume to himself the judgment of spiritual things,
or judge the spiritual Prince, and much less depose him from his spiritual
Seat. This is worded in opposition to Barclay, who by the same Argument which
Bellarmine brings for the Deposition of Princes, proves that they may as well
depose Popes. But if this do not signify, that right or wrong the Pope is
always to be obeyed, I understand it not. For Deposition, according to him, is
a spiritual thing, an act of spiritual Power; to judge of this, a Prince must
not assume to himself, no not in case of Injustice. And if he must not
question, what remains but to obey it, and this in all Cases, just or unjust?
Let the boldest Canonist that is out-go this if he can.

Upon the whole, I see no other difference betwixt the two opinions, but that
one is abominable false, and the other abominable false, and abominable full of
nonsense besides. They with one bold untruth subject all Princes to the Pope,
and for the rest discourse at least consequently. Were their Principle true,
all would follow which they say. He makes Princes as much subject as they, and
when he has done, calls them true sovereign Princes, and discourses, so that no
part hangs together. Every one falls together by the ears with his fellow, and
makes such mad work, that a body can understand nothing of it, but that it is
false. Consider a little what he teaches in his Romans Pont. against these
Canonists: That Christ or the Christian Law, deprives none of the Right and
Dominion he had before; that otherwise Christianity would be injurious, and a
wrong instead of a benefit, and therefore Christian Rings and Emperors
acknowledge no Superior in Temporals, but are true and supreme Princes in their
own Kingdoms. Again, That Christ our Lord has distinguished the Acts, Offices,
and Dignities of Popes and Emperors, that one should not presume to meddle with
the Rights of the other, and a great deal more to this purpose. But that
strange things happen in the world now and then, one would not suspect that
these things and Deposition should both be taught by one man, and that man a
friend of the Popes. Sure if I were Pope, I should not think my self much
obliged by him, who gives me a Power to do injuries.

But with what Distinction-sodder shall we ever cement these things? Does a
King lose nothing, when he loses his Kingdom? Is nothing taken away, when all
is gone? Is he deprived of no Right, who is deprived of the Right to reign? Is
it no injury to be turned out of a Throne, to be forced to change Purple for
Rags, and languish out a despised life in helpless Beggary? Do Christian
Princes acknowledge no Superior in Temporals; if they acknowledge one, at whose
command they must quit their Temporals? By the way, we are at our Superior in
Temporals again, with the meaning of which, for my late bad success, I dare not
meddle. It signifies you know, even what you please. But let it signify what
it will, I am sure no Distinction can hinder, but who has Power to command in
Temporals, is Superior in Temporals. And he would make us believe at the same
time, both that Christian Princes know none such, and yet do know a certain
Person who can command away their Temporals from them. To make both these true
at once, is, me thinks, a pretty confident undertaking.

Then again, what means this, that the two Powers are distinct, and one not to
meddle with the Rights of the other? I am sure, he does not mean, that the same
Person cannot have and exercise both, because then the Bishop of Rome could not
be a temporal Prince. Now I understand how in that case the Powers are distinct
in themselves, notwithstanding they are united in one Person, because that one
Person commands temporal things in virtue of one power, and Spiritual in virtue
of another, which certainly he may do who has both. But when there is but one
Power extended to both kind of actions, The powers certainly are then
confounded, if they can be confounded at all. For what can confounding, or
mixing in this case signify, but making one of two, which one shall have the
virtue of both? So liquors, so every thing that I know in the world, are
blended or confounded together. Wherefore it is Bellarmin, not the Canonists,
who truly confounds these Powers. They make them two, but say the Pope has
both. Bellarmin says, he has but one, and that the Spiritual only; but would
have this one Spiritual Power command both in Spirituals and Temporals. Which
is of two, to make one third Power, neither wholly Spiritual, be cause it
extends to Temporals, nor wholly Temporal, because it acts in Spirituals, but
equivalent to both. And if this be not to confound the two Powers, and make one
of these two which he says Christ would have divided, I would be glad to learn
what is, and what other way they can be confounded. And yet the jest is even
while he does this, he presses the confusion of the Powers as a great
inconvenience upon the Canonists, who are not altogether so faulty as himself,
and can extricate their Doctrine a great deal better. In two words, either he
confounds the Powers, and then he disobeys Christ, who, he says, would have
them kept asunder; or he does not, and then he disobeys him in permitting one
to meddle with the rights of the other. For certainly it is the right of the
Temporal power to command the Subjects to that power, and require their
allegiance and service: And to take away these Subjects and this Allegiance, is
to meddle and that very far too, with what belongs to the right of another.

The Truth is, these Tricks turn a question of as great importance as any in
the world, into pure words and illusion. The world is in suspense about the
decision of this great Question, concerning the independent Sovereignty of the
two Powers, and how that command in the Gospel, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris
Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo, should be obeyed. All the learning of ten Ages
teach, the powers were distinguished by Christ, one given to the Bishop, the
other to the Prince. The Canonists, and they but some, and all late men, teach
they were given both to the Pope. This third indirect Party coming to settle a
point of this importance, profess at first, that the Powers truly are, as
Christ commanded they should be, distinct, and the Pope for his share has the
Spiritual only. Would not any man think now the business decided, and that we
had no more to do but obey our Prince in Temporals, and Bishop, or, if you will
Pope (for I will not meddle with that question) in Spirituals, and there is an
end?

Why this it is to be illiterate, says Bellarmin, and not understand
distinction. The Popes power is only Spiritual, but yet this Spiritual power
indirectly, and for the good of Souls, virtually, and by means of some other
proprieties of speech, extends likewise to Temporals, and may dispose of
Kingdoms as it sees fit. Why then call it Temporal in the name of God, if it
can dispose of Temporals, and say the Pope is Universal Monarch if he be so,
and stand to it. Yes we do stand to it, replies Bellarmin, but we love to speak
properly, and do not call the Pope Universal Monarch, though he can dispose of
all the Kingdoms of the World, because he does it not in virtue of a Temporal
power, but by a spiritual working, and after an indirect manner. Hang the
manner how he does it, if he can do it. What has the World to do with these
mannerly tricks? A King is well holp up, who after he is dispossessed, comes to
understand that this came about after another fashion, and in another manner
then he was aware of.

Well! but are you for the Canonists, or against them? why truly I am for them,
and I am not for them. And our Question, What must be said to that? Must we
obey our King or the Pope? This is what the world looks after. Why, according
to one half of the resolution, which says Princes are supreme in Temporals, and
have in them no Superior, we must obey our King: according to the other half,
which says a power which is only Spiritual can dispose of Temporals too, we
must obey the Pope. But how must I do with this Licet and non Licet? must I cut
my self in two, and list a Leg and an Arm under one, a Thumb and a Shoulder
under the other, and if I happen to meet in the battle fight my King-self
against my Pope-self.

Because this is something difficult, and they are men of reason, I imagine
they would condescend a little in this point, and let me remain entire. As long
as the answer is divided it is well enough. But then I must choose the right
half. That Is it I would be at. Pray tell me then, must whole I take the
Spiritual, or the Temporal half. Why, the truth is you must take the Spiritual
half. Parasits and Flatterers may tell you otherwise. But this is the truth of
the story. Why then to what purpose all this illusion of my Princes
Sovereignty, and Independency, when after all he is neither Sovereign nor
Independent? To what purpose this bustle against the Canonists, only to say the
same thing at last, but with more ado. Could you not have plainly told me at
first what I must trust to, and spared the trapan of so many useless disguises?
The result of all your Spirituals, and Indirects, and good of Souls, and
whatever else, is in short, I must obey the Pope against my Prince; only I must
in spite of all sense believe my Prince is a true and Sovereign King, and has
no Superior in Temporals, and the Pope no power but Spiritual, and so besides
a Traitor and a Rebel, become senseless, and a block into the bargain.

Here Is your fine opinion, of which you make such a Mystery, and are so shy to
discover your thoughts. Come; come; leave dodging, and deal above-board. Answer
me these things, and show me that Bellarmin speaks sense, and sense not
injurious to Government, and the safety of Princes; or disclaim him plainly as
you have the Canonists. It Is at your choice to do what you will; but do one,
and that effectually; or take notice I tell you I will believe for the future
your Church is a wicked Church, absolutely inconsistent with Civil Government,
and has not one sound member in her, no not one. Put me not off with
formalities, and think to escape with telling me, this doctrine belongs not to
your Church as a Church, and that only the Material men hold it. It Is the
material men I only care for at present. We converse not with your formal
Church, we hear and see, and deal with Material men. These are they can do us
good or harm, and it is but reason we should know what to expect from them.
Formalities are ayry things, no rope can catch them: but Material men you know
may be suspended, and when they are found guilty, and have no hopes of
reprieve but in the innocence of their formalities, I doubt it goes hard with
them.

In two words, clear your selves from an imputation, which you have brought
upon your selves, or confess you cannot be cleared; and remember that silence
is a confession, and so I shall take it, as all Justice in the world does, and
believe it was not the wickedness of the Canonists opinion which made you
disclaim it, but because that wickedness came clad in sense, and people could
understand it. But the same wickedness disguised in nonsense is a Darling. So
that your Pique was not to the wicked, but the sense: make it but non-sensical
enough, and let it be never so wicked you are for it. I bar Sophistry too, and
unintelligible Subtleties. Let your Scholars keep their riddle me riddle me to
themselves. I shall understand the Talmud as soon, as what you call Terms of
Art, meaning, I suppose, the Art of keeping things from being understood; The
Art of talking so that no body shall know whether you say I, or No. But I
understand what it is to Command and Obey.

And to bring the whole to a short plain Issue, I ask, If it should happen the
Pope should command you to disobey your King, and the King command you to
disobey the Pope, by whom will you stand? And I expect an Answer as plain as my
Question. I declare too, because I will not turn our dispute into a
controversy of Religion, nor meddle with the Popes Spiritual power, that I
mean only of Temporal commands, of such commands wherein you have no reason,
nor doubt, but you ought obey the King, but only because the Pope commands the
contrary. Give me a direct Answer to this, for I tell you I bar Indirects, and
the business is done. If you will obey your King, you are an honest man, and
have disclaimed Bellarmin as well as the Canonists: If the Pope, you must make
out, if you can, how he is a good Subject who refuses to obey his Prince. The
business being now in a very narrow compass, and perceptible by every body,
there I leave it, with this Advertisement, that upon your Answer depend the
thoughts I shall have of your Church, or, if you will, men of your Church.
According as you Answer I, or No, I shall believe you consistent, or not
consistent with Government. There I began, and there I end. I hope you will
give me no occasion to chang my thoughts of you; for truly 'twould grieve me if
I could not, with as much satisfaction to my Judgment as Inclination, own the
title of,

Your, etc.

FRIEND,
ME thinks you deal roughly for a Friend. If I were as brisk as you, here would
be brave doings. What a bustle do you keep with me, with Bellarmine, and the
Church? and all, because I desired to keep my thoughts to my self. Truly I
thought silence no such heinous crime. I have known many repent of speaking,
but few of holding their tongues. But for my self you may deal as you please;
twenty to one but I may at some time or other find occasion to cry quittance
with you, and then I expect you should allow me the liberty you take. But
Bellarmine! what harm his he done you, to incur your indignation so highly? Is
he the only man who maintains the Indirect Power? And if he were, can you not
disprove him fairly, and let your bitterness alone? The Church too! Pray, what
is she concerned whether I do as you would have me or no? Can no Member of her
Communion displease you, but she presently must be brought in? She is this, and
she is that, if I do not what I have no mind, and, for all your earnestness, I
fear no reason to do. But you have got an eye of me, and you follow it. You
know I value the Church above my self, and that I will never agree she should
be ill thought of, if I can help it. Indeed I was in hope to have cut the
Thread, and answered so, as might please you, and displease no body else: But
since 'twill not be, and that there is no way to clear her from those
blemishes, which your capricious Jealousy has cast upon her, but by forcing my
own inclinations, I think my self obliged rather to expose my self to other
men's censures, then leave her exposed to yours. If any man dislike my
resolution, I entreat him for one moment to make my case his own, and consider
what he would do, so loudly and so smartly challenged, and what duty requires
he should do, when on the one side the Churches reputation is at stake, on the
other the quiet, it may be credit of particulars. If he doubt which side to
take, I must needs think, he has less respect for his mother then becomes a
good child. For my part, I am persuaded otherwise.

Well! But you will not be satisfied unless I speak plainly. Would I knew
whether you will be satisfied if I do. For I tell you truly, I begin to be as
jealous of your earnestness, as you of my reservedness. If reason would have
satisfied you, I think you might have been satisfied before this time. However
I will venture to make one experiment more, and try what I can do with you by
and by. If you be in earnest, and that plain dealing will do it, I shall
prevail at last. For I will tell you, and that very plainly, more then you ask.
You shall know not only what I think, but why I have been thus backward to tell
you what I think. I will frankly discover all my policy, which makes you so
merry, peradventure to be as much laughed at for my simplicity: but however, you
shall have no cause of jealousy of what I harbor in my breast, when you know
all I harbor there. But do not think I mean to be so merry as you are. I am in
no such pleasant humor, and think the matter a little too serious. If you had
spared some of your mirth, I believe 'twould have been never a whit the worse.
The meat might have been altogether as good, if the sauce had been less tart.
But to our business.

You are still harping upon the Church. A worm of Jealousy is crept in, and
will not out. You are still suspicious, she forbids people from dealing freely
in these matters. I told you there was no such thing, and I tell you so again,
at least that I know, and I tell you besides, That had there been such a thing,
and I known it, I would have dealt as sincerely with you, as Fisher with King
James, told you so at first, and never meddled so much as I have done. But if
you will know the true cause of my reservedness, know that you your self have a
great share in it. You are all on fire, because I say not presently what
pleases you. I suppose you do not imagine but there are men of tempers as hot
as you, whom that will displease, which pleases you. Besides the Question is of
a particular nature. It has been can vast heretofore with much animosity. The
fire is not yet dead. It flames not indeed at present, because the fuel of
occasion is taken away, but the heat lies raked up in men's hearts, and would
easily break out again. I would not for all the world be he, who should blow
this heat into a new flame. But for that, I conceive, my breath too faint, and
inconsiderable. However, as I love not to meddle with hot men at all, so I
would gladly be guilty of so much policy, as not to provoke hot men upon a hot
subject. Whether I say, I or No, one hot side will be apt to take offense.
Wherefore I thought it the best way to hold my tongue. Now your fantastical
curiosity is not satisfied with this, but is as hot upon my silence, as others
may be upon my speaking: And would persuade me, you play the Friend all the
while. I hope you will send me the next time to stir a nest of Wasps, and make
me believe it a point of Friendship.

However, I assure you, the Church has nothing to do with my silence, neither
do I, or ever did apprehend any thing from her. The Church has other
employment, then to look so low as I am, and besides, God forbid, that
Innocence should not be safety enough for any of her Communion. All that I
apprehend is the heat of private men, of those with whom I am like to meet and
converse, and from whom I may chance hear twenty cross Questions. 'Twould vex
me to have a man come to me, and say: You Sir! Pray how long have you taught
Divinity, or in what University taken degrees, who presume to handle so freely,
men in reverence for their learning with all Divines, and all Universities? The
world is at a fine pass, when a little pert confidence shall set up every
pidler in learning, against those who have spent their lives in nothing else.
Again, You pass for a Catholic, and acknowledge, at least in words, That the
Pope is supreme Pastor. It Is done like a dutiful Child to go about to lessen
your Father. The next time you write I hope you will leave him no power at all.
I fore see the next piece will be of Antichrist, and then there is hopes you
may in time proceed to the three Impostors. It Is an Heretical spirit this, and
beware of it. I may be in a froward humor when I hear this, and it may be
return a froward answer; and then we fall out, and he tells every body he
meets, I am in a dangerous condition, tottering upon the very brink of
perdition, and it is great luck if I escape the precipice. Every body who hears
this said, and that confidently, and gravely, will not hear what I can say for
my self; or if they did, they are but few with whom the solemn outside will not
carry it against a better reason then I shall be able to produce. And then I
pass for dangerous, or busy, or foolish as they please to frame my character.
My Friends begin to look askew at me, and all the sweetness of conversation,
and innocent pleasure of hearty Friendship is lost. This would be wonderful
uneasy to me, and if it should happen, as it is like enough, I should, whatever
you do, think it a great inconvenience. In fine every man has his humor, and
mine is not to make an enemy of so much as a Cobbler, if I could keep him my
Friend.

This is the reason why I so readily diclaim'd the Canonists, because I meet
with none who are like to give me any trouble about them. And this is the
reason why I was more reserved in the other opinion, because I may meet with
this trouble. I hope you will not think this a reflection upon my communion, as
if they were more troublesome to their Neighbors then other folks. Men are men
of all communions, and hot men are hot men, and such are impatient that any
persuasion they have wedded should be contradicted. This is all the disquiet I
foresaw and apprehended, and the great Policy with which you keep so much ado.
And if it be Policy to think my thought quietly to my self, as I elsewhere told
you, and not fall out with every man who thinks otherwise, nor give any man
occasion to fall out with me; to think I have no commission to Reform every
thing I dislike, but that there may and will be errors in the world, let me do
what I can: I avow to you, I would have been a Politician, if you would have
let me, and am very sorry you did not.

But now we are upon Politics, let me tell you one thing by the way. You are a
mere Mortal at Politics as well as your Neighbors. What work do you make with
the business of 88, and how slily do you make it pass for an effect only of
Heresy? If you do in earnest believe so, I can tell who is the Sir Pol. But
sure you understand things better, then not to know, Pretense is one thing, and
Cause another. It Is true Heresy was pretended, and it may be was a partial
cause too, of as much as the Pope did. But do you think the King of Spain was
at all that charge purely upon the account of Zeal? Sure you do not think him
so great a Saint. Or if you do, all the world knows 'twas Interest of State,
not Religion, which raised that Army, and set out that Armada. The Queen stood
in the way of his great thoughts, and so crossed his designs upon other men's
dominions, that she made him unable to recover his own. This obstacle to his
ambition he had a mind to remove; and Religion was no bad pretense among his
own Subjects, who were and still are exceeding Zealous; but he so little
valued it himself, that he would not so much as own it. And this a better
Politician then you or I, Grotius in his History of the Low Countries has
observed: Some, says he, would have had the war proclaimed by a Herald, but
others thought the right of claim from the Popes sentence would make out but a
lame Title. And these it seems were the wiser, and carried it. See now what
conceit the Spaniards themselves had of your Politic Cause, and no better had
we in England. For though Mendoza had vainly boasted of I know not what
affection of some principal men here toward the Spaniard, in all likelihood to
ingratiate his own diligence, yet whatever his thoughts were, says Grotius
again, it appeared true afterward that however English Catholics might differ
in Religion, there was, none of them so imprudent as to trust their Lives and
Fortunes to the undistinguishing sword of a Foreign Conqueror. And yet they
were at that time as much affected to the Pope as any people in the world, and
thought as highly of his power. And for all that they did not think he had
power to dispossess their Sovereign, and distinguished rightly betwixt Pretense
of Religion, and Reason of Interest. I can assure you we are of the same mind
still, and know an Invader, let him be never so much a Catholic, is an Invader,
and, let him pretend what he will, means to enslave those he Invades, and
always will. He that comes with a Cross in his mouth, and a Sword in his
hand, we know what he would be at, and shall never be so senceless to be
diverted by what he says, from considering what he would do. I tell you
once for all, we would fight as freely against the Pope as the Turk, if he come
like a Turk in Arms; and you may easily believe me: for all Nations do it
without difficulty when there is occasion; French, Spaniards, Italians
themselves have all had their turns. Marry if he come like a Pope, to direct
our feet in the ways of that peace, which Christ bequeathed as a legacy to his
Church, I for my part will fall down at his feet, and kiss them too, laugh you
as much as you will. In the mean time I would advise you, as you do me, to
let Politics alone, and not go about to persuade the world, Heresy was the
cause of all the danger of 88, when if there had been no such thing, there had
not been one Ship, or one Soldier the less. Had Queen Elizabeth been
Inquisition-proof as much as King Philip, he would have done just as he did:
For 'twas the enemy of Spain, and friend to Holland, not the enemy to the Pope,
with whom he had the quarrel. Had the Pope himself been in her place, the
Pope had been invaded as she was. And this I say not altogether by guess, for
both he and his Father actually did invade the Pope, and his Father take him
prisoner too. But so much for your Politics, and my reservedness, of which I
have now given you the very reason, and told you the Truth, the whole Truth,
and nothing but the Truth.

As for Bellarmin, I wish you had spared some of your smartness. He was a great
man, and if you would undertake to answer all that he has writ, peradventure
you would go near to find him so. Nay do but write on any, choose what you think
the easiest, Subject, as much as he has done of intricate matters, and if you
do not somewhere or other give occasion of as much sport as you have made with
him, I shall much marvel. A great piece of Mastery it is, out of so many
Volumes, where it is impossible the Author should always be equally attentive,
to pick out a few lines, and turn them to Burlesque. If I had a mind to take
his part against you, perhaps I could make it appear, He is not altogether such
an Ass as you would make him, even in this question. For example, You quarrel
with him because, as you say, he forgets to explain what he means by Indirect
where he first uses the word. As if those against whom he then writ, did not
understand it well enough, and need no explication. His notion pleases not you,
and you say it is not the Notion of the world. Suppose it be not. He writ to
that part of the World which understood it in his Notion. If they understand
one another, what is it to you and me what words they use? Again; you say, He
makes no use of that word in the whole course of his Arguments. What is it to
purpose whether he did or no? It may be he had no occasion. But if you consider
his Arguments, you will find they proceed all upon what he understands by
Indirect Power, and that they are all along opposite to the Canonists, who
maintain in the Pope a power properly Temporal, whereas he places in him only a
Spiritual Power; and then endeavors by those Arguments to prove, that supreme
Spiritual Power, may in virtue of its being so, extend also in some cases to
Temporals: which is in his language to be Indirect, and was so understood by
those against whom he intended his Arguments. So that he is so far from
forgetting, as you imagine, his Indirect, that he makes use of it and nothing
else. More I could say in his behalf if I had a mind. But I mean not to engage
for him. He has friends a great deal more learned then I, who can speak for
him, when they think convenient. As you have ordered the matter I have enough
to do to quit my self However I mean now to endeavor it, and quit my self so,
if I can, that I may hear no more of you. For I am very weary of being baited
thus long at one stake, and will come no more there, if I can help it.

I tell you then I will stand by your Parliament-Doctrine, as much as you or
any of his Majesty's Subjects, and take it unkindly at your hands you should
surmise I would do otherwise. That Parliament was a Catholick-Parliament, if
you remember, and might have put you in mind, that Catholics may be both good
Catholics and good Englishmen. It Is true, there may be Traitors of them, and
those Traitors may disguise their Treason with the pretense of Religion, as who
would not get as hand some a vizard as he could for so ugly a face? But it is
plain, that their Religion has no inconsistency with their duty to their King
and Country, when we see their Religion was no hindrance to them, for
providing for the liberties of their Country, against the encroachments of
pretended Religior. On the contrary, I conceive it more shameful, and more
wicked for us, who persevere in the same Faith, to degenerate from the same
Loyalty, then for men of other persuasions. But to go on: I disavow and detest
the wicked and pernicious Doctrine, which teaches the deposition of Kings, whom
I acknowledge to hold independently of God, and will be ready on all occasions
to lay down my life in confirmation of this Truth; and when you please, will
give under my hand, that it is new, false, erroneous, contrary to the Word of
God, and several ways mischievous besides, and will never maintain any opinion
to the contrary. I know not how you will relish this way of speaking, but I can
assure you, it is a way in which wiser men then I, have walked before me. But to
give a direct Answer to the Question to which you have reduced the whole, and
which by the way, I am very glad you have confined to Temporals, (for I do not
mean to be persuaded out of my Religion by your earnestness) I answer thus:
That I will at all times, and in all occasions, stand by my King, against
whatsoever Power, and under whatsoever pretenses. And because you are
particularly jealous of the Pope, I declare, I will stand by my Sovereign, and
believe it my duty so to do, against the Pope, as firmly as against any other,
as being fully persuaded, he has no Power Direct or Indirect, Virtual or
Formal, or by whatever names it has or may be called, to depose or dispossess
him of all or any part of his Dominions, or authorize his Subjects not to
perform faithful obedience to him. And I absolutely disclaim all Doctrine to
the contrary, by whomsoever maintained, and under whatsoever disguises. And if
you distrust my word, I will pawn you my hopes of salvation, and swear all this
in as ample manner as you can devise, provided, you keep within the bounds you
have set, and entrench not upon Spirituals. For you desire I should deal
plainly with you, and I must tell you plainly, I mean, by the Grace of God, to
be as good a Catholic, as a Subject, and hope, I do you no harm by meaning to
save my soul. Now if you be not satisfied, it is no fault of mine, and I must
believe, say what I will or can, you are resolved not to be satisfied. Which if
it be so, I am sorry with all my heart you have put me to so much fruitless
trouble, for truly I could have spent my time something better then in washing
the Brick.

But now I am in the humor of telling you all I know, let me tell you farther,
I am not alone of this persuasion. Whenever you make it as seasonable for other
people to speak their thoughts freely, as you have made it necessary for me, I
do not think you will find many Catholics, who will leave you much ground of
jealousy. At least I am sure of this, That there is no Catholic, who may not
remain as good a Catholic as the Pope himself, in the blunt phrase, and say as
much as I do. Those who will not, if there be any such, are not hindered by any,
either Doctrine, or Command of the Church, but by Principles, which whether by
the credit of the maintainers, or whatever flash their eyes are dazzled, they
mistake for more effectual then they are. Notwithstanding if you meet with any
such, I freely consent, you make as much sport with them as you will, and bar
you no part of the pleasure, I doubt, you take even in your jealousy, and
which, I fear, you would be loath to part with. But, to my knowledge, there are
who would gladly give you satisfaction in this Point, if you would receive it.

Pray permit me a little liberty too, and let me ask you a Question or two in
my turn. You know, as well as I, there are of us, who hold in this matter what
displeases you, and there are who do not. You who talk so much of honesty and
uprightness, pray where is the honesty and the uprightness to treat us both
alike, and give the honestest man that is, the portion of a Knave? Do you think
it a just thing, that one man should bear the burden of another man's faults, or
that those Nations do well, who when any one offends, punish all his relations?
You keep us all under the same discouragements, and yet know we do not all
deserve it. You allow us no means to clear our innocence, such as you know are
clear, and should we find a means our selves, our case is still the same as if
we were guilty. Honest or not honest, all is one with you. If you say, You know
not which are which, why do you not know it? You may when you please. But since
you do know that some, whoever they be, are innocent, those innocent men should
rather bear out the guilty, then the guilty condemn the innocent. I think men
of tender conscience would choose to let twenty guilty men escape, before they
would let one innocent man suffer. At least in other cases, the Law does not
condemn any man, because he is not known to be innocent, but frees him without
more ado, unless upon sufficient proof he be in particular found guilty. With
us it is otherwise: because some are perhaps but thought guilty, (for till it
come to trial, that is all can be said) it takes hold of innocent and all. Nay,
we are not admitted so much as to a trial, nor allowed to plead Not-guilty,
with any plea which shall be any way beneficial, and free him, who is found so,
from any thing to which he is liable who is cast. In fine, You pretend, and
endlesly pretend dissatisfaction, yet no satisfaction will be received from
those who could, and gladly would give it. Whatever men be, to look upon them
still as guilty, and keep them so, in spite of all they can do, to make out
their innocence, and not suffer them to pass for other: In two words, To make
men liable to punishment whether they will or no, and then punish them, is in
my opinion something hard dealing. I am persuaded, you are sensible enough that
This might be pressed. But I forbear, and only vvish you to clear things as well
as I have done. You are so nice at receiving satisfaction, that I should be
very sorry, you had this to object against me. I fear, I should have much ado
to make your squeamishness believe otherwise, but we were in love with
severity, and resolved not to part with any pretense of it.

As for me I think I have done my part, and so cleared all who are persuaded
as I am, that if you continue your jealousy against us, it is very plain, you
are jealous for some other reason then demerit in us. And because you shall
perceive I am in earnest, and speak, not only in force of your importunity, but
according to the persuasion of my best little Judgment, I will go a little
farther, and tell you why I am thus persuaded. For I would not have you
think, your Arguments alone have done the feat, and that being formerly either
unsettled, or vvrong fixed, they have converted me: And yet I must frankly
acknowledge, I cannot answer them in the main, though if I had a mind to keep
up the wrangling Ball, I could perhaps here and there pick out enough to give
you sufficient trouble. But I have always been of this Judgment, and you might
perceive so much by the Relation I made of the Arguments; in which I did not
play the Historian so impartially, as not to discover sufficiently with which
part I sided. So much sharpness as I mingled with the Narrative, could not
proceed from one who thought well of the Arguments. By the way, I now wish
there had been less. For since you must know all, that heat was indeed but
counterfeit, a disguise I put on, in hopes to excuse my self from plainly
discovering my own face. Otherwise more modesty to learneder men then my self,
had been more suitable both to manners and my humor, and 'tvvas with regret I
shevv'd no more respect to them. But I thought there was no great harm to
speak a little freely of Books, whose Authors are by death exempt from all
sense of wrong, and if they were alive, perhaps would not take much offense at
any thing I should say. But I perceive I must give over Policy. It Is a Trade in
which I am not skilled, and thrives accordingly.

To acquaint you plainly then with what I harbor in my breast, I must profess
that as far, as I can judge, This Deposing doctrine, in whatever garments of
distinctions clad, as much as it is pinned upon our Religion, is more
inconsistent with our principles, then those of any other persuasion: so
inconsistent, that were it once established for Catholic doctrine, instead of
being an advantage to the Church, as they who favor it suppose, it would be
the ruin of it. One of our Principles is respect to the Ancient Fathers, which
he that would take away, would do the Church very bad service. Every body knows
what reverence we profess to those great lights, and what veneration we pay to
their learning and virtues. What shall we say? that they were ignorant of a
doctrine, which is pretended was taught by Christ, they who understood what
Christ taught so well, and defended it so zealously Can it be imagined our new
Schoolmen know more then these great men, who in defense of Christianity,
against opposers as subtle as any that have since appeared, discovered a
learning, which for ought I perceive After-ages have more reason to admire,
than think they can equal. But if they knew as much as they do now, it can be
less suspected from their Virtue; that they would conceal their knowledge, and
suppress a truth of this importance. I cannot readily fancy any thing more
incredible, not to say a harsher word, than that a point of no less concern
than the performance of our duty to God, and his Vicegerents, Kings, should lie
dormant in breasts inspired with so much zeal, and enlightened with so much
knowledge, for Ten whole ages, and at last break out, and surprise the world
with a new-light. Nor do I see how it can be thought possible, without imputing
either Ignorance or Dishonesty to those, who of all men in the world are
farthest from the suspicion of either. I should be sorry to be, or see the
Catholic, who should in good earnest think either imputable. And yet if they
knew this doctrine and did not conceal it, we must of necessity have heard of
it long before we did. Gregory the 7th is the first unquestionable Author of
it: For though a little more Antiquity be sometimes pretended, yet those
pretenses are in truth but weak, and little better then mere conjecture. All
that I can imagine possible to be said in the case, is, that they had no
occasion to declare their knowledge, but being busied with other controversies
said not all they knew in this. But I fear this cannot be maintained. For they
do often treat of both Powers, explain their natures, and settle their bounds.
They tell us the one consists in constraint, the other in freedom; That one has
to do with Sacrifice, and Sacraments, and Divine things; the other with Human:
That one inflicts Corporal, the other Spiritual punishment, and the like. Was
there no occasion all this while to have given one touch of this Direct and
Indirect Power? one little hint at the distinction, if they had known it? Let
them think so that please. For my part I conclude they knew it not; those who
think otherwise may conclude if they please, that they would not teach what
they knew, but concealed a point of Christian duty, and which they knew to be
so: and so by seeking to justify they knew more than we can possibly tell they
did, since they express it not themselves, call in question their virtue which
we all know.

But yet bare silence is not the case. They teach the direct contrary. They
teach there are none who can punish Kings but only God; that we for our parts
are to obey even unjust and wicked Princes, and this because God has so
commanded, whose secret, but yet just, Providence, places over us, as well
Nero's as Constantins: That the Church has no sword but the Spiritual, which to
extend to Temporals is Arrogance. He that can reconcile these, and twenty other
of their express doctrines with the deposing Power, may never stick at any
thing, or fear that Impossibility will ever stand in his way. In fine, They
allow us no other disobedience then in case of commands contrary to what God
has commanded before, and no other resistance, even in this case, but of
prayers, and tears. Put them to have known the efficacy of our distinction, and
that it was lawful, while directly we are obliged, to pray like Christians,
indirectly to fight like Turks, and they have direly cheated the world, and
trapan'd the Church into many a severe Persecution, from which let them say
what they will, she had force enough to have freed her self, if she had thought
it lawful to use it. Primitive Christians themselves had the confidence to tell
their Persecutors to their faces, they wanted not strength to revenge
themselves, if they had thought the defense of their lives a just excuse for
resisting their Prince, or the Sword a lawful instrument to introduce the
Gospel. But they knew Religion was not to be established by fighting, but
preaching, and that Conquest is not the way to set up the Kingdom of Christ. If
their Prince bad them fight against his Enemies, they did so: but if he himself
became their Enemy, they chose, as was their duty, to die rather then fight
against him.

The truth is, people may say and think as their fancy guides them, but Force
is not the way to preserve or introduce true Religion. Falsehood may need it,
but it we^kens Truth. Consider which way the wisdom of God went to work; As
rain into a fleece of wool, as drops of dew distilling on the earth. He who had
an unresistable power, would not use so much on this occasion as to break even
a bruised reed. It Is evident by the choice of unerring wisdom that this is the
proper way of Truth, and that it is a deceitful wisdom, and takes wrong
measures, which goes otherwise. And indeed what can be more wild, then to think
to force men into Heaven, and make Saints of them whether they will or no? We
see what Christ, what his followers did, we know how we were taught by the
great and best succeeding Masters of Christianity. I shall never be persuaded,
that those who taught in this manner, were acquainted with these indirect
subtleties; at least we should have been acquainted with them much sooner if
they had. In fine, I cannot but think, there is very little of a Catholic
spirit, in introducing a Doctrine, not only unknown to the ancient Fathers, but
so opposite to their Maxims, that it cannot well be imagined how they should
contradict it more plainly then they do, unless we fancy them Prophets too, and
that they foresaw all the subtleties which should be brought in the world after
they left it. Otherwise we cannot expect they should talk of Direct and
Indirect who never thought of either. But they plainly say, There is no Power
in the Church but spiritual, and that this spiritual Power does not extend to
Temporals: Again, That Princes have none to call them to account but only God,
and that just or unjust they must be obeyed, saving only in unjust commands.
And if any disguise of words can hinder this from being a plain determination
of the Thing, I must needs profess, I know not how it can be determined by them.

But forgetfulness of the Fathers, I fear, is not the worst of the Case. It is
pretended in the behalf of the deposing Doctrine, that it relyes on divine
Right, and the hot abetters of it will hardly suffer those to pass for good
Catholics, who reject it. The truth is, they cannot well go less. For while it
is acknowledged, as on all hands it is, That subjection to Princes is commanded
by Gods Law, that which takes away this subjection must be Gods Law too, or
nothing. And indeed considering the import of the Question, and the immediate
influence it has upon a main Point of duty, it cannot well be doubted, but the
Truth, on which side soever it be, dees belong to Gods Law Certainly the Wisdom
of God, who took flesh purposely to instruct the world in all necessary duty,
did not leave out so considerable a part. Now that his Law teaches, we are to
obey temporal Princes, is both plain in it self, and, as I come from saying,
plainly confessed by every body. But it is evident, we cannot at the same time
obey two Powers commanding contrary things. Wherefore I cannot see, but to
require obedience in Temporals to the spiritual Power, by the same Law which
commands obedience to the Temporal, is to make that Law contradictory, and
impossible to be obeyed. Which as it is a Blasphemy intolerable in any
Christian, so I fear, it is unavoidable in those who put a temporal virtue in
the spiritual Power. For that virtue plainly obliges to obedience in Temporals,
to which obedience we are obliged by another virtue, that of the temporal
Power. And this is to require we should do what Christ himself has assured us
is impossible to be done, serve two Masters.

The way by which they seek to avoid this, is by saying, Kingly obedience as
inferior, must yield to Papal obedience as superior. Which I think is, by
striving to weather Scylla, to split upon Charibdis. We have assurance from
those, whom we have more reason to credit, that Kings are inferior only to God,
and have none above them but him alone. I suppose this is to be understood of
the same kind of Superiority. For otherwise it is ordinary enough for the same
man to be both Superior and Inferior to another, in several respects: as a
Father to a Son, who is a Magistrate. But it is plain there is no reconciling
this Doctrine, with that of a Papal Superiority in Temporals. We may as soon
obey both when they command contraries, as believe one has no Superior besides
God, to whom the Pope is Superior.

And yet there is another thing which sticks more with me. This Papal
Superiority in Temporals is no where to be found, but in their own fancies.
There is no such thing in Scripture or Tradition, Councils or Fathers. To
obtrude upon us an invention of their own heads, and this for a part of Gods
Law, is to add to the Law of God. Let them either show that place of Gods Law,
which teaches, Kingly Power is inferior, and Papal superior, and this in
Temporals, or show how they do not give us for Gods Law, that which is not, and
entitle themselves to the maledictions of the Apocalypse. Feed my sheep, and,
whatsoever you shall bind is not, Kings are inferior in Temporals, and their
interpretation, which hooks in Temporals, is not Scripture. Besides the Council
of Trent has forbid the Scripture to be Interpreted against the unanimous
consent of the Fathers; And if any one Father can be brought, who Interprets
those places as they do, or who does not Interpret them quite contrary, if he
meddle with them at all, truly there is more to be said for them than I am
aware of.

But let us consider a little farther. In a Question which belongs to Christian
duty, and the law of God, how does, or how should a Catholic proceed? I
conceive who goes to work like a Catholic, should frame his belief according to
his Rule of Belief. I think that is the use of a Rule. To my judgment they go
not this way, who are for Deposing; as indeed they cannot. For if Tradition be,
as I conceive it is, the Catholic Rule, there is no applying this Rule to
Deposition. Look into all Bellarmins Arguments. Those in his Romans Pont. are all
from Reason, deducing such inferences from Scripture, or acknowledged points of
Catholic Doctrine, as make to his purpose. These deductions, till they be
acknowledged rightly made, which hitherto is denied, and that upon very good
grounds, have no force at all to induce belief, and though they were
acknowledged, would make at most but a Theological conclusion. Those against
Barclay are all from Authority, and this Authority is either of a single Pope
Boniface 8, or a great many single men, or those men met together in Councils.
For as for Scripture, which he pretends, and which indeed would do the
business, if it declared it self, he makes nothing of it. Now there is no
number, or quality of men, let them be Catholics never so much, which obliges
to a belief of what they say, otherwise then when they witness, the point in
question was received by them from their Ancestors as taught originally by
Christ, which testimony of theirs hands it over, for such a point, to those who
come after. In all other cases they speak their own private judgments, and this
whether single, or assembled, and for that reason are not parts of Tradition,
or the Catholic Rule, and make no necessity of Belief. And these being all the
ways they have to the wood, I do not discern the Catholic way among them.

But what is the consequence? There are but two things acknowledged by
Catholics, to which we are obliged to submit our Judgments, Scripture and
Tradition, if these be truly two and not one thing with two names. For as for
Councils, They belong to Tradition, and are when duly qualified the most
considerable parts of it. In Scripture we find Subjection and Obedience, and
this for Conscience, possessing our Souls in patience, expecting our reward in
the next world, and the like, no word of Deposition. Look into Tradition, and
we find Ten whole Ages persuaded and practicing according to the same Maxims,
persevering in faithful obedience to just commands, and patient refusal of
unjust ones, and apprehending they were obliged by the law of God so to do. We
find all the Fathers of all those Ages confirming them in this apprehension,
and inculcating the duty of Obedience even to Tyrants and Persecutors. We find
Popes themselves not only teaching but practicing the same Doctrine, obeying
commands sometimes thought unreasonable and unjust, and submitting with
patience to the pleasures of their then acknowledged Lords, the Emperors. This
is, if any thing can be, semper and Vbique, and ab omnibus. And this is the
known Rule of the Catholic Church. The opposite Opinion began at such a time in
such a place, and by such a Man; and when it began was cried out on as a
novelty contrary to the ancient Doctrine, which in all other cases is a
condemnation without more ado. Neither did they well know at first on what
bottom to fix. This Indirect came in afterward. As far as can be guest they
thought, because the Pope was Superior over all Christians, he might therefore
come and all Christians any thine. Since, the business coming to be debated,
they cast about for ways to maintain it, and the Indirect way pleases most,
though it be not yet well settled, some thinking it as much too little for the
Pope, as others too much.

But whatever they think, I fear both the one and the other is ruinous to the
Church. For neither can pretend to be believed, but for some reason; and this
reason, since it cannot be the same for which we believe other points of Faith,
there being manifestly no such thing as uninterrupted delivery in the case,
must be something else, which as well as It must pretend a virtue of inducing
belief. And, that being a Rule of Faith, which has power to settle Faith, here
is a new Rule of Faith brought into the Church, and with it all the
Incertain^y, and all the confusion blamed in the most extravagant Sect, and
this even by her own confession, who thinks her Rule is the only means to avoid
that inc^rtainly and that confusion. This Rule is manifestly discarded by a new
one; For she cannot with any face pretend, all she teaches was delivered to
her, if it be pined upon her, that she teaches what was not d^livered; and if
She lose the pretense to all, she will keep it to none, since it cannot appear;
but if she have once deserted her Rule, she has don't oftener; And then farewell
Church. Once take away the Rule, and the Church must of necessity go after. She
has no solid ground of Authority but the stediness of her Faith; no stediness
of Faith, but the stediness of her Rule; break that once, and there is neither
Authority, nor Faith, nor will within a while be Church left.

So that in good earnest, I do not think the malice of all her professed enemies
could ^ver do the Church so much harm, as the zeal of her unwary Friends. At
least for my part break but the Chain once, and I know no more any certain way
to Heaven, than the veryest Enthusiast among all those Sectaries who rove
blindly for want of a sure Guide, and should find my self as much at a loss.
That any thing must be believed, but what was taught by Christ, or that any
thing can be known to be taught by him, but by the constant belief and practice
of intermediate ages, is what a Catholic should neither say, nor endure to
hear; for it manifestly takes away Divine from Faith, and all the advantage we
profess in our method above others to come to Faith leaving us as much
benighted, and as much to seek, and as small hopes of success, as we object to
those whom we think stray most, and are most in the dark. Wherefore, salvo
meliori, as far as my short prospect reaches, To bring Deposing Faith into the
Church, is a ready way to depose the Church.

I cannot tell whether I should more wonder or grieve, but I am sure I do both,
to see men so intent upon the maintenance of an Opinion, which they have
espoused, that they forget the honor and safety of the Church: and to observe
a certain supercilious gravity, with which they labor to discourse these
things into Faith and Religion, should so far impose upon the world, that they
do not discover they are quite contrary and destructive to both. But no doubt
there are enough who see all that is to be seen, but if they be no more forward
then I, to say all they think, they are in my conceit the wiser. By the favor
of your earnestness, it is no commendable disposition in private men to turn
Reformers on every occasion, and when they see any thing amiss, step presently
in; and make a bustle in what concerns them not. Let those who Govern the
world, and shall severely answer for those miscarriages of which They are the
cause, look to their duty. Ours is to live quietly, and unoffensively, and
trust God 's Providence.

Your importunity has carried me farther than I intended. But you have now your
will of me, and know I for my part think the not-deposing doctrine is the truly
Catholic doctrine. Did I think otherwise, all your importunities, and all
considerations in the world besides, should not persuade me to it. I hope you
now find I said true, when I told you, my thoughts of this matter were such as
b^came a good Christian, and a good Subject, and afford you no occasion to
change yours, if you had any good of

Your, etc.

FINIS.
The Thirteenth and Fourteenth OF THE Controversial LETTERS, OR Grand
Controversy, Concerning The pretended Temporal Authority of POPES over the
whole Earth, And the True Sovereign of KINGS within their own respective
Kingdoms.

Between two English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of England: The other of
the Church of Rome.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom and Benjamin took, at the Gun; and at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

FRIEND,
YOU had saved your self and me some trouble, if your last had been your first.
I almost despaired of doing any good upon you, and perceive that exsculpere
verum out of one of your humor, is one of the hardest tasks in the world. But
since it is come at last, I regret not my own pains, and for yours, it was in
your power to have spared them. But yet I have not done with you. The Pope is a
crafty Gentleman, and has more strings to his Bow then one. Shut the door never
so fast, it is hard to keep him out. If St. Peter's Keys will not open the lock,
He has St. Paul's sword to cut it off. Not that I apprehend any great danger
from downright fighting. It Is a Trick he shows as seldom as he can: And he has
reason; for Kings overmatch him at that weapon. But Justice has a sword too,
and that so sharp that I should be very sorry to see it in his hands. Now that
there may be justice without deriving it from Pasce Oves, or Dabo Claves; and
that it may belong to him as well as others, and by the same means; And that he
actually has heretofore, and may, when he please, again set on foot
pretensions, upon this Title, to part, perhaps all his Majesty's Dominions, is
something too evident to be denied, and of too great importance to be
neglected. It is a thing which has long disquieted me with uneasy thoughts; but
I must freely avow to you I was never so sensible of the danger, as since I
read the Considerations of present Concernment. You are so much concerned in
that Book, that I must needs suppose you have seen it, and observed how much
may be replied to what you have said to me. But I am for the present so intent
upon what is before, that I cannot reflect on what is past. Hereafter possibly,
when I am in a calmer disposition, and my settled spirits at more liberty to
compare what he says to you, with what you have said to me, I may call you to a
new account, and see whether you can maintain what you have written. But at
present, taking all you have given me in payment for current money, let us only
see how far 'twill go.

That in relation to you, and such as are principled like you, we are safe from
all pretensions of Divine Right, which the Pope can have upon us, I fairly
allow you. Are we therefore safe? Plainly No, if he have right over us any
other way. Nay whether he have right or no, so he but pretend it, and you will
own his pretense, we are as bad as ever. There is a thing called Human Right in
the world, by which men enjoy their lands, and goods, and whatever they call
with truth their own. It has not altogether so glorious a sound as the other,
but is not much less efficacious; for the World could not subsist without it.
Now although what the Pope claims by Divine Right, be enough, as he orders
matters, to satisfy a not very unreasonable man, yet his claim by that, is no
bar from claiming by any other Title too, by which Right may be had. He may
Purchase, as well as another man, or receive a Gift, or Legacy, etc. and what
he gets by these, or any other ways, by which the property of things is
transferred, is as truly his, as they would be of any other man by the same
Titles. And who can blame him, for joining as much Silver as he can to his Gold?

This being so, we have made a fine hand on it with all our wise speculations,
and are much beholding to you, for furnishing us with Armor of proof against
the sharp point of Divine Right, while the Human may chance knock out our
brains with her clouterly club. If there be no fence for this flayl, we are as
much at his mercy as ever. Now Baronius has taken care that no man should be
ignorant, that He may claim both England and Ireland, and this independently of
Divine Right, and in virtue of such Titles as are allowed to create Right in
other men. I must confess, though He speak plain enough, yet I was not so much
startled by him, whom I took for a partial man, and who I see intitles him, to
the better part of Christendom as well as England. This seemed a fancy too
wild, to deserve much credit; and I thought while our case was not singular,
but common to so many and so powerful States, and which engaged the strength of
Christendom on our side, we were safe enough. I considered we were pretty well
out of the way, and that he could not come at us, till he had possessed himself
of some little countries which lie between us, and which I believed would find
him work enough, to let us sleep in quiet, and need no better security then
that of Ulysses, to be devoured last. But I perceive, by the Considerations,
the case i^different from what I fancied. The Pope I find has something to say
to us, which he cannot say to every body, and which, to tell you truth, I am
ill at ease to see can be said.

I know you will spare me the labor of transcribing out of a book which I
believe you have, at least may have, on every stall. Pray what say you to it?
The Author is no Baronius, or Bellarmine, to be suspected of partiality to the
Pope, and though he were, Reason is Reason whoever says it. Blind justice sees
neither Friend nor Foe, and values not whether it be on the left or right hand
the scale goes down. Truly I do not see we are a jot the better for all your
hardly drawn out condescendencies. We are at the en Tierce and the en Quart
again. While the Pope plays fair Play, we fear him not, but what ward for his
foyning tricks? Certainly he is no such fantastical man to insist more on the
way then the end. He will be content without all doubt to drive the nail that
will go, and, so he can get a Kingdom, be satisfied to take it as it comes, and
like it nere the worse for bringing a bare Human title along with it. But
whatever he would think, we cannot agree he may with justice do any thing to
our prejudice. Nay a Human title would be so much worse than a Divine, by how
much we must all acknowledge, that Human Right is a true Right, since we have
no other to whatever we possess and hold dear in the world, whereas we are less
acquainted with the other.

It Is not but that I believe we may with our Author, rely securely on
Prescription. But with such a Gamester, and for such a stage, it is good to play
sure. Besides there is as much danger from what is apprehended as from what is.
Bare Right alone will do no great feats; it must be acknowledged and abetted to
become efficacious: And if that which truly is not Right, be taken for Right,
and will be stood to, and maintained, it will do as much as if it were Right.
Now Prescription which our Author says is, our only, but withal a very
sufficient, plea, he says also the Pope will not allow. And we know how much
influence he has upon those of his Communion, and how prone you are to be of
his opinion. If you be of his mind in this particular, and admit no
Prescription against him, then whether he have Right or no, you at least are
persuaded he has, and will undoubtedly act according to your persuasions when
time serves.

I have a little too much reason to be concerned for this point. Disputatio
Apologetica de Jure Regni Hiberniae Authore C. M. Hiberno.
There is a certain Friend of yours, at least he is of your Communion, who has
the confidence to defend in the face of the world, that, of the conditions
required to Prescription, there is not one which holds in the Prescriptions of
the Kings of England to Ireland. When such things are said, it is time to look
about us. Though England were unconcerned, Ireland is too considerable a branch
to be turn away from the stock. It Is Treason in great abundance to imagine the
dispossessing our Sovereign of any part of his Dominions: and here are plenty
of men with hard names produced to prove, it is consonant to the doctrine of
Catholic Authors, to dismember a great Kingdom at once, and this without any
relation to Divine Right, though it be slightly touched by the by. And for ought
I know, you may pick as many holes in our Prescription against the Pope, as
this Author does in our prescription to Ireland.

Twenty to one but Scotland will be hook't in too some way or other; or though
it be not, it will go near to fall in of it self, either as part of England, or
at least Britain, or by some other fetch. It would undoubtedly run the fate of
its Neighbor Kingdoms, and it is not a pin matter for a Title to that, which
must come in at last, and when it comes will bring Title enough with it. Nature
and Necessity make perhaps as good Titles as Law, and I know not whether the
Law have any better then possession. If the Pope get once possession, as when
he has got England and Ireland, I see not what can keep him from it, 'twil be
to no more purpose to be sollicitous for a Title, then for a man to look after
a horse, who is at his journies end. For Titles serve but to obtain, or hold
what they pretend to, which he that has already, and so, that it cannot be
taken away, no longer needs them. But if the worst come to the worst, why may
not the Pope dispense with a Title, as well as other things, altogether as
hard, and not altogether so advantageous? Plenitude of power, set once on the
tenterhooks, I believe will stretch as far as that, and what cannot he do, Who
can do all which is necessary for the good of the Church, and who is alone to
determine what is necessary? Who shall hinder him from calling the Bunch a Horn
if he please?

But these are no jesting matters. Baron. ad an. 1135. n. 21. 1173. n. 10.
1159. n. 21.
England and Ireland have both been challenged, and that before King John was
born, though his resignation be in truth the most specious matter which can be
alleged. Scotland, to put it out of doubt what would become of it, has been
actually claimed as well as the rest. So that our Sovereign enjoys not one foot
of land free from dispute. Ep. Bonif. 8. ad Edw. 1. ap. Mat. West. ad an. 1301*
It is to much purpose to dispute of Divine Right, when, if there were no such
thing in the world, we have as much to fear from Human. The worst Divine Right
can do, is to make us dependent, and subject; and this they say we are, without
relation to it. And it is this we fear, not caring much how the mischief
happens, if it cannot be avoided. It imports not much whether I be a slave by
the misfortune of War or Birth, if I must tug at the Oar.

I tell you truly, thinking of these things has put me into a very bad humor.
I distrust every thing, and am not satisfied where learneder men than my self
are. I would be glad to have some better security than Prescription; page 19.
for though our Author say, and I think it a sufficient Plea, I doubt, if you
were Judges, his Authority would hardly keep us from being cast. Nay I am sure
it would not; for he confesses the Pope allows it not, and his Judgment would
overrule it at last. Besides though He slip over the business of Hen. 2. the
Vatican Register, and Petrus Blesensis me thinks make too much noise to be
slighted. What we think considerable may perhaps not prove so, when it comes to
the Test, and however, no caution against you is too much. Again why may not
Constantins Donation one day rise up in Judgment against us? Britain was at
that time one of the Western Provinces of the Roman Empire, Omnes Italiae seu
Occidentalium Regionum Provincias, etc.
and, if this Deed be valid, undoubtedly past with the rest. I know well enough
there are among you who make bold with this evidence, and refuse to admit it
for Authentic: But there are too who stand stiffly for it, and among these
several Popes. Were there any likelihood it would bring Grist to the Mil, I do
not think the Palea set before it, would hinder it from passing for good Wheat.
Cap. Constantinus. Did. 96.
In fine while Human Right, not only may, but actually is pretended at this
day, we have reason to look about us. The Lovain Divines, if the History of the
Irish Remonstrance say true, Hist. of the Irish Remonst. p. 117.
made it one of their four chief grounds, and the only ground of Right, for
condemning that Remonstrance, and since they declare not in particular whence
they derived the pretense of Human Right, make it necessary we should be
secured against all.

You see where the Shoe pinches; make it easy if you can, though when you have
done your uttermost, I fear 'twill pinch still. For you are but a single man,
and what a single man can do, is not considerable. Besides you conceal your
self, conscious it seems of being disowned by your fellows, who if they be
otherwise persuaded, what will your single honesty do us good? A Traitor or two
in a Nation can do no great harm, and one or two honest men as little good. As
you carry matters you seem to confess the generality is not of your mind. Nay
how do I know that so much as single you are as honest as you pretend, and
truly mean as you say? You may with the liberty allowed in your Church,
Prevaricate for ought I know, even though you should renounce Prevarication; or
you may, according to your comfortable doctrine of Extrinsick Probability,
embrace to morrow what you reject to day. You are questionless much beholding
to your Church; which with her infallible guidance, has brought you to that
pass, that if there be an honest man among you, He cannot make out that he is
so, but must thank the good nature and Charity of his Neighbors for what
reputation he has.

I must confess I am sorry for the severities which are falling on you, but yet
my pity does not so far blind my Reason, but that I see they cannot complain of
being treated like knaves, who cannot produce any satisfactory evidence that
they are otherwise, and though they could, are too few to be taken notice of.
For the eye of all Laws looks only on Generals, and it is not possible that
every man in a nation should have a particular Law made for him.

Pray excuse me if I press too hard, and seem to add to your troubles, which I
am so far from desiring to increase, that I would ease it if I could. For,
truly, notwithstanding what I have said, I make no question but you are a very
honest man, and take it upon your word that there are more as honest as your
self. And I declare freely, that I concur with the judgment of those, and if
they would perform that common duty, it is very probable, that, there appearing
no more danger to threaten the Estate from them, than from other men, those
Laws which the iniquity of their forefathers brought upon them by their
conspiracies and Treasons, may be suspended toward their Innocent Children,
until such time as their peaceable demeanor and good carriage shall make it
appear just to be abolished. Animadvers. upon Fanaticism Fanatically imputed by
a Person of Honor, p. 261. These things I yield to be reasonable. 1. That
where there is a real difference in Principles, the Government should make a
difference; because the reason of the Law is the danger of those Principles;
which if some heartily renounce, there seems to be no ground that they should
suffer equally with those who will not. Dr. Stillingfleet. Answer to S. C. Ep.
Apologet. p. 476.

By Protection I mean such an Exemption from the Rigor of our laws (which were
never designed against Persons of their moderate Principles) as might encourage
them to speak their minds freely, and to Proselyte others of their own
Communion, and may make a manifest distinction betwixt the good and
ill-principled persons of their Church. That it is Fit as well as Just and
charitable; That it is as much for our Interest as it is Reasonable in it self
to allow them this Protection; besides the considerations intimated in the
beginning of this discourse II. Several others might have been suggested, etc.
Considerat. of pres. Concernment. p. 400. If these Seminaries, etc. would
employ their travails in the works of light and Doctrine according to the usage
of their Schools, and content themselves with their Profession and Devotion,
etc. There is no doubt by Gods grace, but all color and occasion of shedding
the blood of any more of her natural Subjects of this land, should utterly
cease. Execution for Justice, p. 38.


not only the most moderate, but in my opinion the most learned and most wise
among us, who wish some indulgence to such as you are. But these are but
wishes, your fate depends upon a a greater and more efficacious wisdom.
Whatsoever it be, my speaking plainly I conceive will do you no prejudice. For
besides that it gives you the opportunity of clearing your self if you can,
every body thinks, and any body may say as much as I do. And I think you will
not take it amiss if that be said, which you know may. At least I hope you will
hear it with least offense from

Your Friend and Servant.

FRIEND,
I did not expect to be importuned again at a time, when you may very well
think I am but ill disposed to write. When I see the well meaning of such, as I
am, interpreted for a piece of dangerous craft, dreams of bold undertakers and
men of speculation; when any kindness or Indulgence to a Roman Votary, of
whatever Principle or subdivision he pretend to be, is concluded to be stilling
a Tempest by whispering to it, or reclaiming a Viper by receiving him into the
bosom; while the unsheathed Sword of the Law hangs over my head, and may fall,
for ought I know, even while I am at it: I suppose you will easily believe I
have no more stomach to writing, then the flattering fool had to his meat.
Truly did not the question concern the duty of a good Subject, from which I
believe no cross accident a sufficient dispensation, silence, or excuse should
have been all my answer. For as the world goes I foresee no fruit of my
writing, but to make the Author pass for a scribbling Emperick, who makes the
disease worse then it would be, by stirring humors unseasonably. I know not
why it is not as wise to go on endlesly with Mercury and Coals, as continue to
sow the seeds, as simple I think, of good intelligence and mutual love, and
reap nothing but heightened jealousies and Animosities. To set me a writing,
what purchases me the reputation of a Fool and a Knave to boot, and still to
urge me to write, is to stretch the power you have over me with the farthest.
Notwithstanding, the Subject being of the nature it is, I shall overcome the
repugnance I have to meddle more, with the consideration of my duty, and let
you and the world see, that Jealousy, and Scorn, and Severity, and whatever you
please to lay on despicable Papists, shall not hinder them from being affected
as they ought, to the Honor and security of their Prince and Country. Use me
as you please, I shall continue to desire, and, as much as you will let me,
contribute to the service of both. If the success be not answerable to all the
hopes, with which my simplicity has sometimes flattered me, One better
grounded, I am sure will not deceive me. I hope receive from the Grace of God a
constancy in my duty, whatever the face of things be, and from his goodness a
recompense above what man can give, and reposita est haec spes mea in sinu meo.

To come to your Letter, I must acknowledge I have seen the Considerations to
which you refer me. Whatever I think of the Book, I think very well of the
Author. And that for more then one Reason. There is in him great Reading, and
great Judgment, and great Candor, and care to speak strong sense in unoffensive
language, so that he disobliges not, even when he confutes. In short He is one,
such, as when I think my self able to hold up a side, I would wish for an
Adversary. I wish him one as learned and as candid as himself, and then we may
hope to see the Truth fairly tried out between them; and let her carry it on
Gods name on which side soever she be. For what concerns my self, I shall
defend what I have said against his exceptions, as well as I can, when you
require it; which I hope you will not do, till you find me something better
disposed.

Notwithstanding I wish he had spared his two first Topics, which I believe
less digested then any thing he says besides. They are framed against the
supposition of a forcible settlement of Popery. May they be hanged, without
more ado, for grand Traitors as they are, who think such a thought, if there be
any, which because I firmly believe there are not, I complain of a supposition
too injurious. There needs no casting about for Topics to show the
inconveniences of such a supposition, if it could be made. Force cannot be
without mischiefs too obvious to need proof, but likewise too exorbitant to
asperse people with them on suppositions, and those so unreasonable and
impossible. The Papist is not the hundredth, I am confident not the thousandth
man in this nation. When he does any thing by force, the old miracles must
return, one chase a thousand, and two ten thousand. I say nothing to the first
Topic, because it has nothing to do with my present argument, and for another
reason, which I think not so convenient to express. Besides I doubt not but the
Authors zeal for Religion, will move him to consider it over again, and give a
solution to his own argument.

The second is what you make the principal part of your letter, to which being
to speak more at large hereafter, I only observe for the present, that it seems
ill suited to his purpose. It is fear of the Popes pretenses on England upon
Human Right, in case the return of Popery should give him opportunity to set
them on foot. Now I conceive the return of Popery neither makes, nor mars, in
the case. For if the pretenses be good, Protestants cannot avoid them; if bad,
Papists will not admit them. Right is Right to Protestants, as well as Papists,
and no Right has the same no force on us as you. Popery would not hinder us
from pleading Prescription, nor Prescription from having its efficacy. It
sounds just as if he should say: Let us keep the Pope out right or wrong, for
if he should come in, it may chance be sound he has a Right which we are
resolved not to acknowledge, whether he have it or no. Such a discourse I take
to be dishonorable to his own Religion, as if they cared not to do unjustly,
and hinder other folks of their due; dangerous to the Commonwealth; and
supposing a falsity too palpable to admit of supposition, namely, that the Pope
may have a Right to England. But this by the by, and for an exception to the
fitness, not substance of his discourse. For though I think it not proper to
his purpose, and every jot as strong against themselves as us, yet the
difficulty, as he has managed it, truly with more strength then I have seen it
urged elsewhere, both deserves and requires an answer. I hope we shall no
longer pass for men blindly addicted to the Pope and his Interest, when the
world sees a Protestant take the Popes part, and a Papist the Kings against
him. As tenacious as we are of what we believe his due, I trust it will be
acknowledged we believe nothing due, which may keep us from being true to the
Interest of our Country, when all the discouragements we receive from our
Country, hinder us not from standing faithfully by it, in opposition to his
undue pretenses, whenever, and by whomsoever, and howsoever urged. And these
are so urged, that no Arguments, with which I have had occasion to meddle, of
his professed Champions, have given me so much to do.

But respiting this matter a little while, I will take the liberty to alter
your order, and begin at the latter end of your letter, because what you say
there, is of another nature from what goes before, and things of a kind do best
together. You object that I am a single, and, which is more, a concealed man,
and all I say or do inconsiderable. And it is true that I am inconsiderable
enough all ways, whether in learning or credit. Notwithstanding I thought my
self able to answer your Objections. If you thought it not considerable,
whether they were answered or no, you did ill to put me to so much fruitless
pains. I thought you had sufficiently considered why you engaged me to write,
and looked no farther then to answer as truly and plainly as I could. To tell me
at last that all my pains are to no purpose, is a very unexpected objection,
and to which all I can answer is to complain of you, for putting an
inconsiderable employment upon me, who could have spent that inconsiderably
taken up time with some more satisfaction, and it may be advantage to my self.

As for being single, if it were so, I should hope there is no such urgent
necessity, that a man should be punished, because he has no company. To say, as
you do, that the Eye of the Law cannot look on particulars, is something
surprising, when we see them found out and brought to punishment every day; and
why particulars may not, with as much ease, be indemnifi'd, as punished, I
cannot comprehend. It Is a plain case that the care of the Law does extend to
particulars, and in other cases, provides for the security of every single man,
whose guilt excludes him not from their protection. Me thinks it is very hard
that Peter must suffer because he is not Paul too, or because Paul will not
think as Peter does, therefore Peter too must go to pot, and two be punished
because one offends. But to give you satisfaction in this point, according to
your own fancy, consider that Merit, and Demerit are general things, and proper
objects of the care of Laws. Encouragement of the one, and Discouragement of
the other, are the hinges on which Government turns. Lawmakers, without
numbering heads, and counting how many come under one, or the other branch,
frame their Laws in general, and proposing Hopes and Fears to make them choose
right, leave Particulars to the choice of their own ways. Let the same
Providence be extended to this case, which if it were not to others,
Commonwealths would hardly subsist, and I have no more to desire of you. I hope
'twere no disgrace to the Law, if I were the only man who reap't benefit by it.

But indeed I am not single. I have heretofore told you there are more of my
mind, and I tell you again you shall find it so, if people once may freely say
what they think. But while you involve us all, guilty or not guilty, in the
same mass of perdition; while we are sure to be no jot better for speaking, and
not sure but we may be much worse, by adding dissatisfactions among our selves
to the severities we fear from you; me thinks you should not complain of our
silence. This is to tie up a man's tongue, and then blame him for saying
nothing. Pray let us see some good likely to come of speaking, either to you,
or our selves, or some body, before you oblige us to expose our selves to more
harm then we are subject to already.

No Friend! It Is not Fear of being disowned by my fellows, which conceals me,
but Fear I shall be no better; Fear I may be worse looked on by you; and if you
will permit me to say it, Grief, for having that cause of Fear. Not but that I
know well enough that every one of my Communion, is not of my persuasion, in
this point of the Popes power. But you know I have often declared, I desire
favor only for those who are. How many there be, truly I know not, nor will
use any endeavors to know. For I fear you would not take it well, if any of us
should go about to make an estimate of the strength of a party. There may be
more, there may be fewer: But the fewer there be, the less reason, I should
think, to exclude them from your protection, since evidently there can be no
danger from a few. How I fear, if we should prove more then you imagine, you
would then object number to us, with a little mroe speciousness, and a great
deal more concern! Since every body desires to have as few Enemies as they can,
while you will not let us be friends, I cannot believe you much in earnest,
when you object fewness to us. You say this because it came in your way, but
otherwise would be better pleased, if I mistake not, if we were fewer then we
are. Indeed you urge not this fewness as dangerous, but as inconsiderable. But
why should Innocence be thought so inconsiderable a thing? Innocence is
Innocence in one man as well as a thousand, and should not be cast carelessly
away. If the Laws would take into their protection such only as should give you
the satisfaction, which your selves should judge reasonable, perhaps their
number may prove great enough to deserve their care, and then you would have
what you desired; however it is not unworthy the care of Laws to provide that
no man should suffer without demerit.

Now I am upon this Subject, pardon a little freedom, and a little Tautology.
You complain I am single, and concealed, and will not take notice that it is
your dealing which makes me so. What reason has any body to join with me, what
reason have I to discover my self, when doing so will make us worse then we are
already, which I refer me to your self if it be not bad enough? You will not be
fatisfy'd, but with what you know will cause dissatisfaction among our selves.
A man that had any jealousy in his nature would startle at this: but yet while
your pretenses for thus much are at least specious, those whose conscience will
allow them, are willing to do as you would have them, satisfy you your own way,
and upon your own Terms. When this is done you are as little satisfied as
before. And out come harsh suspicions, of I know not what craft and danger
covered under these specious Condescendencies: out come harsher things then
bare suspicions, the Sword of the Law hanging naked over our heads, and
threatening us with all the sharpness of its unavoydable edge. You will not let
us pass for good Subjects, till we have done what no Nation in Christendom,
besides your selves, thinks necessary for the trial of good Subjects. Sure the
English are not the only good Subjects, nor the only wise men of the world.
However when a man has past the test of your uttermost scrupulosity, and may be
called a good Subject, even in your nice language, then has this good Subject
to expect for his comfort, which will be taken, his twenty pound a month, or
his two Thirds. Shall I venture to say, what has, by some less credulous, been
long thought? As Princes resolved to make War, would yet be thought inclined to
Peace, and seek to persuade the World they draw not their Swords but forced by
Justice and necessity, so deal you with us: no answer that is or can be made to
their Reasons, shall keep the Ratio ultima from thundering at last, nor no
return we make to your Objections shall hinder you from what you have
determined concerning us. Whether we stand on our justification, or yield to
you, whether innocent or guilty, They are persuaded we shall with all our
several Principles and subdivisions, Wheat and Tares indifferently be bound up
together into one condemned bundle, and thrown into the fire at last. This they
gather partly from your objections, which in truth are wonderful cross, urging
now Danger, and then Craft, now Number, and presently after Fewness, and when
one is taken taken off, you never fail of another, nor show any disposition
that you ever will. They gather it more apparently from your Actions, more
certain signs of the mind by far than words, and think it a foolish thing to
guess at what you mean by what you say, when they see what you do. When a
Prince fills the Frontiers with Magazines, and Soldiers, and Weapons, they
think his intentions plain enough, and judge not of them by his manifests. If
this be what we must trust to, which truly I shall be the last man who
believes, if the good Subject must be condemned, that the Papist may not
escape, and no hopes of living with comfort in this world, but by forfeiting
our hopes of the next: It is not for us to think of any thing but the next
World, and those comforts which will not fail us, of good Christians and a good
Conscience. And I very earnestly entreat you to leave me in quiet, as long as
the Law will let me, to study, what only becomes me, Patience. For to study
longer how to satisfy those who will not be satisfied, and with a great deal of
pains purchase the reputation of one more dangerous than those who will not,
perhaps cannot, answer you, is not more uncomfortable than irrational.

Is not your next Objection a kind of secret Declaration (to use the Figure
called a Bull) of your mind in this point? You would have it impossible so much
as for a single person to give you satisfaction, because one may prevaricate
even while he renounces prevarication. I cannot tell how far you are in
earnest; but this to my eye looks like a reserve in store, when other pretenses
fail, to maintain a resolution of admitting no satisfaction. Otherwise can you
seriously believe there is no trusting, no taking one another word, because
the Doctrine of Aequivocation has been taught in the world? If this were true,
Cities and Societies had been left off by this time, and we had in Deserts been
experiencing the comforts of the returned Golden Age. For there is no living in
society without mutual trust. Those doctrines do not hinder us from keeping up
society still, and dealing together with security enough, and if we can give
security to one another, such as serves the turn, and enables us to converse
and treat with confidence, what should hinder but we may give it to you too?

But let us look upon the Objection: Some of our Communion have thought
Aequivocation lawful, therefore none may be trusted. Do you think this
Inference concluding? Will you have every one of our Communion answerable for
what is said by any one? Pray consider whether Positions have not been
maintained, by some of your Communion, with which if others should be charged,
they would think themselves not fairly dealt with; it is no more reasonable to
impute these doctrines to our Communion, in which if there be who hold, there
are too who contradict them. The Yea's and the No's should not be confounded,
and which is more unjust, the No's condemned for the fault of the Yea's. For my
own particular, I could produce, if that would satisfy you, sufficient
Compurgators for my innocence in this particular, and sufficient witnesses,
that I never believed Aequivocation lawful, nor was ever taught it was, nor
ever heard of it without a scurvy character. But then if the fancy should take
you to except against my Compurgators, you would leave me no means to make out
my Innocence, and yet I am very sure I am innocent.

Yet let me tell you, if you go this way to work, you may chance be caught in
your own Trap. For this is no point of Religion. It belongs purely to Learning,
and may be held by men of different Communions. You read our Authors as well as
your own, and I suppose assent to as much as you think true in them. Pray who
shall be your Compurgator, that you do not your self hold this doctrine which
you object to me? And why may not I as well suspect you of Prevarication, as
you me? For it is nothing to purpose that it is not found in your Books: You may
think it true by what you find in ours; and if you may, who shall secure me
that you do not? And then there is no remedy, but we must all into the
wilderness. But if you think your self sufficiently justified, that no word or
action of yours, has given a reasonable ground of suspicion, that you believe
the doctrine true, truly I can say as much for my self, and if need be, bring
good proof of what I say. If this will not do, I know not how either of us can
clear our selves, nor how we can deal with one another, or any body else with
either of us.

I conceive therefore this Topic of yours is manifestly deceitful, and as a
Canon overcharged bursts it self instead of hitting the Enemy, becomes
ineffectual by having too much force. For evidently if your Inference be true,
viz. that none of us can be trusted, this is also true, that absolutely none
can be trusted, whether of us or you; and if there can be no Trust, there can
be no Society in the world; which is a Conclusion so destructive, that the
Argument must of necessity be deceitful which infers it. To dive farther into
the business belongs not to me. If you will not take this in payment, demand
your debt where it is due. I for my part owe you no more on this account, than
you me. For I never held Aequivocation lawful no more than you, and am no more
to answer for it. I shall only say, that were we indeed such Juglers as you
seem to fear, so dextrous at the Legerdemain of Aequivocation, nothing you
could do would exclude us from any benefit which other Englishmen enjoy. You
know well enough that words cannot be so contrived, but sophistry may work upon
them, and if we thought it allowable to take advantage by it, we should long
before this have taken all your Oaths, and it may be, by stretching our
Conscience a little farther, dissembled in actions as well as words, and gone
to Church, and taken your Sacraments, and continued Papists all the while.
Alas! we need not trouble you for Physic, if we had such a Remedy of our own
in store. But you know no discouragements, no apprehension, even of utter
ruin, has prevailed with us to do, what yet you would persuade us we think we
lawfully may, and which if we did,. 54.
we were stark mad to refuse. The candid Author of the Considerations has truly
observed, such a liberty would destroy us, and I hope you are sufficiently
secured, if you cannot be undone by us but by undoing our selves.

In the next place you touch slightly upon Probable Opinions, more I suppose
with the exuberancy of a flowing fancy, then check of a real concern. These
Doctrines have been so treated by those of our Communion, that I believe you
sufficiently persuaded there are not many of yours who have less kindness for
them. I know not how you can use them worse than to place them, Aegidius
Gabrielis specimina Moralis Christianae and Diabolicae. page 293.
as a late Author has done among the Devils Morals. However it be, they are
plainly laid open to the view of every body, and we have taken care you should
not be ignorant of any thing we know concerning them. In my opinion it is
needless for me to stay on a Subject so largely treated by better pens, guided
by more acquaintance with them. All I shall return by way of answer is, that I
can give you no more light than you have already, and that you may, if you
truly apprehend any danger from them, provide for your own security, as you
please, and treat those, who shall refuse to give it, as you please too. If
this do not satisfy you, nothing that I can say, will.

Having said thus much to your collateral exceptions, I come at last to the
principal business of your Letter, those Pretenses which the Pope may have by
Human Right. Though you observe it not, Cap. Constantinus Did. 96.
I conceive it best to follow the order of Time, and begin with the famous
Donation of Constantin. Of this there is a very formal Charter extant in the
Canon Law, and said by some to be preserved in the Vatican, by which Rome,
Italy, and all the West are conveyed to the Pope, besides other particulars,
which concern not our question. There is great disagreement among learned men
who treat of this Argument. Some labor to make good the Charter, others the
Donation only, and there are who reject both the one and the other. I speak
only of our Authors, for as for yours they all agree with the latter. Now
although I conceive that to overthrow either, is to overthrow both, (for if the
Charter be forged; the Donation cannot be proved, of which this is the only
Evidence produced or produceable; and again if the Donation be disproved, the
Charter cannot be valid) yet to consult my own ease, I choose only to speak to
the Donation, lest the nice scrupulosity of those who think the Donation may be
true, though the Charter be false, should engage me in a new labor. For the
Charter let it suffice that it is generally rejected by men of greatest
Learning and Judgment, and among the rest by Baronius himself, Baron. ad an.
1191. n. 52.
one not likely to cast away slightly any thing that makes for the advantage of
the Pope.

As for the Donation, it seems the product of a fancy little acquainted with
Nature, and the course of human action, or at least little minding them.
Constantin was a Prince, who with great labor and fortune prevailed against
his powerful Competitors, and established the Empire in himself, and his family.
I cannot easily imagine a conceit more wild, than that he should so little
value, what he had purchas't with so much toil and danger, as to make a present
of the best part of it, to one who never so much as ask't him for it. Princes
do not use to think so slightly of their Dominions. Sovereignty bears a greater
rate then so, nor will they much sooner consent to forego a part, then the
whole. Or if the suspicion might pass son not impossible in Princes, by long
and quiet enjoyment of Power, grown weary, or perhaps insensible of what they
enjoy, as men become cloyed with the same conditions as well as the same meats;
yet it is hardly imaginable of such a man as Constantin. He had fought hard, and
often, and dangerously for what he had; he had staked against it his Life and
Honor, and all he had and hoped. He who struggles into Sovereignty through so
many difficulties, must needs value it more, than to throw a great part of it
away, as soon as he has got it. He might without any hazard or pains have
quietly enjoyed, almost as much, as if his Donation were real, he reserved to
himself. For certainly a composition might have taken up all differences with
his Competitors, had he been careless of more than enjoying his own share with
safety. But he was a man of another spirit, and into whose head it never came
to dispossess himself of what he had obtained with so much dangerous pains. But
if the motion came not from himself, it is more wild to fancy it should proceed
from any body else. Who would dare to speak to him of dismembring the Empire?
And what Christian (for Infidels sure cannot be suspected) would by so mad a
zeal have exposed all Christianity to evident hazard? Had he once perceived it
an interested Religion, and which entertained bold ambitious thoughts, even to
share the Empire with him, and transfer to themselves the fruit of his labors
and victories, nothing but miracle could have kept him from thinking better of
his old.

Again he he had Children whom he trained up as Princes, and entrusted with the
care of several Provinces. Will any man of sense believe, that after he had
with much care made them fit for government, he should leave them nothing to
govern? and having bred them Princes in his life time, oblige them to turn
private men after his death? Without all doubt if Nature would have allowed him
causlessly to disinherit his Children, and give away their Birthright to
Strangers, Prudence would have instructed him to dispose them to this change of
their Fortunes by their Education, and excepting Him, whom he designed for
Successor in the part reserved to himself, to enure the rest by custom to brook
that private condition, in which he meant to place them. He was a good natured
man, and loved his Children; he was a wise man, and his natural judgment
wonderfully strengthened by experience of all sorts of affairs, could not be to
seek how to lay means for the ends he purposed. This fancy leaves him neither
natural affection nor wit: but supposes after he had rooted out those
inclinations which nature plants so powerfully in every body, and this without
any demerit on his Children side, or any show on his, who always testified the
affections of a Father to them, He ordered the matter so crosly, as to dispose
things quite contrary to what he intended to bring them.

But let it pass for once: Let it be supposed, against nature and the course of
his life, he would do such a thing: may it be supposed he could? And I speak
with reference to Nature, not Law. Waving the many, and those not easily
answerable, legal exceptions which some have taken to this Grant, I only
enquire what was likely to follow while men were men, and acted as men use to
do. His Children were Princes, who by their Birth expected, and by their
Education were acquainted with power. Unless they consented to this Donation,
and voluntarily yielded up their pretensions, I see not to what purpose it
could be. Undoubtedly they would never be contented to sit tamely down, and see
their Birthright given away against their wills. Or if they would, some of
their Posterity would have had more ambitious spirits, and struggled with all
their force to recover a height, to which they were once so near. 'Twas a very
preposterous Piety to entail perpetual confusion on the Empire, and expose it
to greater and more lasting troubles, than those from which the virtue and
Fortune of Constantin had newly rescued it. He that can fancy so wise a Prince
should entertain a Project of such a desperate consequence, and so impossible
to succeed, has a fancy, in my opinion, fitter for Romances than any thing else.

And yet peradventure there is not much less difficulty on the side of the
Taker, than the Giver. 'Twas yet the Age of wooden Chalices, and golden
Priests. Popes in those days were holy men, and very free from the suspicion of
Ambition. They were so far from looking after Worldly advancements, that they
accepted not of Spiritual but by force. Silvester, to whom the Donation is
pretended to be made, did no way degenerate from the holiness of his
Predecessors, making himself one in the Catalogue of Popes who were saints. He
was not a man to increase the heavy burden, of the care of Souls, with the
weight of temporal government; and far from being tempted by the glittering
appearances of worldly greatness, I believe would have fled from it, as a
hinderance to a duty, which he took a great deal more to heart. Less
distractions, than the Government of a good part of the World, were long after
his days complained of by holy men, though perhaps not holyer than himself.

But let us suppose a man in veneration for sanctity even to this day, overcome
by the temptations of greatness, so powerful with frail nature, what should he
have done with this power, which Constantine is said to have given him? The
World was like to be well governed, when from the Caves of Soracte, a man
should suddenly be transplanted into an Imperial Throne, and He who had spent
all his time in the meditation of Divine things, and treating with afflicted
poor people, with whom he kept company in obscurity and perpetual fear, set to
rule great nations, full of unquiet Martial spirits, and as much used to war as
He to his Books, and perhaps as much in love with it? Without doubt whoever
invented this story, was not used to check his a^ery fancies with consideration
of what was likely or possible. Turn it which way you will, it is pure Romance
on all sides.

But I need not amuse my self with examining what was likely or not likely,
when it appears, by the uniform consent of all Historians, that actually there
was no such thing. The Empire was, as Nature and Reason required, governed,
after the death of Constantine, by his Children, shared among them by himself,
who is said to have given so much away before. Those very Provinces, said to be
conveyed to the Pope, were by his Testament bequeathed to Constans and
Constantine, and the East to Constantius. By virtue of this Testament they
entered into Possession, and were themselves, and their successors after them
acknowledged for the only Lords of the Countries under them by all the rest of
the World, and by the contemporary Popes, as well as others, till at last the
revolution of human things, rent the West from the East by the breaking in of
barbarous Nations; set up a new Empire in the West, upon a new and independent
Title; put a period to the Empire of the East by the Turks; raised the Pope to
a temporal Principality, and brought the World into the condition it is in at
present. The names and actions of these successors of Constantine, with the
ways by which they came to their greatness, are recorded in History, the Pope
not taken notice of all the while, nor any claim of his so much as remembered.
He had no hand in the succession of the following Emperors, no voice in the
election, no approbation of the Elect, no coronation, no acknowledgment, no
sign of supreme Dominion, but as another Subject obeyed those, who by Election;
or succession, or Force, came to be Emperors. I mean till the Empire was
translated to the West, for as he had a great hand in that translation, he has
ever since appeared more; but I speak of the times before. And all this is
evident beyond all dispute.

Reconcile this, who can, with Constantins Donation. If he put the Pope in
possession of the Western Provinces, how could he bequeath them to his Son? And
if he put him not in possession, how could he be said to give them? It is a
mockery, not a gift, to say these Provinces are yours, which I keep to my self
during life, and dispose to others after my death. Livery and Seisin are pretty
material circumstances in such conveyances, where nothing can be understood to
pass without them. If Constantine gave them, the Pope must have had them, and
that he had them not is as plain as History can make any thing, where it is
particularly with uniform consent recorded in whose hands these Western
Provinces were, what changes happened from time to time, and by what means from
the death of Constantine, till the Arms and favor of France under Pipin and
his son Charles put into the Popes possession most of what he has. It is known,
and by Bellarmine himself confessed, that Popes during those times were Subjects,
at least de facto, which is enough for our present purpose, there needing no
more to show they had not those Countries which Constantine is said to have
given to them. Not but that both he, and diverse others after, and before him
too, were extremely munificent to the Church, by which munificence much Land in
several places was settled on her by way of Alms, and actually in her
possession. But she enjoyed the revenues only of those Lands; Administration of
Justice, and all Regalities were reserved to the Temporal Lords. This has
deceived some, who finding mention of Possessions belonging to the Church in
former Ages, imagined they so belonged to her then as they do now, with entire
and independent subjection. Whereas till Popes were by the liberality and power
of the French raised to the state of Temporal Princes, the Lands of the Church
were in the same condition with the estates of other Subjects, the immediate
owners receiving the Profits, and both their Lands and Themselves subject to
the supreme Lord. They were given to other Churches as well as Rome, for
maintenance of the Clergy and Poor, for the expenses of buildings and
reparations, and Divine Service, and that so plentifully, that some refused
offered Patrimonies, others restored what they once had, not willing to be
burdened with more than was needful. These Lands paid public duties as other
Lands did, till the Laws exempted them: But these things are besides the matter.

To return to our Argument; if the successors of Constantin continued the only
known Masters of those very Countries, which are said to be given away; if
Popes acknowledged them for such as well as the rest of the World, and never so
much as put in any claim, or pretended any thing to the contrary; And all this
be so plain, that nothing can be plainer; no fiction can be more palpable, nor
more wild, than this of Constantin's Donation. It is undeniably evident that
neither Popes nor Emperors, nor any body else in those days knew any thing of
it. And it is as evident that they must know of it, if it had been at all. At
least if they did not, none else could, in after times. This Donation was not
heard of in the World till long after. Baron. ad an. 1191. n. 52. Marca de
Conc. Sacerd. and Imp. l. 3. c. 12.
Baronius thinks the pretended Charter forged by the Grecians after the tenth
Age; Marca by the Latins in the time of Pipin, and by his consent, to stop the
mouths of the Grecians, who made instance that the Lands recovered from the
Lombards, and by Him given to the Church, should be restored to the Empire.
However it be for the Time or Author of the fiction, that the Charter is a mere
and late forgery is acknowledged, both by Baronius, and by most of the learned
men even of the Popes Communion. That the Donation cannot be pretended with any
show of Reason, but in force of the Charter is plain. For it is next to madness
to say the West was given, and produce no Evidence of the Gift. Any man may
claim any man's Estate with as much color, and the Pope from such a claim can
expect no more success than another man. But there is nothing which can be
alleged in proof of this Donation, besides this Charter. Wherefore the whole
business, of which you seem to be jealous, is in it self a pure Chimera,
absolutely contradicted by the course of Nature, and consent of History, and
the only Evidence producible for it, acknowledged a forgery by our selves. And
if this give you much disquiet, I cannot but think you wonderful fearful. Let
the worst come to the worst, it is not the case of England alone. France and
Spain and Germany were Western Provinces as well as Britain, and as much
concerned as we. While we have such Outworks we need not much fear our Fort.
The truth is our safety depends in reality on them. For let his Right be never
so good, till it have seized on them, it cannot fasten on us, and when it has,
we cannot escape, let it be never so bad. Mean time I think you may sleep
quietly on, the noise which will be made in the World, when any of these
Countries leave their native Princes, and become subject to a Forreigner, and
quit their long settled Customs, and Laws and Liberties, in reverence to
Constantin's Donation, will wake you time enough. But if you sleep till then,
you will go near to be the 8th. sleeper, and alone out-slumber all the seven.

Thus far of our Journey we have good company with us, and the best part of
Christendom being of the Caravan, travel with security enough. But now the Road
parts, and we must shift for our selves. Henry II. say you from Baronius,
acknowledged the Kingdom of England Fendatory to the Pope in a Letter extant in
Petrus Blesensis. You might have added the Cardinals Comment upon the Popes
confirmation, or rather approbation of K. Stephen's election, which he says was
therefore mentioned in the Coronation Oath, because the Kingdom was feudatory
to the Pope, Baron. ad an. 1135. 21.
so that every new King received confirmation from him. Which also was
acknowledged by Hen. II. in the Letter of Blesensis. Ad an. 1172. n. 5.
Besides he produces afterward from the Acts of Alexander III. a clause of the
Oath made at the conclusion of the difference, upon the death of S. Thomas of
Canterbury, wherein the Kings both Father and Son are made to swear, That they
will receive and hold the Kingdom of England from the Pope, and neither they
nor their successors repute themselves Kings of England, till the Popes for the
time being, acknowledge them Catholic Kings.

We have here the Cardinals word, the authority of his Acts, and the testimony
of Petrus Blesensis. For the Cardinals word, it had been more for his credit,
if he had not engaged in it a manifest untruth. People would have been more apt
to believe him in other things. It is not known more certainly that there have
been Romans and Saxons, Danes and Normans in this Island, than that the supreme
Government, is, and always has been, Independent on any but God. Truly I
grieve, and am ashamed to see, Zeal to the Pope, carry it in such a man, above
Zeal to Truth. For thus much of his saying, That England is feudatory, he does
indeed bring proof, such as it is; but for the latter part, that every new King
received Confirmation from the Pope, he does not so much as offer at any. And
yet the business is of such a nature, that the proof must needs be evident and
obvious, if the thing were true. But the contrary is notorious, every body,
that knows any thing of our matters, knowing that no King of England ever
received Confirmation from Rome, no not King Stephen himself.

There was indeed this preamble, not to the Coronation Oath, as Baronius
mistakes, but to the ratification of what King Stephen had promised, when he
was Crowned at Westminster, in an Assembly at Oxford. Ego Stephanus D. G.
assensu Cleri and Populi in Regem Angliae electus, and a Willielmo Cant.
Archiepiscopo and S. Romans Ecclesiae Legato consecratus, and ab Innocentio S.
Romans Sedis Pontifice confirmatus, etc. Upon this plain song the Cardinal
descents in the manner before rehearsed, and might as well and as truly have
concluded that the Kingdom was likewise elective. For it is at least true that
he was elected, but it is not true that he was confirmed. The Popes Letter to
the King is extant in Richardus Hagulstadensis. Confirmation is so far from
appearing there, that the word is not so much as mentioned. He says only, that
since for avoiding the mischiefs likely to ensue upon the death of Henry I. He
had by unanimous consent been chosen to succeed; He (the Pope) was well pleased
with what was done, and with paternal affection received him for a special son
of the Romans Church, and would treat him with the same honor and familiarity
which he had used to his Predecessor of famous memory.

This is far enough from Confirmation, and the language of a supreme Lord: No
State in Christendom, or out of Christendom, but confirms Kings, as well as the
Pope, if this be confirmation. When any Prince has a flaw in his Title, He
seeks to be acknowledged by the Neighbor Princes, and when they acknowledge,
They confirm him as much as the Pope did K. Stephen. And this was plainly the
case. Maud the Empress, daughter to Henry I. was the true Heir of the Crown.
King Stephen himself had by a solemn and late Oath acknowledged her right, and
engaged to maintain it. He had reason to color his proceedings as well as he
could, and provide something to say, that he might not pass for a manifestly
perjured man. And so he reckons up Election, and Consecration, and
Confirmation, which yet altogether were not sufficient to make him a good
Title, in the judgment even of the Pope himself. For when K. Stephen, desirous
to secure the succession to his son Eustace, required the Bishops to crown him
in his own life time, they with the hazard of their lives constantly refused to
do it, being forbidden by the Pope to crown the son of a man who had usurped
the Kingdom contrary to his Oath.

Had the Pope been thought supreme Lord, and his consent necessary, K. Stephen
must have had recourse to him in the first place, and could not have taken the
Crown till his ratification was come. But it is plain he was crowned before the
Pope was made acquainted with the business, and before he knew how the Pope
would take it, and however he had taken it, I believe would have kept the Crown
which he had gotten. Indeed he thought it for the advantage of his affairs to
call the Popes acknowledgment a Confirmation; but neither is there any ground
in the Letter on which to raise such a construction; and besides it is plain
that 'twas not dependence of the Crown, but defect of Title in himself, to
which that Confirmation, such as it was, can be applied. So that Baronius is
quite out, and the worst Commenter that ever was; it being so far from true,
that every new King received Confirmation from Rome, that no one ever did it,
not the very King, out of whose fact he so vainly infers all the rest. But that
the force of Prejudice is almost inconceivable, one would hardly believe so
learned and judicious a man should falter in this manner. However it be, He
must excuse us from taking his word in a case, where no body, that I know,
would take the word of the Pope himself.

For his Acts, they are a relation of no body knows who, and that me thinks is
a pleasant Title to no less than a Kingdom. The Author is a nameless man, of
whom it cannot be understood either that he was well informed of what he
delivered, or faithfully delivered what he was informed of. Had the Cardinal
reflected a little better on it, I believe he would have been more tender in
exposing such proofs to a censorious World. These unauthentick Acts are plainly
contradicted by such as are Authentic. Roger Hoveden in his Annals has
preserved a Copy of the agreement made by the Popes Legates with Henry II. upon
the death of S. Thomas of Canterbury. There the Oath is set down, as it was
taken, which was this, That They (Father and Son) would not recede from Pope
Alexander and his Catholic Successors, as long as he should treat them like
their Ancestors, and Catholic Kings. This was sealed by the Kings and Legates
for an authentic memory of what was concluded, and this Baronius himself has
set down at large out of Hoveden. With Hoveden agree the other Historians
nearest those times, Bromton, and Gervasins Dorobornensis (for the rest mention
not this particular at all) and with this agrees the relation, sent by the
Legates themselves to the Archbishop of Ravenna, extant in Hoveden. Against so
clear an evidence to bring a nameless Author, is more to weaken the credit of
his own proofs than strengthen the Popes claim. People will be wary how they
trust Acts produced by Baronius, when he produces such as these, and be
convinced, that, if the Pope himself be infallible, all who write of him are
not.

There remains Blesensis of whom so much is known, that he might possibly be
emploid to write a letter for the King to the Pope. But that he did write this
letter, and by order from the King, needs some better proof than that it was
found among his papers. It might be a rough draught, never sent: In so many
Copies as have been made, from the time in which he lived, till the time his
works appeared in the world, it may have been altered. Vestrae Jurisdictiones
est Reg. Angliae and quantum ad Feudatarii Juris obligationem vob^s dumtaxat
obnexius teneor. Experiatur Anglia qui^d possit Romans Pontifex, and quia
materialibus armis non utitur, patrimonium B. Petri spirituali gladio tucatur.
Pet. Bles. Ep. 136.
And indeed who considers what goes before, and what comes after, will see the
two periods which concern this matter, do not well fit the place. The letter
demands Counsel of the Pope, upon the undutiful carriage of his Children, whom
though he could reduce by force to their duty, yet the affections of nature
hindering him from that course, He prays the Pope to interpose, to whose
arbitration he promises to stand. And this hangs pertinently together. But then
to make the King say, that England is feudatory, and wish it may feel what the
Pope can do, suits so ill with the rest, that it seems no part of the original
piece, but patcht in by some body else, and he but a botcher. For what is it to
purpose, to mention Vassalage, where He only seeks advice? As if the Pope could
give counsel to none but Vassals, and as if it were the custom of Vassals to
have recourse to their Lords for counsel. It is Justice and Protection which
Vassals expect from their Lords, and this the King would have demanded of the
Pope, if he had been his Subject. And then He tells him, that He has no
material Arms, which is as much as to say, that He is not supreme Lord. For
Sovereignty without material Arms, is no very material thing, and indeed is not
Sovereignty. So that the King is made very wisely to say, and unsay, with the
same breath. Again, while He himself abstains from Rigor, to press the Pope to
the utmost rigor he can use, agrees very ill-favour'dly. Besides Blesensis
dedicates his Letters to this very King. Whoever knows any thing of his humor,
and how positive he always was in maintaining less rights of the Crown, than
its independency, will not easily believe he would permit such a clause to
pass, and much less become public. He was more jealous of his Authority than
so. Farther, had such a Letter, as is now read in Blesensis, been ever sent by
the King, Baronius sure would have met with the original somewhere or other.
For certainly the Vassalage of England, and Patrimony of St. Peter here, are
things of that importance, that it deserved some more than usual care to
preserve an Evidence so extraordinary, and not to trust to chance, and the
credit of an insignificant Copy, for so great, and so unknown an advantage of
the Church. For if Blesensis had never been printed, the thing had never been
heard of. If such proofs as these may be hearkened to against Kingdoms, truly
their Fate is very hard, and much worse than of the meanest Subject who lives
in them. He that in a Suit but of 40 shillings should produce no better, were
sure to be cast.

I conceive there is no great necessity of saying more, because sentence will
always be given for the Defendant, where the Proofs of the Plaintiff are
insufficient: but yet let us look into the matter a little farther, and see
whether, this fancy of the Cardinals can be reconciled to Nature and History.
And I consider in the first place, that the Tenure of Kingdoms is no private
thing, to be guest at by uncertain testimonies, picked up and down among Authors
of doubtful credit, but known as much as the Kingdoms themselves, and no more
concealable than their forms of Government. It may as well be doubted whether
they be Kingdoms or Commonwealths, as whether they be independent or no. At
every death, at every change of a King, there must be in Vassals, recourse to
the supreme Lord, his consent required, Homage performed, Duties paid, and all
publicly in the face of the world, it concerning the supreme Lord, and he
always taking care that these demonstrations be made with the greatest show
that can be. In all Treaties, in all Letters, and whatever transactions, the
style betwixt Independent Princes is different from that betwixt Lords and
Vassals. In Competitions for the Crown, one part would always fly to the
supreme Lord, and he, by his influence, make his Superiority appear. A hundred
things of this nature must of necessity be registered in authentic records, and
read in the Histories which treat of our matters. Baronius little reflected on
the nature of the business, when instead of producing Authentic Records,
whereof there must have been many at Rome as well as here, if there had been
any such thing, he alleges Blesensis. It cannot be said that the Records are
lost by Time and Accidents. For their number, in a case so often happening, would
preserve at least some of them, and he has found records both more ancient, and
of less concern. Besides Histories remain still. Whoever among so many as have
writ, ever mentioned any homage done by our Kings to the Pope, or any
confirmation required? Many letters are still extant from the one to the other,
and no hint of subjection in any of them. There have been many Competitions for
the Crown, and none of the Pretenders ever dreamed of fortifying their claims
by the Influence of his supreme Lordship, though for the Influence He had as
supreme Pastor they desired to make him their friend. In fine, not to insist
upon the silence of Histories and Records, and want of proof in Baronius, it is
evident that the Vassalage of a Kingdom not evidently to appear, is evidently
not to be, because it cannot be, without being notorious, and known to all who
know the Kingdom.

In the next place I would fain understand, when, and by whom the Kingdom could
be, or rather was made, thus subject to the Pope. For I wave at present the
want of power in Kings, to do such a thing, if they would, and only enquire
which King it was, who can be supposed to have done it. If the suspicion fall
on the times of the Heptarchy, which Age and want of Writers render more
obscure, it is apparent that no Act of any King then, could be binding to the
whole Nation. For no King, let him be never so absolute, can bind more than his
own Kingdom. But besides, that He, who will recur to those times, may indeed
hide himself in their darkness, but cannot strike out of them any light to his
pretense, and must speak purely out of his own head, without any warrant or
color from any other Author, so I think it is a good argument that no such
thing, was then done, because things of less moment, which were done then, are
remembered. The grant of Peterpence by Ina of the West Saxons, and Offa of the
Mercians, is recorded too plainly, to leave a suspicion that the grant of a
Kingdom could be concealed. While there was exactness enough to take notice of
single pence, the Crown sure could not pass by unregarded. If any man fancy
want of fidelity in our Historians, might possibly suppress so ungrateful a
Truth, let him produce those more faithful Foreigners, who have recorded it.
But considering the Zeal of those times, and mighty opinion they had of Rome,
when the greatest Kings frequently became Pilgrims, and sometimes left their
Kingdoms wholly, and became Monks there, the suspicion lies on the other side,
it being more rational to fancy an amplification than suppression of things to
their advantage. However such an Alms as a Kingdom could not but make a noise,
loud enough to reach even our ears, and had the Romescot charity been extended
to the Regalities, we must have heard of it, as well as of private houses. By
the way, I am not ignorant what Comments have been made on that Alms, but I
think it not convenient to lose time in confuting them. It Is to give them more
credit than they deserve; for he enhances the value of Trifles, who treats them
like things of moment.

The memory of passages since the Heptarchy is too fresh, and too minute to
leave place for suspicion, that a matter of such moment should escape
unobserved. And besides there is among the Works of Lanfranc, a Letter of
William the Conqueror to Pope Gregory VII. which puts the matter out of doubt.
That Pope had the confidence to demand of that King an acknowledgment of
subjection, Fidelitatem or Fealty, as the phrase runs; I know not upon what
ground. For though I have read somewhere, that the Conqueror, to gain the Pope
to his side when he attempted the enterprise, promised, in case of success, to
hold the Kingdom of the Pope, Ep. Lanfranc. VII.
yet it appears by the Kings answer, that he was mistaken who said so.
Fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo, says the King, quia nec ego promisi, nec
Antecessores meos, Antecessoribus tuis id fecisse comperio. So that till the
Conquest England was free, and that it became subject since, sure no body will
imagine. The first Kings of the Norman race were men of too great spirits, and
contested with the Pope, about matters of less importance too warmly, to be
suspected of giving away their Kingdoms. He that reflects what bustles there
were about Investitures in the days of Henry I. and Immunities of the Church
in the days of Henry II. will find it neither likely nor possible the greatest
rights of the Crown should be thrown away, while Princes were so tenacious of
the less. It is true that both these Kings yielded at last to the Pope, but
with a condescendence so far from any sign of subjection, that there was more
of appearance, than substance in the first case, and a great deal of caution in
the second, no subjection nor show of any in either.

The Contrast between Henry I. and the Pope was about Investitures, the King
desirous to continue the custom of ratifying the election of Bishops and
Abbots, by delivering a Ring and Staff to the Elect, and the Pope resolved to
break it. The conclusion was that the Ceremony should no more be used, but so
that the King should choose, or cause to be chosen the person, and receive
homage from him that was chosen. Investituram Annuli and Baculi indulsit in
perpetuum, retento tamen electionis and regalium privilegio, says Will.
Malmsbury. Upon the same terms, In Hen. 1. lib. 5.
a few years after the same difference was compounded with the Emperor, in
which, if I understand any thing, the same expedient was then used, which is
generally observed since, To preserve reputation and Appearance to the Pope,
and substance to Princes. For while They had the chief influence in elections,
and none could be promoted but by their interposition, the rest was a Ceremony,
which might without any great prejudice, be left off. Again, when the persons
Elect were by homage to acknowledge themselves Subjects to their Princes, they
had as much as they desired. Indeed till this point was yielded by the Pope
(for it was a while stiffly stood upon) no agreement could be made. But after,
Peace soon followed.

The quarrel of Henry II. was about the Customs of Clarendon, in which the
chief point was that of Appeals. This point the Pope gained of the King, yet
with this caution, that the Appellant should give security to attempt nothing
to the prejudice of King or Kingdom. It was now a time, if ever, for the Popes
supreme Lordship to appear. He was in the humor of asserting, at least, all
that belonged to him. The World was incensed against the King for the foulness
of the late murder, and ready to take the Popes part. The King found it
necessary to buy his peace, even at the rate of pretensions very dear to him,
and for which he had long and earnestly contended. Had the Pope been supreme
Lord, he would hardly have escaped so good cheap. Murder and Sacrilege might
have cost him the whole Kingdom. For feudatory Lands are forfeited by great
crimes. However this supreme Dominion must needs have appeared in the
transaction. The King was not in case to refuse any thing due to the Pope, who
yielded up what till then he thought not due; and besides the tenor of the
agreement must have been quite different, and drawn in terms used betwixt
Vassals and Lords. But instead of an acknowledgment of this nature, all the
disadvantage the King had in treating, could not prevail with him to acknowledge
the Pope so much as Pope, longer than the Pope should acknowledge and treat him
as King. So that by the favor of the Cardinals Acts, this King left the Crown
as free as he found it, nor can the King be yet found out on whom the suspicion
should fall, of having made it subject.

If I am not much mistaken, the Popes in those days were of a judgment very
different from that which Baronius has taken up in ours. For how can the
conceit of a Vassalage in the time of this King consist with what happened a
little after in the reign of K. John? Neither could K. John make England
tributary, if it were so before, neither could the Pope desire he should.
Besides disobedience in a Vassal, and, what is more stubborn contrasting with a
supreme Lord, especially when that supreme Lord is the Pope, would sure have
been thought as great a crime, as refusing an Archbishop made without his
privity and against his will. Why was not this laid to the Kings charge and
called Rebellion? When the severity of the proceedings against him, perhaps
needed all the color, which could be laid on. Without all doubt, the Pope when
he had the King at his mercy, would never have been contented, with the bare
acknowledgment of subjection, if he had known subjection was due before. He had
prosecuted the King to the utmost extremity: Interdicted the Kingdom;
excommunicated his Person; and at last deposed, and set the power of France
upon him. It is not possible he should take for sufficient satisfaction for
faults, which in his judgment deserved all this rigor, a confession that his
own was his own, and a gift of what was his before. But the Kings resignation
made amends for all, and cleared scores so fully, that the Pope ever after was
fast to him, and heartily took his part in all his necessities. Then and not
before, Popes assumed the liberty to term the Kings of England their Vassals;
which is a plain acknowledgment that they understood this submission, and
nothing else, authorized them so to do. Agreeable to this were the outcries
remembered by M. Paris, Heu Anglia, Ad an. 1216.
Anglia; hactenus Princeps Provinciarum facta es sub tributo -- ut Terra tua ab
antiquo libera ancillaret excogitasti -- factus de Rege liberrimo Tributarius,
firmarius, and Vassallus servitutis, etc. It Is evident the novelty of the Kings
submission put these complaints into the Peoples mouths, and that no such thing
had formerly been heard of.

To conclude, commend me to this fiction of Baronius for an example of zeal not
according to knowledge. To speak without proof in a matter of this consequence,
is pretty well of it self. But to want proof where the nature of the thing must
needs afford a thousand; to fancy the Tenure of a Kingdom, could lie concealed
I know not how long, and at last be discovered by his either pains or luck, to
be quite contrary to what was apprehended by the rest of the world, which could
no more be ignorant of the Tenure than of the Kingdom; to imagine England
subject when no person can be imagined who should subject it, nor time in which
it should become subject; to say nothing of the manifold inconsistency of his
story, and contradiction to palpable evidence. These are strains which as I
admire in him, so I hope not often to find elsewhere. And for Blesensis, either
he knew not what he said, or, which is more likely, those two periods have by
chance or fraud crept into his writings without his privity. In fine, he is no
good Englishman, who does not acknowledge that the Kingdom of England is, and
at all times has been, free, and subject to none but God. A Declaration made
both with particular reference to the Pope, and by those who acknowledged his
Authority in spirituals.

And so we are come at last to the point of greatest difficulty, both of its
own nature, and by the smartness with which it is pressed, the Fact of K. John.
Our Author, not to leave the wound he makes without cure, assigns us
Prescription for a remedy. You have not an entire confidence in this plaster,
and I must confess I cannot blame you; not that I think it bad, but I like
better to be sound, and need none. Most points of Law, and this of
Prescription, as well as the rest, are full of learned Quibbles, and I do not
love to trust our security to a moot case. The rights of Kingdoms are of too
great consequence to depend on the Triccum de Lege. For what if some fiction of
Law be pretended against our Prescription? What if the Pope, by some Act or
other of which we never had intelligence, have continued a Legal, or Civil
possession, all the time of our Natural possession, and so interrupted or
voided our Prescription? It is not safe, in my opinion, to venture our whole
stock in a bottom which possibly may prove leaky. Wherefore though Prescription
may do well enough, yet while we have, in my judgment, a better game to play, I
think it best, as you say, to play surer.

Of the Considerations proposed in this matter with great sharpness by our
Author, I take these to be the most material. That K. John past this grant when
he had undoubted right to the Crown without any Competitor, his Nephew Arthur
being dead before: That this right of his was then unconfined, Magna Charta not
being yet framed, nor any power communicated to Barons, or People, or
Parliaments, for intermedling in the succession: And that however the Deed was
confirmed by his Barons, who were they alone that then had any thing to do in
the greater affairs of State. On these, because they will decide the Question,
I shall insist more largely, and endeavor to show He is mistaken in all three.

First for the consent of the Barons, although this clause Communi Consilio
Baronum nostrorum be inserted in the Charter, yet nothing can be more apparent,
than that in truth there was no such thing. It was so far from this, that there
was an express dissent. Cui etiam manifest contradictum fuit, and ex part
universitatis Regni reclamatum, quid talia nullo modo facere potuisset per os
venerabilis Stephani Can. Archiepiscopi, quo non erat tunc major in Regno, etc.
M. Westminster. ad an. 1245. M. Paris ad an. 1245.
For Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury protested solemnly against it,
and this publicly at the high Altar before all the company, and in the name of
the whole Kingdom. This protestation of his was averred to the Popes face, and
that in full Council, by Will. Povick or Powevick, one of the Ambassadors at
the Council of Lions, whither he was sent to complain in behalf of the Kingdom.
I think it will not be denied, but the Clergy in those days had at least as
much influence on public affairs, as the rest of the Nobility; and that there
could be no common consent, where the Head of the Clergy publicly dissented.
Especially considering that this protestation was not made for himself only, or
his Order, but in the name of the whole Kingdom. For it can hardly be, that he
should arrogate to himself to act in the name of the Kingdom, without the
privity of the rest, and consent of so many at least as might keep his Act from
appearing ridiculous. But that the rest of the Nobility were as far from
consenting as the Clergy, is not left to guess. Their sense is manifest in the
next words of Povick, In quod tributum nunquam Patres nostri consenserunt, nec
aliquo tempore consentient, as Mat. Westminster. relates them, or according to Mat.
Paris, In quod nunquam Patres nobilium Regni, vel ipsi consenserunt, nec
consentiunt, neque in futurum consentient, etc. This was said in circumstances
incapable of the suspicion of falsity. The man who spoke was an Ambassador,
commissionated to speak for the Kingdom. He spoke to the Pope himself, in a
full Council, and while the memory of things was yet fresh, and if he had not
said true, might have been convinced by every body perhaps in the company. But
neither the Pope himself, who certainly knew the truth, and was most concerned
in it, nor any body else had anything to say against it. Besides even in the
days of K. John, the K. of France, and his Son Lewis, when Walo the Popes
Legate would have diverted them from their design on England, by representing
that the Kingdom held now of the Pope, maintained both to his face, M. Paris ad
an. 1216.
that K. John's grant was void, and this among other things, because there was
no consent of the Barons. It is not possible they should so confidently avouch
this to one who could not but know the truth, unless it had been notorious and
undeniable even by Walo himself. Wherefore, it is manifest that the clause
above mentioned was inserted for forms sake, without truth, it being not more
known that there was a Charter, than that it was made without the consent of
the Nobility. What the consequence of this is, will fall into consideration by
and by, when we have discoursed of what remains.

The next point is, that K. John had an undoubted right to the Crown when He
past this Deed. Suppose he had, what then? Right to wear the Crown, and Right
to give it away, are very different things, and very far from inferring one
another. He urges, that the Regal power in disposing of the Crown was the same
then, as at the conquest. That the Conqueror both received the Crown by gift
from K. Edward, and disposed of it by Testament. That although K. Edwards gift
should pass for invalid, yet the very title of Conquest was sufficient for an
Arbitrary power of disposing it, the very grant of Magna Charta from the Prince
to the People being a plain Argument, that at least the power of our Norman
Princes was originally arbitrary and unconfined, till themselves were pleased
to restrain it by voluntary compacts, and concessions, which happened not till
after the fact in question. Thus does our Author discourse, with a Tide of
smartness, threaten Shipwreck to our liberties which way soever we steer. To
deny an arbitrary right in the Conqueror, seems to question the right of his
successors: To grant it, seems to confirm the Deed in question, and expose us
to the mercy of the Pope.

Before I answer particularly, I take leave to suppose, not because it cannot
be proved, but because no body will require proof of what every body
acknowledges, That rights questionable in their origin become unquestionable in
tract of time. The Goths and Vandals broke into the Roman Empire, and mastered
a great part of it with a known violence, but unknown Justice. Should ear be
given to the exceptions which might be made against their Title, and the right
of their posterity, and all who hold under them, questioned till the right of
the first occupants were clearly made out, the world would be embroyled in
inextricable confusion, and suffer little less from our disputes than their
Arms. Few either Princes or private men, would enjoy their Estates with a safe
Conscience. The bonds of Obedience would be broken, the security of Life and
Fortunes taken away, and the Ligaments of human society dissolved. These things
are so evidently contrary to the good of mankind, that speculations, which
would infer them, are evidently contrary to reason. Speculate what you will of
Justice, it is most certain that to ruin the world is a most unjust thing; or,
if you will criticize upon the notion, at least irrational, and wicked, and
intolerable. Wherefore whatever were the origin of established Powers, when
they are established, and by long continuance become necessary to the quiet and
security of mankind, they are most certainly just, and to question them is
madness in all, and Treason in Subjects. To examine by what means this comes to
pass, how true Right is acquired in Time, and even bad Titles become good at
last, I conceive an Argument too high for me, and besides see it needless to
meddle with it. For while the thing is universally acknowledged, and cannot be
denied without extreme mischief to the world, the labor of enquiring more
particularly into it, may be dispensed with. Two things I take to my present
purpose, which I suppose none will deny me. 1. That the Right of succeeding
Kings cannot be questioned on pretense of doubt, nay if you will, defect of
right in the proceedings of such as have reigned so long since as the Conquest.
2. That Power and Right being manifestly two very different things, it follows
not, that because things were then done which ought not be questioned now, I
mean with prejudice to Posterity, that they were therefore well done, and
according to Right.

To speak now particularly to what is alleged, It is true that the Conqueror
had, or pretended a Gift from K. Edward, I suppose to have something to say.
But it is apparent that, not K. Edward's gift, but his own sword gained him
England. The Ratio ultima Regum was his only unanswerable Argument, and had
Harold got the Victory, and preserved the Kingdom, he would have preserved
Right enough to it, notwithstanding the Gift of K. Edward, and as much right
been acknowledged in his Successors, as now in those of the Conqueror. It is
true also that the Conqueror did dispose of the Kingdom to the prejudice of his
eldest Son; but it is likewise true, that Duke Robert did claim, and put for the
Crown, notwithstanding his Fathers Testament, and had he prevailed, had
transmitted a Right to his Posterity, which by this time had been
unquestionable. These are matters purely of Fact, of which kind there are
innumerable in History, but from which, according to the maxim that Fact does
not infer Right, no Argument can be drawn. What the Conqueror did, He did by
the power which his Conquest gave him; success and length of time has
established, what depends on his actions, into a firmness which admits of no
dispute. But this concludes not that all he did was just even in him, and much
less that the same Actions are justifiable in his Successors.

As for what is next urged, That Conquest sufficed for an arbitrary Power, it
is undoubtedly true; for he did arbitrarily dispose of things as he pleased.
But that his Conquest gave him Right so to do, or transmitted such a Right to
his Posterity, is not to be admitted without very good proof. It is universally
agreed that Conquest gives right only where the War is just; which I think
signifies, that his Conquest gave him none at all. For the War is not just,
unless he have a good Title who makes it, and if he have, Conquest only puts
him into possession of what was wrongfully withheld, but his Right is
antecedent to, and independent of his Conquest. Indeed where the revenge of
some collateral wrong, or other cause, put just Arms into the hands of any
Prince, there what he gains is thought justly his own, by virtue of his
Conquest. But this is not our case. The only cause of this War, was because
Harold withheld the Crown, to which if the Conqueror had a just Title, that
which made it so gave him his Right; if he had not, the War was not just, and
Conquest could give him none. Whether his Title were good or no, is a dispute
in which I am not concerned, it not importing much to our times to know what
was just in those. For whether his Title were just, that of his present
Successors is not a jot the better, nor a jot the worse, if it were stark
naught. Wherefore I positively deny the Inference implied in our Author's
discourse, the Conqueror did arbitrarily dispose of the Kingdom, therefore K.
John justly might, because that Arbitrariness of his does not conclude he had
Right, so much as to the Crown, and much less to dispose as he pleased of it.

It Is farther urged, That the very granting of Magna Charta from the Prince to
the People, is a plain Argument, that at least the power of our Norman Princes
was originally arbitrary, and unconfined, till themselves were pleased to
restrain it by voluntary compacts and concessions. And this, as the former, is
true of Power, but I cannot grant it of Right. The Fact is interpretable both
ways, and may as well argue Right in the People to the things granted, as in
Princes to grant them. And if Justice required that such things should be
granted, the Power, which till the grants were past, hindered the People from
what it was fit they should have, can hardly be thought just. The Truth is,
this difficulty would ask rather a Treatise, than a Letter. The Notions of
Power and Right would be explained and settled: It would be shown how Right is
acquired, and how lost: How the Freedom of Nature is changed into subjection;
why, and how far, some command, others obey, and in virtue of what, with twenty
other Considerations, necessary enough to clear the difficulty, as it ought,
but too long for a Packet.

To say briefly as much as may serve turn; I observe that we use these words
Just or Right, as all others, in different senses. We call him a Just man, who
gives to every one what the Law makes his due, in which sense the Law is the
Rule of Just and Unjust; Just meaning as much as agreeable, Unjust the same as
contrary, to Law. But sometimes we apply the same Terms to Laws themselves, and
say some are Just, others Unjust. As if Marriage, or the propagation of
posterity, were universally forbidden, or every body commanded to cut off their
Legs or Arms, such Laws would be thought, and called Unjust. In this case the
notion of those words is very different, from what it was before; Unjustice now
signifying opposition, not to Law, which cannot be opposite to it self, but to
something else, which the Lawmakers had in their eye, when they made a just
Law, and which was their Rule, and directed them to order what they did, and
not the contrary. If we reflect what this is, we shall find that Just and
Unjust are said with reference to the nature of man. For other things being
made for his use, are not always to be dealt with, as is most fitting for
them, but as they may best serve him. But man must be used as his nature
requires, and if he be not, we say he is wronged. I conceive therefore that the
Root of Justice lies in the nature of man, and that the consideration of what
is fitting, or unfit for it, is the original Rule of Just and Unjust. To
descend to more particulars, and dispute how far one man may justly be hindered
from his particular good, for the greater good of the society in which he
lives, with the rest of the Considerations which belong to Lawmakers, is not
to my purpose. It is enough if I observe that Just signifies radically
Commensurate, or Fit, generally implies Agreement, which Agreement is supposed
to be made on sight of what is fit for both parties agreeing. So that
antecedently to Laws, which are, and ought to be in practice, at least betwixt
members of the same commonwealth, looked on as the only Rules of Justice,
there is a proportion or exigence of Nature, with respect to which some things
are Just, others Unjust, and to which when Laws have not an eye, they
themselves are thought not Just. And this explication I take to be, not only
true, but universally acknowledged. For if positive agreements be thought
absolutely necessary to the notion of Justice, I know not how that notion can
be found in the Laws of Nature and Nations, which are the highest and most
binding of all others, and yet are before, and manifestly without agreements.

To apply this to our case, I consider that Government has been embraced for
the good of the world, to avoid the mischief of lawless humors destructive to
society, and that the Good of the Commonwealth is, or ought to be, the Princes
Rule, from which when he swerves, his Action is not Just, because
unproportioned, and not suited to that exigence of Nature which is the root of
Justice: yet it does not follow that a Prince every time he does unjustly, may
be resisted. That is another, and at present, unconcerning Question.

I consider farther that nothing can more import the good of the Commonwealth
than the Governors themselves. For they are the main hinges on which the common
good turns, and the Fountains from which all goods flow to particulars. If
these be such as may endanger long settled Laws, and Customs, and render the
properties of subjects uncertain, and unsecure, the Commonwealth always
totters, and often falls. But all this will unavoidably follow, if the
nomination of supreme Governors be left to arbitrary pleasure. They may be
strangers, and through ignorance unable to preserve national Laws, They may be
enemies, and through ill affection studious to break them. In fine, to fancy
that any thing can be more against the common good, than to want known rules of
succession, and that a Nation should be bound to obey whoever is named by
chance or humor, is to fancy there may be some member more considerable to the
Body than the Head.

If this discourse be good, it may be understood how the Arbitrary power even
of Conquerors, may be bounded, otherwise than by their voluntary Compacts and
Concessions, namely by nature, and by the proportion of their Actions to the
subject on which they Act. It is true that antecedently to compacts, their
Actions cannot be called Unjust, as unjust signifies breach of agreements: but
as Unjust signifies breach of proportion, and the violation of what nature
requires, They may be unjust, even before they bind themselves by compact to
observe this proportion. This now I concieve is our Case, and that, since the
good of the Commonwealth is the Rule of the Princes Action, and that it is
plainly against that good that their supreme Governors should be appointed
arbitrarily, the arbitrary dispositions of the Crown, mentioned by our Author
were effects more of Power than Right. I think himself will grant, if those
Norman Princes were unconfined, till they voluntarily confined themselves, that
'twas at least reasonable and fit they should be confined in this point; and
sure, a Power to act unreasonably, and unfitly, is not what the world means by
Right. Right to do ill, sounds very like Right to do wrong, and is in this case
neither better nor worse. For if arbitrary placing of Governors be against the
good of the Commonwealth, and Right or Just signify as much as Fit, or Good,
and that, as at present it must, with respect to the Commonwealth, there is a
Right in the Commonwealth which requires their Princes should not be set over
them arbitrarily, and those arbitrary dispositions of the Crown were manifestly
against Right. And yet perhaps it is enough that they were unreasonable, and
unfit. For unreasonable Actions are no more to be drawn into consequence than
unjust ones, and peradventure bind no more, where collateral considerations do
not give them a strength, which they have not of themselves.

I have alleged these considerations more to hint what may be said, than
because I think nothing else can. For after all, it may with truth be
maintained, that the power of the first Norman Princes, and of the Conqueror
himself as well as the rest, was actually confined, and in the manner our
Author would have it, by voluntary Concessions, long before Magna Charta, and
the establishment of those liberties to the subject, which he supposes confine
it now. They all took Oaths at their Coronation, and bound themselves to the
observation of Justice. If an Oath do not bind a Prince, an Oath deliberately
and solemnly made in the face of God and Man, in a matter too mainly concerning
the good of the Commonwealth, for whose security he gives that Oath, and which
she accepts as full security, there is no talking of Confinement upon him, of
security to a Commonwealth, of Laws, and Obligations, and Compacts, but all
must be left to the arbitrary unconfined pleasure of one man; a Position,
which, is the Freedom of this part of the world, I suppose will not find much
entertainment. However it is the strength even of Magna Charta it self, which
cannot confine a Prince, if his Oath do not first confine him to observe it.
Now who swears to render Justice, undoubtedly swears to render Justice to the
Kingdom in the first place. For the concern of the whole, is the concern of all
particulars, every one being as much, and perhaps more, interested in the
Rights of the Kingdom, than in his private pretensions. If any man doubt of
this, I suppose no Englishman at least will doubt but that he is to acquiesce
to the Judgment of Parliament. And it is positively declared by Parliament, 40
Ed. 3
that the Fact of K. John was contrary to his Coronation Oath, in which
nevertheless for ought I can find, there is nothing more, than general
expressions of rendering Justice. However it be, since it is a judged case, that
K. John broke his Oath, in his arbitrary disposition of the Kingdom, it is a
judged case, that his Power was confined in that particular, and this
independently of Magna Charta, and all subsequent Compacts. And if his, then
sure of all the rest, for they all swear as much as He.

But if any man will continue stiff in this opinion, and believe nothing able
to confine the arbitrary power of Conquerors but their own Concessions, I would
entreat him to direct me to that Concession which has confined their power in
this point, besides their Coronation Oath. I do not find either in Mag. Charta,
or any where else, any Article concerning the disposition of the Crown.
Learneder men may know more, but my Ignorance persuades me, that if the Norman
Princes had such a Right, and that Right can only be restrained by voluntary
Concessions, and those direct to the point, their Successors have it still. And
it is not easy to be persuaded otherwise, till the Concession appear. But this
no Englishman can either say or think, nothing being more notorious than that
it cannot be done now. Whoever will take the pains to examine how it comes to
pass, that this original power is now restrained, will not easily be satisfied,
if nothing else will satisfy him but a direct Concession. I believe he will be
forced to confess at last, that such a Concession is neither extant, nor
needful, and acknowledge that Power is bounded as truly and as strongly by
Nature as Grants.

Upon the whole I conceive there may in the first Norman Princes be considered
the Power of Conquerors, and Right of Kings. That their Power was unconfined
enough, but ought not be drawn into Precedent, although it be against all
Reason and Justice to question now those effects of their Power, which remain
among us even to this day. For these have strength, not from their Power, but
from what is able to turn Unjust into Just, as Titles, originally bad, become
good in process of Time. That even their Right was confined, the very notion of
Right implying limitation. For right signifies proportion of the Action to the
subject, so that an unconfined Right is not Right. That their Right was
confined in this particular by the good of the Kingdom, as has been discoursed
before; and though it had not Right to what they did is very far from inferring
Right to what K. John did: the two remarkable precedents, mentioned by our
Author, being so remarkably different from this case, that they can be no
Precedents, nor warrant for it.

William Rufus reigned after his Father, and excluded his Brother, in truth by
the favor of the Kingdom, yet claiming by his Fathers Testament. That claim
may be allowed, without allowing King John's resignation. For in the Conquerors
fact there was no more, then of two sons, both fit, both equal to the Kingdom,
to prefer whom he thought fittest. The Laws and Liberties, and condition of the
Kingdom was the same under either; so that apprehending in likelihood no
greater interest in the business than whether their King should be called
William, or Robert, They approved the Fathers choice, and willingly obeyed whom
he appointed. But King John's Fact was quite of another strain, A Stranger, and
such an one who could never become a denizen, one taken up with other cares,
and dwelling too far off, to be ever able to act as was fitting, for the good
of England, was made the supreme Lord; and which was worse, the Tenure of the
Kingdom altered, and of free turned into subject. The Kingdom was sensible of
their Interest in the business, and disclaimed the fact, both then and ever
since. I am mistaken if Reception of Laws, be not generally held a very
material consideration to their validity. But the cases are otherwise so
apparently different, that a Right in the Conqueror, to dispose of the Crown as
he did, may safely be granted, without any necessity, or color, of allowing in
consequence a Right to King John to dispose of it as he did.

If Henry 1. succeeded in virtue of the same Testament, his case is the same
with the former. But this Gentleman's information was better than mine if he had
other Title than Election, at least till his Brother consented, as he soon did,
the same title which K. Stephen, and after him K. John had to the Crown. I
should think their Examples a very good Reason, that the proceedings of those
times are not to be drawn into consequence. For if they may, it will follow
that the Kingdom of England perhaps is, at least has been Elective. Which I
suppose no Englishman will admit: if they may not, I know not to what purpose
they are alleged.

For these reasons I am persuaded nothing can be drawn from the proceedings of
the first Norman Princes to justify the Resignation of King John, which is so
far from being binding to our times, that it never had any validity at all. But
not to leave the matter disputable betwixt my No, and the Yea of who will
maintain the contrary, I will fairly put it to Judgment, and say, whatever was
done, and by whatever right, about the times of the Conquest, that K. John in
particular could not validly do what he did; and that this has already been
decided, and in such manner, that there is nothing so firmly settled in the
world, which may not admit of question as well as this. In the reign of Ed.
III. the Pope demanded the long unpaid one thousand marks granted by K. John,
and threatened by legal process to recover this rent. A Parliament was called
chiefly for this business, and it was unanimously resolved, Rot. Parl. 40 Ed. 3.
That neither K. John, nor any other, could bring Himself, his Kingdom, or
People into such subjection, without their consent, and against his Coronation
Oath. And that in case the Pope should by process or otherwise, attempt to
constrain the King or his Subjects to perform the premises, They would become
Parties, and resist him with all their Power. This is plain and peremptory, and
directly to the point. I cannot but muse to observe them speak doubtingly of
the matter of Fact, Supplication of Souls.
and the more because Sr. Tho. More very positively denies the Church of Rome
could in his, or any time, produce such an Evidence. When I consider He was a
learned man, and no Enemy to the Pope, had great means of being well acquainted
with Records, and passages of former times unknown to others, and speaks as if
he had good ground for what he said, I hardly know what to think of it. I wish
he had informed us what his grounds were; peradventure there is more to be said
than we are aware of. But since he has not, and the Parliament does not
directly deny the Fact, I for my part must be contented to take things at the
worst, and not deny what I cannot disprove. I have this for my comfort, that if
the Fact were true, it was in Sr. Tho. More's words, right naught worth, and
the Authority of Parliament to bear me out. By the way our Author in alleging
the consent of the Barons, at that time the only representative of the Kingdom,
speaks against a solemn Declaration of Parliament, and this undeniable proof
may be joined to what I produced before, to make good my denial of their
consent. However the Question is positively decided, and by an Authority
irrefragable to Englishmen.

But lest we should be suspected of partiality in our own case; let us put it
to the Judgment of Foreigners. When the differences betwixt this King and the
Barons became irreconcilable, they sought protection from France. The Pope
sent a Legate to dissuade the French King and his Son from meddling with a
Kingdom, the Dominion whereof belonged now to the Church. The word was hardly
out of the Legates mouth, when the King of France replied suddenly, M. Paris ad
an. 1216.
That England never had been, nor then was, nor ever should be the Patrimony of
Peter. And this, besides what he else alleged, because no King could give away
his Kingdom without consent of his Barons, an error which if the Pope would
maintain; He would give a most pernicious example to all Kingdoms: The Nobility
present with great heat justified this speech of their King, and declared they
would stand for that point to death, viz. that it was not in the power of any
King to transfer his Kingdom, or make it tributary at pleasure. You see I spoke
not altogether out of my own head, when I refused to yield an arbitrary right
of disposing Kingdoms even to Conquerors, and that I shall not want who will
take my part. But to let that pass, it cannot be attributed to the partiality
of our either Country or Times, that we hold this Deed of K. John null, when it
was condemned for such by those who were contemporaries to it, and as much
abroad as at home. Who desires more security is in my opinion a very scrupulous
man.

Notwithstanding let us put it to the Judgment of the very Contrivers of the
Deed. I am much mistaken if Themselves had not the same sentiments with the
rest of the world. If They did not understand well enough, that the consent of
the Barons was necessary to the validity of the Deed, why did they insert that
clause, Communi Consilio Baronum nostrorum? A thing of this consequence
undoubtedly was not carelessly hudled up. Great deliberation was without
question used, and they would never have put in, what they themselves and every
body else knew was false, but that they were sensible All was to no purpose
without it. So that, in the hard choice of framing a Draught, either without
Truth, or without validity, They had an eye to the latter, and let the first
shift as it could. The truth is, They had reason; it being obvious enough, that
if they could carry things out at present, the Charter it self, as all Records
are, would be a strong Presumption, for the truth of what it contains, to
Posterity. But since it is as evident, as that there was a Charter, that this
Clause was untrue, it is likewise evident, that Those who put it in, thought it
necessary. Wherefore even in their Judgments the Grant was invalid, as wanting
what themselves thought absolutely requisite.

You now perceive of what importance this point is, of the Consent of the
Barons, of which I forbore to speak, while I was examining whether they
consented or no. Neither do I mean to dilate upon it now: it being enough to
observe, that the want of it absolutely invalidates the Grant, and this in the
Judgment, not only of the Framers, and of the King and Kingdom of France, but
of Parliament. For you see They positively declare, that neither K. John, nor
any other could bring the Kingdom into subjection, without consent of the
People, who at that time had none, but the Barons, to consent for them. So that
not to acquiesce in this point, is to refuse the highest Authority of the
Nation; and who does so is not fit to live in the Nation.

But shall I venture to join our Author himself to the rest of this good
company, and say, that whatever out of the strength of his wit He alleges on
the other side, yet this Charter is no more valid in his judgment, than in
other folks? And I do not mean that it is become now invalid, by the force of
Prescription, (for this he has sufficiently declared) but that it was
originally and always invalid. Truly I am mistaken if this may not be concluded
from what he says elsewhere, when dis-engaged from the desire of making good
his Argument, he frankly discovers his true sentiments. Page 239. considering
an observation made in a former Letter, on the particular Fact of the Emperor
Frederick, he replies, That whether supreme Princes may put it into a
Foreigners power to compel them (to cession) by a direct deprivation of their
Right of Government, is a case which he thinks none will easily grant to be
either Just or Secure for the Commonwealth for which they were concerned. I
conceive that when K. John resigned his Kingdom, and received it again to hold
of the Pope, as principal Lord, to whom he became a Vassal, He put it into the
power of a Forreigner to compel him, not only by Ecclesiastical Censures, but
by a direct deprivation of his Right of Government. And this he declares to be
Unjust, and Unsafe for the Commonwealth. King John then, even in his own
opinion, did unjustly, and against the good of the Commonwealth, that is, had
not Right to do what he did, and his Act was invalid from the beginning. I
suppose therefore He will acknowledge on second thoughts, that there are other
ways to bound the actions of supreme Princes, besides Compacts and Concessions,
and that Justice and the Safety of the Commonwealth, are two of those ways, in
which other Princes were obliged to walk as well as K. John, and if they did
not, their Actions are not to be drawn into example.

I will hope the Question is resolved to satisfaction. For I know no fairer,
nor surer way to end a difference, than to put it to Judgment. And since it is
judged on my side by an Authority from which there lies no appeal, and by those
who one would expect should be most partial on the other, Those who contrived
the Deed, and Him who urges it, Of the Popes Temporal Monarchy.
I should think there is no more to be desired. If any man's curiosity reach
further, he may find wherewith to satisfy it in those who have already handled
this Subject; particularly the learned Crakanthrop.

But to touch briefly what is more largely treated elsewhere, the Charter
contradicts and destroys it self, reserving in one place, what it grants in
another. There is in it an express saving of the Rights given away, by this
clause, Salvis nobis and Haeredibus nostris Justitiis, Libertatibus, and
Regalibus nostris. Nothing can be more manifest, than that the Independency of
the Crown belongs to the Regalia; and again, that subjection is opposite to
Liberty. And yet the Regalia, and Liberty are expressly reserved, at the same
time, when the Crown is made Dependent, and Subject. This is just, I give you a
hundred pound, which hundred pound I keep to my self. Which is an unvalid and
self-destructive Act, and passes nothing, and is in truth a piece of Nonsense,
not a Gift. Again, that the Regalia Imperii are Inalienabilia without consent
of the Subjects, is a point settled by a consent so unanimous of all Nations,
that there is no Maxim more known. It Is very troublesome, and more idle, to
fill paper with Quotations, for a point better known than the Author to be
quoted.

This too is a received Maxim, that Metus cadens in virum constantem nuls the
Act extorted by fear, of which, besides a hundred examples in all nations, some
even of Popes themselves, who upon that ground have voided their own Acts, the
Pope, to whom this Grant was made, has left a very pregnant instance in the
case of this very King. The Barons a little after obtained the Magna Charta
from him, confirmed by all the security they could devise. The Pope solemnly
declares all proceedings void, because extorted by fear. But it is most evident
that K. John had no greater cause of fear, when he past the Magna Charta, than
he had, when he signed the Charter to the Pope. Pandulph brought him to it, by
exaggerating his imminent danger, the French with a vast Army ready to land,
backed with the Ecclesiastical power of the Clergy, and Arms of the Laity,
whereof many of the principal were said to have obliged themselves by
authentic Charters to assist the French. The King yielded, confusus valde, and
mente nimis perturbatus, and videns undique sibi periculum imminere, in the
words of M. Paris. Could there be more fear from the Barons alone, than from
the same Barons, and French, and Pope too? Or could his fear in one case make
his Act void, and signify nothing in the other? So that there is this very good
reason to believe, that the Pope himself, to whom the Kingdom was granted,
judged the Grant null, because he declared an Act of the same King null by a less
fear, than that which extorted his Grant. This too was understood by those who
drew the Charter, and inserted this other clause, Non vi inducti, nec Timore
coacti, sed nostra bona, spontaneaque voluntate. By which it is apparent that
there was more than one clause contrary to Truth, and that more was requisite
to the validity of the Act, even in the judgment of the Contrivers, than could
be had. Which is that the Act was invalid, as wanting what themselves thought
necessary to make it valid.

By this, and much more alleged by diverse, the Nullity of that Grant of K.
John appears, I think, very undeniably; supposing in him all the Right, which
can be supposed in any King of England. But by our Authors favor, what he
takes for granted, that K. John had undoubted Kight to the Crown, at the
passing of this act, is very far from undoubted. A Sister of Arthur's was then
living, and long after, in whom the Right of Arthur could not but be. When K.
John by his success at Mirabel got Arthur into his hands, he made use of the
opportunity of his victory to seize likewise upon his Sister Elianor, whom he
brought into England, and confined to Bristol Castle. There was another, and I
think an elder Sister, but what became of her I know not. In likelihood she
died before these times. But this Lady survived her Uncle. The Pope mentions
her, among those who had right to the Crown, to the Ambassadors of Lewis, M.
Paris ad an. 1216.
who sought to justify their Masters title to England, and the French objected
against her, what, if it have any force in their Law, has none in ours. For it
is a plain case that the elder line takes place of the younger, in the
inheritance of the Crown, and no act, or forfeiture of K. John could bar the
right of the Children of his elder Brother, who were Heirs, not to John, but
Richard, and by John wrongfully excluded. This Lady never married, but lived to
a good Age, M. Paris ad an. 1241. Y podig. Neustriae p. 59.
one example of many of the little comfort there is in unsupported greatness.
She died in the year 1241, and was buried among the Nuns of Amesbury, to whom
by permission of Henry III. She gave the Manor of Molsham. Her Right was
buried with her, but while she lived, it cannot be said K. John had no
Competitor. This being so, all pretense from K. John's Fact, is cut up by the
roots, there being not so much to be said for it, as that himself had right to
what he gave away. And yet for my part I think, if he had had a Right as
unquestionable as our Author supposes, it is equally unquestionable that his
gift was no more valid than if he had had none.

Whether I have acquitted my self of what I undertook, and shown the three
material points of our Authors discourse, viz, Consent of the Barons, undoubted
Right, and unconfined power in K. John, are all mistakes, I am not to be my own
Judge. It is the readers right, and to him I leave it. To pass farther, and
examine what else is urged, seems needless. When the Root is dig'd up, the
Branches may be let alone; and I am far from taking pleasure in contradicting,
especially a man whose Learning and Candor I esteem. Yet, because peradventure
to neglect what he says, may show more unhandsom than to dissent from it, I
shall briefly deliver my opinion of the rest.

In the next point, viz. That the Popes Title was the more confirmed by his
uninterrupted Practice, I think He is mistaken too. It Is true, that Henry III.
did at his Coronation take an Oath of Fealty to the Pope, the same which his
Father had taken before. And there was a very pressing necessity, which obliged
him so to do. Lewis Son to the King of France was in the Bowels of the Kingdom
with a strong Army, and many of the Nobility took his part. The King was a
Child, unable to do any thing for himself, and forced to depend entirely on
those who would assist him. Among these the Pope was the most considerable,
whose Legate was with him, and with unweari'd earnestness labored for his
Interest. It was not for him, in such a conjuncture, to break with the Pope.
For it was evidently to ruin himself. So that 'twas wisely done of his Council
to provide for the greater danger first, and leave the rest to time. It is true
also that King John made use of this subjection, to annul his concession to the
Barons. But it does not therefore follow there was no Interruption. The
Archbishop of Canterbury protested at very first, and in the name of the whole
Kingdom; the Barons refused to submit to the Popes sentence, and stood to their
obtained Concessions notwithstanding his Excommunications; the French rejected
his claim with great ardor; solemn opposition was made in the Council of Lions,
both by King and Kingdom, in the reign of Henry III. succeeding Kings
positively denied all marks of subjection, and were abetted by unanimous
consent of Parliament. A Practice so much opposed I think cannot be called
uninterrupted. Opposition sure is Interruption, or at least as good. For the
the act of one part, can never confirm a practice. The Pope may do what he
pleases, but unless the Kingdom do something too, his Title will never be
confirmed. It may be said that the Tribute was paid by Henry III. suppose it
were, what is this to the Kingdom? Henry III. could not be hindered from
disposing of his own, and paying what, and to whom he pleased. But his Act
cannot be thought binding to the Kingdom, unless the Kingdom consented; And the
Kingdom was so far from consenting that it positively dissented. Wherefore the
practice being urged as a Title to the Kingdom, it seems very plain, that this
Title was so far from being more confirmed, that it was not confirmed at all,
nor could be, by any practice of the Popes, unless the Kingdom had concurred to
it.

The next point that the Pope never solemnly divested himself, I conceive not
to purpose. For if his Title were never good, it is no matter whether he ever
disclaimed it or no. And yet, if the Author of the Eulogium, said to be in the
Cotton Library, be of any credit, this too may be denied. For he expressly says,
that in a Parliament at London 1214, where the Clergy cum tota laicali secta
were present, the obligation was, by the Popes command, wholly releast. For my
own part I must confess, I know not how far this Author may be trusted, not
finding any mention of so remarkable a passage any where else. But though his
credit be obscure, this is clear, that if K. John's Act were invalid of it self,
there needed no Act of the Popes to make it so. And I take it to be no less
clear, that it was invalid, and that we may spare the labor of inquiring,
whether the Pope ever gave away, what he truly never had.

The last thing urged is that the Pope admits of no Prescription, which if it
be true, the less reason have we to put our selves upon that trial. But I think
it is not true. For the Canon Law allows Prescription, and that against the
Church of Rome, as well as any other. Only by way of Privilege more time is
required to bear her Plea, than others. But I have already declared, I like not
to enter into that dispute. It depends on Law, a study which the Interests and
Passions of men have embroiled with so many intricate perplexities, that it is
little better than a labyrinth without a Clew. Nothing in my opinion is more
fruitless, nor perhaps more dangerous than to submit the Rights of Princes to
disputes, where there will be always something to say, and not half of what is
said, understood, but by men of the Trade.

Besides there is another Consideration, which to my Judgment, absolutely
excludes this Topic. Prescription is a Plea established by the Civil, and
Canon Laws, which appoint the cases, the persons, the times, and all conditions
of it. Who has a Suit depending in a Court, where sentence is pronounced
according to those Laws, may be concerned to study the nature of it: but with
us, where neither Law is in force, it seems wonderfully from the purpose to
amuse our selves with it. What have we to do, to examine whether our Possession
have all the conditions required to Prescription by those Laws, which
themselves signify nothing? If they pronounce sentence for us, we are not a
jot the better, and if against us, not a jot the worse. England is a Country
Independent of Foreigners, and governed by Laws and Customs of her own. What
Emperors and Popes think fit to establish among their Subjects, concerns us no
more, than what we do concerns them. By our Laws the Grant of K. John is void,
and has been positively declared so by the highest Tribunal among us, and from
which there lies no appeal. After this to put our selves upon the trial of
Prescription, seems a kind of submission to foreign Laws, a kind of confessing
the point, and acknowledgment of a superior Power.

Again, the Law of Prescription is, as other Laws, made for avoiding confusion
in the Commonwealth, and securing the properties of members belonging to it.
That Commonwealths themselves are always subject to the same Laws with their
members, I cannot easily understand. The case of John a Nokes and John a
Styles, is different from the supreme Lord of John a Nokes and John a Styles.
It is true that generally Crowns are inherited by the same Rules with private
Estates. But sometimes it happens otherwise, and it is the Interest of the
Commonwealth, that what is not allowed in one case, should be in another. The
Crown of England has a privilege above all Estates which hold of it. For it
takes away all defects; and this, whatever be in other places, is Law with us.
I know not how idle time can be spent more idly than in unridling what is
subtly proposed by the Sphinxes of Laws, with which we have nothing to do,
while we have Laws of our own, whose meaning we know, and to whose authority we
must and ought submit.

Notwithstanding, if Issue were joined upon this point, I think there is no
reason to doubt of the sentence. The Conditions required to a valid
Prescription by those Laws, are Possession, continued all the time determined
by Law; a Title probably presumed; and a prudent Persuasion that the thing in
question belongs to the possessor, or at least to no body else, which they call
Bona Fides. Now that the Crown of England has been in the possession of those
who have worn it, neither is, nor can be doubted out of Bedlam. That this
possession has lasted much longer, than any time required to Prescription, is
as plain as the former. A hundred years is the longest time allowed in any
case, and bars the claim even of the Church of Rome; Lessins de Just. and Jure,
^^l. 2. cap. 6. Dub. 12.
And, which peradventure is more properly the case, forty prescribes against a
supreme Prince, if there be a Title, but Time out of mind, whether there be or
no. Farther, that the Title of our Princes is something more than probably
presumed, and consequently that their possession has always been accompanied
with bona Fides, is as undeniable as all the rest. So that I think our Author
has reason to believe Prescription a very sufficient Plea against the Pope,
though I am not of his mind, that it is our only one.

But this by the by, and to show we need not fear fighting in this quarrel, at
any weapon. Otherwise, to my apprehension, it is as rational to talk of the
Laws of China, or Japan, as of Emperors and Popes, with relation to England.
Local Laws concern only those who live where they are in force; betwixt Nation
and Nation there is no other Law, but that of Nations and Nature. And
peradventure, if we look better into it, Prescription may it self be a Law of
Nations. For though it be generally taken in the notion of Civil and Canon
Lawyers, and go attended with the train of conditions placed about it by them,
yet it may as properly signify the same with immemorial Possession. So I think
our Law understands it, without any notice of Title or bona Fides, or any thing
else but quiet Possession. And so it may be this learned Gentleman himself
understood it, which if he did, it is undoubtedly, not only a sufficient, but
the best and strongest Plea that can be. It is that whereon the firmness of
most, perhaps all, Commonwealths in the world depends, and in which the consent
of Nations acknowledges an unquestionable force, and which, for that reason
must needs be grounded on Nature. Because Authors commonly take Prescription in
the other sense, I thought it most convenient to go along with the cry, and
speak in their language. So taken, I refuse it for a Judge, not that I fear it
should give sentence against me, but because I think it not qualified to give
sentence, our case belonging not to the cognizance of that Court. But taken in
the other sense, as I cannot refuse to stand to that, on which the security of
the world is established, so it is plainly of my side. It being not more known
that we are a Nation, than that we are independent of foreign subjection, and
have time out of mind continued in the possession of such independency, and in
the sight, and with the acknowledgment of all the world about us.

I know not how my pen runs on beyond my design, and without necessity, for
much I think might be spared. To make an end, since this Fact of K. John was
evidently giving away what he had no power to give, no not though his right to
the Crown had been undoubted, which it is plain it was not; since this want of
power in him was acknowledged by the very Contrivers of the Charter, who were
forced to supply the Defects, of which they were sensible, by Clauses of Form,
but evidently against Truth; since the Case is already a judged Case, both at
home and abroad; since the judgment given at home is peremptorily conclusive,
and unappealable; and has besides been confirmed by a Possession, which to
question is to subvert the foundations of Government, and render all
Commonwealths unsecure and tottering; I think no man of sense can be moved by
any thing, which can be said on the Popes behalf in this point. But if so much
scruple, and so little reason may be suspected in our Nation, of all men in it
the suspicion should not fall on those of our Communion. We have given very
good evidence of our sense in this point, by publicly declaring it. For they
were of our Communion who made the Act of Parliament, mentioned before, and
solemnly resolved this Fact in particular to be void and null. And they were of
our Communion, who in another occasion, declared the Independency of the
English Crown, and its freedom from all earthly subjection, and this with
relation particularly to the Pope. If any one be found scrupulous enough, and
mad enough, against all reason, and the judgment of his Ancestors of his own
Communion, to refuse to give you all imaginable security in this point, I
consent with all my heart you treat him as a man degenerated from the loyalty
of his Ancestors, and no company for good Subjects.

It is now time to make a step into Ireland, in which though the novelty of
strange places be usually full of wonder, yet I do not think to find any thing
more wonderful, than this Bull of Pope Adrian which you mention. That all
Islands, which have received Christianity, should eo ipso belong to the Church
of Rome, is a thing in which often consideration, as it happens in other cases,
diminishes nothing of the surprise. The more I consider, the more I wonder, and
as wondering people do, gaze, and stare, and hardly know what to say. I have a
great mind bluntly to deny the thing; as I would an incredible story related
without proof. Nothing that ever I heard, not the enchantment of O Brazile
sounds more incredibly. But M. Paris and the rest, who record it, have never
been taxed of feigning, and Baronius says he found it in the Vatican. It Is not
for me to oppose my persuasion to their credit, though all their credit, cannot
hinder it from sounding still incredibly. There are many Islands nearer Rome,
Cyprus, and Candia, Sicily, Sardignia and the rest. If the Pope have a claim,
as I think he has, to some of these, surely it is not purely because they are
Islands. For to some I do not know that he ever pretended. The Coast of America
has many very considerable, Hispaniola, Cuba, and our Jamaica, to say nothing
of the rest, and nearer at hand the Canaries as little as they are, are yet
worth having. It is as incredible a thing, as any can be, that Ireland alone
should be claimed by a pretense common to innumerable others, there being no
continent which has not many, and no claim made to any of the rest. England, at
least Britain, is an Island too: How came it to escape, and all this bustle made
with King John, to gain a litigious, and unmaintainable pretense, to what was
clearly the Popes before? Again, why has this pretense never been set a foot
before, nor since, in no case, by no body? Were it not for this Bull, it could
not be known, there ever was such a conceit in the world, and notwithstanding
the Bull, it never entered, for ought I can learn, Eccles. E B. Apost. Petri and
Pauli pro continuatione Luminariorum p^ssessionum praed^a contulimus^ tam in
orient quam in occidente -- vel diversis Insulis, etc. Privileg. Constan.
did. 96.
into the head of any other man.

But whence should this subjection of Islands come? From their receiving
Christianity? If this were so, I percieve no difference betwixt Islands, and
Continents, that Christianity should not work the same effects in both. For
certainly what Christianity does, it does every where. But that Christianity
has no such effect, that non eripit mortalia qui regna dat coelestia, is known
and confessed, and has been discourst enough formerly. If such a thing were once
admitted of Islands, such another Bull might turn the whole world into one
great Island, and all were the Popes without more ado. Or may the famous
Donation of Constantin, because it has the word Islands, ground this pretense?
The word indeed is used once, but nothing more is said of them, than that some
revenues are granted out of some of them, as well as other places, toward
maintaining lights at Rome. Besides the Donation it self signifies nothing, and
if it did cannot be stretched to Ireland, which never was in the power of
Constantin to dispose of. A claim to all Christian Islands can never have its
origin from Constantin, who was not possess't of, nor so much as acquainted
with the hundredth part of them, and yet before the end of the world we hope
The sun of Justice will shine upon them all.

Truly I am utterly at a loss, and which way soever I turn me, can make nothing
of it, unless the Right, of which this Bull speaks, be understood of a
Spiritual Right. Such an one the Pope may claim, and that in virtue of their
receiving Christianity, and if he spoke only of Islands, I would think the
reason was because, the question being only of Ireland, it was not to his
purpose to speak of Continents. So that I would understand the Bull in this
manner: You desire my favor and counsel, in your design upon Ireland, which
you mean to undertake for the good of the Country in general, and the Church in
particular; Islands belonging to my care, as well as the rest of the world: I
am glad all the good be done there which can, and so approve your design, and
wish you to go on. I know not whether I shall not pass for too bold an
interpreter, but I will hope at least, that this is the sense; if it be not, I
should be beholding to him who could instruct me what is.

But be it what it will, I am sure a single line, inserted in an old writing,
no body knows why, or upon what ground, and never insisted on before, nor
since, no not by the most partial Abetters of the Popes Prerogatives, is a
sorry evidence by which to claim a Kingdom. The Kings of England have held that
Country above 500 years, and all that time been acknowledged absolute Lords of
it, by all the world, and Popes as well as the rest. No Homage, no Tribute, no
Investiture, no sign of subjection to the Pope, has all this while appeared,
save in the resignation of King John, nothing performed on our side, nothing so
much as demanded on the other. The world would run into a fine confusion, if
such a Title should be questioned, because some words are found in a writing
500 years ago, which no body can understand. Popes have not been careless in
their Rights: England in some of the intermediate times has been even
scrupulously affected to them, and a great deal more ready to add to, than
detract from their due. It is not possible but, if this Title had been any
thing worth we should have heard of it at some time or other, elsewhere than in
the Bull. At least in the transactions with King John, it must of necessity
have appeared. That King was not in terms to refuse any thing the Pope should
demand. Had he known of any right to Ireland, it had been but saying so: for it
was upon the matter, Ask and Have, any pretense in that conjuncture would have
served turn. And this Bull was not then so old, that it could be worn out of
memory. But it is plain that England and Ireland are both on the same terms in
the grant of King John, and no right pretended to either but in virtue of that
grant. Neither indeed can such a pretense consist with the words of it. Instead
of Offerimus and libere concedimus, it must have been said, we restore, or
acknowledge, or something equivalent by which there might have appeared not
creation of a new Right, but recognition of an old. For that cannot be granted,
which is the Grantee's before the Grant, nor does a supreme Lord receive a Fee
from a Vassal by way of gift; but obliges the Vassal to acknowledge by Homage,
and customary duties that it is so; or if disuse have withheld his duties, and
weakened his Title, to restore things again to their old condition. This,
instead of granting, King John should, and the Pope would have made him, have
done, had there been any knowledge of a claim to Ireland independently of this
Grant. So that whatever Pope Adrian meant, it is evident his Successors never
understood his meaning gave them any right to that Island. Nothing is more
foolish, than to catch at words, and interpret the meaning by the sound, when
we have Actions, immemorial practice, and custom to guide us securely, and
assure us the meaning, whatever it be cannot be contrary to these. Allow that
method once, and you leave no stability, even in what the good of mankind
requires should be most stable, the settlement of Commonwealths.

In short, if our Kings Title to Ireland be not good, there is no good Title in
the world. At least I know none established on a surer foundation. And were it
the question, believe I could make it out. But we are not now enquiring what
Title our Kings have, but whether the Pope have any. For which reason I forbear
to meddle with the Book you mention, which seeks to overthrow the Title of
England, not to establish that of the Pope. Only in short I must acknowledge I
never read any thing with more grief, nor so much shame. The best is, the
Curs't Cow has wondrous short horns. As ill as He means, in my opinion, he does
more good than harm. For Truth is well proved, when it is perceived it cannot be
disproved but weakly. And nothing is weaker than his discourse. What is most
material, is directly contrary to History; but his chief business is to bring,
as you say, hard names to prove, what is not a jot to purpose when it is proved.
He casts away the greatest part of his pains upon the Punctilios required to
Prescription by the Civil and Canon Laws, in Suits betwixt Subject and Subject,
and never considers that those Punctilios, and those Laws have nothing to do
with the case, and that the Rights of Princes are established upon a higher,
and more steady Basis, than local and mutable constitutions. But I have
discoursed of this point before, and mean not to trouble you with repetitions,
and that in a Question which concerns me not. No better answer can, nor other
need, Hist. of the Irish Remonst p. 739. and 742.
be given to this Book, than what was given in Ireland, where an. 1648. the
supreme Council of the Confederat Catholics, caused it to be burned at
Kilkenny by the common Hangman, and the National Congregation too of the Irish
Clergy (I mean Roman Catholic) at Dublin, an. 1666. condemned it to the same
fate. And for the rest, whoever doubts of his Majesty's right, to all and every
part of his Dominions, is a Traitor without more ado, and cannot complain if he
be used like one, nor any body for him.

This answer I conceive may serve for Scotland too, with which I shall make
short work, believing your Jealousies in that particular are not very pressing.
The only stumbling block that I know in this matter, is the letter you cite of
Boniface VIII. to. Edward I. in which, Mat. Westminster. ad an. 1301.
with a phrase as unintelligible, as that of Adrians Bull, it is said, qualiter
ab antiquis temporibus Regnum Scotiae pleno jure pertinuit, and adhuc pertinere
dignoscitur ad Ecclesiam supradictam, meaning the Roman. And again, ex quibus
nulli in dubium veniat Regnum Scotiae praelibatum ad praefatam Romans Ecclesiam
pertinere. While I read this Letter, and the Kings answer, I was inclined to
believe, the meaning of this was, that the Pope as a common Father of
Christendom, had right to interpose in emergent differences in Scotland, as
well as other places. I observed that he alleges Debitum Pastoralis Officii
for the reason why he meddles, and respect to his seat and Person, for the
motive why the King should yield to his request. Again, the Ex quibus whence he
concludes this subjection, are because Scotland used not to admit a Legate, not
particularly directed to that Kingdom; That the Arch Bishop of York could not
obtain sentence at Rome in favor of the Primacy claimed by him over the
Scottish Churches; and that the Kingdom was converted by the Relics of Saint
Andrew. These have so little to do with Civil subjection to Rome (and what he
mentions besides has a great deal less) that I could not imagine a Pope, from
such Premises, could draw such a conclusion. Besides that the King in his
answer does not take the least notice of such a sense. But coming to read the
answer of the Nobility, to whom the King purposely left that point, I percieve
they understood the words as they sounded. I shall therefore give their answer,
and make an end. Your letters being read, say they, tam sensibus nostris
admiranda, quam hactenus inaudita in jis audivimus contineri. Scimus enim --
nec ullis temporibus ipsum regnum in temporalibus pertinuit, vel pertinet
quovis jure ad Ecclesiam vestram supradictam, and again, nec etiam Reges
Scoterum and Regnum aliis quam Regibus Angliae subfuerunt, vel subjici
consueverunt. Pursuant hereunto, They would not consent the King should send
Proctors, as the Pope desired, to Rome, to make out his Title there; nay they
declare, They would not permit the King to do it, although he would, it being
too great a prejudice to his known Rights to submit them to Trial. If this do
not satisfy I know not what will. At least it did satisfy the Pope, who in Pol.
Virgils words, statim refrixit, Pol. Virgil lib. 1^ in Ed. ^.
ut scilicet si pertinacius contenderet, ne inhoneste causa caderet, and never,
that I know touched upon this string more. And It must satisfy all Englishmen.
For it was a resolution of Parliament, or at least of a great Council of the
Nobility, which in those days was equivalent.

I Am come to the end of your Letter, and I think of writing too. Unless you do
something on your side, besides asking questions, painful to resolve, and
fruitless when they are resolved, you have my last, (it may be your full wish,
my first too;) For I cannot answer it to reason, to continue sowing in barren
ground, and believe, while so much trouble is coming on us all, your self would
counsel me not to run into more, that of breaking my brains to no purpose.
There has been already said, what, I hoped, might have wrought more favorable
inclinations toward us. Since the Physic works not, whether by your
indisposition, or its own inefficacy, it is peradventure to play the foolish, as
well as unskilful, Emperick, to go on administering. But yet since Losers have
leave to talk, permit me to make use of that liberty, it may be the only one
which I shall long enjoy.

As much reason as I have to grieve, yet truly I cannot but wonder as much at
your proceedings. Can it possibly be your interest to keep a party always in
fear of the Law, and by that fear prompted to wish a change in it? I mistake if
it be not the Interest of every Commonwealth, that all the members be heartily
concerned for the maintenance of Law, because it is the main security of
Liberty, and Property, and all worldly goods. But in our case the Law, instead
of securing, threatens our Liberties, and Properties, and Lives, nor can we be
concerned in the preservation of it, without being unconcerned in the
preservation of our selves. For my life I cannot imagine by what Policy you are
guided, to lay upon never so inconsiderable a party, a necessity so strong as
that of self-preservation, to wish an alteration of Law. The sword of Justice
should be the Protection, and comfort of Good men, and a terror only to the
bad: and certainly you do not think us all such. I believe our greatest fault
is that you apprehend us desirous of innovation. But pray can you with reason
blame us, if we desire to live less uneasily? I am very certain, there are none
in the Nation, more heartily affected to the liberty and all advantages of it,
than we are by inclination, and should more appear by all justifiable actions,
if you would let us live with any comfort in it.

Again, can it be for your interest, to force part of the Subjects of England,
always to depend on Foreigners, by their interposition to seek relief from
their pressures, and in return be affected to them, and inclined by way of
gratitude to promote their desires? Can it be your interest to oblige us to
send our Children beyond Sea, to be bred up to foreign customs and
inclinations, and suck in principles which you dislike? To have so much money
as they, and so many religious of both sexes require, carried out of the Land,
and spent in other Countries? To complain of Seminaries and increase their
number? For if we cannot maintain our Children at home, we must send them
abroad, and they are not now to begin to live on Alms, if we cannot send money
with them, and that more plentifully than we perhaps should allow them.

But to let these things alone, do you think it for your credit not to do as
you would be done by? to gain the imputation of persecuters, persecuters of a
Religion professed by most of your neighbors, and of a Church from which you
derive your selves? For I hope you do not think to avoid that imputation,
because what you do, you do by Law. The primitive Christians suffered all by
Law, and by Authority, and yet are thought persecuted, and Martyrs even by your
selves. Nor were Q. Mary's proceedings without Law, and Law, not made by her
for the present occasion, but in force before she came to the Crown. You have
reason to reproach her times; but then sure you have the same reason not to
bring the same reproach on your own: for burning is not much worse, than
hanging and quartering. If you are persuaded Persecution, or if that word
dislike you, Punishment for Religion advisable; at least consider that our case
is different from that of other dissenters. We changed not from the Law, but
the Law from us. We are to the Reformation as Judaism and Paganism to the
Gospel, before it. The Primitive Christians, when Authority came to be on their
side, never made use of it to work upon the conscience of those, whose
persuasions in Religion were more ancient than their own. They employed
instruction, and example, and added the allurement of worldly preferment,
disposing of places of Trust and Profit only to Christians. But they came not
to force. Me thinks you should not condemn the practice of the Primitive times,
and use us worse than they thought fit, and I think lawful, to use Pagans and
Jews.

You might too, in my opinion, consider whether it be for your advantage, to
let fall the plea you have so long, and so universally maintained, that you
punish, not for Religion, but Treason. When we ask where this Treason lies, the
answer always is, that it lies in our persuasions concerning the Pope in whom
we believe a power inconsistent with the safety of Princes or fidelity of
Subjects. This the person of Honor against S. C. makes the only cause of
jealousy, or suspicion of our Fidelity, which may prove dangerous to the
Kingdom, and against which the laws are provided: This the Execution of
Justice; This every body assigns for the Treason laid to our charge. When this
is taken away, there remains nothing that I know, but Religion for which we are
to be punished. I hope I have declared my mind sufficiently in this point, and
cleared my self, and those of the same judgment with me, from all guilt of this
Treason. If you will notwithstanding punish us, you may if you please, but I am
sure you cannot say you punish us for Treason. The laws being as they are, it
may show very strange to pretend favor from them: but yet confiding in the
authority of this Honorable Person, who says they were provided against
Opinions, which I have disclaimed, and considering the laws themselves mention
withdrawing Subjects from their natural Obedience (23. Eliz. 3. Jac.) as the
ground of their severity, I hope it will not misbecome me, to wish you would be
more guided by their intention, than Letter. The intention of laws I think is
acknowledged their best Interpreter; were the judgment of this Person of Honor
of value with you, I should not doubt you would allow some equity in my wishes;
for I am sure I am not within the compass of that intention.

But I am not so vain as to appeal to any thing but mercy. As nothing more
becomes me to ask, so nothing more becomes you to show, though truly I think it
not more for your Honor than interest in this case. Certainly you would not
have these Principles gain strength, against which you testify so much
aversion. Why then do you do all you can, to make them pass for Principles of
Religion? For while you treat equally those who disclaim, and those who hold
them, and put no difference betwixt them and points of Faith, you bid fairly to
persuade people that there is none, and that they ought to suffer as much for
the one as the other. Methinks your own experience should instruct you, that
it is no easy thing, to pluck up any persuasions, which are thought to spring
from the root of Religion, let them be never so false or wicked, and that it
concerns you sufficiently not to let more than are, be thought incorporated
with it. If this import you not, can it at least be for your advantage, that
those who would comply with you, should be in a much worse condition, than
those who will not, and this purely for their compliance? The equality, which
you show, hinders not the cases, of the one and the other, from being very
unequal, and the disadvantage of the inequality lies on that side which is
inclined to you. These are in the worst case of any of our communion. For the
rest suffer only from you, these from you and us too.

Pray reflect a little how the world has gone, and goes with those who gratify
you in this matter. What was the event of that unwearied constancy which the
learned Withrington showed in it? He lost his good name, his Friends, all
comforts of life, all sweetness of society with those of his own communion, and
had not so much as Liberty from you, but lived and died a Prisoner. Walsh
succeeds him, in learning, in fidelity, in constancy, and in all likelihood
fortune. He has appeared so far in this business, that I believe he thinks it
not safe to appear in any part of the world where the Pope bears sway: and yet
for ought I know has as little security at home as abroad. His Liberty and Life
are at the mercy of every informer, it not being in the power of any Judge,
before whom he shall be brought, to save him from the punishment appointed for
Treason. Harold is another who has appeared in this cause with the same
success. He lives confined in a convent of his own order, in or near Bruxels,
because he refuses to retract the Irish remonstrance, without an express saving
of fidelity to his King. This by the Congregation de Propaganda at Rome was
judged a captious exception, and the man is by the Internuncio of Bruxels
confined against his will, and notwithstanding the permission of his own
Superiors to retire elsewhere. Coppinger and the rest of the regular
Remonstrants in Ireland, to say nothing of other, and those many and grievous
vexations, are either actually banished by the late Proclamation against Bishops
and Regulars, or live in extreme danger, and fear of being discovered and
exposed to the law by those, who hate them for their constancy to the
Remonstrance. And this is the sat of all who gratify you with those
testimonies of Loyalty which you are perpetually urging.

Time was when you objected against me, that we had an unintelligible way of
Government among us. Permit me to say I can as little understand yours. He was
a wise Prince who caused the Oath of Allegiance to be made, with design to
distinguish the dangerous Principles, which he thought concurred to the Powder
Treason, from others which were innocent. Who can understand, why those, who by
that Distinction are found on the right side, should always be in worse
condition than those who are on the wrong? Did K. James or the Parliament, when
they established a Distinction by Law, mean to find out the Innocent, by their
distinction, that they might be the worse for their Innocence? To impute Danger
and Treason to one part, and punish both, and the not-dangerous, and
not-Traitors more? For so they are though not by you. This is the effect of
your Distinction, though sure it was never the design. The Act seems made to
distinguish the Treason, for which you say we suffer, from the Religion, for
which you say we do not. And when all is done, they are not so much as exempt
from the punishment of Traitors, who by this Act are exempted from the guilt of
Treason. Withrington was no Traitor, his actions and writings clear him
sufficiently. Walsh is no Traitor, on the contrary he has given proofs of
Fidelity which few could, and fewer perhaps would. And yet the Law looks on
him, and may to day or to morrow pass on him as a Traitor. Truly it is not
intelligible, at least to my dullness, how it should be for your interest, that
things should be carried in this manner. This I know, that while they are so,
few will comply with you, I mean where with a safe conscience they may. For
Hopes and Fears are the main motives, which carry human nature, and it is not to
be expected people should gratify you, when they have nothing to hope, and
more to fear, than when they do not. For my own part I think you very
unreasonable to quarrel at me for being concealed, and single. At least I am
not so unreasonable as to court any man, by joining with me, to run the fate of
Walsh and Withrington, and will avoid it my self as long as I can. I relish not
their uncomfortable condition, finding it uncomfortable enough to live in
perpetual fear of the Laws: But I declare they shall not take hold on me for
Treason; For I again disclaim those positions which you say are Treasonable.
More I could and would say to you, if none saw my letters but your self. But
thus much I profess to all the world; and besides, that I am

Your very humble Servant.

This following Quotation out of Dr. H. Fern, late Bishop of Chester, should
have been inserted with those other Quotations taken out of Dr. Stillingfleet,
etc. which you have before at the end of the Protestant Gentleman's Letter,
page 7. But the Book (of the said Dr. Fern) which has it, came not to hand
soon enough to insert it there. And yet being so directly and fully to purpose,
I would not omit giving it here.
I Believe and do suppose there are some, [Popish Priests] who in the
simplicity of their hearts, and out of mere Conscience of Religion, do labor
the propagation of it, whilst others more directly are guilty of Seditious and
Treasonable Practices. It is my wish there could be a distinction made between
the one and the other, that the punishment (which the Law adjudges all Priests
to, that are found within the Land) might only fall upon them, who are indeed
guilty of such practices, which being so frequently found in their predecessors
(and the State being not able to distinguish between them, who are all
Missionaries of Rome) caused those Laws to be made for the security of Prince
and State. And if they that come into the Land, without any Treasonable intent,
do suffer for it, they must thank their fellows (as the abovementioned
Seculars do the Jesuits) whose restless attempts forced the State to forbid
them all entrance into the Land under pain of Treason.

To conclude; it is not Religion, nor the Function, nor any Ministerial Act
belonging to it, that is punished in Romish Priests, but Treason and Seditious
practices, to which Religion, Sacraments, Ministry of Reconciliation, and all
that is reputed Holy, are made to serve; and all this to advance and secure the
Papal Usurpation. Dr. H. Fern in his Book entitled, Certain Considerations of
present Concernment; touching This Reformed Church of England. Printed in
London, 1653. Chap. 5. Paragraph 9. Page 169.

FINIS.
The Fifteenth and Sixteenth OF THE CONTROVERSIAL LETTERS, OR Grand
Controversy, Concerning The pretended Temporal Authority of POPES over the
whole Earth.

And the True Sovereign of KINGS within their own respective Kingdoms.

Between two English Gentlemen, The one of the Church of England. The other of
the Church of Rome.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun, and Benjamin Took at the Ship in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

FRIEND,
I Have got a new Flea in my Ear, which you must needs pull out. It is like
enough my importunity may not be over-welcom, and you may think perhaps I grate
on our Friendship, by pressing you against your humor: But truly, I have no
mind to remain in the dark till you be in the humor of Writing. I may tarry
long enough, for ought I see, if I stay till that day comes. In short, I think
my curiosity more reasonable than your humor; and for our Friendship I have
given enough to it, and more than I can justify to my reason, by forbearing
you thus long; not but that your last complaints appeared to me as Just as
Pathetical, and I truly wish I were able to contribute more to your ease than a
fruitless compassion. But what? because the World goes not as we would have it,
must we therefore whine away our lives, and mourn our selves out of what we may
have, because we cannot have all we would? Alas! we are but Passengers in the
Ship of the World. Whatever our desires, whatever our concerns are, we must be
carried as Winds and Tides drive the great Vessel. Consider what a fine kind of
madness 'twould be, to grow sullen, and neglect our selves, and fall out with
our fellow Passengers, because the Winds do not blow as we would have them. You
and I have nothing to do with the Helm, and it is well we have not, for with our
unskilfulness we should quickly have more to complain of than cross Winds. But
we know there is a Pilot whom the Seas and Winds obey, and who having the
appointing of his Substitutes, we are sure has chosen the fittest. However we
know he watches over them himself, and will certainly bring the Vessel safe
into Harbor at last. The care of our passage is a business which belongs to
him, and with him we may securely trust it. This being so, I cannot see it is
other than plain folly to repine our selves at matters which belong not to us,
and are besides in safe hands, into a neglect of those which do. Our only
business is to know as much as we can of our duty, and do as much as we know;
and this you shall permit me to pursue. If you refuse to go along with me, I
must tell you plainly I shall have more reason to complain of your resty
humor, than you of any thing besides.

Lighting by chance on Aitzema's Resolutions in the United Provinces, I
observed an Address, from the Deputys of the Synods to the States General,
which shockt me strangely. The first Article of the means proposed by them for
hindering the Popes Hierarchy, etc. runs thus, That all of the Popish Clergy,
Jesuits, Priests, Friars, etc. be kept out of the Land, they being no Subjects
of any secular Princes or Magistrates, but only of the Court of Rome, according
to their own Tenets, etc. Now I wonder not to see the Deputys of Synods willing
to be rid of their Clergys company. Every body knows there is no great kindness
betwixt them: but that they should deny them to be subjects of Secular Princes,
and bring even themselves for Vouchers, is a thing I know not what to make of.

Pray Friend, do these men say true? If they do, the Pope is much a greater man
than I took him for. It Is not the Patrimony of St. Peter, the Liberality of
Pepin, or Mathildir which confines his Sovereignty: for it is plainly extended
as far as his communion, and that not only upon the score of that Supremacy,
which shares stakes with Princes, and leaving Temporals to them contents it
self with Spirituals; but with a Superiority which admits no Co-partnership,
and sweeps all for himself. Methinks it is a pretty trick this of the Pope to
get his Subjects maintained at other folks charges, and set up a Principality
of his own in the Dominions of other Princes. But yet I wonder how he could
contrive it: for should any man but the Pope come to any Prince, and say, I
beseech you, Sir, let so many of your Subjects leave acknowledging you, and
turn Subject to me; he had need of great power in Rhetoric to hope to prevail.
What wise bustles have sometimes been made in the World, and peradventure still
continue in some places! Princes think they do great matters when they suffer
not the Pope to dispose of Benefices in their Territories to others than their
own Subjects; when all the while they have it seems no Subjects to whom they
can be disposed, unless they would have them disposed to the Laity, which every
body knows cannot be: yet much ado they keep to have those only preferred, who
are born in places Subject to them; as if it were any matter where they were
born, if when they come to Benefices they are no longer Subject to any but the
Pope; and all the dispute be, whether he shall promote a Subject of this or
that Nation, but still equally his own Subject. By this account a Benefice is a
strange thing; for it dissolves the Tie betwixt Prince and Subject. And I
should think there is no worse nor more ruinous Simony in the World, than to
purchase one at the price of Allegiance.

I tell you truly, Friend, all this looks to me with a very odd face, and would
almost tempt me to suspect animosity had transported the Holland Deputys to say
more than perhaps they believed. Yet I thought it incredible, that persons
chosen and Commissionated to represent their Churches, should come with a lie
in their mouth to an Assembly of the States General. Besides, the Assembly
sitting long, the Churches made a second Address by new Deputys; and They again
insisted on the same Article, and for the same reason. I could not believe this
perseverance in a change of persons could be without ground. Nevertheless, as I
love to hear both sides, I was desirous to know what your men say to the matter.

I had none but Bellarmin at hand, with whom, to tell you the truth, I cared
not to meddle; I have dealt with him, you know, formerly, and found not my
account, and should have been glad of another Chapman. But I was over-stockt
with Curiosity, a fretting Ware, and which will not stay for a good Market. As
much as my mind misgave me, in defect of another, I ventured on him, and read
his 28 and 29 Chapters of his first Book de Clericis, where he treats of this
matter; and it is just as I feared; for I know not how it happened, but I have
always mighty ill luck with Bellarmin; for any satisfaction I have got, I
might even as well have thrown Cross or Pile for the matter. To my thinking, he
talks a good while on both sides, and so as to reserve the liberty of answering
Subjects, or not Subjects, as happens to be most convenient when the Question
is asked. On the one side he tells us that the Clergy, besides their Clerical
capacity, are also Citizens and parts of the Politic Commonwealth, and in
that respect obliged to keep the Civil Laws, consistent with the holy Canons
and duty of a Clerical life; because otherwise much trouble and confusion would
happen in the Commonwealth. On the other side, that the obligation, which the
Clergy have to observe the Civil Laws, is directive only, not co-active, and
that only in defect of an Ecclesiastical Law. For should an Ecclesiastical Law
dispose otherwise even of the temporal things ordered by the Civil Law, the
Clergy are to stick to the Ecclesiastical, and not observe the Civil so much as
directively. Again, that they cannot be judged by the Civil Magistrate, if they
do not keep the Civil Law; and that their Goods, whether Ecclesiastical or
Secular are not liable to the Tributes of Secular Princes.

To my apprehension now, the Clergy, according to one half of this Doctrine,
are very good Subjects; according to the other, none at all. If they be parts
of the Commonwealth, they must of necessity be Subjects, unless they be
Princes; For a Commonwealth holds none but Prince and Subjects. If they be
obliged to the observation of the Civil Laws, they are Subjects again, that
obligation being the very thing we call subjection. But if their Actions, when
they break the Laws, are not liable to the cognizance of the Civil Magistrate,
nor their Goods in their share in the common burdens; if they obey the Laws
only out of good nature, and to do as others do, and no longer than till they
have order to the contrary, I should think they are not Subjects, unless in
respect of him whose orders they are to obey. For there can be no Subjects
without a Prince, nor Prince without Power, nor Power without something on
which it may be exercised. If the Secular Prince can exercise no power over
their persons, nor what they have, nor what they do; there remains nothing,
that I see, on which his Power can work; and consequently neither Power, nor
Prince, nor Subject. Wherefore to my apprehension all this is Handy Dandy: the
Clergy are Subjects, or not Subjects, according to the hand you choose, or
Bellarmin will open.

I could be content to understand by the way, if I might hope to understand any
thing of Bellarmin, what meaning there is in his distinction betwixt Directive
and Co-active obligation. What Directive means, and what Co-active, I think, I
understand. He who shows me a way I know not, is said to Direct; and who draws
me along in it, whether I will or no, to Force me. So Laws are properly called
Directive, because they inform us what we are to do; and Co-active, because
they constrain us by fear of punishment to follow their direction. According to
this, it may be said with sense, whether with Truth or no is another Question,
That the Clergy are directed by the Laws to what is fit for them to do, but not
obliged to do it. But it passes my capacity how Obligation should be divided
into Directive and Co-active, or Co-active, and not Co-active, when all
obligation to my thinking is Co-active. For since he who is obliged to any
thing, is not at liberty to do, or leave it undone, but constrained to do it in
force of the obligation upon him, methinks obligation imports Co-action in its
Notion; and that to say, there can be an obligation which is not Co-active, is
to say there can be an obligation which is not an obligation. I fancy Bellarmin
took his hint from Princes, who being free from the Co-action of their Laws,
yet observe their Direction because they will, and see it fit. But then for
this very reason, because they are not subject to their co-action, we say
Princes are absolutely not obliged by their Laws; and if Bellarmin had a mind
to make the case equal betwixt them and the Clergy, he should put no obligation
in the Clergy, as the Language of the World puts none in Princes. Yet to say
the truth, I conceive by his not co-active obligation, he intended not to
exempt the Clergy from constraint and punishment, so the Secular Magistrate
have nothing to do with it; which whether he have or no, I enquire not now.
Whoever has to do with it, if the thing be to be done, if the Clergy be
punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court only if you will, co-action still is
inseparable from obligation, and not co-active obligation pure riddle.

Again, since the reason he gives of his Directive obligation of the Clergy, is
to avoid confusion in the Commonwealth, I would gladly know how much less
confusion there would be, if they broke the Laws, not by a restiness of their
own, but by command from another. Both ways the Laws would be broken, and so
the thing be done, it matters not much which way. If there be any difference, I
should think disobedience from private Capricios less inconvenient than from
public commands. Capricios are seldom either universal or lasting. Those who
remained sober, would help to reclaim the rest, and a hundred remedies might be
applied, with hopes of success. But where the disobedience is universal and
countenanced by Authority, the disease is little better than desperate. One had
as good say, the Clergy are bound to keep the Laws, as long as they can do but
a little harm by breaking them, and to break them when they can do a great
deal. Let us put the case in his own Examples. If the Secular Power impose such
a rate on vendible things, or forbid carrying of Arms in the night, or
transportation of Corn out of the Country, or the like, the Clergy are to obey
as well as the rest, till an Ecclesiastical Law dispose otherwise; very well.
Let us suppose then that the Secular Power, by the Authority which it has in
these things, has rated a pot of Ale at a penny; should the Clergy out of
Thrift or stubbornness pay but a halfpenny, others would either grumble they
should have their drink cheaper, or perhaps sell them none. To avoid this
inconvenience, they are directively obliged to pay a whole penny, provided the
Ecclesiastical Law interpose not; but let that come, and set another rate, a
half penny for Example, then they are Co-actively obliged to pay no more. Now I
would fain know of Bellarmin, how much less inconvenience there is, now the
Clergy must pay but a half penny out of conscience, than before when they would
pay no more out of stubbornness. Will other people grumble less at the
inequality, or will they get any more drink? For my part I suspect the
Ale-house-keepers will turn stubborn in their turns, and not afford them for
their half penny what they can have a penny for of the Lay-good-fellows, who
both directively and co-actively pay still according to the Secular rate. I
doubt they will be forced to strain a point of Conscience, and for all the
Ecclesiastical Law, and their obligation to stick to it, be even co-actively
obliged to pay as others do, or remain thirsty. Go on if you please to the rest
with the imagination, for I will stay no longer here, and when you have
considered the difference betwixt breaking the Prohibitions of weapons, or
Transporting Corn, etc. by private Capricios, and public and obligatory
commands, tell me whether Bellarmin were not in a pleasant humor, and had
great care of the Commonwealth, when he made a little inconvenience reason
enough to oblige the Clergy to keep the Civil Laws, and permits and makes it
their duty to break them with twenty times a greater. I say nothing of the
greatest inconvenience of all, the acknowledging a Foreign Authority, which
can oblige so great a number of persons living within the bounds, and taken for
members of the Commonwealth, as belong to the Clergy, to break all Laws even
in Temporal things, because at present I mind only how pat the reason is which
he gives for his Directive obligation of the Clergy: Otherwise that Doctrine
brings not only confusion and trouble, but ruin to the commonwealth, and is
absolutely intolerable. But this is not a place for it.

To return into our Road, Bellarmin tells us at last, that the Clergy and Laity
have, even in Temporals, different Laws, a different Prince, and different
Tribunals, and that the Commonwealth which holds them, is in truth and
formally two Commonwealths, though because they all live in the same place,
and under protection of the same Prince, it be materially one. Also that, in
respect of the Clergy, Princes are not superior Powers, and therefore the
Clergy are not bound to obey them neither by Divine, nor so much as Human
right, unless Directively in certain cases, as was said before. This is full
and home; for Bellarmin can speak plain enough when he has a mind to it. But
the Question, and my Curiosity are now at an end. For I do not mean to be
laughed at by persisting to enquire, whether the Clergy be subject to him who is
not their Prince, nor in respect of them a superior power. It is something
strange though. By this account the Clergy are no more subjects to the Prince,
in whose Dominions they live, than Aliens, who live in his Country under his
protection. They are as much a new and strange kind of Aliens, bred and born,
and unmoveably settled in a Commonwealth; and yet Aliens still. However it be,
I have no more to say to the Holland Deputys. Bellarmin has acquitted them. It
remains that he acquit himself: for as great a man as he is, so unexpected and
so important a Doctrine will hardly pass upon his bare word.

He proves it both from Human and Divine Right. And I commend him for leaving
nothing out; but think nevertheless I may deduct the one half, and confine my
inquiry to Divine Right. For Human Right being either by Civil or
Ecclesiastical Laws, what the Clergy have by Civil Laws, is so far from
prejudicing their subjection, that it rather confirms it. For Receiving is an
acknowledgment of the power from which they receive. Besides Princes, whether
they can or no, yet use not to grant any thing derogatory from their own
Sovereignty: or if they do, recall it on better consideration. What in
particular it is, which the Clergy have this way, we must enquire of those who
know the Laws; whatever it be, much good may it do them. Were all men of my
mind, peradventure it should be more than it is: for I am of opinion, they
cannot be respected too much; and whatever serves, whether to preserve or
increase that respect, is the Laitys good as much as theirs, and perhaps more.

As for Ecclesiastical Laws, I conceive they need no place of their own at
present, but may come in either with Civil or Divine. For if the stress be put
only there, so that before the Ecclesiastical Laws were made, the Clergy were
Subjects, and had been so still if those Laws had not exempted them from
subjection, Princes I suppose will expect their consent should be asked;
Ecclesiastical Laws of this nature not binding without the concurrence of the
Civil Power. And then the Question will be, to what and how far the Civil power
is engaged, which plainly belongs to Civil Right? But if the Ecclesiastical Law
be supposed, not originally to give, but declare and press that exemption, as
due to the Clergy by an antecedent Law of God or nature, the exemption is then
refunded into that antecedent Law, and there, as I conceive, it only pinches.
Wherefore leaving Bellarmin's proofs from Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, to
those who are skilled and concerned in them, I am only curious to know what kind
of proofs he will bring from the Divine Law, which if it do command such things
as he affirms of the Clergy, truly, I have hitherto been very ill instructed in
it. He divides them into the two branches of Positive and Natural Divine Law;
either of which would have served his turn; but he will needs undertake for
both.

Beginning with the Positive, he desires us first to observe, That by the
Positive Law of God, he means not any command of God properly so called, which
expressly appears in Holy Writ, but what may by some similitude be deduced from
the Examples or Testimonys of the Old or New Testament. Now this seems to me a
very inauspicious beginning, and as much as to say, that by the Positive Law of
God, he means the not-Positive Law of God. For pray what does Positive
signify? It is used in contradistinction to Natural, and Natural signifies the
Law, or Rule of Actions, imprinted in us by Reason; which inasmuch as it is our
nature, gives it the Title of Natural; inasmuch as that nature proceeds from
God, the Title of Divine. But because it happens from the shortness, or
corruption of nature, that what appears reasonable to one, appears unreasonable
to another; this Rule becomes a kind of Lesbian Rule, bent by our passions
several ways. To remedy which mischief, and not leave us altogether to the
uncertain conduct of our erring Judgments, God in his mercy has expressly
declared his pleasure, about what we are to do, or avoid, in the matters so
declared. This express declaration is called his Positive Law, which supplys
the defects of nature, and freeing us from groping blindly in the dark, and
wrangling fruitlesly and endlesly about what is or is not our duty, sets it in
a clear light before us, and leaves us nothing to do but perform it.

This being so, I would fain learn of Bellarmin what pretense there can be for
the Positive Law of God, where there is no express command of his, and we are
left to our uncertain Deductions? What difference betwixt this, and the case of
pure nature, and what shall hinder us from wrangling as long and to as little
purpose, as if there were no such thing as his Positive Law in the World? Nay
though we could come to an end, since this end is to be made at last by the
force of prevailing Reason, which can satisfy us of the Truth of the
deductions it makes, why is not that end to be refunded rather into Reason,
than the Law of God? We may possibly have some assistance from it toward the
direction of our Reason. But Positive Law is one thing; the operations even of
assisted Reason another. And I cannot imagine how the operations of Reason
should by one that loves to speak properly, as Bellarmin does, be called the
Law of God. Though it be the Law of God on which Reason works, yet it is Reason
still that works: and unless we have good security that our Reason is
particularly directed in these operations, I know not why it may not fail us as
well here as elsewhere. A body would think the sad distractions which perplex
the World in matters that concern the Law of God, are too good an Argument,
that our Reason fails us no where more.

But that the World is a confident World, and the Cry always great whatever
the Wool be, I should wonder people should not fear to make so bold at every
turn with God and his Law. For whoever is mistaken in his reasoning, plainly
pins his own mistakes upon unerring Truth; and who is not, has at most but hit
upon a true conclusion in Divinity, which if he will call the Positive Law of
God, he must have a language by himself.

Nevertheless, if Bellarmin once in his life be infallible in his Logic, and
have rightly deduced his conclusion from his Premises, whether it may be called
the Positive Law of God or no, I acknowledge it is to be embraced, as all Truth
is whatever name it have, and however we come by it. But I must needs avow, his
credit is not great enough with me to engage my laziness into the trouble of
examining his Arguments. I see he cites Classical Authors, men of great names
even among your selves, who know as little of the positive Law, he talks of, as
my self, and who positively deny there is any such thing in the case.

By the way, one may perceive it was not Lightness, but Necessity which drew
Bellarmin to entitle his reasonings to the Law of God. He had a mind to
establish the exemptions of the Clergy on that Basis, which he was sure was
firm and unmovable. But because there was no such Law to be found, to put his
own deductions in its stead, was a forced put. And if a second reason may be
thought of, why he should leave undone what was impossible to be done, I
suppose he might have some consideration of the Gentlemen his Adversarys. For
it would have been a troublesome business to have made out, how there should be
a positive Law of God, of which Masters in Israel, as well as himself, were
ignorant, had he understood by it what others do.

But to let this pass, till he and his Friends are agreed, I have no temptation
to thrust my self into their quarrels. I do not think but they have something
still to say for themselves, for all he has urged against them. Till he have
stopped their mouths, and left them without reply, I think I may take the liberty
to think them as likely to be in the right as he, and unblameably dissent from
him, as well as those of his own party.

Again, People in this Age use not to perform altogether so much as they
Promise: and Bellarmin does not promise more than some similitude between the
cases he finds in the Scripture, and that of the Clergy now adays. Though he
should perform to the uttermost, I suspect the result would be little more than
to make hard shift to bring an Argument against himself. He mentions in all
four places of Scripture, whereof three, according to his own reckoning, amount
but to this: The Levites were exempted by the Positive Law, and therefore
Priests, who are as good men as they, ought to be so too. I fear Bellarmin will
hardly be contented, though a man should allow him all the exemptions which can
be proved due to the Levites by the old Law. But I will not meddle with that
matter. It is plain that God did expressly give the Levites the exemptions
mentioned in the old Law; it is confessed by Bellarmin, that there is no
express mention in the new Law of those exemptions to the Clergy for which he
contends. I see not why this does not evidently conclude, that God was not of
Bellarmin's mind, and intended not that the Clergy should owe their exemptions
to his Law. For otherwise, why did he not exempt them expressly as he did the
Levites? Unless we could swallow the Blasphemy of imagining God was less
careful of Priests than Levites: or when he came to deliver us a new Law,
forgot to insert all he intended, and left it to be supplied by our whimsys.
These places, I think, prove the just contrary of what Bellarmin would have,
and that which follows is, that as the exemptions of the Levites were by the
positive Law of God, because they are expressly mentioned in it, so the Clergys
exemptions are not by the positive Law of God, because there is no mention of
them in it.

However it be, when I reflect that the Topic which, for want of a better,
Bellarmin is fain to choose, is a Simili, and that Like, or Unlike is to be
found or made every where: when I reflect, that even this too dwindles into a
quandam similitudinem, a thing which may be found in the most contrary things
that are, for there is some kind of likeness even betwixt Fire and Water, I
cannot see but that to meddle with it, is to begin an Inquiry which never will
have end. For I believe Doomsday will sooner come, than he shall have made his
cases so like, that no difference can be found between them; and till he do,
the Topic concludes not.

I turn me therefore to observe what work he will make with his Divine natural
Law, which he first distinguishes into three degrees. In the first, he places
those commands of nature, which are so clearly imprinted in men's hearts, that
they need no Discipline or Art, but by the bare light of Reason, even without
the help of new discourse, are by all esteemed Just. As that Good is to be
desired, Evil avoided, etc. The second degree, is of those which follow from
those first principles as immediate conclusions, naturally flowing by an easy,
evident and necessary consequence; and which, as the former, need not
Discipline or Art, but only simple discourse, such as all men may have. Of this
kind he reckons the commands of the Decalogue. Now the Exemptions of the Clergy
belong not to either of these two, but to a third Degree of natural commands,
which he says are indeed deduced from the Law of nature, but by a consequence
neither absolutely necessary, nor altogether evident, and which therefore stand
in need of Humane Constitution.

I should be beholding to him who would tell me what this means. For I can make
nothing of it, and am mightily afraid this unnecessary, and unevident
consequence of his, has a third quality, and will prove unintelligible too.
Deducing, I think, signifies discovering the connection of two Terms between
themselves, because they are both connected with one third. If that connection
be not seen, I should think it is all one as if it were not: and if it be seen,
then to him who sees it, it is evident. I should think again, that where there
is no necessary consequence, or connection of Terms in the conclusion, there is
no connection of them with a Third in the Premises. For if there be, their
connection is as necessary, as the connection of that Third with it self, or its
being what it is; so that the consequence plainly is either necessary, or none.
If this be so, a consequence neither evident nor necessary, is evidently and
necessarily no consequence, and so far from communicating the force of the Law
of nature to the conclusion, that it communicates none at all.

Wherefore take away the learned Terms, and that which Bellarmin says, is in
plain English this, I would have you believe that the Law of Nature commands
the exemptions of the Clergy, which it may do for ought I know, though I
neither see it does, nor any necessity why it should. But yet I would have you
believe it, because I find it would be very convenient it should be so. Though
this found not altogether so amusingly as in his language, yet I fancy it might
be as efficacious. For plain dealing is a taking thing, and might perhaps work
with many; but when you set upon them with dint of Argument, people stand upon
their guard, and to attempt them with unnecessary and unseen consequences, is a
desperate business, when the most evident necessary in the World often fails of
success.

The truth is, Bellarmin himself does not trust his Deductions at this time;
For he says, they stand in need of Humane Constitution. And I pray for what is
this Humane Constitution needful? Is it to make the not evident, and not
necessary conclusion, evident and necessary, and make that follow from natural
Principles, which does not follow from natural Principles? This indeed is what
needs: but it is more than Humane Constitution can do. For Conclusions follow
from the seen Identity of Premises, and all the Authority of all mankind put
together, can never make that be seen, which is not to be seen, or an Identity
where there is a difference. Or does he mean that Humane Constitution is
needful to make the Conclusion, which cannot prevail by its own strength, be
accepted in virtue of the constitutive Authority? This indeed Humane
constitution can do; for it matters not whether the conclusion be well or ill
deduced, if those who can command, will have it obeyed. But then what is
established this way stands wholly upon Humane, and not at all on Natural
Right, farther than as Nature or Reason is the ground of all Laws. For take
away the Humane constitution, nature is so far from obliging any body to a
consequence confessedly unconcluding, that on the contrary it obliges him not
to accept it, he being not true to his Reason, which is his nature, who does.
This being plain, to what purpose does Bellarmin keep such ado with the Law of
nature, when he meant to resolve all into the pure Law of man at last?

I should guess, by the hint he gives presently after, that he had a mind to
make his Exemptions unalterable; for he infers, that what depends on the Law of
Nations, which he makes equivalent to his third branch, cannot be abrogated or
changed by Princes, because it is in some sort natural. This would have founded
something like, if he had not told us what he meant. But the mischief is, we
know beforehand, that his in some sort natural, means deduced from Nature
neither evidently nor necessarily, and that signifying not deduced, the sort
which he calls natural, signifies a sort of standing upon nature, so as not to
stand upon nature, but upon the needful humane Authority, that is a not natural
sort. And then, because his Exemptions can be no otherwise unchangeable than as
they are natural, there is neither evidence nor necessity of their
unchangeableness, and so the most that can be said of them, is that they are
unchangeable in some sort likewise, namely in such sort as they are natural,
that is, in a not unchangeable, or changeable sort.

Wherefore when we come to cast up accounts with Bellarmin, and see what his
Divine Right amounts to, we find that what he calls Divine Positive Law, is,
even by his confession, no Law of God, but deductions from the worst and most
hopeless of Topics. Which who will go about to examine, had need be a man of
great leisure, and who can promise himself a great age; otherwise his attempt
will be desperate: and what he calls Divine Natural Law, is likewise no Law of
Nature, but Deductions like the former, as weak and as endless, and which to
save us the fruitless trouble of examining, he fairly gives us warning are
unconcluding, And this is Divine Right in Bellarmin's language.

Notwithstanding, because Truth has influence on the actions of men, not as it
is in it self, but as it appears to them, it imports not so much what is, as
what is apprehended; wherefore let Bellarmin's proofs be never so bad, if you
apprehend them good, it is all one as if they were perfect Demonstrations. Tell
me then what you think of the matter; what you believe, and what you do in this
point; whether Bellarmin and the Church be of the same mind, and all the
immunities attributed by him to the Clergy, pass among you for unquestionably
Divine and Unalterable Right. And remember our Question is not whether they
have exemptions or no. Every body sees they are, and ought be free from diverse
burdens of the Commonwealth, since otherwise they could not live a Clerical
life, as it is necessary, even for the good of the Laity they should. But the
question is, what those Exemptions are, and how They come by them. For my part
I should think that if any Exemption claimed or enjoyed by them, be discovered
harmful to the Commonwealth, such an exemption is neither necessary to a
Clerical life, nor commanded by God. In particular I see no necessity of their
exemption from Secular Tribunals, and conceive they might be very good Clergy
men without it. What prejudice can it be to the Dignity and perfection of their
state, to be awed from doing ill by fear of punishment? To do ill is the
greatest prejudice to both; how being restrained from prejudicing their state,
should be a prejudice to their state, is beyond my understanding. They are but
men, as much the best men as They ought to be, and to have their frailty
exposed to one Temptation more than the rest of mankind, and that the strongest
of Temptations, Impunity, is, in my opinion, far from a Benefit. I think he is
not their Friend who exempts them from fear of punishment, unless he exempt
them too from the possibility of deserving it.

Again, would They do any thing misbecoming their condition, if They paid their
shares in Public Taxes? They who are to wean the hearts of the Laity from
affection to Riches, and the rest of perishable goods, should rather set them
an example of their Doctrine: and are like to be heard but ill, when they
Preach on that subject, if they be known to love Riches themselves, and refuse,
in the necessities of the commonwealth, to part with what the wisdom of it
judges they may spare. Either show me that a Clergy man cannot live as a Clergy
man should, without such exemptions as these, or I shall never believe they are
commanded by the Law of God or Nature.

Then the Tenure, by which they hold what they have, is to be considered. Not
but what they have purely from the Piety and Liberality of men is truly theirs,
and to look upon it with regret, is Envy, and to take it causlesly away,
Injustice. Notwithstanding though there were no more in the case, it is a point
of Gratitude to acknowledge our Benefactors. But if we reflect, that Divine
Right is an unmovable Basis, on which whatever stands can never be stirred;
Humane Right is subject to the contingency of Humane things; it will appear of
considerable importance, on which of the two the exemptions of the Clergy be
settled; for it may happen, that what is convenient in one time and place, may
be inconvenient elsewhere, and in another season. Now it is in Human Authority
to provide a remedy for whatever inconvenience change of circumstances shall
produce in Exemptions derived from Human Authority. But if all be thought to
flow from a Divine Spring, let the waters be never so troubled, or corrupt,
never so rapid, or overflow with never so much prejudice, the mischief is
without remedy, By the way, since no ill can proceed from the Fountain of Good,
if any Exemption bring mischief along with it, that Exemption confutes it self,
and needs no second Argument to evidence it has no warrant from God or Nature.
Bellarmin now says, They are of Divine Right all: Reason says some, at least,
are harmful to Princes, harmful to the Commonwealth, harmful to the Clergy
themselves: what says the Church? Is she for Bellarmin, or Reason? You and I
have kept a great coyl to little purpose, if she stand fast to Bellarmin, and
all our past labor is even much ado about nothing.

For what avails it to shut up the great gate of Direct, and back door of
Indirect Power, if there be still a way underground to get into the house? All
hitherto said in behalf of Princes is, that the Pope cannot take away their
Kingdoms for any cause. What is this better than a Cheat, if he can, even
without any cause, take away their subjects? For what is a Kingdom good for,
and indeed what is it but the subjects? Consider what a Prince he were, into
whose Dominions strangers might enter in what numbers they pleased without his
leave, and plant, and settle themselves, and live without subjection to him;
And tell me what difference there is, whether those men be strangers or
natives. This is at least a partial Deposition, a fair step to a total, and in
some respect worse. For that may be avoided by a Prince, who will always do
what the Pope pleases, and give him no hold, since it cannot be put in practice
without Demerit. But from this no, even, Merit can preserve any Prince. The
Pope not only may, but of necessity must depose him from all Soverainty over as
many as belong to the Clergy. And how far may that carry? Exemptions, if I
mistake not, are extended to the Families of Clergymen too, and so as many
servants as they take, so many subjects the Prince loses. What if they should
stretch it a little farther to honorary servants too, and bring exemptions into
fashion as well as Protections? I should wonder if all this, and twenty times
as much, might not be deduced from the Law of Nature too, in Bellarmin's
method, inevidently and unnecessarily. What if they should yield sometimes to
the frailty of nature, and out of Avarice or Revenge, take their Neighbors
Goods or life? If they cannot be Indicted, but are exempt from that Fear, which
is the great security men in community have of their Lives and Fortunes, I
suspect 'twill not be good living too near a Clergyman.

But to leave such unlikely Speculations, the Clergy, especially in their
Countries, where Religious abound, are considerable even in number; and every
where in quality, for the Influence they have over the people, more I believe
than any other kind of those into which the people are divided. Consider what
fine doings there would be, if the most considerable part of a Nation owe no
subjection to the Prince, no contribution to the common necessities, no
obedience to the Laws, in short, be a part of the Nation, and no part of the
Commonwealth. What Title have they to the benefits of it, who bear no share in
the burdens? What to the protection of Laws, who break them at pleasure? What
pretense to security in the enjoyment of their Goods, from which they, who
secure them, can promise themselves no assistance upon occasion? Other men's
estates are so theirs, that they are more the Commonwealths, which can at any
time take as much of them, as the public necessities require. With what comes
to the Clergy, she has no more to do, more than to keep it safe to them, that
they may keep it safe from her, and be a Guard for them against her self.
Consider what this imports. I mistake, if I have not heard of times and places,
in which a fourth part of the value of the whole has been in the Clergys hands.
Riches being the strength of a Nation, that Nation was plainly a fourth part
weaker, than it would have been otherwise. But whatever be the proportion, what
the Clergy gets the Commonwealth loses, and I suspect there are few which can
with safety bate any part of their strength. I will say no more, believing that
you see enough what I would be at. Either dam up the Spring, if you judge, as I
do, the waters unwholesome, or show they are wholesome. Choose which you please,
only let me not long bear the burden of the impatient curiosity which is now
upon

Yours, etc.

I must needs add a word of what every body talks of. What work has their
Religion made among us? Pray tell me what you think of the matter: for I will
refer it to your self, and make you Judge, whether it be for a rational man, to
entertain a good thought of a Religion which has set a whole Nation in a flame.
Excuse my Freedom, or if you will, bluntness. Reproaches, I know, ill become
the mouth of a Friend at any time, and have something of inhuman in affliction.
They are not meant to You, but to that restless Spirit which haunts your
Religion, a Spirit which no moderation and good usage of others, no hazard and
inconvenience of your own, can charm into quiet; a Frenzy which keeps you
always talking and waking even when you are ready to die for want of silence
and sleep. For yourself, to do you right, I think you well in your wits, and an
honest man, the only honest man of your party.

FRIEND,
YOU have the pleasant'st Fancys! To hear you talk, a man would think Princes
could not Rule, nor People live in quiet, and the World in danger of being
turned Topsy Turvy, and all for a Page or two in Bellarmin. The Book has been
out a pretty while, and twenty more perhaps have since said as much, perhaps
more than he, and yet we make a shift, thanks be to God, to live still, and the
World staggers on the usual reeling pace. What is it alarms you thus? Your
Clergy pretend to none of those things which disquiet you; and let ours pretend
what they will, you know well enough how to deal with them. While you order
them as you think fit, it is no great matter how they think of themselves. To
see the different Judgments of men. This Question, which to you appears so
important, and so necessary, to me seems not so much as seasonable. There is no
time wherein people should not be wary what they say of those, whose office it
is to keep alive the Sacred fire rained down from Heaven on the day of
Pentecost, and press upon us the concerns of the next life, without which all
the advantages of this are not only useless, but harmful. But in an Age not at
all favorable, and hardly just to them, when all the weight we can throw into
their scale will scarce keep the balance even, methinks it is very improper to
take any out. All your mighty concern, and all your importunity, should never
move me to do it. But I consider that Falsehood weighs not; or if it do, it is on
the contrary side. For the advantages sought from Untruth, turn to disadvantage
at last. The Clergy have Prerogatives established by the wisdom and goodness of
God, which raise them, as it is fit they should be, above the rest of mankind.
Who seeks to increase them by ungrounded fancys, is not their Friend. It Is as
if a man should go about to enlarge his houses with new buildings on a bad
foundation, which will certainly fall themselves, and besides endanger to pull
down part of the old with them. Who grasps at what is not his, hazards to lose
what is. For such is the malice of the World, when we have once found a hole in
our Neighbors Coat, within a while he may chance to have never a whole piece.
If reason warrant us to except against any one, our perverseness will tempt us
to except against every thing: And so we actually see there is Confidence, I
was about to say Impudence, enough in the World to make even Preaching, and the
Administration of the Sacraments common to the Laity. I know not whether this
be not the true, at least original, Reason of the complaints of this Age.
However it be, I am persuaded that to discover what is unsound in the
Prerogatives, whether pretended by, or obtruded upon, the Clergy, is to deserve
well at their hands, and the best, and perhaps only way, to make what is sound
more stable and lasting. This persuasion, more than your earnestness, prevails
with me to do as you would have me, and tell you what I think of the business
with all the sincerity and plainness I can.

In the first place, I think, whatever be of the conclusion, Bellarmin's
Arguments are not good, and prove not Divine Right, either Positive or Natural;
in which, we being all agreed of Human Right, the only difficulty lies. It
would save me some pains, if I shifted them off as you do, with quarrelling at
the Topics. But I consider, that though an Argument a Simili be none of the
surest, and often fail, yet it may hit, and the Topic is allowed among the
rest in Logic. Besides, to reject an Argument, and not say particularly why,
is not altogether so fair play. But pray expect not I should be as smart as
you. Bellarmin never comes in your way, but you must have a Bout at sharps with
him. I must confess he has given you some cause to bear him no great good will,
but none to fall still into your Burlesque fits. For ought I perceive you would
be as much at a loss for sport without Bellarmin, as some Pulpits for matter
without the Pope. They are a pair of Gentlemen without whom, as hardly as you
treat them, it seems you would not know what to do. Why cannot you follow the
example of his sober style, and my Lord Falkland's advice, to treat
controversy with the softness of Love Letters? I have told you of this before,
and cannot help it, if you will not out of your way. But you shall go alone for
me. I like it not so well to keep you company in it.

To come to the matter; in proof of Divine Positive Law, there are in all four
places alleged by Bellarmin. The two first are Genesis 47. where Joseph exempted
the Egyptian Priests, and 1 Esdr. 7. where Artaxerxes exempted the Priests of
the Jews. These two indeed he touches but gently, and he has reason. The
Egyptian Priests avoided the necessity of selling their Lands, by the
allowances of Corn they had out of the Public Granaries: Artaxerxes took from
his Officers the power of imposing Tributes upon the Jewish Priests and
Ministers; and these things are recorded in Scripture. This is the whole matter
of fact, which Bellarmin barely hints, but says nothing to apply it to his
purpose. I for my part, see not how it can be applied, unless it be first
supposed that every thing contained in Scripture, even in the Historical parts,
is positively commanded by God. And that is so far from true, that we see there
are blameable and vicious actions inserted in the Sacred History as well as
good. Not to go out of our present matter, who will make these examples
equivalent to a positive Law of God, must likewise say it is the positive Law
of God, that care be taken for the subsistence and privileges of Idolatrous
Priests (for so were the Egyptians) and that Ministers of state turn all
Subjects into Slaves as soon as they get opportunity. These places are indeed
against Bellarmin. For it is plain that both Egyptians and Jews, had what they
had, from their several Princes. And this I think is not proof of Divine Right
for Exemptions, but Divine Testimony that they proceeded from Human.

To these two places borrowed from the Gloss upon the Canon Law, out of
deference, I suppose, more than needed to the Authority of the Glossator,
Bellarmin adds two more of his own. The first from Numb. 3. where the Levites
are by Gods appointment given to Aaron and his Successors; and God says several
times expressly of them, They are mine. Were no body wiser than I, this place
would prove no more than what need: no Scripture to prove it, it is so clear of
it self: viz. That they belong to God in a special manner, whose whole business
it is to attend to his service. But Bellarmin undertakes to prove out of it, a
total exemption of the Clergy from the Tribunals of Princes. His discourse is
this, For those whom God chose for himself, to the Ministry of the Temple, and
Holy things, He would have Subjects to the High Priest alone, who represented
the place of God on Earth, and by this freed them from the Jurisdiction of the
Princes of the Earth. To see how differently the same things will appear to
different men! Another in his place would have concluded quite contrary, and
thought it plain enough, since the thing for which God chose the Levites is
expressed to be the Ministry over which Aaron was appointed, that the subjection
of the Levites to Aaron is restrained to the Ministry, leaving them in other
respects as they were before.

However this is plain, that the whole force of his discourse lies in the word
Alone, and it is plain that he has put in that word purely of his own head,
without any manner of warrant from the Text, and besides manifestly contrary to
what daily passes before our eyes. For nothing is more ordinary in the World,
than for the same man to owe subjection to several powers in several respects.
At School we obey our Masters, at home our Parents; and yet Scholars and
Children, Masters and Parents, and all are subject to the Magistrate. In what
relates to our health, we obey the Physician; in Sea matters, the Pilot; in the
concerns of our Fortune, the Lawyer; the Prince, as well as others, is guided
by them in such things, and yet all remain his Subjects. The Laity, as well as
Clergy are subject to the Spiritual power in Spirituals, without prejudicing
their subjection to the Temporal in Temporals. But it is idle to dilate on a
thing so known and so obvious. It is enough to say that This, whether Argument
or Supposition of Bellarmin, The Levites were subject to Aaron, therefore they
were subject to him alone, is wholly ungrounded.

In what related to the Ministry, They were indeed to obey Aaron: in other
things, for ought appears, they were still subject even to the Judges appointed
by the advice of Jethro, and much more to Moses himself. Only he has set it off
to the advantage, by saying, the High Priest represented the place of God on
Earth: which sounds magnificently and awfully: otherwise, every Prince, and
every Magistrate, and every Superior represent the place of God too, as far as
his power goes. And for Aaron's, it is expressly confined by the Text to the
service of the Ministry. When the Army rested, the Levites were to receive
orders from him about officiating in the Tabernacle, and when it marched about
carrying what belonged to the Tabernacle: yet none, I believe ever fancied, but
that the orders to rest, and when, and which way, and how far to march, were
given by some body besides Aaron.

The other, and only place out of the New Testament, is Matthew. 17. about the
Tribute, which our Savior paid, but with a declaration that the Children of
Kings are free. To save the trouble of turning over more Books, let us even
refer this matter to Bellarmin himself. He tells us there are two
interpretations of this place: some understanding it of a payment made every
year to the Temple, others of an imposition laid by the Romans. According to
the first, the force of the Argument he says is this, The Kings of the Earth
require not Tribute of their Children, therefore neither will the King of
Heaven require Tribute of me, who am his true and natural Son. This he thinks
the true sense of the place; but withal, that the Argument holds too in the
other exposition, according to which it runs in this manner. The Princes of the
Earth are but Ministers of the King of Heaven, and therefore ought not require
Tribute of his Son. According to both, Bellarmin confesses that the force of
our Saviors discourse lies in this, that He was the natural Son of God. and
that I think is to confess, that to apply it to any other, is to take away its
force.

Notwithstanding, He will needs extend it to all the Clergy. For, says he, when
the Sons of Kings are exempted from Tribute, not their persons alone, but their
Servants and Officers, and Families are exempted likewise. Whether this may be
said or no, methinks it is not for Bellarmin to say it. For in his judgment
what our Savior said, related to a Tribute required by God. Wherefore if he
apply it to Tributes imposed by Secular Princes, he acts against his judgment.
However, it is Bellarmin who speaks now, not Christ. Christ spoke only of
himself; we hear nothing from him of Servants and Families, but barely of the
Sons of Kings; and because we do not, have reason to believe, he meant not they
should be comprehended in his discourse; for if he had, he would undoubtedly
have comprehended them himself: and if it had been his pleasure to have his
Family exempted, as he was himself, he would have signified it. It is manifest
therefore, that what Bellarmin says, is without any warrant from Scripture.
Besides, which ill becomes his learning, it is assuming for proof the very
point to be proved. For calling the Clergy the Family of Christ, as he does in
the following words, it is all one to ask whether the Clergy, or whether
Christ's Family be exempted. Wherefore to assume without proof, as he plainly
does, that Christ's Family is exempt, is to assume without proof that the
Clergy are exempt. The place then teaches the Divinity of Christ, and to recede
even from our right, rather than scandalize our Neighbor; the rest is
ungrounded fancy.

As for what he adds, that our Savior, by paying for Peter, seems to intimate,
his Family too was free: I know not what may seem to Bellarmin, but am sure it
does not seem so to every body. If that had been our Saviors reason, it seems
he should have paid for the rest of the Apostles as well as Peter, who were all
of the Family as well as he. Since they were left to the ordinary course of
things, it seems to be our Saviors pleasure, that his Family should be left
so, whatever were his reason to pay for Peter. I might pass over St. Hierom and
St. Austin, whom he alleges; since they say nothing to his purpose. But to
dissemble nothing, that which they say is this, That the Clergy do not pay
Tribute, for the honor of God, and as being Children of the King of Heaven.
And this is manifestly true, when Princes for the honor of God have exempted
them. And it would be as true of the Laity, under a Pagan Prince, who should
exempt them all, as Artaxerxes did the Jewish Priests. For even They are the
Sons of God too, and Coheirs of Christ. But that the exemption, of which the
Fathers speak, was by the positive Law of God, which is the only question,
neither of them do so much as seem to intimate.

He ends with some quotations out of Councils, with which I have no mind to
meddle, it being to enter into the Question of the Authority of Councils. It
will be enough to say briefly, that if his Councils be so circumstanc'd, as he
himself requires they should be to engage our belief, and mean as he does, he
has made a downright Article of Faith of his opinion, and cannot allow for
Catholic Authors, those who he says think otherwise. But this is more than
even himself pretends. The Councils he cites, all but that of Trent, are not
free from exemption, I think in his own opinion. And the Council of Trent says,
Ecclesiastical Immunities were instituted not Jure Divino, as some others
speak, but Ordinatione Divina, and Ecclesiasticis Sanctionibus. He would
persuade us the Council speaks in this manner, least people by Divine Right,
should understand Canon Law, which for all Panormitan, who he says confutes it,
is a Tenet ordinary enough. But by his favor, considering how tender the
Council was all along to meddle with points controverted among Catholics, it
is a great deal more likely the Council made choice of that expression, to
leave those who are for Jure Humano to their liberty. For even they cannot
except against that expression, since whatever happens in the World, by
whatever means, happens by Divine Ordination. Wherefore the Council, as far as
I can see, is so far from settling Bellarmin's opinion, that it allows the
contrary. However it be, Hic Rhodus, hic saltas. Bellarmin undertakes to show
us the positive Law of God for exemptions. Let him do this, and not tell us
what others think, or say of the matter, even in Council. For this is not the
business now.

This is all that Bellarmin says upon this Head. But that he lived in a place
where the Doctrine of Exemptions ran with a strong Current, and so in
likelihood was carried away with the stream, it is strange a man of his parts
should engage for any thing, for which he had so little to say. He fairly
confesses at first there is no express command for what he would persuade us is
the positive Law of God: and every body may see there is as little in his
Arguments, as in the Text. At least he saw so much himself. For the most he
attributes to them is bare Probability. Which is to say in plain English, It
may be it is so, it may be it is not so: I know not whether it be or no. 'Twere
ill with the World if the Positive Law of God come once to May be's. Nor does
it consist with his Providence to leave us groping in the dark to find out what
his pleasure is with our uncertain guesses, and hit right and get to Heaven, if
luck serve. For all our hopes of Heaven depend upon the observance of his Law,
and if we have no better security of it than May be, it is pure chance whether
we go to Heaven or Hell, and we may even throw Dice for our Salvation. In
short, These are Arguments of the power of Prejudice and nothing else.
Bellarmin, I doubt, was deep in when he made them. Who thinks them concluding,
has a better opinion of them than He had, and must needs be in deeper.

And so we are come to the Arguments, by which he would entitle his Exemptions
to Divine Natural Law. The first is the Custom of Nations; which seems rather
Instance than Argument. He had resolved the Divine Right which he pretends into
the Law of Nations, and now goes about to show that several Nations have
practiced according to it. I must confess this substituting the Law of Nations
for Divine Natural Law, will not down with me. It is promising one thing, and
performing another. For all the World thinks them different, and he himself
among the rest distinguishes them as Principles from Conclusions. In quantum
derivatur a lege naturali per modum conclusionis quae non est multum remota a
principijs, St. Thom. 1.2. q. 5. art. 4. ad. 4.
Which Conclusions, if you will believe St. Thomas, must not be far off
neither. Put them as he does, at such a distance, that there is no evident, no
necessary connection between them, and no body but himself can imagine they have
any thing to do with the Law of Nature. But there being no need to ravel into
that matter, let it pass. Bellarmin quotes for the Jews Exodus 30. and Numb. 1.
for the Gentiles, Aristotle, Caesar, and Plutarch: for Christians, a Law of
Constantine, and another of Justinian: not forgetting the forementioned
instances of Pharaoh, and Artaxerxes, which it seems he thinks prove both
Positive and Natural Law too. To sift all these quotations minutely, would
prove a business, and I love to spare my pains. I conceive we are to set aside
what he alleges from Exodus and Numbers. For that the Levites paid not their
half Sicle to the uses of the Tabernacle: and that the rest did, belongs not to
the Natural but Positive Law of God. For the rest, all he says is, that
something has been done for the Clergy in all the Nations he mentions. Now
because he took care beforehand, least we should mistake, to admonish us, that
there is no evident nor necessary Light of Nature to guide Nations in this
particular, it remains that the Clergy were beholding to the Civil power for
what they had. And this every body will freely grant him without troubling his
Quotations.

Methinks this difference might be compounded. Rather than fall out, Bellarmin
shall have it his own way for me. With all my heart let the Custom of Nations
carry it. I am sure he is not so unreasonable, as to require that Artaxerxes
should be bound by Pharaoh's Laws, or Pharaoh by the Gauls, or Constantine by
any of them. Let the Clergy then be treated by every Nation according to their
own Laws or Customs, and the business is at an end.

But 'twere good we understood one another. A Clergy man is not only a
necessary man in a Commonwealth, but one who spends his whole life in the
service of it. For the good of particulars, is the good of the whole, and his
whole business is to perfect particulars. Now because it is impossible, that
who spends all his time in one employment, should follow another, it is plain,
that nothing is to be required of a Clergyman, but the work of a Clergyman.
Whatever callings others follow, whether by inclination, or for advantage, or
perhaps by constraint, none can be put upon the Clergyman but his own. I
except cases of necessity, where Clergymen too sometimes turn Soldiers. This
is not to undertake a new calling, but to suspend their own, and that for a
short time. As soon as the necessity is over, They are as they were before. Nay
a Clergyman cannot live as a Clergyman, if he be forced to labor so much as
for his living. It Is true, St. Paul upon occasion set his hand to Tent-making
after he was an Apostle. But to follow his example, I think one should be in
his circumstances, extraordinarily and miraculously, and without his own
labor, capacitated for his function. Otherwise, who must take the ordinary way
of study, will find there goes so much time to get the knowledge, which is
requisite for him; so much to preserve it; so much to exercise it: that there
will be none to spare for any thing else. Regularly speaking it is necessary
Provision be made for him out of our Saviors stock, Dignus est operarius
mercede sua. The Clergyman is therefore, by the incompatibility of them with
his function, exempted from the Duties of other employments, and has a good
title from Nature to such exemptions. For Nature plainly teaches that who has
his full load, ought not carry more. And this is common to all Vocations as
well as the Clergy. Who is obliged to fight for the Commonwealth, is exempt
from Tilling the Ground; who administers Justice, from fighting: and so of the
rest. No body I conceive would have any thing to say to Bellarmin, for deriving
the Exemptions of the Clergy from Nature, if this were what he meant by
Exemptions.

But the Question is, Whether the Exemptions he pretends, In rebus politicis
tum quoad personas, tum quod Bona, as he speaks, be taught by Nature? Truly, I
am a very ill Scholar in Natures School, if they be. Subjection in both seems
so far from incompatible with their function, that I see not how it is
prejudicial, and conceive They may pass very well without those exemptions, and
better than with them. I perceive nothing in his Argument toward opening my
eyes. That which he says is indeed true. Many Nations, all if he please, have
given exemptions to the Clergy, such as they were: neither do we need Instances
to prove a thing has happened, which we know beforehand by Reason must have
happened. But it is nothing to the purpose: for we are not a jot the nearer
knowing that his exemptions are due to the Clergy from Nature, by knowing that
they have had exemption in all Nations. When he proves that his Exemptions are
of the number of those, which the Clergy has enjoyed always, and every where,
he will have spoken to the Question. But it is too much to expect we should
believe no Nation has ever meddled with their Persons and Goods, when he goes
not about to prove it so much as of any one. The truth is, the Argument is as
plain a Sophism as can be. Exemptions have been used in all Nations, therefore
these Exemptions have been in all Nations, is just the same as if he should
Argue, Drink is used in all Nations, therefore Wine is used in all Nations. I
conceive therefore I may let his Quotations alone, till they be applied to his
purposes, and in the mean time content my self with seeing that the Argument is
nothing to the Question.

The second Argument compares the Ecclesiastical and Secular Powers to the
Spirit and Flesh in man. The Spirit, says he, though it hinder not the actions
of the Flesh, when they are as they should be, yet governs and moderates it,
sometimes keeping it back, sometimes urging it forward, as it judges expedient
for its own end. But the Flesh has no power over the Spirit, nor can direct, or
judge, or restrain it in any thing. So the Ecclesiastical Power, which is
Spiritual, and by that means naturally Superior to the Secular, may, when it is
needful, direct, judge, and restrain it, but by no means be directed, judged,
or restrained by it. This out-runs the Constable. By this account the Laity are
subject to the Clergy in all things, and the Clergy to the Laity in nothing.
Which if it be true, Exemptions are a pitiful matter not worth talking of. For
what need has an entire Superiority of Exemptions? Nay, with what good sense
can they be applied to it? An Inferior indeed cannot command his Superior; but
to say the Superior is exempt from the Inferior, is a new language. We say he
is above him, not exempt from him. This Doctrine turns the scales strangely.
Instead of inquiring whether the Clergy be exempt from the Laity, as far as I
see, the Laity will be put to their shifts to get Exemptions from the Clergy.
However it be, that which Bellarmin assumes, is a great deal more than that
which he would prove by it, and more ado there will be to get it pass. For the
Laity, who contest even Exemptions, will never be brought to acknowledge a
total Superiority without unresistable conviction, unless that Superiority be
restrained to Spirituals, which as it was never contested, so it hinders not
the Superiority which they claim in Temporals.

As for the Argument, it were an easy matter to get rid of it by a blunt
denial. For how does it appear, that the two Powers are to one another, as the
Spirit and the Flesh? St. Gregory Nazianzen, said so in a certain Sermon, and
others have taken it upon his credit. Be it so. How does it appear that St.
Gregory, and those who follow him are not all mistaken? 'Twere something harsh
to say so; but yet who did, were at an end of the Argument. For there is no
other proof, save a hint of what he has done in his Book de Pont. where he only
tells the same story more at large.

But to use St. Gregory with more respect, let us reflect that a Preacher is
one thing, a Disputer another: and therefore what may be very proper for St.
Gregory, may ill become Bellarmin. For many things are very plausible, and very
pat in a Pulpit, which will not endure the Test of a severe examination
elsewhere. And this happens no more ordinarily than in similitudes. For being
generally used, not so much to prove, as to imprint lively in the minds of the
Auditory what is proved otherwise, they lose both their beauty and force when
they are racked into severe proofs. I have not St. Gregory by me, to speak with
certainty of his meaning, or know how much he says of what is put upon him. But
I see, as much similitude as he found to his purpose, the cases are unlike
enough. The Flesh indeed is subject to the Spirit, or rather acted by it,
because taken in contradistinction to it. It is a mere dead clod, which does
nothing at all. And though it could: to govern, and direct, and judge, are
Actions quite out of its sphere, and of which the Spirit alone is capable. Did
St. Gregory, does Bellarmin himself, or any man in his senses, think in earnest
it is so between the two Powers? Is not the Secular as active as the Spiritual?
Nay, is not this all the complaint, that it is too active? Can it not govern,
and direct, and judge as truly? On the one side therefore we have an Agent and
no Agent, on the other two Agents: and yet he would persuade us that these
cases are alike, and that St. Gregory thought so.

But let the Similitude be what it will, what is it to us? What have we to do
with Powers, who are talking of men? It will be time enough to inquire how the
Powers are to one another, when it is our business. At present we have other
work in hand. Bellarmin says, the Clergy are exempted from Punishment and
Tribute. This Clergy are men, and we are examining whether what he says of them
be true. Let him not amuse us with Powers. Powers do not pay Tribute, or appear
at the Bar. Nor does the Secular Magistrate, or power, pretend to judge, or
restrain the Spiritual power. Marry to the man who has it, when by criminal
Actions he becomes unworthy of it, the Secular Magistrate does pretend he has
something to say. And he may say what he will for Bellarmin. For he takes no
further care than for the Power, which no body offers to touch, but leaves the
poor man in the lurch. And so this similitude which so much pleases Bellarmin,
that he has it up at every turn, is as bad an Argument as can be. It is neither
proved, nor any thing to purpose if it were.

The truth is, here is a plain business clouded with learned handling. Take
away the Scholastical appearances of Authority of Fathers, similitudes and
Arguments, and who can tell ten, can see all that is in it. Every body knows
there are two powers in the World, the Spiritual and the Temporal, and every
body knows men are subject to both. This is no news. Now we must needs be told
that the Spiritual power is to the Temporal, as the Spirit to the Flesh. Which
if it signify that the Spiritual power is, as Bellarmin phrases it, naturally
superior to the Temporal, and so the Temporal acts with the leave and
according to the pleasure of the Spiritual, it is manifestly false. For the
Powers are both supreme, and independent of one another, as we have discoursed
formerly. Nor can St. Gregory of all men, be thought to mean so, who if Caron
cite him right, says, the Temporal power is supreme (Summa) and full, and
liable to the pleasure or command of no other. Besides that elsewhere, he
expressly includes himself in the number of those who are to obey the higher
powers for conscience, and in force of a Law clearly promulgated by the Holy
Ghost. But if it signify that all men, even those who have the greatest
Temporal power are subject to the Spiritual, it is very true. The Sword which
Kings bear exempts them not from the Keys. In this sense I guess St. Gregory
meant it, because the similitude, though not altogether exact, yet is not
amiss, nor misbecoming his learning. For the Secular man is, as the Flesh,
ignorant in the ways of the Spirit, and though he were knowing, the power of
the Keys is not given to him. Indeed he is not altogether guided as the Flesh
by the Spirit; but similitudes must not be searched too near. All this goes
well. But why so much cacling for this Egg? Balk them not with the crack of
learning, and men will crowd into this toil of their own accord. This
subjection to the Spirit is but in the ways of the Spirit. And all the story
in two words of plain English is but this, In Spiritual things men are subject
to the Spiritual power. And who needs St. Gregory, or Bellarmin to tell him
that?

With all this ado, we are but just where we were. The Secular man is indeed
subject to the Spiritual power in Spirituals; but why is not the Spiritual man
subject to his power in Temporals? Because, says Bellarmin, the Flesh never
governs the Spirit, and the Secular man is as the Flesh. Yes in Spirituals: but
in Temporals He, and He alone has the knowledge. The Spiritual man is as
ignorant in them, as he in Spirituals. He too, and He alone has the power. For
the same hand which gave the Keys to Bishops, gave t he Sword to Kings.
Wherefore He is now the Spirit, and the Spiritual man the Flesh. And so the
very similitude which was brought for exemption does in truth prove subjection.

I have been the longer upon this point, because the same clew will guide us
through all the Labyrinths. Here the Clergy are the Spirit; afterward,
Fathers, and Shepherds, and the Lot of God. And all this is but the same stuff
cut into several fashions, which makes not the Web the stronger. He says then,
for a third Argument, that it is against nature for Children to rule their
Parents, or Sheep their Shepherd; and the Clergy are Fathers, and Shepherds.
True; but as they were the Spirit before, in respect of Spirituals: in relation
to Temporals the Magistrate is the Father and Shepherd. And so we ordinarily
call good Princes the Fathers of their Country, Isay 44, and 45.
and a Temporal Prince is called by God himself his Shepherd, and his Christ
too. Sure Bellarmin will not persuade many, that a man is a Father and a
Pastor, when he breaks the Laws, and refuses to contribute to the necessities
of his Country. To do so, is not to feed, and keep the Wolf away, but to
starve, and let the Wolf in to devour the Flock. And that we should be obliged
to look upon and treat a man as a Father and Pastor, when he is not so, but the
quite contrary, whoever may teach, nature does not. This Argument, like the
former, flies in his face who makes it. We need Spiritual food, and Spiritual
direction, and to be preserved from the Spiritual Wolf the Devil. We need also
Temporal food and direction, and safety from the Temporal Wolf, the Enemy. The
Clergy needs all this as much as other folks: and therefore as they are Fathers
and Pastors, in as much as they supply our Spiritual wants: so they are
Children and Sheep, in as much as they receive Temporal things from others, and
so by nature obliged to obey their Temporal Fathers and Pastors.

Bellarmin Objects this very thing against himself, and Answers, That a Prince
is indeed a Spiritual Child, and Sheep of the Priest, but the Priest can in no
wise be called the Child or Sheep of the Prince. And that for a very strange
reason; because Priests and all Clergymen have a Spiritual Prince of their
own, by whom they are governed, not only in Spirituals, but in Temporals too.
But can the Notion of Father and Shepherd be applied to that Spiritual Prince
in respect of Temporals? Does he provide Temporal Pastures for the Clergy? Is
it from him they have safety and quiet when they feed? Does he drive the Wolf
away? We see with our eyes those things are done by the Temporal Prince; and
these, and the like, being the things which ground the Notion of Father and
Shepherd in Temporals, these Notions as evidently belong to the Prince, as the
Actions. This which Bellarmin says, is extremely absurd and intolerably
pernicious on other accounts. But I mind not the Position, but the Answer.
Since the Prince breeds and nourishes, feeds and secures Priests, as well as
others in the Politic life: it is plain he has in that respect the Notion of
Father and Shepherd even to them: and Bellarmin has no manner of Reason to deny
they may be called Children and Sheep, and obliged to do what nature teaches
Children and Sheep ought to do.

The fourth Argument is this, The Clergy are the Ministers of God, consecrated
to his service alone, and offered by the whole people for that purpose, whence
they have their name as belonging to the Lot of God. But the Princes of the
World certainly can have no right over those things which are offered and
consecrated to God, and made as it were his proper goods. If I had a mind to
Dispute of Etymologys, or thought it worth while to maintain against him, that
the Clergy have their name, rather because God is their Lot, than They Gods,
there would be enough to take my part. But I love not to lose time; for which
reason too I forbear to except against all that is exceptionable in the
Argument. It will be sufficient to say, that it differs little in substance
from its fellows, only it is set forth in another manner. The Service, and Lot
of God, are but what he called Spirit and Pastors before. And the same Key will
serve to the Lock. In as much as they are the Lot of God, and in respect of his
Service, to which they are consecrated, the Clergy are unaccountable to the
Secular Power: but when they divest themselves of the Clergyman, and wear only
the man, that man, if he deserve to feel the Secular Sword, may, for any thing
I see in the Argument. Wickedness is sure no part of God's Lot, nor can I
imagine how the privilege of his service should be pretended where there is no
service of his; nay, where the pretender acts directly contrary to it. Were it
true, that Princes had nothing to do with things belonging to God, or men
consecrated to his Service, all Christians, and all things seem in a fair way
toward Exemptions, as well as Clergymen. For God has a very true property in
all Things, and Christians are all, and that very solemnly, consecrated to his
service. They serve him indeed in another way than the Clergy, but they truly
serve him, and are by solemn consecration obliged to that service. Since we see
that service is so far from exempting them from subjection to Princes, that
obedience to them is part of it, it is plain there is no repugnance betwixt the
service of God and subjection to Princes, unless they command things contrary
to that service. And from such commands all men are exempt as well as the
Clergy; with this difference, that the Clergy are exempt from all that is
contrary to the service of Clergymen, the rest only from what is contrary to
the service of Christians.

Yet Bellarmin would bear us in hand, that what he says is certain, and tells
us that the Light of Reason shows it, and God has not obscurely delivered it in
the last of Leviticus. Whatsoever is once consecrated to God, shall be Holy of
Holys to the Lord. The Light of Reason may indeed do much, when he makes it
appear: but He, who is so much for Exemptions, should methinks allow us to be
exempt from the Ceremonial Law. The Chapter he cites takes order about the
offerings made to God, and appoints some to be redeemed, others not. But those
commands are given to the Jews; we see nothing like them in the Christian Law.
And no body knows better than himself, that we are to be guided by our own, not
their Law, and that it lays no obligation on us purely as their Law, though the
matter of it do sometimes bind us on the score of Reason. He says indeed, that
it is so in this case, but barely to say so is not to prove. His word, if that
were the business, would go far with me; but when he is making Arguments, I
expect an Argument. I say no more at present, because this I conceive is as
much as needs for an Answer, and I intend to discourse of the merits of this
cause more at large hereafter.

The fifth and last Argument is from signs and Prodigys, shown, as he says, by
God on those who have presumed to violate Ecclesiastical Immunities. For proof
of this, he sends us to one Bredembachius, an Author I have never seen, and
therefore not knowing, nor having means to know particulars, can only answer in
general. If the signs and Prodigys, he talks of, be true Miracles, and those
express to the point, clearly wrought in confirmation of Immunities extended as
far as Bellarmin stretches them, though I am slow of belief, yet if it be truly
so, I will wash my hands of the business. God forbid I should doubt of any
thing, let it seem never so strange, and never so cross to my reason, which
carries his seal to it uncounterfeited. But I am strongly persuaded there is no
such matter. If there were, Bellarmin is a strange man to amuse us with his
probabilities, and unnecessary consequences, when he had proof in store
infinitely more convictive than even demonstration it self. A Miracle may,
perhaps, have been done to show God's care of the Church, or Ministry. He is
not less powerful now than heretofore in his Judgments upon Nadah and Abiu, Oza
and Ozias. But Miracles are not lightly to be believed, and when they are
manifest, Bellarmin's Doctrine may be never the truer, unless they come home to
it. In likelihood, who had Bredembachius to see what he says, would find no
more than observations of signal, perhaps unusual and unhoped prosperities
happening to some who favored the Clergy, and crosses to those who did
otherwise; which his, whether piety or bigottery enhances into Miracles. If
this be all the Fire to the smoke, the Topic ill becomes Bellarmin's learning.
Who had the Malice to collect all that History affords of adversity to the
good, and prosperity to the bad, might perhaps make as big a Book as that of
Bredembachius. For it is an old complaint, and that of a Wise man too, that all
things happen alike to the Good and the Bad: as if God had no care of the
World, while in truth he has the greater by letting things happen so, and by
that Providence teaching us not to value the Goods of this World, but raise our
hearts to better. I am the apter to think there is no more in it, because
Bellarmin himself makes a famous business of what I should not have thought
worth alleging. As for Prodigys and Signs, as many as there be in
Bredembachius, he had no mind it seems to become Voucher so much as for one;
for he cited not any. But he tells us, the Emperor Basilius Porphyrogenitus
lays all the Calamities of that time to the charge of a certain Law made by
Nicephorus Phocas against Ecclesiastical Immunity, and says that since that Law
was in force, all things went to wrack. And this he calls a remarkable
Testimony. As if that Emperor had been made acquainted with the Counsels of
God, and seen the secret springs of Providence, which set the wheels of
Prosperity and Adversity in motion; or as if worldly Prosperities were to be
looked on by Christians as the reward of virtue. However a body would think it
went not much better with the Greek Empire after that Law than before, when
notwithstanding the abrogating that Law, it was finally swallowed up by the
Turks. And now I have mentioned the Turks, I remember They Argue something
after this manner, when from their success They urge, that God has declared in
favor of Mahumetism against Christianity. And with them I leave the Argument,
to whom it is a great deal more suitable than to Christians.

So end Bellarmin's Arguments, and so might end my Letter, but that, not
content with knowing how the waters relish, you expect to have the Spring damned
up. It is a Task which asks a better Workman, and besides is not the work of a
Letter. One half indeed, the claim he makes to the Positive Law of God, needs
no more trouble: A plain denial is confutation in abundance; for unless he
could show that Positive Law, which he pretends, the pretense is plainly
groundless. To unriddle fully the other half, it would be fit to search into
the Law of Nature; for how shall we understand what it commands, unless we
first know what it is? Now that is a Question about which men are not agreed,
and who would undertake to dispute it from the beginning, and separate the pure
Oar of Truth from the Dross of several mistakes, would cut out Work for a
Volume. That it is nothing but Reason is sufficiently known: but all Laws being
grounded on Reason, they would all be natural, unless their differences were
settled by a more particular account. Bellarmin, I conceive, does not afford us
light enough to see our way. He puts three degrees: First principles;
conclusions evidently following; and conclusions not evidently following, but
which need human Constitution. The two first, he says, belong properly to the
Law of Nature; the third is the Law of Nations, which according to the Doctrine
of St. Thomas, he distinguishes from Civil Law, in that the one is derived from
nature, as Conclusions from Premises, the other as a determination of Generals
to Particulars. As if it be Natural, that who offends be punished, it is Civil,
that he be punished with this or that punishment. I know not whether the
Authority of St. Thomas himself will preserve even that distinction wholly from
Question. Possibly among Laws confessedly Civil, there may be found proper
deductions from Reason, and among those of Nations, determination of generals
to particulars. But whatever be of that matter, St. Thomas is far enough from
vouching what Bellarmin says. He, as I observed before, requires that the
Conclusions, which he makes the Law of Nations, be not far removed from their
principles. Wherefore Bellarmin's second branch of the Law of Nature is the Law
of Nations to him. Of the third branch there is no news in him, nor could he
make Law of Nature of it, if there were. He is not a man to take an inevident
and unnecessary conclusion, for a conclusion; and therefore if he would allow
it derived from nature at all, he could allow it only by way of Determination,
not of conclusion; that is, for pure Civil, not Law of Nature or Nations. Put
it then to St. Thomas, and our Exemptions, which are only the third way derived
from Nature, owe themselves to the Civil Law, and have no more title to the Law
of nature than all Laws; for all are grounded on Reason.

I am mistaken as well as you, if Bellarmin do not in effect say as much
himself. For the Law of Nature is universally agreed to be imprinted in us
without, and before Constitutions: wherefore to make us a Law of Nature which
needs human Constitution, is to make us a Law of Nature, which is not a Law of
Nature. Indeed Human Constitution is but another word for Civil Law; unless you
restrain Civil Law to one City or Commonwealth. But there is no place for that
restriction here. If we were distinguishing or not subject. It will perhaps be
impertinent to add, that this obligation on the one side to obey, cannot be
without power on the other to command. Nor can there be greater or more
palpable nonsense, than that there should be a Head to order the Members,
without power to order them, a Head being nothing but such a power lodged in
one or more persons. But 'twill be fit to reflect a little upon this power.

As the whole is evidently so many men, so the power of the Whole is plainly
the power of so many men. And since every man has power over himself, and what
he has, and the power of every one is transferred to the Head, the Head has
plainly power over every man, and what every man has. So that whatever
propriety men have by Law in their Goods, or liberty of their actions, it is all
with subordination still to the supreme power, which has a greater and
paramount authority over those very Goods and Actions, and may and ought dipose
of them as the common good requires. Neither is any thing more reasonable, nor
can it be otherwise. For it is only by conjunction with the whole, and as a part
of it, that any man has any thing. That this Land, or House is mine, and not
another man's, is only because it is come to me in such a manner as the Laws of
that Society whereof I am a Member, have appointed to make it mine. It Is only
by the same conjunction a man can keep what he has. Any one that is stronger
than he might take it from him, but that the whole in which he lives takes his
part, joined to which he is now stronger than the other, and fears him not.
Wherefore since it is the whole which gives and secures to every man all he has,
the good of the whole is more his good than his private goods can be, and he is
wronged if when any thing he has is necessary for the good of the whole, it be
not disposed that way. To grumble at parting with something, when otherwise we
have nothing, is a pitch of folly at which fordidness it self I think is not
yet arrived. Again, it cannot, as I said, be otherwise. No end can be compassed
either without means, or with means out of our power. Wherefore to put a Head
to look after the good of the Body, without power over the means necessary to
compass that good is manifest nonsense. These means being evidently the
Persons and Things within the Commonwealth, the Head must either have power to
dispose of both for the good of the whole, or not be a Head.

For which reason that power cannot be separated from it, no not by the Head it
self, much less by any body else, and 'twould be ill with men if it could. You
may as well separate Rational from man; for that is not more essential to man,
than Power to Head. But were it possible, and the Head could strip it self of
its power or Headship, it might also, and must by doing so, strip the man, whom
he puts out of his power, of his Membership. For plainly no Head, no Member.
And then, besides that he would be out of the care of the Head, which is
confined to the Members, he might at pleasure or upon fancy, lose all the
benefits he enjoys by being a Member; and those we have found are both the
greatest and all the comforts and aids of life. But I spare this consideration,
because I think it will return again. In the mean time, we have in a
Commonwealth Power in the Head inseparable, and unconfined, and which both may
and ought to dispose of all Persons and Things within the Commonwealth for the
common good; and in the Members, obligation to concur to, or obey that
disposition, and all this with a necesity so absolute, that that who takes
either away, takes away the Commonwealth too. It remains to look now upon our
Exemptions.

Those, of which you are Sollicitous, are Exemptions of the Persons of
Clergymen from the Tribunals, and of their goods from the Taxes of Secular
Princes. Peradventure there needs no more to confute both, than to assume
without more ado, that the Clergy are Members of the Commonwealth. It is a
proposition which one would think needs no proving, and yet the dispute is at
an end, if it be granted. Members are subject; They are Members, therefore they
are subject, is pretty evident; and that subjection goes to the very Notion of
Member, is already discoursed. Notwithstanding since Bellarmin with an
inconstancy, which shows he was at a loss, sometimes plainly grants, sometimes
in effect denis it, let us cast away a little time upon it.

The end of a Commonwealth being the good of those who compose it, If we stop
at the goods of this life, a Clergyman perhaps is no necessary Ingredient to a
Commonwealth. For Peace and Plenty, quiet and security, and whatever relates
purely to this World, may be had without him. But take a Commonwealth, for a
Society designing and providing for the whole good of man, and a Clergyman
cannot be spared, because on him depends the chief, and in truth the only good
of man, viz. advancing in the way to Final Bliss. For other things bear not
that name with propriety, farther than as they contribute to this good: on the
contrary they are harms when they hinder it, as they always do when they do
not advance it. Pleasure, and Riches, and what the World calls Prosperity, as
much as our vanity prizes them, are in reality wretched miseries, when they are
loved for themselves, and not used for means to better ends; And the Cobbler and
Beggar is much a happier man, than he that flourishes in Coaches, and Palaces,
if he uses what God sends better. A Commonwealth therefore is not perfect, and
in Aristotle's language, Nihil extra se desiderans, nor able to attain the end
of a Commonwealth, the good of man, in which there are not means to compass
This, as well as other Goods. It is the Good for which we are created, the care
of which no man can put off, and much less a Society of men. This good it is
plain we cannot have but by the Clergy. It is entrusted to them by God, from
whom they received the knowledge of saving truths, and command to teach them to
the end of the World. Wherefore whatever be of a Commonwealth, considered
purely with relation to the good of this life, a Christian Commonwealth cannot
be without a Clergyman. A Magistrate to end differences, a Soldier to fight,
an Artificer, an Husbandmn, or who else is requisite for convenience or plenty,
may as well and better be spared, than he who furnishes the Commonwealth with
a greater and more necessary good, and without which the quiet, and security,
and plenty, and whatever others contribute, is useless. And since it is evident
that They are all Members, and necessary Members of the Commonwealth, because
the end of a Commonwealth cannot be had without them, it is evident also the
Clergyman is a necessary Member too, and more necessary than any of them,
because he is a necessary means to a more necessary part of the end of a
Commonwealth.

It Is tedious to lose words in a matter determinable almost by Eyesight. For
do we not see They make in most places one, and the first of the three Orders
or States, which represent the Body of the Commonwealth? With us indeed They
do not make a distinct order, but yet They have their place in the
Representatives of the Kingdom. Methinks it is something an extravagant business
to be put to prove that they are Members, who are every where acknowledged for
principal Members. Again, Do we not see they Inherit, and Purchase, and Convey,
and do all which men are empowered by Birthright and Membership to do, and to
which only Members are admitted with exclusion of Aliens? In case of wrong, do
they not draw the waters of relief from the great source common to all the
Members? And if their Prince deny them Justice, do they not think he breaks his
Coronation Oath, to render it impartially to all his subjects? Do they not
claim and receive their share in all the advantages and privileges of Members,
and to which they could have no Title or Pretense if they were not Members? In
short, there is no proving any man a Member, if they be not. For all the
Topics which can be used for any, hold for them; nor is it more repugnant to
nature, and incompatible with the Notion of a Commonwealth, that a Member is
not subject to the Head, than it is to common sense that They are not Members.

Lightly then one shall not meet with a wilder fancy than that of Bellarmin's,
when he says, the Clergy are but material, not formal parts of the
Commonwealth, and have a Prince and Tribunals of their own. I doubt, They have
no great reason to thank him for his subtlety. For should they be sent to that
Prince, and those Tribunals for Justice as often as they need it (and who but
their own Prince is to take care of them?) their complaints perchance might
oblige him to think of a second Recognition. But yet even so much is enough to
spoil his Market. For bare material living in any Country, subjects a man's
person to the Laws of that Country, and the Goods he has there to Taxes. Aliens
are every where protected, while they break not the Laws; but if they do, it
will not avail them to plead, they are not formal parts of the Commonwealth.
They are punished as natives, according as the Law of the place in which they
are, not their own, appoints. They pay Polls likewise, and their share in other
Taxes, if they have any thing liable to the Tax. Wherefore though Bellarmin
went as far as ever he could to find out this Formally, and cannot go farther
though he would never so fain, unless he blind folks; (For people who have
their eyes can see where the Clergy materially live) yet this Formality will do
the Clergy no good, the material share which he cannot deny them, drawing along
with it a share in punishments, when they deserve it, and Taxes too. And as the
Clergy are no way advantaged, the Commonwealth I believe will be as little
concerned in his subtlety. So they can punish the persons, and assess the
goods, I suppose they will not mind much with what Formalities men of
speculation amuse themselves.

But let us look upon those Exemptions a little nearer. That Commonwealth I
conceive is sickly, and not like to live long, where the members are not
protected from injury, and provision made for their quiet; But where is no
power to do it, there can be no Commonwealth. For a Commonwealth is the means
to procure quiet and safety, for which men join and continue in Society. It can
be no means to procure them, if it have no power to procure them, and so ceases
to be a Commonwealth, and becomes an independent unsociated multitude,
standing every one on his own guard, and at War with his Neighbor. I know not
whether it may be called so much as a Heard of a kind of rational Beasts,
preying as mere Beasts, the stronger upon the weaker. Now the power of the
whole Body being, as has been discoursed, in the Head or Prince, the Prince
must have power to right his subjects in case of wrong, or there can be neither
Head nor Body. Neither is it material from whence the wrong comes. Whoever does
it, whether Native or Alien, in or out of his Dominions, become subject to his
Prince whom he has wronged, as far as concerns reparation. Relief is sought at
his hands, and he gives it by forcing the offender to amends, if he be within
his reach, or if he be not, it is just to pursue him where he is, and right his
Subjects by War.

This Reason indispensably subjects Clergymen to the power of the Prince, even
though they had, according to Bellarmin's extravagant conceit, another Prince
of their own. For it is not what they are, or to whom they belong, but what They
may do. If they can do wrong, we need not look for more. And that they may do
wrong, is something too plain. Whatever Exemptions they claim or have, they
have none from the corruption of Nature. 'Twere to be wished they had. That one
Exemption would be more worth than all the rest. But they may, and alas! do
fall ometimes as well as others, and need as well as others the fear of
punishment, to awe the crookedness of Nature into some straitness. It would
sound harsh, and show perhaps invidious, to dilate this Head into all sorts of
wickedness, and show what might be done, and must be suffered, if there were no
help for it. Let it suffice that to deny the Prince a power over them, when
they happen to break the Laws and fall into crimes, is to abandon private men
to all the wrongs, which the Clergy may be tempted to do, and want virtue to
resist the Temptation; to abandon the public to the remediless danger of
machinations, if at any time they arrive at the height of wickedness, Treason.
In short, it is to deny the Prince to be Prince; For he is plainly no Prince who
has no power to right his Subjects. By the way, to avoid mistakes, let me
declare once for all, by Prince I mean all along the subject of supreme power
wheresoever lodged, in one or more persons, according to the different
constitutions of different Commonwealths. That variety is nothing to me, and I
will not embroil my self in unconcerning things.

It may perhaps be thought that these are causless surmizes, and that the
goodness of Clergymen is wronged by being so much as suspected of doing wrong
to others, and that however at worst right may upon complaint be had against as
many as own him, whom Bellarmin makes their Prince. But I doubt there is more
of Bigottery, than sense in those thoughts. Not that I question the goodness of
the Clergy. But it is not for men to change the security of relief, when they
need it, which they have from their Head as Members, into a faint, and possibly
deceitful confidence of a private man's virtue. And then to seek relief from any
but ones own Prince, to omit that it is unpracticable, and has a hundred
insuperable inconveniences besides, it is plainly against the nature and end of
a Commonwealth. For men live united to obtain redress of wrongs by their
union, and would quickly break it, if they be forced to seek it elsewhere, and
where the very pursuit of it may chance prove as great a wrong, as that whereof
they pursue redress.

As these things are too plain to be a secret any where, they are understood in
Italy it self, and when time was, were actually pleaded. 'Twas urged in behalf
of the Venetians, in their contests about this matter with Paul V, Consideratio
sup. Cens. Stis. suae. P P. Pauli V.
That the power of punishing offenses against the Laws, could not be separated
from the supreme Power, and that to say a Prince had any body in his Dominions
not subject to him in Temporal matters, or any other concerning the public
good, was all one as to say he was not Prince. To make which discourse the more
striking They brought it to his own door, and alleged, That the Pope exempted
indeed from Bishops and Archbishops, but could not exempt from himself without
ceasing to be Pope. They urged also, what peradventure is more sensible in a
Country so impatient of injuries, but yet ruinous every where; That the Laity
being wronged by the Clergy, and not revenged by the Magistrate, will revenge
themselves; and which is worse, out of despair of being righted when they are
once wronged, study to be beforehand, and prevent the wrongs they fear. Which
what a gate it sets open to the disturbance and ruin of the Commonwealth, is
needless to be mentioned.

I have not been sollicitous particularly of the Exemption from Taxes claimed
by Bellarmin, because I think it will not be hard to get his consent, that the
Goods of the Clergy go along with their Persons. Nevertheless we may briefly
reflect, which I think was hinted before, that the Prince, or supreme power is
to provide for the security of the whole; that provision cannot be made without
means; that these means being in the hands of particulars, unless they may be
taken out of those hands, to be employed for the public good, as occasion
requires, no provision can be made, and the end of Society is lost. And since
the Clergy have their share, oftentimes a very large one, in the goods of the
Commonwealth, as they can hardly be spared at any time without envy of the
rest, and grumbling at the inequality of public burdens, so the exigence may
be such that They cannot be spared at all. For it may require the utmost of
what the Commonwealth can do, and all be little enough. However That what They
have may be necessary to the end of the Commonwealth, evidently subjects what
They have to the power of the Commonwealth. And this a better Master than
Bellarmin, St. Ambrose, has long since taught us in few, but very significant
words: If Thou will not be subject (obnoxious) to Caesar, have no things of the
World; but if thou have Riches, Thou art subject to Caesar.

These Considerations are but a few of many which the subject affords. Who
would dissect the Notion of Commonwealth into all the parts which necessarily,
and indispensably concur to the whole frame, would never have done. There is
enough said for a Letter, and what is said I think is very clear.

It Is plain the World, which was made for the use of man, cannot be used to any
tolerable convenience of life, without those Societies, which are called
Commonwealths. It Is plain, a Commonwealth cannot be without a Head and
Members, nor they without power to command, and obligation to obey, for the end
of the Commonwealth. It Is plain, the Clergy are Members, at least in a
Christian Commonwealth, and though they were not, would be nere a whit the
less subject to the Power under which they live, barely by living under it. For
which, though I contented my self with alleging the custom of Nations, yet who
will may find it in Nature too. As a stranger cannot go into a Foreign Country
with safety, unless the Laws there secure him from injury, so neither can that
Country receive him with safety, unless the same Laws may hinder him from doing
any. Again, those Laws are Rules appointed for the common good, and if the
Stranger do not regulate his Actions, and Traffic, and whatever commerce he
has with the Natives, by those Rules, the common good is prejudiced, and the
Power to whose care it belongs, is to procure reparation from the Stanger. So
that who Travels, does upon the matter leave, or rather suspend his Membership
with the community to which Birth subjects him, and for the time of his stay
unites himself to that in which he is, whereof he becomes a kind of Member,
with that difference betwixt him and proper Members, which his case requires,
and the Laws whether of Nations, or particular Countries have established. It Is
farther plain, that Security, and Quiet, are some of the many goods for which
men live united in Society. It Is plain, they cannot be attained, without power
to hinder disquiet, and wrong; and that Power is plainly no Power, if it cannot
act wherever it is needful it should for those ends. Wherefore whoever brings
disturbance, and injury into the Commonwealth, must of necessity come under
the Power which is to keep them out. I might have dilated farther; but I
thought it superfluous, conceiving he must be very partial, or rather very
blind, who needs more light to discover Bellarmin's Exemptions, not only
groundless and unproved, but unprovable, and manifestly inconsistent with the
great and most natural good of man, regulated Society. Wherefore it is as
impossible they should be commanded by God, or Nature, as that either can
command things harmful to man, or incompatible one with another. Neither can
he, who will obstinately persist to maintain they are, avoid being driven at
last to say, That Bad proceeds from the Author of Good.

It may seem strange that Learned and Good men should be for things so false,
and so pernicious. But whither will not mistaken Zeal transport us? It showed
them, I suppose, but one side of the Meddal, and made them so hot upon the
advantage of the Church, and Churchmen, that they minded not the harm they did
the Common wealth. Which is the less to be wondered at, because it hindered them
from seeing that They hurt even those they think to pleasure. For I am much
mistaken if these Exemptions be not more prejudicial to the Clergy themselves,
then any body else. And this not only for the dependence the Church has on the
Commonwealth, without which it cannot well be, but on nearer and more obvious
considerations. Let a King say to a Clergyman, as Bellarmin would have him, I
have no power over you, He says at the same time, I am no Head in respect of
you, nor you a Member in respect of me, or of that Body whereof I am Head. Thus
much even Bellarmin himself says; for it is his distinction of material and
formal Members, in other words; though I know he elsewhere speaks otherwise.
Now This, if I understand English, is to say, If any body wrong you, you must
not come to me for redress; for I have nothing to do with you. Or if good
nature make me interpose, it is purely out of Charity; not Justice and the
obligation a Head has to the Members.

Pray how far is this from Out-lawry? An Outlaw is but one put out of the
King's protection: and he who cannot claim his protection of right, seems not
much, if at all, better than he who is formally put out of it. For a King may
protect an Outlaw if he please; and unless he please, at this rate he need not
protect a Clergyman. However barely to change the privilege a subject has to
say to his Prince, I beseech you do me Justice, into I beseech you do me a
kindness, is what the Clergy are strange men if they take for a Privilege, and
they are stranger friends to them who will not be quiet without it.

Again, will not the case be altered, if those among whom They live, cease to
look upon them as fellow Members, and whose good, for the community of Society,
is their own? The experience of strangers in all Nations, instructs us
sufficiently how coldly people interest themselves in their wants, or
afflictions, or whatever concerns. And what more than strangers are They, who
by ceasing to be under the Princes power, cease to be parts of the
Commonwealth? save materially, as Bellarmin phrases it, and so are strangers.
Till the World be made up of courtesy, and good Nature, and every body be sure
to be their friend, whether he be obliged or no, the Clergy in my opinion
should for their own sakes cease even to wish for such Exemptions. As men are
now, 'twill be ill for them to have nothing but good Nature, and Courtesy to
trust to.

Besides, as the Clergy are of the same nature with other men, they need the
same conveniences and supports of life; nor did those, who invented these
Exemptions, mean, I suppose, to diminish those conveniences and those supports.
Other men seek and find such things in Society: Can the Clergy hope for them
otherwise? Can they get what they want, or keep what they get, or recover what
they lose, but by means of the Commonwealth? It is plain, their case is the
same with other men in this point. Whatever They enjoy, They hold by
Commonwealth Tenure, and cannot possibly hold otherwise. Now I ask not how
they can pretend from the Commonwealth, if they be not of the Commonwealth,
nor any of the many obvious questions which the matter suggests, and whereof
some are partly hinted before. I mind only the Privilege, and would know what
Privilege, Exemption from Taxes is, save a Privilege of doing ones self a
mischief. A man has a Penny: if he part with one-Farthing, he saves three; if
he do not, he loses all four. Is it a Privilege to this man, to keep his
Farthing, when it is plainly to keep nothing? So it is with the Commonwealth,
to which if we contribute nothing, we can keep nothing. It preserves us all we
have, and our contributions preserve it. It is the great Ship, which carries us
safe through a Sea of miseries, which would otherwise swallow us up. Who
desires to be exempted from pumping, and laboring in it, when it is needful,
what privilege does he desire, but the privilege of drowning? It is plain,
that the good of the whole is every private man's good, and more than any
private good can be; for by it he has all other goods. It is plain, that Taxes
are necessary to this good. Wherefore it is also plain, that a Privilege of
not concurring to Taxes, is but a Privilege of not concurring to a man's own
good, and his greatest good; a Privilege of letting the Commonwealth perish,
and perishing with it for company. Clergymen must of necessity stand and fall
with it, as well as others, even though they were but material parts of it, as
Bellarmin fancys. When the Ship Sinks, the Passenger is lost as well as the
Mariner.

I cannot imagine how This should be thought a Privilege unless by that error,
which has ruined many a Commonwealth, of thinking all lost which is given to
the Public. Did people reflect, that what is given in that manner, is instead
of being lost, put out to Interest for them, and to a greater advantage than
they can possibly make themselves, They would change their thoughts and
language. The true privilege lies on the other side, that by means of Society,
what particular men have shall be employed more for their good, and in a better
manner, than themselves can employ it; and that, when they have not wit enough
to prefer a greater good before a less, there are who will take what they are
resty to give, and do them good whether they will or no. Next to the Privilege
of Nature, ability to pursue our own good our selves, is the Privilege of
Fortune, to fall into hands which will do it for us. In short, since Man is a
Creature made and obliged to seek his own good, and the great good of man is
Society, and the good of that Society, the great good of every particular in
it, and Taxes are for the good of that Society, to desire to be exempted from
Taxes and think it a Privilege, is to desire to be exempted from acting
according to our Nature, and think that a Privilege which is a misery. For a
man who acts not like a man, is a very wretched, and a very contemptible thing.

I desire not to be mistaken, as if I thought a Commonwealth must needs be
ruined, as often as a private man fails in his Quota, or that some, and as many
as the Public pleases, may not be exempted from Taxes. On the contrary, I
conceive it not only safe, but even fit to exempt those who have no more than
can be spared from the necessities of the Commonwealth without prejudice, or
employ what they have to as great, perhaps a greater advantage than Taxes. For
the Commonwealth both needs it not for the end of Taxes, and enjoys the
benefit of it in another, and it may be better way. And such at least should be
the case of the Clergy, of which I intend to say something before I have done.
I meant only to say, that not to concur to Taxes is in its nature ruinous to
the Public, and therefore no Privilege, but a harm to the Refusers, who if
the Commonwealth perish, must needs perish with it. And that it is in its
nature ruinous is evident. For let every man refuse, the Commonwealth cannot
stand. That this effect does not follow, when private men are either exempted,
or exempt themselves by fraud, happens not for want of harm in the thing, but
because a single man has no sensible proportion to the whole, and so the good
or harm he does is imperceptible. Now if there were but one, or a few
Clergymen in a Nation, or but one or a few Fields in their possession, as
Little in moral things passes for nothing, They would not need to pretend
Natural or Divine Law for Exemptions. Every body would be more forward to give
to, than take from them. But where They have a considerable part of the Revenue
of the Commonwealth in their hands, as in some places of the Venetian
Territory P. Paulo says, they have a fourth, in some a third part, the
Commonwealth can hardly be supported without their assistance. For besides
that the rest would always grumble at the inequality of public burdens, They
would not often bear them with any tolerable convenience, where so much more
than their share is laid on their shoulders.

I forbear to weave the Exemption from Justice into the same discourse, because
every body I suppose will do it of himself. For every body must see that
Justice is as great, and as indispensable a good as Taxes, as necessary to the
whole, and to Particulars; and therefore that the Privilege of being exempted
from it, is but a privilege of doing the Commonwealth as much harm, as
depends on the Exemptee, and helping to ruin That with which he must needs be
ruined too.

Upon the whole I conceive I may with confidence conclude that these
Exemptions, as being many ways harmful cannot proceed from God or Nature, and
therefore what the Clergy have of this kind, They have from human Power,
seeing, and by their wisdom providing, that what harm there is in their Nature,
be over-ballanc'd by a greater good. And in this persuasion I conceive too I
shall be well abetted. Peradventure where things are clear by Reason, more
light is as needless, as Torches to see at Noon. But the palate of the Age is
queasie. Men refuse good meat sometimes, because they fancy not the dishes, and
will not harken to Truth but from a mouth they like. To gratify their humors,
it will be necessary to take a little more pains, and produce Vouchers of
greater credit.

As for grave Authors of his own Form, Bellarmin has exempted me from the
trouble of looking after them. For he brings them to the Bar himself, and opens
their Evidence, and strives to answer it.

I thought once to have Replied to his Answers. But besides that my Pitcher,
contrary to the case in Horace, is already become a Jarr, and 'twould be
monstrous to work it into a Tun, I considered it is not our business at
present. We are not now upon the What Is said, but the Who said it. To examine
who has most reason for what he says, is to turn back to the merits of the
Cause, which if any one will do, I am well content to leave him to himself. For
he must have either very bad eyes, or much turned away, who will not easily see
through all that is said. In the mean time it is enough for my purpose that
it is acknowledged, and by Bellarmin himself, that what he says is contradicted
by Catholics, men of note as well as himself, and whose No has as much
authority as his I*

But I conceive it fitting to produce some of a higher Form, and whose credit
is unquestionable. To begin with one, against whom none can speak, or be heard
without impiety, I vouch in the first place St. Paul, Romans 13. Let every Soul
be subject to the higher Powers. And here I might end as well as begin: For
this is in truth alone decisive. He must have no Soul who can pretend this
command comprehends him not. Yet let us hear his Interpreters. Theodoret upon
this place has these words, Sive est Sacerdos, etc. whether one be a Priest, or
Prelate, or have professed a Monastical life, let him obey those (ijs cedat) to
whom Magistracy is committed. Theophylact, upon the same place, has almost the
same words; Vniversos erudit, etc. He instructs All, whether a Priest, or Monk,
or Apostle, that they be subject to Princes. St. Chrysostom, Hom. 23. upon the
Epistle to the Romans, Sed eas Paulus, etc. But Paul makes use of such reasons
as command obedience to the Powers by way of debt; showing those things are
commanded All, as well Priests as Monks, not Seculars only. And this he
declares in the very beginning, when he says, Let every Soul be subject to the
higher Powers: Though you be an Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a
Prophet; in fine, whatsoever you be. For this subjection is not against Piety.

Let us next hear Popes themselves, Gelasius writing to the Emperor
Anastasius, tells him, that The Prelates of the Church owe him all obedience in
Temporals: And again, Ep. 10. Antistites Religionis, Bishops also themselves
are to obey thy Laws, and this because, forasmuch as concerns the Order of
Public Discipline, that is, the Government of the Commonwealth, We know the
power is by supernal disposition, given to Thee. Anastasius to the same
Emperor acknowledges, that Bishops are subject to the Laws of the Prince in
what concerns public Discipline: But Princes to Bishops in dispensing the
Mysteries and Sacraments. Pelagius the first, Ep. 16. to Childebert King of
France. With how much study and labor must we endeavor, for taking away the
scandal of suspicion, to offer the duty of our confession to Kings, to whom the
Holy Scriptures command us also to be subject. St. Gregory the Great speaks
with a submission which offends Baronius, and makes him strain his wits to find
a scurvy way to color the business. But no Varnish will ly. That he was
subject to the Emperors command: That he did what he ought in obeying the
Emperor on one side, and speaking for God on the other: That Power from Heaven
is given to the Piety of his Lords, as he calls Emperors, over all men, over
Priests as well as Soldiers, etc. have a blunt ill natured clearness, which no
Art can practice upon.

I cannot but take notice by the way how Bellarmin strives to weather those
Rocks. He objects against himself the aforesaid place of St. Paul, with the
other to the same purpose out of St. Pet. 2. and what St. Chrysostom says of
the matter: And answers, That those places are general, and mean no more than
that every one be subject to his own Superior. But the subjection of the
Clergy to Princes cannot be proved by them, till it be proved that Princes are
lawful, Superiors and Judges of the Clergy, which cannot be proved, unless it
be proved that Sheep have pre-eminence over Pastors, Children over Parents, and
Temporals over Spirituals. And yet we do not contradict St. Chrysostom
neither. For though we say the Pope alone is the proper Judge of the Clergy,
and Monks, yet we confess the King is King of them as well as the Laity. For
Princes fight for them, and They must honor and pray for him, and obey him
too, directively not co-actively, and with his former restrictions.

That Prejudice should be thus powerful! Is it possible Bellarmin should in
earnest persuade himself, the Apostles meant only in general, that every one
should obey whom he ought obey, the Laity their Secular, the Clergy their
Ecclesiastical Superior? Are not the Superiors, or higher Powers, whom All
are commanded to obey, expressly named by St. Peter, Kings, and Dukes, or
Governors, sent to punish evil doers; and by St. Paul, Magistrates who bear
the Sword? Can he think this Command is complied with by obedience to
Ecclesiastical Superiors? Are They Kings? Do they bear the Sword? Are They the
Ministers of God to wrath, and vengeance? What better proof would he have, the
Kings are lawful Superiors, even of the Clergy, than St. Paul gives, viz. that
their powers are ordained by God, whom to resist is to acquire Damnation?

In St. Peter we find the reason of his Doctrine expressed, when he admonishes
Christians so to converse among the Gentiles, that They who speak ill of them,
may be moved by their good Works to glorify God, and the ignorance of the
foolish be silenced. By the Calumny which the Apostle means, all Interpreters
understand a suspicion crept in among the Gentiles of disobedience to Temporal
powers, and contempt of their Laws. For such a seditious Doctrine there was
among the Jews, begun by Judas the Galilean, and tenaciously embraced by the
Pharisees. It was too well known by the disorders it caused, and being mistaken
for a point of the Jews Religion, Christians were asperst with it as deriving
their Religion from them. Both the Apostles took care to clear Christianity
from the aspersion, and therefore instructed the Faithful to obey Secular
powers, not by constraint or force, Propter Iram, as they phrase it, but for
conscience, because such was the Will of God, who had given them the power they
had.

This was the matter of Fact. Consider now how Bellarmin handles it. There is
indeed, says he, express mention made of Kings, because at that time it was
very necessary, least they should have hindered the Preaching of the Gospel, but
yet the Apostles meant no more, than that every one should be subject to his
own lawful Superior.

Is not this to say, that the Apostles were not men of that holy simplicity,
which is believed? For it is plainly to go about to overreach Princes with fair
words: to seek, by making them believe They should have obedience from All, to
cajole them into the Church, there to be taught a new lesson, and find there
was no such matter. Is it not to say, They did not dispense the Gospel with
that Fidelity which they profess? For they included every one within the
command of obedience, and yet meant a good part should not be included. They
taught that Kings and Magistrates were Higher powers in respect of all, and
that it is the Will of God, that all be subject to them, and know for all that
it is not the Will of God, and that They are not higher Powers in respect of
the Clergy. In short, it is to make them speak plain nonsense. For if this
Comment pass, their discourse will be this: People have no reason to think any
Christian disobedient to Civil Authority, For we tell you some must obey it,
and the rest Ecclesiastical.

Then for St Chrysostom, he contradicts not him, he says, The Saint says, That
All, the Clergy as well as the rest, and the highest degrees of them, are
subject to those Higher Powers of which St. Paul speaks. Bellarmin says,
Princes can meddle neither with their Persons, nor Goods. Is not this to say,
They are not subject? and is not subject, and not-subject, contradiction? How
can he avoid contradicting St. Chrysostom, and the rest, who speak as he does?
Why, though he make the Pope alone the proper Judge, yet he allows the Prince
to be King of the Clergy, etc. What is this but a new contradiction? For how
can a King be a King, and not a proper Judge? To determine differences is one,
and an essential part of a Kings Office! It Is true, between a Judge by
Commission, and a King, there is a difference. And yet even such a one
represents the King. But to be a proper Judge, without Commission, by an
inherent right of his own, is inseparable from a King. The truth is, it is all
contradiction from first to last. Secular Princes are not lawful Superiors,
and yet Kings of the Clergy, is contradiction: They have Kingly, that is,
Supreme Power, and yet the Ecclesiastical is to be obeyed in case of contrary
commands, is contradiction: They are Kings in respect of those who are not
Subjects, nor formally parts of the Commonwealth, is contradiction, etc. And
yet this happens not by Bellarmin's fault. He has but one; fixing on the wrong
side: which whoever does, let him be never so learned, can no more avoid
contradiction, than He can falling, let him be never so dextrous, under whom
the ground founders.

But to return to our Road, People may speculate themselves out of Common
sense, if they will, and do, more often than every body thinks. The truth is,
whoever takes a wrong Principle, and will pursue it, must come thither at last.
Yet though he may so disguise the matter with learned subtilties, that he
perceive not where he is himself, Nature will be too strong for Artifice, and
show it self through all disguises. Arguments have been made against the
possibility of Motion, and whiteness of Snow: but the World could never be
persuaded they could not go about their business, or that Snow looked like Jet.
We have found the point in question rooted in Nature, and cultivated by the
great Laborers in the field of Grace, the Apostles. Either way it must needs
grow, and appear in the hearts whether of men o^ Faithful. And so it evidently
does. Let a man go to a Bishop or Priest in any Country of Christendom, and ask
him seriously, Do you belong to the Commonwealth in which you live? Are you a
subject of the Prince? He would not be thought well in his wits. Such they own
such they call and write themselves, for such the Prince, and People, and every
body takes them, nor is it more known that there are Clergy very where, than
that wherever they are, They are Subjects of the Prince of the place, both in
the esteem of all besides, and their own constant profession.

Take for a curiosity, (For the clearness of the thing does not endure proof)
the Oath which the Bishops in France make to their King. I swear and promise to
your Majesty, Sire, that as long and I live I will be to you a Faithful Subject
and Servant; that with all my power I will procure the good of your Service and
Estate; that I will never be present at any Council or Assembly held to the
prejudice of them, and that if any thing come to my knowledge, I will presently
give advice to your Majesty. So help me God and his Holy Gospels.

It is so palpable a Truth, that Bellarmin, as contradictory as it is to his
Doctrine, cannot but acknowledge it. For this reason he is forced to confess,
that Kings are Kings in respect of the Clergy as well as Laity; that the
Clergy, besides their Spiritual capacity, are also parts of the Commonwealth;
and in that quality obliged to obedience, etc. For the light of Nature, however
it may be obscured in particulars, cannot be put out generally, and we for our
parts, you know, think as much of what is written in our hearts by the
Apostles. But to let that pass, This is in truth the whole business. To your
Question, whether the Clergy are Subjects or no, all Christendom answers they
are. Now it is evident that Subjects remaining Subjects can have nothing
inconsistent with subjection: And it is as evident, that the Exemptions in
question, in the latitude in which Bellarmin propos^s, and you understand them,
are inconsistent with subjection. It Is therefore evident. They belong not to
the Clergy by Divine, or any Right. Neither can those, which they have, be
Exemptions from subjection, but in the manner of subjection, as Privileges put
a difference between Subjects, requiring either different duties, or the same
duties in a different manner, from some and others. And since the difference
betwixt them and the Laity, as to subjection, is not from their state, and
where the Laws put no difference, all are alike subject, there can be no Title
nor Pretense to the difference which is, but from the Laws, and the pleasure of
the Power which made them.

What Reason tells us must be, unquestionable Records assure us actually was.
For the Laws are still extant among the rest, which make up the Body of the
Civil Law, by which the Clergy obtained now one, now another Privilege, till
the whole number was completed by many Emperors, and in a long time. I had
once resolved to set them down; but my Letter being long, and that Book common,
I thought it not convenient to increase it, with copying what, who has the
curiosity may as well see in the Original. Besides, that our Country not being
subject to the Imperial Laws, the privileges of the Clergy here are to be
regulated, not by them, but our own. Yet it is not amiss to set what Bellarmin
says to them. He objects them against himself, as a proof that the Clergy
heretofore were of Right subject to Emperors: and answers that the Emperors
sometimes meddle with what they have nothing to do: and therefore those Laws
must needs be said to proceed De Facto, not De Jure, and to have been tolerated
sometimes, but never approved by Popes.

This to my ear sounds very strangely. What has the Popes approbation to do
with the Laws of Emperors? Cannot They make Laws without asking him leave?
Cannot They do so much as a kindness to the Clergy, but by authority derived
from him? Again, if his approbation were of any consideration, how could it
appear more plainly than in that which Bellarmin calls his Toleration, in
taking advantage of them, and taking care they should be every where kept, and
the Clergy enjoy what They had by them? Of which there are instances enough to
be produced, if there were need. For I cannot think that Bellarmin is of
opinion in earnest, that the Pope did not like them, and was not heartily glad
of them too. On the contrary I am apt to believe, that had the World remained
in the same state, in which it was when those Laws were made, subject to the
Roman Empire, He liked them so well, that he would never have looked for more,
nor we heard any news of Divine Right. But the state of things altering, and
municipal Laws prevailing over those Laws, in a great part of Christendom, it
became necessary to preserve those privileges, to find out a Title to them
which might do what those Laws no longer could, carry them through every where.
Divine Right peradventure had otherwise never been thought of.

But to let this pass, to say the Laws proceeded not de Jure, or were unjust,
has so presumptuous a found, that he had need be very sure of what he says, who
ventures to say it. Now Bellarmin when he was upon the point, and had
undertaken the proof of Divine Right, could find nothing beyond probable even
to himself. But because Probability makes a man sure of nothing, I doubt he was
something too bold with Emperors and their Laws, to Tax them of Injustice. For
if they have any, it is more than he knows, even by his own confession.

But let us consider a little, and ask whether the Clergy of those times, when
those Laws were made, did know that without and independently of them, They had
right to the same privileges by other Laws, those of God and Nature? If they
did not, They were manifestly ignorant in a point of Gods Law (if it be as
Bellarmin says Gods Law.) Who can imagine this of those Lights, the greatest,
since the Apostles days, that ever shined in the Church? And how comes
Bellarmin to know that of which they were ignorant? If they did, They were
manifestly deficient in their duty. For they ought to have instructed the
Emperors in this point of Gods Law as well as the rest; otherwise They were
unfaithful dispensers of the Word, and subtracted part of what was entrusted to
them.

That They did not teach the Emperors any such Doctrine, is plain, because the
Emperors learnt it not, who yet learned all Christianity from them, and must
have learnt this if it had been any part of the Lesson. I hope it will not be
put off upon their restiness, to admit a point derogatory to their Authority:
Besides, that this conceit traduces Christianity, with holding Doctrines
derogatory to the Authority of Princes, and justifies that calumny of the
Pagans, which the Apostles were sollicitous to take away, it is an aspersion
unsufferably injurious to the piety of those Emperors, and manifestly
impossible besides.

For those Exemptions were not granted all at one time, or by one Emperor.
Between the first grant by Constantine, and the last in the Law, there
intervened several hundreds of years. During this time these Privileges (for
so they are expressly termed) came forth, now one, now another; as the piety of
the Prince, the solicitation of the Clergy, and reason of the thing,
prevailed. Can it be imagined among so many Emperors, all Christian, there was
no one of virtue enough to admit a Right established by God, and who favored
the Clergy enough not to keep from them what was their due? Were there but one
such in all the number, as it cannot be denied but that there were many, and He
made sensible that the Law of God was as Bellarmin says, of which it was both
the duty and duty and interest of the Clergy to make him sensible, the business
could not possibly pass as it did. For he would certainly have acknowledged
this Right of theirs, and instead of so many grants one after another, once for
all confirmed that right by his Authority, and this with reference to the Law
of God, and as their right, not by way of Privilege, as the style of their
Laws runs. It Is therefore as plain as can be, that the Clergy, who were as
Bellarmin says de Facto subject, thought they ought to be subject; It Is plain
the Emperors thought so too, and were not otherwise instructed by the Masters
of Christianity in those times. Wherefore it is plain, the sense of the
Christian World then, was quite different from what is Bellarmin's now, and I
think there needs something more than unconcluding Arguments to persuade a man,
that the whole Christian World was in an Error.

As for the quarrel he has to the Laws for disposing of things plainly
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, I know not what to say to it, unless he would
explain himself a little more. Princes I think may make Laws in matters,
plainly Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, without asking Bellarmin leave, or giving
him cause of offense. When they enact Reverence to be born the Clergy, Tithes
to be paid them, the Christian Law they teach to be observed, and a hundred
things more, He does not sure believe They do the Clergy wrong, or exceed their
own bounds. In general, let a thing be never so Spiritual, and never so much
commanded by God, if you will have the Transgressors awed by the fear of
Temporal punishment, the concurrence of Temporal Authority is necessary to
engage the Temporal Sword. Otherwise who is wicked enough to slight the
Spiritual, and stand out an Excommunication, may break all the Laws of God at
pleasure. Wherefore this Exception to the Justness of a Temporal Law, That it
meddles with a matter plainly Spiritual, is plainly no just exception. What
Bellarmin means by it, we shall know when he tells us what his meaning is. And
yet though it were true, that those Princes had sometimes past their bounds, it
is nothing to purpose unless it be proved, They did so in this particular. To
take first for granted, that Princes did amiss elsewhere, and then require we
should therefore believe They did amiss here too, is to impose upon us a little
too grossly.

After all, as learned a show as he makes of confuting some body, we think all
parties are agreed. The Clergy were heretofore subject, and this appears by the
Laws, says the objection. By the way, this can mean nothing but that, as to the
matters indulged them by Privileges, They were subject in the same manner as
the Laity, till those privileges put a difference between them. Otherwise that
notwithstanding their privileges They always were, and still are, truly
subjects, is the sense of all the World. To this, what says Bellarmin? That
those Laws proceeded de Facto, not de Jure. This is to say, that de Facto They
were subject as well as the Laity heretofore, and that this appears by these
Laws which proceeded de Facto, to favor them in some things. And this is the
very thing which the objection says. That they did not proceed de Jure, he
perhaps may be allowed to say, because he would otherwise have nothing to say;
but reason will not allow any man to believe him, unless he could prove it,
which when he went about to do, we see how ill he succeeded.

In the mean time I see these privileges were granted at several, and long
distant times. I see that the Clergy when they had the former, had not the
later, and before They had the first, had none at all. Wherefore I must needs
think that as They were de Facto subject before the Laws, so they would be de
Facto still but for the Laws. This way They have a clear undoubted right to
their privileges, as much and as strong as any body has to any worldly thing.
No other Right was ever thought of in those Ages; and yet in those Ages lived
all the Doctors of the Church both Greek and Latin; men who had at least as
much insight into the Laws of God and Nature as Bellarmin, and as much Zeal for
the good and honor of the Church. He does not make out so much as plausibly
the Right which he pretends from those Laws. I conceive therefore I may
conclude upon the whole, the Exemptions, or privileges which the Clergy have,
are all from Human, not Divine Law, which though it always guided the Church,
and was peradventure better understood, and more reverenced in former times,
was never pretended till lately: That They neither have nor can have any
Exemptions, which free them absolutely from subjection, that being a thing
which neither a Prince can grant, nor Nature bear: And that whatever Bellarmin
says, this is acknowledged both by the Clergy themselves, and all the World
besides, by the universal consent of all people and places that notwithstanding
all their Exemptions, They are still truly Subjects, and by being so obliged to
all that subjection obliges, with that difference betwixt them and others in
the performance of their subjection, which their privileges import. Possibly
out of this universality may be excepted some of those who live as Bellarmin
did, in the Popes Territories, and so have but one Prince both in Spirituals
and Temporals. These are too apt to think it is, or ought to be, with the rest
of the World as it is with them; And who knows whether that conceit be not the
original source of the whole stream? But elsewhere I think the General Rule has
no exception.

And so I had done, but that I remember we live in times, in which notice is
publicly taken of the contempt of the Clergy, and Reasons given for it. They
indeed miss the mark, nor do I think it fit to give the true ones. But I would
not have the bad humor of the Age fed by any thing of mine. As Bellarmin has
gone too far on the one side, ill will may go much farther on the other, and
possibly take occasion from what I have said against him to do so. I conceive
it therefore fit, before I close my Letter, to resume some considerations,
which I forbore to mention when they occurred, for fear of straying from the
matter in hand.

Bellarmin tells us, the Clergy and their Goods are Sacred things, and the
pceuliar Lot of God. This, if rightly understood, is a great, and even to the
Laity, beneficial Truth. Yet it is to be suspected He did not penetrate it
enough, because he concludes wrong, that they are therefore both quite out of
the reach of Secular power. One might take a fancy to argue them out of the
reach of the Ecclesiastical too. For what has any man to do with what properly
belongs to God? If you say the Ecclesiastical power is from God; so likewise is
the Secular. And so people might with fruitless Conceits and Repartee's, go on
in endless wrangling.

Let us therefore reflect a little on what every body knows, that God neither
stands in need of any created good, nor is capable of receiving either good or
harm from Creatures. For that essential and overflowing fullness of his own
perfection can neither get nor lose. That overflow of goodness has created man
for the good of man, not God, and all material nature besides, not for its
self, or for God, but purely for the use of man. Likewise what he commands, or
requires of man, is only for the benefit of man, who by obeying or disobeying
does himself good or harm, but none to God. Those Phrases therefore of serving
God, being his, and the like, are expressions introduced by his mercy in
condescendence to our weakness, to raise us up by the aw of his interposing,
more steadily to perform those actions, which in truth are profitable only to
our selves. We have the whole benefit of the service we are said to do him; and
in reality serve our selves, when we are said to serve him. So likewise the
things which are called his, are neither taken from us, nor spent in any use of
his, to whom nothing can be useful, but ordered by him to be employed in a way
most beneficial to us, in which they would either not at all, or not so well
and readily be employed, if we were not assisted by an apprehension of a
particular concern, or propriety of his in them. Applying this to the Clergy,
when They, or their Goods are called the Lot of God, given or consecrated to
him, peculiarly his, and what else is said of this kind, it is not that He is
subject to the Meum and Tuum found in the World; nor can his property have the
same Notion, which ours has in respect of our Goods or Servants, who are
wronged when they are taken away, or disposed of, without our consent. But the
meaning is, that They are established in a way of life in which by actions
proper to it, they are to employ Themselves and their Goods, to the greatest
advantage of themselves and their Neighbor. From which that they be not
diverted by humor, or interest, or violence, to ends less beneficial to
mankind, He is entitled to them, that who neither cares nor fears to wrong
another man, may be checked by the fear of wronging God, against whose Anger
there is no Shelter.

And very requisite it is, it should be so. A Christian Commonwealth can no
more be without Clergy, than Christianity. Because they are men, They cannot be
without such things as the nature of men requires, Meat to feed, and Clothes to
cover them; and this not only what is barely sufficient to preserve them from
Hunger and Cold; but, as the temper of the World is, where Poverty is always
accompanied with abjection and scorn, in a proportion which may keep them in
reputation with those among whom They live, and with whom in a condition of
Contempt They would want credit to do them the good they ought. Besides, there
must be Churches for people to Assemble in; The service there, must not be
slovenly, and sordid, and apt to tempt those who come, to irreverence, or
abstain from coming again for scorn. You I know blame our Church for excessive
Pomp in the Sacred Service; I for my part, think no Pomp can be too much. Had
you reflected as much as I have done on the nature of man, and how strong the
Animal part is yet in the best of us, peradventure you would be of my mind. But
letting that pass, there goes expense to all this, and who will be most thrifty
in the Service of God, will find it cannot be performed in any tolerable way
for a little.

Christianity would quickly be in a lamentable case, if the Clergy had not
wherewith to maintain themselves, as it is fit They should be maintained; or
their maintenance depended on the Capricio's of often froward, and sometimes
malicious men. They must of necessity either diminish into a number too small,
or languish in a contempt unable to benefit the World. If there were no money
to build Churches, no provision to keep them in repair, no allotments for the
expenses of the Service in them; within a while there would be either no
Churches, or no Service in them. If They were debarred the exercise of their
Functions, or transplanted into other Callings, or so taken up with other
employments, that they could not attend their own, whether by the humorous
pleasure of other men, or their own irregular passions, mankind must needs lose
the benefit it receives by them, and that is no less than the hopes, because
the means, of a happy Eternity.

That both the men therefore, and the Goods appropriated to these ends, be
looked upon as Sacred, and appropriated in a peculiar manner to God, and wicked
or inconsiderate men be awed by the fear of Sacrilege, from prejudicing
Christianity, by meddling with either, is a great mercy of God, and great
benefit to Man. But it follows not therefore, They may on no occasion be
touched. A Clergyman may become wicked, and hardened, and obstinate in
wickedness. The good of the Commonwealth may require, that the incorrigible
offender be cut off, whether for Example, or to avoid perpetual Injuries and
disturbances to particulars, or sometimes hazard to the whole. Can any man
think, if this be a requisite and necessary good, that God would hinder it, and
that He who neither has, nor can have other end in all he commands, then good
to man, should command what is harmful to man? The injury to him, if any could
be done him, would be to harbor so preposterous a conceit of him, and his
commands, as if he would be displeased when we did our selves good. But if the
Temporal Sword must be used, it is evident it must be used by the Temporal
Power, for the Spiritual has it not to use. And because it must not strike
blindly, the Temporal Power must also take cognizance of the matter, and see
why, and when, and how far it is fit to strike.

For the rest, here is great reason They should be exempted from Magistracy,
and Soldiery, from Trades, Offices, and whatever Services of the
Commonwealth. For their own Function plainly requires a whole man, whether you
look upon the qualities necessary for it, neither to be gained, nor preserved
without long and constant pains; or the perpetual, and those necessary
occasions of exercising, it. Between both, They have employment for every
minute of time they have, and for more if they had it, and must of necessity
neglect their own duty, if any considerable part of their time be taken with
any other. Again, as a man of no esteem shall be but ill heard of, whatsoever
he speaks, there will be small efficacy in their Exhortations to virtue and
good life, if They be not in good reputation. Wherefore, if at any time They
yield to the temptations of human frailty, it is but fit their faults be kept
as much as may be from the eyes of the Vulgar, and rectified among themselves.
And if they have Judges of their own quality, to end their differences, and
correct their misdemeanors, and preserve their reputation unsoyl'd with the
Laity, the benefit is not less, perhaps more to the Laity than to Them. In
fine, it is for the advantage of the Commonwealth, that They have whatever is
useful to perform in the best manner a Function, which is more advantageous to
the Commonwealth, than any other is or can be. And if the Commonwealth grant
Them not all such Exemptions or Privileges, or however you will call them, it
plainly wrongs it self. But yet it is the Commonwealth which grants them. For
as for Judges, unless they Act in the nature of Arbitrators, by voluntary
consent and submission of the partys, They cannot proceed to force, but by
virtue of the Temporal Sword; and however Ecclesiastical the Persons be, the
Judges are pure Secular Judges, when they proceed in that manner. Again, since
no person nor his Service can be taken from the Commonwealth without its good
will, and consent, the other Exemptions are also from the Commonwealth; though
peradventure in things apparently inconsistent with the Function, to allow the
Function may be to grant the Exemption without more ado. That of particular
Judges is more subject to the circumstances of Time and Place, and therefore
more depends on the pleasure of Commonwealths, which also proceed differently,
as every one finds most convenient for itself.

As for their Goods, to note this briefly by the way, The Clergy were at first
rather Trustees, or Stewards than Proprietors. Being looked upon as men free
from affections to the things of this World, the piety of rich men gave largely
to them, to maintain Themselves, and the Poor, whence their Revenues got the
name of the Patrimony of the Poor, besides to keep the Churches in repair, and
furnish the expenses of the Service in it. The money thus given was put into
the Bishops hands, and by his appointment distributed to the several uses by
the Deacons, who gave account of their distribution to the Bishop. Afterward
the passions of men giving occasion to complain of inequality in the
distributions, this Arbitrary management was altered by Canons, and the Whole
divided into four parts. One for the Poor; another for the Clergy; a third, for
Repairs; the fourth for the Bishop and his Family, to exercise Hospitality. In
process of time this too was changed. What became of the share of the Poor, and
Churches I cannot tell; but the Bishop, and inferior Clergy disposed
absolutely, and independently, without any account, of their own. An opinion
being set on foot, which does not relish with every body, even at this day,
that they are true Proprietors of their Goods.

However it be, had They no more than is requisite to maintain them in the way
in which it is fit they should be maintained; or the overplus were spent in the
uses before mentioned, and for which at first 'twas given; there is great
reason to look upon their Goods, as the Lot of God, and upon taking them away
as Sacrilege. Neither could the Commonwealth require any thing of them,
without employing it in uses less beneficial to It, than those in which it is
employed already; neither could there be any pretense to do it. For a
Commonwealth in her greatest exigencys, never takes from any so much as not to
leave them wherewith to subsist. And 'twould be contrary to the end of Taxes if
they should. For Taxes are to preserve what people have from Enemies. And no
Enemy could take away more than All. So that the Commonwealth by so unjust a
Tax would become the Enemy. But it never does Tax those who have nothing to
spare, and had the Clergy no overplus, They would be in the condition of poor
men, untaxable.

But when They have not only sufficient, but abundance, and excess, it is
extravagant to fancy the Commonwealth cannot take what is not needed, to
employ it where it is. We see their excess, instead of preserving, sometimes
diminishes their reputation, and exposes them to the envy, and murmurs of
people, who grumble to see the liberality, perhaps of their own Ancestors,
abused it may be to vanity. To entitle God to goods so employed, is to entitle
him to the abuse of things, and to Vanity. Nor can any thing be more
ridiculous, than because what is necessary for his Service, ought be esteemed
Sacred, and his, to think that must be so too which is employed not in his
Service, sometimes against it, and his Laws too. In short, if the Commonwealth
need it, and They can spare it, It is injurious to God to fancy he would have
any thing employed less usefully for man than it might be.

Upon the whole, I conceive They have from God the Prerogative of the Keys:
They have Commission to go and teach, and Baptize all Nations: They have
assurance of his perpetual assistance in the execution of their Commission, and
of a Woe if they execute it not, and whatever else appears in the Sacred Books
or Tradition. The Piety of Men superadded the rest, some more necessary, all
convenient, and which, as many as they are, I wish were more. And so I take my
leave both of Them and You, remaining

Yours, etc.

YOUR Postscript makes me a very strange Complement. For why should you think
me the only honest man? Had you addressed your self to others, as you might to
diverse, who would have told you the same tale, They, it seems, would have been
the honest men, and I for want of luck, in your black Roll. And yet I think it
more possible for thousands of my Religion to get through the grace of God, an
entire Mastery over the corruption of Nature in all particulars, than that any
wisdom of Laws should make all the Subjects of a Nation honest men. In short,
we inherit the Doctrines, and we inherit the Innocence of our Ancestors the
Primitive Christians, and while you will have it fo, must inherit their hard
fate too, and bear the burden of other Folks folly. But I should think, Gal.
6.5. Ezech. 18.4.
if you would let every one bear his own burden, and that Soul only die which
sins, you would find by experience it were the best Policy as well as Piety.
For God's Law is the best way both to prosperity in this World, and happiness
in the next. For the rest, I assure you faithfully, I know nothing of the
matter you mention. I know that bad effects are not incredible of bad causes,
and I know those bad causes have nothing to do, at least, with my Religion. In
every thing else, I am as ignorant as those in China.

FINIS.

