A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Rebellions and Bloodshed Occasioned by the
Antichristian Practices OF THE JESUITS And other POPISH EMISSARIES IN THE
EMPIRE OF ETHIOPIA. Collected out of a Manuscript History Written in Latin by
JO. MICHAEL WANSLEBEN, a Learned Papist.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Jonathan Edwin, at the Sign of the
Three Roses in Ludgate street, 1679.

IMPRIMATUR,

Geo. Thorp Rmo in Christo P. and D. Dno Guliel. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Domesticis.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Jan. 1. 1678/9.
The Preface.
IN the New Testament which the Author of our Faith has bequeathed us not only
for a brief Summary of Christian Principles but an express and unchangeable
Rule of Practice too, the Wisdom of the Father has so admirably reconciled the
Interests of GOD and MAN as well in the Gospel as the Person of his Eternal
Son, that while it consults Glory to God on High, it does no less conciliate
Peace on Earth and Good Will among Men; all the Laws and Precepts thereof
having such a natural Tendency to suppress or regulate those Humane Lusts and
Passions which disquiet the World, as might in reason procure the due and full
Accomplishment of that Prediction, touching the Happy State of the Christian
Economy under the Messiah, which (according to the Inference Joseph made from
the Duplication of Pharaoh's Dream) for the greater certainty of the thing is
twice recorded by the Prophets in those express terms, Genesis 41.32.
They shall beat their Swords into Plowshares and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks; Isa. 2.4.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, Micah 4.3, 4.
neither shall they learn War any more: but they shall sit every man under his
Vine and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid. And that the
Spirit who spoke by the Prophets might not differ from Himself in the Apostles,
they imposed not their Doctrine upon the Gainsaying Pagans by Fire or Sword,
nor sowed Dissension among Idolatrous People to facilitate their Conversion,
but did at once preach and express the Will of their Master in Suffering the
loss of their own Lives (not conspiring the Death of others) for his sake;
which won their Persecutors to embrace the Faith they taught and died for,
being charmed by the Beauty and Excellence of that meek and quiet Spirit
wherewith they did adorn and recommend it.

Yet, as if the Holy Jesus were not the same Yesterday and to day, his
pretended Vicar at Rome sends forth Emissaries, whose Zealand Industry to
propagate the Faith which they would needs have to be Catholic, are employed
after a far different Method to gain Proselytes; especially those who most
glory in appropriating his Sacred Name to their Unhallowed Order; while,
instead of conforming to the Gospel-Precepts of Jesus, they execute that
Prophecy dictated by the Legal Spirit of Joel, Cap. 3.9, 10.
Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; Prepare War, wake up the Mighty men, let
all the men of War draw near, let them come up. Beat your Plow-shares into
Swords, and your Pruning Hooks into Spears. For, That Church or State which
they fail of perverting by strength of Arguments, shall be condemned to utter
subversion by force of Arms: any Prince whom they cannot infect with their
Superstitious Principles had need beware lest he taste their Poison or feel
their Poniard: What their Preaching or subtle Persuasions cannot effect,
Plots, Treasons, Murders, Tumults, Fire, and such like Unchristian Practices
shall carry on.

This is a Truth which more than one Age and Nation has sadly experienced, but
none ever had more reason to abhor and deprecate than Ours. Yet the
well-ordered Government of our British Church and State is not the sole Object
of Roman envy, nor has England been the only Scene of Popish Cruelty. Not to
mention the known and memorable Instances of Paris, Piedmont, Ireland etc.
Ethiopia, a Country little known and less frequented by the English, has felt
the smart of Rome's malice, and bears fresh Scars of the Jesuits Treachery; who
(if they please to think it a Commendation) are no Changelings, but constant to
their MORALS, having in all points approved themselves the same in Africa which
they appear at this day in Europe; a Transcript as well of their present
Designs as their former Plots against England, being delineated in this short
Abstract of the Abissin History.

Did the Popish Emissaries foment a Rebellion in England, to compass the
Destruction of our Glorious Martyr King Charles? The same they practiced in
Ethiopia, not only to the great hazard of Adams Saghed, but the actual Ruin of
Za Dinghil, lawful Princes thereof.

Have our Modern Jesuits veiled Murder under the Covert of their Chapels or
Altars here? There they raised Strongholds and Fortresses under the Pretense of
building. Churches and Colleges.

Have they secretly prepared Fire-bals and other Instruments of Mischief and
Villainy among us? In Abissinia they did also conceal Warlike Engines in their
Religious Houses.

Have they drawn some of our English Subjects into the horrid Plot (lately
discovered) against their Native Prince and Country? They did no less among
the Abissins.

Have they conspired the Introducing of a Foreign Power into Great Britain and
Ireland? They likewise not only Designed to betray the Ethiopick Empire to the
King of Portugal; but through their Treasonable Practices the Abissin
Seacoasts are actually delivered into the hands of the Turks.

In a word, Have they plotted to Assassinate our Sovereign Lord the King? So
they did to kill the Emperor Adamas.

And yet how exact soever the parallel is, I shall not presume to recommend
those rigorous Proceedings found necessary to rescue Ethiopia from this State
pest, as the fittest Precedent to remedy or prevent the present Danger of
England; but (according to my Duty) leave these Mysteries of State to the
judicious determination of His Gracious Majesty and His Great Council, whom God
preserve and prosper.

But lest the Gate swell too big for the City, I refer my Reader for further
satisfaction to the Narrative it self, which may well be concluded impartial in
what concerns the Jesuits and other Popish Emissaries, since it comes from one
of their own Profession; whom I have not only rendered with all possible
fidelity but (to prevent any just ground of Cavil on that score) whatsoever the
Coherence or Illustration of his Discourse thus abbreviated, induced me to
insert, may easily be distinguished from the Authors own words, by those
Crotchets wherein mine are enclosed [thus] throughout the whole Tract.

And if the Account here given (added to the many other Jesuitical arts, which
are now no longer a Mystery) induce any man to become a Proselyte to the Roman
Cause or Party, I shall as little envy his Wit as I approve his Choice.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Rebellions and Blondshed Occasioned by the
ANTICHRISTIAN PRACTICES OF THE JESUITS And other POPISH EMISSARIES IN THE
EMPIRE of ETHIOPIA.
TEsfa Lion, a Native of Ethiopia, in his close to St. John's Gospel, which he
published, together with the rest of the New Testament, in his Mothertongue
(imprinted at Rome in the year of our Lord 1548.) affirms that his Sovereign's
Ancestors were in times past Lords of 62 Kingdoms, but their Empire is now
reduced to a Third part of its ancient Dimensions. [A vast Region which (though
concealed in those inward Recesses of Africa, neither well known nor often
frequented by us of Europe, yet) may claim a just precedence among all the
Nations of Christendom, not only for the large extent of its Dominions, but
likewise for the prime Antiquity of its Conversion to the Christian Faith, or
at least its early Notice and participation of that Gospel whereby it has been
propagated in the World.

For, shortly after the Glorious Ascension of our Lord into Heaven, an Eunuch
of great Authority under Candace Queen of the Ethiopians] whom the
aforementioned Tesfa Zion, without expressing by what Authority he does it,
names Lacasa, and the place of her principal Residence Tigra [upon his return
from Jerusalem, whither he had come to worship, met with Philip the Evangelist
in the Desert of Gaza, who after he had preached unto him JESUS, in the
Exposition of what he then read in the Book of Esaias the Prophet, baptized him
in the next Water they came to as they went on their way; whereof we have an
authentic Record in the 8th. Chapter of the Acts of the Holy Apostles. And
since the Spirit of Truth in the same Scripture tells us, He went on his way
rejoicing, doubtless at his journeys end he expressed that Joy and its just
occasion, in making a public declaration to his Contrymen of all that befell
him in the way, and so he became the first Preacher of the Gospel to that part
of the World, though he was not fully qualified to convey all the privileges
that might complete the Foundation of the Christian Church among them:] For,
Vid. Spondan. An. Cbr. 35. N. 9. and 15.
the Eunuch wanting the Authority of conferring Holy Orders, (in regard he
received both his Baptism and Instruction from a Deacon only, and returned home
without any Imposition of the Apostles hands) the Abissins remained destitute
of Priests or Bishops till such time as one Aba Selama arrived in that
Country; whereof Lib. 10. c. 9.
Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical History writes to this effect:

Meropius a certain Tyrian Philosopher determining to visit India, took two
Youths to accompany him in his Travels, the one named Aedesius, the other
Frumentius. In his Return he unhappily fell into a Port of Africa, where a
barbarous people surprised him and his whole Company, and slew them all, except
the two Lads whom they found Conning their Lessons under a Tree near the
inhospitable Harbor, and of these they made a Present to their Sovereign.
Aedesius was raised to the Office of his Cup Bearer, but he advanced Frumentius
to be one of his Privy Council. After that Monarchs death, Frumentius became
Protector to the heir during his minority, in which time he made diligent
Inquiry among the Roman Merchants that drove a Traffic in those parts for such
as were Christians; and these he directed and authorized to build diverse
magnificent Structures for the public exercise of the Christian Religion in
more solemn Assemblies than had there been usual afore-time. But when the young
Prince arrived to such years as qualified him to assume the Government, he no
sooner took the Scepter into his own hands, but Aedesius returned to his
Kindred at Tire; Frumentius traveled to Alexandria in Egypt, where after he
had related the State of the Country from whence he came to the Patriarch,
advising him to send some sitperson thither endued with Episcopal Dignity and
Power, upon a Motion made by Athanasius (then newly entered into the Order of An
Ethiopick History written by P. Almeyda says be was Patriarch at that time. Ex
Chron. Auzumensi.
Priesthood) the same Frumentius was sent back invested with the Authority of a
Bishop, who not only increased the number of Believers by the Apostolic
Miracles, which he wrought, but established also a Succession of Ecclesiastical
Officers in those Countries: Whereupon the Abissins, in memory of the singular
Benefits they received by his Ministry, styled him Aba Selama, i. e. The Father
of Peace; [and have ever since honored the Sea of Alexandria with the
Consecration of their successive Metropolitans.] According to the Abissin
Chronologies this came to pass in the Year of Christ 356. when two Brothers,
whom they name Abriham and Azbiha, reigned together: but An. Chr. 327. N. 4.
Spondanus disagrees in the Computation of the time, accounting their Reign
nine and twenty years sooner.

From this Aba Selama, to Abuna Simon who died in the year 1618. they reckon up
Ninety five Metropolitans in a continued Succession.

But the Church of Ethiopia, thus planted and established in the Orthodox
Profession of the Gospel, did not long retain the Catholic Faith in its
Purity: for, soon after the Council of Chalcedon (which was convened in the
year of Christ, 451.) had condemned Dioscorus of Heresy, from whom, being then
Patriarch of Alexandria, (or rather from Jacob Syrus his Scholar, according to
their own Confession) the Abissins received the corrupt Opinion of Eutyches;
they did not only separate from the Churches of Europe, but proceeded so far as
to pass sentence of Excommunication against them, the form whereof my Author
out of an Ethiopick Manuscript which he found somewhere in England, translates
in these words, Maledicta sit impia Synodus quoe Chalcedone habita est:
Maledictus sit qui cum illis communicate, omnesque qui in eadem side cum illis
permanent. Nos autem non obedimus Congregationi istoe hoereticoe unquam. In
English thus. Let the wicked Synod held at Chalcedon be accursed: Cursed be he
that is of their Communion, and all those that continue in the same Faith with
them. But we own no Obedience or conformity to that Heretical assembly.

From that time till the year 1177. our Ecclesiastical Historians make little
mention of the Abissins, or any affairs of that Church: except Galvisius in his
Opere chron. an. Chr. 451. fol. 462.

But in the forementioned year 1177. Pope Alexander the III. was informed by
one of his Physicians, named Peter, then newly returned out of Ethiopia, that
the Abissin Emperor expressed himself very well inclined to the Church of Rome,
and desirous of being reconciled to her Communion; for which purpose he
requested his Holiness to entertain some of his subjects in Rome, where they
might conveniently be brought up and instructed in the principles of the Roman
Faith. This proposal was readily embraced by the Pope, and the better to
promote and encourage the designed Union he appointed them a certain house with
a Chapel dedicated to S. Stephen, situate behind the Quire of S. Peter's for
their Accommodation. As soon as the Popes Letters brought Tidings into Ethiopia
of the kind Reception allotted for them in Rome, many of the Abissins flocked
thither, where they abode till they had thoroughly learnt and espoused the Rites
and customs of the Latin Church, and then these New proselytes were sent home
again sit Instruments to induce their Countrymen to a milder Opinion of the
Roman Religion.

And to further this Design, Vide Spondan an. Chapter 1253. N. 3. 1321. N. 3. 1329.
N. 10.
which had so auspicious a beginning, Innocent the IVth. sent diverse of the
Order of S. Dominic into the Abissin Territories, [to second the endeavors of
those converted Natives now returned thither, and to perfect (if possible) the
subjection of that Mighty Prince and people to the papal Chair.]

Afterward, Eugenius the IVth. having in the Council of Ferrara reconciled [at
least as was pretended] the Greeks, Armenians, and Copties; [that nothing might
be wanting to complete so glorious an acquest,] sent express messengers to Zera
Jacob then reigning in Ethiopia, by whom he did earnestly invite and solicit
him to enter into the Catholic Communion: And he being loath to frustrate so
tedious and chargeable an Embassy (especially since it was the first made into
those parts by an European Prince) sent some of his subjects to Rome, where
they did not only complement the Pope, but in their Emperor's name made a
Confession of Faith according to the Articles received and established in the
Church of Rome; and thereupon carried back with them Letters of Union from his
Holiness, as the Acts of that Council signify, which was continued at Florence
and ended in Rome; in the close whereof this great affair was transacted, a
little before the death of Pope Eugenius. But the short continuance of that
fair correspondence, and the few acts of Union or Obedience put in practice
thereupon, may sufficiently evidence to the world that what the A fair
Confession from a Papist.
Ethiopian Monarchs did of this nature in their Transactions with the Popes of
Rome, was never heartily approved or generally entertained by their subjects.

About this time John the II. King of Portugal, desirous to make some new
discoveries [that might employ and enrich his Subjects, whose experience and
success in the Art of Navigation extended their Renown and Dominion farther
toward the East than any other People of Europe in that Age,] resolved to send
some able persons with his Credential Letters, (as to the most remarkable
Provinces thereabouts, so especially) to the Emperor of Ethiopia; that, (if no
other Advantage should accrue thereby) he might at least be gratified with a
more exact Information concerning those parts of the World. In this enterprise,
Alphonsus a Pavia and Johannes Petrus a Covilham, both Portugueses, were the
chief: They began their Voyage from Lisbon on the 7th of May, 1486. and having
passed through Neapolis, Egypt, Tor, and Suaquem, at last Johannes (Alphonsus
being dead by the way) arrived at the Imperial Court of Ethiopia, where then
reigned Alexander, who was Successor to Beat Mariam the son of Zera Jacob, by
whom they were entertained with all demonstrations of Humanity and Kindness:
especially Johannes Petrus who grew into so much Favor and esteem there, that
he was never permitted to return into his own Country. He therefore omitted
not, upon all fair Occasions which his abode and interest in that Court allowed
him, to discourse of the great Achievements happily undertaken and
accomplished by the Crown of Portugal; the relation whereof so won upon the
mind of Hellen the Empress, that she rested not satisfied till an Embassy was
sent to conclude a League of Friendship with Emanuel, who then sat on the
Throne of his Father K. John deceased some time before. And on that errand one
Matthew an Armenian, whom they made choice of as the fittest person for such an
employment, came to Lisbon in the year 1513.

This was the first Embassy which any Prince of Europe ever received from the
Ethiopian Court: For those Abissins who were sent to Rome upon the Mediation of
Pope Alexander's Physician (as is before related) came not immediately from
Ethiopia, but were recommended from a Monastery which they then had in
Jerusalem.

Hereupon King Emanuel of Portugal returned an honorable Embassy to the
Abissin Emperor, which he committed to the management of Edward Galvan a very
sage experienced person, and Francis Alvarez his own Chaplain, a devout and
learned Priest; and with them sent back the Armenian also. But Galvan dying in
Cameran, an Isle of the Red Sea, Rhoderic Lima was appointed his Substitute,
who with Alvarez and the rest of their company (except Matthew the Armenian who
likewise dyed by the way) presented themselves at the Court of Ethiopia before
David then reigning, See the History written by Francis Alvarez.
who gave them most splendid and obliging entertainment, not only at their
first Reception, but during the whole time of their Residence. After six years
(a great part whereof they spent against their wills in that Court) they were
licensed to return, Alvarez having so well acquitted himself in his Negotiation
there that the Emperor deputed him to be his Ambassador to the Pope, with a
command [as was pretended] to tender Obedience to his Holiness in his Name. But
Claudius, David, successor, did afterward tell Oviedus to his face, that this
was This Forgery is owned by the Pen of a Romans Cath.
added to the Emperor's Letters as well contrary to his intention as without
his knowledge. He sent also with them Christopher Licanatus, alias Zega Zeab,
with kind Letters both to the King of Portugal and the Pope.

These Ambassadors left Ethiopia in the Month of April, an. 1526. and arrived
at Lisbon in July the same year. But Francis Alvarez came not to Rome till the
29th. of January, an. 1533. at which time he delivered the Ethiopian Letters to
the Pope (then Clemens the VIIth.) who caused them to be read in the presence
of that puissant Emperor Charles the Vth. and many other Worthies.

King Emanuel was very desirous this friendly correspondence, already so well
initiated, might be brought to perfection; and though he did not live to see
his Wishes fully answered, yet this design of his was afterward much
facilitated by another Message from Claudius the Son and Successor of David,
wherein he earnestly requested aids from the King of Portugal against one
Against whom Tessa Zion inveighs bitterly, terming him a Companion of the Goats
and Persecutor of the Sheep, because of the devastation of his Native Country.
Grain King of Adel, [a more successful than potent Neighbor, who at that time
miserably wasted his Dominions,] and to render this request the more successful
and avaialable, he [not only sent a Confession of his Faith since published by
Job Ludolfus, but] in the same Letters further craved an understanding person
invested by the Pope with the Authority of a Patriarch, and some other able
Divines to be sent under his Conduct into Abissinia.

In Answer to this proposal, John King of Portugal demanded of Ignatius de
Loyola some Members of his Order (not long before instituted) to be employed on
that occasion; but the Father of the Jesuits [with a Deliberation suitable to
his Gravity] gave him no reply till the year 1555. and then he recommended
Johannes Nunnius Barretta and Melchior Carnerius, both Portugueses, and Andreas
Oviedus a Castilian, as persons thoroughly accomplished for such a purpose. And
[that a plenary power and qualification from the Sea Apostolic might add the
more Honor and Authority to their Mission,] Nunnius was ordained Patriarch of
Ethiopia by Pope Julius the III d. and afterward confirmed by Pope Paul the
IVth. and of his two Co-adjutors, the first was made Bishop of Nicoea, the
later Bishop of Hierapolis: [Thus were they fitted to reconcile the Abissin
Church to the Roman Faith; and to prevent dissension among them,] it was
ordered and agreed that upon the death of Nunnius, Oviedus should succeed in
the Charge and Dignity of Patriarch.

On this occasion the King of Portugal wrote to Claudius; and so did Ignatius
Loyola, whose Epistle may be seen in the History of the Jesuits. However these
Letters were not sent by the three above named, but being conveyed to Petrus
Mascarenius then Viceroy of India, he transmitted them to the Ethiopian Court
by the hands of three other persons, that they might sound the Emperors
Inclinations before the Patriarchs arrival: But Claudius (having already
received the aids he desired) had changed his mind in the matter of Religion,
intending nothing less than to admit of the Alteration he had proposed, so
that, when the Roman Fathers came to press for Audience, he sent them word, he
had neither Need to receive the Instruction, nor Will to obey the Authority of
the Church of Rome; nay, so averse were his Nobles to their Admission, that
some of them openly affirmed, they would sooner submit to the Turkish than the
Roman yoke.

Nevertheless, that so high an enterprise might not fall under the blemish of
an utter frustration, Oviedus [now become principal of the Mission, in the
absence of Nunnus, who proceeded not with them] boldly prosecutes his Journey
with five Fathers more, and so wrought his way through all the Obstacles which
threatened his disappointment, that on the third day of Pentecost in the year
1557. they were admitted into the Emperor's presence, who seemed to promise
them a favorable Reception at the first; but having read their Letters, his
Countenance was quickly changed, the Contents thereof being no way
correspondent to his Humor or Interest; as he afterward sufficiently expressed
in his frequent disputes with the Bishop concerning Religion, whereby he gave
them to understand he would not easily relinquish the received Opinions and
Customs of the Abissin Church. Hereupon Oviedus wrote a confutation of their
Errors and presented it to the Emperor, who made him no other reply thereunto
than what might suffice to signify his firm Resolution of adhering to the
Principles of his Forefathers.

But these repeated altercations having rendered the Bishop's presence
ungrateful at Court, he sound it high time to retire with his Companions to
some place of greater privacy, where they omitted not their usual Industry and
utmost endeavors to reduce the Abissin Christians to the Doctrine and Rites of
the Roman Church; whereupon the Emperor not only sent him a severe check and
prohibition, but (had not some of the Nobles interposed their interest and
Arguments) would have proceeded to put him to death, but [being dissuaded from
inflicting any Sanguinary punishment,] he at last with great fury enjoined the
Roman Bishop never to see his face more. This was transacted in January 1559.
and Claudius ended his days in a battle against the Saracens in the month of
March next following.

Who in another Tract published by my Author is also named Minas.
Adamas Saghed his brother succeeded him both in the Throne, [and in the
Resolute Affection he had for the Abissin Church, as then established by the
ancient Laws and Constitutions of the Empire] being a man so inveterate against
the Promoters of the Roman Cause that, upon some bold reply made by Oviedus
(when admitted to a Conference) he could scarce forbear laying violent hands
upon him; nay, his Fury carried him so far as to tear the Gown from his back:
Nor was his wrath thus appeased, but (when he was become Patriarch, in the room
of Nunnius Barretta who dyed at Goa, in the year 1562.) he banished him into an
horrid and desolate Mountain together with his Accomplices, where they were
confined for the space of six months, till released upon the Intercession of
some Lords. He also revoked the Liberty which Claudius his Predecessor had
formerly granted, That such Abissin women as were married to Portugueses might
observe the Roman Institutions, without incurring any penalty: and forbad all
his Subjects on severe penalties to profess the Roman Religion, or so much as
be present at the Popish Mass or any Portuguess meeting; whereupon diverse were
imprisoned, tortured, and put to death, for transgressing the Imperial Edict.

By this rigor and strict severity which he used for the suppression of the
Roman Interest now set on foot by the Fathers in his Territories, many of his
Subjects were so Not without the concurrent Instigation of the Jesuits, who led
the Portugal Faction.
exasperated, that in the year 1560. Isaac Barnagassi, who drew a considerable
part of the Nobles into the Conspiracy, plotted with thirty Not without the
concurrent Instigation of the Jesuits, who led the Portugal Faction.
Portugueses how they might destroy him: And [finding no sit Opportunity for
the private Assassination of his person, the more plausibly to effect it by
open War] they pretend to vindicate the Right of Bencon or Zarcar.
Tarcar, the Son of his deceased Elder Brother Claudius, for whose advancement
to the Throne they take up Arms. But Adamas, justly apprehensive of the danger,
soon levied an Army to suppress the One Rebellion occasioned by the Pope's
Agents.
Rebellion; and to re-ingratiate himself with the Portuguese party, he invitos
Oviedus, and the rest of his Co-adjutors, by an amicable message, to his Camp;
[not being ignorant from what quarter the Storm arose.] However, the Fire being
blown up so far already as not to be quenched without Effusion of blond, they
came to blows, with various success: For, in the first conflict Adamas was
driven from his Trenches, with some loss; in the second, he had the good
fortune to take Tarcar alive, and (in hopes his Trouble might dye with him)
caused him to be beheaded on the 2d of July, 1561. But in a third Battle,
Isaac, the Traitorous Viceroy of Midrebahr, having set up another Brother of
the deceased Tarcar, and called in the Turks to his Aid, so terrified Adamas
and his Army with their great Guns, that he left his Camp in confused haste and
fled on the 20th of April, 1562. and in the month of February the year
following, he ended his Days and Troubles together, leaving his Son Whom be
elsewhere names Basilides.
Melec Saghed very young to succeed him, who, by those of the Loyal Party, was
set up in his Fathers room.

But Barnagassi, prosecuting the Rebellion upon the Interest of Tarcar's
brother whom he had advanced to the Imperial Title and Dignity, became Master
of Mesauva, and Erquiquum, with all the Seacoast, which [finding himself
unable to carry on the Treason he had begun, to its desired issue] he
maliciously betrayed to the subjection of the Turks, his Confederates. However,
in spite of the malice or success of his Enemies, Melec Segued outlived these
Storms, and became equally eminent in Glory and Virtue.

In the mean time the Patriarch Oviedus, after the forementioned Discomfiture
of Adamas, having retired with part of the Portugueses [notwithstanding their
success, which makes it very unaccountable] into Fremona, a Town in the Kingdom
of Tigra, where he past the remainder of his life, he wrote diverse Letters both
to Rome and Portugal, dated in the year 1562. wherein he charge the
miscarriage of his whole Enterprise on the want of Aids from Portugal, and
(among other things) desires to be removed out of Ethiopia into India, which
request was granted him by a Brief from Pius quintus bearing date Feb. 25.
1566. But notwithstanding this Liberty given him, he afterward excused himself
for not passing into India, by reason of the Turks who were become Masters of
the Passage, in Letters to the Pope on the 15th of June 1567. wherein he also
gave his Holiness an Account, that the number of Roman Catholics at that time
in the Empire of Ethiopia might be about five hundred. And at last this
vigilant Patriarch, after 15. or 16. years Residence in Fremona, dyed there,
an. 1577. [After his death we find not any further attempt from Rome, till] the
year 1584. when Pope Gregory the XIIIth. sent Johannes Baptista Brittus to
reclaim Melec Saghed to Apostolic Obedience; [furnishing him not only with
persuasive Letters, but many Catholic Books, which for the more effectual
Conviction both of the Sovereign and his Subjects, were to be dispersed among
them. Armed with these Instructions] he passed by the way of Aleppo to Ormuz,
thence he sailed to Goa, and there embarked himself on a ship bound for the Red
Sea, where touching upon a small Isle (whose name we know not) he was taken and
slain by the Turks, an. 1586. And yet [though he and the great design he
undertook miscarried together] some of his Books were brought into Ethiopia,
where they were received and cried up [at least by those well affected to the
Church of Rome] as Divine Oracles dropped down from Heaven.

Touching these Affairs we hear no farther mention during the Reign of Melec
Saghed; only that in the year 1593. he sent one Tecle Maria, of the Order of S.
Anthony, to Rome and Lisbon, requiring succors might be sent him on some
special occasion; but his Message was not answered with its desired effect.

About this time diverse Roman Fathers made many ineffectual attempts to pass
into Ethiopia, being still disappointed by the Turks, who were now Thus they
justly smarted by the Effect of their Treason against Adamas.
Possessors of all the Ports and Avenues to that Empie lying on the Seacoast,
by whom some of them were killed and others captivated for many years. Hereupon
they began to consider of some safer Expedient for their Transportation, and it
was concluded requisite to this purpose that an House should be built upon Diu,
an Isle belonging to the Kingdom of Cambaya (situate between the City Cambaya
and the River Sinda) whereunto Armenians, Greeks, Arabs, Turks and Persians
continually resort to lade and unlade the Traffic they carry on in those
parts; in regard that from thence, by reason of the great Concourse of People
always passng to and fro the Fathers might conveniently enough in the habit of
Armenians be conveyed by the Moors themselves into Ethiopia, And no sooner had
Airs de Saldanna, then Vice Roy of India, [of his pious inclination to that
Religious design] built and endowed the House they desired, but this Counsel
took effect, so that in the year 1603. P. Petrus Paez, in 1605. P. Anton.
Fernandez. and P. Anton. de Angelis, and in 1606. P. Ludovicus de Azevedo and
Laurentius Romanus, were successively transported without danger or discovery:
and [for the better dispersing of their Doctrine] the one part betook
themselves to Dembea, and the other to Fremona; where [they knew so well to act
their parts and improve their advantages, that] they drew great numbers of
Proselytes to the Church of Rome, and among the rest prevailed with the Emperor
Which perhaps is no other but the same Melec Saghed under a different Title, it
being usual for the Abissin Afonarchs to have many Names, whereof Job Ludolsus
has given aparticular instanco in his Notes on the Confession of Claudius, N.
5, 6.
Za Dinghil himself to espouse their Religion and own the Popes Authority. But
[instead of winning his Subjects to embrace the same Profession after the
example of their Sovereign, his Defection from the established Opinions and
Practices of the Abissin Church] so enraged the people, [who till then had
expressed themselves Loyal and Obedient to his Person and Government] that they
This is a second Rebellion occasioned by Popish Emissaries.
rebelled against him, and while he endeavored to reduce them to their Duty by
force of Arms, he was slain in the Battle.

After the death of Za Dinghil, there arose two Competitors for the Crown,
Jacob and Susnejos, between whom the whole strength of the Empire was divided.
Jacob had been driven, about a year before, by a Faction of the Nobles, to
Enarea as an Exile, for as much as they reputed him to be Illegitimate; but
having maintained a good correspondence with diverse of the Grandees during his
absence from Court, at his return he [found not only a very friendly Reception,
but so great an Interest among them as enabled him to] overcome his Uncle
Susnejos in the Field and ascend the Throne. But not long after [such is the
instability of Fortune] Susnejos, who pretended to the Crown as nearer in Blood
reinforced his scattered Troops, and with his victorious Arms deprived Jacob at
once of his Life and Sovereignty, on the 10th. of March, an. 1607. This Prince
Jacob had two sons, who (upon their Fathers overthrow) fled for their security;
the one was named Cosmus; the other, Zega Christus, who, after he had escaped
out of the Abissin Territories, traveled to Jerusalem, thence he went to Rome,
after that he came to Paris, and in the end dyed at Ruel, an. 1638.

Susnejos, who was a Prince no less renowned for his Virtues than his
Successes, divided the Government of his three principal Kingdoms, Amhare,
Abagamider, and Tigra, between his three Brethren, and Gorgora he committed to
the charge of a certain Duke, in whom he much confided. And having thus
disposed the places of greatest Trust into safe hands, he was the better able
to suppress all Tumultuary Insurrections in the bud, and provided for the peace
and safety of his Empire, which was much established by his absolute Conquest
of a neighboring enemy, that often infested his Dominions, called the Gallae.
These were a People inhabiting between the Kingdom of Bale and the Sea,
generally esteemed the Race of those Jews that were irrecoverably dispersed by
Salmanassar, Nebuch adnezzar, Titus, Adrian, and Severus, who, as they
accidentally fell into those parts, associated together, and from small
despised beginnings grew up into a considerable body, which proved troublesome
(if not formidable) to the neighboring Princes; though by their long abode in
that Climate, they are now become black.

Ethiopia being thus at rest on every side, Susnejos [resolves to improve those
Haleyon days in propagating the Faith hitherto concealed in his own Breast, and
for this purpose] calls the Roman Fathers, acquainting them with his design to
be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and expressing himself ready to let the
Pope and King of Portugal know his Intentions by Letters, which he would have
sent without the privity of his Nobles. But the Fathers advising the contrary,
he consulted them in this Affair, though little to his satisfaction, they being
utterly averse to his Proposal: However (notwithstanding their dissent) he
resolutely proceeds, and [following his own sence] wrote to Paul the Vth. on
the 14th. of October, 1607. and to the King of Portugal on the 10th. of
December, the same year, in which Letters he requested Aids against his He
seems to intend such of his Subjects as should persist in the old Abissin
persuasion.
enemies, and Ministers to instruct his Subjects in the Catholic Faith.

These [after a long delay] were granted him by Pope Gregory the XVth. an.
1622. (much about the time that the College de propaganda side was first
erected in Rome) and Alphonsus Mendez, a Portuguese Jesuit, was constituted
Patriarch of Ethiopia: But he departed not from Lisbon till the year 1624. when
prosecuting his Voyage, he arrived the year following at the Port of Beilur in
the Kingdom of Dancale, (which lies over against Mocca) the King whereof, being
a Tributary and Ally to the Abissin Emperor, had Notice of his arrival, and
accordingly received him. From thence he past on to Supposed the same with
Fremona.
Maiguagua, where he wintered with the Fathers of the Society; next he came to
Genete Jesus, where also some Fathers dwelt; after that to Gorgora, and there
he found Fathers likewise; and at last he arrived at the Emperor's Court, who
entertained him with great demonstrations of Joy and Favor.

After a few days of refreshment, the Patriarch Alphonsus, attired in
Pontifical habit, made a Sermon before the Court on that Text, Thou art Peter,
S. Matthew. 16.18.
and upon this Rock I will build my Church, etc. And at the Close of his
Discourse, the Emperor (by his Lord Chamberlain) made open Confession in the
presence of all his Nobles, That Dioscorus had been justly condemend, and
though Jacobus Syrus his Disciple brought that Heresy among them, yet they
were still conscious of the Authority of the Church of Rome, whereof himself
was so thoroughly convinced that he resolved to countenance the Roman Faith
throughout all his Dominions; concluding with the Application of that Passage
to the Church of Rome, which S. Paul writes in his Epistle to the Romans, Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? cap. 8.35, 37, 38, 39.
Shall tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword, etc.

After this Speech was ended, the Emperor took an Oath, wherein he obliged
himself to be an obedient Son to the Church and Pope of Rome; then or Basilides.
Fasilades, his Son and Heir apparent, did the like; and after him, Ras Secla
Christus the Emperor's half Brother, with other Grandees and Officers of State,
took the same Oath. Then the Nobles swore Allegiance to Fasilades, as the sole
person whom [at the expense of their Lives and Fortunes] they would set upon
the Throne, in case of his Fathers decease; whereunto some [of the most zealous
for the rising Cause] added this Proviso UPON CONDITION HE CONTINUED FIRM TO
THE ROMAN FAITH.
Last of all, the Ecclesiastical Censure of Excommunication was denounced
against any person that should thenceforward endeavor to remove the Catholic
Faith, or restore the Abissin Persuasion. This great Revolution was transacted
on the eleventh day of February, in the year 1626.

In pursuance of the Oath he had lately taken, Susnejos required his Subjects
to renounce their ancient Opinions and Way of Worship: But the major part of
them were so obstinate in their Old Principles, and their Sovereign so resolute
to reduce them to the New, that the whole Empire (lately flourishing in Peace
and Tranquillity) was transformed into a dismal scene of Oppression and
Violence, being filled with the blood and slaughter of its native Inhabitants,
insomuch that the number of sufferers in this Quarrel of Religion did not
seldom amount to four thousand in a day.

This grand success of the Roman Cause was with all convenient speed certified
to the Pope, then Urban the VIIIth. who (not a little pleased with such
acceptable tidings) wrote gratulatory Letters to the Ethiopian Patriarch
Alphonsus: dated at S. Peter's in Rome the 4th. of March, 1628. and the fifth
year of his Papacy.

In the mean time all Acts of Religion passed in Ethiopia according to the
rites of the Roman Church; all from the Emperor to the meanest Commoner were
rebaptized, and their Marriages, which the Abissin Custom had in times past
allowed to be dissoluble at the pleasure of the parties, became now irevocable:
[except a Divorce were granted by Dispensation, or adjudged by Sentence.]

But, (to use my Author's own words hujusmodi per vim and supplicia populos ad
Regnum Christitrahendi modus, diuturnus esse hautquaquam poterat;) this method
of drawing (or rather driving) People by Acts of Violence and the infliction of
punishments, to the Kingdom of Though the Abissins avere Christians already.
Christ, was not likely to lay any lasting foundation: For, when the Catholic
Faith had been promoted and maintained with Fire and Sword for the space of
Four.
fourteen years, [so that it seemed to be rooted and established in the Empire]
diverse of the Great ones (still well affected to the Abissin Church) combining
together made an A third Rebellion by reason of the Popish Interest.
Insurrection for the Restoration and Defense of their Ancient Profession; and
these were quickly seconded by multitudes of the Common People flocking to them
from every quarter, whose Courage and Numbers received no small accession from
the presence and persuasions of those Abissin Monks, who (lest they should have
been compelled to embrace the Roman Faith or suffer the severe Penalties
denounced against its opposers) had retired into inacessible Mountains, or lain
hid in obscure dens and caves; but now disclosed themselves to the new raised
Forces, animating them against the Roman Fathers and their Doctrine.

[ Susnejos in the mean time was not idle, but like a vigilant and resolute
Champion of the Faith he had solemnly espoused, sent forth his Troops to
prevent the danger of those Tumults, hoping to crush them ere they could be in
a posture to make head against him, though the success did not answer his
Expectation: For] the Viceroy, to whose Valor and Conduct he entrusted that
Campaign, and many Catholic Nobles who fought under his Banner, fell in sundry
Battles; so that by the unhappy issue of these Intestine Wars the Catholic
Cause daily declined, and upon the rumor of their losses the adverse party
proportionably increased both in strength and number.

Hereupon they first demand Liberty to celebrate their Mass after the Rites
prescribed in the Liturgy of their Forefathers: This being readily assented
to, the success emboldned them to press with greater vigor and earnestness for
the Restitution of all their other Opinions and Privileges. And whereas the
Roman Fathers seemed the sole Obstructors of their desired Liberty, they never
gave the Emperor any respit from their clamorous addresses till he condescended
to rid the Court of the Patriarch and his Cooperators, whereupon [being as well
wearied by their Importunity as terrified by their Power] he commanded the
Fathers to return to Maiguagua: Upon whose Removal from their Prince's eye, the
people soon obtained a public Revocation of all those Edicts that had been
made in favor of the Roman Catholics or their Religion, and a general Grant
of Liberty of Conscience to all the Abissins, as in times past. A short time
after, the death of Susnejos put an end to the Controversy, an. 1632.

The Reasons of the peoples implacable animosity against the Fathers, which
procured their Ejection, were not (it seems) well understood in Europe, till a
certain Abissin named Abbas Gregorius, and he a Catholic, being weary of the
Commotions occasioned by the Jesuits in his own Country, came to Grand Cairo,
then to Jerusalem, and after that to Rome, where he gave an Account of the
whole matter upon Oath before Don Pedro Lippa, then Secretary to the College
de propaganda fide.

And Ernestus Duke of Saxony, hearing of this Abissins Arrival and Deposition,
immediately sent an Express to invite him to his Court, that he might be
informed in a more particular manner from his own mouth. However, not being
fully satisfied with his Relation, he sent Wansleben (my Author) into Egypt,
an. 1663. to procure the best information he could from such as came down from
Ethiopia to Grand Cairo.

Now of the Abissins Relation and the Author's Enquiry, this he gives us as the
sum and substance.

The Patriarch Alphonsus Mendez, The Jesuits Pride,
[as if he had vyed with the Emperor's Pomp and Attendance] maintained three
hundred servants in his ordinary Retinue, and in all things carried a losty
Port far exceeding the degree of an Ecclesiastical person; (at least among the
Abissins, where men of that Function live at a contrary Rate and retein very
different Customs;) nay, his Pride was such that he would not give any
Ethiopian, of what estate or degree soever, the respect due to his place or
quality; whereof this may serve for one signal instance. Susnejos, on some
special occasion, sent his Son and Successor to speak with the Patriarch, into
whose presence at the same instant came a Lay-brother of the Order; to the
later he appointed a Chair, [as a mark of Honor,] permitting the Heir apparent
in the mean time to stand before him [without making him the least Tender of
the like Civility.] Nor did he put a less affront upon the Empress her self,
[when she had as much Need as Reason to expect a more obliging Treatment;] for,
Ingratitude,
whereas the Emperor had granted Alphonsus and the Fathers of his Society the
same Castle, wherein he preserved his Treasure, for their Security in the time
of the Rebellion; they ingratefully denied admission to his Royal Consort, when
(in a great apprehension of imminent danger) she sled thither for Refuge. And
so little did he countenance the Natives of that Country, that he would
neither allow any of the Abissins [though zealous Assertors of the Roman
Catholic Profession] the dignity of Holy Orders, nor permit them to accompany
him in those journeys which he rode on Horseback, except they would submit to
walk by him on foot, like so many Lacquies.

[But, besides these personal dis-respects, there were many other Provocations,
of a more heinous nature, which moved the Abissins to hate and expel the
Jesuits, as enemies to the Public Weal, in plotting the Subversion as well of
the Civil as Ecclesiastical Government, not content to Triumph in the Ruin of
their Church, without improving that to the Dissolution of their State too.
For,]

They laid a secret design to betray the Empire of Ethiopia to the Portuguese
Dominion; and Treasonable Practices.
whereof they were undeniably convicted by diverse Letters [written to carry on
the Treason,] which were seasonably intercepted.

Under the pretense of building Churches and Colleges, they raised
Fortifications and strong holds in many advantageous parts of the Country.

And a vast quantity of Instruments for the erecting of Mounds and Bulworks,
with other warlike preparations, were (upon a strict search) found in their
houses.

In short, they did inordinately enrich themselves and were intolerably
insolent; which first bred among the Abissins a suspicion, that they rather
aimed at the Gold and Government of Ethiopia, than the salvation of its
Inhabitants.

Upon this discovery, the Roman Cause dyed together with Susnejos; for no
sooner was his son Fasilades advanced to the Throne, but he resolved to expel
the Catholic Fathers out of his Dominions; and to the more violent as well as
speedy execution of this Resolve he was not a little quickened by a message from
a neighboring King, who, (being both Potent and Wealthy) threatened to invade
him, unless he gave his Subjects liberty to worship God according to the Rites
of their Ancestors. Having therefore granted the Patriarch forty servants,
Letters of safe Conduct, and license to transport whatsoever his Father had
bestowed upon him; he strictly injoyns him and all the Roman Fathers to depart
the Empire without delay, [and by public Decree makes it a Capital Offense for
any of them to be found in his Territories on any pretense whatsoever.]

After their departure, he immediately prohibits the Exercise of the Roman
Religion, deprives the Catholic Abissins of all their Honors and Charges;
compels them both by Threats and Punishments to resume their former Opinions;
and in the Province of Assa put three Jesuits to death, because they departed
not with the rest, [at the day prescribed:] The like number of Abissins and
Portugueses ran the same Fate [for their Obstinacy,] and among others Bishop
Apollinaris; nor did he spare his own Uncle, Ras Secla Christus, then seventy
years old, but condemned him to a tedious imprisonment.

In a word, Susnejos the Father was not more zealous and active to plant the
Roman Faith in Abissinia, than Fasilades his Son and Successor was to extirpate
and abolish it.

As soon as these affairs were thoroughly made known and impartially stated at
Rome; the College de propaganda fide [upon mature consideration of their ill
success and its as just as apparent occasion] resolve to lay aside the Jesuits
as improper instruments for that enterprise, and in their stead made choice of
some Religious persons of the Order of Mendicant Friars to manage their design
upon Ethiopia. Accordingly certain Capuchins (namely Agat-Angelus and
Cassianus) were deputed for that Charge, and ordered to proceed on their
journey thither, an. 1636.

While these things were transacted in Italy, the Patriarch of Alexandria (at
the Request of Fasilades, who in the year 1634. had re-setled his Empire in its
pristine State and Condition) had ordained one Arminius a Copti, of the
Monastery of S. Macarius, Metropolitan of Ethiopia, according to the ancient
usage; whom the Italian Friars, upon their arrival at Grand Cairo, found ready
to depart to his new Charge, as soon as he should receive the Patriarch's
Benediction and his Letters Patents: and understanding that they were also
designed for Abissinia, he made the Fathers a civil invitation to be his
Companions in Travel; but Arminius having obtained his dispatches before they
were fitted for so great a journey, proceeds on his way without them.

At the same time there was in Cairo one Peter Heyling, a Lutheran of Lubec,
who, for his better security among the Roman Catholics, passed under the name
of Petrus Nolingus, an Hollander. An Enterprise worthy of the Protestant
Religion.
This man (as is credibly reported) with Ten others of the same Persuasion,
[emulating the industry of the Roman Church,] concurred in a joint resolution
to disperse the Christian Doctrine, according to the Principles of the Reformed
Religion, over the whole earth; [and that the distribution of their Labors
might be the better regulated, they cast the several Provinces of the World
into a proportionable division among them,] each of them obliging himself to
undertake that part which should fall to him by Lot: In pursuance of which
agreement and design, the forenamed Peter was advanced as far as Cairo, The Lot
having destined Egypt and Ethiopia to his charge. A person (by my Authors own
confession) of eminent Prudence, well skilled in History, experienced in
Physic, and in many Languages (as Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, Ethiopic,) inferior
to none.

From Cairo he traveled sevent days journey to Siut, a City in the upper
Egypt, but was constrained to return thence by the means of Agat-Angelus;
wherefore to prevent the like affront and disappointment a second time, he
determined to procure License to accompany Arminius the Ethiopick Metropolitan
in his journey toward his new Province, for which purpose, that he might
ingratiate himself with the chief of the Copties [at least as my With those of
his Religion it is no sin to belly an Heretic to blast his Reputation
Author saith] he not only professed their Religion, but privately suffered
himself to be Circumcised, and by these means obtained commendatory Letters
from the Alexandrian Patriarch to the Emperor of Ethiopia, as well as
Permission to join with Arminius in his Travels, who left Cairo in the year
1637.

[And yet the Co-herence of my Author's discourse seems to imply that Heylings
great parts and abilities recommended him to Arminius; who, that he might the
better veil his own want of Learning under the covert of such a man's company
and assistance, had a private inducement to obtain the Patriarch's Grant for
his Protection and Society, without having recourse to any such indirect means
or base compliances as are above specified.]

Peter Heyling thus arrived in Abissinia, under the Metropolitans Favor, took
up his abode in a Church, [not far from Court.] And as soon as he was settled in
his new Mansion, he began to practice Physic and profess the Instruction of
Youth in the Greek and Hebrew tongues, wherein he quickly became so famous that
even the principal Nobility accounted it a singular privilege to have their
Sons educated under his Tuition; so that he might easily have amassed a very
considerable Treasure, had he been disposed to accept or hoord up all the
Gratuities that were offered him: But he either generously refused the Presents
when tendered, or else (in ease they were urgently pressed upon him) liberally
distributed the overplus among the poor; [after he had made himself a very
moderate allowance out of it for Food and Raiment.] A sufficient evidence [as
my Author notes] of his great Abstinence or self-denial.

These remarkable qualities and endowments could not long brook the concealment
of a private life, but brake out into such an advantageous report of him as
reached the Emperors Ears, and won him so high an esteem at Court that [after
some Trial had been made of his Capacity for public employments] he was by
large steps and degrees quickly raised to the principal Charge of the Empire,
in which great Office and Trust he acquitted himself with such a prudent
address, that his Great Master obliged him (with a courteous violence) to
accept of a Revenue and Attendance equal to the Chief of the Nobility, with a
most delightful Apartment in a place (accounted the Paradise of Ethiopia)
called Genete Christos; yea, and designed him, as it is commonly and positively
affirmed, his own Daughter in marriage.

Peter Heyling sinding himself so deeply interested in the Prince's Favor and
Affection, began to remind his Imperial Majesty of all those deplorable
Troubles wherein his Dominions had been so often involved [(especially in the
days of his Father,) and so effectually represented to him that those dreadful
Commotions and all their pernicious consequences] were solely occasioned by the
Jesuits, and Popish Emissaries, warning him of the sudden approach of others on
the same Errand, [together with the firm Resolution of their Party to persist
in the like Treasonable attempts,] that at last his Remonstrance prevailed with
the Ethiopian Monarch and his Council to establish a Penal Law against all With
regard (no doubt) to a certain old Prophecy which our learned Dr. Ed.
Castelcites out of Sandoval thus, Que gente blanca haziendo los labradores los
han de echar sucra de Etiopia: importing, That a White People under some
disguise should dispossess them of their Country.
the people of Europe, [of what Country or persuasion soever,] forbidding any
person bearing the native distinction of a white Complexion to enter his
Territories upon pain of death.

In the mean time the Roman Fathers, an. 1638. proceed on their journey by
Suaquem an (Isle of the Red Sea) thence to Enquiquum and so on toward the
Abissin Court, in the Company of certain Merchants who had liberty of Traffic
in those parts. When they came to Serave, where Barnagassi the Viceroy of
Midrebahr had his ordinary Residence, he no sooner saw two White Faces among
the Travelers, but he suspected them to be such as had by the late Imperial
Edict been banished from all the Coasts of Ethiopia: whereupon (being thereunto
advised by the chief Abissin Priest upon the place) he searched their Sumpture,
and therein found Chalices, Stones consecrated for Altars, Sacerdotal Ornaments
and Mass-Books, with other things prepared for Ecclesiastical uses. Having thus
discovered their persons and designs, the Viceroy informs his Master of the
discovery he had made, and detains the Fathers in chains until he should
receive further notice of his Majesty's pleasure; which was no sooner signified
but they were brought to the Emperor's presence on the 5th. of August, 1638.
where, upon reading some Letters which they produced from the Patriarch of
Alexandria, the Emperor was at first inclined to remand them [without any
further mark of his displeasure] to Grand Cairo from whence they came: But,
being advised to the contrary by Peter Heyling, and his new Metropolitan
Arminius, he changed his purpose and required them [as a Test resolved on in
the late Consult] to receive the Holy Communion after the manner prescribed and
practiced in the Abissin Church, with a Promise that (in case of their
Conformity thereunto) they should not only have License to remain in his
Dominions, but be capable of places of Honor and Trust therein: Provided also
that they bless S. Dioscorus, and curse Pope Leo; for, all the Abissins firmly
believe, that in his time the Roman Church fell into Heresy, and (to let my
Author speak in his own Language, Ex sancta and capite, qualem tune fuisse
fatentur, eam factam dicunt Caudam and Cathedram Diaboli) from being Holy and
the Head (as they then owned her) she became, they say, the Tail and the Chair
of the Devil.

This proposal being utterly rejected by the Friars, his Imperial Majesty (at
the urgent motion of his Mother, the Clergy, and the Commons, whose joint Vogue
accused him of Dissimulation, in case he put not these Franks to death
according to his own Decree) past sentence against them; which was speedily
executed, they being hanged with those very Ropes which themselves had made use
of for their Girdles, and in that posture were intombed by the vast number of
Stones which the multitude of Abissin Zealots threw at them; [the heap still
remaining a Monument as well of the Roman Fathers Resolution as of Ethiopian
severity.]

Peter Heyling in process of time (being grown very Rich and powerful) began to
make public expression of his dislike of diverse Abissin Customs, decrying
especially their Adoration of Saints, and of the Virgin Mary her self, as
repugnant to true Religion and the Holy Scriptures; having on the same account
privately forbidden his Scholars to use their ordinary Forms of Prayer directed
to her. This begat him much ill will and great opposition among the Nobles; for
all the Abissins have a very great Reverence for the Holy Virgin: To express
their disgust therefore, they first withdrew their Sons from his Tuition; and
after that, made use of their best Arguments and Interest with the Emperor not
only to remove him from Court but out of his Dominions also, who hereupon
having gently admonished him [at least to be silent and connive at their
Customs, if he could not conform to them] without effect, orders him to quit
his Territories for a time, as the best expedient to avoid the dangerous
efforts of popular fury.

Thus this Great man voluntarily relinquished Ethiopia, together with the High
place and Interest he held there, after he had been (as it were) naturallized
by Twelve years Residence in that Country; being accompanied by his usual
Retinue, and all the Wealth he had gotten, [which was sent along with him as a
mark of the just esteem and favor the Emperor ever had for him:] But having
advanced on his way thus attended as far as the Isle Suaquem, he fell into the
hands of a Turkish Pasha, who (to satisfy his Avarice) deprived him at once of
his Life and Riches.

Soon after Peter Heyling's departure, Another Popish Plot.
the Emperors younger Brother, with diverse Nobles inclined to the Roman
Principles, made a dangerous Conspiracy against their natural Lord, upon the
design of introducing more of the Catholic Fathers; but Fasilades, having
received timely notice hereof from Arminius, his Primate and Metropolitan,
immediately caused his Brother to be According to the barbarous Custom of
Eastern Tyranny.
Strangled with a Napkin [for the better prevention as well of public Rumors
as Commotions] and exposed his Accomplices to open Execution. And, [in
consideration of this Treason,] became so exasperated against the Catholics,
that he rather resolved to introduce Mahumetanism than admit any of the Roman
Church into his Territories. This Resolution [rashly conceived to avoid one
extreme, did desperately precipitate him into another, wherein] he proceeded so
far that (as my Author says) he sent to Iman, a certain King of Arabia Felix,
for a Turk learned in the Law of Mahomet, whose Abilities might qualify him to
transport the Doctrine of his Prophet into Ethiopia. But an Abissin Christian,
being one of those that were employed on this Errand, as soon as he returned
(whether upon disgust, or some other more laudable reason) imparted to the
Principal of the Nobility and Clergy the sum of that wicked Embassy, advising
them to consider of some prudent and safe way for the prevention of so great a
mischief.

Upon this Information they began to raise tumultuary Assemblies, wherein the
people grew so bold as to vent open threats against their Sovereign; nay, when
the Turkish Effendi arrived, they did so much stomach the honorable reception
he found at Court, that they twice set his Lodgings on Fire, and spared not to
make sundry Attempts upon his Life. These daring Actions, pretending no less
than the absolute revolt of his Subjects, engaged Fasilades (under the pretext
of some criminal Accusation) to cast the Mohammedan Ambassador into prison, and
declare himself ignorant of the design for which he came into his Dominions.
Soon after [finding it the only Mean to allay the Commotions and restore the
Peace of his Empire] he sent the Turk back into his own Country, having
gratified him with many rich Presents, among which was a very costly Vest
bestowed on him by the Empress.

The College de propaganda fide, having all this while received no News of the
Fathers Capuchins since their departure, sent after them other Fathers, an.
1638. whereof P. Antonius de Virgolta, and P. Antonius de Petra Pagana, were
the Chief, both being of the Reformed Order of S. Francis. These Emissaries
passing by Grand Cairo, soon after arrived at Suaquem and thence sailed to
Mesauva, where they remained two years [in continual expectation of some
favorable opportunity for their safe passage into Ethiopia:] But having
endured many Grievances from the injurious Turks in the time of their abode
there, [and nothing advanced in the hopes of compassing their design,] they
were necessitated to return to Suaquem; an Isle whose shores are so very white
that they seem at a distance covered with Snow, much about a mile in compass
and well inhabited, but does not yield the least drop of fresh water, wherewith
it is supplied from the neighboring Continent, though at a dear rate; for, a
skin of water is commonly sold for two Chabers, forty of which pieces amount to
the value of a Spanish Paragon, neither does it produce any Fruits or Food for
the use of Man, (nay, it cannot boast of the least Verdure) but is furnished
with all Necessaries for humane Life from the Kingdoms of Fungi and Sennaar. In
this Isle Antonius de Petra Pagana practiced Physic, and Antonius de Virgolta
made Fans of Straw, by which means they lived quietly and supplied their Wants
in that barren place.

There Father Anthony Virgolta dyed, whereupon Father Anthony de Petra (now
left alone) sends Letters to Rome wherein he informed the College that to seek
for any access into Abissinia by Sea would be not only a fruitless but
impossible Attempt.

Hereupon they send other Emissaries with directions to proceed all the way by
Land, wherein they were ordered to go as far as conveniently they might by the
River Nilus, then to pass on through Nubia, Sennaar, and the whole Realm of
Fungi, and so to steal privately into Ethiopia. Jacob Vemmers, a Carmelite
Friar, was Head of the Mission. And, being constituted Apostolic Vicar of the
whole Empire, departed from Rome, an. 1640. with Letters from Pope Urban VIII.
to the Emperor, the Metropolitan, and Archi-mandrita the General of the Monks,
respectively: his Companions were P. Joseph de Atino, and P. Felix de S.
Severino, of the Reformed Order of S. Francis. But upon the death of Vemmers,
Mattheus de Castro succeeded in his Charge, who, when he was advanced on the
way with his companions as far as Cairo, returned to Rome, [for what reason is
not specified in our History.]

While Matthaeus was hastening toward Italy, the Fathers, whom he left in
Egypt, had an opportunity presented for their conveyance to Suaquem, by the
favor they had gained with Mahunied-Pasha who was then going to assume the
Government of that Island with some other adjacent places. Their arrival there
did very much revive and comfort P. Antonius de Petra, [till then disconsolate
in that melancholy Solitude wherein the death of Virgolta had left him.]

Soon after they held a Consultation there concerning the method and
possibility of their gaining entrance into Abissinia, whereupon they resolved
first to found the Emperor's inclinations by Letters, and these they wrote by
the Aid of a certain Catholic Abissin named Gregory, who had been [graced with
the singular favor of being] ordained a Priest by the Patriarch Alphonsus
Mendez.

But these Letters, being delivered to Fasilades at that unhappy juncture of
time when the Mohammedan Doctor was in Ethiopia, put him into such a rage, that
he presently dispatched a Messenger to the Pasha, then resident in Suaquem,
requesting him to kill all the Religious men in his Isle, and (to render this
cruel demand the more prevalent) promised 150. Ounces of Gold for his Reward.
This taking proposal was readily accepted by the covetous Pasha (Successor to
him that brought the Fathers thither from Cairo) who [to purchase both the
Money and Favor of so Potent a Neighbour] cut off their heads almost as soon
as the Abissin Messenger arrived; for, [without any further warning or legal
Process,] they were executed in the Evening of that very day wherein the
Emperor's Letters came to his hands, which is said to be the Feast of the
Annunciation, an. 1648.

From that time till the year 1669. the Roman College, [upon these apparent
hazards and discouragements,] quitted their Designs of propagating the
Catholic Faith in Ethiopia during the Reign of Fasilades: but then, having
News of his death, upon some hopes or intimation that his Successor was less
rigorous toward the Roman Catholics, they resumed their former Intentions,
and made choice of these three Priests to be their Emissaries, Don Antonio de
Andrada a Native of Ethiopia, and two Fathers of the Order of St. Francis; who
[in Obedience to the Directors of their Mission, so diligently prosecuted their
Journey, that without any remarkable impediment they] arrived at Suaquem, the
unfortunate Isle aforenamed, as their last Letters intimate; [where we must
leave them and their Enterprise, till my Author, or some other able Pen, shall
give us a further Account of its Success.]

FINIS.

