THE PRINCIPAL DUTY OF Parliament Men, OR A SHORT AND COMPENDIOUS TREATISE,
CONCERNING THE UNITY, AND UNANIMITY, WHICH SHOULD BE IN THE MEMBERS OF THAT
HONORABLE ASSEMBLY. By Richard Ward, Master of Arts, and Minister of the Word
at Stansteed-Mount-Fitchet in ESSEX.

1 COR. 1. 10. I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
That you all seek the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. London, Printed by J. R. 1641.

TO All the Right Honorable, and Right Worthy of all Honor; together with the
Right Worshipful, and Right Worthy, the Members of the High, and Honorable
Court of PARLIAMENT.
In especial, In regard of a more especial Engagement, To the Right
Worshipful Sir Edward Deering Knight, and Baronet; and Sir Thomas Middleton,
Knight, his very noble Friends; and Sir Thomas Barington, Sir William Massam,
and Sir Martin Lumley, Knights, and Baronets; Of, and for the County of Essex.
RIght Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Religious Senators; I know, that to
the aid, and furtherance of some great enterprise, and design, there is more
required then Wishes and Desires; and therefore (as to the building of the
Lords House, every one brought some thing, according to his ability, so) to the
Prosperous success, and happy issue, of this long desired Parliament, there is
required not only a Religious care, and endeavor in your Honors; but also,
that we (whose causes you are pleased to agitate, and manage, and whose
grievances you take into your grave considerations) should afford unto your
Honors that furtherance, and assistance, which lies in our power; that is,
both in zealous, and fervent calling upon God for you, and in a modest, and
humble enforming, and advising of you.

The secious Animadversion hereof, emboldened your humble Orator, to present
this Petition (for it is no other) unto your Honors, for Unity, and Unanimity
in Religion among yourselves, considering with my self, the necessity, and
excellency of the Theme, (for the furtherance of your Christian consultations,
and deep designs) and that none as yet have tendered any Treatise unto your
Honors of this Subject.

As fair faces need no Painting, nor good Wine a gaudy Bush; So a rare and
transcendent Subject, needs no poor Oratory to praise it, nor affected Language
to set it forth. And therefore, I will not make any Encomions in commendation
of that religious Amity and Unity, which should shine, and show forth it self,
in your Honors; but only give you a short hint of the necessity, and
excellency thereof, and then refer your Honors to the pious consideration of
the Treatise Andreas Alciatus, Lib. Emblem. page 144.
it self.

An Emblematist, by an acute Emblem endeavors to show, the excellency of
Unity, Unanimity, and mutual accord, and aid, in those who are joined in
Commission together, for any public good. His Impresse, or Emblem is,
Diomedes, and Ulisses, the two Gretian Worthies; The former whereof be
supposes to be wise, politic, and prudent, able to advise, counsel,
contrive, and manage a War; and the latter strong, courageous, and bold, yea
able to atchieve any feazible enterprise. His word, or Motto is, Unum nihil,
duos plurimum posse, One is as good as none, but two can do much. The
declaration, and amplification of the Emblem is expressed in these verses:

Viz.

Viribus hic praestat, hic pollet acumine mentis,
Nec tamen alterius non eget alter, open
Cum duo conjuncti veniunt victoria certa est.
That is,

When one is strong, the other very wise,
To help each other, they must not despise.
For when both strength, and wit, conjoined are,
Then crowned victory does follow war.
I have so amply, amplified, and applied this Emblem, in this Discoursive
Petition presented to your Honors pernsall, that I will wholly here balk the
application thereof.

That the Treatise dedicated unto your Honors, might carry the more weight,
the Dedicator being of small worth; I have not stolen a Coal from the Altar, but
borrowed a sentence from Haven, (of Him, who spoke nothing but Golden
Sentences, and unto whom Kings, Princes, Peers, and the mightiest Monarchs
must stoop) that your Honors may look upon, and accept of this Present, as a
Stem sprung from that Stock, (though it be very rough hewn) as an explication
of our Saviors own prayer, for your prosperous Proceedings, (although not
unfolded with that curious art, that it deserves) as a sacred, saving, and
necessary truth, (though folded up in course cloth) and as a Message sent unto
your Honors from Heaven, from the King thereof, though by a most mean
Messenger, and unworthy servant of his. And then he shall think himself happy
(in being an instrument of Peace, Love, Unity, and Concord, unto your Honors)
who will always pray for your Persons, and proceedings, and all that concerns
you, and acknowledge himself ever,

Your Honors most humble, and observant, Orator, RICH. WARD.
THE PRINCIPAL DUTY OF PARLIAMENT MEN.
JOHN 17. 21. Text.
That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee. RIght
Honorable, Right Worshipful, and grave Senators; Astorides having once seen
Roscius Apology.
his gestures, du^st never after come upon the Stage. Hiparchion hearing
Rufinus blow upon his Pipe, would never after play upon his Flute. Two things
daunt the mind of a Speaker, or Writer; Viz. The skill, and Person, of the
Reader or Hearer. Whence Demosthenes that famous Orator of Athens, was so
astonished at the Majesty of King Philip, that he lost his Speech: And Carvitus
se^ing Hannibal come into the Schools, became dumb. I may justly apply these
Antiquities un^o my self, considering the worth of those, to whom I write, and
the unwort^inesse, and weakness of the Writer. I dedicate these lines to
those, who are of acute wits, strong judgments, profound knowledge, sound
learning, and eloquent tongues; but for my self. although I cannot say truly,
That I am like Moses, a man of a slow speech, and stammering lips; yet most
justly, That I am not like Aaron, of an eloquent tongue, neither an
ear-tickling Orator; And therefore may justly fear to speak, or write, unto so
learned an Assembly. But because your Honors are not ignorant, that it is not
more tedious to a Carpenter to work against the grain, then it is for a
Scholar to force his Genius, or to handle a Subject, Iuvita Minerva; I will
therefore make no more excuses for my self, but pass from the Apology to the
Proeme.

CHrist being to give up that body to death, for our redemption, Context.
which he took in a humane life, for our sins, before his now approaching end,
fore-arms his Church with a fourfold warning; to wit,

I. An exemplary document of Love, and Humility showed in washing his Disciples
feet, Chap. 13. 1. etc. And.

II. A prophetical prediction of his death, and their scattering, Chap. 13.
18, etc. And

III. A large Sermon, continued from Chap. 13. 31. to Chap. 16. to the end. And

IV. A most pious prayer (as is used after our Sermons) for Gods blessing upon
them, Chap 17.

In this prayer (practicing the Platform prescribed by himself) he first
requests the glory of God, Chap. 17. 2, etc. And secondly, the good of the
Church; and that dividedly, viz.

First, For his then Apostles, and Disciples, Verse 9. to the 20. Then

Secondly, For all his, of after ages, Verse 20. etc. For whom he craves two
blessings. One, that they may be united in one, Verse 21, 22, 23. This is in
Via, in this life present. The other, that they may be so present with Him,
that they may see his glory, Verse 24. etc. Which shall be performed in Patria,
in the life to come.

The former of these is declared in three Gradations, Viz.

1. In general, that they may be one, Verse 21.

2. More particularly, That this Union may be not of the members only, one with
another, but of the whole body, with God, and Christ, Verse 21, 22.

3. More fully, that they may be perfect in this Union, (...) are God, and
Christ, Verse 22, 23.

The first of these three is the Subject of our Text, and has two Division of
the Text.
parts, Vinculum, and Exemplum; the Conjunction [that they may be one] and the
Declaration, [as thou art in me, and I in thee.]

I will treat only of the first part. That they may be one: wherein if I should
dive curiously into circumstances, these things would occur, and offer
themselves to our consideration, Viz. 1. Who prays? 2. To whom he prays? 3.
For whom he prays? Viz. 1. Of what nature they are for whom he prays? Mine.
And 2. Of what number they are? All mine. 4. What means he uses to obtain what
he desires? Viz. Prayer. And 5. What is prayed for? But passing by the four
former, I will insist only upon the last, which is the principal; That all
Christ's members may be one, and conjoined in one holy, and spiritual bond of
Unity. But before I show the nature of this Union; I will resolve a Question or
two, for the better understanding of the Text.

How many ways are things said to be One, that our Saviors Question. 1.
here prays, That his children may be One?

Things are said to be One five manner of ways; to wit, Things are said to be
One five ways.


First, Naturally, As the soul and body make one man.

Secondly, Artificially, As wood, stones, and timber, make one house. Answer.


Thirdly, Mystically, As Christ and his Church make one body.

Fourthly, Mysteriously, As the husband, and wife are one. And

Fifthly, Spiritually, As all the faithful are one in Christ.

And thus our Savior prays, That his children may be One.

How many ways may One thing be made of Many, that our Savior here prays,
that his children, who are Many, may be made Question 2:
One?

One thing may be made of Many, six manner of ways; as One thing is made of
Many six ways.
namely.

1. By Apposition, As by many stones laid, or cast together, is made one heap.
And Answer.


2. By Composition and mixture, As of water, and honey is made sweet drink. And.

3. By Alteration, When the first perfect form is altered; as of many Grapes is
made one Vessel of Wine. And

4. When one thing is made of matter and form; as Utensils, and the like
Artificial things are. And

5. When one thing is made of a Subject, and an Accident, as a painted wall. And

6. By a spiritual, and Mystical conjunction; and thus the faithful who are
Many, are made One.

How many ways is this word One taken?

One is taken ordinarily three manner of ways; to wit, One, taken three ways.


First, For an eminent, or singular dignity, John 10. 30. And Question 3.


Secondly, For the minds undivided simplicity. And Answer.


Thirdly, For a multitudes aggregated community.

The first, Unity is superior, and is to be admired.

The second is interior, and is to be imitated.

The third is exterior, and is to be aggregated, and heaped together.

The first Unity is of highest dignity.

The second is of the minds simplicity.

The third is of a joint, and Christian fraternity.

The Text speaks of the Last, in which sense Unity and Unanimity Unity twosold.
is in a manner the same; and is twosold; to wit,

1. Aggregative, And is so called, because it consists of many persons added,
or joined together in one Assembly; and thus any National Church is One; that
is, One in profession, as many members joined together, make one body. And

2. Compositive, When not only many are joined together in one Assembly, and
profession; but also in mind, and affection, one participating of the
qualities of another. And of this Union the Text principally speaks, as will
appear by and by.

What Union or Unity does the Text speak of? Union twosold.


First, There is Unity in error, conspiracy, blood, and wickedness: as is
evident from Genesis 19. 4. Prove. 1. 10, 11. 14. Luke 23. Question 4.
12. Acts 19. 24, 25, etc. But this being not of Christ, is without Answer 1.
the lists, and limits of our Text, which speaks only of an boly Union in Him.

Secondly, That holy Union whereof our Text speaks, is two Answ. 2.
several ways divided; Namely,

1. In respect of the Object, or Persons; and so it is, either 1. Of the
Members among themselves. Or 2. Of the Body with the Head. And both these
Unions are found in 1 Job. 1. 3. And

2. In respect of the subject matter; and so it is, either 1. In mind and
opinion. Or 2. In heart, and affection. Both which Unions are found in 2 Cor.
13. 11.

From these two distinctions, come three sorts of boly Union, Three sorts of
holy Union.
viz.

First, of opinion; and is called (...). 1 Cor. 1. 10. One mind and one
judgment, whereby we all think one thing, Philip. 2. 2. And

Secondly, of affection; and is called one heart and one soul. Acts 4. 32.
(...). And

Thirdly of grace and heavenly communion; and is called the fellowship of Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 9. Now passing by the second and third, I will recommend to
your Honors pious consi^eration, only the first, viz. union in opinion; which
affords this Proposition, or point of observation,

That as many as will please the Lord Christ, or approve themselves Doctrine.
to be Christians, must adhere, and cleave fast unto that union of Doctrine,
which is according to the truth of the Gospel; They must be of one mind 2 Cor.
13. 12.
: which the Apostle expounds, to think all one thing Philip. 2. 2.
, and to speak all one thing 1 Cor. 1. 10.
, and to be knit in one mind and judgment 1 Co^ 1 10.
, and to be of one mind 1 P^t 3. 8.
. It must here be add^d, and we must carefully remember, That this union must
be according to that G^spel and eternal truth, which we have heard and learned
of Christ, and has been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus Eph^s 4 21.
. This is called, that F^rm Romans 6. 17.
, or Pattern Tim. 1. 13.
, or M^uld Annor. Genevae.
of doctrine, whereunt^ we were delivered. And this the Apostle especially
prays, That he may hear of the Philippians, That they may continue in one
mind, and unanimous fight for that faith of the Gospel Philip 1. 27.
.

In whom should this holy union especially shine, and show itself? Quest on.


First, in general in all Christians; because there is but one way Answer 1.
one truth, one Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

Secondly, in all Ministers; because their lips should preserve Answer 2.
knowledge, and the people are to seek the Law (which is but One) at their
mouth Mal. 2. 7.
.

Thirdly, In all spiritual or Ecclesiastical Lawgivers, and Answer 3.
all pious public Assemblies, convened for the good of the Church. And these
especially must be One, both in wind, opinion, and judgment. But of this more
amply afterward, in the second Use. I will now apply, for methods sake, the
point propounded.

Is it so, That all true Christian should adhere unto that Union Use 1.
of Doctrine, with an unanimous consent, which is according to the truth of
the Gospel; then all Auth^rs, and Abettors, all Fathers, Fautors, and
furtherers of division in Religion, and the Church, are first of all to be
reproved, as guilty in a high nature. The Apostle Saint Paul, reproves the
Church because of dissentions 1 Cor. 11. 18.
, entreating them to admit of none amongst them Cor. 1. 10.
; no though an Angel from Heaven should preach otherwise unto them Gal. 18.
: And grievously reproves them who forsake the fellowship, which we have among
our selves Heb. 10. 25.
. Mark how fearfully he adjureth us, to observe them diligently, Which cause
dissentions, and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which we have learned. And
wherefore? To follow them; Or favor them? No, but as Snakes, and Adders
Canep^ius and Angue.
, to avoid, and eschew them Rom 16 17.
, to stop their mouths Tit. 1 10.
, and to have no society or fellowship with them, that they may be ashamed 2
These. 3. 14 What the Sowers of discord are.
. And therefore, that your Honors may the more carefully see to those
Seeds-men of mischief, and sowers of the Tares of dissentions, and discord in
our Church, and make sharp the sickles, and fithes of your zeal, for the
cutting of them down, and weeding them up by the roots; I will give you a
Character or two of them.

First, Sowers of discord, and dissension, and disturbers of the 1. Sowers of
discord are not of God.
peace of the Church, by introducing of errors, heresies, schisms, sects, and
superstitious practices thereunto, are not of God: and therefore let them not
stand. We read of a contention between Scotland, and Ireland, about an Island
situate betwixt both, to whom it should belong, each challenging it as theirs.
But after much contest on both sides, they sell upon this resolution, and
agreement, To put a Snake thereinto, and if it lived, then Scotland should
enjoy it, but if it dyed, Ireland. Thus if we be of God, this Snake of discord
will dye in our hearts; but if it be nourished. ha^boured, and live there, we
are not his. And therefore, let all Gods people know, that they are not of God,
who introduce divisions, and innovations into the Church: for God is not the
Au^hor of c^nfusion but of peace. 1 Cor. 14 53.
He that transgresses the Doctrine of Christ, has not G^d; therefore receive
him not into your houses, neither bid him. God speed 2 Ioh 9 0.
. All lines the further from the center, the further disjoined; the nearer to
it, the nearer united. Now this Center, is the God of truth, and this Union is
the truth of God; and therefore let your Honor approve your love unto God, by
your study and care to preserve his truth.

Secondly, These Sowers of dissension, and Broachers of division 2. Sewers of
discord, rend Christ's Coat.
in doctrine, rend Christ's seamlesse Coat John 19. 23.
, yea Christ himself 1 Cor. 1. 13.
. And as at the death of Christ, the Veil, of the old Temple was rent, to let
in the new doctrine of the Gospel Matthew 27 51.
; even so, these men (with a contrary event) would rend in pieces the
Tabernacle of Truth, to re-admit old and antiquated superstitions. And
therefore let your Honors have a special eye toward them, and care to
prevent them.

Thirdly, As dissentions are fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5 20.
So they that 3. Sowers of discord are fleshly men.
maintain, and broach them, are fleshly minded men; 1 Cor. 3 3.
And such as the Church of Christ disclaims: If any list to be contentious, we
have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. 1 Cor. 11. 16.
Nay, they a^e instruments of the devil, that envious one, That sowedtares in
the field of God. Matthew. 13. 25.
For this is Satan's chief policy, when by the seed of the Word, (as by Cadmus
his teeth or Deucalions stones) God has raised up children to Abrabam; then to
cast some bones of dislention amongst them, that they biting, and devouring one
another, may be consumed one of another: Gal. 5. 15.
Thus he threw bones of dissension between Lutheranes, and Zwinglians; and
since between Separatists and Conformitans; knowing that a Kingdom divided,
cannot stand Matthew. 12. 25.
And therefore let your Hon^urs seriously labor to suppress such Satanicall
spirits, a labor (for the satisfying of their own lusts, and appetites) to set
the Church on fire by their diss^ntions.

Fourthly, Satan triumphs, both over his preachers, and prisoners, 4. Satan
triumphs over such.
his soldiers, and slaves, deceivers and deceived 2 Timothy 3. 13.
; those who take captive simple souls, and those who are taken captive by him
a^ his will 2 Timothy 2. 27. and 3 6
. Therefore seeing those are his vo^aries, these his vass^ls; and both his
(...) Active, and P^ssive: ^et your Honors suffer neither those Actives, who
study to deceive Ephesians. 4 14.
; nor those Passives, who are carried about with v^ry blast of vain doctrine;
but be your selves Deponents, casting away ^ut of our Church, every thing that
presses down Heb 12 1.
; and thi^ (...), and cogging of men, whereby they lie in wait to d^ceive Ephesians
4 14.
; punishing those who Satmically deceive; pitying these who simply are
deceived, and laboring that these instruments of Satan, who pe^vert unstable
souls, may be either truly reclaimed, or severely corrected for these their
wicked practices.

^ifthly, These sowers of discord, dissension, and jarres in 5. Seedes-men of
dissension, are the Churches worse enemies.
Religion, are the most desp^rate enemies the Church and Commonwealth have.
The Trojanes had tw^ great enemies, Achilles, and U^isses: Ulysses he stole the
Pall^dium out of the Capital, which was the fare, fortune, and prosperity of
their City; Achilles he flew Hector their chief, and choicest Champion; but yet
V^isses did them more harm, then Achilles. Thus is it with us, we have had some
of our H^ctors sl^in; I mean some of our bu^ning, and shining Lamps
extinguished, and silenced, and some princip^ll Pillars, and prime piou
Preachers suspe^ded; wh^reby our Church has be^ much weakened, and the hearts
of the faithful mightily enseebled: but yet behold a greater mischief.
Religion is the Palladium, and fa^e of our Lind, and no longer can the
Commonwealth fl^ish, then the Church fares well; (for if the Church s^ake, the
S^te cannot stand) And therefore. He or They, who go ab^t to bring ^rroneous,
or heretical opinions, or superstitious practices into our Church; and wh^
countenance, and encourage such; and labor to smother, and suppress the
truth, as much as in them lies, are the worst and wretched st enimi^s the
Church and S^te have: for in cutting off the Head of Religion, by the
introducing of these errors, and ^uperstitions, they utte^ly ruin both. And
therefore, let your Honors, who stand at the Helm, take h^ed of these
devouri^g shelves, and rocks; which without your (...) care, and help, threaten
our shipwreck, and ruin. Oh consid^r (grave, gracious, and sage Senators) what
Innovations, and Altarations, have of late years been introduced into our
Church? How many of late years have been preferred in our Church, by some of
our principal Prelates, who were either loose, and lewd in their lives, or
lazy in their callings, or Papisticall, or Pelagianists in their opinions, or
superstitious in their practices, or extollers of ceremonies above substance,
or set forms of prayer above conceived, or of reading above preaching, that
thereby people might be nuzled up in ignorance? What courses of late years have
been taken to put down Lectures on the week day, yea, preaching on the Lords
day in the afternoon? That so people being deprived and robbed of the light of
Gods Truth, might stumble, and fall into errors, and be robbed of their souls,
and everlasting welfare. What Popish and Arminian Tenants have been preached,
and printed of late years, with the allowance, leave, license, liking, and
approbation of some in authority in the Church? What courses of late have been
taken to discountenance, discourage, keep low, and curb those who like Candles,
did consume themselves, and their strength, to give the benefit of light and
knowledge unto others; I mean, who did not only labor to benefit their
particular fl^ck and charge, by their painful, and industrious preaching; but
also the whole Church; yea, future ages, by their profitable writings? What
cursed, and crafty care has been taken of late days, sor the expunging (out
of Books, tendered to the press) of Orthodoxe truths, and grounds, which
overthrow those Tenants which are Heterodoxe? I may say here, Experto creed
Richardo, that sad experience has taught me this truth. But I pass it by,
because I hope your Honors in your depth of wisdom, will take care for the
rectifying of this abuse for the time to come. I will conclude this, with the
saying of the Psalmist, If the Lord had not been on our side; now may the
Church of England say, If the Lord had not been on our side, and with a strong
Non omne malumab Aquilone.
North wind turned the stream, and hindered the proceedings of these wicked
Achilles, and Achitophels; we had ere long been overwhelmed in the deluge of
ignorance, heresy, superstition, popery, and blindness. But blessed be God,
who has hitherto delivered us from this danger, and the Lord in mercy so
bless your Honors, and all your proceedings, and undertakings, that this
juggling, legerdemain, and water-mens tricks (to look one way, and row another)
may be more and more discerned, and discovered by you; to their shame, but our
rejoicing.

In the next place, the point propounded, and proved, may fitly Use 2.
be applied to all your Honors now assembled, and met in High Court of
Parliament.

When Carthage was besieged by Scipio, Hannibal sought for peace, who never
before that time refused war; professing ingenuously, that he might better
have lost all the battles, within, and beyond the Alps, th^n one at the Gates
of Cartbage; for there he adventured nothing, but the superfluity of youthful
blood, who sought their destiny in the field of honor, under the banner of
Mars; but here the Commonwealth was laid to stake, and they played their lives,
liberties, wives, children, religion, and all at one game. I may aptly apply
this (Religious Senators) unto you, whom we have betrusted with our lives,
liberties, estates, Religions, and all; and therefore it behooves us all, (as
those who fight, pro aris and focis) to tug, and wrestle with the Almighty God
of Jacob for you, That you may be One in the maintenance, and furtherance of
this one truth.

More particularly, Two things we pray for you, and of you, Viz.

1. That you may be one amongst your selves. And

2. That you may be a means to make us one. Now of these in their order.

First, We beseech you, and we implore the throne of grace for you, That all
you may be like Jerusalem, at unity amongst your selves.

The Fowler is to be condemned of folly, who takes in hand to talk, or treat of
hunting; and the Merchant is counted mad, who meddles with the rules of
Astronomy. But it is allowed to every man to treat and talk of his own trade,
and to discourse of those things which conc^rn his own calling Navita de
ventis, de tauris narrat arator, etc.
: and therefore seeing I do not read a Lecture of Law, or state policy unto
you, but keep my self in my own element of Divinity; I hope your Honors will
not only bear with me, but (as Credendum artifici in sua art, so) also give
credit to what I speak. Indeed it may be said, That the Sow teaches Pallas,
and the Ass Apollo; when Phormio treats of war before Hannibal; or an
ignorant Attorney of law, before the learned Judges; or a weak Divine, of the
peace, and distractions of the Church, before, or unto those Divine Spirits,
who have long made, the causes, effects, and remedies thereof, their chiefest
study, and observation. But because I bring a message unto you, the Lords
Jehues, who are by him appointed for the purging out of allidolatry out of our
Church, Let not the meannesse, or weakness of the Messenger, be the least let,
to hinder your Honors from hearing, and bearing the word of exhortation
patiently. Yea, because I come unto you from the Lord, and in his Name, be
pleased (although I am unworthy to speak unto you) to be exhorted, To be one,
and to adhere to this holy Union of Truth; and as far as you go in matters of
Religion, and the Church, to proceed by that One Rule of Truth, and to mind
one thing Phil 3. 6.
; and in your rowing, to strike altogether Part re^ ducere Adag.
; and in your grave, and godly Assembly, to drink one to another, in
Philothesius his cup (...) Adag.
, and to conspire altogether (...) Plato.
, for the establishi^g of this holy Union of Truth amongst us; and to preserve
the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, amongst your selves Ephesians. 4. 9.
.

Three things I have here to recommend to your Honors most serious
consideration; Viz. 1. The Motives which should move, and persuade you to be
one. 2. The Manner, wherein you must be one. 3. The Means whereby you may be
one. And of these in their order.

First, The Motives which should incite, and induce you to be The Motives.
one, are these, Viz.

1. Because great must our misery needs be, if you should be Motivs 1.
Many. The Proverb says, Quot capita tot sensus, So many men, so many minds;
but God forbid, that ever we should take up this Proverb of you, who are our
Patriots, our public parents, our Guardians, and Lawgivers; and therefore if
you jar or differ, we perish Tu es Patro^ tu pate^, etc.
. What a Greek Poet said once of Megalopolis, in Arcadic, s^ffingly, The great
City is become a forsaken Wilderness (...).
, must needs be said of us, and our Land, if you be divided Contraries (we say)
are best Commentaries Contrarioru^ contr^ia sunt consequentia.
, and from contrary propositions, contrary conclusions may be collected: and
therefore, if your Unity and Unanimity be our bliss, your dissentions, and
breaches will become ou^ ^ane; and therefore be ye one. Solons ^aw to the
Athenians adjudged him to dye, who i^ civi^ Garboyles became a Neuter. Now if
it be a crime deserving death, to be a Neuter in diss^ions, and to take ^o
part. t^en certainly it is much worse to be an Incendi^ry, and a party, to
throw, and kindle the coals of (...).

But l^st I should seem to any, to blemish those, whom sincerely I honor, I
will no^ prosecu^e this Motive; the Body of our Land ha^ng with admi^ation, and
holy tha^kfulnesse, observed ho^ the eyes of this Honorable Assembly look not
a squint, but (...), with one m^tion, and a m^st pious unanimous consent in
^ose things which simply concern Religion. And therefore M^cte virtute est^, Go
on in Gods Name, and the Lord prosper you, and all your grave, gracious, and
godly proceedings.

2. Another inducement is, Because if ye be one, ye shall be Motive 2.
the Patriots, Preservers, safeguard, and defense of the Land, which (to you^
hon^ur and everl^sting praise) will be registered in the Records of Fame, for
future and succeeding ages. The Heathens thought it a thing worthy of applause,
and praise, for a man to dye for his Country (...) p^o (...) mori.
; and Christians cannot have a lower value and esteem of those who protect, and
preserve their Country from desola^ion and destruction. Anaximenes being about
to travel to A^hens for the study of Philosophy, a friend comes to him to
disswad^ him from his intended journey; and he coul invent no stronger argument
then this; Ob friend, have thou no care of or regard unto thy Country (...)?
? I dare not, I may not say thus unto you, whose care is evidently seen, and
made apparent unto all; you waking, when we sleep, yea, waking, that we may
s^curely sleep, and sparing neither cost, nor pains, for our good, but denying
your selves for your Countries welfare. I will only make bold to tell you, that
both Church, and State, cry unto you, as they of M^cedonia did unto Paul, Come,
and help us, for both Acts. 16. 9.
stand in need of your help: And therefore for their good, be ye one.
Antistbenes said, That Unity, and Unanimity amongst Couns^llors of State, were
better for a City or Commonwealth, the any wall, or the like defense Qnovis
mu^o fi^ius munimentum. La^. lib. 6. cap. 1.
: and Agesilaus being demanded by one, Wherefore Sparta was not walled about;
He showed him the unanimous Citizens armed for their own defense, and safety,
with these words Hi sunt Spartae civitatis moenia. Plutarch. in Apoph.
, These are Sparta's walls; signifying thereby, That a Commonwealth can have
no surer, not safer Forts or Bulwarks, then Unity and Unanimity among the
Heads, Pilots, and Stears-men thereof. Now, although this be most true, yet it
is not more true, in a State, then in a Church; and therefore be ye one, That
by your Unity and Unanimity, our sinking, and half ruined Republike, and
drouping and declining Church, may be saved, and reduced to their best, and
purest estate. You (the Parliamentaries) are our Bulwarks, Walls, and Gates,
under the Lord; yea, the Host of the Lord, and of Gideon his anointed, chosen
out of the Land, for the glory of your God, the honor of your King, the
demolishing of idolatry, and Popery, the promoting of Religion, the peace of
the Church, the punishing of delinquents in Church, and State, the encouraging
and countenancing of the good, the relieving of the distressed, the rectifying
of what is amiss, the reforming of abuses, and the advancing of the honor,
peace, and welfare of the Commonwealth. And therefore, that the expectation of
Church and State be not frustrated, be ye one.

3. Another Inducement to persuade you to this holy Unity, Motive 3.
is, Because thereby your Assembly shall be the more strong, and impregnable,
yea plainly invincible. For many can do that with ease, which one cannot with
pains Vis unita fortior.
. Scipio Africanus having overcome the Numantines, asked Prince Tiresus, Qua de
causa Numantia aut prius invicto, aut post eversafuisset.
How it came to pass, that Numantia was formerly so victorious, but now
overcome, and conquered? To whom Tiresus returns this answer, Concordia
victoriam, discordia exitium praebuit; Concord presages victory, but discord
destruction. Whence Mycipsa lying at the point of death (as Salust tells us)
admonished his sons to be at Unity amongst themselves; Because (says he
Concordia parvae res crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur.
) by Unity a Molehill will become a Mountain, but by dissension, a Mountain, a
Molehill. Many brooks meeting together in one, will make a swelling, and over
flowing River; and a great stream cut into many rivulets, may quickly be
stepped over. And hence, Scilurus having eighty sons, when he lay upon his
death bed, caused a bundle of Arrows to be fetched, and then bad his sons
break them, which none of them could o^ong as they were bound up; but being
loosed, every one could break them. one by one: Whereupon the old man takes
occasion to give this seasonable admonition, and careful Caveat unto his
sons Si concordes eritis, validi invictique ma^cbitis; (...), si desidiis and
sedetione (...), imbeci^es eritis, and expugna^u faciles.
; My children (says he) if ye will be of one mind, and bold close together in
mutual love, then you shall be strong, and invincible; but if ye be severed
with jar^es, and discord, then every one will wrong, and trample upon you.

I have rehearsed these Histories, that your Honors may fee, that so long as
you are of one mind, one judgment, one opinion, and one affection in
Religion, nothing can interrupt your proceedings; but like a swelling billow,
or surge, you shall with ease carry all before you; yea, a Mountain before you,
the Lords Zorobah^ls, Stab. s^m. 82.
shall become a plain. But if ever (which the Lord in mercy avert, Zach. 4.
and forbid) you should (for a punishment of our sins) be rent with divisions
and discord; then this great, and strong Ass^mbly would thereby be so weakened,
that neither Church, nor State could be supported, or redressed thereby; and
therefore, for the Lords sake, be ye one.

As in a body, the best constitution is made of the temperature of heat, cold,
moisture, and dryness; so in a politic, or ecclesiastic body, the best
Assemblies are, when the^e is unity of opinion, and affection, in men of
different dispositions and parts: I mean when some are more fiery, some more
moderate; some better Speakers, some better contrivers; some more acute, some
more sound, and-solid; some more able to invent; some to prosecute a thing set
a foot by another; some more skillful in one art or science, and some in
another. When (I say) all these several persons, of such various parts, shall
deny themselves, and the seeking of themselves, and with an unanimous consent,
all jointly labor to improve their proper gifts for the good and benefit of
that Church, and State, wherein they live, and for whose prosperity and peace
they are assembled; then all things must needs succeed prosperously, and well
with them. And therefore be ye one.

As the members of a natural body by consent, do help one another; so the
members of a politic, and ecclesiastic body, by concord, and unanimity
should assist one another Macari^, hom. 3.
. The body we know consists of many several members; now if the eye should not
help the head, nor the hand the eye, and one member another: the little
Microcosme of man, would then quickly perish: but if there be a sweet union
amongst all the parts, and every member tenders the weal, and happiness of the
whole body, as it does of it self, then the whole body will live and prosper,
and be able both to defend it self, and offend its enemies. Oh give me leave
grave Senators, to apply this unto you, who are our Microcosme, and the great
representative Body of our Land; if you who consist of many members, and are of
diverse and sundry parts, will employ all your learning, and eloquence, and
judgment, and wisdom, and invention, and zeal, and courage, and resolution,
and whatsoever parts, abilities, and gifts, God has given to all, and every
each of you, for the peace and prosperity of this our Church and State; then
the blessing of the Lord shall be upon you, and ye shall go on, and prosper,
maugre the malice of all the Devils, and Antichrists instruments. And therefore
if your Honors would be Murus aboneus, a Bulwark o^ Brass for our de^ence,
and your own safety; Oh then be ye one.

4. Another inducement to perswad you to this boly Unity, and Moitve 4.
Union of Truth, amongst your selves, is, Because it both seems, and indeed is
an excellent good thing, for those who are joined in one body, for the common
good, to be of one mind. The Philosophers say, that there is Bonum apparens,
and revera bonum: some things which seem good, but are not, and some which both
seem, and are good. Now Unity and Unanimity amongst your Honors is of Psalm. 1
3. 1.
the nature of the latter. And therefore be ye one.

The Gem which is gallant in color, and perfect in virtue, is the more
precious; the Tree which has a fair bark, and a sweet sap, is the more to be
esteemed; the Pantber having a fair skin, and sweet breath, is much delighted
in. If the Ore, which is dross outwardly, and gold inwardly, be of great
price, what is then the pure refined Gold? If the rough stone with a secret
virtue, be of value, what is it then being polished? If a smooth and learned
style, in an ill print, import some credit, what then does that, which comes
out of a perfect Press? And therefore seeing Union in mind and opinion,
amonst Senators, such grand Counselors, does both seem, and also is good; be
ye therefore one.

5. Another inducement to persuade your Honors to this Motive 5.
holy Unity, and Unanimity, is, Because then we shall say of you, That surely
God is in you, and with you, yea, that ye are Gods. As Don Petro Waldez, a
Spaniard, when he saw the ruin of their invincible Navy, although he scoffed
at Religion, yet confessed, That now be perceived Christ to be a Lutherane; So
when those who cry in their hearts, concerning our Church, and State, Down with
it, down with it, even to the ground; And omit, no damned plo^s, nor divellish
practices for the effecting of our ruin and destruction; and yet to their
confusion and horror shall s^e, that by your Unanimity, and Concord, all their
fraud, and force is frust ated, and all their secret workings discovered, and
hindered; they will then be forced to acknowledge, that Christ is a member of
your Assembly, and that surely the Lord in one of the Parliament House: Yea
further, as they your enemies will say, That God is amongst you; so we your
Admirers shall acknowledge, That ye are Gods, and all of you the children of
the Most High. Psalm 82. 6.
The holy, and ever happy Trinity, is but one in essence, although three in
person; whence the Sabians worshipped God in three persons, naming the first
Sanctus, the second Fidius, the third Semi-pater; and in their oaths they did
commonly put Fidius in the midst, a^ under that name comprehending all the
three persons, whereof came their great oath, Medius Fidius, Now, If as you are
not only three, but above three bundred in persons, you be but one in opinion,
affection, and mind, amongst your selves, in the furtherance, and maintenance
of that one truth of the Gospel; you shall then therein be like unto God
himself; and therefore, be ye one. Although the head has two eyes, yet they
two have but one motion, and the one cannot be turned about, without the
turning of the other; even so if your Honors would be eyes to the blind, and
lights to the Land, and golden Snuffers to make the Lamps of Religion burn
bright; you must all mind one thing, and fix all your thoughts upon this one
object, the glory of God, and the establishing of the unity of truth, and true
Religion amongst us. And therefore, be ye one.

6. The last inducem^nt which should move your Honors to Motive 6.
this holy unity, and union of truth, is this, because if ye be one, in the
maintenance, defense, and promotion of the truth, The truth will make you free,
and defend you from all your foes. As wary Tradesmen will say to those whom
they love, and wish w^ll unto, Keep your shop, and you shop will keep you: So I
may say unto your Honors, maintain Religion, and it will maintain you; defend
it, and it will defend you; stand stoutly for the sincerity and pu^ity thereof,
and it will stand for you; protect it, and it will pr^tect you. The wisemen of
Rome persuaded Anthony to bew^re of Caesar, Because^ Genius was the stronger:
Even so the Genius of Religion is stronger then that of her enemy; and
therefore fear not ye the face or frown of any in the defense, and maintenance
of Religion. As Caesar said to his Pilot in allorm, Be not disinayed, thou
carriest C^sar, and his fortunes; So I say, so long as your Honors stand
stoutly for the Spouse, and truth of Christ, you carry the Palladium, and fate
of the Land and Church in your hands, and need fear no storms. As the Picture
of Diana was framed with that art, that she seemed to frown upon those who
stood without the Temple, looking upon her, but smiled upon those who were
within: So the Lord smiles upon those who unanimously ag^ee, and accord in the
advancement of his Truth, being assemb ed together for that end, and purpose:
But frowns upon those, who by sowing seeds, and ^ares of dissension, in such
sacred Assembli^s, hinder the establishing of this holy Union. Wherefore, if
you desire the Lords favor, and not his frown, be ye one.

Frederick the Emperor, warring upon the Turks, to his great honor, and their
loss; Pope Alexander the third, repining at his success, caused an exquisite
Painter, to draw the Emperors picture to the life; and when it was done, sent
it to the great Turk, wishing him by his letters, if he desired to live in
peace, to labor by all means, (fraud or force) to kill him, whom that picture
did represent. I will not mis but cros-apply this; I have d^awn the picture of
Unity, in these Motives mentioned, wherein to the life we may so, the nature,
excellency, and utility thereof, both in regard of our Church and State; But I
have not labored to limb it to the life, that you might make it livelesse, but
that knowing it by its picture, you might labor to protect, preserve, and
defend it, from those who seek nothing more, then the rending, ruining, and
ruinating of it. And thus much for the first thing I propounded, to treat of.
Viz. The Motives which should persuade your Honors to be one.

The next thing in order to be handled, is, Wherein your Honors Wherein the
Parliamenta ries should be one.
should be one? Namely, in these things, Viz.

First, In relieving, the injured, and oppressed, as the people of Israel with
one consent, went out, to relieve those who were 1 In relieving the oppressed.
1 Samuel 11. 17.
besieged, and hardly bestead, in Jabesh Gilead. You are elected by the
Commons, to take notice of their particular oppressions, pressures, and griefs,
and to redress them. And therefore, in the Cordial desire, and careful
endeavor thereof, be ye one. And

Secondly, In punishing those public offenses, which either 2. In punishing of
oftenders.
have be^n scandalous, and perilous unto the Church, or pernicious and noxious
unto the Commonwealth, as the children of Israel joined themselves together,
as one man, to revenge upon the Benjamites, the wickedness committed by them,
unto the Judge 20.
Levites wife. Your Honors are chosen to this Assembly, not only to (...)
injured persons, but also to reform unjust practices, and practiced impieties,
both in Church and State; And therefore, herein also you should be one. And

Thirdly, In settling, rooting, grounding, and establishing of 3 In
re-establishing of Religion.
Religion, and in building up thereof. I know God is not the Author of
confusion, but the God of order; and I cannot conceive how any particular
National Church, or any outward Church, established in any particular Nation,
can subsist without some constitutions, discipline, and order. But yet for all
this be not more careful for Discipline, then for Doctrine, but labor to
establish an Unity and Uniformity in both. Let not England, like Amsterdam,
allow of many Religions, because the true one, is but one. Let some care be
taken for the restraining, and suppressing of all such Schisms, Sects, and
Sectaries, as are contrary to the truth, and doctrine of the Gospel; because
these rend Christ's seamlesse Coat, and disturb the peace, and desired
tranquillity of the Church. Let not every Preacher be a Plummer, or a Potter, to
new mould, or cast new models of Divinity as they please; or to impose the vain
issues, and foolish fictions, of their own fancies, or the bastards of their
own brain, upon people, as Articles of faith, or as sound, and saving
doctrines. Truth is but one (as follows by and by) and therefore be ye all as
one in the establishing of this one truth. Say ye to Archippus, (the Ministers
of the Word) Take beed to the Ministry which thou bast received in the Lord,
that Col. 4. 17.
thou fulfill it. Give some injunctions to the Lords Messengers and
Ambassadors, that they deliver no message, nor embassage to the Lord people,
but only what they have received from the Lord, and learned out of his Word.
Impose some strict charge upon them, for the strict observation, of truth and
true Religion which are but one. Lay some bridle of restraint upon them, to
cu^b them from venting their own private conceits, and opinions publicly to
their people, when they have no footing at all, nor any warrant, in the written
Word, lest the people being seduced thereby, both perish. Let your Honors be
pleased to take notice, That they are unnatural, and unfitting nurses, who
either do not give children milk at all, or else adulterated, and sophisticated
with many dangerous ingr^dients to hinder their growth. The first are
careless, and unlearned Ministers; The second are superstitious, and
idolatrous false Teachers, who by mixing Traditions with the Word, hinder the
growth of the people committed to their charge. And therefore your Honors
ought also to be one, in your care of, for, and over ihe Church, and Truth of
Christ. And

Fourthly, In taking away all offensive Ceremonies out of the 4. In taking away
of Ceremonies.
Church. Give me leave my lords, and the rest of that Honorable Assembly, to
enlarge my self a little here, touching the fitness of our Ceremonies, Should
your Honors, our Lawgivers, question, or demand, Whether it were better to
urge such things or not? I am utterly persuaded of the negative; and for the
confirmation of my assertion, I will lay down some plain particulars.

1. Some hold it unlawful, for the Parliament, or Magistrate, to command and
urge them, (being thus offensive) but I dare not say so, l^st I be asked, Who
made thee a Judge Exodus 2 14.
? or, Who art thou that condemnest another man's servant Romans 14 4.
? This were (...), to be wise above that which is meet Rom 12. 3.
; because, Quae supra nos, uihil ad nos, What have private men to do with the
public Magistrate? It is our duty to follow those things which concern peace
Romans 14. 19.
, and would God all men would embrace it. But yet I dare not allow to any in
authority, greater power for the establishing of ceremonies, then the Word does
warrant.

2. I am fully persuaded (were your Honors so pleased) that it were much more
convenient, not to command them, or (at least) not (wi^h such offense,
strictness, and rigor) to urge them; and in my opinion, I have not found any
weighty objection to the contrary

first, It is objected, That our Ceremonies were in use, in the Object. 1.
Primi^ive Church.

When they were in their purer use, they were not holden (...); Answer.
neither then were they polluted; neither did the Primitive Church, (which is
our case) ever maintain them, giving scandal to their brethren; neither is
there now more (...) of them, or (for a^tiquities sake) more respect to be
given them, t^n to the brazen Serpent, which holy Hezekias burnt for the abuse.

Secondly, It is objected, There is good use of them; viz. hope Object. 2.
to reduce the Romish Church to us.

Fi^, As it is no ordinance appointed by God, to gain our Answer 1.
brethren; so if th^re were any such hope, as is pr^tended, it might well
bedoubted, whather men ought to grieve their own children within the Church,
out of a slight and uncertain hope to gain them who are without.

Secondly, But indeed there is no such hope at all, the contrary Answ 2.
being manifest. For as they have always stuck fast to all their own
ordinances, holding it a Maxim, to change nothing; Neprius errasse videantur;
so if there be no hope of their yiedling in ceremonies, how much less in
substan i^ll doctrines? Surely, We may justly suspect, that this argument was
first coined in some hollow heart, that desired to hold us in our old
ceremonies upon any price or promise whatsoever. And me thinks it is no reason,
that we should le^n (even in circumstances) rather to that polluted Harlot,
then to so many godly reformed Churches, where they are demolished; and as for
the Papists, well may we draw near to them, but they will not stir onefoot
toward us, either in doctrine or ceremonies.

Thirdly, It is (...), The Parliament, and Magistrate have Object. 3.
power to command, and settle these Ceremonies; therefore it is fitter, others
should yield to them, then they to private men.

All this I acknowledge with reverence (provided, they go no Answer.
further ther^in, then the Word does lead them;) But it is nothing to the
question, What were convenient for them to command. For. 1. Men may have power,
and not find necessity to use it 1 Cor. 9. 12.
. And 2. In that place to the Corintbians, the Apostle gives some light to our
question, Not using (says he) his power, to the hinderance of the Gospel; The
preaching whereof is hindered by these our Ceremonies, in many worthy men. 3.
The Apostle, who had as much power, as any now in our Church, was afraid to
burden the Disciples necks with such yokes Acts 15 10.
. And I profess^ ingenuously un^o your Honors, if power were in my hands, I
durst not for the world, command them, and that for these reasons; namely,

1. Offense is every where for bidden. It is not good to do any thing, whereby
thy brother is offended Romans 14. 21.
: no, though thine own conscience be resolved 1 Cor. 10. 28, 9.
. Whence I reason thus, If I ought not to do^t ese, when my brothers conscience
is offended (for if I d^, I sin against Christ 1 Cor. 8. 12.
) how much less ought I to command him to do them, whose conscience trembles
at them? And seeing the cause of this offense (to speak truly, and freely) must
needs be in him, who has power to choose, whather he will impose them, or not;
I durst not for the world, venture on that Woe, pronounced against such as give
offense, and lay stumbling blocks before their brethrens feet, when they need
not Matthew. 18 7.
.

2. Things once polluted (especially by Antichrist, and the rather, offen'e
remaining still in them) ought not (I think) to be retained, much less
advanced by en^orcing Law, without great necessity; which in these I confess I
see not.

3. Seeing we plead freedom from Traditions (even those ordained by God under
the Law) me thinks the Lord may thus plead with us; Have I by the Gospel freed
you from my own ordinances, and will you entangle your bretbren with man's
devices? I prosesse, in the fear of my soul, I should fear, that to lay such
yokes on the Disciples necks, were to tempt God Acts 15. 1^.
.

For conc^usion, I will lay down a particular or two, viz.

First, I ^istinguish betwixt Affection, and Conscience; that may be moved,
where tbis is not entangled; and indeed I see no reason our conscience should
be brought into subjection for these things. The Apostle bidding us seek those
things above, and not these below Col. 3. 1, 2.
, which is expounded by the best Comments, that I have read, of those negative
Traditions, T^uch not, taste not, handle not, etc Col. 2. 21.
. as if the negl^ct of such could defile us with sin.

But for our Affection, I see not how I can embrace those things (with
applause, and liking) if the Lord would please to dispose them otherwise, or to
move your Honors hearts to take them away For

1. They are the dregs of that Romish abomination, and grant it were lawful to
marry a harlot, yet who would espouse her, whom such Ruffians have defiled? The
High Priest might not marry a harlot, o^ one p^lluted, but a Virgin of his own
people Levit. 21. 14.
. St Paul holding it no sin to eat of the Idol sacrifice, forbids it
notwithstanding, because we must have no fellowship with them Cor. 10. 20.
. And

2. These Ceremonies of ours make the Papists boast; both abroad, and at home.
Abroad, that we are but little separate from them; yea, that all our rites are
borrowed of them Read but Parsons (under the name of E. O.) against Dr
Sutcliff, and Dr Willet. And at home, the Papists in Yorkshire, and other
places, have triumphed at the Altaring of the Communion Tables, hoping that in
time, sacrifices would be ^ffered thereupon. And

3. The simple people in many parts of our Land, do very often abuse our
Ceremonies, and are abused by them; many thinking our Service and Sacraments
without the Su^plice; and Baptism without the Cross to be imperfect. And

4. If there were no more in them, but that they offend many souls of excellent
temper, zeal, and humility, what heart that lov^s the brethren truly, can
affect those things, that so much offend them? For it is no small thing to
disturb the peace of God in the consciences of the weak. But

5. How much more, when by them a grievous Rent is made in our Church, drawing
and driving many into foreign parts, and Nations, and into parts, and
divisions, who else would join with us in a gladsome reconcilement? Then

6. What Christian heart will not bleed to see, the grievous harms our
Ceremonies have done (and in part do) to the children of God. Bishop Farrer,
(and others in Master Fox) entrapped by them, when otherwise they might have
escaped, and daily (of late days) many conscionable, and able Preachers
silenced, for no want of unblameable conversation, (even their adversaries
being witnesses) but only for not daring to conform. Whereby, many people, yea
innumerable poor souls, have been hindered of that food, which Gods ordinance
h^th allotted unto them. I will shut up this first particular, with the words
of Master Fox, speaking of one Harlstone, threatened for not wearing a
Surplice. It is pity (says he) such baits of Popery are lest to take
Christians in, God take them away, or else us from them Acts and Monuments,
Fol. 2065. 6.
.

Secondly, I desire, that every one would do his part, in these Ceremonies, i.
e.

1. That every private Christian, in his daily private prayers, would importune
the Throne of mercy, in the behalf of the Church, that it may be daily more and
more pu^ged from all dross, and freed from spot, or wrincle, or any such thing
Ephesians 5 27.
; as also for his brethren, That the Lord would please to free them from such
burdens, as pierce unto the soul. And

2. That those who shall be called, either in Parliament, Convocation, or any
lawful Assembly, would plead as much for the purity and p^ace of the Church
openly, as private Christians do, or should do in their prayers privately;
modesty, mildness, humili y, love, and peace always observed. And therefore
herein also your Honors should labor to be one. And

Fifthly In withstanding zealously, and courageously, all errors, 5. In rooting
out of Popery and superstition.
heresies, superstitions, and whatsoever else might disturb, and distract the
unity of Religion. A covetous old man, going out of doors, and leaving his God
(his gold) behind him, commanded his old wife, who s^aid at home, to let in
none till his return, lest he should be robbed, Imo non ad fortunam quidem; No,
not to Lady Fortune herself, though she should knock. O^ let the fire of your
zeal, so consume all carnal state policy in your Honors, that though by
probable arguments you should be persuaded, That if error, heresy, or Popery
were tolerated, permitted, or winked at, the Commonwealth would prosper and
flonrish the more; and our Traffic, with foreign Nations of that Religion,
would be more free; yet let not this promised, and flourishing Fortune, cause
you to open the door to any such toleration, permission, or connivencer. See
Doctor F^ley, ag^nst toleration of Popery, ^l. 4^4 and 487.


Remember in general, as the Jacinth, if it be rubbed with lime, is soon set
on fire, but hardly quenched; and the Adamant and iron soon joined, but hardly
dissevered; and the coin soon receives its stamp, but cannot loose it without
melting: Even so, error and heresy are soon admitted, but hardly rooted out;
and therefore ye should be one, in withstanding constantly, and courageously,
all heresies, errors, and superstitious vanities.

More particularly, Remember (for I know your Honors are not ignorant of it,
as is evident by your Proclamations, Statutes, Acts, and Edicts to that
purpose) that P^pery is a great plague unto us, and a most pernicious doctrine
in it se^f, and therefore be ye one, in the rooting up, weeding out, and
extirpating thereof. I will give unto your Honors, and all who shall peruse
this imperfect, and impolished piece, a Character of Popery; and then Ex ungue
Leonem, let all the world judge thereby, whether that devilish doctrine be to
be tolerated admitted, permitted, winked at, or embraced, by any Church or
State, which desires prosperity, peace, religion, and safety.

Popery is a Superstitious, I^olatrous, Supercilious, Pernicious, The Character
of Popery.
Devilish, Theevish, Cruel, Heretical, Insolent, and Derogatory doctrine.
Hence I thus argue,

That Religion which is superstitious, idolatrous, supercilious, Argument.
pernici^us, etc. Is not to be admitted, permitted, favored, harbored, and
embraced, by any Christian Church or State, which desires to be preserved,
protected, prospered, and blessed by God; but rather by all means to be
suppressed, rooted out, and extirpated, root and branch.

But Popery is such a Religion. Ergo.

The Papists I know will not put me to prove the Major (that being luce
meridiana clarior, as true as Gospel, as the Proverb says) and therefore I
pass by that. But una voce, they cry out, The Minor is false, and dare me to
prove it; which I will do particularly, and plainly, but briefly, (although I
could both add more particulars, and more enlarge these then I have) that the
world, and all them who view this Treatise, may see, that I do them no wrong.

First, I say, Popery, is a Superstitious Religion; for God will 1. Popery is a
Superstitious Religion.
be worshipped, both for the matter, and manner, as himself has prescribed in
his Word Matthew 15 9. and Ioh 4. 24^ Ezech. 20. 18.
. But the Papists say, That God must be worshipped, according to the
Traditions, Ceremonies, and constitutions of the Roman Church; and that the
Constitutions of the Pope do equal in value the Gospel of Christ, Did. 15.
cap. Sicut. and Did. 19. cap. In Canonicis, and Did. 20. cap. de Libellis.
And therefore we may well say, That Popery is a superstitious doct'.

Secondly, Popery is an Idolatrous Religion. Note here these 2. Popery is an
Idolatrous Religion. Idolatry defined.
things, Viz.

1. What Idolatry is? Namely, To give the honor, worship, and service, which
is due only unto God, to a Creature, whether good or bad, holy or profane. And

2 How manifold Idolatry is, two wit, twofold, i. e. 1. Internal, Idolatry
divided.
and Mental, and is forbidden in the first Commandment. And 2. External, and
visible, and is forbidden in the second Commandment. And

3. That both this Definition, and Division of Idolatry do agree with the
Church of Rome. If any do question this, I refer him to our famous Featley,
Fol. 490. 491, 492. where this truth is proved, and painted out to the life,
amply, fully, and faithfully. I will for your Honors satisfaction add a word
or two. The Sc^ipture teaches, That the worship of Images is a thing
abominable Levit. 26. 1. and Deuteronomy. 27^ 15.
, and expressly forbidden Exodus 20 4. and Deuteronomy. 5. 8, 9.
also, That the holy Spirit call^th Image, Teachers of lies, and vanities Iere.
10. 8. Hab. 2. 18.
. And therefore in no wise to be allowed in the Temples of Christians. But the
Papists teach, That the worship of Images is well pleasing unto God, and very
(...), and profitable for the Church. And that Images, are the lay men's Books:
He therefore that teaches the c^ntrary, is accursed Council. Trid. s^ss 9.
. The Word of God teaches, that Christ Jesus our Redeemer, by the perfect
sacrifice of himself once offered upon the Cross, for the putting away of sin,
has so reconciled the faithful unto God his Father, that there now remains
no more sacrifice for sin Heb 9. 12. 26 and 10. 12 18.
. But the Papists teach, that the Mass is a Sacrifice for the r^mission of the
sins both of the quick, and dead Council. Trid. sess. 6. Can. 2.
. Is not Popery then an Idolatrous Religion? Yea, perhaps themselves will not
deny it; for Gregory de Valentia, the prime of the Schoolmen professedly
pleads for Idolatry, and endeavors to prove it to be law^ull, out of the words
of Saint Peter 1 Pet. 4. 3.
. When ye walked in unlawful, and abominable Idolatries; Quid attinebat ita
determinate cultus simulacrorum illicitos notare. si omnino nullos simulacrorum
cultus licitos esse censuisset Greg. de Valent. de cult. im^g.
? What need (says he) Saint Peter deter us from unlawful Idolatries, if
some kind of Idolatry were not lawful? And therefore it is evident, that
Popery is an Idolatrous doctrine. And

4. Note, That Popish Mass is Idolatry, and therefore their Religion is
Idolatr^us. Bellarmine himself most truly observes. That although all the other
controversies could be composed between Protestants, and Papists, yet in this,
it were impossible for them to be reconciled. Quod illi Missam suam
divinissimum Dei cultum, nos borrendum idolatriam judicamus Bell. Tom. 1.
d^laic. lib. 3. cap. 19.
. Because Papists say, That their Mass, is a most sacred sacrifice, and divine
worship, But Protestants affirm it to be most horrible idolatry. By this it
appears to every seeing eye, That Popish Mass, is no excrement, but an
essential part of Popish Religion, and consequently, If their Mass be
Idolatry, then their Doctrine is Idolatrous. Now for the proof of the
Antecedent, your Honors may please to take notice, That there are two kinds of
Priests, which offer sacrifice for sin; the one after the order of Aaron, the
other after the order of Melchisedech. They diff^r thus, O^ the order of Aaron,
there are many, one succeeding another; of the order of Melchisedech, only
Christ, who is an eternal Priest, and his Sacrifice of eternal virtue. Now
Popish Mass Priests (which say they offer Christ in Sacrifice for the sins of
m^n) are not of Aaron, for that order ceased with the death of Christ; nor of
Melchisedech, for of this order, there is none but only Christ; and therefore
they are Baals, Antichrists, Idolatrous Priests, and consequently their
sacrifice of the Mass is Idolatry, and their Religion Idolatrous. And

Thirdly, Popery is a supercilious Religion: for the holy Scriptures 3.
Popervis 2 Supercilious Religion.
teach, That our good works, because they are imperfect, can deserve nothing at
Gods hand Esa. 64. 6 and Luke 17 10.
. But the Papists teach, That our good works deserve the grace of God, and
everlasting life: also, that men may do works of supererogation, i. e. over and
above those which the Law of God commands, whereunto the doers thereof are
not bound; and they are available to help others. Bell de Purgat. lib 1. cap 8.
(...). col. fol. 175
And therefore we may truly say, That it is a proud and supercilious Religion.
And

Fourthly, Popery is a pernicious Religion, where it is (...), permitted and
embraced; and that both to Princes and 4. Popery is a pernicious Religion.
Popery most pernicious to Princes.
People.

First, To Princes; and that in many regards: namely,

1. The Pope and Popish Clergy challenge freedom from their power. The
Scripture indeed teaches, That every soul ought to be subject to the higher
powers, which are the Magistrates Romans 13. 1. and 1 Pet. 2. 13.
: But the Papi^ts teach, That Ecclesiastical persons are not subject to the
secular power, or politic Magistrate, but all ought to be subject to the Pope,
who compares himself to the sun, and the Emperor to the moon: and therefore
Emperors and Kings, in token of subjection and obedience, do kiss^ his feet
Lib. Decret. Gregor. Tit. 33.
. And

2. The Pope has power over Princes, and (as he says) is of greater authority
and power in a Kingdom, then the lawful King and Prince thereof: as was
observed by a Friar, who says, That it was not without cause that Malchus
(whose ear Peter cut off) was the high Priests servant, seeing that Malchus
signifies a King: From whence he collects (as the Papists indeed would have
it, and which Princes should observe and mark) That as Malchus was servant to
the high Priest, so the Regal Majesty of Kings and Emperors is subject to the
power of Priests. Meno^. fol. 49
And Dorman said, The Pope is the head, and Kings and Emperors are the feet:
And Stanislaus Orichovius in Chimaera says, The Emper^urs Majesty is so far
inferior to the Pope in dignity, as a creature is inferior unto God. Whence
our famous Tindale deliberately and considerately said, Popish Kings are but
shadows, vain names, and idle things, having nothing to do in the world, but
when the Pope needs their help. And

3. The Pope challenges power to excommunicate Princes, and to cast them ou^
of the Church; as Pope Clement excommunicated our Henry the eighth, and Pope
Pius 5. our Elizabeth. And

4. The Pope has power (as he says) to depose Princes, and to cast them out
of their thrones, and to dispose of their royalties and egall seats as him
lists. Pope Benedict 9. desiring to pu^l down H^nry 3. Emperor, and to raise
up Peter King of Hu^gary, (...) ^im the Crown of the Empire, with this verse:

Petra dedit Rom^ns Petro, tibi Papa coronam:
The Rock to Peter gave Rome the Town,
The Pope to thee Peter gives the (...).
Thus Pope Zichary, by the consent or conspiracy of the Nobles of France de
(...) Chilpericus, the true, natural, and liege (...) tha Realm, and placed
Pipin in his room. And Pope Bonifice the eighth, because he could not have the
Treasury of France at his command, endeavored with all his both worldly and
ecclesiastica^l puissance, to remove Philip the French King from his (...); and
under his Bulls, or Letters pate^ts, conveyed the same solemnly unto Albertus
King of the Romans. And therefore we do the Papists no wrong, in saying Popery
is a p^rnicious doctrine to Princes. And

5. Popery teaches Regicide, and King-killing. 1. Bernardus de monte
Polician^, a Dominick Friar, poisoned Henry Emperor of Lucemberg, in the
Sacrament. John Chastell attempted the death of King Henry the fourth of
France, and Jaques Clement ^ffected it. Thus private papists and priests have
practiced Regi^ide. 2. The Jesuits, the prime pillars of popery, do maintain
it. The popish Divines at Salamanca held, That the Catholik^s in Ireland, who
did fight against our Queen Elizabeth, were by n^ ^onstruction Rebels. And
this was also thus resolved by John de Sequenza, Emanuel de Royas, Jasper de
Mena, and Peter de Osorio, professors of Divinity in the College of Jesuits
there. And John Chastell confessed that the argument of King-killing was
ordinary among the Jesuits: and the aphorisms of Emanuel Sa confirm as much;
and likewise a book composed by the I^suite. Catech. lib. 3. fol. 204. p. 2 fol
205.
principal of the Seminary at Rhemes, wherein it was affirme^ and maintained,
That it was lawful in certain cases for the Subject to kill the King. 3. The
Pope himself has winked at such offenders: Reg. Apol. p. 55.
for many of those who had a hand in the Gunpowder plot fled for that fact
into Italy, but not any of them was ever questioned, reproved, punished, or
called to an account for it by the Pope. y^e, fourthly, such Judasites and
Traitors have Reg. Apol. p. 67.
be^n praised by the Pope; as we see pope Sixth us 5. who made an oration in
praise and commendation of the Friars faith, who murdered Hen^y 3. of France.
And fifthly, the popes have practiced Reg. Apol. p. 73.
it by their agents: for Innocent the fourth, after he had excommunicated the
Emperor Frederick, corrupted one in Apulia to give him poison; of the which
the Emperor recovering he afterward hired his bastard son^e Manfred us to
poison him, whereof he died. And Alexander the third writ unto the Soldane,
that if he would live in quiet, he should by some slight murder the Emperor;
and to that end sent him the Emperors picture. And thus by some gradations and
steps it evidently appears, That the popish doctrine allows of Regicide and
King-killing.

6. To fill up the mystery of iniquity, popery teaches, That it is meritorious
to murder those princes, who will not take the popes part in the favoring and
furthering of his idolatries and superstitions; witness Cardinal Como his
instructions to Parry, and Sixth us his oration (mentioned before) in defense of
the Jacobine that murdered Henry the third. I will conclude this with a story
of our own; King James being admonished by Queen Elizabeth, a little before the
coming of the Spanish Armamado, to take heed of the Scottish papists and the
King of Spain, answered pleasantly, That he looked for no other favor of the
Spaniards, then that which Polyphemus promised to Ulyss^s, To devour him last
after all his fellows were devoured. Certainly, woeful and wretched experience
has proved this true, That those princes who embrace and entertain Popery, are
not only in a miserable slavery, but also in as great d^ of their dearest
lives, as any private person, if they will not (...) all things comply with,
and be obedient and subject unto the Pope, that man of sin. And therefore our
late Prelate D^. D^ven (...) 17 de ^ people.
(now I hope with the Lord) who was never corrupted with the (...) of the
times, boldly concludes, That Jesuited Papists cannot be good subjects.

^ndly, Popery is a pe^nicious doctrine to People, as well as to P^inces; and
that in a threefold regard: to wit,

1. I^ respect of their estates: for faith (they say) is not to be kept with
Heretics; and the Pope can dispense with, and absolve from all cove^ants,
contracts, bonds, and bargains made with such. And

2. I^ resp^ct of their bodies and lives: For the Papists say, That it is
lawsull to violate promise and oath, in favor of the Roman Church: as it was
concluded in the Council of Constance, and with the death of John Hus and
Hiero^ of Prague (...), contrary to the public faith and safe conduct granted
unto them from the Council. And

3. In respect of their souls, and that many ways; namely,

1. By teaching people ignorance. The Scripture teaches us, that the ignorance
thereof is the cause and mother (...) er^ors Matthew 22 19
and therefore we are commanded both in the old and new Testament, to read,
meditate, and search the holy Scriptures Deuteronomy 6 7 8. 12. 32. and 17. 19 Is^. 8.
20. Io^. 5. 39. Act. 17. 11. 2 l im 3. 15.
. But the (...) teach us, that ignorance is the mother of Devotion; and that to
keep Religion safe, it is needful to forbid the lay or s^cular men the reading
of the holy Scriptures, seeing it is the cause of many (...) B^ll de verb.
Deil. 2c. 15 and 16 cens. co^f. 19.
. In the County of Burgundy in France i^ an (...) of long continuance, and
therein a College of Jud^sites (or, as they call themselves, Jesuits) who
fearing lest the (...) doctrine might creep in upon them, have not only
d^barred the people of the Protestants books, but also express^ly forbidden
them to talk of God, either in good sort or bad Heylin Michroc.
. And

2. By permitting, favoring, and conniving at fornication and uncl^annesse.
The Scripture teaches us, That marriage is honorable amongst all men Heb. 13.
4.
; and, that it is better to marry then to burn 1 Cor. 7. 9.
; yea, that to forbid marriage is a doctrine of Devils 1 Timothy 4. 3.
: But the Papists teach, That matrimony is a carnal estate, and therefore with
such severity to be forbidden to the Cl^rgy, that it is more tolerable for a
Prelate, or Ecclesiastical person to live in fornication then lawfully to
marry, according to the Law of God: or, that it is a greater wickedness for an
Ecclesiastical person to marry, then to commit fornication: and Bell^rmine,
who boldly averres this, gives this base reason for the confirming of it,
Because he which is married is made unable to keep his vow, which he that
commits fornication is not Bellar. de Monac^is lib 2. cap. 34.
. And this holy doctrine he learned from his most holy Father Pope Nicolas the
first, who prohibited the Clergy marriage, saying, That it was more honest to
have to do with many women privately, then to marry one wife openly. Whence a
Priest of Placentia, being accused to have wife and children, was deprived of
his (...); but proving the sai^ woman to be another man's wife, and only his
concubine, he was again restored Heylin.
. As this doctri^e has been taught by inerring and infallible Popes, so also
by such Councels: for in the first Council of Toledo (held in the reigns of
the Emperors A^adius and Honorius) this Canon was agreed upon for the keeping
of Concubines. Caeterum is qui non babet ux^em, and pro uxore con^binam babet,
a communione non repellatur, tamen ut unius muli^ris, aut uxoris, aut
concubinae (^t ei placuerit) su conjunctione content us: that is, He is not to
be debar^ed from the Commu^ion, as unworthy thereof, who has no wife, but in
stead of one keeps a Concubine, if that he do not defile himself with many
women, but content himself with one wife, or one woman, or one concubine. And
about two hundred years after, Isodore (as Gratian quoteth him in his Decrees
D^stinc. 34.) has written hereof in these words, Christiano non dicam
plurimas, sed nec duas simul babere licitum est, nisi unam tantum, aut uxorem,
aut (...), loco uxoris (si conjux deest) concubinam. And thus we see, as
ignorance, so also fornication and uncleanness is taught to people, and
permitted unto them, as though they were not prone enough there^nto of
themselves by nature. And

3. By teaching uncertainty of salvation, and thereby making men hang in
fuspence all the days of their lives, d^prived of all true comfort. The Word
of G^d indeed teaches us, That faith is not doubtful, but assured of
salvation, which it has by the blood of Christ H^. (...) 1. and Phi^. 1. 11.
. But the papists teach, That the particular justification of men, and much
more the s^lvation, is very uncertain; so the men must always doubt of their
salvation. And that not to doubt of the favor and grace of God is presumption
(...) (...) (...). 6. Can 13. Cens. col^ f^l. 56.
. Oh what greater misch^ef can be done unto religious and conscientious men,
then thus to make them halt between heaven and hell as altogether uncertain all
their days, whether they shall at last be ever lastingly saved or damned. I
will conclude this fourth mark of popish doctrine with this argument:

That Religion which teaches men ignorance of divine and saving truths, and
the sacred Word and Will of God, and fornication and uncleanness, and
uncertainty of their f^ure eternal estate and condition, is a most pernicious
and pestilent doctrine in regard of peoples souls; because ignorance is the
mother of disobedience; fornication the defiler and destroyer of the soul; and
the uncertainty of salvation, the depriver of the heart of all true peace and
comfort:

But popery is such a Religion, as has been proved:

Therefore it is a pernicious and pestilent doctrine in regard of men's souls.
And thus we see, That popery is a perilous Religion both to princes and
people: wherefore let both prince, peers, and people, be one in the rooting out
of popery, and all popish superstitions out of the Land. And

5. Popery is a divelish dectrine, 1. Tim. 4. 13. For the forbidding 5. Popery
is a (...) doctrine.
to marry, and the commanding to abstain from m^ats for conscience sake, which
are there called Doctrines of Devils, are both expressly taught and commanded
by the Church of Rome. And

6. Popery is a theevish doctrine, and a robbing Religion. For 6. Popery is a
(...) religion.


1. It robs people of the sacred Word of God, the food of our souls, which they
must not enjoy in a known tongue. And

2. It robs people of the Cup in the Eucharist, for the papists teach, That the
Sacrament ought to be given and dispensed in bread, and in wine to the priests
only; but to the Laity the bread alone ought to be administered Council. Trid.
S^ss. 5.
. And

7. Popery is a cruel doctrine, and bloody religion; witness the Spanish
Inquis^tion, the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, and 7. Popery is a cruel
religion.
the bloody persecutions, massacres, and treasons practiced by the pope, and
his agents, in all places where he has authority, upon those who will not
yield to his idolatry, superstition, and Antichristian power. And

8. Popery is an heretical doctrine, and a mass or lump of errors, 8. Popery
is an heretical religion.
. For

1. From the Manichees they have learnt these heresies, viz.

First, as the Manichees forbad lawful marriage, but allowed fornication, so
do the papists. And as the Manichees thought not Marriage in their Laity
unlawful, but only in their priests and prelates; even so do the papists. And

Secondly, as the Manichees received and administered the holy mysteries under
one kind; so also do the papists. And

Thirdly, as the Manichees abstained from flesh, and yet in their Fasts used
a^l manner of delicates, and strange fruits, with sundry sorts of Spice, in
great abundance: so likewise do the papists Vide Aug. epist. 19. and 74. and
Hae^u. 71. and Contr. Faustum, lib. 32. c^p. 19. Dc mayor Mam^h lib. 2. ca. 15.
13. 15.
. And

2. From Elixay the heretic, the pope has learnt to celebrate divine Service
in an unknown tongue; for that was his heresy Epiphan. haeves. 14.
. And

3. From Montanus the heretic, the pope learnt to prescribe his rules of
Fasts; for ^e first limited times of Fasting Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 18.
. And

4. From the Collyridians, he was inspired to worship the Virgin Mary. And

5. Erom the Caj^nes, to invocate Angels. And

6. From the Carp^ratians, to worship the images of Christ, and S. Paul; and
therefore we sl^nder the Church of Rome but with a matter of truth, when we say,
That her religion is beticall. And

9. Popery is an insolent religion, teaching those Tenants, which 9 Popery is
an insolent religion.
do fl^tly and directly, thwart the truth of God. For

1. The Scripture teaches us, That the use of strange Tongues is unprofitable
in the Church, to the ignorant auditory; and therefore they who teach pray, or
sing in the Church, ought to use the vulgar Tongue, understood of the people,
for the edification, ^xhorration, and consolation of all 1 Cor. 14. 3, 6, 7, 8,
etc.
. But the papists, contrary here unto teach, That the worship of God ought to
be used in the Latin tongue: and that it is not only unprofitable, but also
hurtful for the common people, to have the holy Scriptures read or sung in the
Church in the Vulgar tongue Bell. de verbo Dei, lib. 2. ca. 15
. And

2. The Scripture teaches us, That that which enters into the mouth defiles
not a man Matthew. 15. 11.
all meats being clean creatures, and allowed to be eaten by the faithful with
thanksgiving 1 Timothy 44. Tit 1. 15.
. But contrary her unto, the Papists teach, That it is not lawful for a
Christian, under pain of mortal sin, to eat of all sorts of meats, on all
days, and times; As in Lent, the four Ember weeks, Fridayes, Saturdayes, and
the Vigils of some Saints Di^ (...) Stat^imus.
And

3. The Scripture teaches us, That Antichrist as God, sits in the Temple of
God, attributing to himself that which is proper to God 2 Thessalonians 2. 4.
, and that the place of his sitting, is the great City which has seven hills,
and reigns over the Kings of the earth Rev. 17. 9. 18.
. But contrary hereunto (because this touches them to the quick) the papists
teach, That Antichrist is to come of the race of the Jews, of the Tribe of Dan;
and that the place of his seat shall be in Jerusalem Bell. de Romans Pantis.
(...). 3 cap. 12, and 13. Popery is a derogatory doctrine.
: And therefore we may truly say, That Popery is an insolent religion. And

Popery is a derogatory doctrine, and that both in regard of God, Christ, the
Word, and Faith.

1. Popery is a religion which de^racts, and derogates from God the Father; for
the Scripture says, That we ought to serve God alone, woe is the Creator and
Governor of the world Matthew 4. 10.
; But the papists teach, That we ought not serve God alone, but also the
Sa^nts, because they are Patrons of Kingdoms, People, Cities, Societies, and
(...) Pell. de San^. beat lib 1. ca 11. Cons^col sol. 230.
. And

2. Popery detracts and derogates much from Christ, and that many ways, viz.

First, from his Kingly Office, while they deny him to be the (...) Head of the
Church, making the Virgin Mary the Q^en of (...), as God the F^ther is the
King, and giving (...) her the one half of that heavenly Kingdom. And

Secondly, from his Prophetical Office: here note, That the Papists deny Christ
out Prophet to become in the flesh; and that

In their Transubstantiation: for Christ our Prophet, was conceived of the holy
Spirit, and born of the Virgin Mary; but their Christ is not begotten, but
created; whence they say, That the sacrificing Priest in the celebration of the
Mass creates his Creator. Again, Christ our Prophet, was born of the flesh of
Mary, and the seed of David; but the Papists Christ is created of bread. Again,
our Christ is the same to day, and tomarrow, and for ever. But the Papists
Christ, was not yesterday, or the day or hour before the consecration of the
host. And

Thirdly, From his Priestly office, while they deny him to be the alone
propitiatory sacrifice for sin, and the only Mediator, and Intercessor, between
God and man. For they say,

1. That Christ is the propitiatory satisfaction, and sacrifice for Lib. 4.
sent did. 17. 18.
sin primarily, and principally; but secundarily, our satisfactory works in
this life, and purgatory after this life, satisfy the justice of God for our
sins, diametrally contrary to S^ripture, which says,

1. That the blood of Christ purges us from all our sins; and therefore there
is nothing left for Purgatory to purge. And

2. That Christ (...), by himself (Heb. 1. 3.) purged us, and neither by
Purgatory, nor by our own works; and therefore the vulgar Latin Bible, which
is only with the Papists authentical, has expunged those words. And

3. That as Christ purges us by himself, not by others, from all our sins, not
from some; so also perfectly, and imperfectly Heb. 7. 25. Lib. 4 sent did. 45.
in M^ssale Paris. in p^soa Missae de Annuatiat.
. And

2. They deny Christ's intercession to be sufficient, while they pray unto the
Saints, to pray unto God for them. And

3. Popery detracts much from faith; for the Scripture teaches, That we are
justified by faith in Christ, without the works of the Law Genesis 15. 6. Gal. 2.
16. Romans 1. 24. 28. and 4. 3. 23 24.
. But the Papists teach, that not faith only, but works also do justify us
Conc. Trid. sess 6. Can. 11.
. And

4. Popery detracts much from the Word of God. The Scriptures teach, That they
were dictated by God himself, and have sufficient authority in themselves, and
contain all necessary doctrine to piety, and salvation 2 Pot. 1. 19. 20. 2 Timothy
3 15, 16, 17
. But the Papists teach, That although the holy Scripture be the Word of God,
yet it should have no authority were it not for the approbation of the Church;
and that it is an imperfect, and maimed doctrine, which contains not doctrine
sufficient to piety, and salvation, but must be supplied by unwritten
Traditions Bell. de verbo Dei non script. lib. 4.
I will conclude this with a testimony or two of their own. A Papist wa^ driven
by Tindall in disputation blasphemously to say, We were better to be without
the L^w of God, then the L^w of the Pope In vita Tindal.
. And Sylvester Prie^iss Master of Pope Leos Pallac^; in his B^ok Contra
Lu^berum, thus writes, Indulgentiae ^baritate Scrip^urae non invotuere nobis,
sed auth^ritate Rom^inae (...), Rom in ^mque Pontificium, que m^jorest. The
pardons for sin granted by the P^pe, are not warranted un^ us by the authority
of the Scripture, but of the Church, and Pope of Rome, whose authority is
greater, then that of the Scripture. Mark it will. And a little after, A (...)
Rom (...), and Romani Pont fi^is, (...) Scriptura robur and authorit^tem
trabit; that is, The Scripture dr^werb all its authority, efficacy, and power,
from the authority of the Church, and P^pe of Rome: And therefore [oh horrible
blasphemy] if the Pope would not license the Bible, and grant it to be (...),
it were but ^s a dead letter, not to be regarded at all. And therefore, seeing
Popery is so derogatory a doctrine, both in regard of God, Christ, the Word,
and Faith; Oh let your Honors, who Minibus pedibusque contend for the glory of
Go^, the honor of Christ, the purity and perfection of the Scriptures, the
common Faith, and pure profession of the Gospel, continue to be one, in
weakening the power of Antichrist, by denying him all privilege, and power, and
his doctrine all favor, freedom, or friendship amongst us.

And thus your Honors see, Wherein you should be one; to wit, In relieving the
oppressed, in punishing the wicked, in fast rooting, and re-establishing of
Religion, in taking away of all offensive Ceremonies, and in rooting out, and
removing from us, (as much as in you lies) all errors, heresies, schisms,
superstitions, idolatry, and popery.

But it may be some will say, That as, Aristotle sets out a happy Objection.
man, Tully an Orator, Plato a Commonwealth, the Italian his Courtier, but
could never find any such as they described; so I have portrayed such an Union
and Unanimity, as can scarce ever be found, or probably be hoped for, or
exspected in so great an Assembly.

But let not this be any bridle to keep you back, but rather a Answer.
spur to prick you forward, to an earnest desire, and endeavor thereof,
remembering,

1. That as the Phoenix is the more desired, because seldom seen, and the Gem
more desired, because very rare, and the stones of Arabia of high price,
because exceeding strange; even so the rarer such an Unity and Union is amongst
so many, the more remarkable, notable, and famous it will be to all succeeding
ages, and make the Cornets of fame echo, and sound forth your praises on
earth, when your souls enjoy the joys of the Kingdom of Heaven. And

2 Endeavor earnestly after this Unity and Unanimity, in the advancing of the
truth, and true Religion, remembering, That Christ has treated his Father, and
your Father, to work this holy Unity of mind, opinion, and spirit, in you, as
Alexander the Great, commanding his soldiers to ascend a Mountain dangerous,
and full of Snow, and perceiving them timorous, leaped off his horse, and led
them the way, and then they courageously followed. So your Honors (to your
great comfort, and encouragement) may please to observe, how your Captain, and
Comma^der the Lord Christ, has led you the way, and given you an example, and
encouragement to endeavor after this Unity, by his prayer unto God for it. For
whether we conceive these words (Father I pray, that they may be one) as the
Lords will explained to us, or as his petition offered to his Father (who is so
well pleased in him Matthew. 3. 17.
, as he heard him in his requests Heb. 5. 7.
; and will deny him nothing, for then he could not have been a s^fficient
Savior) It shows one and the same thing unto us: viz. That all the living
members of Christ's Church, who are assembled for the purity, and peace of the
Church, according to his will, and desire must be (and by virtue of this his
prayer shall be) conjoined in one holy, and spiritual b^nd of Unity.

And thus much for the second thing we observed; to wit, The means whereby the
Parliamentari^s may be One.
Wherein your Honors should be one. Now

Thirdly, We have in order to prescribe the Means, whereby you may be one; but
because they are diverse, I will therefore be the briefer in them.

The Means are these; namely,

First, Labor that you may all be the faithful of the Lord, Means 1.
and the Lords faithful ones; and then he will make you one for the good of
his Church, as is implicitly promised in this His prayer, as was showed
before. The members of the body will admit of no fractions, divisions, rents,
nor jarres amongst themselves; but have all one joint desire, and endeavor for
the good of the whole; because that good which is communicated to the whole, is
extended to all, and every each member of the body: Even so, if all the members
of your Honorable Assembly, be the faithful members of Christ, then he will
so unite your hearts, affections, desires, and endeavors, that as one man you
shall all labor af^r this holy Union of truth.

Secondly, Because either Christ must work this boly Unity of Means 2.
Truth in you, or you cannot have it, another means to procure it is prayer
unto him; and that both by the Commons and Commonwealth for you, an^ by you
for your selves. But I enlarge neither of these, because in my pious man's
practice in Parliament time (which I put forth at the beginning of the
Parliament, to teach the faithful of the Land their duty in the time, and for
the continuance, of this Honorable Assembly) I have largely, and amply showed
and handled the first of these; viz. How the Land should assist your Lordships
with their prayers unto the Lord of glory for you; and by and by, I shall touch
upon the second; viz. How your Honors ought to petition the Throne of grace,
for this grace of truth, and unity of Spirit amongst your selves.

Thirdly, Let your meeting, convening, and assembling together Means 3.
be in the Name of Christ; and then (according to his promise) he will be
present with you Matthew. 18. 20.
: I need not enlarge this, because Vincentius himself consesseth Sermon. hyem.
page 544.
, That when the Rulers or Governors of a City. Church, or Land, are gathered
together, for the good and benefit, of the City, Church, or Land; they are then
gathered together in the Name of Christ, who (according to his promise) will be
in the midst of them. But your Honors are thus convened, and gathered
together; and therefore in the name, power, spirit, and virtue of Christ; and
consequently he will be in the midst of you; that is, he will be present with
you, and president amongst you. Wherefore, if as you are assembled by the power
of Christ, with an unanimous accord, desire, and endeavor, you make his glory,
the advancement of Religion, the peace of the Church, and prosperity of the
Commonwealth, your prime, and principal end and aim, then Christ will be both
present with you, and president amongst you. And so this shall be a third means
to procure this holy Union, and Unity of Truth.

Fourthly, Another excellent means to procure this grace, is Means 4.
a serious, and sedulous animadversion of the benefit which will redound
thereby, both unto our Church and State. On remember, for the Lords sake,
remember, That if ye be one in mind, affection, opinion, and spirit, and that
you all mind, and speak, and desire, one and the same thing; that then pe^ce,
and joy shall be heard in our streets; righteousness shall break forth, and
shine in our Church; prosperity and plenty shall attend our Commonwealth, and
both Church and State shall have cause to bless you, and to bl^sse the Lord
for you, and daily to inv^cate the. Throne of grace, for a blessing upon you
both in body and soul, who by your Unity, Union, and Unanimity, have been under
God a means to turn our sorrow into joy, our fear into b^pe, our ruins into
repaires, our darkness into light, our war^e into peace, our con^ention into
concord, and our discord, differences, divisions, and jarres, into a sweet
barmony and agreement, both in Church, and State.

Fifthly, Another means is a continual remembrance, That Means 5.
all relations, resemblances, types, and figures, require this at your hands;
viz. That you should be one in the promoting of this holy Unity of truth.
Remember,

1. The Birds which breed in Bobemia are of the same color in their age, that
they were of in the shell; the finest Crystal never changes color, and the
clear Diamond remains always in one estate. And therefore be ye like the
clear Crystal, and glistering Diamond, always one in affection unto the
truth, and in endeavor for the establishing thereof. And

2. Call to mind, That God made all mankind of one man to teach us how
acceptable Unity in many is unto him A^gust lib 12 (...). (...). Ca. 21
; whence came that A^ome, Multitudo procedit ab unitate; many springs from ^e
(...), (...). (...) (...). page 21.
; that is, the multitude of men now in the Wo^ld came all from one man; and
therefore be ye (although many, yet) one in mind, and judgment. And

3. Remember, That the Land represented by you, is but one body; and therefore
be ye one in your endeavors, for the good thereof. And

4. That the Body of this Land has but one Head over it, viz. The King, and
one Heart in (...), which is your Honors; and therefore be most unanimous for
the honor of your Head, and the welfare of your Body. And

5. Remember, That you have all but one end, and one aim; that is, You are all
of you elected, and called to this Assembly, for the glory of your God, the
honor of your King, the welfare of his people, the peace and purity of the
Church, the punishing of offenders, the reforming of abuses, and the taking
away of all polluted, and pernicious doctrines, and practices from amongst us.
And then the remembrance hereof, will be a means to make you one. And

6. Remember, That God your Father is but one, and it will be a means to make
you one. And

7. That the Church your Mother is but one body, and in the body, must be no
divisions 1 Cor. 12. 25.
; because a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. The Law of Christ's
Kingdom is Religion, and therefore must be, as is Jerusalem, at Unity in it
self. O^ remember your one Mother, and it will be a means to make you one. And

8. Remember Truth, and Religion is but one; for how ever men's opinions are
different and various (Quot homines tot sententiae) and (like the branches of a
growing Tree) increase still as well in multitude, as bigness; yea, like
Hydra's heads, from one cut off, many a^ise; yet Truth is but One. never lower,
never more; as the Eccliptique in the Zodiaque, the Center in a circle, the
pole of the world, or a Mathematique line howsoever extended in length, yet in
breadth exactly, and eternally indivisible. For there is but one Spirit, and
one Faith, as there is but one God, and Father of all Ephesians 4 3. etc.
; yea, were not this Truth simply one, and uncompounded, it could not be
eternal, but must pe^ish; for, Omnia composita corruptibilia, says the
Philosopher, only the simple unmixed Truth abids for ever. Certainly, a serious
remembrance, That your Honors have but one Father, one Mother, one Religion,
and one end, and aim in your Assembling together, would be a means to make you
one, in and amongst your selves.

Sixthly, The last means, though not the least Material, is a firm League,
Promise, Protestation, or vow, made unto God, by, and amongst your selves.

This Means is not of Prometheus, but of Epimethius his prescribing; for it
does not go before as a precept, but follows your president; your Honors by
divine assi^tance, and direction, having already taken this course, and used
this means, of a pious Protestation, to knit close, make one, and un^te
yourselves. And therefore were it not for the satisfaction of some religious
persons, and expectation of my diligent Reader, I need not write a wor^ hereof,
your Honors being abundantly informed, n^ satisfied, concerning the nature,
necessity, lawfulness, and u^ility, of such a holy Vow, Protestation, and
Covenant. Now although a word or two hereof, is too much, and n^edlesse, in
reg^rd of you, yet because it is necessary in regard of some others, who have
heard of your Honors unanimous Protestation; I must entreat you to permit me
to handle a few particular Queres, and but a few (because I would not l^ng
detain, or hold your Honors, in such well known Truths) and I will be as
plain, as brief in them. because I speak not to your Honors, who are already
satisfied, and informed herein, but for the information and satisfaction of
those my Readers, who are as yet unsatisfied in the point.

Such a Protestation as I speak of, may in a large sense (^s the Lord does use
the Word, Genesis 9. 15.) be called a (...), but properly a Covenant is not
without a Contract, Sive dato and accepto, A condition, and a promise; and
therefore, I will not call it a Covenant, but a Protestation, Vow, or Promise
concerning which, these queres, or Interrogatories may be pu^, Viz.

What is to be vowed, protested, or promised unto God? Question. 1.


To continue in, yea, to profess, and maintain, the truth of Answer.
the Gospel, and to defend the Laws, Liberties, and Immunities of the Lund,
when not contrary unto the Gospel, and Word of the Lord.

Who must make this Protestation, and P^mise? Question 2.


First, The great represen^ative Body of the Land, (viz. Prince, Answer 1.
Peers, and (...)) must begin, for the example, and encouragement of others.
This being done already, to the admiration, Nehem 9 38. Exodus 29. ^0, 11
and exu^tation of all true Subjects (because beyond their expectation, and
thought) I may, I hope without any shadow of adulation (though not without
unspeakable consolation) affirm, (...) Chron. ^4. 31, 32.
That I confidently persuade my self, That as it was said of Josiab, Nehem 8. 9.
There was never any like him, before him; so it may truly be said of this
Parliament, That there was never any before it in our days, like unto it, (...)
the good, and comfort both of our Church and State.

Secondly, The people must then make this Protestation, and Answ. 2.
Promise; For when Magistrates are Leaders in that which is good, people must
therein be followers. When the first give good example, the latter must take
it; When the one practice, and prescribe, the other must obey; because, as it
belongs unto Magistrates and Parliaments to re^orm, and redress abuses; so
unto people to assist, and be directed by them. Magistrates must maintain, and
protect Religion, and the Laws; and people must defend their religious
P^otectors, and L^ngivers. And therefore as the one makes a Vow, Protestation,
or Promise, for the defense of Church and State, so ought also the o^ber.

When is such a Vow, Protestation, or Promise, principally necessary? Question
3.


First, When a people generally are in peril, or danger to Answer 1.
perish, by the might, multitude, power, policy, strength, or subtl^ty Nehe. 9
37, 38.
of their enemies; then it is requisite that they should conjoyn their forces,
for their joint freedom, and link themselves fast together by some such solemn
engagement, or Protestation, lest the craf^, and cunning wiliness of their
enemies, should make a breach, or division amongst them. And

Secondly, When a people generally desire some special blessing Answer 2.
from God, or the continuance of his love unto them, and Ne^e. 9. 37, 38.
Gospel amongst them; then people should oblige, and knit themselves by a
strict, and solemn Protestation, and Vow, to continue in the truth of the
Gospel, and the maintenance and profession thereof, in purity, and sincerity;
and to root out all Popery, superstition, and idolatry, from amongst them.

What necessity is there for us in this Land, at this time to take Question. 4.
this, or the like Protestation?

From the Preamble before the Protestation, these Reasons may Answer.
be collected; namely,

1. Because the designs of the Priests, and Jesuits, and other Adherents to
the Sea of Rome, have of late been more boldly, and frequently put in practice,
then formerly; to the undermining, and danger, of the ruin of the true
reformed Religion amongst us.

2. Because some have endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws of England,
and Ireland, and to introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary, and Tyrannical
Government amongst us.

3. Because many illegal taxations have been levied, and laid, of late upon
the Subjects, to their great grievance, and oppression.

4. Because diverse innovations, and superstitions have of late been brought
into our Church; and an Oath devised to make us practice, and perpetually to
maintain them.

5. Because many have been exiled, and the mouths of many Ministers stopped, for
these Innovations, and Superstitions, and other Ceremonies.

6. Because some have endeavored to raise, and soment jealousies, between the
King, and his people, Ezra 4. 13, 14, 15.

7. Because Armies have been raised in England, and Ireland, of dangerous
consequence; to wit,

First, For the making, or taking part with the Conspirators, as has been
confessed, or discovered by some. And

Secondly, For the weakening of the Land, by a consumption of the Treasure
thereof, making us thereby lie more open to foreign invasion.

Wherefore should both Prince, Peers, Parliamentaries, and Question. 5.
People, or Commons, make such a Protestation, or Promise, at such times, or
upon such occasions, as were named even now?

First, Because our enemies usually strengthen, and bind themselves, Answ. 1.
Nehe. 6. 17, 18.
by wicked oaths, and vows to ruin us; and therefore, much more should we, by
religious and pious Protestations, and promises, assist one another in the
resisting, and rooting out, whom, or whatsoever might on danger our lives,
laws, liberties, or religion.

Secondly, Because our ordinary resolutions, and purposes, Answ. 2.
are like S^psons cords, which we break as fast as straws: and Nehe. 9. 10 29.
therefore we had need upon the occasions mentioned, to help our frail
purpos^s, with some firm Protestations, and Vows.

Thirdly, Because the Lord only can do for us, what we desire: Answ. 3.
He is wi^r, stronger, and more potent then all our enemies, he can deliver us
from all evils; he can avenge us of all our adversaries; he can turn away all
his plagues; he can impart unto us any blessing, or grace, which we stand in
need of; yea, he can do for us above all we are able to ask or think; but we
are not certain that he will, except we enter into a holy Covenant with him,
and by a firm Protestation and Vow, join our selves unto him, to serve, honor,
obey, and worship him, with all our hearts, and with all our souls, all the
days that we have to live.

How many things are observable in this Protestation, or Vow? Question 6.


These four, Viz. The Matter, Manner, Intension, and Extension Answer.
thereof.

First, The Matter of this Protestation, and Vow, must be Christian, and
Religious; respecting God, Religion, the King, the Laws, the Liberties of the
Subject, the Patriots of the Land, the enemies of the Church, and State, and
the union or unity of the Kingdoms united. Particularly,

1. This Protestation must respect the Lord, and that thus. Upon the times, and
occasions before mentioned, we must make solemn Protestations and Vows unto
God, to worship, and serve him sincerely, and purely, and to abstain from all
sin, and iniquity (as much as in us lies) totally, and perpetually, if he will
be pleased to deliver us from our enemies, and those evils which we fear, and
to bl^sse us with those blessings which we sue, and supplicate for. And

2. This Protestation must respect Religion; for when we see That in some
eminent, and apparent danger, and that It is like to be justled, and shouldred
out of the doors of Church or State, by any innovations, superstitions, sects,
errors, heresies, or Popish vaniti^s, th^n we must labor to support, and stay
it, by some firm, and joint promises, and vows. And

3. This Protestation must respect the Kings sacred Majesty; for when we see
either his royal person, honor, estate, or soul, in danger, or endangered, by
any wicked Counselors, Achitophels, Tr^ors, U^derminors of States,
Machiav^llians, or any of Antichrists imps or brood: Then the representative
Body of the Land, must by some holy, and unanimous Protestation, and promise,
strenghen themselves, and each one the other, for the presertion, and safety of
his Noble person, estate, and honor, and the eternal salvation of his
precious soul. And

4. This Protestation must respect the Laws of the Land, the power and
privileges of Parliaments, and the liberties of the Subject; for when (by the
malice, mischief, and treachery of any) Laws are in danger to be subverted,
Parliaments stinted, and straightened, and people to be envassalled, and deprived
of their immunities, and privileges, Then all (so far as Religion and Law will
allow them) by some religious Protestation and Vow, should unite themselves,
for the maintenance, and defense of their liberties and laws. And

5. This Protestation must respect the Patriots of the Land; for when we see
those whom the Lord has endued, with wisdom, zeal, courage, and resolution,
to speak boldly for the good of Church or State, and undantedly to oppose the
enemies of either, or both of them; then (as far as warrantably we may) we
must support, and uphold them, by some faithful promise or vow; as They (the
Pillars of the Land) labor to maintain our Commonwealth and Us, by their
standing and speaking for our Religion and Laws. For it they who are zealou^,
courageou^, and resolute, for the good of their Country, and who are not
afraid to lay down their lives for their Country, should not be maintained,
and defended to the utm^t of our power, it would utterly discourage any to
speak for the common good, or good and welfare, of the Commonwealth or
Commons. And

6. This Protestation must respect the enemies of Church, and State; for we
must oppose as far as lawfully we may, and by all good ways, and means
endeavor to bring to condign punishment, all such as shall by force, practice,
counsel, plots, conspiraci^s, or otherwise, do, or endeavor any thing,
against the common good of Church and State. And

7. This Protestation must respect the three Kingdoms, now united by their one
thrice noble Head; For every one should seriously, (in all just and honorable
ways) endeavor to preserve the union and peace, between the three Kingdoms,
England, Scotland, and Ireland. And thus much for the Matter of this
Protestation.

Secondly, The next thing observeable in this Protestation, is the Manner
thereof, how it must be made; viz.

1. Solemnly, reverend^y, and in the fear of God; because made in the presence
of God; for we are commanded to fear the Lord, and to swear by his Name.

2. Sincerely, cordially, and in truth, because made, and promised unto God,
who must be worshipped in Spirit, and in Truth, John 4. 24.

3. Faithfully, for the thing protested must be performed. Promises made unto
men must be performed, much more unto God, Psalm. 89. 38. And hence people are
commanded, Not to forget their Covenant with God, Jere. 50. 5. And therefore
the promises we make unto God, and our Protestations, and Vows made in the
presence of God, must be performed, and neither for hope, fear, nor other
respects must be relinquished, Nehe. 5. 12, 13.

4. Cheerfully, and with joy, Nehe. 8. 9, 12.

5. In manner of an Oath, Ezra 10. 3. 5.

6. With a penalty for refusal, Ezra 10. 7, 8.

7. With praise unto God. Note here. That we in this Land, have at this time,
great cause, to praise, and magnify the Name of our God; as namely,

1. Because he has chosen us out of the world, Nehe. 8. 7.

2. Because he has looked upon our afflictions, Nehe. 9. 9.

3. Because he has seen our fasting, and heard our prayers, Nehe 9. 9. 27.

4. Because he has destroyed our enemies, Nehe. 9. 10, 11.

5. Because he has guided, and assisted our Patriots, and Parliamentaries, in
their counsels, and consultations, Nehe. 9 12.

6. Because he has been merciful unto us in this Land, above our merits,
Nehe. 9. 16, 17, 18, 19. And therefore,

1. Let us all trust in him, Psalm. 115. 9, 10, 11. And

2. Let us all praise him, Psalm. 118. 2, 3, 4.

Thirdly, The next thing observable in this Protestation, is (if I may so term
it) the Intension thereof; for we must (as ^arre as lawfully we may) with our
lives, power, and estates, perform the things promised, and vowed.

Fourthly, and Lastly, In this Protestation, we must observe, the Extension, or
continuance thereof; for it must be perpetual, and continue unto our lives
end; Truth, and Religion (the sum and Ierem. 50. 5.
substance of this Protestation) being always, one, as was showed before, in
the fifth Means.

And thus much for the first main general, Viz. What we pray of you; namely,
That your Honors may be at Unity amongst your selves. I proceed now unto the
second; to wit, That you may make unity amongst us, or make us one.

Jovinian the Emperor being solicited to answer the Macedonians petition; gave
this answer Odi omen contentionis genus, (...) autem unice am ^ctor and amo.
Nicephor. Callistus. lib. 10. cap. 40. Eccles. histor.
, I hate all kind of contention, but unity I like and love; his meaning was,
He would do nothing to further dissension and dis^rd, but all he could to make
peace, and unity. And this is that which your ^ble Petitioner now sues unto
your Honors for, That you would (because Vis unita fortior) join all your
force together, to make unity amongst us; and to stint, stay, settle, and
suppress, the dissentions, and diffe-rences which are in our Church, to the
^uine of Religion; and establish the true Religion in Unity amongst us.

In this second main general, we have these two particulars, particularly to
handle; to wit,

1. We desire, That the dissentions, and differences which are in our Church,
and which hinder the progress of Religion, may be taken away by you. And

2. That true Religion, may be established in unity amongst us by you. Now of
th^se in their order.

First, Our request here unto your Honors, is, That you would be pleased to
compose those jarres, and to appea^e those differences of Religion, which are
so rife amongst us. If you should demad Quest.
how this may done? the Philosopher answers Sublata causa to^li^ur effect^ss.
; Answ.
Take away the cause, and the effect will c^ase. If this answer b^get another
Question, Question.
viz. W^^t is the cause of these differences and dissentions in Religion
amongst us? Then I answer thereunto,

Answer.
That c^rt^inly, all iniquity is drawn on with certain cords of vanity I^a. 5 18.
; and dissentions would not be so dangerously emb^aced, if there were not some
inducing causes, which make us mistake error for truth, and so commend falsehood
to our easier belief. These therefore, indeed, would b^ hunted after, and
Fer^et^ed out of their holes and holds; that error being unmasked, her dark
teachers of untruth may be no more mistaken for Angels of Light. 2 Cor 11. 13.
The causes of dissentions and discord.
.

First one cause is the slippe^y, smooth, and Snak^-like nature of Error, which
easily glides and insinuates it self, both into our judgment and affection.

1. Touching our judgment, Gods truth is many times (Supra Cause 1. Rom 11 33.
Captum) above our understanding, not only in the Reason why it should be so
(which made Paul cry out, Oh the deepnesse of God wisdom, and unsearchable
ways!) but sometimes in the Manner. How can this be Luke 1 34.
? as one says of Christ's mystical Union; Scio quod verbum caro; it quomodo
nescio; miraris? Omni^ caro ignorant Ch^^s. Daven. 242.
, That the Word was made flesh I know, but how it was done, I do not know; do
thou marveil at this? All flesh is ignorant hereof; For man's wisdom cannot
know God 1 Cor. 1. 21. and 2. 14.
. Whence one says, In eo peccatum est, quod rem dictu ineffa^ilem --
comprehensione impossibilem, vani homines se animo complecti posse crediderunt
Danaeus. shaeres. Val^^t.
. This was no small fault in them, That those things which were ineffable, and
incomprehensible, they believed they could conceive, and take up.

But Errors have commonly their g^ounds from mistaken, or misapplyed grounds of
man's wisdom, called Philosophy. Man's wisdom has e^nticing words 1 Cor. 2.
4. and Coloss 2 4
, and does sophistically deceive us Rom 16 18. and Col^ss 2. 4
, and Philosophy l^ads our belief prisoners Coloss 2 8.
. Whence Tertullian says, Haereses a Philosophia si bor^antur Tret. de
raescrip^aeret.
. That Philosophy is the suborner of heresy; and the same Father shows, That
heresies were borrowed from Plato, Epicurus, Z^^o, Heraclitus, Aristotle, and
(Ibid.) Whence it h^th been said, Summi Philosophi, summi Haeresiarchae, The
greater Philosophers, the greater heretics; which was found too true in Ehion,
Samosatenus, C^lius, Porp^yrius. Iamblicus, Psellus, etc. yea, even Julian
himself drew his strongest Shaft out of that Quiver. Now

2. Touching Affection the case is more plain; for the natural man sees no
beauty in Christ, nor form to desire him Isa. 53. 2.
; and truth has no relish with him, that being such a hard saying, that he
cannot endure it Ioh. 6. 60.
; yea, all truths Doctrines are bands, and bridles, that enthrall and check our
carnal liberty; as for example, The condemning of evil words, and of lust,
even in the heart Matthew 12. 36. and 5 18.
, the injunction to confess our selves nothing Rom 7. 18.
, and unprofitable servants Luke 17. 10.
, and the denial of the world, which startled and amazed the very Apostles
Matt. 19. 25.
, and makes men go to true Religion, as a Bear to the Stake.

But now touching Errors, it is otherwise: for as Alcibiades covered his
Pictures, being Owls and Apes, with a Curtain embroidered with Lions and
Eagles: and as Silenus his Pictures, were without, Lambs and Doves, but within,
Tigers and Vultures; so error is gilded, and painted over with such delightful
colors, and so perfumed, as it strongly entangles natural affections. Such
are the Familists wanton communion; the Perfectionists lazy rest from the use
of the means, and all Christian War-fare; the Papists pardons for money; and
their outward pomp and bravery in Processions, Alt^rs, Shrines, Rood-losts, and
other vanities, in the service of their Churches, serving only to allure simple
people. Such are also the Mahometists promises of pleasant Gardens, sumptuous
and pleasant Palaces, stately Horses, many Wives, etc. in the life to come; to
which things man's nature easily listens. And this is the first cause why error
is more readily embraced than the truth. And therefore let your Honors care and
endeavor be, to suppress all those doctrines and opinions which are pleasing,
and suitable to our corrupt natures, but pernicious and finfull for our souls.

2. Another cause hereof, is the manifold wickedness of man's Cause 2.
corrupted heart, which (as a slime brought in by the inundation of sin) breeds
many poysonons Serpents of dissension: As for example,

1. In some the only shallow humor of new fanglednesse, like Athenians, ever
delighting in Novelties Acts 17. 21.
. No sooner does Satan raise a smoke of Novell errors; but these puffs of
wind blow abroad the tume thereof into all men's eyes. Never was error devised,
so monstrous against God, or so absurd against common reason, but there were
some found who would embrace it. What mad man or Idiot would believe, that
Simon were God, or Menander Christ, or Montanus the holy Ghost; or that the
Serpent which deceived Eve should be worshipped of us (except some papist
should parallel it with the Spear which wounded Christ) yet thus subtle Satban
taught, and tbus simple men believed And

2. In some the vain pride of ambition occasions errors, or a desire to be
called Rabbi Matthew 23 7.
; and with Diotrephes, to have the pre-eminence 3 John 9.
, and to speak proud and perverse things, and draw Disciples after them Acts
20. 30.
: These men delight to broach new opinions, and to be holden inventers of new
Tenants. So Theodotus, Proclus, and others, were followers of Montanus, and
also the Cataphrygians; but they in their singular pride, called their heresies
by their own names. Magno fastu, proprias and a se denominaton haereses
condiderunt Danaeus de Cataphryg.
. And I would to God England were free from that vanity. And

3. In others, a froward stubborn wilfulness occasions the spreading of
errors; who will obstinately defend whatsoever has casually dropped from their
pen or tongue. So Theodotus (having for fear of death abjured Christ) defended
it afterward by saying, He denied not God, because Christ was not God, but
only Many Epiphan. de haer. Theodot.
. And this is one of the papists chief principles, To confess nothing
erroneous, which their Church has taught at any time. And

4. In very many the minding of earthly things Phil 3 19.
, who teach things they ought not, for lucres sake Tit. 1. 11.
; and serve not the Lord, but make them Gods of their own bellyes Romans 16. 18.
Phil. 3 19.
, and admire men's persons for advantage sake Jude 16.
. There is a fish in the flood Aranis, that at the waxing of the Moon is as
white as Snow, at the waning as black as pitch. And there are many who seem
very clear in doctrine and opinion, so long as the truth is most promoted and
approved by great ones, but muddy and corrupt, when error is most favored and
advanced. Their Religion is princo Regis; and if King Henry be a papist, King
Edward a protestant, Queen Mary of the one, Queen Elizabeth of the other, they
will ever sail with the wind, and row with the Tide, and swim with the stream,
and imitate (but the wrong way) Hushai the Archite. Whomsoever (or whatsoever)
the people, and all the men of Israel shall choose, theirs will they be, and
there will they abide 1 Samuel 16. 18
And

5. In all the general corruption of our nature, which is ever wilful, and
skillful, ready, and able, to dispute against the truth of God.

1. Ready, by our natural disaffection; the wisdom of the flesh, being enmity
with God, is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be Romans 87.
: wherefore the natural man is called, Averse from God Ierem. 3. 12. and 8. 5.
Isa. 59 13.
, as having all our inclinations drawing away from him.

2. Able, by the perverse crasty wit we have learnt from Satan, who does
furnish us abundantly with arguments against every truth of God; like to that
Sophister, who boasted, That he had sometimes wanted conclusions to defend, but
never arguments to defend them withal. And this brings in the third cause of
so many dissentions; which is,

Thirdly, the subtle malice, and malicious subtilty of Satan; Cause 3.
who, as he is in general a perpetual, and indefatigable enemy of Christ, his
Church, Religion, and Truth; so in this particular he racks his malicious wit
to the highest strain, to prepare, and fit us for errors, and errors for us.

1. He prepares us, partly by raising doubts in our minds, which he has
sometimes done in the mainest grounds of Religion (as Protagoras says, it may
be doubted, Dii sint avnon? Whether there be any God or not?) and partly by
softening the courage and constancy of our minds, which should animate us to
oppose errors, and their abbettors, under the show of love, peace, and the
spirit of meekness; and, which makes many forbear to reply, when they see the
truth strongly opposed; and partly by suggesting to our minds, arguments
against the truth of God. Thus he has taught men to dispute against the
Creation of the world of nothing; against the contents of the Ark; against the
renovation of so many millions of men by Noa^, and his three sons, within
three hundred years, and even against the foundation of the Mystery of our
salvation, in both the natures of our blessed Savior: And

2. On the other side, He prepares Errors for us and that these ways; viz.

1. By seasoning them to our tastes; by observing our several dispositions,
and fitting us with agreeable suggestions. To the proud wit he suggests matter
of novelty; to the ambitious, doctrines of prerogative; to the worldly minded,
gainful Tenants; and to the loose affected doctrines of liberty. As he made
Evab his instrument to deceive Adam, so he causes our Affections to betray our
Judgment Venit tadem (...) ad ^eam Sententi^. Ter.
. And

2. He prepares errors for us, by glazing, and polishing them over, that they
may the more smoothly deceive. And herein he has played his Master-prize. For
although he daily suggests to man the same errors for substance, wherewith he
infected former ages, yet he does so mould them a new, and cast them into other
forms, Ut non cognos^ as cosdem esse, that we cannot at first fight perceive
them to be the same. For example, The doctrine of the now libertines is for
substance the same which the Simonians h^ld in the first infancy of the Church.
But the gross Tenants which his boldness broached in former times (that it
was lawful, yea as some said, requisite, or rather, as others, necessary to
follow all uncleanness, and so to please and delight those evil spirits to
whom by nature we are subject) were too broad for these days of light and
knowledge. And therefore he brings in this Harlot muffled with many
distinctions; sometimes between the upper and neither parts of the body: after,
between the body, and the spirit; Lastly, between the compre^ending part, and
other parts of the soul. Again, Satan desires now (as much as ever) to reduce
the pomp, and idolatry of Rome into our reformed Churches; but as the Fowler
hides his nets with (...) dulce canit.
cheffe, and himself with bushes, and pipes sweetly, as if there were nothing
there, but meat and melody: so the devil covers his dangerous purpose with
chaffy doctrines, and hides himself under other pretenses, entertaining the
simple with delightful vanities, in the mean time assaulting faith (as
perseverance of the Saints, the All Sufficiency of the written Word, and
heavenly nature of says, etc.) and laboring to draw us back into some
antiquated and demolished vanities, of old used by the papists, and disused in
reformed Churches, as Altars, Cross s, Tapers, Images, Pictures in walls,
windows, garments, and the like; because these being once admitted, will serve,
as so many graduall Steps, to re-advance that Babylonish Strumpet, to that Seat
of Supreme and Spiritual Monarchy, from whence by our forefathers, she was
justly dismounted.

These three mentioned, are main causes which fill the world with dissentions.
For errors are a pleasing bait, our wanton appetite greedily embracing them,
and the devil, as a skillful Angler, baits his hook of dissension with them;
that we may say as Anthoninus once said, Vah Domine quis evadere queat, O Lord,
who can escape? But

Fourthly, there is another over-swaying cause, of more power Cause 4.
than any (yea all) of these; and that is, The fearful wrath of our God,
delivering up those people to blindness and error, whose sins he finds
ripe unto harvest. It is dangerous when Satan, like a roaring Lion, goes about
to deceive us 1 Pet. 5. 8.
; but much more fearful, when the Lord gives leave, and permits him to tempt
us Ioh. 1. 6.
; but then beyond all most desperate, when our sins shall provoke the Lord to
seal a Commission or Warrant to this deceiver. Go thy way, and thou shall
prevail 1 King. 21. 22
. If men turn the glory of God to the similitude of sinful man Romans 1. 23,
; whether the Prophet and people do wickedly Iere 23. 11.
, or the people sacrifice to the golden Calf Acts 7. 41.
, or set up Idols in their hearts Ezekiel 14 7.
: God will give up the people to serve the Host of Heaven Acts 7 42.
, and even infatuate the Prophets for their sakes Ezekiel. 14. 9.
, and make their ways slippery in darkness, that they may fall therein Ierem.
23 12.
; and so give them up (both priest and people) to their own hearts lust, and
even unto a reprobate sense Romans 1. 24. 28
: For it is a just thing with God, if we will not receive the Word of truth, to
send us strong delusions, that we should believe lies 2 Thessal. 2. 10, 11.
; yea, to a people thus given over, it will little avail them to have religious
Princes, Peers, and Laws; For God will effectuate his own will, mauger all
impediments Quos perdere vult jupiter, hos dementat.
, he can make foolish the wise Counselors, and send among them the spirit of
errors Isa. 19. 11 14.
; he can take away the heart of Princes, and make them wander out of the way
Job 12. 24
; yea he has threatened to make our hearts fat Isa. 6 10.
, and sm^e us with the spirit of slumber, that we shall not see, for a
recompense unto us Romans 11. 8, 9.
.

Thus your Honors have seen the causes of these differences, dissentions, and
rents which are amongst us: and it may now be expected, that I should show the
remedies against those causes; but I omit it.

Partly, because I have amply showed the duty both of Magistrates and people,
for the averting of spiritual as well as temporal plagues from Church and
State, in my Pious man's practice in Parliament time. And

Partly, because I would not presume to teach a Dolphin to swim; or direct your
Honors (our politic and Ecclesiastic Physicians) what physic to administer,
or what receipts to prescribe, for the curing and recovering of our sick Church;
your own Christian care, and consideration, and pious prudence, experience and
knowledge, being best of all able to direct you herein. Thus much therefore
shall suffice for the first prime particular of the second main general; viz.
That we petition your Honors, so to consider of our dissentions, divisions,
and discord, and the causes of them, that you may use the utmost of your
endeavor and power, to suppress, redress, and take them away. The other
fellows.

Secondly, the next thing, which (in the name of all true hearted English, and
sincere children of the Church of England) I humbly beg of your Honors, is,
That true Religion may be established in the unity of truth amongst us, by you.

But it may be your Honors will here demand of me, Which Quest.
is that holy Unity of truth, which You desire We should establish, and be one
in the firm rooting of?

I might answer unto your Honors, That it is the true Religion Answ.
of Christ: But this does but beget another question; viz. Which is that true
Religion of Christ? Now though it were answer enough against the Papists, to
say, That which the reformed Churches hold according to the written word; yet
this will not satisfy the doubt amongst our selves; considering the manifold
Tares of different opinions, which Satan has labored to sow even in the midst
of our Reformed Churches, yea in the midst of our own Church of England: (I
might here instance in Lutherans, and Zwinglians; in non-conformists, and
conformitans; in Calvinists, and Remonstrants, and Socinians, etc.) What shall
we then say to this? Shall we take upon us to determine which are true Tenants,
and which erroneous? It were too great a pride to confine all differing learned
men to my poor opinion (lest they should say unto me, When went the Spirit of
the Lord from me, to speak unto thee 1 Kin. 23. 24. Rules whereby the true
Religion of Christ may be discerned.
?) neither will I undertake a work of such arrogance. It will be (I hope) a
more acceptable and profitable course, to observe unto your Honors some few
Rules and Remonstrances, which may serve as Landmarks, to overn and direct our
doubtful steps (at least probably) to find out that heavenly palace of holy
truth, where we may safely and securely set down our staff, and stay our
selves.

1. Take heed of innovating in Religion. Innovation has bin Rule 1.
ever held so dangerous, that the fear thereof brought our prudent State to a
pawse, even in the holy work of Reformation; as a Prelate of our own witnessed
Tantae molis crat Romanum tollere ritum. Archb. Hutton.
; and therefore let that abide in us, which we have had from the beginning 1.
Ioh. 2. 14.
; and let us keep the profession of our hope without wavering Heb. 10.
; taking especial heed of relapsing, and falling back again (with the dog to
his vomit, and the sow to the mire 2 Pet. 2. 20.
) into any forsaken and demolished erroneous opinions, or superstitions of
Popery. Our Fathers (in the times of Reformation) taught us the certainty of
our salvation, the perseverance of the Saints, the sweet doctrine of
Predestination, the heavenly gift of Faith, the free grace of salvation, and to
prefer (in the service of God) the inward worship of the Spirit, before
unmeasurable outward pomp, or any lip-labor, or bare outward performance. Yea,
these doctrines have been sealed unto us, by the blood of many holy Martyrs,
(Bishop Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrer, etc.) and continued and
confirmed by the unanimous teaching of many famously learned (unparalleld
Juell, Morton, Davenant, Fulke, W^itakers, Humpbry, Sutcliff, Willet, and many
others.) Now if (...) build again what we have destroyed, we make our selves
transgressors Gal. 2. 8. Multi superstitiones veteres mordicus retinent, multi
explo^as reducunt. Gualt. s. Matthew. 11. 21.
. Wherefore let not us leave these doctrines, and lean unto the contrary,
maintained by Papists, Pelagians, Remonstrants, and their abettors: but let us
hold fast, and keep to the instructions which we have been taught (2. Thessal.
2. 15.) let us not waver, nor be carried about with every blast of windy
doctrine Ephesians. 4. 14.
; but hold fast what we have learnt, that no man may take away our Crown Rev.
3. 11.
, lest if we re-edifie, or re-admit what has been banished, Satan will not
come alone, but bring in with him seven Spirits worse then himself Matthew. 12.
47.
.

Saint Augustine tells us of a man that fell into a ditch, and his friend
coming by, and being desired by him to help him forth, he began to question
with him, How he fell in? If he were drunk when he fell? or, If it were dark?
How long he had been in? If none at all had come by since he fell in? and the
like demands. Oh (says he) help me forth from hence, and do not enquire how I
came hither. If a man see his house on fire, he does not first enquire, How it
came? In what room it began? What damage it has already done? By whose
negligence it was? Whether it was done wilfully, or carelessly? But he labors
by all means, with all speed to quench it. Give me leave, my Lords, for the
conclusion of this first Rule to apply these passages. Every seeing eye, and
marking man, observes how our Church and Religion is on fire; and how the very
main pillars thereof are in peril utterly to perish: for these doctrines have
been miserably shaken, burnt, battered, defaced, and opposed. viz. The
pers^rance in faith and grace, the certainty of salvation, particular
redemption, the free grace of salvation, and that it is not of works, with
diverse others; which by persons popishly affected (at least in these points)
have been withstood; the contrary Popish errors broached, printed, and
preached, and the defenders thereof preferred and countenanced; as by many
particular petitions and instances has been proved to your Honors: yea the
case stood so, and the matter was so managed, that if the Lord had not been the
more extraordinarily gracious unto us, in calling your Honors to help us, we
might ere long have taken up the Fathers complaint, with some mutation, That
all England is become an Arminian. Now I know your Honors, in your grave
wisdom, and great care of us, will not so much enquire, Who first broached
these opinions amongst us? Who first gave life unto them, and who nourishment?
Who fomented, and who favored them? who preached them, and who promoted the
Preachers of them? (although all these be worth enquiry, that the instruments
of our mischief may be found out:) as study how to suppress and expel these
doctrines and Doctors from amongst us for the present, and make provision
against them for the time to come. And thus much shall suffice for the first
Rule.

2. Let us not presume to arraign God at the bar of man's understanding, Rule 2.
to give an account to us either of his works or will. For the shallow shell of
man's brain cannot comprehend those Oceans, either of his Works, How they are
done? or of his Will, Why he did so?

1. Touching hi^ Works, many things are impossible with man, which are possible
enough with God Luke 18. 27.
: as was Christ's conception to his blessed Mother Luke 1. 34.
; and some things to the Fathers, as shall appear in the next particular. Our
help here must be in the heavenly evidence of things not seen Heb. 11. 1.
, walking by faith, not by sight 2 Cor. 57.
: Disciples must turn disputing into believing (...).
, as has been with all humility acknowledged by the Fathers. Now

2. Touching his Will, it is strange that some should hold it strange, That
Gods will should be given as a sufficient and final reason of his works, as if
man were of Gods privy Council, and did know what reason moved him to all his
works; or, as if Gods justice should not be approved further then man can give
the reason thereof. Alas, who has known the mind of the Lord, or who was his
Councellor Rom 11 34. Isa. 40 13. and 1 Cor. 2. 16.
? or, what man is he that can know the counsel of God, or, who can think what
his will is Wisd. 9. 13.
? Therefore it must suffice us, That the Scriptures give Gods Will, as a
determining reason of his Works Matthew. 11. 26. Isa. 46. 10. Dan. 4 32. Rom 9.
15. Iam. 1. 19. Ephesians. 1. 11.
. And if the natural wise man demand a reason, How this can stand with the
Justice, or that with the Mercy of God, etc? Let Saint Paul's reprehension stop
his mouth. Ob man, what art thou that that pleadest against God? has not the
Potter power to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, another to
dishonor Rom 9. 20. 21
? Saint Augustine says plainly, That only God knows the reason of his will.
Posset Deus, cur ergo non fecit? quia noluit: -- cur noluerit, penes ipsum est
Gen ad lit. 11. 10.
: and as flatly, That Gods will is the necessity of the creature. Voluntas
Creatoris est rerum necessitas Ib. lib. 6 ca. 15
. And Saint Paul wraps up this mystery in a holy rapture, admiring the
deepnesse of Gods wisdom, and unsearchable judgments and ways (note this
well) past finding out Romans 11 33.
. Gravely and divinely does learned Musculus reprove the boldness of man,
daring to examine the justice of Gods works; as if it were no further to be
approved, than our shallow sense can comprehend it. Non vocanda in jus divina
providentia; sed discamus altitudinem illam (Romans 11. 33.) reverenter
suscipere. Non ferenda morositas, non tribuentium Deo justitiae la^dem, nisi
quoad sensus eorum pertingit Musc. s. Man. 11. 21.
.

Thirdly, give not too much place to curious questions, or disputations, Rule 3.
especially touching the Works of God. A simple man may knit more knots in an
hour, than many learned men can unloose in a long time. It is easier to raise
many such spirits, than to lay or conjure down a few of them. To confess a
truth, we shall find some so strongly armed with seeming weight of reason or
equity, that it will even confound man's wit and understanding to avoid them;
and they must, indeed, be assoiled only by faith, as was said before. I will
recite some few such questions, not that we should discuss them, but (as the
Lacedaemonians showed drunkards to their children) that we should abhor to
dispute them.

One disputes thus, Either God did not reveal to the good Angels their future
perseverance (and then, how were they happy?) or he did it to them, but not to
the rest, which after fell; and then how was he equal to all? Si sancti Angeli
aeterne su^ beatitudinis incerti, quomodo beati? Si dicamus Deum diabolo (adbuc
bono) revelare ^oluisse, ^teris vero revelasse, quo malo merito disceruebatur a
caeteris? Number Deus prius ultor quam ille peccator Aug. de Genesis ad lit. 11 17.
? Again he questions, Why God permitted Adam to be tempted, knowing that he
would fall if he were Ib. lib. 11. c. 4.
. Also, Why Infants should be damned, through the negligence of other men Ib.
lib. 10. c. 15.
? Also he thinks it cannot by Scriptures be proved (which yet is holden for a
certain truth) That man's soul is derived from God, and not from the parents Ib.
lib. 10. cap. 15.
. Another cannot conceive, How the Word could be made flesh Chrys^st. S. Ioh.
1. hom. 10.
? So some question, How it can stand with Christ's mercy, not to offer the means
to Tire, and Sidon, which he knew would have repented Matthew. 11. 21.
?

Now my Lords, lest these should be imputed as faults to those holy Fathers;
Let me acquaint your Honors with their pious, and reverend answers. It is
true, Saint Augustine struggles (like a man embogged in the depth of Gods
judgments) to find a reason, Why Infants are damned? Either from Gods fore
knowledge, how they would have sinned if they had lived; or from some other
hidden cause August. de Genesis adl^. lib. 10. cap. 15.
. And Fr. Maro elsewhere, would excuse him, to speak only by way of argument,
not of judgment. Hic loquitur, non determinando, sed arguendo Veritate qui^ S
11. 16.
. But the blessed Father rests not in these, but confesses plainly, That he
cannot pierce into the depth of Gods counsels, they being far above his reach
Genesis 14 4.
; and he thinks above all humane judgment Ib. 10. 15.
. And Chrysostom forbids us to search such things Chrysostom. S. Ioh. 1. hom. 10.
, professing himself, and all creatures to be ignorant thereof. These are pious
confessions, learned ignorance, humble sincerity, bright shining faith, and
heavenly spirits; and we should learn of them, to confess our blindness, and
to submit our understanding in faith, to the wisdom of God. Nisi ardore
disputationum ingenia incalescerent, ad multa possemus pie respondere, Deus
novit. Aretius. If heat of argument did not inflame us, we might piously answer
to many questions of this nature, God knows how, though we know not. And
therefore seeing these Questions, and Disputations concerning the Will, Works,
and Attributes of God are so dangerous, derogatory, and unwarrantable; Let your
Honors care be to take some Religious and pious course, for the stinting, and
restraining of them; and the extinguishing of this fire of Arminianisme, which
gives heat, life, and growth unto them.

Fourthly, Let us never leave our own colors, to pafse into Rule 4.
the Pavilions of the Papists. This is done,

Partly by siding with them in opinions, touched in the first Rule. And

Partly by fighting with their weapons, and borrowing their armor, and
arguments against our brethr^n. Let pride, and faction say what it will: I know
your Honors will hold those opinions (at the very b^st) suspicious, which
cannot be defended, but by those self same arguments, (and sometimes pressed in
those very words) which the Papists were wont'to use, against our reverend
Reformers, and learned Writers: for example, Universal Redemption, general
election, predestination unto life from a for^ of works; the merit of works;
justification by works; the (...) of the aw; and diverse other Tenants are held,
and pro^ssed by many in our Church, who are not able to maintain their opinions
without borrowing of helps, grounds, and arguments, from J suites, and Popish
Writers.

Fifthly, let your Honors be wel^ aware of the cheating, and Rule 5.
crastinesse of men, who will not openly, and plainly oppose us, with main
forces, propounding simply their main doctrines in question, but labor to
gather upon us in By -- and indifferent -- seeming propositions; which y^ilded
unto, from thence they will induce others; and so (like cunning Faulkoners,
holding fast what they get) by constant prosecuting of advantages gotten, take
in all our forces, by insensible degrees one after another. For false Apostles
are deceitful workers 2 Cor. 11. 13.
, and like Serpents if they can wring in, but the tip of their tails, will
slyly insinuate the whole bodies of their errors into our affections. Let us
therefore beware how we open unto them, any postern of belief, left before we
be aware, we (to our own unspeakable danger) admit all their forces, and so
suffer them to quarter their whole squad ons in our hearts. I will only
instance in one sort of false Teachers. It appears as clear, as the Sun at
high noon, by that learned work e^led, Collatio Remonstrantium, and
Socinianorum, That Arminianisine is but a step unto Socinianisme; and whether
Socini nisme will not (in all probability) in time, lead unto Arrianisme, I
leave it to the learned to judge. And therefore, let your Honors (we humbly
beseech you) join all your strength, to quench this sire of Pelagianisme, that
has so long burned, and e^ed, the very bowels of our Church.

Sixthly and lastly, I will conclude my unpolished Petition unto Rule 6.
your Honors, with this exhortative Caveat, That if you desire my Petition may
be admitted, accepted, read, voted, answered, and granted, by both your
Honorable Houses, to the general joy and rejoicing of the whole Church of
England; that then your Honors must unanimously become Petitioners your
selves, both for your selves, and us, Remembering that all holy perseverance
(and therefore this abiding in Unity of truth) is above the reach and power of
man. To be of one opinion, and to hold fast that Union of Doctrine, which is
according to the truth of the Gospel, as also to establish and settle it
amongst others, is a fruit that the Garden of Nature affords not, but must be
transplanted from Heaven, and grafted in us by the Spirit of our God, from whom
every good gift does proceed and flow. Iam. 1. 17.
Therefore it is not to be p^sed elsewhere, than in the high and heavenly
Court of Requests, by Petition to him, who has assured us, That what soever we
ask according to his will, we shall have it granted. 1 Ioh. 5 14. 15.
And therefore as your Honors are helped by the holy and daily prayers of the
faithful, for the blessing of the Lord upon your persons, proceedings,
counsels, and pious designs and endeavors; so let your Honors continue to
petition the Throne of Grace, for his gracious and divine assistance, still
following with one heart and soul, those things which concern peace; and
whereby the holy Union of truth may be confirmed and founded amongst us, and
abiding amongst your selves in Unity, Peace, and Love; And then the God of
Love, and Peace, shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13. 11
and the Peace of God shall preserve you. Phil 4 7 9.


Now that God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant make
you perfect in every good work, to do his will; Heb. 13. 20, etc.
and keep you all one in bim, and for his truth here on earth; and in his due
time, bring you to Heaven Ioh. 17. 21, 23, 24.
where Christ your Lord is, that you may behold the glory which the Father bath
given him, and your selves be made partakers thereof. Amen.

FINIS.

