A TRIP TO NEW ENGLAND. WITH A CHARACTER OF THE Country and People, BOTH
English and Indians.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

A TRIP TO New England, etc.
BISHOPS, Bailiffs, and Bastards, were the three Terrible Persecutions which
chiefly drove our unhappy Brethren to seek their Fortunes in our Foreign
Colonies. One of these Bug-bears, I confess, frighted me from the Blessings of
my own dear Native Country; and forced me to the Fatigue of a long Voyage, to
escape a Scouring.

But whether Zeal, Debt, or the sweet Sin of Procreation, begot in my
Conscience those Fears, which hurried me a great many Leages beyond my Senses,
I am as unwilling to declare to the World, as a Romish Damsel that has lost her
Maidenhead, is to confess her Frailty to the Priest.

For many Years my Mind sat as Easy in my Breast, as an Alderman in an
Elbow-Chair, till the Devil envying my Felicity, flung so many Crosses and
Losses in my way, that every Step I took in my Occupation, I was timorous of
Tumbling.

I thought it then high time to seek for Balm, but finding none in Gilead, I
was moved by the Spirit of Necessity, to forsake Ungodly London, for Religious
Boston in New England; hoping to Purify my self by the way in an Ocean of
Brine, That when I got thither, I might find my Condition, as well as my
Conscience, in a tolerable Pickle, fitted for the Conversation of the Saints
in so Holy a Land.

I packed up my Auls in order for my Voyage; and Embarked the Ship the Prudent
Sarah, at Gravesend, who was weighing Anchor, with a fair Wind for the Downs,
That I had no leisure to step back to London to satisfy my Creditors; but,
like a Girl that is Ravished, was forced, with a very good will, to do that
which I intended.

To entertain this Merry Town, with an exact Iournal in Tarpaulin Arabic, is
like reading the Revelations to an established Atheist, or repeating a Welsh
Commedy to a Highlander. I shall therefore omit all such accustomary Fustian,
and divert you with some Thoughts of my own in the time of my Passage.

When I first came on Board, I fancied a Ship to be like a Country Village with
two or three May-poles in it; and the Fellows running about Deck in Red and
White-wastcoats, to be the Young Men of the Town engaged in a match at
Football.

Sometimes I considered them as a Pack of Hounds, and the Pilot to be the
Hunts-man: For, like Dogs upon a Scent, they keep a heavy Yelping at their
Business; but in every interval, were as silent as a Beagle at a Loss.

At other times, I have fancied a Ship to be a floating Hive, instead of Bees,
possessed by Drones, who make more T -- d than Honey.

A Vessel, whilst the Pilot is on Board, is an Emblem of Feeble Monarchy; where
the King has a Statesman in his Dominions Greater than himself, That the
Prince only bears the Title, but the other the Command.

A Man on Board cannot but be thoughtful on two Destinies, viz. Hanging and
Drowning: For withinside you have Rope, and without Water enough to effect
either. So that it often put me in mind of the old Proverb, The Sea and the
Gallows refuses none.

A Commander when at Sea, is a Marine Deity; his Will is his Law, and the Power
of Punishing soly in his own hands. He has a Wooden World at his Mercy, wherein
there is no way to be Happy, but by due Obedience: For he that knows his
Masters Will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes.

When out at Sea, I thought the World was Drowned, because no Land was to be
seen. The Captain and his Mess, I compared to Noah and his Family; but as for
the rest, they were the Beasts of the Ark.

We were very good Christians when we'd nothing else to do: All Hands in a
Calm to Pray or Pick Okum; but to work in a Storm, serve God serve Devil.

Brandy and Tobacco are the Soul of a Seaman; he that wants either, is but half
himself; and he that has neither, wants every thing that is needful; and must,
in his own defense, turn Thief or Beggar.

Mariners, like Parsons, are much given to look Upwards; but never consult
Heaven beyond the Pole, or the Pointers. At Sea they are a kind of Persians,
trusting to the Sun, Moon and Stars for Bodily Salvation.

They seldom take notice but of one Miracle since Adam, and that is of Noah's
guiding the Ark to a safe Harbor, without the help of a Sail, or the use of a
Rudder: Which (forgetting Providence) they urge to be Impossible.

A foul Wind makes scanty Messes; for it is a cheerful saying among Seamen,
Large Wind, Large Allowance: Starving and Drowning being to them equally
terrible.

Facetious Ignorance is an excellent Tallent to win the Captains Favor. Reason
at Sea, without the Rules of Navigation, is as dangerous to be talked as
Treason: For nothing galls the Ambition of a Commander more, Than to hear any
Body on Board seem Wiser than himself.

They generally bestow their Favors, as Fortune does her Benefits, as if both
their Heads were in a Bag; and for want of Sense or Sight, choose Dunces for
their Minions, and Fools for their Companions: Dreading Ingenuity, and
slighting Merit. Being possitive in Errors, hateful to Instruction, proud of
their Ignorance, and Wise in their own conceits.

A Violent Storm at Sea, to me, seemed the Minute resemblance of a general
Conflagration: When Jarring Elements for Power contended; and angry Heavens
belched out flakes of its consuming Fire on the reflecting Ocean; followed with
dreadful Claps of rending Thunder, rattling from Cloud to Cloud, through Rains
and Hurricanes, till the Conquering Wind had blown his Sable Enemies beneath
our Horizon, and cleared the Skies of his affrightening Rivals.

A Calm to me was an Effeminate acquiescence of the Elements; and unpleasant to
a manly disposition: The World looked as if Nature was a Sleep; and, careless
of her charge, had suffered (through Neglect) the whole Universe to be Idle* I
could compare our Ship to nothing in so smooth a Sea, but to an Egg upon a
Looking-glass.

Idleness at Sea is the worst of Slavery; and he that has nothing to do, is
Buried Alive in a Cabin instead of a Coffin.

With these sort of Cogitations I past away my Time, being tossed about by the
Waves like a Dog in a Blanket, till we got Sight of the Promised Land, and
Arrived at our desired Port, Boston. Of which I shall first proceed to give you
an Account, free from Prejudice or Partiality.

Of Boston, and the Inhabitants.
On the South-west side of Massachusets-Bay, is Boston; whose Name is taken
from a Town in Lincolnshire: And is the Metropolis of all New England. The
Houses in some parts join as in London. The Buildings, like their Women, being
Neat and Handsome. And their Streets, like the Hearts of the Male Inhabitants,
are Paved with Pebble.

In the Chief, or high Street, there are stately Edifices, some of which have
cost the owners two or three Thousand Pounds the raising; which, I think,
plainly proves Two old Adages true, viz. That a Fool and his Money is soon
parted; and, set a Beggar on Horseback he will Ride to the Devil, for the
Fathers of these Men were Tinkers and Peddlers.

To the Glory of Religion, and the Credit of the Town, there are four Churches,
Built with Clap-boards and Shingles, after the Fashion of our Meeting Houses;
which are supplied by four Ministers, to whom some, very justly, have applied
these Epithites, one a Scholar, the Second a Gentleman, the Third a Dunce, and
the Fourth a Clown.

Their Churches are Independent, every Congregation, or Assembly, in
Eclesiastical Affairs, being distinctly Governed by their own Elders and
Deacons, who in their Turns set the Psalms; and the former are as busy on
Sundays, to excite the People to a Liberal Contribution, as our Churchwardens
at Easter and Christimas, are with their Dishes, to make a Collection for the
Poor.

Every Stranger is unavoidably forced to take this Notice, That in Boston,
there are more Religious Zealots than Honest-men, more Parsons than Churches,
and more Churches than Parishes: For the Town, unlike the People, is subject to
no Division.

The Inhabitants seem very Religious, showing many outward and visible Signs of
an inward and Spiritual Grace: But though they wear in their Faces the Innocence
of Doves, you will find them in their Dealings, as Subtle as Serpents.
Interest is their Faith, Money their God, and Large Possessions the only Heaven
they covet.

Election, Commencement, and Training-days, are their only Holy Days; they keep
no Saints-Days, nor will they allow the Apostles to be Saints, yet they assume
that Sacred Dignity to themselves; and say, in the Title Page of their
Psalm-Book, Printed for the Edification of the Saints in Old and New England.

They have been very severe against Adultery, which they Punished with Death;
yet, notwithstanding the Harshness of their Law, the Women are of such noble
Souls, and undaunted Resolutions, that they will run the hazard of being
Hanged, rather than not be revenged on Matrimony, or forbear to discover the
Corruption of their own Natures.

If you Kiss a Woman in Public, though offered as a Courteous Salutation, if any
Information is given to the Select Members, both shall be Whipped or Fined. It Is
an excellent Law to make Lovers in Private make much of their time, since open
Lip-Lechery is so dearly purchased. But the good humor'd Lasses, to make you
amends, will Kiss the kinder in a Corner.

Public Kissing, and single Fornication are both of a Price; for which Reason
the Women wisely consider* the latter may be done with more safty than the
former; and if they chance to be Detected, and are forced to pay the Fine, they
are sure beforehand of something for their Money.

A Captain of a Ship who had been a long Voyage, happened to meet his Wife, and
kissed her in the Street; for which he was fined Ten Shillings, and forced to pay
the Money. What a Happiness, thought I, do we enjoy in Old-England, that can
not only Kiss our own Wives, but other Men's too without the danger of such a
penalty.

Another Inhabitant of the Town was fined Ten Shillings for Kissing his own
wife in his Garden; and obstinatly refusing to pay the Money, endured Twenty
Lashes at the Gun: Who, in Revenge of his Punishment, Swore he would never Kiss
her again, either in Public or Private. And at this rate, one of the
delightfulest Customs in the World, will in time be quit thrown out of Fashion,
to the Old Folks satisfaction, but to the Young ones Lamentation, who love it
as well in New England, as we do in the Old.

A Man and Woman, were sentenced to be Whipped for the like offense* he being
ordered Thirty Lashes, and she Twenty; but he having extorted the Kiss from
her, was so Generous to Solicit the Select, that he might have the Fifty, and
the Woman to be excused; which was consented to accordingly.

Every Tenth Man is chose as one of the Select, who have Power, together, to
Regulate and Punish all disorders that happen in their several Neighbour-hoods.
The Penalty for Drunkenness, is whiping or a Crown; Cursing or Swearing, the
same Fine, or to be bored through the Tongue with a hot Iron: But get your Select
Member into your Company and Treat him, and you may do either without offense;
and be as safe as a Parishoner here in a Tavern in the Churchwardens Company
in Sermon-time.

A couple of Deacons Marching along the Street, espied a Woman in a corner
relieving Nature from the uneasiness of a Burden she could keep no longer, one
of them cried out to the other, pointing to the Stooping object, Brother, Brother,
what a Shameful thing, what a Beastly thing is this? I Vow, Brother, this is a
thing that ought to be Peeped into. The other being a more sensible Man,
Prithee Brother (said he) do thou Peep into it then, for I care not to run such
a hazard of my Eyesight. Besides (said he) the thing's to Deep for our
inspection; and therefore we shall only be laughed at for meddling with the
matter.

They are very busy in detecting one another failings; and he is accounted,
by their Church Governers, a Meritorious Christian, that betrays his Neighbor
to a Whipping-Post.

A good Cudgel applied in the Dark, is an excellent Medicine for a Malignant
Spirit. I knew it once Experienced at Boston, with very good success, upon an
Old rigged Precisian, one of their Select, who used to be more then ordinary
vigilant in discovering every little Irregularity in the Neighborhood; I
happening one Night to be pretty Merry with a Friend, opposite to the Zealots
dwelling, who got out of his Bed in his Wast-coat and Drawers, to listen at our
Window. My Friend having often been served so, had left unbolted his Cellar
Trap-door, as a Pitfall for Mr. Busie-Body, who stepping upon it, sunk down
with an Outcry like a distressed Mariner in a sinking Pinnace. My Friend having
planted a Cudgel ready, run down Stairs, crying Thieves, and belabour'd Old
Troublesome very sevearly before he would know him. He crying out I am your
Neighbor. You Lie, you Lie, you Rogue, says my Friend, my Neighbors are
Honest Men, you are some Thief come to Rob my House. By this time I went down
with a Candle, my Friend seeming wonderfully surpised to see 'twas his
Neighbor, and one of the Select too, put on a Counterfeit Countenance, and
heartily begged his Pardon. Away troop'd the Old Fox, Grumbling and Shruging up
his Shoulders; and became afterward the most Moderate Man in Authority in the
whole Town of Boston.

A little Pains sometimes do good
To such Cross Knotty Sticks of Wood.
Correction is the best Recept,
To set a Crooked Temper Straight.
If such Old Stubborn Boughs can Bend,
And from a just Chastisment mend,
Fond Parents pray asign a Reason,
Why Youth should want it in due Season?
The Women here, are not at all inferior in Beauty to the Ladies of London,
having rather the Advantage of a better Complexion; but as for the Men, they
are generally Meagre; and have got the Hypocritical knack, like our English
Jews, of screwing their Faces, into such Puritanical postures that you would
think they were always Praying to them selves, or running melancholy Mad about
some Mystery in the Revelations: So that it is rare to see a handsome Man in the
Country, for they have all one Cast, but of what Tribe I know not.

A Woman that has lost her Reputation, has lost her Portion, her Virginity is
all her Treasure: And yet the Merry Lasses esteem it but a Trifle, for they had
rather, by far, loose that then their Teeming-time.

The Gravity and Piety of their looks, are of great Service to these American
Christians* It makes strangers that come amongst them, give Credit to their
Words. And it is a Proverb with those that know them, Whosoever believes a
New England Saint, shall be sure to be Cheated: And he that knows how to deal
with their Traders, may Deal with the Devil and fear no Craft.

I was mightily pleased one Morning with a Contention between two Boys at a
Pump in Boston, about who should draw their Water first. One Jostled the other
from the Handle, and he would fill his Bucket first, because his Master said
Prayers and sung Psalms twice a Day in his Family, and the others Master did
not. To which the Witty Knave made this reply, Our House stands backward in a
Court: if my Master had a Room next the Street, as your Master has* he would Pray
twice to your Masters once, that he would, and therefore I Will fill any Pail
first, Marry will I; and did accordingly.

Some Years Ago, when the Factors at Boston were Credited with large Stocks by
our English Merchants, and being backward in their Returns, and more in their
Books then they were willing to satisfy, contrived this Stratagem to out-wit
their Correspondents. As it is said, They set Fire to their Warehouses, after
the disposal of their Goods, and Burnt them down to the Ground, pretending in
their Letters, they were all undone, their Cargos and Books all destroyed; and
so at once Balanced their Accounts, with England.

One of their Factors, who had three or four Thousand Pounds worth of an
English Merchants Goods in his Hands, sends him an Account of this Lamentable
Mischance, to the purpose he was quite Ruined, and had lost all but a small
Cheese of four Pound Weight, which he sent him for a present. The Merchant
having had some Intelligence of the Roguery of his Factor, invites several
Eminent Merchants (that dealt to New England) to Dinner with him, who came
accordingly, he having prepared an Extraordinary Feast to entertain them. They
mightily condol'd his great Loss, (he making slight of it) and blamed him for
the Extravagancy of his Treat, after he had sustained so considerable a
Misfortune. Ah! Gentlemen, says he, this is nothing to what I have provided
you: I have one Dish still to come up, which cost me between three and four
Thousand Pounds; and, notwithstanding its costliness, I think it not Good
enough for such worthy Company. The Gentlemen looked one upon another, and
thought he was Frenzical. In the interim, up came his New England Present,
under a cover. That Is the Dish, says the Master of the Feast, that stood me in
so many Thousands. It Is but a small Morsel, considering the Price. The Company
all wondering of what delicates the Cook must have composed this Extravagant
Kickshaw, lifted up the Cover, and finding nothing but a Cheese, laughed as
heartily at their Disapointment, as the Mob in the Fable at the Mountain-mouse.
Then he continued their Mirth by unfolding the Riddle: And Swore, if ever he
trusted a New England Saint again for three Pence, the Devil should have a
Title to him and his Heirs for half the Money.

The Ground upon which Boston (the Metropolis of New England) stands, was
purchased from the Natives, by the first English Proprietors, for a Bushel of
Wampum-peag and a Bottle of Rum, being of an inconsiderable Value. Therefore
the Converted Indians, (who have the use of the Scriptures) cannot blame Esau
for selling his Birthright for a mess of Porrage.

The Latitude of Boston is accounted 42 degrees. 30 Min. North. Its Longitude 315
degrees. And is very commodiously Seated upon a Bay, large enough for the Anchorage
of 500 Sail of Ships.

Of the Country in General.
New England is computed to begin at 40, and end at 46 North Latitude; Running
from De-la-Ware-Bay to New Foundland. The Country is for the most part
Wilderness, being generaly Rocky, Woody and Mountainous, very rarely Beautified
with Valleys, but those Large and Rich, wherein are Lakes thirty or forty Miles
in compass, from whence their great Rivers have their beginnings, and are
chiefly Succored.

There are many Plantations by the Seaside, Situate for the advantage of the
East and South Winds, which coming from Sea produces, warm Weather. The
Nor-west blowing over Land, causes extremity of Cold; and very often strikes
both Indian and English Inhabitants with that terrible Distemper, called, the
Plague in the Back.

The Country, by its Climate, is always troubled with an Ague and Fever; As
soon as ever the Cold fit's over, it is attended with a Hot: And the Natives
themselves, whose Bodies are Habituated to the sudden changes, from one Extreme
to another, cannot but confess, They Freez in Winter and Fry in Summer.

A Ridg of White Mountains run almost through the Country, whereon lies a
remembrance of the past Winter, in the warmest of their weather, An Indian at
the sight of the Snow, lodged upon the Shoulders of these Hills, will Quake at
Midsummer: For they love Cold like a Cricket. At the Top there is a large
Plain, ten or twelve Leages over, yielding nothing but Moss, where a Man may
walk with his Mistress, in the height of his Juvenality, and not entertain one
Thought of attempting her Chastity, it being fatally Cold, and above the
Clouds; and would have been a rare place, for the presumptious Babilonians to
have Built their Tower on.

Plymouth Plantation was the first English Colony that settled in New England,
in the Year 1618. Their Habitations, at their going on Shore, being empty
Hogs-heads, which they whelmed over their Heads to defend themselves from the
cold Damps and falling Mischiefs of the Night. Each House having but one
Window, and that is the Bung-hole, requiring a Cooper instead of a Carpenter to
keep their Houses in repair. Their Provision (till better acquainted with the
Country) being only Pumkin, which they Cooked as many several ways, as you may
Dress Venison: And is continued to this Day as a great dish amongst the
English. Pumpkin Porrage being as much in esteem with New England Saints, as
Ielly Broth with Old-England Sinners.

Ten Years expired, before any other Colonies were Planted; since which time
the Possessions of the English are so greatly improved, That in all their
Colonies, they have above a Hundred and Twenty Towns, And is at this Time one
of the most Flourishing Plantations belonging to the English Empire.

There is a large Mountain, of a Stupendous height, in an Uninhabitable part
of the Country, which is called the Shining Mountain, from an amaizing Light
appearing on the Top, visible at many Leages distance, but only in the Night.

The English have been very curious in examining the Reason of it; and have, in
Bodies, with great Pains and Danger, attempted a rational Discovery of this
Prodigy to no purpose: For they could not observe any thing upon it to occasion
this unusual brightness. It is very terrible to the Indians, who are of a blind
Opinion that it contains great Riches, and the Devil lives there; and do
assert, That when any of them ascend this place, they are met by something in
the figure of an Old Indian, that commands them to return, or if they proceed
further they shall Die, which several have found true, by presuming to climb
higher, heedless of the caution.

Of the Native English in General.
The Women (like the Men) are excessive Smokers; and have contracted so many
ill habits from the Indians, that it is difficult to find a Woman cleanly enough
for a Cook to a Squemish Lady, or a Man neat enough for a Vallet to Sir Courtly
Nice. I am sure a Covent Garden Beau, or a Bell-fa would appear to them much
stranger Monsters, then ever yet were seen in America.

They Smoke in Bed, Smoke as they Nead their Bread, Smoke whilst they are Cooking
their Victuals, Smoke at Prayers, Work, and Exonoration, that their Mouths
stink as bad as the Bowl of a Sailers Pipe, which he has funk'd in, without
Burning, a whole Voyage to the Indias.

Eating, Drinking, Smoking and Sleeping, takes up four parts in five of their
Time; and you may divide the remainder into Religious Exercise, Day Labor,
and Evacuation. Four Meals a Day, and a good Knap after Dinner, being the
Custom of the Country.

Rum, alias Kill Devil, is as much adored by the American English, as a dram of
Brandy is by an old Billingsgate. It Is held as the Comforter of their Souls, the
Preserver of their Bodies, the Remover of their Cares, and Promoter of their
Mirth; and is a Sovereign Remedy against the Grumbling of the Guts, a
Kibe-heel, or a Wounded Conscience, which are three Epidemical Distempers that
afflict the Country.

Their Industry, as well as their Honesty, deserves equal Observation; for it
is practicable amongst them, to go two miles to catch a Horse, and run three
Hours after him, to Ride Half a Mile to Work, or a Quarter of a Mile to an
Alehouse.

One Husbandman in England, will do more Labor in a Day, then a New England
Planter will be at the pains to do in a Week: For to every Hour he spends in
his Grounds, he will be two at an Ordinary.

They have wonderful Appetites, and will Eat like Plough-men; tho very Lazy,
and Plough like Gentlemen: It being no rarity there, to see a Man Eat till he
Sweats, and Work till he Freezes.

The Women are very Fruitful, which shows the Men are Industrious in Bed, though
Idle up. Children and Servants are there very Plenty; but Honest-men and
Virgins as scarce as in other places.

Provisions being Plenty, their Marriage-Feasts are very Sumptious. They are
sure not to want Company to Celebrate their Nuptials; for its Customary in
every Town, for all the Inhabitants to Dine at a Wedding without Invitation:
For they value their Pleasure at such a rate, and bear such an affection to
Idleness, that they would run the hazard of Death or Ruin, rather then let slip
so Merry a Holy Day.

The Women, like Early Fruits, are soon Ripe and soon Rotten. A Girl there at
Thirteen, thinks herself as well Quallified for a Husband, as a forward Miss at
a Boarding-School, does here at Fifteen for a Gallant.

He that Marrys a New England Lass at Sixteen, if she prove a Snappish
Gentlewoman, her Husband need not fear she will bite his Nose off; for its ten
to one but she has shed her Teeth, and has done Eating of Crust, before she
arrives to that Maturity.

It is usual for the Men to be Gray at Thirty; and look as Shrivel'd in the
Face, as an old Parchment Indenture pasted upon a Barbers Block. And are such
lovers of Idleness, That they are desirous of being thought Old, to have a
better pretense to be Lazy.

The Women have done bearing of Children by that time they are Four and Twenty:
And she that lives un-Married till she is Twenty Five, may let all the Young
Sports-men in the Town give her Maidenhead chase without the Danger of a
Timpany.

Notwithstanding their Sanctity, they are very Profane in their common
Dialect. They can neither drive a Bargain, nor make a Jest, without a Text of
Scripture at the end on it.

An English Inhabitant having sold a Bottle of Rum to an Indian (contrary to
the Laws of the Country) was detected in it; and ordered to be Lashed. The
Fellow bribed the Whipster to use him tenderly; but the Flog-master resolving
(being a Conscientious Man) to do his Duty Honestly, rather punished the
Offender with the greater severity, who casting a sorrowful look over his
Shoulder, Cried out, the Scripture says, Blessed is the Merciful Man. The
Scourgineer replying, and it also says, Cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord Negligently: And for fear of coming under the Anathema, laid him on like
an unmerciful Dog, till he had given him a thorough Fellow-feeling of his Cat
of Nine-tailes.

Their Lecture-Days are called by some amongst them, Whore Fair, from the
Levity and Wanton Frollicks of the Young People, who when their Devotion's
over, have recourse to the Ordinaries, where they plentifully wash away the
remembrance of their Old Sins, and drink down the fear of a Fine, or the dread
of a Whipping-post. Then Vptails-all and the Devils as busy under the
Petticoat, as a Iuggler at a Fair, or a Whore at a Carnival.

Husking of Indian-Corn, is as good sport for the Amorous Wag-tailes in
New England, as Maying amongst us is for our forward Youths and Wenches. For
it is observed, there are more Bastards got in that Season, than in all the Year
beside; which Occasions some of the looser Saints to call it Rutting Time.

Many of the Leading Puritans may (without Injustice) be thus Characteris'd.
They are Saints without Religion, Traders without Honesty, Christians without
Charity, Magistrates without Mercy, Subjects without Loyalty, Neighbors
without Amity, Faithless Friends, Implacable Enemies, and Rich Men without Money.

They all pretend to be driven over by Persecution, which their Teachers Roar
out against in their Assemblies, with as much bitterness, as a double refined
Protestant can belch forth against the Whore of Babylon: Yet have they used the
Quakers with such severity, by Whipping, Hanging, and other Punishments,
forcing them to put to Sea in Vessels without Provision, they flying with
Gladness to the Merciless Ocean, as their only Refuge under Heaven, left to
escape the Savage Fury of their Unchristian Enemies, till drove by Providence
upon Rhoad-Island (so called from their accidental discovery of it in their
Stroling Adventure) which they found full of Fruits and Flowers, a Fertile
Soil, and extremely Pleasant, being the Garden of America; where they happily
Planted themselves, making great improvements: There Live and Flourish, as the
Righteous, like a Bay Tree under the Noses of their Enemies.

The Clergy, though they Live upon the Bounty of their Hearers, are as
rediculously Proud, as their Communicants are shamefully Ignorant. For though
they will not suffer their Unmannerly Flock to worship their Creator with that
Reverence and Humility as they ought to do, but tell them it is Popery to
uncover their Heads in the House and Presence of the Deity; yet they Oblige
every Member to pay an humble respect to the Parsons Box, when they make their
offerings every Sunday, and fling their Mites into their Teacher^s Treasury. So
that the Haughty Prelate exacts more Homage, as due to his own Transcendency,
than he will allow to be paid to Heaven or its place of Worship.

If you are not a Member in full Communion with one of their Assemblies, your
Progeny is denied Baptism, for which reason, there are Hundreds amongst them,
at Man's Estate, that were never Christened.

All Handicrafts-Men may live here very well, except a Pick-pocket; of all
Artificers he would find the least Encouragement; for the scarcity of Money
would baulk his Tallent.

An Eminent Planter came to me for an Ounce of Venice-treacle, which I would
have sold him for a Shilling; he protested he had lived there Fifty Years, and
never see in the whole Term, Ten Pounds in Silver-Money of his own; and yet was
Rated at a Thousand Pounds, and thought the Assessors used him kindly* But gave
me for my Medicine a Bushel of Indian-Corn, vallued at half a Crown, and Vowed
if a Shilling would save his Family from destruction, he knew not how to raise
it.

They have a Charter for a Fair at Salem, but it Begins, like Ingerstone
Market, half an Hour after Eleven a Clock, and Ends half an Hour before Twelve:
For I never see any thing in it but by great Accident, and those were Pumkins,
which were the chief Fruit that supported the English at their first settling
in these parts. But now they enjoy plenty of good Provisions, Fish, Flesh and
Fowl, and are become as great Epicures, as ever Dined at Pontack's Ordinary.

Lobsters and Cod-fish are held in such disdain, by reason of their Plenty,
it is as Scandalous for a poor Man in Boston to carry one through the streets,
as it is for an Alderman in the City of London, to be seen walking with a
Groatsworth of Fresh-Herrings, from Billings-gate to his own House.

There were formerly amongst them (as they themselves Report) abundance of
Witches, and indeed I know not, but there may be as many now, for the Men look
still as if they were Hag-ridden; and every Stranger; that comes into the
Country, shall find they will Deal by him to this Day, as if the Devil were in
'em.

Witchcraft they Punished with Death, till they had Hanged the best People in
the Country, and Convicted the Culprit upon a single Evidence: So that any
prejudiced person, who bore Malice against a Neighbor, had an easy method of
removing their Adversary. But since, upon better consideration, they have
Mitigated the severity of that unreasonable Law, there has not been one accused
of Witchcraft, in the whole Country.

Many are the Bugbear storys reported of these supposed Negromancers, but few
Believed, though I presume none True, yet all Collected and already Printed, I
shall therefore omit the relating of any.

They have one very wholesome Law, which would do mighty well to be in force in
Old-England; which is a Peculiar method they have of Punishing Scolds. If any
Turbulent Woman be Troubled with an unruly Member, and uses it to the
Defamation of any Body, or disquiet of her Neighbors, upon Complaint, she is
ordered to be Gagged and set at her own Door as many Hours as the Magistrates
shall think fit, there to be gaiz'd at by all Passengers till the time's
expired. Which, to me* seems the most Equitable Law imaginable to Punish more
particularly that Member which committed the Offense.

Whipping is a Punishment so Practicable in this Country, upon every slight
Offense, that at a Town upon the Sound, called New Haven, the People do
confess, that all the Inhabitants of that Place, above the Age of Fourteen, had
been Whipped for some Misdemeanour or other (except two) the Minister and the
Justice.

Of the Beasts.
They have most sort of Four-footed Beasts that we have here, only something
different in either Sise or Color, but of the same Species. I shall only
mention those which are Natives of that Country, and to us uncommon; for to
Treat of Creatures daily to be seen, or heard of in our own Climate, will
afford the Reader but little Satisfaction.

First of the Moos-Deer.
Of all the Creatures that inhabit these parts of America, the Moos-deer makes
the most Noble figure: He is shaped like an English Deer, only round Footed;
but of a stately Stature, seldom so low as the biggest of our Oxen. His Head
fortified with Horns proportionable, whose Palms are very broad, full of
indented branches, and are commonly two Fathom distance from Tip to Tip. His
Flesh is not dry, like Venison, but moist and Lushious; extremely palatable,
and very wholesome. The flesh of their Fawns, is also delicious Food; highly
commended by all such who are more than ordinary Nice in obliging their
Voluptuous Appetites. There is much said by the Phisicians of that Country
concerning the Excellent Virtues of the Horn of this Creature: Being looked
upon as an incomparable Restorative against all inward weaknesses; and in all
Cases where Harts-honn is prescribed, the Moos-horn they look upon to be a far
better Medicine; half the Quantity being more powerful in effect.

Of the Bear.
The Bears that Inhabit this part of America, are generally of a blackish
Color during the Winter season, which is much colder than in England. They
defend themselves from the hardship of the weather, by retiring into Caves,
where they continue for about four Months; in which time their Snows are pretty
well dissolved, and the severity of their Frost over. They are commonly very
Fat in the fall of the Leaf, by feeding upon Acorns, at which time the Indians
destroy a great many; looking upon 'em then to be incomparable Venison: But the
Head, I believe, is but a sorry dish, because they hold the Brains to be
Venomous. They are very fierce in Rutting-time; and then walk the Country
round, thirty or forty in a Company, making a hedious roaring, which may be
heard a Mile or two before they come near enough to endanger a Traveller. They
will never injure a Man at any other time of the Year, except you attempt to
hurt them first; But if you Shoot at one, and miss him, he will certainly
destroy you; which makes the Indians sure of their Mark before ever they
discharge their Piece. Their Skins they sell to the English, but the Flesh they
Cook sundry ways, Salting and Drying some, of which they make extraordinary
Bacon, no Hogs-flesh in the world being more pleasant to the Eye, grateful to
the Taste, or agreeable to the Appetite.

Of the Raccoon.
It is a Creature about the bigness of a Cat, but of a different Species. Its
Furr is of a dark color, and in good esteem, though something course. He is of
an Owlish disposition; and chooses for his Mansion House a Hollow-Tree. They
are mere Gluttons at Indian-Corn; and feed themselves in Autumn very fat. Their
flesh is dark, like Venison; and accounted good Food Roasted.

Of the Wild-Cat,
Which the Indians call the Ounce. It Is as tall as an English Bull-dog; and as
fierce. Their manner of Preying, is to climb a Tree, and drop from the Branches
upon the Back of Horse, Cow, Deer, or any Creature that is feeding under it;
clinging close with their Tallons, knawing a great hole between the Shoulders
of the Beast, who runs full speed till he drops down Dead, and becomes a prey
to his subtle Enemy. Their Flesh Roasted, is as good as Lamb, and as white.

Of the Porcupine.
This is a very peevish, also a dangerous Creature; being the height of an
ordinary Mungril, but in shape like an Hedgehog, armed all over with
mischievous Darts, as a Hemp-dressers Comb with Teeth; which he exercises with
as much Art as an old Soldier does his Pike, charging them according as you
Attack him, to the Right, Left, Front, or Rear, which they will Shoot at their
Enemies a considerable distance; and wherever they Stick in the Flesh, if you
pluck them not out presently, they will work through. The Indians use these
Quills to adorn their Birchen Dishes. The Flesh they do not Eat.

Of the Beaver.
This is an Amphibeous Creature, rather larger than an Otter, Hairy all over
but his Tail, which is Scaly like a Fish; and is of an admirable Instinct, as
is observed by their artificial Dam-heads, by which, in dry Seasons, they raise
the Water to their Houses, when the Pond, upon whose brinks they dwell, is sunk
from it is usual Edges. Their Nests or Burrow which they make, are three Stories
high, that in case excessive Rains should overflow their first and second
Floor, they may mount into their Garrets, there Sleep in a dry Skin till the
Floods abated. They have two pair of Testacles, one soft and Oily; and the
other pair hard or solid. The Women dry the latter, and grate them into Wine,
to further Generation, remove the causes of Barrenness, prevent Miscarriages,
and to strengthen Nature against, and also moderate the Pains of Delivery. They
Eat no part of this Creature but the Tail, which they flea and boil, accounting
it rare Victuals. It Is very Fat, and Eats like Marrow, being an excellent
Supper for a Bridegroom, or good Food for that unhappy Man who has Married a
Wife much Younger than himself: Of their Furr, mixed with Coney-wooll, they
make your Beaver-hats.

Of the Jackall.
These are very numerous in New England. They are the color of a Gray Rabbit;
something less than a Fox, having much the same Scent, but not so strong. This
is the Creature reported to hunt the Lions prey, which make some suspect there
are Lions, but there never was but one seen as we have any account of; and that
was shot by an Indian, with Bow and Arrow, Sixty Years ago, as he lay Dormant
upon the Body of an Oak, by a Hurricane blown up by the Roots. The Iackall is
sometimes Eaten by the Indians.

Wolves there are abundance, of two sorts, one like a Mungril, which kills
Goats, Sheep, etc. And the other shaped like a Greyhound, which preys upon
Deer. They are very shy and difficult to be Shot or Trap'd. Their manner of
distroying them, being by four Maycril-hooks, which they bind together, with
their Beards reversed, then hide them with a Ball of Tallow, and tie it to the
Carcass of any thing they have just killed, from which you have scared them,
and when he comes to make up his Meal, being a lover of Fat, he certainly
takes your Bait, and becomes your Prisoner.

Besides what I have above mentioned, they have a great deal of good
Provisions, as Beef, Mutton, Kid, Swines-Flesh, etc. Also great Plenty both of
Fish and Fowl; the Particulars being too large to Treat of in so Brief an
Account.

Of the Indians, and first of the Men.
They are generally of a comely Stature, grave Disposition, deliberate in their
Talk, and courteous in their Carriage, quick of Apprehension, very Ingenious,
Subtle, Proud and Lazy.

There is nothing they Value so much as Liberty and Ease. They will not become
Servil upon any Terms whatsoever, or abridge their Native Freedom, with either
Work or Confinement, to gain the Universe: For they neither covet Riches, or
dread Poverty: But all seem Content with their own Conditions, which are in a
manner Equal.

For these four Virtues they are very Eminent, viz. Loyal to their Kings,
Constant to their Wives, Indulgent to their Children, and Faithful to their
Trust.

For nothing will tempt them to offer Violence to their Sagamore, to abuse
their Squawes, use Soverity with their Papooses, or betray a Secret; rather
choosing to die then do either.

They call themselves Hunters; and are very dexterous at the use of either Gun
or Bow, by the exercise of which; they maintain themselves and Families.

They acknowledge a God, whom they Worship for his Benefits. They believe a
Devil, whom they Adore through Fear. And have a Blind Notion of Futurity, which
appears by their manner of Interring their Dead, with whom they bury his Bow,
Gun, with Provisions for his Journey into a better Country; but where or what it
is they know not.

Upon the breaking out of a War, or such extraordinary Occasions, as the old
Romans consulted their Oracles, so do the Indians their Pawaws, which are a
kind of Wizards: And at a General Pawawing, the Country a Hundred Miles round
assemble themselves in a Body; and when they are thus met, they kindle a large
Fire, round which the Pawaw walks, and beats himself upon his Breast, muttering
out a strange sort of intricate Jargon, till he has Elivated himself into so
great an Agony, that he falls down by the Fire in a Trance; during which time,
the Sagamores ask him what they have a mind to know: After which, he is
conveyed through the Fire, in the same posture that he lies, by a Power
invisible, in the sight of the Spectators; then awakes, and Answers the several
Questions asked by their Kings or Sachems.

The chiefest Vice amongst them is Drunkenness, which (to the Reputation of
Christianity) they learned of the English: And are so greedy of being Drunk,
when they have purchased any Rum, that if they have not enough to Fuddle their
whole Society, they draw Cuts who shall Drink, till it falls into the hands of
so few, they may be sure to have their Bellies full. When they get Drunk they
are very Mischievous one to another: But are never known to offer any Indignity
to their Kings, who are Hail Fellow well met with his Subjects.

Their Garments are Mantles, about the bigness of a Cradle-Rug, made of course
English Cloth, which they call a Coat. They also have a piece of the same
Cloth, about six Inches wide, between their Legs, tucked under a Deer's-Skin
Belt, to hide their Privities, by them called Breeches. Adorning themselves
with Beads of several Colors, of their own making. Their Heads, Breast, Legs
and Thighs being bare. Sometimes, for their Children, they Weave Coats of
Turkey Feathers.

Their Houses they call Wigwams; and are built with bended Poles, after the
fashion of our Arbours, covered with Bark of Trees, and lined with Mats they
make of Rushes, leaving a hole at top for a Smoke-vent, kindling their Fires in
the middle of their Wigwams. Their Lodging is upon Hurdles, raised from the
Ground with Wooden Stumps.

Of their Women.
Their Squaws when Young, are generally round Visage'd, well Feitur'd, Plump,
and Handsome; black-Eyed, with Alabaster Teeth, a Satin Skin, and of excellent
proportion; with tolerable Complections, which they injure much with Red-lead
and Bears-grease, being so silly to believe it gives an advantage to their
Beauty.

They are extremely Modest when Virgins; very Continent when Wives, Obedient to
their Husbands, and tender Mothers to their Children. From whom our English
Ladies might learn those Virtues, which would heighthen their Charms, and
Illusterate their Perfection beyound the Advantages of gaudy Dresses.

They are much in the Condition of our first Parents; having a little more than
a Fig-leaf to hide their Nakedness: Yet the modestty of their deportment, makes
it not look like Impudence but Necessity.

They carry their Children at their Backs, laced to a Board in the form of a
Boot-jack: which is said to be the reason their Children are never Rickety, or
shall you ever see a Bandy-leg'd or Crooked Indian.

Of their Food.
Their Diet is Fish, Fowl, Bear, Wild-cat, Raccoon, Deer, Oysters, Lobsters
roasted or dried in Smoke, Lampres, Moot-tongues dried, which they esteem a
dish for a Sagamore. With hard Eggs Pulverized, they thicken their Broth;
Indian-Corn and Kidney-Beans boiled, Earth-Nuts, Chest-Nuts, Lilly-Roots,
Pumpkins, Milions, and diverse sorts of Berries; Cooked after various manners.

Their Distempers are,
Quinsies, Pleurisies, Sciatica, Headache, Palsy, Dropsy, Worms, Cancer,
Pestilent Fever and Scurvy; For all which Diseases, the Indians are
Incomparable Physicians: Being well skilled in the Nature of Herbs and Plants
of that Country. But the English will not make use of them, because their
Ministers have infused this Notion into 'em, That what they do, is by the Power
of the Devil.

FINIS.

