The Chiefest DIVINE VIRTUES EPITOMIZED: OR, A compendious Treatise of the
three Theological Graces, Faith, Hope and Charity.

By Richard Ward, Preacher of the Gospel at Bushy in Hartfordshire.

Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, but the greatest of these
is Charity, 1 Cor. 13.13. Fides dicit, Aeterna bona reposita sunt; Spes dicit,
Mihi reposita sunt; Charitas dicit, Ego curro post ea. Bernard. LONDON, Printed
for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the
Inner-Temple-gate, 1655.

To the Worshipful, and my truly Loving Friends, and Parishoners, Dr. Walker,
John Gale Esquire Thomas Nichols Esquire Mr. Thomas Gee, Mr. William Ba^ly, Mr. Henry
Hickman, Mr. George Blackwell, Mr. Thomas Hobson, and his truly virtuous
Mother, Mrs. Barbara Hobson, Mr. Robert Blackwell, with the rest of my charge,
and Christian Congregation.
MUch Honored and Kind Gentlemen and friends, revolving many times with my
self the unanimous entrance I had among you, my peaceable continuance to this
hour with you, the experience of your love generally toward me, (when being
disturbed by an unworthy person, who endeavored to sequester me, not one
inhaibitant in the whole Parish assisting him, or giving his hand against me)
and your in these days) rare and singular freedom from division and
distraction in point of opinion, not so much as one in judgment declining the
good old way of sound and solid Doctrine; Pondering (I say) these things with
my self, I considered both How by way of thankfulness I might make them known
unto others; and also How I might testify to the world my desire to recompense
your love; and for this double end, I have presented this small Tractate unto
you, entreating you, and all those who shall peruse it, to consider seriously
these five things.

First, That the great aim and scope of a faithful Minister is, the salvation
of his people, Romans 10.1. Heb 13.17. whence they are said To save, 1 T^m. 4.16.

Secondly, That a cordial and real love ought to be between Minister and
People, 2 Cor. 1.14. Those being as Fathers, these as Children, Judges 18.19.
Gal. 4 19. Those being as Guardians, these as Orphans: th^se as Captains, these
as Soldiers: those as Shepherds, th se as their Flocks. The inhabitants of
Dalmatia in Sclavonia, as they were by the Romans often subdued, so they as
often revolted: and the last rebellion was raised at the instigation of one
Batto, a man very po^e^t with the People; who having ten years together
maintained the liberty of his Country, at last, broken and wearied by and with
the forces of Germanicus, and Tiberius, he submitted himself unto the two
Captains, who asking the reason of his revolt, was answered* Because the Romans
send no Shepherds to keep, but Wolve, to devour their flocks. Some sou^diers
once mutinying in their Captains tent, and offering to go forth into the open
field to fight it out; their Captain laid him down upon the thresh ld, with
these words* If you go forth, it shall be by treading on your Ge^er^l. Thus,
such is the love of a good Minister to h^s people, that he will expose his life
to hazard, and himself to death, for their good: and a religious Flock will not
stick to do the same for a faithful Pastor.

Thirdly, The Gospel has the more free passage where such reciprocal affection
is; for love makes all things light, and the pains undertaken for those whom we
love, is (though great) the better undergone: L^ve takes all things with the
right hand, and receives in good part what co^^s from, and is spoken in love.

Fourthly, The true love of a Minister to his People, is to their persons, not
to their sins, Exodus 32.33. Romans 9.3. 2 Cor. 6.11. and that both in regard,

I. Of his Duty, which is care of, for, and over them, Acts 20.28. to reconcile
fathers to their children, Mal. 4. and God to man. 2 Cor. 5.19. And,

II. Of Gods glory, which will be advanced by their peoples conversion and holy
conversation. And,

III. Of their pe^ples good; who being ^^^verted, reconciled unto God, and
devoted unto his service, are happy here, and shall be eternally blessed
hereafter.

Fifthly, Observe, that a Ministers love to his people is best known and shown
by these ways and means.

I. By preaching the mystery of the Gospel unto them, Romans 16.25.

II. By preaching rather profitable things then pleasant: for as he is an ill
Cook who rather dresseth such meat as will please the pallat then help the
stomach; and provides for hungry hearts rather Spice-cakes then wholesome food:
so he is no good Minister of Christ, who in his Preaching seeks rather to
tickle men's phansies, and please itching ears, then to build them up unto a
holy building.

III. By preaching according to the capacity of their Auditory; Solomon says,
concerning children, Prove. 22.6. Hanoch lanagnar gnal Pi, Instrue vel initiare
puerum ad os, Teach the child according to his capacity; even as we feed
children with such meat as they are able to digest seting down before them
(...) a plain form of Doctrine, Romans 2.20.

IV. By praying publicly and privately for them; as Moses did, Exodus 32. as
the Priests were commanded to do, Levit. and as the practice of the Apostles is
frequently in their Epistles. Hence Ministers are Types of Christ, 1 John 2.2,

V. By endeavoring that faith may be wrought in them; not only an Historical
says (as Ca^dinal Ascanius Parrot could pra^^ the Creed all over) but a true
and lively faith, testified to be such by its works.

VI. By desi^ing, and endeavoring, that Religion may be propagated, and the
truth of the Gospel preserved to posterity: this is done,

1. By planting the Gospel, by instruction, and Doctrine.

2. By persuading to the practice of the things ^aught and learnt.

3. By comm^tting to writing or public view, what is most necessary to be
known and d^n^. ^^is the principal sc^pe of our labor, that our people should
remember what we teach: and hereunto writing or printing avails much, Romans
15.15. 1 Cor. 4.17. 2 Pet. 1.15. Wherefore seeing I can no way better express
my love unto you, then by endeavoring to the utmost that your souls may be
saved in the day of the Lord; and nothing being more absolutely necessary unto
eternal life, then these three amiable, superexcellent and divine graces,
Pallas, Juno, and Venus, or, Faith, Hope, and Charity; I have taken off the
Veil, and drawn aside the Curtain, and exposed them to public view, that by a
serious animadversion of the Doctrine thereof, your judgments might be
informed, your affections enflamed, and your conversations so religiously
regulated, that the end of your days may bring you to the end of your hope,
the salvation of your immortal souls; which is the earnest desire, and shall be
the hearty prayer, of

Gentlemen, Your weak, and unworthy Pastor, R. Ward.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
I Know a little door suits best to a poor Cottage; and as the French say, Aun
petit mercier convient petit panier: A little Pack sorts best with a mean
Pedlar; and a short Epistle is most agreeable to a compendious Treatise; but
necessity does constrain me to be a little larger here, then the smalness of
this Manual will well brook. Revolving many times with my self, How absolutely
necessary knowledge was to eternal life; and that the sacred Oracles of God
were the fountain of this Knowledge, I gave my self principally to the study of
the Scripture, which is able to make a man wise unto salvation; wherein I
observed principally these five things: First, that some places of Scripture do
teach posit^ve Divinity, and confirm the grounds and foundation of Christian
Religion, both in regard of Faith, and manners. Secondly that in some places of
Scripture, some doubts and difficulties arise and occur which stand in need of
answering, for the clearing of the Text. Thirdly* that some places seem to
thwart, cross, and contradict others, which therefore are necessary to be
reconciled. Fourthly, that some places serve Heterodox men to ground some one
or other Objection upon, for the overthrow of the truth. Fifthly, that some
Texts of Scripture serve as Arguments, either to confirm some point in
question, or to confute some tenants and opinions of those who are Heterodox,
and corrupt in judgment. I will give an instance of all these from one Text,
and then apply it to my present purpose. Our Savior says, Luke 16.9. Make to
your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they
may receive you into everlasting habitations. Here,

F^rst, in the Text are laid down the necessity of Alms, and the true nature
and use of riches.

Secondly, from the Text it may be demanded 1. How do men make them friends of
riches? 2. What riches does Christ speak of? 3. Why are these riches called The
Mammon of unri^hteousness?

Thirdly, ^n Joh. 10.28. Christ only is said, to receive us into everlasting
habitations; and therefore this Text, which ascribes this to the poor, seems to
cross and contrad^ct that.

Fourthly, from this place, some Papists endeavor to prove Purgatory; some that
Almsdeeds are meritorious; some that the Saints are Patrons of heaven, and can
receive or let in whom they please.

Fifthly, this place serves as a sure and solid Argument, against the Popish
Limbus Patrum; But of the full explication of this Text, in regard of all these
particulars, God willing in its due place. I have made so large a progress in
all these, that they will be ready to come forth, by parts, as fast as the
Stationer shall vent them; but such is the ticklishness of our times, that he
dare not venture to begin with a Volumn; wherefore because I would not out of
my love to the public, prejudice any private particular person, I have sent
this small Harbenger before, to see whither or not the rest be like to find
any kind entertainment: and the four Moral Virtues are ready to come out the
next Term. The sum of what I intend ((...), the Lord saying Amen) is,

First, Courteous Reader, to give thee a Commonplace of every word of the
Scripture, which is of practical concernment or use; which words by search I
found to be 2224. which first, I Alphabettically disposed; and then for the
abbreviating of the work, I collected and conjoined all the Synonymaes, or
words of near affinity and signification together.

Secondly, I shall then endeavor to clear the dubious, difficult and
controverted places of the Scripture; and I hope, I may say without
affectation, concerning the whole Work intended.

Davus ^s? sinc venias and eris mox C^^^pus alter? Art thou weak in
understanding? come hither, Toll and lege, read and study this, and it will
help thy understanding, and teach thee how to direct thy steps aright.
Concerning this particular Treatise, Ex pede Herculem, ex u^gue Leonem; as a
man may judge of the Lion by his paw: as Pythagoras found out the measure of
Hercules body by his foot (Pliny) as the Husbandman judges of the whole sack
by one handful; so, this being a true Idea of the whole Work mentioned, both
for method, matter, and manner, by a serious view of this, the judicious and
intelligent Reader may easily conjecture what the rest will be.

If this be received, as given, with the right hand, and the rest be desired by
thee (Christian Reader) then I earnestly beg, that thou would afford me the
assistance of thy daily prayers unto God Almighty, for the furtherance of his
grace, in the carrying on of this great work: and then to spend my self, and be
spent, in the service of my Lord, for thy good, shall be the joy and rejoicing
of thy servant in the Lords work,

R. Ward.
From my Study in Bushy, Jan. 20. 1654.
CHAP. I. (...). Of Faith.
IN the handling of this Head of Faith, I will observe Aristotle's rule, Prius
dividendum, tum definiendum: I will first divide, and then define it.

Qu. 1. How many sorts, and kinds of Faith are there?

Answ. 1. It is usually by Divines answered, that there are four; Temporary,
Historical, Miraculous, and Justifying Faith.

First, there is a Temporary Faith. Luke 8.13. Acts 8.13. which is, a belief in
Christ, and a trust in the mercy of God for a season. Psalm. 78.^9. Matthew.
13.20, 21. Heb. 6.4. or, Temporary Faith, is to assent unto the heavenly
Doctrine, which is delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, yea to profess it,
to rejoice in the knowledge thereof, and to glory therein for a time, yet not
out of any true sense of Gods grace toward them, but for some other causes;
and is therefore without any true conversion or final perseverance in the
profession of that Doctrine.

Secondly, there is an Historical Faith, which is either,

I. In Devils, Jam. 2.19. or,

II. In men. Acts 8.12, 13. This faith is the knowledge and understanding of
the will and truth of God, so far for^h as it is revealed; either,

1. In the Law, which teaches us what we should do, and how we should live,
and behave our selves both toward God and man: or,

2. In the Gospel, which sets down, what we should believe of the
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and Mediation of Christ our
Savior; or,

The Historical Faith is to know, or think all those things to be true, which
are manifested from above, either by voice, vision, or by any other manner of
revelation; and are taught in the Books of the Prophets and Apostles; yea to be
thus persuaded of them, for the asseveration and testimony of God himself.

Thirdly there is a Miraculous Faith Acts 14.9. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. This Faith is a
gift of God, whereby many men, especially in the Primitive Church, when the
Gospel was first to be planted, were enabled to heal the sick, to raise the
dead, or to do some other like miraculous work, beyond the ordinary power of
nature, or the ability of any natural causes, Mat. 7.22. 2 These. 2.9. or, The
faith of Miracles is a special gift of working Miracles: or a certain
persuasion springing from a special revelation, and promise of God, whereby a
man firmly believes that some extraordinary and miraculous work, and contrary
to nature, shall come to pass, by Gods power, which he has foretold, or would
have to be done in the Name of God, and Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, there is a Justifying Faith, which is either,

I. Weak, Mat. 6.30.8.26.14.31. Romans 14.1. or,

II. Strong, Mat. 8.10.9.2.15.28. Acts 6.5.8. Romans 4.19, 20 Heb. 10.22. What
this Justifying Faith is, is showed in the next Question.

These four sorts of Faith differ thus; the Miraculous Faith, and the
Temporary, the wicked may have; the Historical the Devils have; and the
Justifying only the Elect and faithful have.

Answ. 2. I might answer, That Faith is only twofold: False and True.

I. There is a False Faith, which is threefold, Temporary, Miraculous and
Historical, of which in the former answer.

II. There is a True Faith, which is twofold, Imperfect and Perfect.

First, there is an Imperfect Faith, which is either,

I. In knowledge; when a man believing and holding the foundation of the Love
of Christ and Religion, is ignorant in the rudiments and particular grounds of
Religion. And

II. In certainty; when a man has some probable persuasion and comfortable
hope of his good condition, but yet dare not certainly conclude of the
certainty of his salvation.

Secondly, there is a Perfect Faith; and it is either,

I. Perfectly Perfect; viz. when knowledge and assurance being absolutely
complete and perfect, begets a hope without any doubting; or, an assurance
never to be shaken by any temptation, or tribulation at all; or.

II. Imperfectly Perfect, viz. when that confident assurance, which a man
sometimes has, is at other times shaken by affliction and temptation, although
never finally or totally destroyed, Job 13.14, ^5. Romans 8.38. 2 Timothy 4.8.

Note here, these three things.

1. The Perfectly perfect Faith was never in any save only in Christ.

2. The imperfectly perfect Faith has been, and is in many, and all true
Christians should labor for it.

3. The imperfect Faith may be in the Lords younglings, and babes, who are but
newly regenerated.

Qu. 2. What is Faith? or, true Justifying and saving Faith?

Answ. 1. For the answer hereof, I will lay down these several particulars.

First, Faith or believing follows illumination and the opening of the eyes; as
Numb. 24 16. Ioh. 3.19.9.39. Acts 9.

Secondly, Faith is a habit or quality, wrought by the holy Spirit, Romans 5.5.
Ephesians. 1.13. whereby we are enabled to comprehend Christ, Phil. 3.13. that is,
the Love of Christ, Ephesians. 3.^8. whence comes the act of confidence and
assurance, Ephesians. ^.12. and therefore to those who demand, unde? from whence
Faith is? we answer, from heaven. Joh. 3.27. Jam. 1.17.

Thirdly, Faith gives a new mind, and a new life, Gal. 2.20.5.^8, 25. that is,

I. It makes us acknowledge our duty and service, and that we ought to serve
God both in body, soul and spirit, 1 C^r. 6.20.

II. It makes us hate sin, acknowledge our sinfulness, and be ashamed of our
sins, and cohabitation and conjunction with sin and sinners; Psalm. 120.5 Rom
7.24.

III. It makes us seek the glory of God in and above all things; whence comes a
desire after good, and unto every good work.

IV. It makes us ashamed of our childish affections and delights, and teaches
us to contemn and despise the world, with the vanities thereof.

V. It makes us to ruminate of heavenly things, and to desire to be there,
Phil. 1.23.^3.20. It makes us set our affections upon those things which are in
heaven, and to meditate continually of those joys. Animus ubi amat, non ubi
animat. Aug.

Fourthly, Faith gives internal peace: Romans 5.1. that is, assures us of our
reconciliation with God. 2 Cor. 5.19. And,

Fifthly, spiritual and solid joy, Romans 8.37. 1 Pet. 1.8.

Answ. 2. The Apostle defines Faith thus, It is the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. whence the Father
described it, (as follows afterward) Fides quod non ^ides: Faith is that which
thou see not, or more fully, Faith is the acquiescing of the heart in God, as
in the author of life, and eternal salvation; that is, that by him we may be
freed from all evil, and made partakers of all good, Psalm. 37.5. Isa. 10.20.
Ier. 17.7. or,

Justifying Faith is a most firm and perpetual appropriation of the Love and
Mercy of God, through the merits of Jesus Christ, to every penitent heart and
faithful soul Or,

Faith is a sure and certain persuasion, whereby we assent unto every word of
God delivered unto us and whereby we are resolved, that the Promise of the free
grace of God for Christ's sake does belong unto us. Or,

Fait^ is a firm and certain knowledge of the good will of God toward us,
which is founded upon the truth of the free Promise of ^od in Christ, which
Promise is revealed to our mind, and sealed to our heart by the holy Spirit. Or,

Faith may be considered, either according to the derivation, or signification
of the word.

First, Grammatically, Fides a fio; dicitur fides quia fit: it is called Faith,
because it is made: and therefore Faith is twofold.

I. Active, Faciens veritatem, and is called Fidelity: Hinc fides facta.

II. P^ssive, credens veritati, and is called Persuasion; hinc fi^es habita.

Secondly, according to the Greek, (...) and (...) are taken either,

I. Actively* and thus God is said to be faithful, 1 Cor. 1.9. and his word to
be faithful, ^ Tim. 3.1.4.9. and his Ministers to be faithful, 1 Cor. 4 2.
because God works Faith in his children by the Word and Ministers thereof: Or,

II. Passively; and thus they of the Circumcision, and Timothie^ mother, and
diverse others believe in God, Acts 10.45.16.1. 2 Cor. 6.15. Now the question
here is concerning Passive, not Active Faith; and it may clearly be thus
defined. True Faith is a certain persuasion of the Love of God, given unto us
from the holy Ghost, by the word; whereby being changed and renewed into new
creatures, we have Christ dwelling in us, and leading us unto every good work.

1. Faith is a certain persuasion, Romans 8.38. Heb. 10.22.

2. It is given or wrought by the Holy Ghost. Romans 5.5. Ephesians. 1.18.

3. The holy-host works Faith in us by the means and ministry of the word, John
17.10. Romans 10.17

4 The Holy Ghost by the word having wrought Faith in us, we become renewed,
and changed into new creatures, John 1.12, 13. 2 Cor. 5.17.

5. We being renewed, and our hearts cleansed, Christ vouchsafes to dwell in
and with us. 2 Cor. 6.16.13.5 Galat. 2, 20. Ephesians. 3.17. Apoc. 3.20.

6. Christ dwelling in and with us, our Faith becomes active and operative, Gal
5.6. I conclude this Question with a double testimony; Quid est fides, nisi
credere quod non vides? August. in Johan. ^ides est voluntaria certitudo
absentium supra opinionem, and infra scientiam constituta. Hugo.

Qu. 3. What is the difference between presumption, and a true assurance of
salvation?

Answ. They differ thus, and in these things.

I. Presumption is natural, and from the very womb, but this assurance is
supernatural.

II. Presumption is in those who make no account of the ordinary means of
salvation; but this assurance comes by the reverend and careful hearing of Gods
Word.

III. Presumption is in them who use not to call upon the name of the Lord; but
this assurance of salvation is joined with that Spirit of Adoption, which is
the Spirit of prayer, Romans 8.26.

IV. Presumption is joined with looseness of life; but this assurance brings
always along with it a happy change and alteration of conversation.

V. Presumption is peremptory without doubting; but there is a weak assurance
which is mixed with some doubtings, Psalm. 77.7, 8. Mark. 6.24. Luke 17.5.

VI. Presumption will give a man slip in the time of sickness and hour of
death; but this assurance will then stick by him, and afford him comfort. Isa.
38.3.

Qu. 4. What is the difference between Faith and Sense?

Answ. 1. Faith is like a true Clock or VVatch, which will show us the hour,
and time both by day and night, Job 19.25, 26. that is, in the time of
affliction and adversity, yea, in the time of peace and prosperity, it will
direct us.

2. Sense is like the Dial, it can neither show the hour by night, nor by day,
if a cloud do but interpose it self between the Sun and us: Sense comforts and
believes only when it sees, as follows afterward.

Qu. 5. How do Faith, Hope, and Love differ?

Answ. Faith considers things as true; Hope as hard, but possible and proper
to us; Love as good for us.

Q^. 6. How is Divine Faith distinguished from Opinion and Humane Faith?

Answ. 1. Divine Faith cleaves to the testimony of the word, 1 John 5.9, 10.

2. Divine Faith is always conjoined unto, and accompanied with a pious love
unto God; To. 4.20.

3. Divine Faith overcomes the world, Romans 4.18. 1 John 5.4.

Qu. 7. How or wherein do Faith and Hope agree?

Answ. 1. In this, that they both respect the same benefits; and therefore Heb.
11.1. Faith is said to be of things hoped for; and thus we both believe and
hope for the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. And,

2. In this* that they are mutually joined in an inseparable bond; for he who
by Faith is certain of the present good will of God toward him, is also in
Hope certain of his good will to come, because God does not change.

Qu. 8. How do Faith and Hope differ?

Answ. 1. I might answer more briefly, that they differ in these five things.

I. Faith respects Verbum rei, the word of the thing; H^pe has respect unto
Rem verbi, the thing of the word, or that which the word promises.

II. God as the first truth, is that which Faith leans unto; God as the
chiefest good is that which Hope looks toward.

III. Faith looks mainly at the authority and truth of the promiser; Hope
chiefly at the mercy and goodness of the promise.

IV. Faith looks only upon the object as present; Hope looks upon it object as
future.

V. The object of Faith is all divine truth, promises, threatenings, good and
evil; but the object of hope is only the promise, and good. Or,

Answ. 2. I may answer more fully, That Faith and Hope differ three manner of
ways; viz. in their Object; Order and Office.

First, they differ in their Object, which is twofold.

I. Faith has for its Ob ect, things past, present, and to come; but Hope only
looks upon suture things. We believe that the world had a beginning, and
shall have an end, and has now a being. We believe that Christ was dead, is
now in heaven, and shall come unto judgment* But we cannot hope for things
that are past, they being irrevocable, and hope that is seen is no hope: Romans
8.24. and therefore we hope only for things to come.

II. Faith has for its Object the word of God: for we believe both the
promises and threatenings thereof, and the rewards and punishments laid down
therein, yea whatsoever is contained in the word; but we hope only for things
desirable. The Object of Faith is good and bad; for we as well believe that
there is a hell as a heaven; that there are Devils as well as Angels; and
eternal torments, as well as everlasting happiness but the ob^ect of hope is
only good; for we fea^ that which is evil, and hope only for that which is
good, or at least which we suppose to be good

Secondly, they differ in Order: for Faith is the cause of hope, hope the thing
caused by Faith: Faith is the ground and foundation of hope, Heb. 11.1. and
therefore precedeth it; and hope does always follow after faith: whence if
there be no faith, there can be no hope. Faith begets hope; for by believing
the forgiveness of our sins, and Gods promises for the present, we are
encouraged to expect and (...) ^or all future mercies, or, When faith believes
the Promises it so believes them, that withal it begets h^pe in us, whereby we
patiently wait and expect until the Lords d^^ and appointed time comes, when he
will perform, ^ccomplish, and make good his promises unto us.

Thirdly, they differ in their Offices: For, I. The Office of fa th is to
apprehend the promises of things to come; but hope relieth on the things
promised, Romans 8.24. 1 John 3.2

II. The Office of faith is to believe future mercies, (as the resurrection of
the body, and life everlasting) as present in Gods Promises, which it applies
unto us; but the Office of hope is to expect them as absent.

III. The Office of faith is to tell or teach us, what we must believe; but
hope tells us, How we must with patience tarry, wait, expect, and look for
what we believe.

IV. The Office of hope is to sustain, support, and confirm faith, from whence
it springs; that is,

1. Hope holds fast faith, lest by running too fast, or making too much haste,
it should fall headlong, when God defers the accomplishment of his promises,
which faith apprehends.

2. Hope confirms faith, lest it should stagger, or doubt of the promises; yea
keeps faith, when it does doubt and stagger.

3. Hope leads faith unto his last and principal scope and mark, yea
nourishes, cherishes and restores it, that it fail not. Faith is the parent
of hope; and hope like a good child helps to relieve its Father Faith in the
time of need: whence the Apostle says of the faithful, 1 Cor. 15.19. That if
they had hope only in this life, they were of all men most miserable. For what
avails it a man in misery, to believe eternal life, if he had not hope in
time to obtain it, and therewith freedom and redemption from distress? But we
have therefore comfort in believing, because we have hope of enjoying in due
time.

Qu 9. Wherein does the Faith of believers now differ from that Faith which was
in Adam in his innocence?

Answ. In answer hereunto, observe, that the object of that faith which is in
Believers is twofold. viz.

I. The whole will of God revealed unto us in his word, containing all
Histories, Doctrines, Threatenings and Promises, of what kind soever; this is
called Legal Faith.

II. The particular promise of remission of sins, and everlasting life by the
death of Christ: this is called Evangelical faith. Now in this distin^^ion
between Legal and Evangelical faith, we must not conceive or conceit two
distinct habits: for it is but one gracious quality of the soul disposing it to
believe, or to the belief of all divine truth, which for the substance of it
was the same in innocent Adam, with that which is in regenerate men; the
difference standing only in these three things:

1. In the degrees Adams fait^ was perfect, because his understanding was fully
enlightened, and his affections absolutely conformable to all holiness. We know
but little, and b^ reason of our internal weakness, we believe but weakly what
we know. And

2. In the Original: in Adam faith was natural by creation; in us it is
supernatural by the holy-Ghosts infusion. And

3. In the particular object; Adam believed God without reference to Christ the
Mediator: we believe chiefly the promise of grace in Christ, and all other
things with some relation to him.

Qu. 1^. What is the Nature and Excellency of true Faith?

Answ. 1. It is a grace common to all the Elect, Tit. 1.4.

2. It is a working faith, Gal. 5.6. 1 These. 1.3. 2 These. 1.11.

3. It is a precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1.

4. It is the faith of the Lord Jesus, Romans 3.22. Jam. 2.1. Apoc. 14.12.

5. It is the faith of God, Romans 3.3.

6. It is the faith of the Saints, Romans 13.10.

7. It is a most holy faith, Jude 20.

8. It is a mystery 1 Timothy 3.9.

9. It sanctifies all things, Romans 14.23.

10. It only makes us acceptable to God, Heb. 11.6.

11. It is one of the three principal graces and virtues, 1 Cor. 13.13.

12. It only sustains and supports us, Romans 11.20. 2 Cor. 1.24.

13. It is that whereby we live, Galat. 2.20.3.11.

14. It is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

15. It is firm, stable, and certain. Fides electorum aut nunquam deficit, aut
statim reparatur. August. de corr. and great. The faith of the Elect is either
not shaken, or soon rooted and settled; it being a building founded upon an
immovable rock, Mat. 7.25, etc.

16. It makes all things seem as nothing in regard of God. As the reason why a
Perspectiv^ glass draws remote objects close to the eye, is, because it
multiplies the species: so we by faith apprehending an infinite and everlasting
glory, must needs conceive any thing through which we look upon it, to be but
short and vanishing.

17. It is as a candle in the night, or as a light in a dark place: for as a
Carbuncle shines in the night, and in darkness brings light unto the eyes;
so faith shines so bright and clear, both in the darkness of heresy, and in
the night of persecution, that it cannot be overcome or extinguished of either.
Fides lampas est; quia sicut lampas illuminat domum, ita fides animam.
Chrysostom. in Mat. 25.

Scilicet ut sulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum, Tempore sic duro est
inspicienda fides. Ovid.

18. It makes invisible things visible, and teaches us to believe what we see
not. It is the efficacy of faith to believe what we see not; and it shall be
the reward of faith to see what we believe. Greg. Qu^d non invenit fides:
attingit inaccessa, deprehendit ignota, comprehendit immania, apprehendit
novissima. Bern. sup. Cantic. Ibi fides non habet meritum, ubi humana ratio
habet experimentum. Greg. but of this more by and by.

19 It is the foundation of the other venues; Fides lapis fundamentalis: Zanch.
As Quicksilver is the element or matter of all metals, as a Philosopher
says; so faith is the basis or foundation of all virtues. As there appears
outwardly no beauty in he tree root, and yet how sweet, or fair, or precious
soever the fruit be, it comes from the ^oot; so although faith be invisible,
yet all the excellent fruits of holiness, which are in the life and
conversation, proceed from Faith. Sicut in radice arboris nulla prorsus apparet
pulchritudinis species, and tamen quicquid est in arbore pulchritudinis, vel
decoris, ex illa procedit; sic ex sidei humilitate quicquid meriti, quicquid
beatitudinis anima susceptura est, ex fidei fundamento procedit. August. in
Johan. Faith is like a Vine, whose branches are virtues, whose grapes are good
works, and whose wine is Christian and holy devotion. Dicamus fidem vitem,
virtutes palmites, botrum opus, devotionem vinum. Bern. in Cantic. And
therefore faith is a grace of so excellent a Nature, that she bears away the
Bell and Ball from all Graces.

Qu. II. What are the Properties of true Faith?

Answ. These which follow: True Faith;

1. Is a cordial Faith, and not a bare labor of the lips: Faith is not a
certain bare opinion of our brain, as the Papists and others dream: but it is a
certain assurance of the heart, which drives men unto Christ, all humane help
failing them, attributing unto him only the power and will of enriching them
with all holy and heavenly graces.

2. It is a visible Faith, which may be seen by its works, and known by the
fruits thereof.

3. It is a constant Faith, not leaving or giving over until we have found
Christ, and obtained from him our requests.

4. It is a certain Faith; Romans 8.38.

5. It is a faith, which makes us rejoice, and delight in the word, John 8.47.

6. It is a revealed Faith, wrought in us, and testified unto us by the holy
Spirit, Rom 5.5.8.16.

7. It is a changing Faith, which transforms us into the image of Christ,
Galat. 2.20.

8. It is a rejoicing Faith, which works in us joy unspeakable and glorious,
Colos. 3.3, 4. and 1 Pet 1.8.

9. It is a heavenly Faith, which sets the affections wholly upon heaven
turning the eyes from all worldly things to the recompense of reward, Col. 3.1.
2 Timothy 4.8.

10. It is a most confident Faith, holding nothing impossible; as appears,

I. From these places, Math. 17 20. Mar. 11.21, 23. Luke 17.6. Heb. 11.33, 34.
and,

II. From these two reasons;

1. Because that which true Faith dictates, the Lord dictates; for Faith is
from the Spirit of God, and of truth, John 14.17.15.26.16 13. Jam. 1.17. and,

2. Because Faith gives Christ unto us, and with him all things, Rom 8.32. 1
Cor. 3.21. And therefore we should strive for a full assurance of Faith.

Qu. 12. Whether is Faith an Act of the Understanding, or of the Will?

Answ. It is an Act both of the Understanding and Will; that is, of the
Understanding, as it is an Assent; of the Will, as it is voluntary; for Faith
is a willing assent of the soul.

Qu. 13. How manifold is the Act of Faith?

Answ. Threefold for

I. There is the Faith of reliance, whereby a soul does rely upon God in Christ.

II. There is the Faith of assurance, whereby a man is persuaded of Gods love
toward him, and his love to God, and that he is the child of God.

III. There is the Faith of acknowledgement, whereby a man does own and
acknowledge the cause and truth of Christ; but of this more by and by. Qu. 18.

Qu. 14. Who or what are the Causes of true Faith?

Answ. 1. The principal efficient cause is God the Father, who in the Son, by
the holy Ghost, begets and nourishes Faith in our hearts, John 6.29. Romans 12.3.
Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29. Hebr. 12.2. As the river comes from the
fountain, so Faith comes from the Lord. Fides appellata est ab eo quod sit:
duae syllabae sonant, quum dicitur fides; prima syllaba est a facto, secunda a
Deo. August. Sermon. 22.

Note here, How God does work Faith in us: or, What the work of God is
concerning our Faith; viz.

First, God, (in massa corrupta praevisa) seeing man subject to a total and
final curse, and destruction, out of his Love to mankind desired to save some,
and to that end decreed Christ for them: this is called, The purpose of God,
Rom, 8.28.

Secondly, God did of his free mercy in Christ ordain some to salvation, in
this order:

I. He did take notice of so many as he would save, in his particular wisdom,
Romans 8.29.

II. He did predestinate them (so known) unto salvation by Christ freely,
having no respect to any thing in us, or, to be done by us.

III. These in time he does call by the Gospel without, and by his Spirit
within, begetting Faith in them.

IV. After they believe, he does seal them unto salvation, Ephesians. 1.1^. that
is, does justfie them, Romans 8.30.

Answ. 2. The meritorious cause of Faith is Christ: for as we are elected unto
salvation in Christ, so we are saved by Faith in Christ, which is wrought in us
by the Spirit for Christ's sake.

Answ 3. The ministerial cause is the holy Spirit of God, Romans 8.15. Gal. 5.22.
for he enlightneth the mind, and makes it to understand the word, and moves
the will, making it to assent unto the word once understood.

Answ. 4. The moving cause is Gods Decree, Act. 13.48.

5 The instrumental cause is either,

I. The preaching of the word Zach. 8.23. Joh. 1^.8.20. Romans 10.14.17. 1 Cor.
3.6. Ephesians. 2.20. Col. 1.6 7. 1 Timothy 3.15. or,

II. Miracles wroug^^, John 2.3.

6. The material ca^^e, or subject wherein it remains, is the Understanding
and Will of man, Luk 24.45. Ephesians. 4.23 Acts 16.14. Romans 10.10. The material
cause whereof it is made, is none, for Faith is wrought by the sole and alone
motion and efficacy of the holy Spirit, working by the word, whereby the mind
is enlightened for the understanding, and the Will is moved for the assenting
unto, and acquiescing in the word of God.

7. The formal cause is not Love, though Faith works by Love, Galat. 5.6. no
more then the body is the form of the soul, because the soul works by the body;
but the formal cause is trust and confidence, whereby Christ being acknowledged
with his benefits, is apprehended and applied, 1 Cor 2.2. 2 Cor. 4.14.

8. The final cause is,

I. The glory of God, or, the celebration of his truth justice, bounty, and
mercy, which he has showed in the sending of his Son, and in the giving of
Faith in him.

II. Our Justification, and salvation; or that we may receive the blessings
which are promised in the word.

Qu. 15. How many things are there in Faith?

Answ. Three.

I. An aptness, or readiness to believe.

II. An ability of adhering, and laying hold upon God.

III. An actual fastening upon him, by a lively Faith.

The first of these is like unto earth.

The second is plain earth, wherein the Tree is planted.

The third is the fruit which springs upon this Tree.

The first of these is taken away by infidelity.

The second by the sin against the holy Ghost.

The third by every sin, they being no fruits of Faith.

Qu. 16. How many things are observable in true Faith?

Answ. Two, the Object, and the Act.

Qu. 17. What, or how manifold is the Object of true Faith?

Answ. Threefold, for,

I. Faith looks upon temporal and corporal blessings, especially those which
belong to the exornation, conservation, and consolation of this life, as
outward peace, health, food, and prosperity in what we take in hand.

II. Faith looks unto, and upon spiritual things, as remission, reconciliation,
righteousness peace, joy, the gifts of the holy Ghost, life eternal, and the
like.

III. The adequate object of true Faith is Christ, or, the Gospel, or, the
promises; or, Christ revealed in the promises of the Gospel.

Qu. 18. How manifold is the Act of Faith?

Answ. Fourfold; viz. Knowledge, Judgment, Discerning, Apprehension, or
Application.

First the initial Act of Faith, is the knowledge and understanding of the
Gospel, and the heads thereof; viz. of Christ, and of his natures, offices and
benefits.

If it be here objected,

I. That knowledge is the subsequent reward of Faith; as Psalm. 119.66. And,

II. That this is the difference between Faith and knowledge; viz that
knowledge is founded and built upon some reason; but Faith upon some authority.
And,

III. That the Love of Christ which is apprehended by Faith, passes knowledge,
Ephesians. 3.19. Then I thus distinguish of knowledge.

1. There is a weak knowledge, whereby we understand such things as are
revealed unto us in the Word.

2. There is a perspicuous and clear knowledge, whereby we understand the
things themselves, and apprehend them as they are. Now the former precedes
Faith, and the latter follows, in the life to come; for before we believe the
Doctrine of the Trinity, the hypostatical union, etc. we ought to know, that
such things are revealed in the word, although the things themselves exceed and
pass our understanding.

Secondly, The next Act of Faith is Judgment, and that both of the truth, and
goodness of the Gospel; for as S. Paul says, Romans 7. I assent unto the Law,
that it is good; so much more does Faith assent unto the Gospel, that it is
true and good.

Thirdly, Another Act of Faith, is Adjudication; when our understandings do
conceive, and imagine that the promises of the Gospel belong particularly unto
us.

Fourthly, The last Act of Faith, is Apprehension and Application; when
apprehending, and laying hold upon the promises, we apply them unto our selves;
or, when the understanding does adjudge, or conceive, that the promises belong
unto us, then the Will does apprehend the Promises and that with joy; John
1.12. 1 Timothy 1.15. Hebr. 11.13.

Qu. 19. How many things are observable in the Application of Faith?

Answ. Five: viz.

First, The ground; which is the general, or definite Promise, made upon
condition of Faith, concurring with Gods Commandments, and bidding us to apply
the promises of Christ unto our selves.

Seco dly, The Means to beget Faith; viz. the preaching of the Word of God,
Luke 24.45. Romans 10 17.

Thirdly, The Order of Gods working it; for,

I. The Law shows us the sight of our sins and misery.

II. It works in us compunction and terror, Acts 2.37. Romans 8.15.

III. Then the Law is made our School master, to bring us unto Christ, and to
the consideration of the Gospel.

IV. Learning from the Gospel that our sins are pardonable, we then hunger
after mercy, and Faith to apprehend mercy Then,

V. This desire causes us with bleeding hearts to crave and cry for mercy.

VI. Upon this follows some quieting of the heart, with some assurance of
mercy, and pardon: and being thus bred, it is confirmed by the frequent use of
the word, prayer, Sacraments, exercises of repentance, and daily experience of
Gods Love and goodness.

Fourthly, The Manner how Faith does apprehend, and see Christ, viz.

I. Faith apprehends Christ as the gift of God our Father; and therefore takes
him as God gives him in the use of the means.

II. Faith apprehends Christ, with feeling of sweetness in him, and in the
promises, Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3. And,

III. With an humble and contrite heart for sin. Za^h. 12.10. Math. 11.28. John
5.35. And,

IV. With a strife against our own infidelity, and Satan's temptations to
doubting.

V. Faith apprehends Christ with the apprehension of inferior and dependant
promises. Math. 6.33. Romans 8.32. 2 Cor. 1.20. And,

VI. With transforming us into the image of Christ, Luke 8.15. 2 Cor. 3.18.

Fifthly, The Degrees of Apprehension, and Application; these are either Weak
or Strong.

First, Weak apprehension is when a man desires, and strives to apprehend, and
apply the promises, but to his own thinking cannot: this weak Faith consists in
two things. viz.

I. Want of feeling, by reason of that little life that is in it, as smoking
flax: for an infant has life, and sense, and reason, long before he discerns
these things in himself. And,

II. Want of certainty, by reason it is overwhelmed with so many doubtings,
that he dare neither say* Christ is mine, nor not mine. For there is a double
certainity: viz.

1. Of Evidence. And,

2. Of Adherence. Now though the weak Believer want the certainty of evidence,
yet he wants not the certainty of adherence: though he be not sure that the
promises belong unto him, yet he thinks it good to cleave to them. Now the
reasons of this weakness are,

I. Want of experience; and therefore for the most part, it is in our first
conversion, when we are unacquainted with Gods dealing with us, And,

II. Violence of temptation, especially if it prevail, for then strong Faith
becomes weak; as we see in Peter after his denial, and in David after his
adultery. And,

Secondly, There is a strong apprehension: viz. when a man has a sure hold of
Christ: as Genesis 32.26. Romans 4.21.8.38.

Qu. 20. How many things does true Faith apprehend?

Answ. 1. The graces of Justification, and Reconciliation, Romans 3.12.6.1.

2. Adoption into the fellowship of sons, John 1.12. Gal. 4.4.

3. The Spirit of Sons; that is, God, John 7.38, 39. Romans 8.15, 16, 17. Gal.
3.2.4.6. Ephesians. 1.3.

4. The knowledge of God and Christ, which the world cannot take up or
understand, Ioh. 6.68.8.30, 31.

5. Life eternal, John 5.24.6.40.47.13.16.20.31. Romans 1.16.1 Cor. 1.21. And,

6. The gifts and good things which we beg at Gods hands. Mark. 11.23, 24. Iam.
1.6.

Qu. 21. How does it appear, that we are saved only by Faith; or, that by Faith
only we come unto salvation, as was affirmed in the former Question?

Answ. 1. It appears most clearly by these texts of Scripture, Habak. 2.4. Mark
16.16. Ioh. 1.12. Romans 1.17.3.22.4.2.13, 14. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 2.16.

2. It appears hence; salvation is to be had only in Christ. John 3.16. Acts
4.10.12. but we obtain Christ only by Faith. And,

3. It is hence also evident, because by Faith we obtain all the graces of the
holy Spirit: whether,

I. The power of healing, Acts 3.16. or,

II. Health it self, Acts 14.9. or,

III. Internal peace, and joy, Romans 5.1.2. 1 Pet. 1.8. or,

IV. The Testimony, evidence, and seal of the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13.

Qu. 22. How can Faith save us? Is not Faith our action? Is it not we who
believe? Can we by Faith, this action of ours, merit God or heaven?

Answ. Faith does not merit Christ, but only applys the Merit of Christ unto
us. For the understanding hereof, let us observe this order: viz.

I. Our Physician is Christ, who came to call and cure those who were sick.

II. The medicine, or (...), is the death and blood of Christ; which he Paid,
or Shed on the Cross. And,

III. Our curing and healing consists in the application of this medicine: or,
we are recovered, and cured by applying, and taking of this Medicine by the
hand of Faith. Neither is Faith our action, but being instructed, and
strengthened by the holy Spirit, we believe, Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6. Yea again, he
who stretches forth his hand to reach a potion, and takes what is prescribed
for his curing and healing, does not thereby merit health, and although he who
in a brook being ready to sink, by catching hold of a rope thrown unto him, is
saved, and comes safe to dry Land: yet he merits not hereby: and so we must
confess and acknowledge, that even this power of apprehending, and applying of
Christ by Faith, is given from above, comes from heaven, and is not of and from
our selves.

Qu. 2^. What may we l^arn from hence, that we are saved only by Faith in
Christ?

Answ. 1. We may learn hence, what the end of preaching is: viz. that we might
believe, and that Christ might dwell in our hearts by faith, Acts 15.9. Gal.
4.19. Ephesians. 3.17. and therefore all should desire, and love preaching, that
thereby faith might be begotten, and increased in their hearts.

2. We may learn hence, How diligent we ought to be, in laboring for, and
acquiring of true faith, and avoiding all deceits concerning it; as,

First, Some think themselves well enough: although they are not sensible of
any thing within, nor of any grace in their hearts; but only of some natural or
moral works in their lives. And,

Secondly, Some think they are well enough, because they have sometimes some
legal terrors for their sins committed. But,

I. If this fear arise from the fear of Punishment, and not of the sin
committed against God; And,

II. If it be fear without any joy; then there is small probability of true
fear; or, that this fear springs from true faith.

Thirdly, Some have an hypocritical faith, which is only an ignis fatuus, and
false presumption: such wanting both,

I. The assistance, operation, and strength of the holy Spirit within, in their
hearts. And also,

II. Internal joy, and peace. And likewise,

III. True certainty and assurance, Romans 8.38. 2 Timothy 4.7. Indeed it is true,
that true faith may be weak: but,

1. In true faith this weakness and faintness continues not long, Heb. 10.38.

2. The true weak faith is full of sighs and sobs for its weakness, crying
daily, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And,

3. If faith be true, it will bring forth some fruits of renovation, be it
never so weak; holding forth the signs, and symptoms of life more and more:
although it be but a babe and suckling.

Qu. 24. Who are here too blame?

Answ. 1. Those who deny, that only faith saves us: for although the phrase be
odious unto the Papists: Yet it is frequent with the Fathers, as Bellarmine,
(de Iustific.) acknowledges. Yea, works do not cooperate at all with faith in
the matter of salvation: for we must either be saved by grace only, or without
grace, Romans 11.6. For Gods work of faith, and man's of works, is but a
Linsie-woolsie garment, or like two incompatible qualities, which cannot stand
together.

2. They are too blame, who think that any faith will save them: for faith is
an equivocal word, Iam. 2.19. there being a true faith, and a false; a
temporary faith, and a firm: a blind presumption, and a seeing, sure, and
certain persuasion.

3. They are too blame who hold that true faith merits salvation: for it is
only the death of Christ which merits salvation for us: yea we are not saved by
any merit of faith, but by the action of applying Christ's merits unto us: as it
is the medicine that cures, and heals, and not the hand that receives the
medicine. And,

4. They are too blame, who say, that faith is a humane action, and is not
given from heaven: for God works faith in us by his holy Spirit, Romans 8.15.

Qu. 25. How many ways does true faith work?

Answ. True faith works four manner of ways: toward God, toward our
neighbor, toward our selves, and against Satan.

First, True faith works these things toward God: viz.

I. A quiet and peacable conscience, Romans 5.1.8, 33, 34.

II. Love, Luke 7.1.47.

III. Hope, Romans 4.20, 21.5.3. Heb. 11.1.

IV. A confident boldness in our approaching unto him, Habak. 3.16. Math. 9.21.
Mark 2.4. Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.22.

V. A confession of the truth believed, Romans 10.10. 2 Cor. 4.13.

VI. Obedience. Romans 1.16, 17. Heb. 11.8.17.

VII. Perseverance, Ioh. 6.68.

VIII. A commending of the soul and spirit unto God, Acts 7.49, 50.

Secondly, Faith works these things toward our Neighbors: that is,

I. Toward the elect it works concord, unity and unanimity Acts 3. and 4. Chap.

II. Toward all humanity, courtesy, pity, and mercy.

Thirdly, True faith toward a man's self works these things.

I. Patience, and glory ng in affliction, Romans 5.3. whence,

1. Sometimes faith and patience are joined together; as 1 These. 1.14. And,

2. Sometimes faith and joy* Heb. 10.34.

II. It takes away anxiety of mind, and dejection of spirit in trouble, Math.
6.25, 26. when wicked men faint and fear, then those who are confirmed in Faith
are free from carefulness.

III. Consolation in God, John 14.1, 2.

IV. Such a measure of grace and strength, that for Gods sake we can undergo
the greatest dangers and trials; as we see in Moses, Gideon, and David, Heb.
11.25.

Fourthly, True faith works against Satan: For,

I. It is a shield and buckler against him, Ephesians. 6.17. 1 Pet. 5.6, 7.

II. It overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4. and that,

1. Whilst we trample our corruptions and concupiscence under our feet, by a
Godly victory over them And

2. Whilst we overcome all our afflictions, as well as our affections.

Qu. 26. What is the Foundation of faith?

Answ. 1. Not our works, nor any thing in us: As a Light or Lamp is not lighted
or kindled with oil, but is nourished by oil: so faith does not spring from
works, but is nourished by works. Chrysostom. hom. 18. op. imp. Faith is a
miracle of miracles; for its founded as the earth, upon mere nothing in it
self, yet it bears the weight of sins, devils, yea of God himself.

Answ. 2. As our Works are not the Foundation of our Faith, so neither the
words nor writings of the Fathers. This being controverted between us and the
Papists, I will a little enlarge it: It being demanded, Whether or no we may
build our Faith upon the ancient Fathers?

First, The Papists sometimes say absolutely Yes: thus Gregory de Valent. tom.
3. page 291. d. says, The Protestants in the questions of Faith, should
enquire on what side the Fathers stand, that it being known immediately without
any other examination, they might embrace that Doctrine which the Fathers of
old judged to be true. So another of them ( Brist. Mot. 14.) cries out, What
the Fathers believed I believe; what they held I hold; what they taught I
teach; and what they preached I preach.

Secondly, Some of the Papists are not so lavish as these, but limit their
answer thus; That which all the Fathers deliver with one consent, is infallibly
true, and a sure Rock for us to build our Faith upon. This seems reasonable, if
it were not a stale to deceive us, and a mere juggling trick to blear our eyes:
for we must observe well what they mean, when they say, All the Doctors, or the
Fathers consenting in one, are to be assented unto: the meaning whereof is not,
that they know the judgment of all at any time (unless it be very rare) but
this is it: ( Greg. a Valent. tom. 3. f. 290.) They are to be counted all the
Doctors, whose authority is such, that the circumstances of their learning,
piety, and multitude considered, they alone may justly be regarded, and the
rest neglected as nobody, if they be compared with these. And thus one or more
Doctors erring, may be pressed with the authority of the rest. Here we see one
brave device, that although they brag of all the Fathers, and say, they will
refuse nothing wherein they all consent, yet when it comes to scanning, they
have no hope so much as to find this consent of all, but refer it to their own
discretion, wisely to judge by circumstances, who are All, and what the Consent
is. Another brave device of theirs is, to give sovereign authority to the Pope
over the Fathers, to explain their meaning, to allow them, dis-allow them,
purge them, and fit them to their purpose. If the Reader desire to see this
clearly confirmed, let him peruse D White his way to the true Church, fol. 328.
sect. 11.

Thirdly, Some Papists of as good credit as the former, answer the question
negatively, That they care not what the Fathers say, neither does their
authority move them at all; and therefore they will be sure not to build their
Faith upon them. Here,

I. They speak of the Works and Writings of the Fathers in general, as
Marsilius says, Def. p. 413. He will receive whatsoever they bring consonant
to Scriptures, but whatsoever they bring dissonant from them, he will reject
upon the authority of the Scripture, whereto he will lean. Turrecremata says,
(In. c. Sanct. Romans d. 15. n. 12.) The writings of the Fathers bind us not to
believe them in all their opinions, but we may lawfully contradict them where
they speak against the Scripture or the truth. And Possevine says, Bibl.
select. lib. 12. cap. 23. Some things in the Fathers, wherein they dissented
from the Church, are judged, and rejected.

II. They reject the Fathers one by one ordinarily, when they cross Romes
Doctrine: many examples the Reader may see hereof in our forenamed White, page
330. sect. 13.

III. The Papists basely slight the Fathers, although many of them agree in one
and the same thing: e. g. In the question touching the cause of Predestination
one says, That Chrysostom, Origin, Ambrose, Hierom, Augustine, Theodoret,
Gedulius, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and Theodulus, held, that the prescience of
Merits was not the cause of Predestination, as Pelagius maintained, and yet he
prefers the opinion of him before them: ( Sixth. Se^ens. bibl. lib. 6. annot.
241.) thus bravely rejecting ten Worthies at once. Another says, ( Mich.
Medin. orig. sacr. hom. li. 1. cap. 5.) that Hierom, Augustine, Ambrose,
Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophilact, (which
are the chiefest of the Fathers) in the question concerning the difference
between a Priest and a Bishop, held the same opinion which Aerius, the
Waldenses and Wickliffe did, whom he counts for Heretics, and charge the
Fathers with the same heresy. In the matter touching the Baptism of
Constantine the great, they ( Baron. an. 324. n. 43. and 50 and ^nde) reject
Eusebius, Ambrose, Hierom, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen, and the whole Council
of Ariminum, saying, They deserve no credit, because not they, that is, the
Fathers, have written the truth; but themselves, that is, the Papists, have
truly related, that he was baptized by Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia. Thus
we see how the Papists esteem of the Fathers, and their Writings, when they
suit not with their own Tenants.

Fourthly, The Works and Writings of the Fathers are purged, (I should rather
say polluted) by the Papists, and adulterated, corrupted, gelded, and changed
by them: and therefore we are not now by any means to build our Faith upon
them. I desire my studious Reader to peruse Perkinsi Problema, page 2. etc. ad
44. And Censura quorundam Scriptorum, Auctore Roberto Coco, where he shall find
this answer abundantly confirmed.

Fifthly, The Fathers in many things dissented among themselves, and therefore
we cannot build our Faith upon them; because the foundation of Faith ought to
be firm, and infallible, truth being but one.

Theophilus calls Epiphanius Haeresiarcham, the grand Captain and Father of
Heretics. Gennadius says, that Augustine was not far off from being an
Heretic.

Hierom writing to Augustine, says, In Epistola tua quaedam haeretica esse
judicavi, I conceive there are some heretical opinions in your Epistle. And
Augustine wishes Hierom to acknowledge his error and recant. Jewel def. of
the Apol. f. 378.

Sixthly, The Fathers have erred in many things, and therefore are neither
firm, nor fitting pillars to build our faith upon. This a learned Papist,
(Canus loc. theol. l. 7. c. 3. concl. 2.) does acknowledge in these words; The
Canonical Authors, as being directed from above, do always hold a perpetual
and stable constancy in their Writings; but the Fathers being inferior unto
them, fail sometimes, now and then contrary to the course of nature, bringing
forth a monster. And another of them ( Anselm. comment. in 2 Cor.) says, that
in the r Books which the Church reads, many times are found things corrupt
and heretical. Thus Hillary denied that Christ in his sufferings had any
sorrow: ( Refert. Bellarm. de charit. l. 4. c. 8.) Clemens Alexandrinus says,
that Christ did not eat and drink out of any necessity, but only to show that
he had a true body: and that both he and his Apostles after their death,
preached to the damned in hell, and converted many, Strom. l. 6. and l. 3.
Cyprian held rebaptization; and Athenagoras condemned marriage.

Seventhly, We Protestants do not deny the Fathers, but receive them with all
reverence; studying their writings, and accounting their Books as most
excellent monuments of Antiquity: but we dare not make them rules of Faith in
themselves, by which, Doctrines of truth are established; but we allow, and
affirm the Scriptures only to be judge, whereby we try both the Fathers, and
our selves. Faith comes from the word of God, not from the writings of men,
Romans 10.14. and therefore the Word, not the Fathers, must be the rule of our
Faith: and by the proportion and analogy of Faith, and truth therein contained,
all opinions are to be proved. I conclude this Quaere, Whether or no we may
build our faith upon the ancient Fathers? thus.

I. That the Fathers may err.

II. That many of them may err together.

III. That the learned of this present age in many things have more
understanding then the Fathers had; we being (as Dominicus Bannes a Doctor of
the Church of Rome said, page 58, 59.) like children standing on the shoulders
of Giants, who being lift up by the taleness of the Giants, see further then
they themselves.

IV. Lastly, That therefore with reverence they may in some things be refused.

Thus we see, that neither our works, nor the Fathers writings, are the
Foundation of our Faith.

Answ. 3. The Word of God is said to be the foundation of our Faith: Oportet
discentem credere, Aristot. The Scholar must believe, and be directed by his
Teacher; especially in Divinity, Credendum ut intelligas, non intelligendum ut
credas. August. We must believe the word, that we may understand it, not
understand the word that we may believe it: we must receive the word with
meekness, Jam. 1.21. not presuming to understand above that which is meet, Romans
12.3. we must not turn from the word, either to the right hand, or to the left,
because if there be any truth, it is there, Deuteronomy. 5.32. Rabby Joseph Albu
says, That the Jewish faith is founded upon three foundations; viz. Upon the
Unity of the Divine Essence, upon the Law of Moses, and upon the eternal reward
of good works, and punishment of evil. Now all these are learnt from, and laid
down in the word of God.

Answ. 4. Christ only is that foundation upon which the spiritual building of
the Church is raised, and upon which our faith is founded, Matthew. 7.24. But of
this amply and fully God willing, when in the Large work promised, I come to
speak of the Son of God, what he is in Himself, and what he is unto, or in
regard of us.

Qu. 27. What necessity is there of Faith?

Answ. 1. As nothing is delectable unto men without light, so nothing is
acceptable unto God without faith, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible
to please God.

2. An historical knowledge of Christ without Faith, profits us nothing, Mark.
1.24 Mat. 7.22. For,

I. Only Faith truly fructifies: true repentance and conversion is from Love,
and Love is from faith, because it persuades that Christ is ours. And,

II. Knowledge without faith makes us more indocible; for an ignorant man is
more easily persuaded to that which is good then a worldly wise man, who is
conceited of his own knowledge, and wisdom: and therefore,

III. Knowledge without faith is so far from helping, or profiting us, that it
brings a greater judgment upon us.

Answ. 3. Without Faith no man can gain Christ, or the Love of Christ: or,
until we believe in Christ, we can neither be assured of his presence with us,
nor of his love to us, nor of any interest in him, Habak. 2.4. Mark. 3.5.6.5.
John 1.12. and 3.15, 16, 18, 36. Acts 8.37. Romans 1.7, etc. unto 3.28. Gal. 3.11.

4. Without Faith there can be no salvation; or, except we believe we cannot be
saved. Anima si credit, est ad vitam immortalis; si non credit, ad poenam
indissolubilis. August. If the soul believe in Christ, it shall be preserved
for ever in everlasting blessedness: But if it be without belief, it shall
remain for ever in infernal wretchedness. Fides religionis catholicae, lumen
est animae, ostium vitae, fundamentum salutis aeternae. Chrysostom. in symbol.
That it is faith only which gives salvation; or, that there can be no
salvation without faith, does appear,

I. From these Scriptures. John 3.36, 6, 40, 47. Romans 3.22, 25.11, 20. 2 Cor.
1.24. Gal. 2.20. And,

II. From hence, because we are absolved, not by defending or pleading that we
are just or righteous, (for if we should so say, we should lie, 1 Ioh. 1.8.)
but by proving our pardon, and remission, 1 Cor. 6.10. Psalm. 32.1. Tit. 3.3.
etc. Now neither our merits, nor any thing that is ours can prove unto us, That
our sins are pardoned, or procure unto us the remission and pardon of them. And,

III. Christ is to be gained, and apprehended, Romans 13.13. Now faith is the
hand that apprehends him, and the Anchor that lays hold upon him. And,

IV. It is thus further cleared, because other virtues, graces, and gifts, are
the fruits of faith; as hope, joy, and the like: and serve to confirm,
corroborate, and augment faith, 2 Cor. 10.15. And,

V. Because no works done out of faith, can avail us unto eternal life. A man
void of faith may,

1. Lament his sins committed, as Cain, Judas and Ahab did. And,

2. He may be true in his words, and promises, though he lose by it. And,

3. He may be charitable to the poor, and rich in charitable works, 1 Cor.
13.2. And,

4. He may profess the truth, and join himself to the society of Gods children;
as did Simon Magus, Acts 8, and Saul when he prophesied, 1 Samuel And,

5. He may reverence the Word of God, as Herod did. Mark 6.20. All these and
much more a man may do, and yet not be one whit benefited thereby unto
salvation, because they may be in a man in his natural condition.

Qu. 28. How does faith save us?

Answ. 1. We are saved diversely: For,

I. God the Father saves us primarily: And,

II. God the Son saves us meritoriously; And,

III. The Gospel of Christ saves us declaratively, 1 Cor. 1.18, 21. And,

IV. The Ministers of the Gospel save us instrumentally, 1 Timothy 4.15. These are
generals.

Answ. 2. That saves us which adjoyns us unto Christ, and engrafts us into him;
viz. which reveals Christ unto us. Here are two actions; viz.

I. An immediate action, but secondary; namely, faith, whereby we apprehend
Christ. And,

II. A mediate action, but principal, namely, the holy Spirit, who teaches us
within to believe, Romans 8.16. And therefore we must say, That the first cause
of salvation is the work of grace in us but this work is neither righteousness,
nor joy, but peace, which arises from faith, showing unto us our
reconciliation unto God, Romans 14.17.

Answ. 3. For the better understanding of the causality, and order of our
salvation, observe three things.

I. Faith causes righteousness, (as the tree the fruit) and joy springs from
them both.

II. This fruit of faith, cannot give faith, but only confirm it; that is, it
increases faith in him who has it, but does not give it unto him who has it
not. And,

III. Salvation and grace is wrought in this order, at least ordinarily; viz.

1. Faith is infused into the heart.

2. Then there is a sincere desire to obey God; and that in newness of life.
And,

3. Then comes strength of grace, which does so reign, that sin cannot domineer
within, or over us. And,

4. Then faith comes to be strong, and certain, and is both the beginning and
ending, 2 Cor. 10.15 And,

5. Then from hence comes joy unspeakable, and glorious, Romans 14.17. And
therefore we may say, that the work of grace in us saves us; but,

I. We must not exclude faith, neither say, That the work of grace besides
faith, or over and above faith saves us. But,

II. That grace working by faith saves us: and this is consonant to the whole
course of Scripture.

Qu. 29. When or wherein is Faith necessary?

Answ. 1. In prayer, or when we pray, Mat. 21.22.

2. When we hear the word preached, Romans 1.16. Heb. 4.2.

3. When we are in any distress, danger, tribulation, or trouble, either by
reason of enemies or evils, Heb. 11. For, -- illos,
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidos ferient ruinae. Horac.
Those who trust in the Lord, shall be free from the fear of evil, even in evil
times, and from the malice of foes. Suetonius Tranquillus tells us, that
Titus the Emperor being advertised that the Consuls would kill him, and usurp
his Empire, answered; Even as without the divine will and providence I could
never have possessed the Imperial crown, so without their permission and
sufferance, it lies in no man's power to deprive me of it: for to us men it
belongs only to keep the Imperial jurisdiction, and to the Gods alone to give
and defend it. Marcus Antonius would not believe that Avidius Crassus would
ever have deposed him; and his reason was, Because the Gods had greater care of
him, then to let Crassus wrong him undeservedly. Thus David, Psalm. 11.1. I have
put my trust in the Lord, why say ye then unto my soul, Fly as a fowl unto the
mountains? as if he would say, True faith expels fear.

Qu. 30. How is true faith to be proved, tried or approved?

Answ. 1. By Examination, 2 Cor. 13.5.

2. By affliction, Jam. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.7.

3. By our Love and affection unto the Word, Psalm. 119, 81, 97, 111, 113, 131.
For,

I. The word is the object of faith, and the means both to beget, and nourish
it, Romans 10.15. 1 Pet. 2.2. And,

II. Faith covets and desires to be wise unto that which is good: and this the
word works, Psa. 119.98, etc. For,

1. It teaches us to obey, Psalm. 119.9, 105, 133. And,

2. It leads and brings us to God, Christ, and to the knowledge of heaven, our
Country.

3. Without the word, there is no light, or, nothing but darkness, Isa. 8.20.
And,

III. Faith desires to increase and grow greater; this it does by the word, 1
Peter 2.2. And,

IV. Faith desires comfort: this it has in the Word, Psa. 119.92. And
therefore let us endeavor to delight in the word, if we desire to approve our
faith; Remember,

1. It is one thing to hear the word. And,

2. Another to understand it. And,

3. Another to taste the good word of God, or to relish the word to be good,
Heb. 6.4. that is, to perceive the truth of the goodness and sweetness thereof.
And,

4. It is another thing to hunger after the word, Luke 11.27. Lord, give us
evermore of this bread. And,

5. It is another thing to delight in the Word. Isa. 58.13. This is the true
trial of faith; when we are continually conversant about the word, either
reading it privately, or hearing it publicly, or meditating daily of the many
good things we gain thereby, and the like. Thus faith is to be proved by
examination, affliction, and by our Love unto the Word.

Answ. 4. Faith is to he proved and approved by works. Luther was wont to say,
that faith does pinguescere operibus, grow fat and well liking by or with good
works. Faith should be in the soul as the soul is in the body, which is not
there idle, or in vain, but is still stirring, and showing it self by motion
and action. Faith without works, is like a Bird without wings, who though she
may hop with her companions here upon earth; yet if she live till the worlds
end, she will never fly to heaven. Faith, Instrumentum percipiendi and
recipiendi Christum, the instrument that receives Christ to Justification, and
partakes all his merits to salvation, declares us then to be just, when
accompanied with good works. Faith is the root, good works the fruit: where
fire is, there is hear; where a soul is, there is life: Fides a fiendo, and
where faith is, there are works. Habet vitam aeternam fides, quia fundamentum
est bonum: habent and bona facta quibus vir justus and dictis and rebus
probatur. Ambros. 2. offic.

2. Faith has eternal life as a good foundation. He who believes is not
condemned. John 3.8. and good works have the reward as an approbation, because
faith is shown by works, and works are manifest unto all. Fides probatur per
opera. Chrysostom. hom. 1. in 1 These. 1. Faith is tried by works. Fides similis
est venusto corpori vita destituto. Chrysostom. hom. 8. in 2 Timothy 3. Without
works, faith is like to a fair and beautiful body void of life; to a golden
picture, or statue.

More particularly, it appears that faith is to be proved and approved by
works, four manner of ways: viz.

I. By these places of Scripture, Mat. 5.16. Phil. 2.15. Tit. 3.8, 14. Heb.
2.14. Iam. 2.18.20, 22. 2 Pet. 1.5. etc. And,

II. From nature; for naturally the tree is known by his fruit, Mat. 7.20. and
the fruit of faith is works, Gal. 5.6.22. whence the Apostle conjoyns them,
Ephesians. 1.15. yea by our fruits we are known what we are, John 13.35. 1 John
3.5.14.4.13. And,

III. From the precept of the Lord, who has commanded us to testify both our
faith and Love unto him, by our obedience, John 14.15. Tit. 2.11, etc. 1 These.
4.3. And,

IV. From our vocation, Ephesians. 2.10. 1 These. 4.7. Iam. 1.27.

Qu. 31. What may we learn from hence?

Answ. 1. That if our faith be to be approved by works, then works are no more
the cause of Justification, then an Apple is the cause of the grafting, and
planting of the tree.

Note here, that there is a double plantation:

I. Of good apple trees; for some plant excellent, and profitable fruit. And,

II. Of wild trees, which of themselves will never bear any good or pleasant
fruit, and such plants are we. For,

1. The Lord plants us. And then,

2. He cuts us off. And then,

3. He grafts grace in us, or, engrafts us into Christ. And then,

4. We bring forth good fruit.

Answ. 2. We may learn hence, that faith which works not, is no true faith,
Jam. 1.23.2.17. and therefore this may be applied;

I. To carnal men, who brag of their faith, and hope, while in the mean time
they live in sin, Romans 6.2. whereas sin and grace can no more live in one and
the same heart, then the Ark and Dagon could stand in one Temple. And,

II. To novices, and fresh water soldiers; who beginning to perceive some
conversion to be wrought in their hearts, are ready to stop stay, and stand
still, as though no more now need to be done: whereas they should strive unto
perfection, Titus 3.8. 2 Peter 1.10.

Qu. 32. What rules must we observe and follow for the approving of our Faith
by our works?

Answ. These which follow.

I. Do not perform good works only sometimes, e re nata, by chance, or upon
some special occasion; but make it (...) non (...), not our holiday work, but
our daily labor: Let our study, care, and endeavor be to serve the Lord, 1
Cor. 6.20.

II. Principally have a care of the inward man, laboring that all carnal
affections may be subdued in us; all Satan's strong holds in our hearts
demolished; and our hearts established with grace, Ephesians. 4.22, etc. Colos.
3.5, etc. Romans 10.20. 2 Cor. 10.4.

III. Neglect not eternal works of holiness, for Fides est sanctissima, Faith
is most holy, Phil. 1.27. Jude 20. And,

IV. Omit not, but add unto these the works of honesty, and righteousness,
Phil. 4.8.

Qu. 33. What are the Adjuncts of true Faith?

Answ. 1. Latimer says that faith is like to some great Lady, who has her
Gentleman Usher going before her, which is the knowledge, and acknowledgment of
sin, and a noble or honorable company of attendants waiting upon her.

Answ. 2. More particularly, the Adjuncts, or the graces and virtues
accompanying, and attending upon this Queen Faith, are these;

1. Repentance, Mark 1.15. Acts 19.18.11.21.

2. Obedience, John 1.12, 13. A man cannot live without lively faith, and faith
is not lively without a holy life. Faith in Christ must be seconded with
faithfulness unto Christ; as we must have faith in him, so by obedience we must
keep faith unto him. As fire cannot be without heat, nor the Sun without light;
so a justifying Faith cannot be without sanctified obedience; for as water
makes the earth fruitful; so faith enricheth the man endued therewith, with
good works: As Fabritio the famous Italian at the conflict of Ravenna, bare in
his Shield A Touchstone, with this Motto, Fides hoc uno, virtusque probantur;
importing thereby, that his virtue and faith should of all men be known by
touch and trial.

3. Peace, Romans 15.13.

4. Joy, Acts 16.34. Romans 15.13. 1 Pet. 1.8.

5. Hope, Rom: 15.13.

6. Confidence, Mark 5.36.

7. Divine worship, John 9.38.

8. A good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19.

9. Patience, 2 These. 1.4. Hebr. 6.12. 1 Pet. 2.6.

10. Sincerity, 1 Timothy 2.7.

11. Charity, Tit. 3.8.

12. Love unto God, Gal. 5.6. 1 Timothy 1.14.

13. Love unto our brethren, 1 John 3.23.

14. Unity, and concord with the brethren, Acts 4.32.

Qu. 34. What are the notes, marks, and signs of true Faith? or, by what signs
or marks may true Faith be discerned?

Answ. This question might be answered from the former; but I will add
thereunto, That faith may be known by these and the like signs: viz.

1. It enables us to resist sin, Ephesians. 6.16.

2. It makes us desire to be more fully assured of Gods favor, and to be
reconciled unto him, Psalm. 31.16.84.5.106.4.

3. It makes us desire to please God, though we displease our selves, Genesis
22.10. Hebr. 11.5.

4. It does in such measure purify the heart from noisome lusts and affections,
that there is a continual fighting, and striving against them.

5. It makes us to long after Christ, and a fuller taste of his sweetness, Cant.
1.2.

6. It works in us the sweet fruit of heavenly, and spiritual joy, Phil. 1.25.
1 Pet. 1.8.

7. It strives against doubting, Judge. 6.17.

8. It makes us, when we are not sensible of it, to complain bitterly for the
want of it: John 3.23.

9. It makes us fervently seek to be settled in believing, Psalm. 77.3, 8, 9, 10.

10. It makes us careful to seek and search diligently for the sin which
hinders the settling of our faith, and to be industrious in our endeavors to
expel it, Psalm. 32.5. Hebr. 12.1. 1 ^et. 2.2.

11. It makes us desire to perform the works of obedience, not only in word,
but in deed also; that is, by a renewed, changed, and purified life and
conversation; that is,

I. It makes us obey God otherwise then we were accustomed, that is, in
sincerity, and singleness of heart, by an universal, and continual obedience
with Love and delight therein. And,

II. It makes us labor to find out all the relics of sin and pollution, and
to approve and allow of none, but to condemn, and relinquish all.

12. It makes us truly humble; or, true faith is known by true humility.

That true faith is, and makes us humble; appears two manner of ways: viz.

I. From these places, Mich. 6.8. Zeph. 2.3. Math. 11.29.18.4. Ephesians. 4.2. And,

II. From hence, because faith opens the eyes of the mind, giving unto the
Believer a double knowledge: viz.

First, of his state, that is, it lets him see that,

I. The glory, honor, and the riches (...) ^e world are but vain things, and
unable to save (...), Prove. 11.4. And,

II. It discovers unto him his sins, and takes off all figg-leaves of excuses.
And,

III. It lets him see, that his own best righteousness is but but like a
polluted ragg; Ephesians. 4.10. And,

IV. It shows him, that hitherto he has been deluded by dreams. And,

Secondly, of his hope; viz, that,

I. He deserves nothing at Gods hands; And,

II. That of himself he can do nothing that good is. And hence he comes to be
truly humble and lowly.

13. The last sign of Faith is Love, 1 Timothy 1.14. 1 John 3.23. Faith works by
Love, Gal. 5.6. and where there is no love, there is no faith; and where no
true love, no true faith: and therefore we should examine whether we love God
or not: and that not only lightly in word, but solidly in heart.

Qu. 35. Whether may Faith be without love or not?

Answ. Bellarmine upon this question reports our division of faith into these
three kinds thereof. viz.

I. Into an Historical faith.

II. Into a Miraculous faith.

III Into a Faith of promises; which faith he subdivides

1. Into a general faith. And,

2. Into a particular: and from this division of faith, lays down this position
concerning faith;

That the faith of promises may be without Love. But this Division is lame; for
he should again have subdivided it into a true justifying faith, and a false
Temporary faith: and then he had furnished us with this answer to his Thesis;

That the false Temporary faith of promises may be without Love; but not the
true Justifying faith.

Qu. 36. How does it appear, that true Justifying faith cannot be without Love?

Answ. From these and the like grounds, and reasons.

I. Faith which is without the works of Love, is false and dead, Jam. 2.14, 20.
1 Timothy 1.5. and therefore true faith cannot be without love.

II. To know God in Christ, is to have true faith; but none knows God in
Christ, but only he who keeps his commandments, that is Loves; for love is the
sum of the Commandments, 1 John 2.4. and therefore true faith cannot be
without Love.

III. To be in the light, and to abide in the light, is to believe, and
persevere in faith; but none is in the light, save only he who loves, John 2.9.
And therefore true faith cannot be without Love.

IV. Every one who is born of God; that is, who is the Son of God, loves God:
but every one who believes: that is, who has true faith, is the Son of God, 1
John 5.1. therefore he loves God; but he who loves God, loves also his
neighbor, verse. 2. wherefore he who has faith has love.

V. He who believes abides in God, and God in him, is Love, 1 John 5.16.
therefore he who believes loves; and consequently faith is not without love.

VI. That which Christ puts as an infallible sign of a true Believer, without
which neither faith can be true, nor any can be truly faithful, cannot be
separated from true faith: but he puts love for an infallible sign of a true
believer, etc. John 13.33. Ergo.

VII. That which is always effectual, and works by love, cannot be separated
from Love: but faith is such, Gal. 5.6. Ergo. I conclude, Fides sine delectione
est fictio, delectio sine fide est deceptio. Faith is feigned without love, and
love deceived without faith. Faith works by love; take away love and farewell
faith: to believe and not to love is for the devil, to love and to believe are
for the true Christian. Omni habenti fidem cum charitate dabitur spiritus
gratiae, and abundabit in bono opere. August. Where faith is linked to love,
there grace is given to abound in good works; where works abound to the glory
of God, there heaven is promised to the comfort of man. Cum dilectione fides
Christiani, sine dilectione fides daemonis. Qui autem non credunt, Pejores
sunt, quam daemones, and tardiores. August. Sermon. 10. de charit.

Qu. 37. Whether is faith or love, the greater or better Grace?

Answ. 1. Faith is the Prime grace.

If any object, Love is preferred, 1 Cor. 13.13.

I answer, love is there preferred before faith, not as a more excellent grace
in it self, but in the use of it, and that only in respect of men: because it
makes good works done to men, profitable unto them; and this is the Apostles
meaning.

Answ. 2. In some regards faith, in some love may be said to be superior,
greater, and better; as for example.

I. Love is greater then the Miraculous, Historical, or Temporary faith, 1 Cor.
13.1, 2, etc. 15.2.

II. Love being an effect of justifying Faith, is inferior unto it; and
therefore when it is said to be greater, we must not understand it, as though
it were the greater grace or virtue, much less in regard of the act of
Justification, ( Love not Justifying) but (...) in a double respect.

1. In regard of more ample effects, because faith profits a man's self, but
love transmits his effects unto others. And,

2. In respect of a longer duration, in regard of the act thereof; because love
shall continue in heaven, but not faith.

III. In many things faith is greater then love; for,

1. Faith is the cause of love, Gal. 5.6. 1 These. 1.5. but the cause is greater
then the effect.

2. Faith is called our victory, 1 Ioh. 5.3. so is not love.

3. We are born again by faith, we are made the children of God by faith* and
Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.

4. We are justified by faith, we please God by faith; and as faith without
love is dead, so love without faith is sin, Romans 5.1.14.23.

Qu. 38. How or by what means is faith begotten and confirmed?

Answ. 1. By Christ's own teaching and preaching, Ioh. 4.42.16 30.

2. By his Miracles wrought, John 2.23.

3. By the grace of God, Acts 18.27.

4. By the teaching and testimony of others, John 1.7.4.42.19.35.

5. By sensible demonstration, John 20.27.

6. By a serious consideration and observation of the written Word, John 20.31.

7. By the example of others, or, those who are over us, 1 Timothy 4.12.

8. By subduing and weaning our affections from all immoderate delights in, and
desires of the creature, and by setting them upon heaven; and heavenly things,
Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.20

9. By prayer unto God, whose gift faith is, Mark. 9.24. Luke 17.5.

10. By the Gospel preached by his Ministers, and Messengers, John 17.20. Acts
15.7. 1 Cor. 1.21. 1 These. 2.13. Romans 10.17.

Qu. 39. How or by what means is spiritual assurance augmented, and increased?

Answ. 1. I might answer this question from the former, because Ex iisdem
nutrimur ex quibus generamur; we are fed and nourished by the same means
whereby we are begotten.

Answ. 2. But I will add a word or two:

I. Distress and danger is sometimes a means to increase faith.

Crescit amor fidei, quantum ipsa pericula crescunt; the more true faith is
exercised, the more it is increased.

II. Experience of former love and mercy, is a means to increase faith; He who
delivered me from the Lion and the Bear, will likewise deliver me from this
uncircumcised Philistin, 1 Samuel 17.34.37.

III. The word of God; and therefore we must both read and meditate thereof
privately, Psalm. 119. and also hear it read and preached publicly, Iam. 1.18,
etc. 1 Pet. 1.25.

IV. To purge and purify the heart and conscience, Jam. 4.8. by a constant
examination both of our thoughts, words, and works, by the Word of God.

V. By meditating seriously of these four things; viz.

1. How true and faithful God is in all his Promises.

2. How unspeakable the Love of Christ has been, and is, toward his children.

3. What experience the Saints have had of the care and love of God and Christ
toward them.

4. What sweetness there is to be found in Christ; viz. in the fruition and
possession of him in the soul by a lively faith, Psa. 34.8.

VI. By an earnest endeavor to increase in these three things; 1. In knowledge
and truth, Ephesians. 4.15. Phil. 1.9. Col. 1.10. 2. In internal fruits, Romans 15.13.
And, 3. In external fruits also, both of holiness and righteousness, 1 Cor.
15.58. Col. 1.10. 1 These. 3.12.4.10.


VII. By fervent and earnest prayer unto God, Romans 12.12. Cant. 1.3, 5, 8.8.6,
7.

Qu. 40. Because we affirmed the word to be both a means to beget faith, and to
increase it; and the Apostle, Heb. 4.2, 3. testifying that the word profited
not some, because it was not mixed with faith in those who heard it; it may be
demanded, How does faith prepare our hearing, if hearing precede faith? How can
faith be a help unto hearing, and hearing a means unto faith?

Answ. 1. Most certain it is, that faith comes of hearing, or is begotten by
it. For,

I. By preaching, the subject of faith is given; that is, God, Christ, the
Promises and Salvation. And, These things by preaching are given to the
understanding. And,

II. Preaching does excite the affections; and that,

1. By showing us the danger wherein we are by nature, through sin. And,

2. By propounding unto us Christ, as the remedy against both the evil of sin
and of punishment. And,

3. By awakening us from the sleep of sin, Isa. 58.1. And,

III. The cooperation of the holy Spirit is Promised in the right hearing of
the word of God.

Answ. 2. Although faith be begot by hearing, yet both of them mutually help
one another: For,

I. There is a hearing which does excite unto some certain seeds of faith; as
we see in the blind man, Matthew. 9.28. Zach. 8.23. Acts 8.6. And,

II. That faith does desire to hear more, and more fully, Acts 13.42. yea the
heart being once molified, the hunger and thirst is increased, Ezekiel. 36.26. And,

III. Frequent and continual hearing augments and perfects faith; e. g. Those
of Antioch.

1. Hear the word, Acts 11.20. And,

2. In some sort or measure believe it, Acts 11.21. Then,

3. They send for Barnabas and Paul. Acts 11.22, 25. And,

4. By their Doctrine are confirmed in faith, Acts 11.26, etc. Therefore we
must neither neglect faith nor hearing; but,

I. Attend to the hearing of the Word. And,

II. Believe what we hear from the word, though we do not understand it. And
then,

III. Labor to understand what we believe; And,

IV. Implore the aid and assistance of the holy Spirit, that our hearing may be
profitable, and comfortable unto us.

I conceive, I may safely thus conclude this Question; An Historical faith,
whereby we b^lieve the truth of the Word, and a diligent attending unto and
upon the Word, does prepare us unto, and is a Means to beget Justifying faith
in us: which being begot, is by the same means nourished, cherished, and
augmented.

Qu. 41. What are the benefits, excellencies, fruits, and effects of true
Faith?

Answ. 1. In general: many rare fruits and effects of faith are declared, Heb.
11. which, because every ordinary capacity may with ease conceive, perceive,
and take up, I willingly omit.

2. In general; Faith is like to the Cocorenut-tree, which grows in the Islands
called Maldyva, of the wood whereof they make their Boats, of the leaves sails,
of the Nut-shell strings, which serve instead of vails, and of the kernel they
make both meat and drink: for faith lays hold upon promises, whether temporal,
spiritual, or eternal.

3. The Benefits of faith either concern,

I. People; for if they believe in the Lord, they shall be established, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. or,

II. Particular persons: these benefits, effects, and fruits, are either
Negative, or Affirmative.

I. The Negative Benefits of faith are,

I. If we believe we shall never die, John 11.26. And,

2. We shall abide no longer in darkness, and ignorance, John 12.46. There is
no darkness so desolate, no cross so cutting, but the splendour of a sound faith
and clear conscience is able to enlighten, and mollify. Faith helps unto
knowledge, and understanding, and thereby expels blindness. As we cannot live
without the elements; so we cannot attain unto knowledge without faith. Clem.
Alex. As a child who learneth his first elements, ought to believe what his
Master teaches him, and not to ask the reason why this letter is called A, and
that B: so in the mysteries of Faith, we must not ask the reason, how this may
be, or that may be, but we must give absolute credit to the Scriptures,
believing them to be infallibly true, without any errrour, falsehood, or
contradiction: for if we thus believe, it will make us more diligent in the
study of the word, and consequently will be beneficial unto us, for the
expelling of ignorance, and gaining of knowledge. Noli intelligere ut credas,
sed creed ut intelligas, intellectus merces fidei est. August. in Johan.
Although there be nothing true in Religion, which is contrary to reason, yet
because there are many things to be believed, which are above reasons reach,
therefore the word is first to be believed, and then to be learnt.

3. Faith expels fear: or, if we believe, we need not fear enemies or evils:
as, Mark. 5.36. Luke 8.50. And,

4. We shall not finally or totally be subdued or overcome by Satan, or our
spiritual enemies, faith being the best armor against Satan, and all his
temptations, Ephesians. 6.16. 1 Pet. 5.9. In India there is a little beast called
Quil, or Quirpele, which by nature is so great an enemy to Snakes, that
whenever, or wheresoever she finds any, she fights with them, and being stung
or poisoned by them, she presently eats some Palo de Cebra, or Snake-wood,
whereby she is instantly cured and healed: Faith is like this herb, for when we
are soiled or wounded by Satan, we are cured and recovered by faith in the
merits of Christ. Fide armatus, difficilia quaeque potest. Tindal hearing of a
Conjurer in the Low Countries who could by his conjurations fetch any dainty
dishes from any Princes table in the world, and therewith would welcome his
friends, whom he invited to feast with him; Tindal resolved to go to see him do
this act, and coming unto him, set himself to believe the contrary, and by
faithful inward supplication besought the Lord, to restrain the devils Power,
for the convincing, confounding, and amazing of his servant the Conjurer: who
was, notwithstanding all his endeavors, so hindered by the faith and prayer of
Mr. Tindal, in his conjurations, that he cried out and said, I cannot do it,
there sits the man who hinders me, and holds my hands: thus powerful, and
prevalant is faith against Satan and all his devices. And,

5. Faith makes us that we need not be ashamed, Romans 9.33.10.11. 1 Pet. 2.6.
Thus we see the Negative Benefits, etc. of faith.

II. There are Affirmative fruits, Benefits, and Effects of faith, which are of
four sorts: either Mixtly temporal and spiritual, or merely Temporal, or merely
Spiritual, or Eternal.

First, Some Fruits, Benefits, etc. of faith, are Mixtly temporal and spiritual.

I. If we believe our prayers shall be heard, and our requests granted, whether
they be for temporal or spiritual mercies, Math. 21.22. And,

II. Faith preserves us from persecution, or from the evil thereof. For as a
garment touched with the stone Amiathon, does resist fire, and if it be hung
over the fire will not burn, but become brighter, as Isidor reports; so the
soul being endued with faith does so resist the heat of persecution, that the
body is so insensible of pain, that they can sing in the midst of the flames,
and the soul thereby becomes sooner more glorious and more happy.

III. Faith apprehends, applies, and lays hold upon all the Promises of the
word, whether they concern this life, or the life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Secondly, Some Benefits, Fruits etc. of faith, are merely Temporal, for by
faith we lay hold upon all the Promises which concern Protection, and
Providence, yea the blessedness of us, and ours, both in regard of our bodies,
estates, and good names, Levit. ^6. Deuteronomy. 28.

Note here, that faith in temporal things is not literally certain and sure;
for it does not assure us that that very individual and numerical blessing
which we want, and desire, shall be bestowed upon us; but that whatsoever
blessing may be for our good, and for Gods glory, he will not in his due time,
withold from us. A most full and clear testimony of faith in temporal things
is laid down, Dan. 3 17. We know that our God is able to deliver us; but if
not, we are ready to suffer for him. Where they express and imply four things.

I. That God is able to deliver them.

II. That whether he will, or not, they know not; because neither love nor
hatred is known by any external deliverance or mercy.

III. That if the Lord did not deliver them from the fire, he would enable them
to endure the heat thereof. And,

IV. That howsoever the Lord dealt with them in temporal things, yet they would
not deny him, nor turn aside from him to worship an Idol. And thus faith does
assure every true Believer;

1. That the Lord is able to deliver him from all evil, and to give him any
good thing. But,

2. Faith does not assure him, that God will answer his desires, or necessities
in outward things. But,

3. That what the Lords sees to be fit and necessary for him, he will give him,
in his appointed time. And,

4. That the Lord will either give him what he desires, and wants, or give him
a heart to rest contented without it. And,

5. That howsoever the Lord deals with him, or whatsoever his lot and portion
be in outward things, yet he will cleave close unto God, in confidence,
dependence, adherence, and holy obedience.

Thirdly, Some Benefits, Fruits, etc. of faith are merely Spiritual as,

I. If we believe in Christ we shall be beloved of him, 1 Timothy 6.2. And,

II. We shall be added unto the Lord, Act. 5.14. And,

III. We shall be abundantly endued with all spiritual graces. John 7.38. And,

IV. We shall receive remission of our sins, Acts 10 43. And,

V. If we believe, the preaching of the Gospel will be the mighty power of God
unto salvation unto us, Romans 1.16. Heb. 4.2. And,

VI. We shall be sealed by the Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. And.

VII. We shall be justified by Christ, Romans 3.26. And,

VIII. Christ will be the end of the Law for righteousness unto us, Romans 10.4.
And,

IX. By faith we overcome the world, 1 John 5.5. And,

X. Thereby our hearts are purged and purified, Acts 15.9 And,

XI. It justifies us before God, Genesis 15.6. Habak. 2.4. Romans 1.17. 3.22, 25,
30.4.5, 24 5.1. And,

XII. It makes us the children of God, Gal. 3.26. And,

XIII. It distinguishes us from the children of wrath. In ipsa distinguuntur
filii Dei, a filiis Diaboli, filii lucis a filiis tenebrarum; August. By faith
the Sons of God are distinguished from the Sons of Satan, and the sons of
light from the sons of darkness. And,

XIV. Faith makes us like Bees; in whom four things are very remarkable:

1. They make no strangers Denizons.

2. They bring home store of wealth, but transport, or export little.

3. They harbor no sluggish Droans.

4. They go forth well furnished with wing and sting, for offense and defense.

Thus those who are endued with faith;

I. Will not suffer any strange lusts to harbor in their lives or hearts.

II. They improve their talents, and increase their gifts and graces; not
hiding them in a napkin, much less spending them in the service of sin and
Satan.

III. They are enemies to sluggishness, and sloathfulness in Gods service,
desiring that all that is in them may praise, and serve the Lord, R^m. 12.1. 1
Cor. 6.20.

IV. They labor to put on the whole armor of a Christian; whereby they may be
enabled both to defend themselves, to offend their foes, and to work out their
own salvation with fear and trembling, Ephesians. 6.13, etc.

Fourthly, Some Benefits, Fruits, etc. of faith are Eternal: for if we believe
in Christ, we shall have life eternal through his Name, Mark. 16.6. John
6.47.20.31. Acts 16.31. 1 Timothy 6.2. or, faith saves our souls, Luke 7.50.8.12.
Ephesians. 2.8. 1 Pet. 1.9. I will conclude this question thus, Faith saves the
sinner, scares the Devil, overcomes the world, makes our sacrifices welcome,
commands the Sun and brings salvation to man. Nullae majores divitiae, nulli
thesauri, nulli honores, nulla hujus mundi major est substantia, quam est fides
catholica, quae peccatores homines salvat, caecos illuminat, infirmos curat,
catechumenos bapizat, fideles ^ustificat, poenitentes reparat, justos
augmentat, martyrs coronat, clericos ordinat, sacerdotes consecrat, in aeterna
haereditate cum sanctis Angelis collocat. August. de verbis Dom.

Qu 42. Wherein does the happiness of those who are endued with true faith
consist?

Answ. In these seven things which follow; viz.

First, That the true knowledge of the truth belongs only unto them, John 6.37.
For,

I. Christ will only teach his, not the world.

II. Christ only can teach the saving truth, it being a mystery revealed only
by Christ.

III. Those who believe not do not hunger after, nor labor for this knowledge:
and so they are destitute of it, because they regard it not. And,

Secondly, That a blessing always goes along with them; and that not only,

I. In regard of themselves; as was showed in the fore going question; but also,

II. In regard of others; as Egypt was blessed for Israel; Potaphar for Joseph;
Laban for Jacob; Zoar for Lot; and the woman for Elias, 1 King. 17.14. And,

Thirdly, That they may certainly believe even in temporal things, Genesis 50.25.
Acts 27.22, 25. Phil. 1.25 For,

I. The nature of faith is to be certain, and it apprehends, and applies
temporal things, yea all things. And,

II. Faith is founded upon the truth, fidelity and particular providence of
God, which orders, disposes, rules, and governs all things, Job 1.21. And,

III. The faithful are not led by sense, but dare boldly trust God further then
they can see him, Romans 8.24. 2 Cor. 4.18. And,

Fourthly, That the holy Spirit is given unto them, Isa. 44.3. Jer. 32.39.
Ezekiel. 11.19 Joel 2.28. John 7.38. Acts 2.17. 1 Cor. 3.16.6.19. For,

I. We can do nothing of our selves, but as we are enabled by Christ, Romans 8.9.
And,

II. Christ is not in us in his own person, but by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 13.5. By
whom he bestows these inestimable blessings upon the faithful; viz.

1. He preserves them from sin, 1 John 3.9.

2. He gives grace unto them, 1 Cor. 12.11. 1 John 2.27.

3. He corroborates grace in them, Ephesians. 3.16.

4. He begets faith in them, Gal. 4.6.

5. He seals them, Ephesians. 1.13.

6. He infuseth the love of God into their hearts, Romans 5.5.

7. He comforts them in temptation, and tribulation. John 14 16.

8. He teaches them so to speak, that their adversaries know not how to oppose
them, Acts 6.10.

9. He teaches the hidden things of God unto them, 1 Cor. 2.12. And,

Fifthly, That their spiritual felicity is subject to no mutability or change.
For,

I. In heaven their life is eternal, Isa. 9 6.25.8. Dan. 7.14.22 2.

II. The death of the wicked will be eternal, Mat. 25.41, 46. 2 Pet. 2.17. Jude
13.

III. The distribution of grace is eternal; for whom he loves, he loves unto
the end, John 13.1. Romans 11.29. 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6

Sixthly, That they are safe, and secure from perishing everlastingly, John
3.16.6.39.17.12.18.9. For,

I. If they look up unto God, then they see to their great comfort;

1. That God is most faithful, and true in all the promises he has made unto
them, Hebr. 10.23. 1 Cor. 1.9. Tit. 1.2. 1 These. 5.24. Heb. 6.10. And,

2. That God is omnipotent, able to defend, and keep them, and to perform his
promises, Ioh. 10.29. Romans 14.4. And,

3. That God is omniscient and knows all things, 1 Cor. 8.3. 2 Timothy 2.19.

II. If they look into the promises, there they find,

1. That all their former sins are remitted, and pardoned, Ezekiel. 18.22. Acts
2.38.3.19. And,

2. That not only are their sins pardoned, but their persons also are
reconciled unto God in Christ. 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 2.13. And,

3. That if they sin hereafter, they shall be pardoned, Psalm. 89.32, 33. 1 John
2.2. And,

4. That they shall be protected from a final and total relapse, John 10.28.
Romans 8.31, 34. 14.4. 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. 1 John 2.27.3.19.

Seventhly, That they shall certainly be saved at the last, John 3.19. or, that
undoubtedly they shall come to life eternal in the end God has divided the two
worlds with his children; giving them a crown of thorns here; and reserving a
crown of glory for them hereafter, Luke 16.25. Romans 8.17. 1 Cor. 15.19, 58. 2
These. 1.5.7. Hebr. 6.10.

Vincentius observes four lives; viz.

I. A corporal life.

II. A spiritual life.

III. A celestial life; i. e. A life after death in soul And,

IV. An eternal life after the Resurrection. Indeed there are but three sorts
of Lives; viz.

1. A corporal life, which is so full of gall and wormwood, that is, all manner
of temporal evils, that it deserves the name of death rather then life. And,

2. A spiritual life, which is a little sweetened: for what is gracious to the
spirit, is grievous to the flesh. And,

3. An eternal life, which is unspeakably joyous and delightful. 1 Cor. 2.9.

The first life is given for our suffering or sorrow.

The second for our study and endeavor.

The third for our eternal joy and peace.

Qu. 43. What are the lets and impediments of faith?

Answ. 1. Sometimes Gods giving men over to a reprobate sense, or, to the
hardness of their own hearts, John 12.39.

2. Sometimes the plots, practices, and persecutions of wicked men, against the
professors of Christ, John 11.48.

3. Sometimes the not being of Christ's flock, and fold, John 10.26.

4. Sometimes ambition, pride, and affectation of humane praise and honor,
John 5.44.

5. Sometimes obstinacy and perverseness; John 4 48.8.45.

Qu. 44. What things are contrary to true faith?

Answ. 1. Unbelief, Genesis 19.14. 2 King. 7.12. or, incredulity. John 3.36.

2. Doubtfulness, Exodus 17.7. Mark 11.23.

3. Distrust, or desperation, Genesis 4.13. Mat. 27.4, 5.

4. A dissembling or hypocritical faith, Jam. 2.18, 20.

5. Temporary faith, and a revolting from faith, Luke 8.13. Hebr. 6.4.

6. Tempting of God, Exodus 17.2. 1 Cor. 10.22.

7. Carnal security, Psalm. 94.7.

8. To judge of the word of God according to humane reason, Genesis 18.12. 2 King.
5.11.

9. To trust in vain things, which are not able to help us, Isa. 59.4.

10. To place or put confidence in man, 2 Chronicles. 32.10, 11, 12.

11. To trust in idols and false gods, Psalm. 115.8.

12. To trust in riches, Psalm. 52.7, 8. Mat 6.24. Mark. 10.23.

13 To trust in ones self, or, in their own righteousness, John 5.44.

14. To hunt after the praise of men, as hypocrites do, John 5.44.

15. Not to confess Christ before men, Mat. 10.32, 33.

Qu. 45. Who are too blame in regard of faith?

Answ. 1. Those who believe not in Jesus Christ for their Justification and
Salvation, John 3.17.

2. Those who neglect, and regard not the assurance of faith Romans 1.16. Hebr.
6.12.

3. Those who in affliction doubt of Gods favor and goodness, Isa. 49.14, 15.

4. Those who seek not after God at all, Zeph. 1.6.

5. Those who stir not up themselves to take hold of God, when mercy is
offered, Isa. 64.7.

6. Those who answer not when God calls, Isa. 50.2.

7. Those who scoff at the signs of mercy, John 2.18.

8. Those who make shipwreck of faith, Acts 8.13, etc. 1 Timothy 1.19.4.1.5.8, 12.

9. Those who blame them who believe in God, ^ King. 18 19, 22, 30.

10. Those who trust in gold. Job 31.24.

11. Those who deride men for trusting in God, Mat. 27.43.

12. Those who are hardly drawn to believe in God, Numb. 14.11.

13. Those who will not believe the Lords promises, although he have showed
many testimonies of his good will toward them. Deuteronomy. 1.32.

14 Those who will not believe in Christ, except he show Miracles unto them,
Mat. 27.42. John 4.48.

15. Those who will not believe in Christ, except they see some visible and
ocular demonstration, and manifestation of his Deity, John 20.25.

16. Those who will not believe the comminations of the word, Acts 13.41.

17. Those who seek for salvation by the works of the Law, and not by faith,
Rom* 9.32.

18. Those who through fear of enemies, and evils, dare not profess Christ, nor
the faith of Christ. e. g. In Frithes answer to the Bishop of Rochester, there
is a story of a youth, who being present at his Fathers burning, the Officers
to try whether or no he was of his Fathers religion, asked him, How he
believed? He being dismayed at the sad sight of his Fathers death, and fearing
the like torment, answered, Sir, I believe even as it pleases you.

19. Those who believe with a bare, verbal faith; too many say, with
indifferent Apelles in Eusebius, Sat est credere in crucifixum: it is enough to
believe in Christ crucified, though it be with a dead, dull, ignorant, yea
wicked faith.

20. Those who walk by sight and sense, refusing to believe any thing, which
they cannot comprehend, and take up by reason; and not daring to trust God any
further then they see him. Lodovicus Granatensis says, As he who having never
seen glass before, seeing a curious and excellent vessel made of it, and set
before his eyes, cannot be induced to believe, that it was made of a kind of
straw, and sand, and by the breath of man; so is it in matters of faith being
considered of by the light of reason. As we cannot imitate nor well understand
the art of Bees in making their Hony-Combs, and tempering their honey; nor the
art of Spiders in weaving their webs; nor the art of Silkworms in spinning
their silk: so much less can we imitate the works of God, or comprehend in our
reasonable understanding the mysteries of faith; and therefore what we cannot
believe by understanding, we should labor to understand by believing: though
the Philosopher teaches otherwise, where he says, Rationi fides adhibenda
est, si quae demonstrantur, convenient cum his quae sensu percipiuntur rebus.
Arist. 3. de gener. animal. cap. 10.

The faith mentioned by Juvenal, is more like the belief of a Heathen, then of
a Christian; Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in arca.
Tantum habet and fidei.
Look how much money he has in his chest;
With so much faith only his heart is blessed.


The Schoolmen here teach better when they say, Rations praecedentes minutent
fidem, subsequentes augent. Reasons going before faith, do diminish it; but
reasons following faith, strengthen it. Luther says well; If you would
believe, you must crucify that question, Why? for God loves not to have us so
full of Wherefores; but rather if we would believe, to go bindfold into Gods
commands. We must walk by faith, not by sight or sense, 2 Cor. 5.7. For the
nature of faith is to apprehend righteousness in the sense of sin, happiness in
the sense of misery, and favor in the sense of displeasure. Faith will enable
us to see the sweet Sunshine of Gods favor, even through the thickest clouds
of Gods wrath. I will conclude this question, with that saying of Gregory, hom.
16. sup. Evang. Divina operatio si ratione comprehenditur, non est admirabilis,
nec fides habet meritum, cui humana ratio praebet experimentum.

Having briefly treated of true faith in general, I will now propound a
question or two of the kinds of it; viz. of Weak faith and Strong.

Qu. 46. How is there a greater faith and a less? or, in whom?

Answ. 1. Sometimes in diverse men; thus the time was, when Peter's faith was
greater, and Thomas his faith less.

2. Sometimes in the same man, but at diverse times faith is greater and less;
thus sometimes Paul saw clearly, sometimes but in a dark speaking, 1 Cor. 13.
and our faith is more quick-sighted at one time then at another.

3. There are diverse degrees of faith, as of age; sometimes we are infants and
weak, sometimes men of ripe years. Thomas his faith at first was very weak, but
afterward a strong, comfortable, and applicative faith, 2 Cor. 10.15. Ephesians. 1,
13. 2 These. 1.3.

Qu. 47. How many ways is faith weak?

Answ. Two, to wit, either,

I. In apprehension: when knowledge is weak; Or,

II. In application; when a man cannot certainly lay hold upon Christ; but is
like him in the Gospel, who said, I believe, Lord help my unbelief, Mark. 9.24.

Qu. 48. Can weak faith be true?

Answ. It may, as appears thus;

I. There is a smoking flax, and a bruised reed, Isa. 42.3. Mat. 12.20. Psalm.
103.2.

II. Sometimes the Sun is obscured by the interposition of a cloud; and
sometimes the Lord hides his face that we cannot see him, Psalm. 22.1, 2.

III. Faith is not created Simul and Semel, Perfect at first, as Adam was; but
is like a man in the ordinary course of nature, who is first an imperfect
birth, then an infant, then a child, then a youth, then a man: or like a grain
of Mustard Seed, Matthew. 13.31, 33. 1 Pet. 2.2. for faith grows and increases
unto perfection, Prove. 4.18. 1 Cor. 1.7. and 2 Cor. 1.7.10.15. Ephesians. 4.13. 2.
These. 1.3, 2 Pet. 3.18.

Qu. 49. Why is true faith sometimes weak and small?

Answ. Because although faith be given from above ( Ephesians. 2.8.) yet it is not
given miraculously, but by the means of the Word, Romans 10.15, etc. Hence it is
said, The sower sowed seed, Mat. 13.1.31. Mark 4.26, etc. And hence it is
sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser. For the better understanding of this,
observe three things:

First, the Schoolmen say, that faith is less in a double regard; viz.

I. Quoad objectum, in regard of the object; because expressly some believe
sewer things then others do. Thom. 2.2.54.

II. Quoad participationem, in regard of the participation; and that either,

1. Ex part intellectus, because some have lesser understanding then others:
or,

2. Ex part voluntatis, because some have,

I. Lesser promptitude and readiness in believing then others; some being more
dull, lasie, and sluggish t^^ others are: or,

II. Lesser devotion; some being less zealous then others are: or,

III. Lesser confidence, and trust; some being more fearful then others are.

Secondly, our Divines affirm faith to be lesser in a double regard also; viz.

I. Fructibus, in regard of the fruits thereof: as holiness, joy, strength,
zeal, constancy, and the like.

II. Gradibus, in regard of the Degrees, or Nature of Faith; as in
apprehension, and application. Perkins. And therefore Chemnitius observes three
things; viz.

1. That sometimes faith is great: as, Matthew. 8.10.15.28. and,

2. That sometimes faith is small: as Mat. 14.31. and,

3. That sometimes faith is weak: and that either,

I. In acknowledging, Romans 14.1. or,

II. In trusting, Mark 9.21.

Thirdly, observe, that sometimes faith is lesser,

I. In regard of others; i. e. one man's faith is greater then another, as one
star differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. Romans 15.1.14.1. and,

II. In regard of a man's self; that is* sometimes faith in one and the same man
is greater, and sometimes lesser; and that either,

1. Ord^narily; and thus a man's fai^^ is less when he is newly regenerated,
then afterward, Heb. 5.12. or,

2. Extraordinarily, in the hour of temptation; which is occasioned either,

I By reason of some sin committed, 2 Samuel 12. Psal^ ^^. and 32. or,

II. Because God withdraws his grace and spiritu^l light for a time, 2 Chronicles.
32.31. Psalm. 51.11. o^,

III. Because the good and holy Spirit of God is grieved, Ephesians. 4 30, 31. and
that either,

1. By our love of sin: or,

2. By our neglect of the exercises of Religion: or,

3. By our quenching of the good motions of the holy Spirit.

Qu. 50. How may a weak faith be known to be true?

Answ. 1. The weak true faith is but of short time; or, is but newly, and
lately infused, 1 Pet. 2.1. where there is life in an infant, there is daily
growth, insomuch as from a child it comes to be a man, except it prove a
Dwarf, or monster in nature; and therefore they may suspect the truth of their
faith, who are always children, and both weak in knowledge and application.

2. The weak true faith is humble sorrowing and blushing for sin and iniquity,
though past, and mourning for her present weakness in application: true faith
greives because she is weak.

3. True faith (though weak yet) brings forth some good fruits of obedience,
Gal. 5.6. James 2.14.

Qu. 51. What are the Effects of weakness of Faith?

Answ. As infidelity in toto, so debility in tanto causes much evil. E.G.

I. Sometimes weakness of faith drives unto the use of wicked means* a fear to
want things necessary, often hurries men unto covetousness, oppression, usury,
covenant breaking, and the like.

II. Oftentimes it brings men to murmuring, fears, terrors, sorrow unto death,
and the like, 2 Cor. 7.10.

III. It hinders in part from the hearing of the Word, because they are not
sure of the presence of God with the word, nor of the aid and assistance of the
Spirit in the hearing thereof.

IV. It makes prayer tedious, because we are not sure that thereby, and therein
we talk with God, as a man with his friend.

V. Weakness of faith, or a weak faith cannot bring a man to peace of
conscience, Phil. 4.7. And therefore we should not only examine whether we
have faith; but also, whether our says increase and be strong

Qu 52 What may we learn here from the weak true faith?

Answ. That God will not reject infants, and those who are weak in faith, Mat.
12.20.19.14. True indeed it is that we ought to be,

I Hot in true zeal, as Elias, Christ and Paul were. And,

II. Pure and immaculate in our lives, and convers^tions, Mat. ^.16. Phil.
2.15. yea,

III. Strong, resolu e, and perseverant in the ^r^ct se of Religion, Colos.
1.25. 1 Pet. 5.^. yet Ch^^^ p^sseth h^^ and pardons many sins in us, and
bears with many infirmities, not rejecting us because we are weak in faith:
and therefore tender consciences may here find comfort in a threefold distress;
viz.

1. Art thou dejected, and in heaviness, because thou have been a great sinner?
then remember that such were Zacheus, Mary Magdalene, the thief, and many
Publicans, unto whom Christ showed mercy: and therefore he will be gracious
also unto thee, if with them thou do repent and believe.

2. Art thou dejected and drowned in tears, because thou art weak in faith?
then remember, Mat. 12.20.

3. Art thou cast down because thou art weak in Sanctity and obedience? then
call to mind, Psalm. 103.3. John 15.2. Ephesians. 5.14.

Qu 53. What does God require of us unto this comfort?

Answ. 1. That we have a good foundation, a sincere heart within.

2. That we strive unto perfection, not acquiescing or resting in any degree of
grace received, but laboring that we may grow from a weak faith to a strong;
from a small faith to a great.

Qu. 54. When, how, or how many ways is faith in any one said to be great?

Answ. 1. To this Dormisecurus, sermon. 18. answers, Tunc autem est fides magna,
quando est operibus conjuncta, charitati admixta, perseverans and firma: faith
is then great, when it is conjoined with works, mingled with love, and firm and
constant. For,

I. Faith which is without works, is an idle, addle, and dead faith, James 2.
and,

II. Faith which is not accompanied with love and charity* is a fruitless and
unprofitable faith, 1 Cor. 13.2, etc. And,

III. Faith which is not constant and perseverant, but temporary only, is not
a great faith, nor at all available unto salvation. And therefore unto a truly
great faith, it is required* that it have with it ^^th works and charity; and
be constant and perseverant even unto death.

Answ. ^. ^a ^h i^ called great five several ways; vi^.

I. When a man understands and believes Profound things concerning God; or when
he appreh^nds ^^ch more of the Nature, Essence, and Attributes of God then
humane nature can teach him. Thus the Centur^ans faith was great, Matthew. 8.9

II. When a man can esteem all temporary things to be transitory and contemn
them in regard of those things which he hopes for by faith in Christ. And thus
the faith of Moses was great, Hebr. 11.^6

III. When in adve^sity, affliction, and misery, a (...) ^n fully trust (...),
without ^^her ^^inti^g or d^^bting. And thus Jobs faith was great, (...).

IV. When it holds nothing impossible which is promised; neither believes
according to the probability of humane reason, but according to the almighty
power of God. As the great Mathematit^an said, Show me a place where I may six
my engine* and I will shake all the earth: so faith says, Give me but a sure
word of promise, whereupon I may set my foot, and I will carry any thing. Thus
Abraham's faith was strong, when Speravit in spe supra spem, he believed in
hope, against hope, Romans 4.18. being fully persuaded, that what God had
promised, he was able to perform, verse 21.

V. When a man does not desist from doing his duty, although the Lord answer
him not at first: and thus the Can^anitish woman's faith was great, Mat. 15 22,
etc. who notwithstanding the great and diverse repulses she had, continued to
follow Christ, and to pray unto him, until her request was granted.

Qu. 55. What necessity is there of strong faith?

Answ. God measures his blessings according to our faith; and therefore a
strong faith is necessary to our well-being.

Qu. 56. Why dot^ G^d me^sure his mercy according to our says?

Answ. 1. Because without faith we cannot pray; and therefore as there is no
faith where there is no prayer; so where there is no prayer, there is no
assurance of any blessing, Rom 10 14.

2. Because a weak faith is less able to work: for as the want of faith hinders
us from prayer, so the weakness of faith hinders us from true performance of
many duties, Mat. 8.26.14.30. 17.20. And therefore if we be destitute of any
blessings let us remember that the reason hereof is, either want or weakness of
faith. For,

I. ^o unbelievers nothing is given, at least in love; faith being the key of
Gods treasury, and the vessel of the fountain, whereby water is conveyed unto
us: and therefore if faith be cold, carnal, idle empty and sleepy, no wonder
then if the reward be ^uch And.

II. To children is given according to the proportion of their faith, more or
less.

Q^. 57. How is it then elsewhere said, That God gives abundantly to all his
children?

Answ. It is true, that God gives to them all a^u^dantly, but yet it is
according to their capacity. At a costly feast or banquet, all eat according to
their own proper appetites or strength, not equally and alike. All vessels in
heaven are full, but all are not of the same capacity. And there fore three
things are required of us in regard of faith:

I. To labor that our says be a true, living, and j^st fying faith for it is
a most perilous thing for a man herein to be deceived. And,

II. To labor that our faith may daily increase and grow in strength; because
a weak, or feeble faith affords but small or no comfort. And,

III. To labor that our faith may be an exercised faith; that is, that it may
be employed and extended unto all the actions and occurrences of our life, that
we may live by faith, and walk in faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. that is, exercise our
faith by a daily dependence upon God.

Qu. 58. How may we know whether our faith be strong or not?

Answ. 1. Luther says, There are three things which are arguments of a strong
faith:

I. Credere impossibilia rationi: to believe things which are impossible to
reason, as Abraham did, Romans 4.

II. Deum amare cum praebet se inimicum; to love God, when he seems to be our
enemy; as the woman did, Mat. 15.

III. Sperare dilata, to hope for things long delayed; as David did, Psalm
40.1, etc.

Answ. 2 We may easily know whether our faith be strong or not, by these plain
marks and signs.

I. Can we in all things cast our selves into the arms of Christ, and commit
our selves wholly unto him?

II. Can we hope, expect and see the help and presence of Christ, even without,
yea contrary to means? Do we walk by faith, not by sight?

III. Can we in crosses, afflictions, and temporal disasters (for Christ's sake)
rejoice? Romans 8 35.

IV. Can we contemn and despise the world, using it as though we used it not, 1
Cor. 7.30. because we have built our nest in the Rock, and placed our
confidence upon a surer stay then the world is, namely, upon Christ, who has
promised never to forsake or f^^l us? Heb. 13.5.

V. Do we daily increase both in love, faith, obedience, zeal, and all graces?
1 Pet. 2.2. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6.

Although I have hinted at some things here concerning a strong faith, which
perhaps the Reader might think sufficient for an Idea, or Essay, which this
Trac^ is; yet because a strong faith signifies Constable lence and Assurance: I
will, before I take leave of this grace, add a question or two more concerning
them.

Qu. 59 In whom must we place our Confidence and Assurance?

Ans. In the Lord, and his Christ, Psalm. 44.8.65.5. Ephe. 3.12. Heb. 10 19.
whereof we have some rare examples in these following texts; Acts
4.31.19.8.28.15. Romans 10.20. 2 Cor. 3.12.7.4.10.2.11.21. Phil. 1.14 1 Thessalonians.
2.2. Bellarmine, de Just^fi^^. 5. c. 7. prop^sit. 3. could not but confess.
That it is the safest way to place all our confidence in the only mercy of ^od
by reason of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the danger of
vainglory. And yet it is worth observing. How certain he was of the
righteousness of another, at another time; for being put to his Oath before a
public Notary, he affirms, That he verily believes, that Gonzaga, (who left
the dignity* and inheritance of a Marquisite) never committed mortal sin, and
that from his age of seven years, he is certain of it. Caeparius de vita
Gonzag. l. 3. c. 2.

Qu. 60. How must we trust in God?

Answ. 1 We must ever trust him on his bare word, even with hope, besides hope,
above hope, and against hope. And.

2. We must trust him for small things as well as great; as we believe he will
raise up our bodies from dust, and save our souls; so we must depend upon him
for Providence and Preservation: And,

3. To try first, and then to trust, is a good rule for trusting, in regard of
men, but not in regard of God; for we must first trust his Omnipotence, Wisdom,
Mercy and Goodness, and then try him.

Qu. 61. Why must we place our Confidence and Assurance in the Lord?

Answ. 1. Because we are commanded by him so to do, Heb. 4.16.10 22.

2. Because he only is able to preserve us from the evils which we fear, Prove.
3.26.

3. Because it is better to put our trust in God then in men; in the King of
heaven then in earthly Princes, Psalm. 118.8, 9.

4. Because they who place their trust in him, shall have a place of refuge,
Prove. 14.26. Isa. 30 15.

5. Because then we shall be of the household of God, Heb. 3.6.

6. Because then we shall be made partakers of Christ, Heb. 3.14.

7. Because it has great recompense of reward, Heb 10.35.

Qu. 62. How many sorts of Assurance are there?

Answ. Two: Humane and Divine.

First, there is a Humane assurance, or an assurance of humane things; as,

I. Of life, Deuteronomy. 28.66.

II. Of Peace, Jer. 14.13.

Secondly, there is a Divine Assurance, or an assurance of spiritual things;
which is either,

I. An assurance of charity, or, a charitable persuasion of other men's
salvation, 2 Timothy 1.5. Or,

II. An assurance of certainty, or, a persuasion of our own salvation by Christ.

This assurance is either,

I. VVeak, Prove. 3.26. Or,

II. Strong, Romans 4.21. Colos. 2.1. Hebr. 6.11. 10.22.

Qu. 63. VVhereupon is the Assurance of faith built?

Answ. 1. In answer hereunto observe, That the certainty and assurance of faith
is twofold, according to a double faith; viz.

First, there is a Miraculous faith, whose assurance is absolute. And,

Secondly, there is a saving faith, whose assurance is conditional. Observe
here, that these two agree In genero, That Christ will give, grant, and do what
is desired; but they differ, In individuis; because the Miraculous faith does
absolutely believe that Christ will do this or that; but the Saving faith
believes conditionally: viz. if it may be for Gods glory, and our good, then we
are assured that God will give, or do it, as Mat. 26.39. 1 John 5.15.

Ans. 2. This being premised, I answer two things; viz.

I. The assurance of the miraculous faith is built upon the internal strength
of the Spirit, which moves the mind of the party to believe that he shall be
able to do such or such a thing; or, that at least it shall be done: and thus
the Spirit of the Lord was upon Balaam, Saul, Elias, Elisha, and the Apostles.

II. The assurance of the Saving faith is built upon the Word; the promises
being therein explicated, and given. And therefore seeing Miracles are now
ceased, let us not look after, or seek for the miraculous assurance, but for
the certainty of saving faith, laboring to increase in that assurance more and
more.

Qu. 64. How may we be assured that our confidence and assurance of salvation
is true, and neither carnal nor hypocritical?

Answ. We must prove and try our selves by these Signs.

I. Have we made the Lord our God, both by receiving from him the seal and
earnest of his love, the evidence of his Spirit, and by giving our selves
wholly up unto him, and his service, John 8.34. 1 Cor. 6.20.

II. Does the Lord dwell and inhabit in our hearts? that is,

1. ^s his love there? do we love him unfeignedly, desir ng and longing for him
above all other things? Psalm. 27.4.42.1.63.1.

2. Is his fear there? do we tremble before him? are we fearful to offend him?
are we ashamed, and affected with blushing for our former sins? are we smit
with an awful reverence of Gods presence?

3. Is his comfort there? do the comforts of the Lord refresh our hearts? If
these things be in us, then doubtless God is with us.

III. Whether are these things perpetually in us, or not? If they be in us by
fits, and starts only, it argues against us; but if we labor to serve the Lord
in a constant course of Religion all our days, then we may be confidently
persuaded that our confidence and assurance is real. Fidei certitudo importat
firmitatem ad haesionis, non semper quietationem intellectus. Parisius.

Thus much for the first Theological Grace, Faith.

CHAP. II. (...). Of Hope.
Qu. WHat is Hope?

Answ. Plato says, Spes est vigilantium somnium; Hope is a waking man's dream;
And Aristotle being asked, Quidnam esset Spes? what Hope was? answered,
Vigilantis somnium; and gave this reason, Multa enim sibi promittunt inania,
qui spe rerum futurarum ducuntur, Laert l. 5. c. 1. As many a man feeds himself
with dreams, and delights to build castles in the air; so those promise many
vain and idle things unto themselves, who are lead and live only upon future
hopes. Or,

Hope, as one says, is a pleasant passion of the mind, which does not only
promise us those things which we most desire, but those things also which we
utterly despair of.

Christian Hope is a certain, and undoubted expectation, or looking for of all
promised good things which be to come, especially of heavenly blessedness,
being freely given us of God, and grounded upon his infinite mercies, and
Christ's merits alone; or Hope is a virtue whereby we are inclined to the
expectation of those things which God has promised unto us, Romans 8.25. or,
Hope is a patient expectation of those things which we believe to obtain; or,
Hope as it is a passion of the irascible part of the soul* may be thus defined;
It is a passion of the soul, that we have of the impression of future good,
which presents it self to our imagination as difficult to obtain, whereby we
endeavor to pursue it, conceiving that we are able to attain unto it, and in
the end to get the possession thereof.

Qu. 2. How many sorts and kinds of hope are there?

Answ. Hope is either,

1. Uncreate; viz. in Christ, Hebr. 12.1, 2. or,

2. Create; which is either,

I. Analogical, and is in unreasonable creatures, or, beasts, as Job 41.9. Romans
8.20. or,

II. Real, in reasonable creatures or men.

Now this hope which is in men is twofold, Humane and Divine.

First, there is a Humane hope, which is twofold; viz. Good and Evil.

I. There is a Humane hope which is good and warrantable; which is twofold.

1. A courteous hope, 1 Timothy 3.14.

2. A natural hope, Ruth 1.12. Job 6.11.20. Romans 4.18.

II. There is a Humane hope, which is Evil, and wicked; which is fourfold.

1. A curious hope, Luke 23.8. And,

2. A covetous hope, Luke 6.35. Acts 10.19.24.26. Some hope for the death of
those by whose death they may be enriched; but according to the proverb, He who
hopes for dead men's shoes, may go long barefoot. Some hope to gain by their
kindness to others; but to hope for requital of benefits bestowed, may rather
be accounted usury then virtue. And

3. There is an ambitious hope; but high hopes have oftentimes hard haps; and
such as reach at the tree often stumble at the root.

4. There is a cruel hope, Hest. 9.1.

Secondly, there is a Divine hope which is twofold; viz.

I. False, opinionative, deceitful and deceivable; as Job 6.20. Prove. 11.7. And

II. True and good; and is either

1. Charitable, 1 Corinthians. 13.7. 2 Corinthians. 1.7.10.15. or

2. Spiritual, Ezra 10.2. Job 5.16. Hebr. 11.1. To hope above, and against
hope, is the excellency of a mighty resolution.

Qu 3. How do Hope and Desire differ?

Answ. Thus, Desire extends it self to all kind of good things, without any
apprehension of difficulty; and therefore belongs to the concupiscible
appetite; but Hope is subject to the irascible, and respects the future good
gotten with difficulty; for no wiseman ever hoped for things which he holds
impossible to attain unto.

Qu. 4. Wherein does the Hope and expectation of the faithful in earth, and of
the Saints in heaven differ?

Answ. 1. Negatively; the hope and expectation of those and these does not
differ herein, that the H^pe of these is certain, but of those uncertain; for
both are sure and certain of the salvation both of souls and bodies at the last
day.

Answ. 2. The hope and expellation of the Saints in heaven, and faithful on
earth, differ in these things;

I. That the hope of the Saints on earth adheres unto faith, which looks upon
God in his promises as in a glass, or dark speaking 1 Cor. 13.12. but the
expectation of the Saints in heaven adheres unto an open and manifest vision of
^od. And

II. Our hope is with labor, pains and strife; but the expectation of the
Saints in heaven is without any difficulty. And

III. Our hope is an imperfect expectation, theirs a perfect hope. and

IV. Our hope is for the possession, theirs for the perpetuity of heavenly
glory. And

V. Our hope is for the glorifying both of our souls and bodies, theirs only
of their bodies, their souls being already glorified.

Qu. 5. How do Faith, Hope and Charity differ?

Answ. Bernard in Psalm 91. sai h, Dicit sides, parata su^t ma^na
inexcogitabilia bova a Deo sidelibus suis; dicit spes, mihi illa servantur;
tertia quidem charitas, curro ego, ait, ad illa. Faith says God has prepared
many good and great mercies for his children, Hope says, I am one of Gods dear
ones, and therefore have a right unto, and an interest in those inestimable and
inexpressible blessings. And Love says, seeing they are mine, I w ll hasten to
the enjoyment of them, desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which
is best of all.

Qu. 6. What difference is there between Hope and Heaviness?

Answ. Crates answers, Sadness is the punishment of the heart, but Hope is the
medicine of distress.

Qu. 7. Wherein does true Hope consist?

Answ. Bernard in Psalm 91. says, Tria considero, in quibus tota spes mea
consistit: charitatem adoptionis, veritatem promissionis, potestatem
redditionis; Three things I constantly and continually consider, wherein my
whole hope stands; the love of adoption, the truth of promission, and the power
of reddition. When I call to mind* that God so loves me in Christ, that in him
he has made me a son; and remember the truth of the promises made unto sons;
and withal, how abundantly able the Lord is to perform all his promises made to
his children; then does my soul cheerfully hope in God.

Qu. 8. What is the Nature of spiritual Hope?

Answ. 1. It is of that nature that nothing can destroy it: for though fortune
(as one says) man take away our goods, yet death cannot deprive us of hope.

2. It is a better hope then we had by the Law, Hebr. 7.19.

3. It speedily desires, and earnestly longs for the enjoyment of the thing
hoped for, Prove. 13.12.

4. It makes us not ashamed, Romans 5 5. And,

5. It is a remedy against all evils, temporal, and spiritual Si insurgant
adversum me prae^ia, si saeviat mundus, si fremat malignus, si itsa caro
adversus spiritum concupiscat, in te ego sper^bo. Bern. ser. 9. sup. Qui
habitat. Hope in God is a sovereign Antidote against the poison and perils of
Satan the world, wicked men, and our own corrupt nature. Si tribulatio
infertur, per te sperabo, tu es spe^ mea: si insurgat hostis, non nisi in te
sperabo. Bern. in Psalm. 91.

6. It comforts us in spiritual dejections and languishments, Psalm 42.5, 11.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope
in the Lord, etc. As without food the body would fail; so as the proverb is, If
it were not for hope, the heart would break. Futurorum spes laborantibus
requiem parit, sicut in agone positis dolorem vulnerum mitigat spes coronae.
Orig. hom. 9. sup. Exodus Sola spes hominem in miseriis consolari solet. Cicer
in Catalin.

7. It is always of things not seen, and to come, Romans 8.24. Spes non nisi
bonarum rerum est, nec nisi futurarum. August. Enchir. c. 8.

8. It is a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3.

9. It is one of the three chiefest Theological virtues, 1 Cor. 13.13.

10. It is the hope of righteousness, Galat. 5.5.

11. It is a refuge in the time of need, Hebr. 6.18, 19.

12. It rejoices in adversity, as follows afterward.

13. It is a good hope, Lament. 3.26. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.

14. I is a blessed hope, Tit. 2.13.

15. It is the hope of salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. Tit. 3.7. or, it is a hope that
saves our souls, Romans 8.24. Spes praemii solatium sit laboris: the hope of the
reward is the comfort of the work. Hier. in ep. Spes in aeternitatem animum
erigit. Greg. in moral. Spes est ultimum adversarum rerum solatium. Senec. in
ep.

Qu. 9. What are the Fruits, Effects, Benefits and Excellencies of true Hope?

Answ. 1. This question might be fully answered from the former; but I will add
a word or two.

2. Hope keeps us from sin; for as it did not hurt Rahab to dwell with the
people of Jericho, but her faith kept her safe; so sin does not harm those who
by faith and a lively hope do expect their redeemer. And,

3. It causes us to approach unto Christ; for as by the Cable a man may draw
his vessel to the Anchor; so the soul being fixed by the anchor of hope to
Christ, does hale and draw it self nearer and nearer unto him. And

3. It animates and emboldens a man to undertake great things, adding as it
were wings to his attempts Cum al^qua spes sub^st, vehementio^es vires apparere
assolent. Aug. de quant. anim. c. 22. Spes ad m^jora audenda sese erigit. Greg.
in Job 4. l. 5. c. 29. and

4. Hope upholds in all labors, troubles, adversities and disasters. Spes
commodi furatur labores, and metum ab cond^t Periculi. Ambros. in Psalm. 12. An
Italian suffering many cross adventures and troubles* painted in his study a
Pinnace or small Bark, tossed with tempestuous storms, and in the sail was
written, Expectanda d^es; meaning, that he hoped for one Sunshine day to
recompense all his glowry and winter months. Hippolito Cardinal de Medic^, to
the same purpose, figured the Moon in the Eclipse, which happens by reason of
the interposition of the earth between the Sun and it, with this Motto, Hinc al
quando eluctabor. Thus Jews of Luxemberg, a French Captain, coming to the wars
in Italy, had for his Impress A Sun, Or in a field Azure, environed with thick
clouds, with this Mot, Obstantia nubila solvet; to infer, that he having
endured diverse adversities, after the beheading of his father, the high
Constable of ^r^nce, hoped notwithstanding by his valor and virtue, that even
as the Sun with his scalding beams dissolves the clouds, so he hoped to
vanquish all who were averse to his shining virtues. Maximian an Italian Earl,
being enamoured with a Lady named Anna Moronna, who afterward was his wife, had
for his Impres^ a Silkworm, which only lives with the leaves of the
Mulberry-tree, which tree in Lombardy is called Moronnna, with this Mot, Quol
di cio vivo. Only of th^^ I live, disdaining other food; to show, that as that
little beast does only live of those leaves, so he only contented himself to
feed on the leaves of his love, in hope one day to enjoy the fruit of
legitimate marriage.

5. Hope does not only uphold in labor, but comforts in misery: hence Bernard
calls it the god of the wretched. The evenings hope may comfort the mornings
misery. The apprehension of hope derideth grief, and fullness of hope consumes
it. Hope of all passions is the sweetest, and most pleasant; whence it is said,
that hope only comfort the miserable.

Qu. 10. How many sorts of men are there in regard of Hope?

Answ. 1. I might answer three; for,

I. Some hope for that which they may hope for.

II. Some hope for that which they should hope for.

III. Some hope for that which they should not hope for. Or,

An. 2. I may answer, four for,

I. Some men neither hope in God, nor fear him; these neither regard his wrath,
nor his mercy.

II. Some fear, but hope not; these regard his wrath, but not his mercy.

I^I. Some hope, but fear not; these regard his mercy, but not his wrath.

IV. Some hope and fear; these regard both his mercy and his wrath.

Qu. 11. Who is the Hope of the Elect?

An. 1. God, Psalm. 71.5. Jer. 14.8.17.13. Joel 3.16.

2. Christ. 1 Timothy 1.1.

Qu. 12. In whom, or what may we hope?

An. 1. In the Lord, Job 5.16. Psalm 31.24.38.15. As a son in all his
necessities and straits trusts unto, and depends upon his father
(especially if he be great and rich) that he will help him, and not suffer him
to want, nor permit him to suffer; so should we hope in the Lord, and depend
upon our heavenly father, who is abundantly able, and most affectionately
willing to relieve, help, save and succor us.

2. We may hope in the word of the Lord, Psalm. 119.74.147. and,

3. In the judgments of the Lord, Psalm 119.43.

Qu. 13. Whence comes our Hope in God?

An. 1. From God. Psalm 22.9. Romans 15.13. ^ Thessalonians. 2 16. and,

2. From spiritual experience, Romans 5.4.

3. From the consolation of the Word, Romans 15.4.

Qu 14. Why must we hope in the Lord?

Answ. 1. Because the eyes of the Lord are upon those that hope in him, Psalm.
33.18.

2. Because sometimes the Lord proportions his mercy toward us, according to
our hope in him, Psalm 33.22.

3. Because the Lord will hear those who hope in him, Psalm 38.15.

4. Because hope is a sovereign antidote against spiritual dejection, Psalm
42.5, 11.

5. Because such are happy as hope in him, Psalm 146.5. Jer. 17.7. and,

6. Because the Lord takes pleasure in such Psalm 147.11.

7. Because he is our Portion, Lam 3.24.

8. Because we are saved by hope Romans 8.24.

Qu. 15. How does Hope respect God?

Answ. 1. Divine hope respects God as the object which is expected; for God
himself is the principal object of hope, 1 Pet. 1.21. the less principal
objects are all those things, whereby as by degrees and means we come unto God,
1 Pet. 1.13. Hence God himself is called The hope of Israel, Jer. 14.8. and
Romans 15.3. the God of hope: not so much because he is the Author and giver of
hope, as because it is he in whom we hope.

2. Hope respects God as the Author and giver of every good thing which it
expects, Psalm. 37.5, 6. Jer. 17.7.

Qu. 16. Who must hope in the Lord?

Answ. 1. The people of the Lord, Psalm. 130.7.131.3.

2. The particular servants of the Lord, Jerem. 17.17.

Qu. 17. What is the duty of those who hope in the Lord?

Answ. 1. To be of good courage when they are in any want, distress or danger,
Psalm 31.24.

2. To wait patiently for that which they hope for, Rom 8.25.

3. To rejoice in their hope, Romans 12 12.

4. To remember that their hope is not for temporal things, or the things of
this life, but for eternal after this life; and therefore the want of temporal
things must not shake their hope, 1 Cor. 15.19.

5. To purge themselves, even as Christ is pure, 1 John 3.3.

6. To continue in their hope unto the end, Col. 1.23. Heb. 3.6.6.11. 1 Pet.
1.13.

Qu 18. When has the righteous hope?

Answ. 1. In this life, Psalm 71.5. Joel 3.16 and therefore, while there is
life there is hope. A Rhodian being cast into a cave by a Tyrant, and fed there
after the manner of a wild beast; some of his friends persuaded him to abstain
from eating, that so he might dye; to whom he answered, Dum spiro spero, I will
hope while I have life. Thus though we in our journey unto Canaan, through the
Straits meet with many cross winds and storms, yet we must labor skilfully to
steer, and keep on our course by the Cape of good hope, till we arrive at the
haven of eternal happiness.

2. The righteous have hope in their death, Prove. 14.32.

Qu. 19. When must we hope in the Lord?

Answ. 1. When we are in any misery or distress, as was showed before. And,

2. When humane help fails. De divina miseratione tunc sperandum amplius est,
cum Praesidia humana defecerint. Ambros. in Hexam.

Qu. 20. Who can have no hope in God or Christ?

Answ. 1. Not those who go down into the pit, Isa. 38.18. Nor,

2. Those who are without Christ. Ephesians. 2.12. Nor,

3. Those who are strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. Nor,

4. Those who are aliens from the Covenant of promise, Ephesians. 2.12.

Qu. 21. Whose hope shall perish?

Answ. 1. The hope of the unjust and wicked man, Job 11.20.14.19. Prove.
10.28.11.7. and,

2. The hope of hypocrites, Job 8.14.27.8.

3. Sometimes the hope of the righteous for a time. Job 19 10. Lam. 3.18.

Qu. 22. What must we not hope for?

Answ. 1. We must not hope for any use, increase, or advantage of, or for what
we lend, especially to the poor, Luke 6.35.

2. We must not hope for the ruin and destruction of Gods people, Hest. 9.1.

3. We must not hope for help or deliverance by our gold* Job 31 24.

Qu. 23. What may we hope for?

Answ. ^. We may hope for some temporal, natural and oeconomical things viz.

I. To find water to quench our thirst, Job 6.20.

II. To see our friends whom we are absent from, 1 Timothy 3 14.

III. For a second marriage after the decease of the first choice. Ruth 1.12.

IV. For children in marriage, Ruth 1.12.

V. For longer life, Job 6.11.

Answ. 2. We may hope for spiritual things; as,

I. For the accomplishment of Gods promises, even above natural probability,
Romans 4.18, etc.

II. For the pardon of the sins committed against God, if we will but turn from
them, Ezra 10.2.

III. For deliverance from the mighty, though we be but mean, Job 5.16.

IV. For a joyful Resurrection, Psalm 16.9, Acts* 26.6, 7. Qui enim arat, arat
ut metat; qui pugnat, pugnat ut vincat: toll ergo spem resurrectionis, and
resoluta est observantia omnis pietatis. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 22. In every
action, the virtue of working is from the hope of a thing to come. He who
ploughs, ploughs to reap; he who fights, fights to overcome; and he who does
well, hopes for a reward in the Resurrection: Take away the Resurrection, and
farewell all care of godliness.

V. We may hope for the salvation of the Lord, Psalm 119.166. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. or,
for heavenly glory, Romans 5.2. Col. 1.5. Tit. 1.2. As the Husbandman sows his
Land, in hope of a plentiful crop; so men perform the duties of Christianity in
hope of heaven. Macarius hom. 14. As a Merchant takes pains to furrow the vast
Ocean in hope of earthly gain; so a Christian strugleth through the waves and
billows of this life in hope of a heavenly reward. Basil in Psalm 1 As the hope
of a crown and victory makes the trouble, danger and hazard of war tolerable;
so the hope of heaven makes the griefs and turmoils of this life portable, and
to be endured. ^hrysost.

Qu 24. What is the Object of Hope?

Answ. Futurum possib^le; something to come which is possible to be obtained.
Note here, Hope has a twofold respect to its object; viz.

I. As an Anchor, Heb. 6.9. and in this respect it rests upon God for the thing
promised.

II. As an Eye, and so most usually it is taken, and imports no more but the
expectation and waiting for the enjoyment of the thing promised

Note further, Hope is a Theological virtue, which

I. In regard of the Subject, the superior part of the soul, has three gifts
or properties, according to the three principal faculties of the mind: whereof,

1. One does consummate and perfect the rational appetite or faculty; and that
is, the Beatifical vision, which takes away faith.

2. Another respects the concupiscible; and this love confirms and perfects.
And,

3. Another the irascible; this is the perfect intention of blessedness, and
confirms Hope.

II. In regard of the Object, God; because as faith in believing assents to God
as one who speaks nothing but truth or true things: so hope adheres and cleaves
unto God as to one promising great things. Bonavent.

Qu. 25. What are the Encouragements of Hope?

Answ. The Philosopher lays down these three: I. Auxilia magna; great ayds and
helps. II. Multa; many ayds and helps. And, III. Vicina; those near at hand.
These the faithful, who hope in the Lord, have in a full measure: for,


1. They have great ayds. And,

2. Many; for God loves them, Christ prays for them, the holy Spirit will help
them, the Angels pitch their rents about them; and the creatures befriend them
And.

3. The Lord in whom they hope is always near them, his eye is always upon
them, his holy Spirit dwells in them, and his help is always ready at hand.

Qu. 26. Whereunto may hope be resembled or compared?

Answ. 1. Unto death; because as death is common unto all, so is hope; for he
has hope who has nothing else. Spes maxim commune est omnibus: hanc enim
illi habent, qui aliud nihil. Thales.

2. Hope may be resembled to the Cuttle, a very wise fish, who during the storm
fixes herself firmly on the rocks; for hope anchoreth upon Christ, the true
Rock, when the tempests of troubles, tribulations and persecutions arise in the
sea of the world.

3. Hope may be resembled to an Anchor; for as an Anchor fastened into the
earth, keeps the ship so safe, that it fears not the billows of the raging
sea; so lively Hope being firmly fixed upon the heavenly promises, preserve^h
the mind of the righteous immovable, in the midst of the waves of this world.
Or as a ship by the Anchor is kept from the violence of the tempests; so the
soul by hope is kept from the rage of temptations.

4. Hope may be resembled to a Staff; for as that supporteth a man, so does
Hope. And,

5. To a Helmet; for as that defends the head, so does Hope the soul. And,

6. To Pillar^; for as they support and uphold earthly buildings; so hope
upholds and supports spiritual edifices. And,

7. To a Bladder: or, Hope is to a man as a Bladder to one learning to swim; it
keeps him from sinking in the bosom of the waves, and by that help he may
attain the exercise; but yet many times it makes him venture beyond his height,
and then if that breaks, or a storm arises, he drowns without recovery; this is
true in covetous and ambitious Hope. And,

8. Hope is like a valiant Captain in a losing battle; it is ever encouraging a
man, and never leaves him, till they both expire together, Job 13.15. Though
the Lord kill me, I will hope in him. And,

9. Hope is the Rattle which nature does provide to still the froward crying of
the fond child; Man, according to Tibullus.

Jam mala simssem Letho, sed credula vitam
Spes fovet, and melius eras fore semper ait.
Spes alit agricolas; spes sulcis credit aratis
Semina quae magno saenore reddat ager.
Spes etiam valida solatur compede vinctum,
Crnra sonant ferro, sed canit inter opus.
Hope flatters life, and says she will still bequeath
Better; else I had cut'd all ills by death.
She glads the farmer, does his grain commit
To earth, and with large use returns it.
She chears the shackled prisoner, and whiles thigh
Rings with his chain, he works and sings on high.
Qu. 27. What are the Adjuncts of spiritual Hope?

Answ. 1. Righteousness, Gal. 5.5.

2. Christian courage and magnanimity, Psalm 31.24.

3. Prayer, Psalm 119.147.

4. Patience, Lament. 3.26. Romans 12.12. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.

5. Spiritual experience, Romans 5.4.

6. Faith, 1 Pet. 1.21.

7. Rejoicing. Prove. 10.28. Heb. 3.6.

8. Confidence, Psalm 119.116.

Qu. 28. What are the notes, marks, and signs of spiritual hope?

Answ. 1. It adheres and trusts soly to the grace of God, and his free
promises, Heb. 11.1. 1 Pet. 1.13.

2. It begets in us a care and desire in all things to please God. 1 John 3.3.

3. It diligently uses those means which God has appointed tor the obtaining
the thing hoped for, and abstains from the use of all unlawful and
unwarrantable means, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25.

4. It depends not upon any means but only upon God, who can work by, or
without those, Hest. 4.14.

Qu 2^. What things are contrary unto true hope?

Answ. 1. Despair of mercy.

2. Doubtings of the blessings to come, which are expressed in the word.

3. Carnal security, and a neglect of the use of the means appointed for the
obtaining of the thing hoped for.

4. Shame of face, or confusion, in regard of the event, is opposed to hope,
Psalm 25 2, 3.

Note here, the certainty of faith is opposed to error; but the certainty of
hope is opposed to distrust: and as in this they differ; so in this they are
alike, That either of them is firm and certain; for faith establishes the
understand ng, lest it should not believe and hope establishes the affection,
lest it should distrust.

Qu 30. Who are too blame in regard of Hope?

Answ. 1. Those who prefer worldly enjoyments before spiritual hope. Bias said,
He who will lose a favor for a hope has small ^tore of wisdom: the proverb
says. A bird in hand is worth two in the bush: Bion says, He who supposes to
thrive by hope may happen to beg in misery: and most men choose present
enjoyments before future hopes; the pleasures of sin, and profits of the world*
before the hope of the pleasures at Gods right hand for ever and ever.

2. Those are too blame, who hope in the creatures: for to put our confidence
in the creature, is to despair of the Creator. De Creatore desperare est, spem
in creatura ponere. Gregor. in Mor. lib. 3. And,

3. Those who hope in God, while they are wicked; for vain is that hope which
does not fear God, they only hoping well who are good. De spe incassum
praesumit, qui timere Deum in suis operibus temnit. Greg. in mor. as Socrates
was wont to say, Spem malam nihil aliud esse quam pessimum viae ducem ad
gravissima quaeque peccata. Stob. sermon. 109. So indeed, for a man to hope well
in evil-doing, makes him neglect to do good, and encourages him in evil.

Qu. 31. What may we learn from or concerning Hope?

An. 1. That Hope is a thing which is appropriate unto man alone: for beasts
have no hope at all, looking only at things present. And,

2. That hope grounded on God never fails; but built on the world, never
thriveth. And,

3. That hope of life is vanity, hope of death is life and the life of hope is
true piety and virtue. And,

4. That sweet words and fair promises beget hope: large protestations nourish
it, and contempt kills it. And,

5. We may learn, that true spiritual hope cannot be without faith. Spes sine
fide quomodo esse p^ssit, non inv^nio; nem^ enim se sperat posse ass^qui, quod
non esse c^edit. August. How can hope be without faith* seeing a man cannot
hope to possess or enjoy that which he does not believe is? Fides credit, spes
and charitas crant: sed sine fide esse non possunt; at per haec and sides orat.
August. in Enchirid. Faith believes, hope and love pray, but these cannot be
without faith, and by these faith prays.

Qu. 32. What is required, or, what is the duty of all in regard of this grace
and virtue of spiritual hope?

Ans. To labor diligently for the full assurance of hope, Heb. 6.11. When
Alexander passed into Asia, he gave large Donatives to his Captains, and other
principal men of virtue; insomuch as Parmenio asked him, Sir, what do you keep
for your self? He answered, Hope. Wincelais King of Hungary, being driven out
of his Kingdom, and forsaken of his own, oftentimes used to say, The hope I had
in men hindered me from putting my trust in God; but now my hope being wholly in
him, I assure my self that he will help me by his divine goodness; as indeed it
fell out not long after, he being re-established in his Estate and Dignity.
Thus by hope we are saved; and therefore we must hope for good by a good hope.

Qu. 33. Whether may hope be certain? or, Whether is there certainty in hope?

An. 1. Sometimes I confess Hope is contrary, and uncertain* men oftentimes
hoping one thing, and another coming to pass. For,

I. Sometimes that which men hope will be for their salvation turns to their
destruction, as Romans 11.9. Let their table be made a snare, and a not, for a
recompense unto them. Christ here by the mouth of the Prophet wishes that
which came upon the Jews; that is, that as Birds are taken whereas they think
to find food; so the Law which the Jews of a blind zeal preferred before the
Gospel, thinking to have salvation by it, should turn to their destruction.

II. Sometimes a man hopes for one thing and a better comes to pass: Saul hoped
by his seeking to find his Fathers Asses, but found a Kingdom. Phalaris the
Theban being grievously sick of a disease in his lungs, would needs enter into
battle with his enemies, hoping to be slain therein, and so to be released from
his pain: in the battle he was sore wounded with a Spear; and hoped it had been
mortal; but he was cured of his wound, and eased of, and freed from his former
malady by the wound received.

Mamilius Bubulus King of Hetruria, received in a battle a wound with an arrow,
which entered his body up to the feathers, and being drawn out, the head thereof
remained still in the flesh; being something recovered of his wound, he went to
hunt a Heart, hoping to cheer and refresh himself thereby; but in his hunting he
fell into a ditch, and his horse upon him, and thereby the Arrow-head, which
was left in his body, was forced out, and it being voided out, he became
afterward more healthful then ever he was.

III. Sometimes a man hopes for one thing, and a worse comes to pass; as
Cornelius Rufus being very weary, laid him down to sleep, hoping to ease and
refresh himself thereby, but in his sleep the faculty or sense of seeing was
taken away from him, and he became all his days blind. Lucian in his Dialogues
tells us of a Cobbler, who being invited to a rich man's house, and seeing much
plate, dreamed the next night that he was his heir, and enjoyed it all: but the
Cock crowing* and awakening him, he threatened to kill him, for making him poor.
Thus many build Castles in the air, hoping for great things without any ground.
The Oracle having said, That if Rhesus King of Thracia and his horses did once
drink of the river Xanthus, Troy should not be won, he hoped confidently to
preserve the City from ruin: but the first night he and his horses came, they
were surpized by Diomedes and Ulysses, and slain, before ever they touched the
water.

An. 2. By reason of our imperfection, and those many temptations whereby we
are assaulted, our Hope has often some doubting accompan^ing of it, whereby in
regard of our sense and apprehension, Hope is not always certain. Lam. 3.1^.

3. Divine hope in regard of the certainty of the Object, is most certain
because it is supported and upheld by the power and faithfulness of God,
whereby he has revealed. That as he can, so he will most certainly perform all
his promises, Romans 4.21. 2 Timothy 2.13.

4. Divine hope in regard of the certainty of the Subject, ought to be by all
means most certain, and firm, Heb. 6.18, 19.

5. Hope considered absolutely, and in it self, is also infallible and certain,
Psalm 2^.2, 3. because it adheres unto, aad is built upon that most certain and
infallible foundation that faith is, Romans 4.18, 19. Heb. 11.1.

Qu. 34. Upon what grounds is the certainty of hope built?

An. 1. Upon the word of God, Mark 9.7. Luke 12.32. And,

2. Upon the oath of God, Hebr. 9.18. And,

3 Upon the legacy and testament of Christ. The Lord, Psalm 2. says unto
Christ. Ask of me what thou will, and I will give it: and Christ asks, that
those who are his, may be where he is, etc. John 17.24. And,

4. Upon the blood of the Lord Jesus, which was shed for us, whereby all the
promises of God are unto us Yea and Amen. And,

5. Upon the pledge of the Spirit given us on earth Ephesians. 1.13. for the
Holy Ghost is an earnest given us by, and from God who is faithful and true.
And,

6 upon the pledge of our nature, taken up into heaven by Christ; as the
Apostle says, He has entered into heaven, our forerunner.

These are the six Pillars, and strong rocks of our Hope which does sustain us
in all our troubles; but when we shall enjoy what we hope for, then hope shall
cease; for Spes tunc non erit (says Augustine) quando res erit: hope will not
be when and where the thing hoped for is enjoyed.

Qu. 35. Why must we labor for this certain hope?

An. 1. Because God commands and requires it at our hands, Heb. 15.13. Col.
1.23. Heb. 6.11.10.22. 1 Pe^. 5.9.

2. Because this hope is as necessary for us when we are tempted, as a Helmet
is for a Soldier, when he is assaulted ( Ephesians. 6.17. 1 These. 58) or, as an
Anchor for a ship in a storm, Heb 6.1^.

3. because it brings freeness, fortitude and firmness in every work of God, i.
e. adds strength, courage, and resolution in us, in the performance of every
good duty, Psalm 19.12. 1 Cor. 15.58. Gal. 6.7, 8. Heb. 3.6.12.2. James 5.7.
And,

4. Because it is the end of our calling, Ephesians. 1.18. And,

5. Because it will never make us ashamed; i. e. it will never deceive us, or
frustrate us of our expectation, Romans 5.5.8.24.

Qu 36. By what Means may we attain unto this certain hope?

An. 1. By a firm and lively faith; for hope both flows from faith, and depends
upon faith, and that not only in regard of its being, but also in regard of
the degree, manner and sense thereof: wherefore if we desire to attain unto a
firm hope, we must labor for a lively faith, Heb. 11.1.

2. We must by all means labor to keep a good conscience; for such a
conscience avails much for the confirming of our faith and hope, 1 Timothy 1.19. 2 Timothy 47, 8.

3. We must diligently observe and mark all the testimonies, experiences and
experiments which we have of the Love of God toward us; for such experience
begets hope, Rom 5.4.

4. We must continually remember those who with good success, and a happy
issue, have hoped in God, James 5.10, 11. And

5. We must be frequent in the exercises of Piety, Romans 15.4

Thus much for the second Theological grace, Hope; I proceed unto the third.

CHAP. III. (...). Of Love; or Charity.
Qu. 1. HOw many ways is this word Charity taken in Scripture?

An. 1. Sometimes largely, for our Love both to God and man, Romans 13 1 Cor. 13.

2. Sometimes strictly, for some one part or office of charity; especially
these three:

I. To remit all offenses done against us. And,

II. To interpret all things in the best sense, when they are doubtful. And,

III. To relieve the poor members of Christ, when they are in necessity. Now in
this place Charity is taken largely, in the first sense, for Love.

Qu. 2. What is Charity?

An. Char^ty is to love God for himself and his own sake, and our neighbor for
Gods sake; or, ^t is that affection of love which moves us to hold our neighbor
dear, and to desire and seek his good in every thing which is dear unto him,
and that for Christ's sake, according to the will of God.

Qu. 3. Whether is this grace of Charity, the justification of a sinner before
God or not?

An. It is not. For,

I. One grace or virtue cannot be our whole righteousness.

II. Charity is a fruit of Justification, or, an effect of faith, 1 John 3.18,
19. For love does not beget faith, but is begot by faith, and thereby is
confirmed more and more, in so much as we gather the cause by the effects, 1
John 4.17. 2 Pet. 1.10. and therefore S. Luke does plainly make Charity the
effect of Justification, not the cause, Luke 7.47.

Qu. 4. By how many words is Love expressed?

An. There be four words which the Greeks use to express love, (...),
Friendship, Love, Charity, Lovingness. I here omit Friendship, as also Charity
as it signifies Alms, referring them to their proper places, in the Volumn
promised; and concerning love, the only thing here to be hinted at, I shall
treat in this order:

First, of love generally.

Secondly of love particularly; as it is

1. Evil. And,

2. Good; which love is either,

First, Uncreate: as,

I. The love of God (essentially) to us.

II. The love of Christ (personally) to us.

Secondly, Create; which love is either,

I. Spiritual: as

1. Our love to God. And,

2. Our love to Christ. And,

3. Our love to the faithful. Or,

II. Natural; as, our love to our selves. Or,

III. Moral; as,

1. Our love to our Neighbor. And,

2. Our love to our Enemy.

Qu. 5. To whom is love referred in Scripture?

An. 1. Sometimes to God the Father; and that both.

I. Positively, in the lowest, or first degree of love: and thus he loves all
his creatures, as his creatures, John 3.16. 1 John 4.8, 16.

II. Comparatively, in the second degree of love; and thus he loves his Church
and children, Deuteronomy. 10.15. Hos. 11.4. Zach. 2.8.

III. Superlatively, in the highest degree of love; and thus he loves Christ,
John 10.17.15.9.17.24.

An. 2. Sometimes love is referred to God the Son, who is said.

I. To love his Father. And,

II. His Church, Psalm 45.11. Cant. 1.2.7.10. And,

III. Some particular persons, Mark 10.21. John 11.35 36.20.21. And,

IV. To love righteousness, Psalm 45.7.

Answ. 3. Love sometimes is referred to God the holy Ghost. Romans 15.30. And,

4. Sometimes to the Church of Christ, Can. 7.12.

5. Sometimes to men, and that both,

I. To good men, Genesis 22.2. Luke 7.5. John 21.15, 16. 1 Pet. 1.8. And also,

II. To bad men, 2 Chronicles. 26.10. Psalm 52 3, 4. And,

6 Sometimes to beasts, Hos. 10.11.

Qu. 6 How many ways is a thing loved?

An. Things are loved three manner of ways; viz.

I. Propter se, for themselves; thus we love health.

II. Non propter se sed propter aliud; not for themselves, but for another end;
thus the sick man loves a bitter potion, not for it self, but for healths sake.

III. Et propter se and proper aliud; somethings are loved both for themselves,
and for another end: thus we love good wine, and such Preserves and Censerves
as we like, and are good for our health, and the preservation thereof.

Qu. 7. From whence comes this word Love?

An. (...) comes of (...), or, of (...): Love comes from doing or working,
because it is a working grace, not only working it self, but setting all the
soul on work to attain what is believed True love is never idle, but works
industriously to serve him who is beloved; for as fire is most active among the
elements; so is love most active among virtues and graces; and, As a root is
engendered of moisture and celestial heat; so love grows, arises, or
springs from the moisture of devotion, and the supernatural heat of the holy
Spirit, whence it becomes so vigorous and active.

Qu. 8. What is Love in general?

An. Ovid who thought himself a Master of that art, and writ precepts of the
same, thought it more obscure then the letters of Ephesus, or the riddles of
Sphinx, to tell what it was; so that being demanded to show the definition
thereof, said, Love is I know not what, it comes I know not from whence, who
sent it I know not, it engenders I know not how, it is satisfied I know not
wherewith; it is felt, but how I know not, and to what end it tends I am
ignorant, but sure, quoth he, it is the loss of a man's self.

Anacreon said, It was a sweet mischief, since for a pint of pleasure we
receive a gallon of sorrow and pain.

Callimachus called it a Court without Sergeants, because they who love obey
without constraint, and are captive without conquest.

Propertius says, Love is a sweet tyranny, because the Lover endures his
torments willingly.

Natural love is an inward good will, which we bear to Parents, Husbands,
Wives, Children, or Kindred, moved thereunto not only by nature, thinking that
we should love them as our selves, but also by a likeness of mind; whence
generally we love all, because all be in some things like unto us; but yet we
love them most, who both in body and mind do most resemble us.

Love is a passion or affection in the concupiscible anpetite, that it may
enjoy the thing which is esteemed to be good as near as it can. Or,

Love is the purest, rightest, and best affection of the soul, whereby we love
God for his own sake, and our neighbor for Gods. Or,

Love is Complacentia appetibilis, an appetible complacency of that which is
good. For the understanding of this definition given by the Schoolmen, we must
note, That there are three things in love:

I. An affection to the thing or person loved.

II. A desire to be united, or conjoined unto, or possessed of the thing or
person beloved.

III. An extraordinary and unspeakable joy in the fruition and possession of
what we love. Hence we may gather, How we shall love the Lord;

I. We must be enflamed in our affections, and ravished with the love of God.

2. We must then desire to be made partakers of the Lord, to enjoy him by faith
in our souls, and to be married unto him with an everlasting covenant.

3. Being once made partakers of the Lord, we must re^o^ce in him, as the
Church did in her beloved, when she had found him, Cant. 5.

Qu. 9. Wh ch ^ true Love?

An. 2. Not that which is in word and tongue only 1 John 3.18. ^ut,

2. That which is without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. or, that love which is
unfeigned, 1 Pet. 1.22. that is, which is indeed and in truth, 1 John 3.18.

3. That which is fervent Cant 8 7. 1 Pet. 1.22.

4. That which springs from faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

5. That which proceeds from a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.5.

6. That which issues out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.22.

Qu. 10. Whereunto may Love be compared?

An. 1. Love is like nature in light and heavy bodies; for it presses down if
it be terrene and earthly; it raises up if it be heavenly: hence Augustiwe
says, Amor meus, pondus meum, eo feror quocunque feror: my love is the lead
and weight which sets all the wheels of my soul on work; and guides me
whethersoever I go, and in whatsoever I do.

2. Love is like Fire; that is, like a fire enclosed, which straightly kept, more
fiercely flames at last,

Adverso tempore crevit Amor. Ovid. Love heightens by depression. And as fire
in all shops is an instrument for all or the most Artisans and workmen; so
nothing is well done without love and charity.

3. Love is like to a Racket; for as at Ten^^, Rackets make the ball live in a
perpetual motion; so do repulses in love, reflecting it stronger into one
another bosom; the best temper of it is, that the communication thereof be
neither too forward to cool desire; nor too froward, left it cause despair.

4. Love is like a light: for as a light is not diminished by participation: so
love is not lessened by being divided amongst, or imparted to many, but rather
augmented.

5. Love in many things is like unto the Sun: For,

I. As the Sun is of an uniting virtue, it uniting (as some Astrologers say)
the Planets in their effects; so love does spiritually unite, and is therefore
called the bond of perfection, because it perfectly uniteth the soul to God,
and binds the hearts of the faithful together.

II. As the Sun is of a reviving nature, so is love, it translating from death
to life, and quickening the soul to every good work.

III. As the Sun is of an attractive power to draw vapors upwards; so love
ravisheth, and raises up the affections unto God, setting the heart upon those
things which are above.

IV. As the Sun is never without heat; so love is never without works and
well-doing.

6. Love is like unto Compasses; or, Faith and Love make up a perfect pair of
Compasses, which can take up the true latitude of a Christian heart. Faith is
the one foot pitched in the center immoveably, while love walks about in a
perfect circle of beneficence; and these two can never go asunder.

7. Love is like Honor, which varies it self according to the qualities of the
persons. Or,

8. Like unto the Pourcontrel or Peak fish, who becomes of the same color the
things are whereon it fastens; so that a man may love diverse persons with all
his heart, according to diverse respects; a father as a father, a mother as a
mother a child as a child, a neighbor as a neighbor, a friend as a friend,
etc. This flame of love extends it self like unto the flame of a torch, which
lights many others, without impairing his own light.

9. Love is like dew; for that as this falls as well upon the low grass, as
upon the high Cedar, the poor as well as the rich are subject to love, and to
be beloved.

10. Love is like death; for as death is the end of sin, so is love, because he
who loves God cease to sin.

11. Love is like the Sardian-stone; for as it expels fear, procures mirth,
makes bold, and sharpeneth the understanding, as Dioscorides says; so love
brings joy, joy expels fear, and consequently makes bold and valiant, and
whetteth the understanding to the contemplation of heavenly things

12. Love in many regards is like, or may be compared to a vessel: or, ^ soul
repleat, or replenish't with the love of God and Religion, is like unto a
vessel full of liquor. For,

1. As a full vessel will endure the fire, whereas an empty one cracks or
melts; so the soul being empty of grace and goodness, is broken by affliction;
but a heart filled with the grace of God, will endure the fiery trial.

II. As a full vessel is more firm and stable, but an empty one less steady,
and more easy to be overthrown: so a soul filled with Gods love is more staid
and steady in good, and the practice thereof, then a heart void of love.

III. As a full vessel is in no part separated from the liquor it holds; so a
spiritually loving and religious heart is never separated from God in obedience.

IV. As the vessel and the liquor it holds are of the same figure or form; so
by a holy love we are made like unto God, or after his image.

V As the full vessel sends forth liquor at every hole; so he whose heart is
filled with religious love, is always speaking or uttering something that is
good: From the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

VI. As the full vessel being bent downwards toward the earth, spills or sheds
part of the liquor; so those who lean and incline unto the world, fall away
quoad gradum, in regard of some degree of grace received, for a time.

VII. As the full vessel will receive no other liquor, except part of that
which it holds be emptied out: so the heart filled with the love of God, will
not admit of the love of the world, or worldly things.

VIII. As the full vessel being struck sounds not; so where the love of God
is, there affliction is undergone without murmuring.

IX. As the full vessel becomes empty, and runs out, if there be any cracks or
clefts therein, so if the heart be not sincere, but dissembling, all shows or
seemings of love will soon be lost.

X. As the full vessel holds and has more within then is seen without: so a
heart filled with Gods grace and love, cannot show forth so much of goodness
without, as it has within.

Qu. 11. How many sorts of love are there?

An. 1. I might, with some, divide love into these three sorts; viz

I There is a natural love; this is that love whereby every thing has an
inclination to the like, as heavy things naturally go down to the center of the
earth.

II There is a commanded love; now this is that love whereby reason shows us
some good thing to be loved; and then our will commands us to love the same.

III. There is a love freely proceeding; now this is, when the affections make
choice of God freely; that is, when they so consider his goodness, that it
breeds admiration in them; and his beauty, that it breads love in them; and his
sweetness, that their desires are satisfied therewith; and consequently, they
find nothing so worthy an object to be beloved as God, who has all these
properties in him infinitely.

An. 2. To give a full answer to the question, and a full division of love, I
say, that there are thirteen sorts of love; viz.

First, God loves God. i. e.

I. ^od loves himself.

II. God the Father loves God the Son from all eternity, and God the holy
Ghost. Heb. 1.

III. God the Son loves God the Father, and God the holy Ghost.

IV. God the Holy Ghost loves God the Father, and God the Son.

Secondly, God loves God and Man; that is,

I. God the Father loves the Son incarnate, or when he took man's nature upon
him, John 17.24.

II. God the Holy Ghost loved Christ become man.

Thirdly, God and man loves God; i. e.

I. Christ in our nature loved his Father. And,

II. His holy and blessed Spirit.

Fourthly, God loves man i. e.

I. God the Father loves man, John 3.16. and,

II. God the Holy Ghost loves him, Romans 15.30.

Fifthly, God and man loves man, that is,

I. Christ loves his Catholic church, Cant. 2.4.3.10. Romans 8.35. Ephesians. 3.19.
and.

II. He loves his particular servants, John 11.3, 4.5.36. 20.2.

Sixthly, man loves God; that is,

I. Personally; and thus he loves God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost. And,

II. Essentially; and thus he loves God one in essence, but three in person:
and that either,

1. With a false and hypocritical love, for his own ends and sake. Or,

2. With a true, sincere, and faithful love.

Seventhly, man loves God and Man; and thus,

I. Sometimes the Church is said to love Christ, Cant. 7.12.8.7. 2 Cor, 5.14.
and,

II. Sometimes his faithful children and servants are said to love him, John
21.15, 16. 1 Cor. 16.21. Phil. 1 23.3.8.

Eighthly, Man loves man; that is,

1. Man loves himself. 2 Men love men. 3. Men love women. 4. Women love women.
5 Women love men.
FIRST, man loves himself; and that,

I. Naturally; Semper tibi proximus esto: Ego sum proximus mihi, est vox
naturae; it is so natural for man to love himself, that he needs no precept or
command to do it. And,

II. Sinfully; every one has two selves; a self of nature, and a self of sin,
and both must be denied for Christ: this we must ever cast away as a snare, and
that we must be ever ready to lay down as a sacrifice when Christ is pleased to
set himself in competition with it.

SECONDLY, men love men; and that either with an evil or a good love.

First, sometimes men love men with an evil love: this love is fourfold,

I. Inconstant, when for the smallest offense committed. or, but supposed to be
done, extreme love is changed into extreme hate. Eusenides talking privately
with the Philosopher Cuspides, asked him, If he were not so happy, as that
nothing could be added to his felicity seeing he was above all others most
favored and honored by Ptolomy the King? To whom Cuspides answered, How soon
can Fortune tumble thee down, and then how miserable a thing will it be to have
been happy? Shortly after this discourse, Ptolomy found Eusenides his great
Favorite, and one of his Concubines, whom most dearly he loved, talking
privately together; whereat he was so incensed* that he made her stra^ght drink
a cup of poison, and caused him to be hanged before his own gates And,

II. This evil love is immoderate, inordinate and most lewd. Adrian the Emperor
so doted on the love of Antinous, a beautiful young man, that he dedicated a
Temple to him at Mantinea, and a City at Nilus. Pausanius. Too too many* with a
Sodomitical affection have loved and lusted after some, Genesis 19. and,

III. This evil love of men to men is Sensual, called Amor concupiscentiae,
which is this, when we love our neighbor for our own profit and commodity
only; as Laban loved Jacob only for his own ends; and as subjects sometimes
love their Princes for their own advantage and advancement. And,

IV. This evil love is most wicked and diabolical, when men love such as
themselves because they are wicked, Psalm. 50, 18. Suetonius tells us, that
Caligula the Emperor did deeply love Marcus Lepidus, and Marcus Nestor the
Buffoon, only for the commerce of mutual alternate brothelry: or, because they
would accompany him to the stews.

Secondly, sometimes men love men with a good, lawful and laudable love; this
love is sixfold; viz.

I. Natural, that is, of Parents to children, of children to Parents, and of
kinsmen to kinsmen, Genesis 22.^.25.28.37.3. And,

II. Oeconomical, viz. of husbands to wives, of wives to husbands; of masters
to servants, and of servants to masters, Genes. 29.18.20.30. 2 Chon. 11.21.
Prove. 5.19. Eccles. 9 9. and,

III. Political, when a man lives peaceably and quietly in a Commonwealth, not
having suits, contentions or jars with any. And,

IV. Reciprocal, when one neighbor or friend loves another, because he is
beloved of him, Exodus 21.6. 1 Kings 5 1. It was said of Socrates, that all who
knew him loved him; and the reason why any loved him not, was only because
they did not know him, he was so loving to all he knew. And,

V. Moral, which is an intimate, entire and cordial love, and is for the most
part between two: as Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 18.1. 2 Samuel 1.26. Pylade^ and
Orestes, Damon and Pythias, Scipio and Laelius, and Severus and Pertinax; for
such was the love of Severus the Emperor to Pertinax, whom Iulianus slew, that
he commanded, that all should call him Pertinax. Entropius. And,

VI. Spiritual and Supernatural, which is called Amor amicitiae, love of
friendship; and is this, When we love either our neighbor chiefly for his
own good: or, our neighbor, or our enemy for Gods sake. This love I call
spiritual, because although the object of this love be our neighbor, yet the
reason why we love him is God.

THIRDLY, men love women; and that either with an evil or a good love.

First, sometimes men love women with an evil love: This is twofold:

I. Inconstant: thus Demaphon was false to Phillis, Aeneas to Dido, Jason to
Medaea, Paris to Oenone. And,

II. Immoderate, inordinate, lascivious and lustful, Genesis 34.12. Colos. 3.5.

Militat omnis amans, and habet sua castra Cupido: This love is a wanton war
under Cupids colors. Turinge had so many lovers, that she could not reckon
them upon her fingers ends, but called for a bushel of pease to tell them by.
Aurelius Alexander, for the love he bare to that (famous for beauty, infamous
for lewdness) harlot Thais, caused that most renowned and rich City Persepolis
to be burned. Cataline for the love of Orestista killed his own son, because
she would not join in marriage with him while his son lived. Salust. From this
lascivious and inordinate love came that proverb, Wisdom and love never go
together.

Secondly, sometimes men love women with a good love: this is,

I. Moral: when,

1. He who marries is as though he married not, in regard of the moderation of
his affection, 1 Cor. 7.30, 31. and.

2. When the husband is constant in his love to his loyal wife. And,

II. Natural or Conjugal: when men love women in the way of marriage. Two
things are here observable: the kinds and causes of this love.

First, this love s threefold; for, 1. Some love for virtue. 2. Some for
beauty. And, 3. Some for both, loving dainty meat in a neat dish.


Secondly, the causes of this Natural or Conjugal love, are Sight and
Suitableness.

I. Sight; for looking is the cause of loving, and a curious observation the
rice of affection. Etrasco the Roman, and Verona, being both born dumb, by
beholding one another, were so taken with one another love, that it continued
full thirty years before they were joined in marriage; and of them descended
the noble lineage of the Scipio's. Aurelius.

II. Suitableness of disposition; Likeness is the cause of liking: For as
between the similitude of manners, there is a friendship in every respect
absolute; so in the composition of the body, or likeness of disposition, there
is a certain love engen. dred, both the bodies resembling each other, as woven
both in one loom.

FOURTHLY, women love women, and that sometimes with an evil and inconstant
love; and sometimes with a good and constant affection.

FIFTHLY, women love men; and that either with an evil or good love.

First, sometimes women love men with a good and constant love; as Charites
loved her husband Expolemus, Cornelia Gracchus, Julia Pompey, Artimesia
Mausolus, Panthea Abradatus, Portia Brutus, Alceste Admetus, Penelope Ulysses,
Sulpitia Lentulus, Hipparchia, Crates, and Macrina Torquatus.

Secondly, sometimes women love men with an evil love; this love is either,

I. Inconstant; when women like to the Polipe stone, change color every hour;
or, like the Weathercock, waver with every wind; or like the Marigold, change
with the Sun. This inconstant love proceeds often from sudden choice; for we
account those Damosel^ too light of love, who betroath themselves upon the
first sight and motion; because as the rattling thunderbolt has but his clap,
the lightning but his flash the baven but his blaze so hot love begun in a
moment, ends in a minute. Scalding water if it stand a while, turns almost
to ice; and Pepper, though it be hot in the mouth is cold in the maw; so hot
love is soon cold; and that affection which frieth in words, commonly freezeth
in works. And

II. The evil love of women to men is sometimes merely feigned and counterfeit;
as was the love of Cresida to Treilus, having tears at command as the
Crocodile, to betray, and smiles at will to bewitch. And,

III. Immoderate, inordinate and lustful: as the love of Joseph's mistress unto
him, Genesis 39 9.

Thus much for the eighth sort or kind of love.

Ninthly, man loves sin, and the world, 1 John 2.15. James 4.4. Hic amor est
odio majus scelus. This love is worse then hatred. I wave these till I come to
treat of the World and Sin.

Tenthly, man loves things; viz. both,

I. Natural things, as Xerxes, all his great exploits both by sea and land
being laid aside for a time, he fell so far in love in Lydia, with a Plane-tree
which happened to his sight, that he tarried a whole day by it, and caused the
boughs to be adorned with chains of gold, bracelets and spangles, yielding
thereto great reverence. And,

II. Artificial things: as a Senators son in Rome loved extremely the Ivory
picture of Vesta, which wrought him such discredit, as that he was exempted
from bearing office in the City. Pigmalion doted on an Ivory image that he had
made with his own hands. Ovid. Two young men of Athens were in love with the
picture of Fortune. Prillius Pilatus was in love with the images of Helena and
Atalanta; and Demetrius having strongly begirt the city of Rhodes, for the love
he bare to Protogenes painted table, raised his siege.

Eleventhly, Men love beasts; as the Emperor Adrian caused a tomb to be made,
and a pillar to be set up* with an Epitaph in praise of his horse Boristhenes,
which he exceedingly loved. Julius Capitolinus witnesses* that the Emperor
Verus ordained, that there should be a tomb erected in the Va i^a^ for his
horse Volucer (which he loved so much, that he used him more like a man then a
beast) and made for him a statue of gold. Dio^in vita Ver. The Persians for the
affections they bare to their horses, when they dyed buried them. Alexander the
great made a tomb for Bucephalus. The Emperor Augustus buried his Parrot, and
Heliogabalus made a grave for his Sparrow, out of their love to them.

Twelfthly, beasts or living creatures love men. At Assus a Babylonian City, a
Dolphin so loved a boy, that following too far after him, he stuck fast in the
sand. Solinus. c. 18. Aelian tells of one Sophocles an Athenian, who seeing
himself to be so well beloved of his horse, that he would exceedingly faun upon
him, he fearing some shame thereby, sold his horse away; which the horse took
so heavily, that he would never eat after, but pined himself to death.

Thirteenthly, beasts love beasts; as Marcus Aurelius says, as one bird loves
another, one bruit another, one wiseman another, so one fool loves another.

Thus much for the sorts and kinds of love.

Qu. 12. What difference is there between the love of a child, and the love of
a servant?

Answ. They differ not in the subject matter of their obedience, but in the
m^nner; thereof: for the child ex amore obeys the law for the love of virtue;
but the servant ex timore, obeys rather for fear of punishment. The child who
conforms himself to the Law rather for love, has respect especially to the
Affirmati^e precepts; but the servant who conforms for fear, has respect
chiefly to the Negative commandments.

Qu. 13. What difference is there between Love and Charity?

Answ. 1. All charity is love, but all love is not charity.

2. There are three words which signify Love; Dilectio, Amor. and Charitas.
Peter Martyr, loc. com. fol. 379. calce, distinguishes them thus, Dilectio est
lenior affectus, Amor vehementior, charitas vero ibi statuitur, ubi conjunctio
and necessitudo quadam intercesserit. Dilection signifies a lower degree of
affection, and love a higher, but charity rather imports a necessary duty unto
Parents, Country, Kindred, and the like.

Qu 14. Wherein do Nature, Reason and Religion differ in regard of Love?

An. 1. Nature bids me love my self, and hate all who hurt me.

2. Reason bids me love my friends, and hate those who hate me.

3. Religion bids me love all, and hate none Nature shows care, Reason wit,
and Religion love; and therefore Nature may induce us, and Reason persuade us,
but Religion must rule us.

Qu. 15. What difference is there between Love, and the most, if not all things?

Answ. Of all things the newest is best, save of love and friendship, which the
elder it waxes is ever the better.

Qu 16 What difference is there between Love and Friendship?

Answ. The difference between femine love and true friendship is; Love is but
an eye-worm, which tickleth the head with hopes and wishes: Friendship is the
image of eternity, in which there is nothing moveable, nothing mischeivous. As
much difference as is between beauty and virtue, bodies and shadows, colors
and life, so great odds is there between Love and Friendship. A friend loves
always, a Lover but for a time.

Qu. 17. What difference is there between the love of men and women?

Answ. Some Poets and Painters representing the love of men, bring in Cupid
with a pair of wings; discyphering the love of women, a Tortuse under the feet
of Venus; showing, that as the love of men is moveable and unconstant as a
bird, so the fancy of women is as firm and fixed, as a steadfast Tortuse. This
is not generally nor universally true; for from what was showed before, Qust.
11. it appears, that,

1. Sometimes men are more constant in their love then women.

2. Sometimes women are more constant then men.

3. Sometimes both are constant. And,

4. Sometimes neither.

Qu. 18. What difference is there between the love of heavenly things and
earthly?

Answ. The love of heavenly things is better then the knowledge of them; the
knowledge of inferior things is better then the love of them.

Qu. 19. How does our love differ from the love of God?

Answ. Our love is caused from the goodness of a thing; the love of God is the
cause of the goodness of a thing.

Qu. 20. What difference is there between our love to God, and to our neighbor
in regard of the time?

Answ. 1. We should chiefly and principally love the Lord in prosperity,
because otherwise he will not love us. Xenophon says, We should always honor
and love God, but much more in prosperity, because we may then more confidently
call upon, and seek unto him for succor in adversity. Themistocles in his
lower fortunes was in love with a young Gentleman who scorned him: when he grew
to his greatness, which was soon after, he sought to him; but Themistocles
answered, We are both grown wise, but too late. Thus if we will not love the
Lord in prosperity, we may expect that he will not love us in adversity.

2. We must approve our love to our neighbor or brother principally in
adversity: for as the Chrysolite is proved in the fire, and the Diamond by the
Anvil; so love is tried, not by favor of fortune, but by the adversity of
time. Jacob Almansor King of the Moors, going one day on hunting, found by
chance a poor traveling man, who being taken with some sudden sickness, was
fallen on the ground, which he seeing alighted, set him upon his horse, and
with one hand led the horse, and with the other upheld him; and when his
Alcaydes came unto him, he refused to ride on another Steed, or to let any
other conduct him, until he had brought him home, and then gave him a great sum
of money, that he might live in good fashion afterward; for which the poor man
thanking him when he was recovered he answered, there belongs no thanks to me,
but to God only who brought me to that place where you was. Thus in misery and
distress, our love to our brother is chiefly to be manifested.

Qu. 21. What is the Nature and Excellency of Love?

Answ. 1. It is of that nature that many waters cannot quench it, Cant. 8.7.
and,

2. ^t is of that nature, that the more it is expressed, the more it is
enflamed: For as fire suppressed does often flame forth with more violence, so
does Love; according to the French Proverb,

Vne amor par contraire est plus chaude rendue. Love does increase when it is
withstood; it is like fire, which the more it is dammed up, the more it burns:
or, like the water which being stopped overflows all, and bears all before it.

3. Love makes men courageous: Castillo in his Courtier, lib. 3. thinks and
affirms, that an Army of Lovers were invincible, except by another Army in
love: and he instanceth in Troy, and in Ferdinand and Isabel of Spain, in their
war against the King of Granada, that all notable exploits performed in battle,
has still been by Lovers. Leander being in love with Hero, the fair Sestian
Nun, ventured for her love to swim over Hellespont, but was drowned therein.

One asking, Why Cupid is pictured with wings? was answered, Because the
desires of lovers for the most part tend to high things.

4. Love thinks a great deal of labor and pains taken and undergone for the
party beloved, to be easy, and as nothing, Genesis 29.20.

5. Love descends, as appeared by Pythius Bythinius a Persian, who feasted all
Xerxes Army, and gave him four hundred Miriads of gold, and only because of
five sons he had, Xerxes would leave one of them at home to comfort him in his
old age. We ordinarily do say, Love does descend more then ascend; whence we
see, that one father does with less labor and trouble maintain ten children,
then ten children can one father. A certain man and his son being both
condemned to dye for a heinous offense; the Earl of Flanders promised to save
his life, who would cut off the others head, which after much debate was done
by the son. Among the Ancients it was a common proverb, That the taste of all
tastes is bread, the savor of savous is salt, and the greatest love of all
loves is from the fathers to the children.

6. Love is of that nature, that all is well taken that comes from love, Si
diligis, fac quicquid vis; si tacueris, dilectione tace; si locutus fueris,
dilectione loquere; si precaris, dilectione precare, etc. Aug. in Joh. 1.
epist. If thou love, do what thou will, speak or be silent, exhort or rebuke,
call or cry, so it be in love, all is well.

7. Love is strong as death, Cant. 8.6. Reward has an attractive, and
punishment an impulsive, but love has a compulsive faculty; reward draws,
punishment drives, but love hales a man forward to the discharge of his duty;
and therefore if God write a Law of Love in our hearts, and shed abroad his own
love to join therewith, it will work so strongly, that one grain thereof will
have more force to purge out sin and to constrain and strengthen to obedience,
then a whole pound of terrors. Chrysostom says, Love i^ a pleasing tyrant,
the power whereof is above all power, and reigns over all impediments in heaven
and earth, prevailing both with God and man. As men allure Doves by the beauty
of the house, and reclaim Hawks by the fairness of the lure; so love joined
with virtue is able to recall the most straggling Aeneas to make sails again to
Carthage. As there is no cloth so fine but Moaths will eat it, no iron so hard
but rust will fret it, no wood so sound but worms will putrify it, no metal
so course but fire will purify it; so there is neither man nor woman so
resolute or constant* but love will bring them into thraldom and bondage.

8. Love will show it self; As bashful Suitors seeing strangers by,
Parley in silence with their hand or eye.
The French say to this purpose, Vne parfaite amor ne se peut desguiser: A
perfect love cannot be disguised; for as fire cannot be hidden in the flax
without smoke, nor Musk in the bosom without smell; so neither can love be
hidden in the breast without some suspicion or manifestation.

9. It is free, or there is no affection freer then love; for as there is
nothing more forcible, so nothing that can be less forced. Marcus Aurelius in
his oration to Fulvius the Senator, says, There is never true love where there
is any particular interest; and if so, then love is free, and then no wonder if
love be so rare, every one as the Dutch say, having their backdoor, or by end,
and self-respects in whatsoever they do.

10. Love desires love again, the party loving desires to be beloved, as Hellen
says to Paris.

Bella gerant alii, tu Pari semper ama. Whilst others follow Mars, do thou
follow Venus Pythagoras says, Love is not satisfied with gold, but only paid
with love again. Hence Sophocles being asked, What harm he would wish to his
enemy? answered, That he might love where he was not liked, and that such
misfortune might last long. There is no herb will make lovers sleep but
hearts-ease; and there is no hearts-ease where love is not mutual and
reciprocal.

11. It is the cause of all action and motion; Parisius says, Omnis animae
motus radix est amor. Love is the root and principal of all the motions of the
soul. Quodlibet agens propter amorem agit quodcunque agit. Aquin. Every wise
and free agent does for love whatsoever he does.

12. Love is Lord of all. Love of old was pictured with flowers in the one
hand, and a fish in the other, to show that he is Lord both of Sea and Land.
And,

13. It is svveet, profitable and comfortable. Love is like honey in bitter
broth, and sugar in sour wine. It is a rule to direct us, a light to show us,
and a way to walk unto salvation; and therefore full of profit, comfort and
sweetness.

14. Love is the preserver of mankind; for as a ship would perish without a
Pilot, as a City is in danger without a Magistrate, as the world is nothing but
darkness without the Sun: so the life of man is not vital or a living life
without love. And.

15. It is the best of Virtues. Irenaeus calls love (l. 4. c. 63.)
Eminentissimum charismatum, the most eminent of all the gifts of God.
Geminianus says, As gold excels all other metals, so love excels all
other virtues, whether theological or moral. God is love what is then more
precious? He who dwells in love, dwells in God, what is more secure? and
God in him; what is more delectable? As the whole life of the body proceeds
from the soul; so the whole dignity and worth of all external virtues proceed
from the internal, but especially from Love.

16. Love is constant and perpetual. Prove. 17.17.

17. The nature of Love is to communicate and impart the secrets of our hearts
to those whom we love, Judge. 16.15. To conclude this question concerning the
Nature and Excellency of Love and Charity: Love in adversity is patient, in
prosperity temperate, in passions strong, in good works quick, in temptations
secure, in hospitality bountiful, amongst her true children joyful, amongst her
false friends forbearing. Love in the midst of injuries is secure, in heart
bountiful, in displeasures meek, in concealing evils innocent, in truth quiet,
at others misfortunes sad, in virtues joyful. Love in adversity faints not,
because it is patient, and revengeth not injuries, because it is bountiful.

Qu. 22. Whether is desire or love stronger?

Answ. Love is stronger then desire, because quiet and rest in the end, or in
the enjoyment of the good willed or wished is more and greater then the motion
to the end; for the motion to the end, is not but for the quiet in the end; and
Propter quod unumquodque est tale, id ipsum est magis tale; he who loves the
master for his child's sake, does love the child more then the master. Because
this Maxim or Axiom is often made use of, I will therefore show how it is to
be understood; viz. that four conditions be kept carefully in memory, for the
truth thereof:

I. That the praedicate or attribute be common both to the cause and to the
effect; and therefore it follows not, Men are drunk for wine, therefore wine is
more drunk.

II. That the praedicate or attribute be capable of Magis and Minus, more and
less: therefore it follows not, The son is a man for the father, therefore the
father is the more man.

III. That the attribute be diverse in number, both in cause and effect:
wherefore it follows not, Man sees for the eye, therefore the eye sees more
then man; or Man is learned for man, therefore the mind of man is more learned
then man.

IV. That the attribute do agree with the effect, by a dependence from the
cause, insomuch as if it be not in the cause, it will not be in the effect;
wherefore it foll^ws not, The scholar is learned for his master, therefore the
master is more learned, and the greater scholar.

Qu ^3. Whether is Love or Hatred stronger?

Answ. Love: because love is of that which is good, hatred of that which is
evil: and good is stronger then evil; because evil acts not, but under the
notion, or in the power of good, or something which seems to be such: yea
hatred comes from some kind of love.

Qu. 24. Whether is Dilectio or Amor stronger?

Answ. Because we want words in our English Tongue to express these two, I must
be forced to answer the question thus, Amor dilectione fortior; ista enim in
judicio solo, ille in appetitu.

Qu. 25. Whether is Love or Knowledge better?

Answ. Love is more excellent then Knowledge:

I. Because knowledge cannot effect that good and evil which love does effect.

II. Because to love is of more worth then to know.

III. Because we enjoy God more by love then by knowledge. And,

IV. Because we depend more upon God by love then by knowledge.

Qu. 26. What things do men love sometimes which they should not love at all?

Answ. 1. Some love pre-eminence over their brethren, 3 John 9. and highest
places, Mat. 23.6. Mark 12.38. And,

2. Some negligence in those places wherein God has set them, Isa. 56.10.

3. Some idolatry and idols, Isa, 57.8. Jer. 3.1.8.2. Ezekiel. 16.37.

4. Some love cursing, Psalm 109.12. And,

5. Some adultery and whoredom, Prove. 7.18. And,

6. Some transgression and strife, Prove. 17.19.

7. Some evil more then good, Psalm 52.

8. Some lying more then truth, Psalm. 52 5. Apoc. 22.15.

9. Some love bribery, Isa. 1.23. Hosea 4.18. 9.1.

10. Some cruel and crafty words, Psalm 52.4.

11. Some pleasure more then God, 2. Tim. 3.4.

12. Some oppression, Hosea 12.7.

13. Some to have the Prophets prophecy falsely, Jer. 5.31.

14. Some love vanity, Psalm 4.2. and,

15. Some simplicity and folly, Prove. 1.22.

16. Some sleepiness and idleness, Prove. 20.13.

17. Some pleasure and wine, Prove. 21.17.

18. Some to wander, Jer. 14.10.

19. Some darkness more then light, John 3.19. And,

20. Some hypocrisy, Mat. 6.5.

21. Some perjury, Zach. 8.17. and,

22. Some love the world and the things therein, Mat. 6.24. Eccles. 5.10. 1
John 2.15. Now the reasons why we should not love the world, are,

I. Because the love thereof cannot satisfy our souls, or the desires of our
hearts, Eccles. 5.10.

II. Because it hinders us from loving of God, 1 John 2.15, 16.

III. Because it makes us the enemies of God, Mat. 6.24. James 4.4.

IV. Because it makes men apostatize from Christ, 2 Timothy 4.10.

V. Because it is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.

Qu. 27. What do men love which they may as a natural or moral duty?

Answ. 1. Some love some sort of meat, Genes. 27.4. And,

2. Some long life, Psalm 34.12. 1 Pet. 3.10. And,

3. Some hospitality, Tit. 1.8.

Qu. 28. What is required of us in regard of those things which naturally we do
and may love?

Answ. Not to love them inordinately; that is,

I. Not to love fathers, mothers, husbands, wives or children more then Christ,
Matthew. 10.37.

II. Not to love our lives more then Christ, John 12.25. Apoc. 12.11.

Qu. 29. What things do men love which they ought to love as a Theological duty?

Answ. 1. Heavenly things; that is, both spiritual graces which come down from
heaven, and heavenly glory, which abides in heaven, Colos. 3.1, 2.

2. The statutes, commandments, and word of God, Psalm 119.119, 127, 140, 167.

3. The appearing of the Lord in his second coming, 2 Timothy 4.8.

4. The house of God, 1 Chronicles. 29.3.

5. Every thing which is good, Amos 5.15. Galat. 4.18.

6. Instruction and knowledge, Prove. 12.1.

7. Their own souls, Prove. 19.8.

8. Purity of heart, Prove. 22.11.

9. Truth and peace, Zach. 8.19.

10. Wisdom, Prove. 4.6.8.17.29.3. Now we must love wisdom for these reasons;

I. Because then Wisdom will love us, Prove. 8.17.

II. Because then we shall be blessed in outward things, Prove. 8.21.

III. Because otherwise we love death, Prove. 8.36.

Qu. 30. Whom do not wicked men love?

Answ. 1. Not the Lord, Job 21.14.

2. Not the righteous, John 15.16.

3. Not those who rebuke them, Prove. 15.12.

Qu 31. Whom do men love which they should not?

Answ. 1. Some love their enemies more then their friends, 2 Samuel 19.6.

2. Some inordinately love themselves, 2 Timothy 3.2.

3. Some love women lustfully whom they will not marry lawfully, 2 Samuel 13.4.
although this marriage had not been truly lawful.

4. Some love those whom God has forbidden them to love, 1 Kings 11.2. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.

5. Some love strangers; i e. idolaters, Ierem. 2.25.

Qu. 32. Whom do men love which they may, out of a natural, or, with a moral
love?

Answ. 1. Some love strangers, Deuter. 10.18, 19.

2. Some love those who are under their charge, 2 Cor. 7.3. Phil. 4.1.

3. Some love their neighbors and acquaintance, 1 Kings 5.1.

4. Some men love their wives, 1 Samuel 1.5. Hest. 2 17. Prove. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.26.
Colos. 3.19. Note here two things: viz.

First, why husbands must love their wives; viz.

I. Because wives should be as dear unto their husbands, as the Church is unto
Christ, Ephesians. 5.25.

II. Because in loving their wives, they love themselves, Ephesians. 5.28* etc.

Secondly, observe how conjugal love is increased; viz. by bearing of children:
as Genes. 29.32. whence they are called Pignora amoris, the pledges of love.

5. Some wives love their husbands, Titus 2.4.

6. Some parents love their children, Genesis 22.2. 44.20. and do truly show their
love by chastizing of them betimes, Prove. 13.24.

7. Some children love their parents. Note here, what is required of children
in regard of their love unto their parents, or their parents love unto them;
viz.

I. It is required of them not to love their parents above, or more then
Christ, Matthew. 10.37. And,

II. Not to hate any of their fathers children, because their fathers loves
them more. Genesis 37.4. And,

III. To love wisdom, that so they may rejoice their Parents, Prove. 29.3.

8. Some Magistrates love their people: Agesilaus was fined by the Ephories,
because he had stolen away the hearts, and won the love of all the Citizens to
himself.

9. Some subjects love their Rulers: and this is of no small moment or
consequence, seeing, as the French say, L'amour des subjects est la ferme
colomne d'un Prince, The love of the subjects is the strongest pillar of a
Prince.

10. Some brothers love one another; and some brothers love their sisters, and
some sisters their brethren. A Persian woman being asked, why she had rather
save the life of her brother then of her own son? answered, Because I may well
have more children, but never more brothers, seeing my father and mother are
dead.

11. Some masters love their servants, and some servants their masters.

12 Some Schoolmasters love their scholars, and some scholars their
Schoolmasters.

Qu. 33. Whom do some love which they ought to love, as a Theological duty; or,
Whom ought we to Love?

Answ. 1. We ought to love God the Father, Deuteronomy. 11.1. Psalm 91.14. Romans 5.5.
and,

2. God the Son, Cant. 1.7.7.12. John 21.15, 16. 1 Pet 1.8. and,

3. God the Holy Ghost Romans 15.30.

4. The Church of Christ, Isaiah 66.10. And men.

5. Their enemies, Exodus 23.4. 1 Samuel 24.5, 7. and 26.5. 30.11. and,

6. Kings should love those who speak truth and right, Prove. 16.13. and who are
pure in heart, Prove. 22.11. and,

7. Ministers should love their flocks. 2 Cor. 7.3, 15.9.14.12.14, 15. Philip.
1.7, 8. 1 These. 2.7. And,

8. People must love their Pastors, Gal. 4.14, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. And,

9. We must love the children of God, 1 Pet. 1.22.2.17. that is,

I. All good men, or, all faithful ones in general, 2 Cor. 7.15. Tit. 1.8. 1 Samuel 18.1.20.17, 18, 22. Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 2.2. 1 John 4.7. and,

II. Those who have been converted unto God by us, Phil. 12.

III. Those in whom we see the sparks of grace shine, and show forth
themselves, 1 Samuel 2.26.18.5.

Qu. 34. What rules are worth observation in regard of Love?

Answ. 1. As there must be in every triangle three lines, whereof the first
begins, the second increases, and the third concludes, or perfecteth the
Figure, and without any of these lines there can be no Triangle; so in Love
there are three virtues:

I. Affection, which draws the heart.

II. Action and expression, which increases the hope.

III. Constancy, which finisheth the work, and without any of these virtues
there can be no love.

Answ. 2. Ovid de art amandi, gives three rules not much differing from the
former: Principio quod amare velis reperire labora:
Proximus huic labor est placidam exorare puellam:
Tertius ut longo tempore duret amor.
First find out one whom dearly thou can love:
Then with entreaties seek thy love to move;
Lastly, see constant thou in love do prove.


I. Make God and good the object of our love.

II. Labor to be good, and by all diligent service and industrious endeavor,
to be assured of Gods love toward us in Christ. And,

III. To be constant and immovable in our love to God and good.

Qu. 35. How long does true love last?

Answ. Till death, yea ater death. Some Painters of old did draw on the borders
of Cupids Robe, Life and Death; to show, that love remains both in life, and
after death. God has ordained, that we who love shall have an end, and that,
or those whom we love shall have an end: and therefore our love must then, and
not till then have an end, when both we and our friends are dead. Vne parfaite
amor dure eternellement, say the French, A perfect love does last eternally;
and, Le neud que l'amour joinct, la mort ne peut deffaire; the knot that love
does knit, death cannot untie. Scipio Affricanus esteemed so much the Poet
Ennius alive, that being dead, he caused his picture to be set before his eyes,
as a memorial of his great love. Plutar. When Cyrus went to overcome Babylon,
and was hindered by the river Euphrates, a Knight whom the King entirely loved,
venturing into the water was drowned; whereupon the King made a vow, that he
would make that great river passable on foot: and accordingly parted it into
460 channels, and so took the City. For the most part, that love which lasts
after death, is begun betimes; whence one says, Would thou have love last
even unto the tomb?
Then let it take beginning at the womb.


Qu. ^6. How many way does Love cease?

Answ. 1. Sometimes naturally, when men dye; Eccles. 9.6.

2. Sometimes impiously and enviously, when men cease to love those who are
become good, whom they loved when they were evil, 1 Pet. 4.4.

3. Sometimes piously and religiously, when men cast off the familiarity and
acquaintance of Apostates, and those who become wicked, and enemies to the
Church, although they were intimate and familiar with them when they were
professors, and seemed outwardly religious, 2 Timothy 3.5. Heb. 10 38. 1 John 2 19.

Qu. 37. What* or where is the Seat of Love?

Answ. Love has three residences, in cord, in ore, in apere; in the heart by
loving and affecting, in the dead by well doing and relieving, and in word by
instructing and reproving.

Qu. 38. What are the Marks, Signs and Properties of Love?

Answ. As one knows not a Musician, but either by his voice, or by the touching
and handling of his instrument: even so he cannot be reputed a true and perfect
Lover except he make it known by the testimony of the true signs belonging to
love: These signs are;

1. Love is full of fear, Res est solliciti plena timoris amor: Love that is
dear,
Is full of fear.
The French say, Amor ne fut jamais ou sans Peur, ou saus pleurs: Love never
was without both fear and tears. Love is full of fear; that is,

I. Is afraid to offend the party beloved.

II. Is afraid to lose the love of the party beloved. And,

III. Is afraid lest any occasion of difference should be given between him and
his beloved. Discipulus plus amat Christum, quam timet gehennam. Bern. The
servants of Christ love him more then they fear hell: and fear him out of true
love.

2. Another sign is this: Love is always thinking, pondering, ruminating and
remembering the party beloved. Anima Amatoris est in re amata. Aquin. the desire
of the lover is toward the party beloved, as the needle of the Compass is
toward the north. The soul of man entangled and set on fire with love, dies
in his own body, and lives in another. Plato. A man traveling into far
foreign parts, left his wife a precious jewel, as a token of his love, to
remember her of him in his absence: she loved often to look upon her jewel, but
forgot her husband; her jewel was often in her hand, but her husband seldom in
her heart, and far from the desire of her thoughts; this argued, that she loved
her jewel more then her husband; for if the Passionate Lover sail, love is his
Pilot; if he walk, love is his companion; if he sleep, love is his pillow.
Pondus meum amor meus, where we love, there we like; if it be earth, there we
rest; if heaven, thither we aim: For where our treasure is, there is our heart,
Mat. 6.21. Machina mentis est vis amoris, Love draws us to our liking, if
heavenly upwards, if earthly downwards.

3. Another sign is this, Love sings always loath to depart, and cannot with any
patience bear the absence or departure of the beloved. We bewray out love more
by grief, in parting with any good, then by our joy in partaking of it.

Love goes to love, as schoolboys from their books,
But love from love toward school with heavy looks.
Perdiccas for the love he bare to Alexander, refused a great revenue in
Macedonia, following him in his wars in Asia, Plutar. he would part with his
possessions rather then the person of him whom so dearly he loved. Quanto
gratiorem experta est persentiam, tanto molestiorem sensit absentiam. Bern.

4. Another sign is this, that the party loving cannot endure to hear the party
beloved to be evil spoken of. Men by duels and quarrels will hazard their lives
to revenge a disgraceful word against themselves or their female Loves, but can
endure to hear God blasphemed, without any rising of their blood at all; which
shows, that most men love their lusts and themselves more then God. Plato said,
The man who loves with his heart, neither in absence forgets, neither in
presence becomes negligent, neither serves for profit, nor loves for gain;
and finally, defends the case of his friend as his own.

5. Another sign is this, love bewails the miseries of the party beloved;
according to that of Euripides, That which with the heart is loved, with the
heart is lamented. And,

6. When we never think we love enough; as the Papists say, that Friar Giles,
companion to St. Francis, wept bitterly, because Amor non amatur (as the Author
says) he could not love God so heartily, as he was beloved of him. And,

7. Love me and love my dog: a sign of love is, to love those who are loved by
the party who is beloved. He who loves the father, will love the son; he who
loves the King, will love his servant, and he who loves Christ, will love his
members.

8. Another sign of love is this, the person loving will hazard, yea lay down
his life for the good, or at the command of the party beloved. When Dionysius
the Tyrant, said in the presence of Xenocrates, to Plato, I will cause some to
cut off thy head. Xenocrates said, But they shall not, except they take away
mine first. Eros the servant of Antonius, having promised to kill his master
when he requested him, drew his sword (his master remembering him of his
promise) and holding it as if he would have killed him, turned his masters head
aside, and then thrust the sword into his own body. Plutarc. He who desires
clear water, must dig deep; he who longs for sweet music, must strain Art,
as well as the strings to the highest; and who seeks to win, or desires to
show love, must stretch his labor, and hazard his life.

9. Sympathy is another sign of love; yea to love what the party beloved loves,
and to loath what he hates, is one of the clearest arguments of love. And,

10. Another is; to be constant in love, notwithstanding all the denials,
delays and discouragements we meet withal; for one may as soon go kindle fire
with snow, as seek to quench the fire of love with words; seeing love is like a
Spaniel, who fawns upon his master when he spurns him away. As the Hunter
plyeth his hounds, the Falkner his Hawk, and the ^^s^er his angle, for getting
the pain through delight of the pastime: so the Lover in the prosecution of his
love, esteems all labors and troubles but trifles, in respect of the hope of
his amorou^ harvest. Substractio rei quam amas, augmentatio des^derii est, and
quod amas ardentius cares aegrius. Bern. Denial in love does but sharpen the
edge of desire, and the lack of the thing beloved does augment the love
thereof, for as the Abeston stone once kindled can never be quenched; as the
Griphon if he once soar into the air, will never come down without his prey; as
the fly Pyralis cannot live out of the flame; and as the bird Trochiles cannot
keep from the Crocodile; so the heart once thoroughly heated with love, cannot
live without the thing beloved, but does pursue after it to the death. Thus we
see what the signs of love in general are.

Qu. 39. What are the Means unto Love?

Answ. The Means are either ordinary or extraordinary:

I. The ordinary means unto love, or to be beloved, is to love. Hecaton says,
I will show thee a means to get or gain love without herb, medicine or
enchantment; Vt ameris amato, and amabilis esto: if thou will be beloved love*
etc. labor to be lovely. How can God but love them who love him, seeseeing he
loved them, when they loved him not?

II. The extraordinary means are either lawful or unlawful.

1. The extraordinary lawful means, is a strange herb which Marcus Aurelius in
his letter to Antigonus makes mention of, which grows in Cypres upon a
little mountain called Archady, which herb is called Ilabia, and has this
virtue, if it be cut it dropeth blood, and if a man rub another with the blood
thereof while it is warm, he will love him extremely; but if he rub him with
the blood when it is cold, he will hate him deadly. The truth hereof the
Emperor says, he found by experience; for anointing one with the warm blood of
that plant, he would always protest, that he would sooner lose his life then
cease to love him.

2. The extraordinary unlawful means are charms, enchantments and philtres.
Love gotten with witchcraft, is as unpleasant, as fish taken with medicines is
unwholsom; or, affection bred by enchantments, is like a flower wrought in
silk, in color and form most like, but nothing at all in substance and savor.

Qu. 40. What is here required of us in regard of Love?

Answ. To labor so to live, that people may love us; the love of others
toward us, being better then silver or gold, Prove. 22.1.

Qu. 41. Who are too blame in regard of Love?

Answ. 1. They who are without natural affection, Romans 1.31. 2 Timothy 3.3.

2. They who love those who are unworthy to be beloved, as Dido the
Carthaginian Queen loved Aeneas, a straggling Trojane; as Phillis loved
Demophoon a Pyrate, a robber in Greece, cast up as a shipwreck on the shore;
and as Sappho loved Phao a Ferriman, a slave.

3. They who love evil, and loath good; as the Scarab loathes the sweet flower,
and loves the corrupt flesh: the Vulture forsakes the odoriferous ointment, to
smell the dead carcass; the common rabble are more delighted with a song which
is ordinary and barbarous, then that which is cunning and curious; many with
Sytha had rather hear a horse neigh, then a musician play; and too too many
prefer in their affections the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season,
before the joys which are at Gods right hand for ever and ever.

Qu. 42. What may we learn from Love?

Answ. 1. That true love is very rare in the world, Mat. 24.12. and,

2. That in perilous times the love of many shall wax cold, Mat. 21.12. and,

3. That love consists in unity; as the heart has but one string, and the
heaven one Sun, so true lovers have but one love. And,

4. That love sometimes turns to hate: for as the best wine does make the
sharpest vinegar: so the deepest love in some, turns to the deadliest hate. And,

5. That the love of ancient approved friends, for the most part is the truest;
as the young vines bring the most wine, but the old the best: so tender love
makes greatest show of blossoms, but tried love brings forth sweetest fruit.
And,

6. We may learn what the Causes of Love are, viz.

I. The goodness of the thing loved; for no man loves any thing, but what he
apprehends to be good and worthy to be loved.

II. The knowledge of the thing loved; Ignoti nulla cupido* a man cannot love
what he knows not; and therefore as the thing must be good, so he must know it
to be such. And*

III. Likeness is a great cause of liking; Toute chose naturelle appete son
semblable; every natural thing loves that which is most like to it, as the
French men say* Adam loved Evah when he saw her first because she was like unto
him. As a man when he looks into a glass, he loves his image because it is
like unto him; but he loves not a Toad or Serpent, because they are unlike him.

Thus much for love in general: I proceed, according to the method propounded,
to touch upon evil and inordinate love.

Qu 43. How many sort of Lovers are there?

Answ. 1. I might answer, that Lovers are either constant and true, or,
inconstant, dissembling and false, 2 Samuel 13.4, 15. Job 19.19. Judges 16.15 The
love of some thaws like a waxen image against the fire, which quickly bears no
impression of the thing it was. Some expressions of affection are but like Apes
hugings, which smoother with their embracings* or,

2. I might answer, that there are three sorts of Lovers;

I. Some love what they should not.

II. Some love what they may.

III. Some love what they ought: of all these I spoke before.

3. Some answer, that as there are four sorts of Combats, or wars; Foreign,
Civil, Duels, and Internal conflicts; so there are four sorts of Lovers;
Spiritual, Carnal, Temporal, and Common. F. Johan. a. S. Geminiano. lib. 1. de
caelo. cap. 4.

4. Lovers are of two sorts; for,

I. Some love their souls better then their bodies. And,

II. Some love their bodies better then their souls.

Qu. 44. Whereunto may inordinate love be compared?

Answ. 1. To a fish; for as they who angle for the Tortois, having once caught
him, are brought unto such a sluggishness, or numness, that they lose all their
spirits; so those who hunt after the love of women, and being taken in their
toils, are brought into such a slavery, that they are deprived of their
liberty, and bewitched like those who view the head of a Medusa; or the Viper
tied to the bough of the Beech-tree, which keeps him in a dead sleep, though
it begin with a sweet slumber. Or, as the Fish Echineis, or the Remora, albeit
but little, yet stays a ship under sail; so the love of one or other
beautiful woman, has often diverted wholly a man's course from study, or the
wars, or at least has for a time made him lay his great and important affairs
aside.

2. Inordinate love may be compared to envy; for as envy consumes both body
and soul, so does such love. And,

3. To fire; for as fire is not felt without burning; so love is not
entertained without enflaming and wounding. B^sil de virginit. Or, unlawful
love given way unto, is like a firebrand tossed in the wind, by which how much
the fire increases still, so much the brand with blazing flames consumes.

4. Inordinate love may be compared to poison; for as poison mixed with sweet
wine, at the first is pleasant to the drinker, but afterward paineth deadly;
so they who consume their time with beautiful harlots, at the first feel
pleasure, but afterward dolor, sorrow and bitterness do follow. Diogenes.

Qu. 45. Whether are all Lovers alike or not?

Ans. They are not: for as the Serpertine Powder is quickly kindled, and
quickly quenched; but the Salamander stone once set on fire, can never be
extinguished; so all lovers are not alike, some being like troathless Jason,
some like trusty Troilus; some like dissembling Damocles, and some like loyal
Laelius. More particularly,

I. Some Lovers are faithful and constant, like a stone found in Egypt, which
will quickly receive a form, but never change without cracking: such Lovers
were Amian to his Ignatia, Auficlius to his Canchia, Amador to his Florida,
Leander to his Hero, Pyramus to his Thisbe, Theagines to his Cariclia, and
Erasto to his Persida. The Jacinth if it be rubbed with lime, is soon set on
fire, and hardly quenched; the Adamant and the iron are soon joined, but hardly
dissevered; the coin has its stamp in a moment, which cannot be taken out
without melting; the Turtle chooses, but never changes; the Swan once liking,
never leaves; and the Lion after his first choice never covets a second
chance. Lamia a Concubine by no torments could be haled from the love of
Aristogicon.

II. Some Lovers are false, inconstant, and faithless, more brittle then a
glass, more wavering then a weathercock, more variable in thought then the
Camelion in hue, more changeable in deed then the Nightingale in voice; now
loving, now loathing, now fire, now frost: hot at the first, and as soon cold
as hot.

Qu. 46. What is the nature of inordinate Love?

Answ. 1. It makes men blind and dark in their judgments, and is the cause of
sin, Genes. 3.6. 34.12. Judges 16.4. 2 Samuel 13.2. 1 Kings 11.3.

2. It is the greatest plague; as Miltiades the Athenian was wont to say, that
of all the plagues wherewith the Gods did afflict mortal men, love was the
greatest, in that they sought after that as a heavenly bliss, which at last
they found their hellish bane.

3. It is a small thing, yet produces great effects; for as the least spark,
if it be not quenched, will burst into a flame, and little moaths eat thick
cloth, and Coneys in Spain, and Moles in Thessalia did undermine two towns; so
love which secretly creeps into the mind (as the rust does into the iron, and
is not perceived) consumes the body, yea confounds the soul. As the little
grain of Mustard Seed in time becomes a tree; and the slender twig, which with
the hand might easily have been pulled up, comes to that greatness, that it is
requisite to bring an ax to hew it down; so love at first may be easily
prevented, but being suffered a while is not easily razed.

4. The nature of inordinate love is, that it is more bitter then sweet.
Parrasius dravving the counterfeit of love, painted her tickling a youth on the
left side with a feather, and stinging him on the right with a Scorpion;
meaning, that they who are besotted with the sorceries of ^upid, reap for one
dram of gold a pound of dross, and for one pint of pure oil, a whole Tun of
infectious poison, being a fading pleasure mixed with bitter passions, and a
misery tempered with a fevv momentary delights. Hence the French say, Au prix
du mal a' amor, tout autre mal est doux; all sovvr is svveet, being compared
with the svveet sovvr of love. Love is likened to the Fig Tree, whose fruit
is svveet, whose root is more bitter then a Bitterns claw; or, to the Apple in
Persia whose blossom savoureth like honey, but whose bud is more bitter then
gall; or, to a Labyrinth, which leads us to as much pain and pains ar
Sisiphus, Tantalus, and Ixion endure and undergo.

Qu. 47. What are the Causes of this evil and inordinate Love?

Answ. 1. Sometimes a heart naturally lascivious and lustful for as the dropsy
comes from abundance of moisture, so love many times springs from abundance
of lust.

2. Sometimes laziness is the cause of love: for as a lamp is maintained with
oil; so love is nourished with idleness: Otia si tollas, periere cupidinis
arcu^.

3. Sometimes wealth and worldly abundance is the cause of this evil love; for
as the Cedar tree is without fruit, and the grain sown in the sand withers for
want of moisture; so inordinate love without wealth and outward fullness does
frequently freeze; whence we see, that this vice is more frequent in great men
then in mean ones.

4. Sometimes quick* nimble and ripe wits are the causes of this love; for as
the fairest blossoms are soonest nipt with frost, and the best fruit soonest
destroyed with Caterpillars; so the ripest wits are most apt to be overthrown
by love. Or, as the dry touchwood is kindled with lime, and fire quickly
consumes flax; so love enters the sharp wit without resistance, and is
harbored there without repentance.

Qu 48. Whom do men inordinately love?

Answ. 1. Sometimes their wives, 1 Kings 11 3, etc.

2. Sometimes harlots, Judges 16.4.

3. Sometimes strangers for their beauty Genesis 34.12. And,

4. Sometimes their kindred, 2 Samuel 13 2.

Qu. 49. What are the Fruits and Effects of inordinate, lawless and immoderate
love?

Answ. 1. Sometimes the death of others; as Fabia the wife of Fabrias
Fabricanus, sell so deeply in love with Pet^oninus Valentinus, that in hope to
enjoy him, she caused her husband traitorously to be murdered: for which she
was hanged.

2. Sometimes the loss of ones own life; and that either by their own hands, or
by the hands of others.

I. Sometimes lustful love has caused the loss of life by the ^o^^^rs own
hand, as Crates the Theban being asked What was the rea^iest remedy to quench
love? answered, Hunger asswageth love, and so also does time; but it these will
not work the feat, a halter will. And I think (...) ^ction has an eye to this,
of some Peets, who ^aign, That in L^ucadia there is a very high sleep Rock,
which is a notable remedy to assuage love; as was experimentally proved true in
and by Cephalus, who for the love of Degonetes, whom he loved without measure,
leaped from the top of the Rock. Giddica the wife of Pomminius Laurentinus did
so lasciviously dote on her son in Law Comminius, that not able to train him to
her will, and perceiving that her husband knew of her loose affections, she
strangled her self.

II. Sometimes this unlawful love is the loss of life by the hands of others; as
appears in Fabia mentioned before in this same question.

3. Another bitter fruit growing on the tree of lascivious love, is loss of
Wit, understanding and reason. A Counselor of the Parliament at Grenoble,
being taken with the love of a married Gentlewoman, and perceiving that
notwithstanding all his suit and endeavors she slighted and contemned him, he
grew so careless of himself, that he began to grow lousie, and being strangely
tormented with lice, he grew mad, and so dyed, 2 Hist. of France, 1559. Francis
Valeriol^ in his Physical observations, l. 2. obs. 7. tells us of a rich
Merchant, who fell so strangely and strongly in love with a maid, that he was
transported beyond the bounds of reason, became stark mad, and so continued a
great while, notwithstanding all the physical means used for his recovery.
Propertius when he was in love, said he was not himself, but a shadow. Socrates
says, the love of beauty is the forgetting of reason, because love is not to
be suppressed by wisdom, because not to be comprehended with reason.

4. Another effect is, it blinds judgment, according to the French Ad^^e,
Amor fait trouver b^^u ce qu de soy n' est be^u* Love makes us judge a thing
fair, though it be soul. Quisquis amat ranam, (...) pu^^ esse Dianam. And,

5. It is sometimes the cause of irreconcilable jars and strife. The cause of
civil dissension between Them^stocles and Aristides, was the love of Stesil^a
an harlot, whose beauty being decayed, their hatred did so continue, that they
could never be reconciled, but continued enemies even to death. The like hatred
was between Cato and Caesar about the love of the harlot Servilia.

6. It i^ hurtful both to the party loving and beloved; the dart of Love being
like a stroke with a clod of earth, which being thrown amongst a company, does
hurt one, and blindes another.

7. It makes men like beasts; the Poets tell us, that Jupiter transformed
himself into the form of a Swan, to enjoy Lae^a and into a Bull to beguil Jo;
and that Neptune changed himself into a He^fer, a Ram, and a Dolph^n, only for
the love of those he lusted after. By these fictions I think the Poets mean
that lustful love makes men more like beasts then men.

8 Another fruit is, loss of peace, quiet, virtue and all sweet content. Marcus
Aurelius writing to his Empress Faustina, about the careful education of their
daughter Lucilla, says, Love in young blood, and springing and flourishing
youth, is a poison that spreads into every vein, it is an herb that enrreth
into the entrails, a fainting which incontinently mortifieth all the members, a
pestilence that infecteth the heart, and finally it puts an end to all
virtues. For as the precious stone Antracites, being thrown into the fire
looks black and tawny, but being cast into the water, glistereth like the
Sunbeams; so the precious mind of man once put into the flame of love is ugly,
and loses her virtue; but sprinkled with the water of wisdom, and detestation
of such fond delights, it shines like the glorious rays of Phoebus.

9. This loose lewd love makes men effeminate, low-spirited and base in their
courses and carriage. The Ambassadors of Lydia coming suddenly into Hercules
chamber to speak with him, found him attired like a woman, lying on Joles lap.
Dionysius the Tyrant was so devoted to the love of his Curtezan Mirta, that he
only ordained, and she took care for the execution and administration of all
the weighty affairs of the Weal-publique. Antenaricus the famous King of the
Goths, after many great victories in Italy, was so deeply enamoured with one
Pincia, that whilst she combed his head, he made clean her slippers.
Themistocles that famous Grecian Captain, in the wars of Epirus took a woman
captive, whom he so doted on, that if she were sick, he would feign himself not
to be well; if she were appointed to purge, he would purge if to be let blood,
he also would bleed carrying himself toward her, not as if she were his
prisoner, but as if he were her slave. King Demetrius having taken ^hodes, a
beautiful Gentlewoman of the City was presented unto him, whom by little he did
so immoderately affect, that once she seeming angry with him, and refu^ing to
sit near him he forgetting all majesty and dignity, fell before her on his
knees, entreating her pardon: and the Kings of Assyria of old, never answered
any Ambassadors themselves, but by Messengers, they wasting their time wholly
in their Concubines company. Pausamus.

10. Another fruit and effect of inordinate love, is, the ruin and destruction
both of soul and body; for as fainting and swounding mortifieth every member,
as pestilence infecteth every part, and as poison pierces every vein; so love,
if not timely prevented and looked unto, will in time bring body and soul to
utter confusion.

Qu. ^0. What are the Remedies against inordinate l^ve?

Answ. To labor that our heart may be taken up with another love; for as
Rubarb by a certain peculiar virtue does purge choler, although by nature it be
choleric; so one love often times does drive out another, as one nail does
another, one: re another, or one grief another. And indeed, as a ^^ll vessel
will receive no more, so where the love of God has taken possession,
lascivious love will not be entertained.

2. Another remedy is speedy resistance; for as fire is to be quenched in the
spark, weeds to be rooted up in the tender blade, Tetters and Ringworms to be
cured in the beginning, lest they spread over the whole body; so the assaults
of love are to be beaten back at the first siege, lest they undermine at the
second.

3. Another remedy is to avoid occasions: He who has sore eyes, must not
behold the candle; and he who would not be entrapped or entangled in the meshes
of love, must not look upon beauty; but with Job, make a covenant with his
eyes. If the Fly will flutter about the candle, she mu^t expect to be burnt;
if the Qu^il will seed on the Hemlock, she must look to be poisoned; and if
lascivious dispositions will frequent the society of lewd women, they may look
to be seduced and led aside; and therefore Guevara in his letter to Sir Jews
Brave, fol. 186. says, Let Hermogenes, Tesiphontes, Dorcatius and Ovid write
what they please concerning the remedies of love, yet I say, There is no better
remedy for love, then to avoid the occasions of love, or never to begin to
lov^; for love is so evil a beast, that with a thread he suffers himself to
be taken, but he will not depart w th the thrusts of a lance: and therefore,
Fly, fly betimes, for only they
Do conquer love who run away.
Thus much for the Evil and inordinate love at present, till we come to treat
of Fornication and the kinds thereof; according to the prescribed order. I now
proceed unto the Good love, and the several sorts thereof.

Qu. 51. How is love attributed unto God?

Answ. Both in the Abstract and Concret: for,

I. In the Abstract he is said to be love, 1 John. 4. 8, 16. And,

II. In the Concrete he is said to be loving.

Qu. 52. What does the Lord and his Christ love?

Answ. 1. Righteousness, Psalm 11.7.33.5. Hebr. 1.9.

2. Judgment, Psalm 37.28.99.4. Isaiah 61.8.

3. The gates of Sion, Psalm 87.2.

Qu. 53. How manifold is Gods love toward us,

Answ. The love of God is twofold; viz.

I. Amor benevolentiae, the love of Gods good will; or, the love of Election.
And.

II. Amor complacentiae, the love of Gods being well pleased with us and
delighted in us, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. Romans 11 6, 7, ^8. God loves us before we
are sanctified and called; God is pleased with us when we walk worthy of our
vocation, and according to the rule of sanctification.

Qu. 54. What is the love of God?

Answ. Love is a will whereby God wills; that is, approves that which is good,
and rests therein, Psalm 45.8, 11. Matthew. 3.17. or, love is the essence of God,
whereby he loves his creatures, though unworthy of his love, Malac. 1.2, 3.
Titus 3.4.

Qu. 55. Whereunto may Gods love toward us be compared?

Answ. 1. To the rod of Moses; for as this turned into a Serpent before
Pharaoh, devoured all the Magicians rods turned into serpents: so the assurance
that God loves us, does beget such a love in us unto him, that it devoureth the
love of all worldly things. Bern. ser. de Ascens. And,

2. To light; for as the visible light of the morning when day is plainly
broke, is the Hench-man of the Suns brightness; so the bene^its of God daily
received, are heralds of his divine Love. And,

3. To the love of Hens to their Chickens, as Matthew. 23, 37. And,

4. To the love of Parents to their children; or, to the care of fathers, and
the pity of mother, Omnis in Ascanio chari stat cura parentis. Virg. As the
Father loves his child, so God his creature.

Qu. 56. Whom does the Lord love?

Answ. 1. Those whom men and the world contemn and despise. There is a Country
in Asia called Mysia* who were so despised of all their neighbors that they
were as a byword unto them; for so often as a man would denote a thing of no
estimation, they would proverbially say, Vltimum esse Mysiorum, they are worse
then the Mysians, as we see in Cicero's Oration for Flaccus; and yet Paul the
Apostle, and John the Evangelist preached the doctrine and light of the Gospel
to this poor and despised people; so that these Mysians who were such a
despicable people unto others, were more highly esteemed of ^od who out of his
love to them converted many of them by the preaching of John and Paul; and some
think, that Paul alludes to these Mysians, when he says, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many
wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble; but God has
chosen the foolish things of this world, that they might confound the wise.

Answ. 2. The Lord loves the poor and strangers, Psalm 146.9.

Answ. 3. The Lord loves the fatherless and widows, Psalm 58.5, 6.140 9.

Answ. 4. The Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9 7.

Answ. 5. The Lord loves the seed of the righteous, 2 Samuel 12 24.

Answ. 6. The Lord loves his people whom he has chosen, and amongst, or by
whom his name is called upon. Note here, wherein the love of God toward his
people does appear:

First, in remembering his promises toward them, Nehem. 1.8, 9, 11.

Secondly, in his mindfulness of them, Psalm 115.9 12, 13.

Thirdly, by his taking vengeance of all their enemies, Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36, 43.

Fourthly, by his taking notice of all their troubles and afflictions, and his
care to succor them, Exodus 2.25. Judges 15.19. Psalm 25.15.40.17.

Fifthly, by his separating them unto himself, or, gathering them unto him: as,
Lev. 24. Ezekiel. 36.24, 29, 30.

Sixthly, by his delight in them, Isa. 58.14.

Seventhly, by his curbing, restraining and withholding of their enemies from
harming of them. This he does three manner of ways:

I. Sometimes by forbiding them to speak any evil unto them, or, to harm them,
as Genes. 31.24.29.

II. Sometimes by striking a terror in them, and making them afraid of his
people, Genes. 35.5.

III. Sometimes by revealing his judgments from heaven against their enemies,
as he did upon Pharaoh and others, Exodus ^. and 8 and 9, and 10. Chapters,
14.27. Deuteronomy. 32 43.

Answ. 7. The Lord loves his Church. The picture of Diana was framed with that
art, that if those who were without the Temple looked upon her, she seemed to
frown upon them* but upon those who were within she smiled: so the Lord loves,
and smiles upon those who are within the Church, but frowns upon those who are
without, Isa. 61.10, 11. Note here, that the Lords love unto his Church appears
three manners of ways; viz.

1. By his beautifying and adorning of her, as a Bride with jewels; i. e.
divine and spiritual graces and virtues, Isa. 61.11. And,

II. By his subduing Nations unto her, or, by causing them to flock and submit
unto her, Isa. 60.4, 6, 7. And,

III. By making righteousness grow, and Religion flourish in her, Isa. 61.11.

Answ. 8. The Lord loves his elect and faithful children, John 13.1. that is,
both his eldest son by creation, and the children of that son.

First, the Lord loved the first man Adam, or the first of his children who
were mere men; expressing and showing his love to him in or by these things:

I. By creating of him in his own image, Genes. 1.26, 27.

II. By blessing of him, Genesis 1.28.

III. By giving him dominion over the creatures, Genesis 1.26, 28.

IV. By providing food for him, Genesis 1.29 30.2.9 16.

V. By appointing Paradise for him to dwell in, and placing him there, Gen 28,
15.

VI. By making unto him an Helper meet for him, Genesis 2.18.23.

VII. By forbiding him to meddle with that which was evil; or, by forewarning
him of what was evil, Genesis 2.17.

VIII. By enduing him with admirable and eminent knowledge, Genesis 2.19, 20.

IX. By preparing garments for them after the fall, Genesis 3 21.

Secondly, the Lord expresses his love unto his children, who sprung from the
loins o^ the first man Adam. Two things are here to be taken notice of; viz.

I. Who they are whom the Lord loves.

II. How, or wherein he expresses his love unto these.

I. Note who they are whom the Lord loves.

1. Righteous men, Psalm 146.8.

2. Good men; -- At pauci quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus. Virg.
The Lord being just, loves not many but only those who are good. And,

3. Those who love him: Vespasian commanded a liberal reward should be given to
a woman, who came unto him, and professed she was in love with him. His Steward
demanding what ^^em he should put to it in his accounts? He answered, te^ to
ber who loved Vespasian, so much. Thus God gives much, and forgives much, as a
token of his love to those who love him. Amor currit per des^^erium, and
quiescit per g^u^ um: all things, and so love amongst others, loves vicissitude
(...) bred it says Plato, and the same seed it: heats and cools are the best
diet for it. In love there must be a desire of enjoying, a delight in enjoying,
and a sorrow for lack of enjoying; and those who are thus affected to God, he
will love.

4. The Lord loves those who obey him in love. Luther said, God loves
^urristas, not Quaeristas, runners nor reasoners; and it is not possible for us
to be prompt and diligent in obeying, except we love

II. Note, wherein the love of God appears unto these his faithful ones:

1. In his covering and hiding of their iniquities, Numb. 23.21. Je^. 31.34.
and,

2 In making them instrumental for the preservation of others Genesis 45.5.

3. ^n his presence with them in their labors, and prospering whatsoever they
do, Genesis 39.23.

4. In his giving of them favor in the eyes of strangers or those under whose
charge and custody they are, Genesis 39 21.

5. In his care to deliver and save them from and out of all evils, Isa. 63.9
Genesis 15.5, 6, 7. Psalm 37.39.

6 In his raising up christ to be a Shepherd unto them, ^z k ^4.^3 26, 27, 2^.

7. In his revealing of his will unto them, Genesis 18.18.

8. By his subduing of all their enemies, Apoc. 3.9.

9. By defending them against their enemies, Isa. 43.4.48.14.

10. By giving them wise and prudent Princes, 2 Chronicles. 2.11 9.8.

11. By taking the wrongs done unto them, as done unto himself. Zach. 28.

12. By giving them favor in the eyes of their enemies, Isa 66.12.

13. By extending his own favor unto them, Isa. 44 3. Hosea 11.4.

14. By his delight in them. Numb. 14 8.

15. By dignifying of them with the title of sons, 1 John 3.1.

16. By his sending his son into the world for them; or, by giving Christ unto
them, 1 John. 4.8, 9, 10. Romans 5.6, etc. O Lord, what is man that thou so
regardest him? Mittis unigenitum tuum, immittis Spiritum tuum, promittis vultum
tuum. Bern. in Cantie. So God loved the world, as he gave his only begotten
Son; the Son sends the Spirit and the Spirit teaches truth.

Qu. 57. Why does the Lord thus love his children and people?

Answ. 1. Because they are his people, Nehem. 1.8, 9.11. and,

2. For his promise sake, Nehem. 1.8, 9, 11.

Qu. 58. Wherefore does the Lord love, or express his love to some people more
then others?

Answ. 1. Not for their multitude and greatness, Deuteronomy 7.7. Nor,

2. For their merit or goodness, Hosea 14.4. Romans 9 13. but,

3. For his own Name and mercy sake. Deuteronomy. 7.8. and,

4. For his promise sake unto his servants, Deuteronomy. 7.8.10.15.

Qu. 59. What is the Nature of Gods love, and loving kindness unto his people
and children?

Answ. 1. It is an acceptable love unto them, and more welcome then the former
and latter rain unto the earth, Hos. 6.3. yea then the morning dew, Hos. 14.5.

2. His loving-kindnesses toward them are many, Psalm 25.6. Isa. 63.7.

3. His love toward them is good, Psalm 6.9.16. And,

4. It is toward them perpetual and everlasting, Psalm 42.8.89.33. Isa. 54.8,
10. Jer. 31.3. or, it has been of old, Psalm 25.6. or, it is an eternal and
immutable love, Numb. 23.20. John 13.1.

5. It is a free love, Hosea 14.4, 5. Romans 9.13.

6. It is mavelous, Psalm 17.7. Ephesians. 2.7. Tit. 3.4.

7. It is extraordinary, excellent, Psalm 36.7.

8. It is a perfect love; he loving them as he loves his only begotten Son,
John 17.23.

9. It is better then life, Psalm 63.3.

10. It is an immense, profound and infinite love, Ephesians. 3 18, 19. or, It is a
great love, Joel 2.13. Jonah 4.2. Ephesians. 2.4. i. e.

I. It is greater then the love of a friend to his friend; for he gave his Son
to dye for us out of his love unto us, John 3.16.

II. It is greater then the love of a mother toward her child, Isa. 49.14,
15.66.13.

III. It is like the love of a husband to his wise, Isa. 54.4, 5.

Qu. ^0. What are the Degrees of Gods love toward his children?

Answ. These five.

I. He decreed before all times, to save them.

II. In the fullness of time he gave Christ to be a Savior unto them

III. In his appointed time, he justifies them, reconciles them unto himself,
and pardons their sins, before he reveals it unto them, or assures them thereof.

IV. He then gives them a glimpse of his love; when from or by the signs
manifested in the Gospel, they perceive that they are regenerated. Then,

V. He gives them an open and clear vision, 2 Cor. 3.18. that is, he
immediately speaks unto their hearts by an internal revelation, his Spirit
witnessing unto their spirits, that he loves them as sons in Christ, and will
love them unto the end.

Qu. 61. What consolation may the faithful reap from Gods love toward them?

Answ. 1. They may be comforted with this, that none can curse them, Numb. 23.8.

2. They need neither fear want, nor enemies, nor dangers, Genesis 26.24. Josh.
10.8.8.1, 10. Deuteronomy. 1.21.

3. They may know to their comfort, that they are blessed whom the Lord loves,
Psalm 145.5, 7, 9. And,

4. That God will increase his graces in them, Psalm 115.12, 14. and,

5. That he will give the earth unto them, and prosper them, Psalm 115.12.16.
And,

6. That he will heal their sins and backslidings, Psalm 1^3.2, 3. Hosea 14.4,
5.

This Question may be much enlarged from Quest. 56.

Qu. 62. What means must we use, if we desire that God may love or show
kindness either to us or ours?

Answ. 1. We must pray unto God to do so, Genesis 24.12, 14. Psalm 119.76.

2. We must labor to be of the number of his servants and children, and not of
the world, Ioh 17.

3. We must pray unto him to inflame our hearts with his love, 2 Thessalonians. 3 5.

4. We must be obedient to his law and commandments, Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13.11.1.13.

Qu. 63. What may we learn from the Lords love and loving kindness toward his
people or children?

An. 1. That it is a great judgment to have it taken away from us, Jer. 16.5.

2. That it cannot be made known in the grave, Psalm 88.11.

3. That it is showed unto thousands, Jerem. 32.18.

4. That the mercies and graces we receive from God, are not bestowed upon us
for any merit of ours, but for his own loving kindness sake, Psalm
119.88.149.159. Jer. 31 3. Hos. 2.19. Amat Deus; non aliunde hoc habet, sed
ipse est unde amet, and ideo vehementius amat, quia non amorem tam habet quam
hoc est ipse. August.

Qu. 64. What is required of us in regard of Gods love, and loving kindness
toward us?

Answ. 1. To love the brethren, 1 John 4.8.

2. To love strangers, Deuteronomy. 10.18, 19.

3. To cast our care upon God, 1 Pet. 5.7.

4. To praise him, and set forth his glory* Deuteronomy. 26.5, 10. 2 Samuel 1.27, 28.
Ruth. 4.14. Psalm 13.4, 13.22.24.115.12, 18.103.1, 4.138.

5. To follow him, Numb. 14.24. Joshua 14.6, 14.

6. To seek to know him, and his love unto us, and that with joy, Deuteronomy. 12.7.
Hos. 6.2, 3. Ephesians. 3 8.

7. To admire his love, Isa. 5.18. Romans 5.6, 7, 8, 11.33.

8. To obey and serve him, Genesis 12.1, 2. Exodus 23.26. Josh. 24.2, 4.

9 To hear him, Deuteronomy. 15.5.6

10. To rejoice in the Lord who thus loves us, P^alm 5.12.

11. To trust in him for his love, and depend upon him, Psalm 36 7.61.4,
5.115.^, 12.

12. We must labor and pray for true wisdom, that we may understand the loving
kindness of the Lord, Psalm 107.43.143.8.

13. We must not conceal, but make known unto others the Lords loving kindness
toward us, Psalm 40.10.48.9.92.2. Isa. 63.7.

14. We must pray unto God to continue it both to us, ours, and all his, Psalm
25.6.36.10 51.1. 89 49.119.88.149, 159.

15. We must always remember it, and ruminate of it, Psalm 26.3.

16 We must take heed that we lose not the love of God; as the birds Ibes lose
their sweetness, when they lose their sight: so we lose all peace and happ
ness, when we lose the sense and apprehension of Gods love toward us in
Christ. The Lizard has this peculiar property, that he is never in love, which
all other beasts are subject unto; whereupon S. Fed^rico Duke of Manto, made
him this Impress, The Lizard figured with this Motto, Quod huic deest me
torquet: thus it should be the anguish of our souls to lack the assurance of
Gods love, it being a misery herein to be like the Lizard, without this love.

Qu. 65. How may we know whether the Lord love us or not?

Answ. 1. We cannot know it by any outward thing, Eccles. 9.1.

2. We may ghess at his love by his correcting of us, Prove. 3.12. Heb 12.6.

3. If we be righteous in our lives and conversations, and obedient to his
commandments, we may then be assured that he loves us, Deu. 7.12, 13.11.1, 13.
Psalm 146.8.

4. If we be the members of Christ by faith and regeneration, then we may be
assured that the Lord will love us, John 17. This question may be abundantly
amplified from Qustion 56. and 64.

Qu. 66. Wherein or how does the love of Christ express, and show itself toward
his Church or children?

Answ. 1. By that impression which they make upon his heart, they being there
deeply engraven, Cant. 8.16.

2. By his desire unto, or toward them, Cant. 7.10.

3. By his dying for them, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 5.25. 1 John 3.16.

4. By his washing of them clean by his blood, Apoc. 1.5.

Qu. 67. What is the Nature of Christ's love toward h^s?

Answ. 1. It is a perfect love, John 15.9.

2. It is a love which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19.

3. It it an unparallelled love, Romans 5.6, 7, 8.

4. It is an eternal love, John 13.1.

Qu. 68. What is here required of us in regard of Christ, and (...) love
toward us?

An. 1. To continue in his love, John 15.9.

2. To remember his love, Cantic. 1.4 and,

3. To be obedient unto him for it, John 15.10.

4. Not to love our lives in regard of him, Ap^c. 2.11.

Qu. ^9. By what means may we be assured, that we shall continue in Christ's
love?

Answ. 1. If we keep his Commandments, John 15.10.

If my diligent and observing Reader admire at my brevity, concern^ng Christ's
love toward us, or his; let him know, that the reason hereof is, because I
shall fully, God willing, handle it, when I come to treat of God the Son, which
will be a little ^olio by it self.

Qu. 70. What is predicated in the Word of our love unto God?

Answ. 1. That it is the sum of the law, it being taken for our whole
obedience, as being the cause of our obedience, Mat. 22.40.

2. That it is the first Commandment, it being the spring and fountain of the
rest, Matthew. 22.38.

3. That it is the greatest commandment, Mat. 22.38.

Qu. 71. What is the love of God?

Answ. It is a virtue whereby we love God as the chiefest good, Psalm
106.1.118.2.136.1. or to love God, is to acknowledge him to be the chiefest
good in himself, and so to us and so to love him, that we will rather forgo all
things, then part with him, or not be joined unto him.

Qu. 72. Who must love the Lord?

Answ. 1. In general, all are commanded to love him, Exodus 20.

2. More particularly, all the Saints ought to love him, Psalm 31.23.

Qu. 73. How many ways do the children of God love God?

Answ. Three manner of ways:

I. Secundum actum; actually and always: and thus the glorified Saints in
Heaven Love God.

II. Secundum studium, in regard of their endeavors; because their care,
desire and study is to love the Lord. And this is the greatest perfection of
love the children of God can attain unto in this life.

III. Secundum habitum, in regard of the habit of love; and thus although many
of the children of God fall into some great sins, yet they lose not the habit
of the love of God, but may be said, even then, habitually to love him?

Qu. 74. Why must we love the Lord?

An. 1. In regard of himself; viz.

I. Because he requires this at our hands, Deuteronomy. 10.12.11.1, 13.

II. Because he loved us first, 1 John 4.10.

III. Because he sent his Son into the world to reconcile us unto himself, 1
John 4.10.

IV. Because he is our rock and fortress, Psalm. 18.1.

Answ. 2. In regard of our selves, because a threefold benefit will redound
unto us thereby; whereof,

The first is Temporal; for if we love him;

I. He will preserve us, Psalm 31.23. and,

II. He will deliver us, Psalm 91.14. and,

III. He will fight for us against our enemies, Josh. 23.10, 11.

The second is Spiritual: for if we love him:

I. ^e will hear our prayers when we call upon, or unto him, Psalm 116.1.

I^. He will know and take notice of us, 1 Cor. 8.3.

I^I. He will be merciful unto us, and keep covenant with us, Exodus 20.6. Deuteronomy.
5.10.7.9. Nehem. 1.5. Psalm 119.132 Dan. 9.4.

IV. He will give us a place in his Church, Psalm. 69 36.

The Third is Eternal; for if we love him:

I. He will cloth us with glory* ^udges 5.31.

II. He will give a crown of life unto us, Cor. 2.9. (...) 1.2.2.5.

Qu. 75. How must we love God?

Answ. 1. Above all friends: Amandus est generator, sed praeponendus Creator.
Aug. we must love all, but God above all, but God above all. Ordo charitatis
est, ama post Deum patrom. Hier. Loves method is, first love God. then our
kindred; and if the case happen, that there be a difference between them and
God, then Odium in suos, pietas in Deum est, hatred to kindred is piety to God.

2. We must love God above all things. It was an ancient custom among the
Romans, that the things they most entirely loved, they offered up to their
gods; nature teaching them* that nothing should be too dear for God, but that
he should be preferred and loved more then, and above all.

3. We must love the Lord for himself. The Ploughman loves his Ox for his
profit, and the enemy a traitor for commodity; but God must be loved for
himself. Alexander would say, That He hestion loved Alexander, and Craterus
loved the King. Plutar. And some Christians love Jesus others love Christ:
there are many of the first rank, who desire to rule and reign in heaven with
Christ; few of the second, who desire, that Christ may rule and bear sway in
their hearts. Vix d^ligitur Jesus propter Iesum. August. Jesus is scarce loved
for his own sake. There is a Spanish P^overb, Love without end has no end;
meaning, that if it were begun not upon particular ends, it would last.

4. We must love the Lord in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24 Religion is no vizard for
impiety God must not be served in hypocrisy (...). Plato. But must beloved in
truth and verity. He must have the heart as well as the hands Deuteronomy 6 5. the
soul as well as the body, Mat. 22.37. he searches the mind so ^oon as the man, 1 Samuel 16 7 and will be worshipped within, as well as without.

5. We must love the Lord constantly and perseverantly; never falling from our
first love, Romans 8.35, 39. Apoc. 2.4.

6. With all our heart, and with all our soul, Deuteronomy. 13.3. Ephesians. 3 17. To love
with all the soul, is to love wisely: to love with all the strength, is
manfully to suffer for truth: to love with all our heart, is to prefer the love
of God before all other things. The measure to be observed in loving God, is to
love him without measure; for our love to our God should be in the highest
degree; and that both,

I. In regard of the Object, or, as they say, Objective; that is, wishing
greater or more good unto him then unto any. And,

II. In regard of estimation, or as some speak, Appretiative. that is, by
preferring him, and his will, before all other things yea before our own life.
M^t. ^0 37. Luke 14.26 yea so, that we had rather choose to dye, and to submit
our selves to death, then transgress the least of his Commandments. And,

III. Intensively; i. e. in regard of our most vehement endeavor, in applying
all our faculties to the love of God, Deuteronomy. 6.^. Thus the Prophet David says,
That he will love the Lord with all that is in him; which our Savior, Luke
10.27, 28. expounds thus, We must love the Lord with all the heart, soul, mind
and might; that is,

First, in general; that there must be no part of us void of the love, fear,
and honor of God, but that all our zeal, thoughts will, study of the mind, and
labor of the body, should tend unto the love, service and honor of God, and
there must be nothing in any part of us, which is not dedicated unto God. But,

Secondly, more particularly, Deuteronomy. 6.13. it is said, Thou shall love the Lord
with all thy heart, soul, and strength: S. Matthew 22.37. says, with all thy
heart, soul and mind; and S. Luke has all, Heart, Soul, Might and Mind

I. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart; that is, Thou shall esteem and
acknowledge him thy chiefest good. V sin. or, With all thy heart; that is, with
thy whole understanding, without any error. August. de doct. Christ. ca. 22.
or, with all thy heart; that is, wisely. Bern. ser. 20. sup. Cantic.

II. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy soul; that is, with thy whole will
and purpose. Vrsin, or, With all thy whole will, without contradiction, August
de doct. Chris. ca. 22. or, sweetly, and with joy, Bern. ser. 20. s. Cantic.

III. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy strength, or might; that is, all
thy actions both external and internal must be con^ormable and agreeable to the
will and law of God. Vrsin. or With all thy strength; i. e. so valiantly,
courageously* and constantly, that we neither be subdued by deceit, nor seduced
by allurements, nor dejected by injuries and afflictions, Bern. ib.

IV. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy mind, and thought; that is, thou
shall always intend to think and meditate of God, that thou may both know
him, and love him the better. Vrsin. or, With all thy mind; i. e. with thy
whole mind, without oblivion. August.

Qu. 76. Whether are we to love God more, for the more benefits he bestows upon
us or not?

Answ. God is to be loved, though he should give us nothing but correction; as
a good child loves his father although he correct him. But when it is said,
We are to love God for his benefits, this word FOR denotes not the final cause
here, but the moving; and therefore Augustine (in Johan. ser. 3.) says, It is a
good thing for a man to think upon Gods benefits, that he may be stirred up by
them to love ^od; but to love him only for himself, and not for his benefits

Qu 77. Can we by nature this love God?

Answ. No; for by nature we rather hate him. That we cannot by nature love God,
appears thus:

I. Nature is so wholly corrupted and depraved, that we are prone unto every
evil thing, but averse from every thing that is good, Jer. 3.12.14.

II. The love of God is a spiritual work, and that a hard one; and consists not
in word or countenance, but in internal and ineffable joy, Psalm. 42.1. 63.1.
Cant. 5.8.

III. The love of God requires self denial; which is a duty not to be performed
Viribus naturae, by the power of nature, Ephesians. 2.3.5.17. Heb. 10.36. 1 Pet. 41.
1 John 2.16, 17.

Qu. 78. Whether is the love of God, or of our neighbor, one sort of love or
not?

Answ. It is one sort of love; for the formal object of our love in this life
is God, because all things are reduced to God by love; and the material object
of our love is our neighbor; and these two make not two sorts of love but one;
for as there is but one Spirit, though diversity of gifts; so there are two
precepts, and but one love, 1 Corinthians. 13.

Qu. 79. What things are contrary to the true love of God?

Answ. 1. The casting away of Gods love; or, the contempt and hatred of God, as
the avenger and punisher of sin.

Inordinate love of our selves, or of other creatures; viz. when we prefer our
own lusts, pleasures, wills and lives, before God and his will, and will rather
offend him then part with them.

3. A feigned love of God; viz. when we seem through hypocrisy to love him,
but indeed do not, Mark 7.6.

Qu. 8^. What are the Impediments of the love of God; or, What things hinder
us from loving him?

An. 1. The love of the world, James 4.4. 1 John 2.15.3.17.

2, The want of love to our brethren, 1 John 4.8, 19, 20.

3. The love of sin. Psalm 52.3.

4. The love of our selves, 2 Timothy 3.2.

5. Idolatry. Hosea 3.1.

6. Drunkenness, Hosea 3.1.

7. Pleasure, Hosea 3.1.

Qu. 81. By what means may we attain unto this love of God? or, How may we be
enabled to love him?

An. 1. The Author hereof is the Author of all good; viz. God who works this
love of himself in our hearts by his holy spirit, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 8.28. 2 Cor.
13.11. Phil. 1.9. 1 Timothy 1.14. 2 Timothy 1.7. 1 Pet. 1.22.

An 2 The means which the Lord uses for the begetting of love in us toward
his Majesty, is the revelation of his love toward us, 1 John 4.10. whence the
Saints are called Beloved, Romans 1.7. Col. 3.12. and therefore we should
meditate of this infinite love of his toward us, John 3.16. Romans 5.6, 7, 8.

An. 3. The means which we must use, if we desire that the love of God may be
wrought in our hearts, are these;

I. We must learn the sweetness of God, and labor to taste how good and
gracious the Lord is, Psalm 34.8.

II. We must pray unto God to work in our hearts an unfeigned love to his
sacred Majesty, Psalm 51.11. Phil. 1.9.

III. We must be careful to preserve the seeds of grace in our hearts, Jude v.
21. 1 John 15.18, 19.

IV. We must fear and reverence the Lord; for where there is no reverence,
there is no love, Deuteronomy. 10.12.

V. We must be careful to avoid those impediments mentioned before; yea
separate our selves from whatsoever might hinder us from this holy duty.

Qu. 82. How many virtues has divine and spiritual love?

Answ. Four; whereof,

The first is communicative; for love is of some good, and good is of a
diffusive nature; hence because God is exceeding good, or the best of all, he
does especially communicate himself. Hence Dion says, Amor divinus est bonus,
boni, propter bonum; that is, spiritual or divine love is good essentially, of
that which is good causally, and for good finally.

The second virtue is motive or inclinative to the producing of every good
thing.

The third is ordinative; for it ordains and appoints all things to the good of
the party beloved.

The fourth is elevative; for love does so extol the party loving, and raise
him to such a height, that now the lover is not his own man, but rather his who
is beloved, Gal. 2.20.

Qu. 83. What are the fruits and effects of our love unto God?

An. 1. Gods love in the heart kills and casts out sin, Rom 6.2. 2 Cor. 13.5.
until the heart be enflamed with this love, it is infected with some other; --
novo, vincitur omnis amor; But when this new love enters, the old departs, for
Non been convenient, nec in una sede morantur. The love of God and of sin will
not lodge together.

An. 2. Another fruit and effect of our love to God is joy; or, love is the
cause of joy; and that

I. Propter benevolentiam, for goodwil; for to love is to will well. Hence
because we love any, we rejoice at their prosperity and preferment.

II. Propter boni praesentiam, for the presence of the good loved; for when we
love that which is good, we rejoice in the enjoyment thereof.

III. Propter boni inhaerentiam, for the inherence of good Hence when virtue
and grace is lodged in those whom we love, we rejoice thereat.

Answ 3. The Schoolmen say, Amor divinus quatuor bona in homine operatur.

I. Inclinat superiora inferioribus, per humilitatem and contemptum sui.

II. Superioribus inferiora per desiderium supernorum.

III. Ordinat aqualia aequalibus.

IV. Transformat amantem in amatum secundum affectum.

Answ. 4. Others say, Amoris effectus quatuor sunt:

Primo, deformatum reformare; convertit enim a falso objecto amoris ad Deum.

Secundo, reformatum conformare, viz. Per effecta unionis ad Deum: Vnio autem
triplex.

I. Substantialis, sui nimirum ad seipsum; and talis Vnio.

1. Identitatis est causa, qua quis amat seipsum: etc.

2. Similitudinis, qua quis amat alium.

II. Realis, and est unto amantis ad amatum, quae fruitio est.

III. Essentialis, seu mentalis, quae nihil aliud est quam ipse amor.

Tertio, conformatum confirmare; est enim inseparabilis,

I. Ratione spiritus custodientis nos.

II. Ratione nostri non deserentis spiritum.

Quarto, conformatum transformare: amantem in amatum transformat amor. The sum
of all is,

I. Love changes us from evil to good

II. Love makes us endeavor to be like unto God.

III. Love confirms us in this endeavor and likeness; because, 1. The Spirit
takes care of us. And, 2. We are careful to be directed by the Spirit.


IV. Love makes us to go out of our selves, and to devote our selves wholly up
unto God.

Qu. 84. How may we know whether we love God or not? or, what are the signs
thereof?

Answ. In answer hereunto two things are seriously to be considered; viz.

1. The necessity of examination.

2. The rules of exploration.

First all think that they love God, but the most are deceived; for none can
love him indeed, but those to whom it is given. For.

I. There is an innate hatred in us toward God: as is clear from these two
particulars;

1. We love not naturally the works of virtue. And,

2. The things which we desire in God or from him, we desire for our selves
only out of self-love; and otherwise nothing pleases our nature. And,

II. This hatred of God which is, in us, is called An aversion of the mind from
God, and is not changed, until our hearts be converted by the Spirit unto ^od.
2 Cor. 3.16. And therefore it concerns us nearly to examine and try diligently,
by certain, undoubted and infallible signs, whether we love the Lord or not.

Secondly, we may know whether we love the Lord truly, and indeed or not, if we
seriously examine our selves by these clear and plain Signs; viz.

.1 He who loves God, will adhere and cleave unto him, Deuteronomy. 30.20. Matthew. 6.24.

2. He who loves God, will keep his word, 1 John 2.5. that is, will obey him
both,

I. ^ffirmatively, doing what he requires, And,

II. Negatively, eschewing what he forbids.

3. He who loves God the Father, will and does love God the Son, 1 John 5.1.

5. He who loves God, will love his brethren, 1 John 4.20 21.

4. He who loves God, will relieve and succor the necessities of his brethren,
1 John 3.17. And,

6. Will esteem the Lord as his chiefest good, and giver of every good thing,
Deuteronomy. 6.13.10 20. And,

7. Will withdraw all trust and confidence from all creatures, placing his
whole assurance upon the Lord, and believing only in him. And,

8. He will fear and stand in awe of him with a filial fear, Deuteronomy. 6.13.10.20.
Psalm 38.8. Prove. 24.21. 1 Pet. 2.18. And,

9. He will humble himself before the Lord, and be lowly in his sight, James
4.7. 1 Pet. 5, 6. And,

10. He will patiently bear all adversity and affliction which is sent by God,
James 1.21.2.20, And,

11. He will worship and serve the Lord, as himself has prescribed in his
word. And,

12. He will meditate continually of God and his word, and that with delight,
Psalm 1.2.119.172.

13. In all things he will seek the praise and glory of God, as his chiefest
scope and aim, 1 Corinthians. 10.31. And,

14. For benefits, favors and mercies received he will give thanks; that is,

I. With his mind and spirit. And,

II. With his tongue. And,

III. With his gesture and countenance, And,

IV. With his life, by willingly doing whatsoever he commands, and shuning
whatsoever he forbids, Psalm 50.15. Colos. 3.17. And,

15. He will continue steadfastly in all these, unto his lives end.

Qu. 85. By what means may the love of God be augmented and increased in us?

Answ. 1. By knowledge: we can neither desire nor love him whom we do not know,
since Affectus motus est cordis, a notitia and cognitione objecti exercitatus:
affection is the motion of the heart, arising from the knowledge of the object,
or thing loved. As those who know God, will love him: so the greater our
knowledge of God is, the greater will our love unto him be.

2. There are four meditations very helpful to increase in us the love of God;
viz.

I. We should love him because he is the Supreme good: Invenito si potes
aliquid pretiosius Deo, and dabitur tibi. Bern. Seek heaven and earth quite
through, and if in either thou can find any thing more excellent then God,
thou shall have it. And,

II. We should love God, because he has first loved us: Invenimus eum, sed non
prevenimus. Aug. we may find God, but we cannot prevent him, he seeking us ere
we seek him. Dilexit non existentes, imo resistentes, Bern. God loved us before
we were creatures, yea when we were traitors.

III. We should love him, because he has declared his love already by
innumerable gifts given unto us. And,

IV. Because he has yet greater things which he has prepared for to give unto
us. Non de his quae condidit, sed de scipso. August. For he will give himself
unto us, which is better then all the enjoyments of earth and heaven.

Qu. 86. Who are too blame in regard of Gods love?

Answ. 1. Those who will not acknowledge Gods love unto them, Mal. 1.2.

2. Those who have not the love of God in them, John 5.42.

3. Those who love those things which hinder them from the love of God, 1 John
2.15.

4. Those who are inconstant in their love unto God, Apoc. 2 4.

Qu. 87. What is required of those who love the Lord?

Answ. 1. To hate evil, Psalm 97.10

2. To labor to keep themselves in the love of God, Jude v. 21.

3. To be joyful in the Lord* Psalm 5.11.

4. To bless and praise the Lord, Psalm 40.16.70.4.

5. To do whatsoever they do in love. We read of one ^^^nundus, who would
answer all questions with this one word LOVE; e.g. If he were asked, Whence
came you? he answered, From love; whether go you? to love; with whom dwell you?
with love: What aim you at? love: Why do you this or that? for love: so all we
do should be done in love, and for love, and come from a heart filled with love.

6. To love the Lord alone: we say, Love and lordship brook no fellowship; and
the French say, Amor et Royaulte ne neulent point d'esgal* Love and royalty
can suffer no equal, and therefore the Lord will have no Rivals in his love.
Simbaldo Flischo of Geneva, perceiving that a Lady, whom he entirely loved,
suspected that he loved others besides her, in regard of his free, courteous
and cheerful behavior in the company of others, he devised this Impress; A
Needle touched with an Adamant, applied to a sea Card, with a Compass
thereunto, and above was the clear Azure sky with stars, with this Mot, Aspicit
unam; to show that although in the heavens were very many fair and bright
stars, yet there was but one regarded of the Adamant; viz. The Pole Star. This
should be the Christians Motto; for although we are compassed about with many
things, which seem amiable and lovely, yet the eye of our affection must be
fixed only upon God.

Qu. 88. What is our love unto Christ?

Answ. Love unto Christ is an holy affection of the soul carrying of us with
full desire to the enjoying of him and making us prefer our communion with him
before all things in the world, that may challenge our dearest respect.

Qu. 89. Who love Christ?

Answ. 1. The Church, Cant. 1.3.

2. The righteous, Cant. 1.4.

Qu. 90. Why must we love the Lord Christ?

Answ, 1. Because if we do not love him, we are worse then infidels: for
(Christ has loved us, and) they will love those who love them, Matthew. 5.46, 47.

2. Because If we love not him, we shall be accursed, 1 Cor. 16.22.

3. Because if we love him, the Father will love us, John 16.27.

4. Because if we love him, he will love us, John 14.21.

5. Because if we love him, he will know and take notice of it, John 21.17.

6. Because if we love him, all things shall work together for our good, Romans
8.28.

7. Because his love toward us was extraordinary: that is,

I. It was a perfect love; viz. As his father loved him, so loved h^ us, John
15.9.

II. It was an unparallelled love, John 15.13. Romans 5.6, etc.

III. It was a perpetual love, John 13.1.

IV. It was an inexpressible love, Ephesians. 3.19.

Qu. 91. How may we know whether we love Christ or not?

Answ. 1. If God be our father, we will love Christ, John 8.42.

2. If we love him, we shall rejoice that he is ascended unto the Father, John
14.28.

3. If we love him, we will obey him, and keep his commandments, John 14.15,
21, 23.15.9. 2 John 6.

Qu. 92. How must we approve our love unto Christ?

Answ. 1. By forsaking all things (that is) our beloved sins, yea if it be
required, our life and all, ( Matthew. 19.) for his sake. Quomodo amas Christum,
cum adhuc amas quod in te odit Christus? August. And,

2. By taking up his cross and following him, Mat. 16.24. and

3. By denying our own wisdom and righteousness, that we may be found in him, 1 Corinthians. 3.18. and,

4. By loving the brethren for his sake, 1 John 2.3, 4, 5. Chapters.

Qu. 93, What is required of us in regard of Christ's love?

Answ. 1. To desire and prize his love above all things. When Alexander came to
Diogenes, and asked him if he wanted any thing, or would request any thing of
him? he answered, He desired nothing of him, but that he would stand out of the
Sun: Thus our hearts should be set on fire with a love to Christ, that we might
covet nothing more then to see the beauty of his face, and the ravishing beams
of his favor.

2. We should so long meditate of the love of Christ to us, Donec totus fixus
in cord, qui totus fixus in cruce, till he were as fast fixed in our hearts,
as he was upon the cross.

Qu. 94. How, or how many ways does a man love himself?

Answ. 1. Some answer, that a man loves himself three manner of ways:

I. Diligit se ut se: this is not good love.

II. Diligit se ut principalem finem: this is not right love.

III. Dil git se in ordine ad Deum: this is to love a man's self truly.

Answ. 2. There is the love of a man's self which is proper to the wicked; for
they esteeming their bodies and sensitive nature to be the principal thing in
them, love them better then their souls, and so are more careful to pamper,
feed and satisfy them, then to cherish nourish or provide for their souls.
This self-love is wicked, and not to be imitated.

Answ 3. There is the love of a man's self which is proper to the good; for such
esteeming their souls to be the principal thing in them do love them better
then their bodies; this is the best love; and this self-love is peculiar to the
righteous, and is grounded upon a truth, and fixed with wisdom and pious
prudence. Thus we are commanded to love our neighbor as our self; that is, we
must love him cordially and truly, and express our love unto him in the best
kind, loving his soul more then his body.

Answ. 4. There is the love of a man's self which is common to all, both good
and bad, For the confirming and understanding whereof observe, That ^ man is
said to be something two manner of wa^s;

I. According to his substance and nature; and thus all men know what they are;
that is, that they consist of a body and a soul; and according to this
knowledge of themselves, they love themselves in desiring the conservation of
themselves, and their own being. Thus both good and bad naturally love
themselves, and that without sin; for Omne appetit praeservationem sui. And,

II. A man is said to be somewhat, according to the principal thing in him; and
thus men do neither always know themselves to be what the^ are, nor love
themselves as they ought. The principal thing in man is the reasonable soul,
and the next thing thereunto is the sensitive and corporeal nature; the first
is called the inward, the second the outward man, 2 Cor. 4 16.

Qu. 95. Because our Savior says, Luke 10.27, 28. We must love our neighbor
as our self; it may be demanded, How does a man love himself?

Answ. 1. Not feignedly, or with the tongue only; but truly, heartily and in
work as well as word.

2. Not frigidly, nor coldly, but zealously and fervently.

3. As a man seeks diligently for that which may be for his own good or gain,
but carefully avoids that which is evil, or which may turn to his hurt; so
should we do for our neighbor.

4. As we love our selves constantly, and are not weary of doing good unto our
selves, although we see many vices and evil habits in oor selves; so we must
not cease to love our brethren, although there be in them something which
deserves hatred rather then love.

5. As we wish well unto our selves for our own sake, and not for the sake of
others; so should we love our neighbor, not for our benefit or profit, but for
his own.

6. As we would be done unto by others, so should we do unto others; e. g.

I. Would we that others should supply our wants, when we are in need? then let
us do so unto our neighbor when he is in want, and we able to supply him.

II. Would we have others heartily to interpret all our actions and words? then
let us do so unto our neighbor.

III. Would we have others to pardon us when we have injured or offended them?
then let us do so unto our neighbor.

IV. Would we be helped by the prayers of others? then let us help our
neighbor with our prayers.

Qu. 96. Because it was said before Quest. 94. That men oftentimes love
themselves so as they should not, it may therefore he demanded, Whether the
love of God, and of our selves, be contrary one to the other, or not?

Answ Man is considered in a fourfold estate;

I. In his innocent estate; and so to love God and himself were the same. For
when man loved God in his innocent estate, and then loved himself, it was but a
reflex of the love of God, and but one love with it.

II. In his corrupt estate; and so to love God, and to love himself are
contrary, Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.2.

III. In his regenerate estate; and thus to love God, and to hate our selves,
are not directly contrary, but sub-contrary: for by this hatred is only
understood self-love, hatred not being properly taken here, which makes the
subcontrariety. As the Lord in regeneration does not extinguish, but well order
the affections; so he does not in those who are regenerated take away the love
of themselves, but only moderateth that love; and so to hate themselves,
signifies only, to love themselves less then God; as, Genesis 29.31. it is said,
Jacob hated Leah; that is he loved her less then Rachel.

IV. In his glorified estate; and so to love God, and to love himself, shall be
one love again.

Qu. 97. What is the nature of self-love?

Answ. 1. To wish better to a man's self then to others; or to desire and
endeavor to raise themselves above others, though by an indirect way. Titus
Livius says, That the Romans were offended because Appius Claudius had chosen
himself of the Decemviri and Lucius Furius Camillus to be Consul; and so the
Cardinals disagreeing about the choice of a Pope, gave way to John 24. to
appoint whom he pleased, who chose himself: this is the natural property of
self-love.

2. The nature of self-love is to like themselves best. The people of Chin^
having thin beards, short n^^es, little black eyes and wearing long garments,
when they would describe a deformed man, they paint him with a short habit,
great eyes, a broad beard, and a long lose. Thus as there is no creature that
more fervently loves her young ones, then an Ass and an Ape; so many unlearned
Idiots (tainted with this vice of self-love) do more esteem their own vanities
and scurrilous pamphlets, then the grave, learned and elaborate Works of others.

Qu 98. What evils proceed from self-love?

Answ. These two great ones;

I. It makes a man hate God. And,

II. Good men. It is a rule in the School, that Amor est odio prior, and odium
ex amore oritur. Thom. Aq. sum. part. 1. 2. qu. ^9. art 2. Love ever goes
before hatred, and all hatred springs from love. Therefore do wicked men hate
God and his law, because they love themselves and their corruptions which God
by his Law does cross, control, and endeavor to curb; and Plutarch (de irac.
colub) well observes, that men are many times eager against some whom they
either deem, or would have deemed delinquents, (...), rather out of self-love,
then any hatred of evil, because they stand in their way, or in their light, in
regard of their ends and interests, or because they oppose and thwart them in
some corrupt courses that they are strangely addicted unto.

Qu. 99. Whom should we love besides the Lord and his Christ?

Answ. 1. Particularly, all those who are our brethren in the Lord; or who are
truly religious, 1 John 2.9.3.10.4.20. Note here, which is the true respect of
love; or for what respect chiefly we must love our brethren.

First, in general, we must love the faithful for Gods sake; or love of the
Lord in them.

Secondly, more particularly from Mat. 10.41. we are taught to love them for a
threefold respect.

I. Because they are Prophets; and thus we must love them for the words sake
which they bring, or at least, which they profess

II. Because they are righteous; and thus we must love them for that sanctity,
purity and integrity which we see in them.

III. Because they are Disciples; and thus we must love them for their
spiritual society, and bond of charity; as fellow-travellers in a long journey
love one another, or as Contrymen love one another in a strange place, or
remote Country. And therefore three sorts of men are here too blame:

First, hypocrites and dissemblers; who as Bernard says, have Mel in ore,
verba lactis; fell in cord, fraus in factis, peace in their words, but war in
their hearts toward the Saints: loving them with their lips, but hating them
in their hearts, Pro. 23.7. James 2.13. Our love unto the faithful must be
sincere and cordial, not sinister and counterfeit.

Secondly, those are too blame who love the Saints only for some second
causes; either,

I. Because they are their neighbors, and their good neighbors, from whom
they receive no evil, but upon every occasion, all neighbourly offices; Or,

II. Because they are of their kindred and alliance. Or,

III. Because they are of meek, affable and gentle natures, and loving
dispositions; or,

IV. Because they love them, and theirs. Or,

V. Through vainglory, that they may be praised for their loving of those who
are good.

Thirdly, those are faulty who love the faithful only with a mercenary love,
or for reward. Aliud est sperare, aliud est hoc agere. Hier. A man may hope,
that God will bless him if he love his children (because this God has
promised) but a man must not therefore love them, that God may bless him, this
being but self-love.

Ans. 2. In general, besides the Lord, we are commanded to love our neighbor
and our enemies, Luke 10.27.28.

Qu. 100. What is the nature of the love of the faithful one to another?

Answ. 1. It is a growing and increasing love, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.

2. It is a continuing and abiding love, Hebr. 13.1.

Qu. 101. Whether are we to love all the Saints and faithful alike or not?

Answ. I might for the resolution and satisfaction of this Quaere, refer my
Reader to Camara, quaest. council. and exposit. qu. 97. p. 98. But I will to
him, add two things:

First, in respect of the different degrees of men, there must be different
degrees of love; e.g. Magistrates and Ministers being public Persons, and
religious, are to be loved above other private persons, they bearing in them a
double image of God;

I. Inward in sanctification. And,

II. Outward, in authority and place.

Secondly, in equal comparison when men are equal in degree, then we must first
and principally love parents, children, affinity and consanguinity; we being
bound to love them by a double bond.

I. Of nature. And,

II. Of grace; for grace does not abolish natural affection, but only orders
and disposes it aright.

Qu. 102. How may we know whether we truly love the children of God or not?

Answ. 1. He who loves the Father, will love the children, 1 John 5.2.

2. He who obeys the Father, loves the hildren 1 John 5.2.

3. He who loves those whom he hears to be religious and zealous, though he
knows them not, is a lover of Gods children.

4. He who delights in the company and society of godly men, when he has no
other relation unto them then as they are good men, is a true lover of the
faithful, Psalm 16.3.126.5. Romans 1.12.

5. He who has a fell ow-feeling of the Saints miseries, as if himself were in
misery, is a lover of them.

6. He who is always willing to distribute to the necessities of the Saints,
according to his ability, must needs be a lover of them.

7. ^e who can bear with reproaches and reproachful words at the hands of truly
righteous men* ^ a true lover of the Saints. When Luther had woefully wronged
and reviled Calvin, the good man said. Etiamsi Lutherus millies me Diabolum
vocet, ego tamen illum insignem Domini servum agnosco, etc. Let Luther hate me,
and in his wrath call me Devil a thousand times, yet I will love him, and
acknowledge him a most precious servant of God. To answer the wrath of the
Saints with love, is a good sign of a Saint-lover. As the members of the same
body, albeit having diverse duties and functions, and differing also in form, do
tenderly and mutually love one another, because they live by one and the
self-same reasonable soul; so faithful Christians love one another, being made
alive by the Divine Spirit of God, who by how much he is more good or
excellent, by so much also he is more Powerful to knit and unite those
together, in whom he dwells. Lodov. Granat. As in a material building one
stone is knit unto another by lime and mortar; so in the spiritual building one
Christian is joined to another by love; and hence, though one member be
casually, or causlessly injured by another, it does not seek revenge upon the
other.

Qu. 103. Who must principally abound in Christian Love and Charity toward
their neighbors?

Answ. 1. Old men, Tit. 2.2.

2. Ministers. 1 Timothy 4.12. 2 Timothy 3.10.

Qu. 104. Wherein or how ought Ministers to express, and show their Love unto
their People.

Answ. 1. By speaking friendly unto them, and beseeching them to be reconciled
unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20.

2. By testifying their inward affection unto them, by their outward works.

3. By serving them in Christ, not desiring so much to be ministered unto, as to
minister.

4. By being ready to lay down their lives for them, John 15.13.

Qu. 105. From whence springs true Christian Love and Charity toward our
brethren?

Answ. 1. Originally from God, true Love being his gift, Ephesians. 1.15.16.6.23.
Phil. 19. Col. 1.3.4. 1 These. 1.2, 3.3.12.

2. It proceeds out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.22.

3. It issues out of a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.5.

4. It flows from Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

Qu. 106. Whether are wicked men to be Loved?

Answ. As the Physician hates the disease, yet loves the person diseased: so
we must love that in our neighbor which is good, and made of God, and abhor
that which the Devil and man has made evil, i. e. we must Love the wicked man's
person, though we hate his vice. For,

1. God has commanded us to love our enemies; and those are truly evil who are
enemies to good men. And,

2. Those who are wicked for the present, may belong unto God, in regard of
divine election; and therefore such are to be loved. And,

3. We ought to pray for all wicked ones who have not sinned against the
Holy-^host: and therefore we must love them.

4 This is confirmed from Christ, who for our example, loved us when we were
wicked* Romans 5 6, 7

Qu. 107. What is the Love of our neighbor?

Answ. To love our neighbor, is, for the love which we owe unto God, to wish
well, and do good unto our neighbor: and to do all things unto him, which we
would in equity and according to Law should be done unto us; Or,

The love of our neighbor is a true and sincere good will, both in will, mind,
and heart, toward others; declaring it in words, behavior, and duties
convenient, and requisite. Or, It is the work of the Spirit in our hearts,
whereby we are moved to wish well and to do good unto our neighbors, to the
utmost of our power, when they stand in need of our help, in the name of God
and Christ; or, according to Aristotle, it may be defined thus;

To love our neighbor, is to will all that which in our judgment we esteem
good unto him, and to the uttermost of our power, to procure it for and unto
him.

Qu. 108. Why must we Love our neighbor, or brethren, or be charitably
affected toward them?

Answ. The reasons hereof are many, whereof the first is taken from God:

I. Because we are so commanded by him from the beginning, 2 John 5

II. Because God takes notice of it, Apoc. 2.10.

III. Because this lesson is taught us by God, 1 These. 4.9.

IV. Because Love is of God, 1 John 4.7.

V. Because God our Father has Loved us, 1 John 4 11.

VI. Because we provoke God to leave us, if we will not love our brother.
Memorable to this purpose, is that story which is recorded of Nicephorus,
(Metaphrast. in Niceph. Mer.) who being brought to the place where he was to
receive the Crown of Martyrdom, and seeing Sapritius (between whom and him
there had before some bitternesses and enmity broke forth) fall down before
him, and beg a Pardon, and reconcilement, was so much elated with this glory of
Martyrdom, and his heart did so rise against him for former injuries, that
uncharitably he disdained to admit of any reconciliation. In punishment of
which uncharitableness he lost his whole hope and victory: for the Spirit of
God forsook him, and he apostated from the faith: so that it appears, that Love
and Charity is justly esteemed the form of Martyrdom.

The second reason is taken from Christ.

First, Because Christ has commanded it, John 13.34,

Secondly, Because Christ has Loved us, Ephesians. 5.2.

Thirdly, Because Love to the brethren is the chiefest office of a Christian,
or, of him who by covenant is engaged to the profession and service of Christ:
for,

I. This is a note of a disciple of Christ, as follows afterward.

II. It is a sign of the Lords paternal Love unto us.

III. It is a sign that we Love God, 1 John, 4.10.

IV. It is a sign that we are sensible of our communion, and concorporation
with the faithful.

V. Because we are a people separated, and set apart for the service of God,
and therefore must Love our brethren either in or for God.

VI. Because we are hated of the world, and therefore had need do that which is
acceptable unto God.

VII. Because we are united unto Christ, and therefore we should be one in
Love, with all his.

The third reason is taken from the excellency of Love, because Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, and the end of the Commandments, Romans 13.7, 8. Gal.
5.14. 1 Timothy 1.5.

The fourth is taken from others, because thereby we shall give a good example
unto them, 1 Timothy: 4.12. 2. Tim. 3, 10.

The fifth is taken from our brethren themselves, because this is the principal
debt we owe unto them, Romans 13.8.

The last reason is taken A signo; and that both Negatively, or Privately, and
Affirmatively.

First, Negatively; if we do note Love our brethren, it argues these things;

I. That we yet abide in death, 1 John 3.14.

II. That we do not love God, 1 John 4.20, 21.

III. That iniquity abounds in us, when love waxes cold, Math. 24.12.

IV. That we know not God, 1 John 4.8. And,

V. That we are not of ^od, 1 John 3.10.

Secondly, Affirmatively, if we do truly love our brethren: then,

I. It will be an argument unto us that God dwells in us, and that his Love
is perfected in us, 1 John 4.12. And,

II. That we are the Disciples of Christ, John 13.35.

III. That we are of the truth, 1 John 3.18, 19.

IV. That we are heirs of salvation, not of perd tion. 1 John 3.14. And,

V. That we are born of God and know him, 1 John 4.7.

Qu. 1^9. Why do men Love men?

Answ. 1. Some love men for their Poetry. Thus Sci^io Affricanus loved Ennius:
and Augustus the Emperor, Virg^l.

2. Some love men for their Oratory: thus Pomponius Atticus loved Tully,
thinking himself happy, when either he was in his sight, or his books in his
bosom

3. Some love men for their skill in painting, engraving, carving, etc. Thus
Alexander loved Apelles and Lysippus; forbidding all to draw his picture save
Apelles, and to cut it in brass except Lysippus. Curtius.

4. Some love men for their careful tuition of them, and diligence in their
good education: thus Alexander loved Aristotle; many Scholars their Masters;
and many good hearers their Ministers.

5. Some love men for their former care, love, and kindness unto them. Valerius
servant to Panopion, hearing that certain soldiers were come unto the City of
Rheatina, of purpoose to kill his master, he changed apparel with his master,
and conveyed him away, suffering himself to be slain in his masters bed, for
the great love he bare him, his master having formerly used him more like a son
then a slave.

6. Some love men for their grace, and goodness; or, because they see, (as it
were) the image of God in their face; thus men love the Lords faithful ones as
such.

7. Some Love men for their strength, courage, magnanimity and resolution; thus
Alexander crowned the tomb of Achilles, and Hephestion that of Patroclus for
their valor.

8. Some love men for revenge, and cruelty, Timon of Athens, called M
santhropus, a hater of men, loved none but only Alcibiades, and him he loved,
and once kissed, because he saw in his face the destruction of Athens. Plutar.

9. Some love men for their filthy lust, and lascivious life. Caelius, cap. 30.
li. 8. reports, that Bagoas the Eunuch was much endeared unto, and highly
beloved of Alexander the great, for no other cause, but that there was some
brutsh and unnatural congress betwixt them

Qu. 11^. How many ways do men Love others?

Answ. An Au^hor which I have read, answers, There be five ways of lo^ing one
another whereof one is praised, three dispraised, and one neither pr^ised nor
dispraised.

I. Some love their neighbor for Gods sake; and thus good men love all men.

II. Some love their neighbor for natural affection, because he is his son,
brother, or k nsman.

III. Some love their neighbor for vainglory; that they may be commended and
esteemed for so doing.

IV. Some love their neighbor for covetousness; a^ when men flatter some, and
pretend a great deal of love unto them, hoping to be enriched, or promoted by
them.

V. Some love for sensual lust, and appetite; as some men love women, and some
men, for their bellies, or gluttony and drunkenness. Of these,

The first is spiritual, therefore praiseworthy.

The second natural; therefore deserves no praise.

The third, fourth, and fifth sensual and carnal; and therefore merit dispraise.

Qu. 111. How must Christians love their neighbors and brethren.

Answ. 1. Not better then the Lord, Matthew. 10.37. for they who love father or
mother, son or daughter, better then God, are not worthy of him.

2. Not better then themselves; it is observed in the nature of the Brocardor
Heart, that whereas it is the nature of the vulgar Hearts to lurk in ditches at
the hearing of the hounds; this beast never seeks any such place to hide or
cover himself, but runs still in the sight of the dogs, to draw the hunters and
hounds from the other Dear in covert; whereupon the dogs leave the other which
hid themselves, and seek not for them, having the Brocardor in sight and chase;
and so the hunters being passed by, the lurking Hearts return back; being safe
from the danger of nets and dogs, whilst the poor Brocard^ are hunted and
chased to death. We are not bound thus to love our brother or neighbor; that
is, of set purpose to expose our selves to death for the preservation of a
private neighbors life.

3. We must love them as brethren. 1 Pet. 3.8. And,

4. We must love them in the Spirit, Col. 1.8.

5. We must love them sincerely and in truth, Romans 12.9. 2 Cor. 8.8. 2 John 1.3
Joh. 1.

6. We must love them as Christ loved us Joh. 13.34.15.12. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Ioh.
3.11, 16.

7. We must not love them inconstantly. 2 Samuel 13.4, 15. Job 19.19. But,

8. We must love them daily more and more, 1 These. 4.10. And,

9. We must love them as we love our selves, Lev. 19 18, 34. Gal. 5.14. Iam. 2
18 John Gonsalve Bishop of Tarracon, and one of the Inquisitors of Sivil, when
any were brought before him for the profession of the ^ospel, would say, that
it was wonderful to observe, how these Heretics had this Commandment
engraven in their hearts, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, because
they would for no threats or torments accuse, or discover one another

Q^ 112. How* or wherein is our true love, and charity toward our brethren, to
be expressed and shown?

Ans. 1. By laboring to build them up, and to instruct them in the most holy
Faith, Lev. 19.17. Acts 18.26. 1 These. 5.14. Hebrews 3.13.4, 24. Jude ^

2. By praying for them, Psalm. 122.6. Romans 10.1. Ephesians 6.18. 2 These. 3.1. Hebr.
13.18.

3. By administering to their necessities according to the uttermost of our
abilities. Romans 12.20. Gal. 6.10.

4. By preserving them in what we can, from all manner of damage in their
estates. Exodus 23.5, 6.

5. By being kindly affectioned toward them in our hearts, Romans 12.10.

6. By performing offices of love one unto another, Gal. 5.13.

7. By speaking friendly unto them.

8. By forbearing one another, Ephesians 4.2.

9. By Christian Love feasts. Jude 12.

Qu. 113. What are the properties, nature, and qualities of love and charity?

Ans. 1. It covers a multitude of sins, Prove. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4 8.

2. It edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1.

3. It suffers long, 1 Cor. 13.1.

4 It is kind, 1 Cor. 13.4.

5. It envieth not, 1 Cor. 13.4.

6. It vaunteth not it self, 1 Cor. 13.4.

7. It never fails, 1 Cor. 13.8.

8. It is the effect of faith, 1 John 3.18, 19.

9. It is fervent, Cant. 8.7. 1 Pet. 4.8.

10. It endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

11. It hops all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

12. It believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

13. It works no ill to its neighbor, Romans 13.10.

14. It bears all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

15. It is not puffed up, 1 Cor. 13.4.

16. It does not behave it self unseemly, 1 Cor. 13.5.

17. It seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13.5.

18. It thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5.

19. It is not easily provoked, 1 Cor. 13.5.

20. It rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth, 1 Cor. 13.6.

Qu. 114. What are the excellencies of love, and charity toward our brethren.

Ans. The excellencies thereof appear in these and the like particulars.

1. That all things are nothing without Love and ch^rity, Cant. 8.7. 1 Cor.
13.1, 2, 3.

2. That poverty with love, is better then riches without it, Prove. 15.17.

3. That it is a Theological virtue, 2 Timothy 3.10. 2 Pet. 1.7. Jude 2. 2 John 3.

4. That it is one of the three most excellent Theological graces, 1 Cor. 13.13.

5. That it is a greater grace then either faith or hope, because it shall
abide when they shall cease, 1 Cor. 13.13.

6. That it is the bond of perfectness, Col. 3.14.

7. That it is a breast plate to defend us, 1 These. 5.8.

8. That it is a testimony of our election, Romans 8.14. Heb. 6.11. 2 Pet. 1.10.

9. That it is a sure sign of eternal life, 1 Ioh. 3.14.

10. That it casts out all fear, 1 Ioh. 4.28.

11. That it is the Law of Christ, Ioh. 13.15, 33, 34. Gal. 6.2.

12. That it is the exercise of the faithful. 1 Cor. 16.14. Gal. 5.6. Ephesians. 5.2.

13. That it is an argument of faith, 2 Cor. 9.13. Whence,

I. Faith is said to work by love, Gal. 5.6. And,

II. Faith and love are joined together, 1 Timothy 2.15.

14. That it is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

15. That it is the sum, scope, and end of the Law, Romans 13.8. Gal. 5.14. 1 Timothy 1 5.

16. That it is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.8.10. For the understanding
of this place observe, that the Apostle therein does not speak of the perfect
or imperfect obedience of the Law; but Love is commended as the sum of the Law,
which is to be understood of perfect and complete charity, which is contained
in all parts, and precepts of the Law, as appears by Romans 13.9. Now it will not
follow (as the Papists would have it) in any good consequence, That because
perfect love is commanded in the whole Law, therefore it is performed perfectly
by the Saints; for as our knowledge is in part, so is our charity: we can love
no further then we know.

Qu. 115. How then is love the fulfilling of the Law?

Ans. Love is said to be the fulfilling of the Law three manner of ways.

1. Reductive, because we fulfill all the commandments of God, for the love of
God. And,

2. Effective, because he who loves the Lord, is ready to obey him. And,

3. Formaliter, because all our actions should be referred to Gods glory, 1
Cor. 10.31.

Qu. 116. What Order may we observe in our love unto our brethren?

Ans. 1. If other circumstances agree, and be answerable, then we may love our
kindred more then strangers, in those things which belong unto this outward
life; and amongst our kindred we may love those most who are nearest akin unto
us.

2. We may love some special, intimate, and approved friend, more then a common
kinsman, especially in those things which belong unto the common office of this
life Prove. 8.24.

3. We must love our parents, more then any friend; because the conjunction o^
Parents is nearer then of friends, in regard of the communication of those good
things which are most near unto us, 1 Timothy 5.4.

4. We must love Parents more then children, in those things which ought to
redound from the effect to the cause; of which kind are honor, estim^tion,
reverence, thankfulness, and the like.

5. We must love children more then Parents, in those things which ought to be
derived from the cause to the eff^^t of which kind are maintenance,
adv^n^^men^, ^^^cation, and the like.

6. We must love husbands and wives more then either Parents or children, in
those things which belong unto the society and union of this life Genesis 4.24.
Matthew, 16.5.

7. We must love those who have deserved well of us, more then others; and
amongst those we must love them most who have communicated spiritual things
unto us, Gal. 6.6.

Qu. 117. What are the steps and degrees of true Christian love?

Ans, 1. We must love some for God; and thus we are commanded to love strangers
and enemies, Exodus 23.4. Deuteronomy. 10.18, 19. 1 Samuel 24.5, 7.

2. We must love some in God; and thus we are commanded to love the faithful,
Romans 12.9, 10. 1 Pet. 2.17.

3. We must love the Lord for himself, that is, simply, by himself, and
according to all the parts of love, i. e. with the affection of good will, with
the desire of union, with a most contented, yea joyful acquiescing in the
fruition of him; and all this in the highest degree.

Qu. 118. What are the fruits and effects of true Christian love and charity
toward our brethren?

Ans. 1. It will cover a multitude of sins, Prove. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.8.

2. It will be a means to keep a man in the light, and to preserve him from all
scandals, 1 John 2.10.

3. It is a sure sign unto us, that God dwells in us, and that his love is
perfected in us, 1 John 4.12.

4. It confirms us in an assuran^e of glory, 1 John 3, 14. This question may be
much amplified, and enlarged, from Quest. 113. and 114.

Qu. 119. By what Means may we obtain love and kindness from our brethren?

Answ. 1. By making a Covenant and league of amity with them, 1 Samuel 20.14, 15.

2. By being kind unto them, Genesis 21.23. Josh. 2.12. 1 Samuel 15 6.

3. By being loving and kind unto those whom they love, 2 Samuel 2.5.6.

4. By fair and gentle entreaties, Genesis 40.14. John 2.12.

5. By covering their trespasses and transgressions, Prove. 17.9.

6. By forgiving them their debts, Luke 7.47.

7. By a friendly rebuking of them, Prove. 9.8.

8. Aristippus says, a means to preserve love between us and our neighbor is
this, Haunt not too much thy friends house for that engendereth no great love;
neither be long from thence, for that engendereth hate, but use a mean in all
things: Neither be too troublesome unto, nor too great a stranger from thy
friend and neighbor.

Qu. 120. What are the Impediments of true Love and Charity? or, what things
hinder us from loving our neighbor?

Answ. The causes hindering this love are either internal, or external.

First, The Internal impediments are,

I. A natural (...), or coldness, or want of affection; there are some who care
for none.

II. Self love; some love themsel^es so much, that they cannot love others at
all, as they ought.

III. A proud affection toward a man's own will; or, a supercilious wilfulness:
for he who adores and deifies his own will as his God, can never love his
neighbor.

IV. Suspicion, jealousy, and doubtings, that our neighbor loves not us, at
least not truly, but only for his own end^.

V. Want of patience: a peevish, passionate, impatient, and angry man cannot as
he ought love another.

Secondly, The external impe^iments of Love between neighbor and neighbor,
are either in others or our selve^.

I. The Impediments of Love in others; are,

1. Whisperings, and tale-bearings; Busybodies, and carriers of tales are
oftentimes the Devils instruments for the kindling of hatred, and cooling of
love between friend and friend.

2. Evil counselors; many by persuading, urging and soliciting of others unto
hatred and revenge, do hinder love betwixt neighbor and neighbor.

II. The Impediments of love in our selves; are,

1. Our injuring and wronging of our neighbor.

2. Our carelessness to provoke and incense them.

3. An aversness from reconciliation for if a man abuse and wrong his
neighbor, if a man be careless of his carriage toward his neighbor, never
regarding whether he give him just cause of distaste or not: and if a man
refuse to be reconciled unto his neighbor, when some breach has been made
between them, there can be no true love or charity.

Qu 121. Who are too blame in regard of brotherly love and charity?

Answ. 1. Those who would not be beloved. Cepariu^ tel^ us of Gonzaga the
^esuite (vita ejus ^46) that he was sorry if any body loved him. To be free
from love is strange, but to think scorn to be beloved is monstrous. And,

2. Those are too blame, who will love none but those who love them, Mat. 5.46.
And,

3. Those who hate those who love them Psalm 109. 4, 5. as Tereus did Progne;
Minos did Scylla; and one of the Sabins did Tarpeta. And,

4. Those who love men better then Christ. Dr. Ruy Lopez being accused for
undertaking to poison Queen Eliz^beth, answered with oaths and execrations,
that he never intended any hurt to her, for he loved Queen Elizabeth better
then he loved Jesus Christ. Amongst these they may be ranked, who are more
careful to please men, out of their love unto them, then to please Christ. If a
Prince were to come to a subjects house, what painting, what paving what
flourishing with flowers, what perfuming with smells, what t^^mming of apparel,
what garnishing with Jewels no cost too costly, no pains sufficient. Quicquid
ergo non vis inveniri in domo tua, quantum potes, ut non inveniat Deus in
animae tua. August. de temp. Are we so conceited of our house, and so curious
of our apparel against the coming of an earthly Prince, oh how provident
should thou then be of thy soul, and careful of thy body, for the entertaing
of the Lord of glory? Shall not the Prince see a cobwep in thy house, and shall
God behold sin in thy soul? shall not he see a spot in th garment, and shall
God behold filthyness in thy body? Certe non amant ille Christum qui aliqu d
plus quam Christum a^^nt August. Those who either love men or sin more then
Christ. are much too blame, and unworthy of Christ's love.

5. Those are faulty, who love none affectionatly. Bias the Philosopher gives
this counsel, (...); so love as though thou were immediately to hate; so hate
as though thou should shortly love; but Scipio could never believe that ever
this was the speech of a wise man; because according to this rule or advice, we
must never Love any heartily.

6. They are too blame who have minds evil affected toward the people and
servants of Christ, Acts 12.2. And,

7. They who love their brethren only for their own base ends, Gal. 4.17.

Qu. 122. What is required of us, in regard of the Christian Love and Charity
of others toward their Brethren?

Answ. 1. To give thanks unto God for them, Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 1.4. 2 These. 1.3.

2. To imitate them, 1 Timothy 4.12. 2 Timothy 3.10.

Qu. 123. What is our duty in regard of Christian Love and Charity toward our
brethren? or, what is required of us in regard of Christian Love and Charity?

Answ. 1. To follow after it, 1 Cor. 14.1. 2 I^m. 2.22.

2. To let all our actions be done with it, 1 Cor 16.14.

3. To put it on, Col. 3.14.

4. To provoke one another unto love, Heb. 10 24.

5. To speak the truth in Love, Ephesians. 4.15.

6. To labor to edify our selves in love, Ephesians. 4.16.

7. To continue in faith and charity, 1 Timothy 2.15. or, to abide in love one
toward another, Heb. 13.1. or, to be always paying of this debt one to
another; for love is a debt which we must be always a paying where it is due,
and yet never so pay it that we owe it not.

Qu 124. How does it appear that our enemies are to be loved?

Ans. 1. From Lev. 19.17, 18 where three things are laid down.

I. We must reprove our enemies, and not suffer them to sin.

II. We must not avenge our selves upon them.

III. We must not remember the injuries they have done us. And,

Ans. 2. It appears from Romans 13.9. 12.20, 21. whereupon Augustine says, ( de
doctr. 1.30.) that this precept of loving our enemies belongs unto all.

Qu. 125. To love is to esteem as a friend; how can this then p^ssibly agree w
th an enemy; for, to be a friend and an enemy are contraries?

Ans. We must not hold any man our enemy, but every one our brother, friend or
neighbor. This is taught us by the parable of the man who was wounded betwixt
Jerusalem and Jericho; the conclusion whereof is, that we must hold every man
our neighbor, and none our enemy, Luke 10.31, etc. Yea in the Gospel we are
taught that all men are our brethren, either,

1. By regeneration or creation. Or,

2. In deed, or in hope: Or,

3. ^n the Lord, or for the Lord; and therefore none are to beheld as enemies.

Qu. 126. How are we to love our enemies?

A s. 1. I may answer that our enemies are to be considered three manner of
ways.

First as our private enemies.

Secondly, as ^ods enemies, viz. those who sin against the holy Ghost

Thirdly, as his ^^^ches enemies; who persec^^^ the (...) thereof. To apply
this to the q^^st on propounded, I say.

I. We must always distinguish betwixt our own pr^vate c^use, and Gods, and his
Churches cause.

II We must distinguish always betwixt the persons of wicked men and their
actions

III. We must l^ve ou^ private enemies although they have wronged us (...) we
must lo e their persons not their ^ins and we must pray against their sins, not
their persons, 2 S^m. 5.31. Acts 4.29.

IV. We must he ready to help our private enemi^s with temporary thing when
they are in ne^d, u^^ess those th ngs b ^urt ^ll unto them; but it th^^ ^e
enemies to the Church we ^re not t^ supply their w^^ts, unless we have some
prob^bl^ hope by that means to draw them to the Church.

V. If the persons sin unto death, 1 Ioh. 5.19. then we are to pray not only
against their actions, but against their persons also.

IV. Because few have the spirit to discern these, we should apply the
imprecations used in the Psalms, against the enemies of the Church in general.
Or,

Ans. 2. I may answer this question Affirmatively and Negatively.

First, affirmatively; we must love our enemies thus:

I. As they are men, and so flesh of our flesh.

II. As they are our enemies we must not covet or desire to be avenged of them:
yet,

III. ^e may lovingly reprove them for their amendment.

Secondly, Negatively; thus we may not love them, viz.

I. As wicked men; lest so we be found to love wickedness, which God hates. Nor,

II. As the enemies of God, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Nor,

III. Must we love them unto death; that is, so love them, that our love be a
means to bring them to perdition, i. e. we must not flatter them in evil, but
labor by gentle reproofs to reduce them from their errors.

Qu. 127. Why must we love our enemies?

Answ. Because it is a probable A^gu^e^t that we are more then natural; for a
man (...) naturals may love his friend, but it argues an Angelical, and
Evangelical nature to love our enemies. indeed the light and Law of nature does
teach this lesson to some, but it is only to a very few; as Phoc^on, after he
had done many notable Services for the Athenians, was put to death by them; and
a little before his death he charged his son never to wish ill to the Athenians
for what they did to him.

2. Because we shall astonish our adversaries when they see our patien e; and
thereby they will know that we seek another life enduring all the troubles of
this ^o patiently; and consequently they will ^^^^by be moved to abstain from
injuring of us, I^^c^ dil^gere ^^^m cum, si vis ^avere inimi^um. August^n Psalm
99. the means to be preserved from enemies, is to love and pardon enemies.

3 Because they are procurers of great rewards for us, they being truly blessed
who suffer for righteousness sake.

4. Because it shows that there i^ in us a great measure of love unto Christ
when we are contented to endure reproaches for his sake.

5. Because they occasion excellent virtues in us; for tribulation brings forth
patience, etc. Rom 5.3.

6. Because they are but Gods instruments, whereby he does either chastise, or
prove us.

7. Because herein we shall imitate our God, who is an exemplar hereof unto us,
Matthew. 5.45.

8. Because otherwise we cannot love God, 1 Ioh. ^.20.

9. Because otherwise we have not the Spirit of God, 1 John 4.7.

10. Because the bond of peace is to be preferred before all outward things;
and therefore we must suffer any thing rather then dissolve and break it.

11. Because if there were any cause why we should hate any, it were for their
hatred of, and hostility against us; but this is no cause of hatred, seeing we
are to look upon God not man; and therefore for his sake we must wish them
well, who wish us evil; we must love and be friends to our enemies; praying for
and not cursing of them who do despightfully use us.

Qu. 128. What are the Degrees of this love of our enemies?

Answ. The Schoolmen observe a threefold degree thereof; for,

I. They say, there is a common love which is indifferent, or, communicable or,
to be showed both to friends, and enemies, and all always.

II. There is a particular love which is to be exhibited and showed unto our
enemies in the time of need.

III. There is a particular love which is to be demonstrated, and showed unto
enemies when they have no need. Now this precept of loving our enemies, enjoins
love unto our enemies always, and to do good unto them principally when they
stand in need, not forbidding it when they have none; and does also imply a
charge to perform all offices of love, at all times when any occasion offers it
self for the making up of the breach, or, appeasing of the jarr, or stinting
the strife, or for the begetting or breeding of love.

Qu. 129. Wherein, or how should we express our love unto our enemies?

Answ. 1. In loving them, as Christ loved us, when yet we were enemies, Romans
5.10.

2. In receiving of them to favor, or in forgiving of them, when they desire
it, or humble themselves as Joseph did unto his brethren.

3. In ministering necessary things unto them, as El^h^ did to the Army of the
^ss^rians.

4. In procuring, or helping forward their conversion as An^ni^s did Saul's,
Acts 9

5. In praying for them, as Stephen did for the Jews.

6. In taking heed of giving them any offense; as Jacob did when he departed
from Esau, Genesis 27.

7. In bearing their wrongs patiently and cheerfully, as the Apo ^le did, Acts
4 18 5.28.

8. In mollifying them with gentle words, as Ab^g^il did D^^id, 1 Samuel 25.

Q^ 23^. That are the Impediments which bind^r us from taking out this hard
lesson of loving our enemies?

Answ. The Remor^es, or hindrances are these viz.

I. An Apothy of the love of Christ; for if we were sensible of Christ's love
unto us when we were enemies, then we would not think it so strange for Christ's
sake to love our enemies.

II. (...), want of affection toward our brethren; love covers a multitude of
sins, and therefore the lack of this Christian charity hinders us from the love
of our enemies.

III. The error in judging of love and charity. Because we neither know the
excellency, nor value of this Evangelical virtue of brotherly love nor the
necessity thereof, but think it to be a kind of free-will-offering; therefore
we are not so careful to practice it as we ought.

IV. The love of the world, and self-love, is another thing which hinders us
from the love of our enemies.

V. So is also too deep an apprehension of the w^ongs and injuries that have
been offered us: And,

VI. So also is an innate and natural pronness unto hatred, anger, and envy.

Qu. 131. What are the Remedies against these and ad Impediments?

Answ. The Remedies or Means whereby we may be helped forward in this duty of
love toward our enemies, are these;

1. Love God, and prefer him and his will before thy own and thy self: and then
for his sake thou will not be unwilling to do any thing which he requires of
thee.

2. Learn to see thy brother in thy od, and to love him as a child of God, and
(...) thou will be easily persuaded to be reco^^^^^ unto him, though he have
offended thee.

3. Despise and contemn the world; and then thou will not be so sensible of
injuries offered in temporal things.

4. Con ider thy self, and think humbly of thy self; and then if thy brother
have injured thee, thou will remember that thou also at some time or other in
some thing or other, have injured either him or some else; at least that thou
have offended thy heavenly Father oftener, and in a higher nature then ever thy
brother offended thee.

5. Let thy conversation be in heaven, and let thy affections be set upon those
things which are above: walk continually in the paths of love, charity,
patience, humility, and meekness; and then thou will be more ready to love
those who hate thee.

Qu. 132. How may we know whether we truly love our enemies or not?

Answ. We may know it easily, if we will but seriously examine these things;
viz.

1. Whether do we envy their prosperity, or rejoice at it?

2. Whether do we condole for their afflictions, or exult and rejoice?

3. Whether do we extenuate or amplify the good things which we see in our
enemies?

4 Whether do we aggravate, amplify and condemn the evil things which we see
in our enemies; or, do we cover and excuse them, 1 Pet. 4.10.

5. Whether do we love them as our selves, no^ fainedly but truly, not coldly
but servently.

6. Whether do we grieve that we are not able to show or express our love unto
them, by reason of their obstinacy, perverseness, wilfulness and malice, whereby
they slight, and reject al^ testimonies of love and favor shown.

7. Whether are our hearts so truly bent to love and to do them good, that no
prevocations from them can hinder us from doing good unto them, when we see
they stand in need.

8. Whether do we frequently and fervently pray for them, as we are commanded,
Luke 6.20.

Qu. 133. Oh but it is a hard matter to do these; by what Motives or Arguments
therefore may we b^ excited and induced to love our enemies?

Answ. All duties of religion are hard, and therefore this must not be
neglected for the difficulty thereof, but rather practiced, being induced
thereunto by the meditation and animadversion of these particulars.

1. Remember that those who hate and harm us, do themselves thereby much more
hurt then they do us: for by malice, hatred, and wrong a man destroys his own
soul, and he can but harm his brothers body. And therefore in this regard our
enemies are to be loved and pitied.

2 Remember the benefit we reap by the hatred and persecution of our enemies;
for their persecuting, and troubling of us, will purchase unto us an eternal
weight of glory, if we patiently and piously undergo them, 2 Cor. 4.17. and
therefore seeing they help and promote our happiness, and eternal reward, we
should love them.

3. Remember Christ has commanded us to lo^^ ^ur en^m^es* and therefore with
willingness, we should do it.

4. Conside^ that it is an excellent sign of a true child of God, and strong
hristian, to love his enemy, Mat. 5 44* 45. and therefore we should love ours.

5. Remember that this is the most principal way to reclaim our enemies, and to
make them friends; to love them as friends, and to do good unto them; and
therefore we should love them, though enemies.

6. Consider that we cannot hurt our enemies, but we shall harm our selves,
yea, and that more then we can hurt them, for by hatred, malice, m schief, and
revenge, we may hurt their bodies, but by these we harm and endanger the
destruction of our own souls: and therefore if we love our selves, we should
love our enemies.

The Ma^quiss of V st^, being sent upon a Design, or Expedition, by the
Emperor Charles 5. and the ^g after his return, with applause and victo^ (...)
some ^^ll was presently upon his re^ (...) ^en^ral of the whole Army* ( Antonio
(...) Leva, the former General being dead) whereupon he caused this device to
be figured in his Shield, two sheaves of ripe corn, with this Motto, Finiunt
p^riter renovantque labores; signifying thereby, that scarce is the corn fully
ripe, but the Plowmans or Husbandmans restless to^l is renewed, by providing
for another harvest or crop. Paul. Jov.

This Emblem does so sort, and suit with my purposes, intents and thoughts,
that I shall take the boldness to make it my constant Mo^to, for this small
Treatise of the three heological Graces being finished, and published, the four
Cardinal Virtues will presently follow; which having once seen the light, A
tract of the nature, necessity, utility excellency and infallibility of the
Scripture (the whole work mentioned in the Preface being a Clavis Scripturae)
will speedily come forth: and then the great Work by Parts; yet so composed,
that both ever^ Part shall be a perfect and entire Tractate by it self; and
also, that every succeeding and following part, shall depend upon the preceding
and former; And if the Stationer be but encouraged by the quick and speedy vent
and sale of this present Piece, the rest will come out, as fast as the
judicious Reader can well and thoroughly peruse them, the whole work (...),
being in a great forwardness.

FINIS. (...).

