THE Poet's Ramble AFTER RICHES, OR, A Nights Transactions Upon the ROAD
BURLESQU'D; With Reflections on a Dissenting Corporation: TOGETHER, With the
Authors Lamentation, in the time of Adversity.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by I. Millet, at the Angel in Little-Brittain, MDCXCI.

THE POET's Ramble AFTER RICHES, etc.
I SING of neither Hogan Mogan,
Of Ancient Greek, or Trusty Trojan;
Or is my Muse disposed to Babble
Of some strange Antiquated Fable,
In blustering Strains to Boast, or Brag on,
How George for England slew the Dragon;
Or do I Sing, in flat'ring Phrases,
Fair Helen, or Queen Dido's Praises;
Or in a Whining Cant discover
The Fate of some poor slighted Lover,
Who Raves and Sighs, Laments and Wanders,
And on disdainful Phillis Ponders.
I Treat you with a merry Tale,
Spun over a Cup of Nappy Ale;
For Custom's sake excuse Preamble,
I Will Sing you over a Country Ramble;
Where l, in doleful Cogitation,
Have viewed, with mighty Admiration,
The Circled Earth, and Misty Sky,
Where Fairies Dance, and Witches fly;
And often have heard the Country Wenches
Complain of Hags, and Fairy Pinches:
And Ralph, with Hands over flaming They burn Cow-turd for Fuel.
Cow-Turd
Turn Tales and Stories inside outward;
Where Dames, whose pretty Eyes would pierce ye,
Will turn up Tales for God have Mercy,
And think no greater Obligation,
Than the sweet Tie of Copulation:
But lest l tire your kind Complaisance,
By thus Haranging on your Patience,
No more bye-Crochets will I scatter,
But come with speed unto the Matter.
In an Age blessed with no great Plenty,
When Wit and Money both grew Scanty,
I then, with quiet mind possessing
The Poets ancient Threadbare Blessing,
Lodged in a Place, I must declare it,
I think, for Neatness, called a Garret;
Where, as I pensively lay thinking,
One Morning, after Nights hard Drinking;
Up comes a Man with Hasty Look,
And opens me his Pocketbook;
At that my Heart began to fail me,
I thought of naught but who should Bail me*
Good Sir, says he, I Am come to tell you,
Of an Estate of late befell you;
Your Grandmother is, Sir, Departed;
Pleased with the News, then up I started:
And is my Granny Dead? quoth I;
He answered me, Yea, verily;
Thou may believe me without Swearing,
She is as dead as any Herring:
Well, if the News be true, said I,
Excuse me that I do not Cry,
Since it is appointed all must Dye;
For Grief, you know, will neither save,
Or call Relations from the Grave.
I lugg'd on Hose, and fell to dressing,
Few Tears let fall, small Grief expressing;
From thence we'djourned to the Alehouse,
Where Credit seldom used to fail us,
And there I made the Bumpkin Fuddle,
Till Muddy Ale had seized his Noddle,
And then was forced to call two Porters,
To lead the Lubber to his Quarters,
My Landlord, as I passed the Bar,
Gry'd out, Who pays the Reckoning here?
Said I, pray take it not amiss,
Remember I must pay you this:
Said he, pray, to prevent mistakes,
Will you remember what this makes;
Landlord, let no Ill Thoughts be harbored,
I Will soon be rubbed from off your Bar-board;
I Will pay you in a little time;
I doubt, says he, 'twill be in Rhyme,
For whatsoe' re we Trust a Poet,
Our Bar for seven years may show it;
And then if Dunn'd, all that they say to it,
Poh, that Debt's Cancelled by the Statute.
From thence I went to the City Crest,
In Pasty-Nook, to hire a Beast,
Where one I got on Reputation,
To prevent tedious Ambulation;
Girt with a Sword, which in old Wars,
Made many Bloody Wounds and Scars,
Whose Blade was so experiencive,
Often self it knew to be defensive:
A pair of Boots then on I Garters,
The Owner said had been King Arthurs,
With Spurs, whose inlaid Gallantry
Were Types of great Antiquity:
Thus mounted I my Noble Steed,
In this brave order to proceed;
But by the way, my Muse intent is,
To Sing my Horse's Excellencies;
A short Encomium on his Paces,
With all his Comely Looks and Graces.
Don Quixot's Steed never moved so nimble,
When he advanced against the Windmill;
And as for Shape, mine far surpasses
The Courser of Sir Hugh de Brasses;
He was, if I am not mistaken,
As fat as any Hock of Bacon;
He Would all his Ribs, I Will boldly Swear on it,
I told them, they were so apparent;
No Curb he needed, whose will ride him,
Instead of that, a Thread would guide him;
For thus much in his Praise I Will say,
I never knew him run away;
Three Legs he would Gallop, like a Racer,
But still the fourth would be a Pacer;
Yet when he Paced, as sure as could be,
That self same Leg a Trotter would be;
What Pace so ever he would into enter,
One Foot would still be a Dissenter,
Which makes me apt to think, Plague Rot him,
Some Presbyterian's Cart-Horse got him;
With Whip and Spur* he might be beat up
Into a Canterbury Tit-up;
But then on's Knees, he was so humble,
Each other step would be a Stumble;
Then would I Spur, Whip, Curse, and Mumble,
And he, poor Jade, so Groan and Grumble,
That 'twould have made you laugh to have seen us,
Such work sometimes there was between us:
He never would Sweat, or Tired be,
Confound him, but he Tired me;
Hail, Rain, or Shine, he would in all Weather,
Trot, Stumble, Gallop, altogether;
So fierce he would look, when he was Prancing,
With Pendant Ears, and Tail advancing,
And through both thick and thin would trudge it,
As fast as Ass with Tinkers Budget;
He Would rarely serve some Country Parson,
To clap his Laziness's Arse on;
Or truly to exchange my Notion,
He Would finely fit a Spaniard's Motion;
For Whip and Spur at any rate,
Will never make him change his Gate:
Poor Poet never was mounted thus
Sure, on so Damned a Pegasus.
And Madam Fortune, she to double,
Like an Old Purblind Bitch, my Trouble,
And that my Case might be amended,
My little Coin was all expended:
Thus on I Traveled, Hey Ie* Dobbin,
Exempted from the fear of Robbing,
Till it grew late, and to be short, Sir,
I forced was to take up Quarter,
Where I put up my Steed in Stable,
Who scarce to crawl to the Rack was able:
Then, to look Big, I Cockt my Caster,
And bid the Hostler call his Master,
Who when he came, cried Welcome, Sir,
You're welcome into Leicester;
Here, Jack, Tom, Harry, Will, who is there?
Pray set the Gentleman a Chair:
What News, I pray, Good Sir, from London?
Then I replied, King I -- s was undone;
For that our Royal, Brave King William,
He did so hack, so hew, and kill The King was just gone to Ireland.
'em,
That lest he soon was reconciled,
He Would slay them every Mothers Child;
And that some Troops, near Inneskillen,
Had drowned themselves for fear of killing;
Nay, and King James, by his Men forsaken,
But that they mist him, had been taken:
My Host replied, Marry, Good speed,
This is rare, dainty News indeed!
Here, Thomas, take four Cans and fill'em,
Ifac, well drink thy Health, Brave William;
And if, good Sir, you will permit me,
I with a Can or two will Treat ye:
I thankt him --
Then, undaunted as a Trooper,
I asked him what he had for Supper?
He answered me rare Duck, or Chicken,
Or Ribs of Beef, where was fine picking,
As sweet and good as Knife could stick in.
In then he called his pretty Daughter,
In truth, which made my Chops to water;
That I should scarce have made a scruple
To Have lent her Buttons to her Loop-hole:
When she came in to show her breeding,
She dropped a Cout'sie most exceeding;
I'rose and kissed her, as I should do,
And gave her earnest what I would do;
With fine white Hands laid cross her Belly,
She looked so tempting, let me tell ye;
Her Lips so melting soft and tender,
They did so sweet a Kiss surrender;
That Pego, like an upstart Hector,
Finding how much I did affect her,
Would fain have Ruled as Lord Protector:
Inflamed by one so like a Goddess,
I scarce could keep him in my Codpiece.
By this time she had brought up Supper,
Then at the Tables end that is upper,
My Landlord set his Brawny Crupper;
With Eyes toward Heaven devoutly cast,
As if it were to be his Last;
He said a Grace, as I Conjecture,
As long as any Evening Lecture:
His next Oration being then,
Fall on, you're Welcome Gentlemen;
Which he had spoke, but I no sooner
Fell on as fierce as a Dragooner:
I Cut and Slasht, and Carbonado'd;
The Meat being cold, had some grilliado'd:
We sat not long upon our Haunches,
Ever we had all well stuffed our Paunches;
Hiding with his Hat an ugly Face,
My Landlord then said After Grace;
And so in order to be Drunk,
We each Man called for Pipe of Funk;
Then Nasty Cans well lined with Rozen,
Were called for in by the whole dozen.
An Alderman both Grave and Wise,
Did from his Elboe-Chair arise;
Plucks off his Hat from his bald Noddle,
And thust' wards me begins his Fuddle:
Here, Honest Master, here is to to thee,
To England's Church Prosperity:
Then up starts one, and Swears aloud,
For England's Church he would lose his Blood,
And he is a Rogue, and he would maintain it,
That dares to speak a word again it.
The following Point we chanced to pitch on,
Being half Drunk, it was Religion:
Then one begins in a great Rapture,
And goes a Gleaning through the Scripture,
Divinely for to prove it true,
That Balaam and his Ass were two;
At which, then I clapped in a word,
And Swore by G -- d he made the Third;
Then up starts he in mighty Anger,
And Swore, but that I was a Stranger,
Or else he further would Contend on it,
Then bit his Nails, and there is an end on it,
Another he breathes forth a Hick-up,
And gravely then begins to speak up,
That he would before the World maintain,
Eve Damned her self with a Paremane;
I told him, No, 'twas a Boon-Critting,
The Lord preserved for his own Eating;
At which he skip'd, to make Evasions,
From Genesis to the Revelations;
At last, to the Clouds his Fancy tossed him,
Like Doctor Sh -- y, there we lost him.
A Third, who being more Sedate,
That seemed not much to care to Prate,
Would now and then, by chance, refine us
Some Godly Phrase from Tom Aquinus,
Or else would tell us some strange Story
Of our Old Father St. Gregory.
My Landlord, who had long sat silent,
At this poor Saint grew very Violent,
Saying, if he wa'n't much mistaken,
He was a Saint of Rome's own making,
And then railed furiously on
Against the Whore of Babylon,
Telling us many dreadful Stories
Of Massacres, and Purgatories;
And how their bloody Priests would Broil us,
Stew, Frigasie, nay, Bake and Boil us;
And were so exquisite in Evil,
In Wicked Snares they would trap the Devil:
Then one whose Argumental Fire,
Spoke him some Jesuit or Friar,
Huffs, Puffs, and Sweats, looks Big, and blusters,
Speaking great Words to m' Host by Clusters,
And Stagg' ring Swore, his Brains being mellow,
St. Greg'ry was an Honest Fellow;
And as for Baking, Boiling, Frying,
He Swore, by Jove, 'twas all Damned Lying;
Saying, to the Pope a Power was given,
With His Bulls, to toss a Man to Heaven.
Then one who is Church-Clark in the Town,
At that same word began to Frown,
And takes him smartly up, and short,
Which, truly, made us pleasant Sport:
Says he, I Will hold you, Sir, a Shilling,
I Will prove the Pope to be a Villain;
With that such Noise we had a while,
Loud as the Cataracts of Nile;
Each strained his Lungs, to keep on prating,
No sweeter Music at Bear-beating;
Noise through the whole Soci'ty went,
For the better part of Argument;
He that bawled loudest, we all cried,
Had the most Reason on his side:
The one he makes a loud Oration,
Thumping the Table'n Vindication
Of the Pope's Power of Dispensation;
At which the Psalmist grew so angry,
He Roared like one perplexed with Strangry;
At last being raised, by Indignation,
To the highest pitch of Disputation,
Each Learned Point, to tell you truly,
Ended in, You Lie, Sir, and you Lie:
Now, fired with heat of Argument,
The Disputants to Boxing went,
That Blows might give Determination
To their deep Point in Disputation;
Thus to it they fell, and banged each other,
Amidst the Spittle, Spew, and Smother;
The Pipes and Noggins flew about,
And Candles soon were all put out,
Whilst I at distance stole away,
Not caring for the heat of the Fray,
Yet stood where I could see Fair Play;
For Poets, tho's they often, by Writing,
Breed Quarrels, seldom care for Fighting:
Both spurred with Honor in Bravado,
Each bravely stood the Bastinado;
One Scratched and Clawed, like any Ferret,
Last the other lent him such a wherret,
Who being astonished at the Cuff,
Cried out, O Lord, I have enough:
The mighty Conqueror then sat down
With torn Clothes, and broken Crow;
His Victim from the Ground arose,
First blowed, and then he whipped his Nose,
Which truly much revived the Noddy,
To find 'twas Snotty, more than Bloody:
The Clark, who stood in Vindication
Of England's People, Church and Natiou,
With painful threshing, let us see
How he could mawl down Popery:
Now when the hot Dispute was ended,
And the Clerks Courage much Commended,
To make the Champions both amends,
We all agreed they should be Friends,
Provided they would both be willing,
On that account, to spend their Shilling;
They answered, Yea, if it were Ten,
And so shook hands like Honest Men.
The Tapster we began to call on,
To bring the Jug that holds a Gallon:
But who stepped in from out the Gate-way,
But our Caesar's, Wife to the Clerk, who had so manfuly thrasht the Papist.
Cleopatra,
Who entering in a mighty Passion,
Gave her Great Lord this Salutation:
You Rogue, you Rascal, are you not
A silly, sorry, sap-head Sot,
Thus to sit hugging of a Pot,
And let your poor young Infants mutter
At home for want of Bread and Butter;
You Will find, you Sot, this loving Ale,
At last will bring you to a Goal:
Be Judge your self, would it not vex one,
To see how handsomely the Sexton
Maintains his Wife and Family,
In all her Silks and Bravery?
Whilst I, its well known, since my Marriage,
Have wanted Bread to crumb my Porridge,
And you that are the Clark of the Parish,
In Pots of Ale to be so Lavish;
I will appeal, is it not a hard thing,
That none will Trust us for a Farthing?
Nay, don't you grin, and thus perplex me,
I vow to God, if once you vex me,
You know I shall not be afraid
To fling the Flaggon at your Head:
You're a fit Man to say Gods Word,
You say Amen, you say a Turd:
These Practices you know are evil;
You Clark to the Church, you Clark to the Devil;
Rise and come Home, or, by my Soul,
I Will crack your Noddle with the Bowl.
The Noddy feared to disobey,
Arose, took leave, and went his way;
The rest, as well as he, God wot,
Pay'ng Homage to the Petticoat;
Fearing their Wives, in Indignation,
Should blow up our Association;
With Sparkling Eyes, and Flaming Noses,
They all Reell'd home to their dear Spouses,
Leaving my Host and I to prate
Of some Affairs concerning State:
I told him 'twas not to be doubted,
But that the French would soon be Routed;
And that the Prince of Wales for certain,
Was a mere Flam, a Sham, a Perkin:
By this time we were got so Fuddled,
That both our Brains in truth were addled;
Thus, like true Sots, we neither started
Till Drunk, and then to Bed departed.
Reflections on a Dissenting Corporation.
THE Town it is a Corporation,
Where Women all have Toleration
For Universal Copulation.
Of what Degree so ever, or Function,
The Females never want Conjunction,
Or that blessed Ointment, Humane Unction.
Adultery, and Fornication
Are Licensed through the Corporation,
As proper Means for Generation.
Cuckolds and Misers here are plenty,
Many Mechannicks, and few Gentry,
Whose Bags are full, as Skulls are empty.
Honest Men precious are as Rubies,
Their Mayors Successively are Boobies,
And Aldermen great Brawny Loobies.
The Top of the Town are Petty-Foggers,
The Mean are Mercers and Corn-Jobbers,
The Lowest Common Whores and Robbers.
Their Justices, to speak the best on,
Are Country 'Squires, the People rest on;
But Fools enough, you need not question.
As for Religions, there are many
Professed, but few that practice any;
They Would deny God to gain a Penny.
The Puny sort are kind of Franticks,
Who Pray and Prate on Stools, like Anticks,
Followed by Spiritual Pedanticks.
They Cackle Doctrine by the Spirit,
Who Lie, and say they shall Inherit
A Heavenly Kingdom, by the Spirit.
Yea and Nay's their Communication,
Swearing they hold's Abomination,
But Whoring, as a small Transgre^sion.
For all their Canting, Pious Prating,
And Godly Humming at their Meeting;
Yet, Lawyer like, they live by Cheating.
The Rest are Presbyter-Dissenters,
These are the Herd the Devil enters;
They are all Sinners, no Repenters.
This is the Godly Tribe we read of,
Who Cut the Royal Martyr's Head off;
These are the Rogues the Devil has need of.
So fixed, their Principles never alter,
So Honest, each deserves a Halter,
So Learned, scarce one can Read his Psalter.
'IT is true, the Pastors of the Zealous,
Such Doctrines will in Tub reveal us,
You Would think 'twas Magic from Cornelius.
At such deeping Notions they will be reaching,
That all the tedious hours they are Teaching,
You Would think them Conjuring, not Preaching.
Their Lawyers, by Gods great Mercy,
Enough of Lattin can Rehearse ye,
To fill up Nov'rint Vniversi.
To give more ample Definition
Of these, the Wedges of Sedition,
We'll do it by way of Supposition.
They the Benefit of the Clergy needing,
I doubt, but few, for all their pleading,
Could save their Necks by their right Reading.
The Top of these the Town Relies on;
I dare not say but he is a Wise Man,
And Honest as their Fat Excise Man.
What if they all were Fools, what then?
They may be Wiser, God knows when,
But Cuckolds still; Wives say Amen.
The Authors Lamentation in time of Adversity.
A Shirt I have on,
Little better than none,
In Color much like to a Cinder;
So Thin and so Fine,
It is my design
To present it the Muses for Tinder.
My black Fustian Breeches,
So fallen in the Stitches,
You might see what my Legs had between'em;
My Pockets all four,
I Am a Son of a Whore,
If a Devil a Penny is in 'em.
A Hat I have on,
Which so Greezy is grown,
It remarkable is for its shining*
One side is stitcht up,
'Stead of Button and Loop,
But the Devil a bit of a Lining.
I have a long Sword,
You may take it of my word,
That the Blade is a Tolledo Trusty;
The Handle is bound,
With a black Ribbon round,
And the Basket Hilt damnable Rusty.
My Coat it is turned,
With the Lappets piss-burn'd,
So out at the Armpits and Elboes,
That I look as absurd,
As a Seaman on Board,
That has lain half a Year in the Bilboes.
I have Stockins, it is true,
But the Devil a Shoe,
I am forced to wear Boots all Weathers;
Till I lost my Spur-Rowls,
And damned my Boot Souls,
And Confounded the Upper Leathers.
My Beard is grown long,
As Hogs Bristles, and strong,
Which the Wenches so woundily stare at;
The Color is Whey,
Mixed with Orange and Gray,
With a little small spice of the Carrat.
As true as I live,
I have but one Sleeve,
Which I wear in the Room of a Cravat;
In this plight I wait,
To get an Estate,
But the Devil knows when I shall have it.
O had you but seen
The sad State I was in,
You Would not find such a Poet in Twenty;
I had nothing that is full,
But my Shirt and my Skull,
For my Guts and my Pockets were empty.
FINIS.

