Labor in Vain: OR, WHAT SIGNIFIES Little or Nothing. VIZ. I. The Poor Man's
Petitioning at Court. II. Expectation of Benefit from a Covetous Man in his
Lifetime. III. The Marriage of an Old Man to a Young Woman. IV. Endeavors to
Regulate Men's Manners by Preaching or Writing. V. Being a Iacobite. VI.
Confining an Insolvent Debtor. VII. Promise of Secrecy in a Conspiracy. VIII.
An Enquiry after a Place.


LONDON Printed, and Sold by most Booksellers in London and Westminster, 1700.

A DIALOGUE Between the AUTHOR AND THE PRINTER.
Printer. WHat Title do you design to give this Book?


Author. Labor in Vain: Or, What Signifies Little or Nothing.


Printer. Then I Am like to make a very hopeful Bargain this Morning; and grow
Rich like a Jacobite, that would part with his Property, for a Speculative
Bubble.


Author. Be not angry; for the same Estimate and Epithet the greatest Divines
give to the whole World.


Printer. I don't like their Characters, or Epithets; f^r I believe there is a
real value in our Coin; and I know little of their Spiritual Notions, neither
will I puzzle my Head about what they tell me I cannot rightly Understand.


Auth. I could convince you, that you are in the wrong, in being so Indifferent
about Enquiring into the Cause, Nature, and Value of Things.


Prin. I am, in this point, a Quaker; and will not by Reason be Convinced.
Pray, Sir, tell me, am I to Buy a Shop-full of Empty Pastboard-Boxes, or not?


Auth. Sir they are full.


Print. Why then do you put over the Door, That the Goods Signify Little, or
Nothing? It Is a strange sort of Information, to expect to get Customers by.


Auth. I had several Reasons that induced me to put this Title to my Book; and
not to keep you longer upon the Fret, I will tell you some of them. First, The
natural inquisitive Humor that reigns in all Mankind after Novelty; for no
sooner will the Title be Read, or Cried, but the Reader, or Hearer, will query
what it is about, conclude it some Maggot or other, and to be satisfied, will
Buy it; so you will gain by his Curiosity. Then I Have known many dull Books that
have sold well, by the help of an Ingenious, or Whimsical Title. Puff me,
Puff mo, Puff cannot stay, Colle molle Puff; the Odness and Maggot of that
Cry, has sold the Fellow many a Tart; for many Persons who only out of
Curiosity have peeped into his Basket, have found something or other that
pleased them. Besides the Title is a pro po, because the Subjects I write
about, though they make a great bustle in the World, yet their Conclusions, or
Produce, are very Frivolous, Insignificant, and answer not the End designed.


Print. To what purpose did you spend your time in Writing on such Subjects?
And why should I be at the labor of Printing, or charge of Paper?


Auth. Print it by all means; it may employ some to add to it, the History of
the Printer.


Print. What, that my Pains was Labor in Vain, and Charge signified Little or
Nothing? I am mightily obliged to you for the method you have taken to Expose
me to Laughter: But let it prove as it will, if I Buy the Devil, I Will try to
Sell him. But if your Whim ^on't take, I Will never buy Goods again before I Have
looked over the whole parcel.


Labor in Uain: OR, What Signifies Little or Nothing.
The Poor Man's Petitioning at Court.
HOW Fruitless and Empty the Requests of the Poor have returned at Court,
whether they have been for I^stice or Mercy, is apparent from a Thousand
Instan^e^: And one I Will relate to you, without Peevish (...) Reflecting upon
any particular Court, for the Pauper's Petition is alike neglected (by what
I Have Seen, Heard, or Read) in every Court. A Gentleman (fitly Qualified) who
by permission had Purchased an Employ for Life, under a King, and to his
Successors, was, upon a Successor's coming to the Crown (though he had taken
Oaths of Allegiance, and done what was requisite, according to Law, for
Qualification) to feed the Avarice, or gratify the wicked Bounty of a certain
Person, to whose care the Managery was entrusted, was turned out, with only the
Madmans humourous Reason, Sic Iub^o, sic Volo. By which unjust (at least
unkind) usage, he had very little left to maintain himself, Wife, and four
Children.

At once his Quondam Friends sounded Retreat,
Would scarce afford good Words, and much less M^at
To see his Face, they would never after Care,
As if his very Looks Insectious were:
Like Careful Bees, to their own Hives they f^ew:
As he from Fortune, they from him withdrew*
I cannot forbear in this place putting the Epithet Wicked, to that Generous
Virtue, Bounty; since here 'twas a powerful Robbery committed upon one Man's
Right, to seem Bounteous in a Bequest to another. The deprived Man hurt,
complained with all the respect a Supplicant should use, but his Prayer was
answered with a Negative. Afterward he served that King without Pay in His
Army abroad; and upon the death of the Possessor of his Employ, he again prayed
to be Restored; upon which prayer he had an Order for the next Vacancy; which
when happened, a certain Gentleman, who but a short time before had presented
the Deprived Man to the King, in the Army, and had given it under his Hand,
That he had been turned out without cause, and that he served as a Volunteer;
gave it again under his Hand, That the poor Petitioners alleging to have
served in the Army, was a mistake; and his last Act (the former, in good
manners, I Will believe being forgot) was credited; so Order and Petition were
both dismissed, to the Ruin of the Man, and his Family.

OBSERVATION.
By this true Relation is evident, the little success that is to be expected
from the poor unhappy Man's Petitioning against a Man in Power; for when he
pleases, he Blackens and Misrepresents an Underling; and what a Favorite says,
is easily believed.

Then tell me how the Poor shall find relief,
Or gain a Cure for Undeserved Grief,
Their Fate depending on a King's Belief.
In such a Case, a Prince is the easiest Man in the World to be Imposed on,
considering the vast multitude of Affairs that Center in His Ordering and
Manage, the particular Cognizance of all which, it is impossible for Him to
take; for upon a kind of Necessity He is obliged to have His knowledge of
several Affairs from the report that those about Him are pleased to make; and
what Man will tell a Story to his own disadvantage? And who can tell it but the
Favorite, whilst the poor Petitioner is debarred Access?

Before a Favorite, none shall be believed
And against the Rich, it is hard to be Believed:
In vain you offer up an empty Prayer,
Which Fattens not the Courtier, or his Heir;
Something that is Solid, and of real Good,
(At least for such by Worldlings understood)
Must be presented, if you would favor find,
Which rarely warms the Endowments of the Mind;
But to the Fortunate, and Rich are kind.
Since Money weighs down Justice and Desert,
The Poor's Desires don't signify a Fart.
Expectations of Benefit from a Covetous Man in his Lifetime.
QVis Pauper? Avaras: An admirable and proper Answer to the Question; because
the Covetous Man wants that which he has, as well as that which he has not,
as proves true by the following relation. A Friend of mine (if a Covetous Man
can be so) of Gentile Extraction, and suitable Educa^i^^, having a competent
Estate of four hundred Pounds per Annum, an^ a thousand Pounds in Money left
him, which Revenue as far exceeded his desire of Living, as it came short of
his desire of Acquiring; for he no sooner had the Possession, but he retrenched
the usual Expenses of the Family; he saved Charge, by putting away the Mouths
that caused it; and the only Servant that he kept, lived almost like a Bear in
Greenland, on the Nourishment he had got in the Summer of the Fathers Life
time. In short, no Anchorite lived more sparing than he, unless it were upon
another cost, and then 'twas a covetous humor made him Eat and Drink like a
Glutton and a Drunkard. In all his Actions he was Base; He would Steal his own
Goods, to make his Servant pay for them: By such sordid ways his Wealth was
accumulated; he sold the Mansion House, because the Purchase-Money would yield
a greater profit than the Rent amounted to; and retired from a great House (not
from Plenty and Abundance) to a less, that he could not Rent out: By such
Niggardly Methods, in proc^ss of time, he had heaped up a very great Treasure.

There was a Young hopeful Gentleman, his Nephew, who expected to ^^ap the
fruits of his Covetousness, that often came to visit him; and was always
Complaisant, soothed, and commended every Humor, which I take to be the right
way of Pleasing; for certain (at least du^ing the time of prevailing Fancy, or
Action) every Man is pleased with his own Sentiments, or Doings; so
consequently loves to have them approved, and applauded.

He gr^^^^i'd the Misers Appetite at his own Expense, his Pantrey and his
^ellar were always ready to gratify his least motion of desire, his C^^ch and
Horses attended his occasions; he balked his own Hu^ou^, neglected his
pleasant and facetious Companions, and con^^^^ himself to Oblige his Sordid
Temper. Though it must be confessed S^^^-interest moved him, yet it pleased the
Wretch, when he advised him to secure his Treasure, that no Rachel, or other,
might Steal his God. He Christened his Son of the Iew's Name, he did, what not?
to Oblige him. He defended him from Robbers at the peril of his own Life: Nay
more, He justified his base Principles, contrary to his (...): But all the
Returns that were paid to these Services, ^e^e Mountain-Promises, whilst in his
Cups; but Molehills, or no ^erformances, when Sober.

Afterward this Obliging Gentleman fell by misfortune into Straits and
Necessities, so that his Family wanted convenient Subsistence; yet the other
pitiless, and unconcerned, returned no good Nature, no Charity, no grateful
Act, for all his generous Obligations; not so much as even common Humanity
would out of Mercy oblige a very Jew to show to a Stranger in Misery. After the
Miser had Bought what he had left, for half the value, he forbid him his House,
and whenever he met him, he passed by him as a Stranger. At last, Intestate,
the miserable Rascal Dies; for the very Thought of disposing of his Riches,
would have been as Mortal as a Cannon Shot: So Volens N^lens, what he left,
fell to this Gentleman. But I had almost forgot to tell you, That his Jealous
Temper (which must accompany the Covetous, let their Avarice be fixed on what
it will) made him Bury a great part of his Money and Writings, so that a great
deal was lost for want of the knowledge of the Concealments.

OBSERVATION.
A Covetous Desire is properly applicable to self, for even when I seem to
desire the Advantage of another, there is something of self in the matter; and
it must be allowed that he I wish well, is my Friend; though another being my
Enemy, only makes him so; so by my desire, I gratify my own Inclination in my
Friends Advantage, or please my Anger, in my Enemies Disadvantage; a Covetous
Man's Thoughts center in his own Prosit, and what good goes besides him, he
counts by Providence wrong applied; then it is Idle to expect, that he that
Covets all, should frustrate his vast Design, by giving me a part; as
Covetousness is a Selfish humor, it is impossible it should be diffusive.

The Misers Wish, is of a vast Extent,
And would Engross, beneath the Firmament,
All that it likes; still Covetous, would try
To Merchandise with Spirits of the Sky.
His Wishes only to Advantage tend,
From Self's their Origin, in Self they End;
So cannot be Diffusive to a Friend.
In Vain a Favor you expect from such,
You may as well expect one from the D --.
The Marriage of an Old Man to a Young Woman.
THe mutual Disapointments that commonly thwart, and hinder the Happiness
expected by the Marriage of an Old Man to a Young Woman, the following Story
sets forth: An Ancient Gentleman, whose head Age had Powdered like a Beau's,
who in his Sp^ightly Youth could at Sight answer the Expectations of the most
Lascivious Female, as Doctors Commons and Parish-Books could Witness, he had
lived a Libertine Life, and had never thoughts of Marriage, till he was Three
Score and Ten, when he happened into the Company of a Beautiful Young Woman,
whose Charms, and Behavior bl^w away the Ashes that covered the Fire that
remained in the Brands end, so that it made a Faint Blaze, which (of late
unaccustomed) warmth made the (willing to be Deceived) Senior fancy that there
was yet a great Stock of Vigor in his Veins, that would answer the ends of
Marriage; thus when Lechery had left his Tail, and agitated only by Desire,
fancied mighty Performances in his Lustful Brain, he Courts this Lady for his
Bride, who had not the Charms to renew an old Aeson's Age, sensible that his
expiring Flame could not long last, he was Impatient of delay; so by continual
Courtship he tried to watch his Mistress, like a Hawk, into Compliance; but
'twas persuasive Money that made her Consent to endure a Lenten Penance, in
Expectation of an happy Easter after his Death. In short, for filthy Lucre
Married him, and submitted herself to his ^eeble Threescore and Ten Years
Attempts, after his fluttering all the Wedding Day, they were put to Bed, (I
think that word suitable to his Age) and after Sack-Posset Eat, and Stocken
thrown, the Company withdrew, and left them to themselves. When he failed in
Performance, she was frustrated in her Expectation, so that their Marriage
signified Little or Nothing.

OBSERVATION.
The Answer I make, to those that will say, Every Body knew this Story before,
is, That though I pretend to Write Novel's, I don't Novelties, but to dress up
something that for one Meal may be Pleasing, and of grateful Gust; and perhaps
some Observation may be made from this Story worthy Self-Application: But though
the Reader do not, I will, to continue the Method I first Designed.

To Attempt any thing, which nothing but (almost) a Miracle can make
Successful, is Folly and Madness; and little less, can move a Man of Threescore
Years and Ten to do -- to any purpose. An Old Man Marrying a Young Woman, is
like laying down a good Joint of Meat, to an almost Consumed Fire, which will
blaze a while, but by the sudden decay, for want of Fuel, will make it but luke
Warm: He is counted a Blockhead that pretends to set up a Trade, when he is
past Labor, without he takes an able Journeyman; and I believe in this Case,
no Man will willingly admit of a Journeyman to manage his Commodity, and
without one (by effects may be judged) the Marriage will signify little
toward Procreation. Disappointments must happen to the Man from Natural
Consequence, notwithstanding the mighty belief of his Abilities. I have known
from Powerful Fancy, when a Child has been tired with Walking, yet Imagining he
Rode when he had a Switch between his Legs, would Imitate the Trot and Gallop,
for a small while, without complaining; but presently the weakness and
Imbecility of his Feet, made him sensible his Natural Strength (though agitated
by Desire) could not carry him to his desired home: So the Old, whose Vigorous
heat is Spent, may imagine if he get a Cock Horse, how furiously he will Ride;
but like the tired Child, his Natural decay will appear.

The Man being deceived, by Consequence the Woman must; and what sad Effects do
such Disappointments cause, are Evident from the future carriage of both Man
and Woman: He grows Jealous, unwilling another should Feed, though he himself
cannot make use of the Dainties; then the Poor abused Woman is watched, perhaps
confined, and her whole Life made uneasy.

Like a poor Man (cajoll'd by mighty Promises) transported to the West Indies;
when he comes there, finding himself a Slave, to the Beck and Rod of an
Imperious Patron, being fast bound by Contract, has no hopes of Liberty, but
from the Expiration of time; such is the Condition of a Young Woman, who
flattered with the belief of Fond Doting Dalliance, and Plenty, is betrayed
into the Slavery of Marriage, with an Old Fellow, she has no hopes of
D^liverance from, but by the Expiration of her Disagreeable Husbands Life; her
Youthful heat meeting with the Icy coldness of his Age, causes thunder in the
House: Continual Jars forbid all hopes of Peace.

When Waves Swol'n high by force of mighty Wind,
They fiercely meet, and are in Bat^^c joined;
The frothy Salt, with motion's set on Fire;
But Washed with Native Water, soon expire:
So tossed by Billows of remaining Lust,
Which Shuffles up and down the Aged Dust,
Salt Sparks are blown into a sudden Flame,
But Ages Moisture soon does quench the same.
The old Man's boasting Promises in Love,
Do little signify, as Women prove;
It Is Vapor all, and Limber as my Glove.
In Vain the Aged Man hopes to Receive
Blessings, which only Spritely Youth can give;
In Vain a Women does expect a Trade,
From one whom Stingy Age has Bankrupt made;
Such Disappointments happen to them both,
Which makes the Marriage prove of little worth.
The Reverse of this Story, which is an Old Woman Marrying to a Young Fellow,
is to the full as ridiculous, and signifies as little to a mutual Content.

Endeavors to Regulate Men's Manners by Preaching or Writing.
THE present Age is not so very Virtuous, but that we may meet with examples in
almost every Company and Conversation, that demonstrates the little Efficacy
the well designed Writings and Public Teaching of Good Men have had, toward
Reformation of Manners, and the Practice of Virtue. But not being willing to
expose particularly the Insensibility that appears either in my own Life, by
not Amending, and Correcting my reproved Actions, or in the general Practice of
any Fellow-Countrymen; I have pitched upon the History of Socrates, so far as
it agrees with my Design; that is, to show how little the good Documents he
Taught, signified to the Reform or Benefit of the Athenians, and the Odium they
caused from those he endeavored to Amend.

Socrates, who was Born in a small Village called (...)* under the Athenian
Jurisdiction; is commonly called the A^^eni^n, to distinguish him from several
others, of that Name, one of which Wrote the History of Argos, another was a
Bat^ynia^, etc. This Socrates the Athenian, was taught Philosophy under
Anaxagoras, he was a Man of great Temperance, of a strong Constitution, one who
inquired into the Nature of Sublime things, Studied Humanity, Practiced and
Publicly Preached, to poor and Rich, Virtue and Good Manners; to be silent,
and not to reprove Wicked Men, he counted a Crime against the Gods; to
Discourse of Virtue, he esteemed as a great Happiness; and employing himself
almost constantly in instructing of the Citizens, he neglected mightily his
private Affairs, so that he was Poor, and told the Athenians, that he ought to
be Maintained out of the Prytaneum, or Public Storehouse: That he ought to be
Rewarded more then a Victor, for the Conqueror could but make them appear to be
Happy, when by his Instructions in Virtue (if Practiced) they would really be
so, not only from present Serenity of Mind, but in Futuro; for he believed an
Immortality of the Soul, and the very day he Died, he employed in Discoursing
of, and by Convincive Arguments to his Friends proved the Souls Indivisibility,
and Consequently Immortality; he Taught as he Believed, that nothing of Evil
could happen to a Good Man, his Concerns being taken Care of by the Gods; but
notwithstanding his Eloquent persuasive Speeches upon so Noble a Subject, as
Virtue, which for its own Sake, ought to attract Men's Inclinations, and
Affections; the Athenians were so far from Reforming from their Accustomed
Immoralities, that Miletus, Anytus, and others, accused him, as Guilty of a
Capital Crime, for Instructing the People in the ways of Virtue, and for
Reproving them, when they Acted contrary to Morality and good Manners: They
were so Exasperated against him for his Good Endeavors to introduce Honesty
and Piety, Inconsistent with their Practice, that without a Confronting
Witness, they Condemned him to Death; which Sentence was put in Execution by a
Draught of Poison. By which Barbarous usage, it is Apparent that all his
Te^^hing signified little toward the Reformation of the Lives of ^is Fellow
Citizens.

OBSERVATION.
Tho Licentiousness is more agreeable, and facile to the depraved Nature of
Mankind; yet almost every Age has produced a Preaching Experienced Solomon, a
Socrates, a Plato, or some such Good Men, who have Endeavored by Writing and
Teaching, backed with the Inducing Reasons of a present Serenity of Mind, that
must upon N^cessity Accompany Virtuous Actions, or the Glorious Prospect of an
Unconceivable Reward hereafter; to persuade Men by Arguments, Conducing to self
Interest, (which in all other Cases is prevailent) to Practice Piety, Honesty
and Civility, yet what poor Crops have the Stony Soil produced, every Age
against it self is Witness. The Libertinism of an Heathen, I don't so much
wonder at, because he has no Thoughts of Futurity to Check his Mad Career; but
that Men who are daily Taught, and Instructed in Piety, and Morality, and who
upon a Self-query, will own that they really Believe to do Good, is for their
Advantage, should Act directly contrary to their Belief, is an Extravagant
Madness, not to be paralleled: Is there no Remedy for so Great, and Contagious
an Evil to be found? Yes, an Heathen teaches me one, Trabimur Exemplis Plus
Quam Praeceptis; for if those in Power and Greatness Practiced Virtue, the
Underlings would Imitate; if 'twere Customary, every one would be in the
Fashion: But whilst Vice and Immorality are Countenanced by the Great, Orders
for keeping the Sabbath, and against Prophanness, are of little Efficacy; for
when the great Fish break the Net, the little ones will go out at the Rent.
Though arguing for Virtue, and good Manners, is highly to be Commended, yet the
little Reformation we find, shows that hitherto it has signified Little or
Nothing.

He that would bar me of a coming Joy,
And by strict Rules, my Liberty Destroy,
In Trammels makes me Pace away my Life,
'Twixt Nature and his Rules is constant strife;
So Irksom, and Uneasy I must be,
By Reason of their great Antipathy;
This is the Language of the Vnthinking Man,
Who led by Custom, loves to be Profane;
And will not change his Road, what e're you Teach,
Scarce though a Jonah once again should Preach:
But still that Monkey, Man, would Imitate,
And Virtue Practice, Copied from the Great.
Examples, wanting Precepts, are but Vain;
And moving Arguments in florid strain,
Will Not make the Blockish Crow'd from Ill Refrain.
Being a Jacobite.
ONE, who out of Good Manners, I must style a Gentleman, because he justly
Claims that Title from his Ancestors; and it must be allowed him now, even in
his Adversity, since his Accounted Crimes of Omission, in not actually
complying to the Laws in force, proceed from the Dictates of his Conscience,
and not from an Obstinate Spirit of Contradiction; for though this Gentleman's
Opinion will not permit him to comply in the Active part, yet out of Submission
to the Laws of his Country, without refractoriness, he is Obedient in the
Passive. This Gentleman (as many others) is at this time termed a Iacobite, as
being the title Customarily used, in Opposition to Williamite; concluding, that
he that is not for me, is against me.

Upon the Revolution in the Year 1688, (which by Unfathomed Providence was
brought about, so contrary to Rational Appearance, that after Ages will
hesitate at the Belief of the Heroic Attempts of the present King, and the
Unaccountable Manage of the last) this Man was turned out of several
Considerable Imploys, (or rather he turned himself out, for it cannot be
expected, that any will be (...) (unless by Power to those that will not serve
them) stripped of (...) In^omes, he for a while handsomely subsisted; but seeding
con^^^ntly upon last Years Crop, without Sowing for another Harvest, ^is
Gra^^ry was Empted without hopes of Replenishing, without a Miracle; Reduced,
he herded with those of his own Opinion, that by the Benevolence of Fortune
were able to relieve him, and did Generously for a time; but continual
Dependence made him sensible of the Bitterness of the Curse: The Undervaluing
Slights, the ^y^ing Attendance, often Refusals, beggarly Loans, Reprimands,
Advice too late given, all which, with appearing Patience, by force he was
oblig^d (if he would Eat) to undergo, made him almost distracted in his
Thoughts. The impending Misery of want by its near approach, appearing Dreadful
and Afrightning, put him upon the St^dious Thoughts, how to subsist for the
future. He considered the many reasons drawn from self Interest, and other
Powerful (...), for Conforming to the present Government; the general (...),
and Practice of many, whose Learning and Integrity he could (...) call in
question (unless he should Contradict his own Experience) made him bring his
Manage into Examination, and his Rational Arguments made him often Waver, and
query the Prudence of his Opinion; so far, that he had some thoughts of
Conforming to what the Representatives of the Nation had agreed; but having so
long stood out, he could have no hopes of being received with that favor, so
as to be trusted in any considerable Employ; either Civil, Military, or
Ecclesiastical; he was too Poor, and of too little Interest, to expect an
Honorable Title; too Illiterate to be made a Dean, too well known to be
trusted with the Managing of a Secret in National Affairs; so he stuck to his
old Principals though he reaped no Advantage by them, for Poverty like Ivy
twines to the Iacobite, and spoils his Growth; his Opinion Contradicting in
general, to the Sentiments of the greatest part of the Nation, was so far from
being any ways Advantageous to him, that it exposed him to want; and debarred
him from the hopes of repairing his Ruined Fortunes.

OBSERVATION.
THIS Story is equally applicable to Iacobite, Williamite, Wigg, Tory, or what
other Name of Distinction is given to any Man, who Rows not with the common
Stream that the River of his Country runs; he tugs against the Tide, and makes
very little Progress. To oppose the General Sentiments of a Country, is drawing
up-hill by choice, and gives just cause for People to call a Man's Judgment in
Question, since there is a nearer, and down-hill beaten Path at Hand; it is
something like going in the Strand, toward the Horse-Guard, on a Sunday in the
Evening, when one has the trouble of meeting the Current of the City Gentry,
going from the Park; he that complies not to the Practice of a Nation,, appears
like one in a Sad-coloured Coat, bearing Arms amongst the Guard at White Hall,
he is star'd at; and if observed by a Superior, will be Punished.

Relating to a Man's Compliance, or Noncompliance, ought to be considered;
whether what required be consonant to Juice, and Self-Preservation, argued Pro
and Con, in refference to Spiritual, and Temporal Affairs, the last not
contradicting the formers positive Commands. And sure I am, or must appear to
be, by rational Men, much Wiser, or more Blockish, than the rest of the Nation,
in a General Council consenting, if I oppose, or refuse Conformity to its
Agreement. Parallel Examples ought to be searched for, and the method of
Proceedings, that have been commonly taken by others, approved by future
Allowance to have been Just, and fitting to be done, ought to Guide, and
mightily Sway me to concord to such approved Precedents; for if a Man disagrees
out of a particular Opinion, or Interest, he, as far as in him lies, calls the
discretion of a great many in Question, and battles a number with his opiniated
Reason, from such Proceeding, one can expect no Benefit, or Reputation. No
Advantage, because none will trust another (in any thing of Weight) that is of
a contrary Persuasion; because it is reasonable to believe, that every Man is
inclinable to act what suits best to his Fancy, and most conducting to bring to
effect his desired Aim: So, instead of serving that Interest by which
intr^sted, to gratify his real Sentiments, he will betray the secrets to him
committed.

What is i^ Vogue carries a present Reputation, (than being a Iacobite) must
consequently cause an undervaluing, and so Sig^ify Little, or Nothing.

Allow Sentiments offered, right, or wrong,
If Judge and Jury too, join with the Throng;
In Contradiction to the present Thought,
My sole Opinion signifies naught.
It Is* overruled, and I am surely cast,
Which proves the fate of Separists at last;
For to oppose tde Torrent of a Stream,
Resist a greater Power, is like my Dream,
Which fancies mighty Riches, mighty Power,
But Poor and Weak, I meet the waking Hour;
With a Probatim est some sadly tell,
What once they were, to what they now are fell.
Confining an Insolvent Debtor.
A Grave Citizen, an Alderman's Fellow, by Losses and Crosses, and GOD knows
what, was reduced to the necessity of leaving his House, and moving himself and
Effects into the Sanctuary for Bankrupts, White-Fryars; where, for a while he
confined himself to his Chamber, and when he went out, the Company seasoned to
the Place, who were no proud Men, but would quickly be acquainted without
Ceremony, made him ashamed, and blush like a young Sinner, the C^rtains
undrawn* with care he soon cast up his Books; and substracting his Debtors from
his Creditors, he found a greater Balance due than he was able to pay; but
willing (as it is natural for all Creatures) to be at Liberty, he summoned his
Creditors, and o^fered them ten Shillings for every Pound, reserving for
himself but a small Pittance to subsist on, or lay a new Found^tion for fresh
Credit: But some ( Jews in Practice) refused a Compliance to any Abatement, and
resolved to make Dice of his Bones: Their Cruelty grieved and afflicted him so
much, that his Sorrow and Concern was apparent in his Face; and being asked the
Reason, he told that his Creditors Noncompliance was the cause of it; upon
which, a Doctor in the Civil Laws of the Place, took him to Task; told him his
Security there; brought Examples and Precedents how Tom such an one, and Sir
John such an one, had used their Creditors, and brought them to Compliance:
Unmerciful Rogues! What? Refuse to take Ten Shillings in the Pound? If I might
advise you, they should not have above half a Crown; I intend to give mine but
Eighteen Pence; sure you are not such a Fool to part with all, and suffer your
self and Family to want: Such Company, such Examples, such Documents have
washed away the honest first Intents of many a Man, but it could not flote his;
for he still designed, to his Power, to satisfy every Body; but unwilling to be
Caged in a closer Prison, he there Lived; and spending upon the main Stock
constantly, it wasted so fast, that at his next Proposal to his Creditors, he
could offer but Fi^e Shillings, which was also rejected: And some time after
not being watchful of his Ways, the Catchpoles siez'd him at the Suit of an old
protesting Friend of his, a Neighbor, for whom he woutd sent, hoping Mercy
from th^r former intimate Acqunintance; but the Officers telling him 'twould be
to no purpose, since that Warrant which they named to him, was but one amongst
Twenty they had against him; so after squeezing him out of Twenty Shillings for
Dinner, Ale, and Brandy, they lodged him in the Compter; where his
Fellow Prisoners flocked about him, some pulling this way, some that, like
Watermen at turn of Ebb at Billinsgate; all calling for Ga^nish, which
clamorous demand never ceased till he had paid it The want of Liberty made him
value it more than ever, and desiring next to Life his Liberty; he with Prayers
entreated his Creditors to accept of all that he had, but they refused it, and
would not believe that he gave a true or just account, though he offered to
make Oath of it; so, by lying there, the poor Man for Ne^essaries consumed,
what merciful men would have been contented with, when the Parliament, out of
Consideration of the Misery that many (not able to pay their Debts) in Prison
endured, ordered a Discharge upon such and such Conditions, under the which he
was comprehended, and consequently discharged, without paying one Farthing;
whereas, if the Creditors had formerly complied, they might have had half their
Debts, and the Man his Liberty; so their consining him proved their Detriment.
And the like happen to others, when the Insolvent Die in Custody; for where
it is not to be had, the King must loose his Right.

OBSERVATION.
SUCH have been the Fate of many Insolvent Debtors; and such have proved the
Return to many uncharitable and cruel Creditors; and I believe all merciful Men
will think the last deserved it: Expectation to recover Debts by consining an
insolvent Man, whereby he is debarred of opportunity to acquire wherewithal to
pay his Debts, is an Egyptian Proposal, To make Brick without Straw, quod
ultra posse, now est esse.

It Is a very good Law in the Signiory of Biscay, that no Native Biscayner shall
be Imprisoned for Debt above Forty Eight Hours; but the Creditor in that time
shall have Judgment against whatsoever Effects shall be found to be his, or
what afterward he either by Labor, Art, or otherwise shall acquire, yet upon
giving Security, not to depart the Signiory, he shall be discharged out of
Custody, to get his Livelihood.

I have heard that in Holland no Creditor shall keep in Prison an insolvent
Debtor, unless he will maintain him there, with subsistence to preserve his
Life: But here in England in this point, we outdo the Dutch in Cruelty,
confining People to Starve, contrary to Humanity, Mercy, or Policy. One may as
reasonably expect his Dog should catch an Hare, when chained to a Post, as a
poor Debtor should in a Goal get wherewithal to pay his Debts.

Ask ^ut the cruel Man, what he would ^a^e
From h^^ poor Debtor, to his will a Slave
Confined in Prison, presently he will say
My Money, yet acts quite contrary way
To gain his end; for, how can one expect,
Where no Cause moves, there should be an Effect.
What silly Farmer will confine his Cow
From needf^l Herbage, for no hear der Low
For Food; or in reason can he believe,
By such Confinement, he shall Milk receive:
As silly is the Hope, when you confine
A Man Insolvent, for to raise the Coin.
Promise of Secrecy in a Conspiracy.
THOUGH I could produce variety of Instances out of Ancient History suitable to
this Subject, yet I have chose one which has come to the knowledge, and is
still fresh in the Memory of almost every Englsh Man, to show the little Trust
and Confidence that is to be given to the solemn Promises of Secrecy in a
Conspiracy, or wicked Design.

In the Year 169 several angry discontented Men club'd to the hatching a Plot
or Conspiracy for subverting the present Government; and for the more certainty
of effecting it, designed, contrary to Honor, and common Humanity, to take off
the present Head, that the Limbs might be in Confusion, wanting an immediate
Director for their Motion, so in the hurly burly to have Proclaimed one, who
unhappily has too much Proclaimed himself.

There i^ no need of mentioning their Design at large, or the Progress they had
made, every Man knowing the drift of their Conspiracy, and the Conspirators; so
I Will only take Notice, that after their Plot was laid, the Assassinators agreed
on, and Secrecy sworn to, at the Sun-Tavern, and other Places, some of them
(false, first to their Country, then to their Adherents) discovered the
Conspiracy. I wish 'twere done out of a repentant Principle, and believing a
Promise to do Evil ought not to be kept; but their covetous siliciting for
Rewards induce me to believe, that the Principle of Self-interest was the chief
Motive of their Discovery; but let it proceed from what cause soever, it is
apparent, that the Obligations under which they were engaged, were not of Force
to keep the Secret undiscovered, The like Discoveries have been made at Venice,
at Rome, at Genoua, and in almost all the the Kingdoms on the Earth; though the
greatest Cautions and Securities that Self-preservation, or aspiring Ambition
could invent, to tie up the conseiling Tongue, have been made use of; he that
will be a Villain in attempting a great Evil, is not to be trusted; for it is
probable he will be so in a lesser, especially if he expects to reap advantage
by it.

OBSERVATION.
SELDOM any Resolution is so fixed, but that apparent benefit, as
Self-preservation, or Riches, will alter it, especially when the Resolve is
evil, for no Man, though never so much prompted by Ambition, Avarice, Lust or
Revenge, but has a Monitor within, which Dictates to him, that his Resolve and
Attempt is Evil in it self; and from what one's Reason informs to be bad, a Man
is easily drawn from Effecting: So we find many Men who dare undaunted, look
Death in the Face in a just Cause, will Recant and appear Cowards, when Ill is
to be attempted, from whence has proceeded many Discoveries of Plots and
Conspiracies, to the Secrecy of which, Men have Obliged themselves by all the
Ties that are counted Sacred and Binding; such are to be counted Repentants,
because they discover the Design out of an Odium to the Evil. But some, without
Considering Good or Evil, in Relation to Futurity, discover the secret
Conspiracies with them entrusted, not lor Conscience, but for Lucre sake,
others when their first Heat is over, grow Pusilanimous, and confess to save
their Lives; sometimes insinite Wisdom confounds their Councils and Devices,
lead them into Errors and Mistakes, and by ways unimaginable, bring to Light
the hidden things of Darkness.

Whilst a protecting Providence do sway,
Whilst Men Inspired dictates do obey,
Whilst Life has Value, and Reward has Love,
Protested Secrecy in Ill does prove
Of small Validity; the first will act
What Is Consonant to Justice of a Fact:
The Second by Impulsive Power Command,
What wo'n't Man do to keep his wasting Sand*
And bountiful Reward makes Men betray
Their dearest Kin, and Friendship wipes away*
Subject to Power, and tempted by a Bait,
Too pleasing to deny, of little weight
Proves promised Privacy; then why should I
Meddle in Plots, in Hopes of Secrecy?
The Progress of an Enquirer after Places.
THOUGH Disappointments are in some Degree or other, most commonly the
Companions that attend and thwart the Hopes and Expectations of all Mankind;
yet have I not observed more Disappointments generally to accompany any
Attempt, than I have the Endeavors, and Designs, to get into Reputable Places
and Employments, as by the Sequel will appear.

An English Gentleman, who by Hospitality amongst his County Neighbors, had
Spent the greatest part of his Estate; having very little, besides the Mansion
Seat of his Family left, seeing himself Slighted by those very Men who had
largely tasted of his Bounty, seriously began to Consider, how he should still
Support himself in some Credible Reputation; and after he had run over several
designing Thoughts, and Built Castles in the Air, he at last six'd upon the
common Hopes of getting a Place, or Employ at London. To effect which, he
presently Sold the remaining part of his Estate; and to London he came, to put
in Practice the Scheme he had Drawn, for raising once again his Fortune. His
first Application was, to be sure, to one of the worthy Burgesses that Served
for a Neighboring Corporation, who by the Charms of Bribery, and by Virtue of
his strong Drink, had carried the Election Nemine Contradicente; him he
acquainted with his Design, and desired his kind Assistance, who presently
Promised Fair for Country sake, tho he was an Irishman; upon his Promise, every
Morning he danced Attendance, at the Levee of my Dear Joy; and when he walked,
he kept Cringing on his Larboard Quarter, not presuming to go Check by Iowl
with one of the Representatives of the Nation; who had the same Business during
the whole Sessions of Parliament, that he had during the Term-time, two Motions
a Day, to Westminster and back again; but finding his Waiting, and the other's
Promises, would Signify the same thing, and the Senator being gone to
Tanoridge, where the Proverb was on his side, he bethought himself what farther
Methods were to be taken; and luckily finding upon a Coffee-house Table, a
Paper Entitled, A Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade, by John
Houghton, F. R. S. Wherein he found, that he knew of several that wanted Men so
or so Qualified or Recommended, and several that were so and so Qualified and
Recommended, that wanted the Employments which others wanted to have
Officiated. At first view he thought this Paper as a Pillow of Light to guide
him in the Dark: But upon examining the Inquiries after Places and Imploys, and
those that wanted Agents, found they answered one another's Occasions, and that
there was not one Agent enquired after, but there was the same Place sought
for; so he dispair'd of Success from that, seeing every one's Occasion might be
supplied.

Though his Sleep, or rather Slumbers, was unquiet and short, occasioned by the
concern that hagg'd his Thoughts about his future earthly well Being, yet his
lying Awake was more tormenting to him, as much as Impending want had then a
more lively Impression, than his drowsy Fancy could Represent; so trying, as if
it were to avoid himself, he arose, slighting Beauish Formality, soon dressed
himself, and went to Man's Coffee-house, where, though 'twas early in the
Morning, he found Talkative Will, a tall elderly Man, with his own Hair,
diverting the Company, sometimes in English, sometimes in French; in both
Languages he told Stories as improbable to be true as all D. O's Narrative. He
took upon him the Statesman, and told the Company he knew of Funds that would
have raised Money enough to defray the Charge of the War, without being any
pressure to the Subject: He blamed all that he was pleased to think
Mismanagement in the Concerns of the Nation; and then gravely told them, how
all might have been prevented, which every Block-head can do, after the Act is
past; and, for the future how he would have things managed; but Mercy upon us
if Affairs were to be ordered by his Managery, (looking upon his own Conduct)
it may reasonably be believed, they would have been Ten times worse directed.
After he had Railed at several particular Persons, whose names he did not tell.
(but described them plainer than I do him) He grumbled at the Bounty bestowed
upon Favorites; but I suppose his Cozen Harry's Humor then possessed him, who
always Rails when he is Poor; (...) a Bounty is in his Pocket, (which never
wears it out) (...) as much for Prai^ing, as when Penniless in Railing and
Re^^cting. If Variety be pleasing, sure Mr William's Discourse wa^ diverting;
for he run over Stories (as much as the time would allow) of Men and Women, of
all Qualities, all sorts of Countries, Governments, Languages, Horses, Dogs,
Cocks, Wine, Snaff, etc. as positively as if he had been an Eye or Ear-witness,
had Traveled them all over, been a Privy-Councellor in every one of them; a
Professor of Languages, owned, or laid Wagers, Drank, ^asted, or Snuff'd or
every sort: But at last took opportunity, though no occasion offered) to tell
how nigh he was Related to, and how he was beloved and respected by a Dutch
English Nobleman; which at last startled my Inquirer from the Confusion the
medley of his Discourse had put him into, and brought into his Thought, that
this Gentleman's Interest might do him a Kindness.

His approaching Necessity having made him confident beyond his natural Temper,
he presently enquired the Gentleman's Name and Lodging, and that Day waited
upon him, and in short desired his Favor toward helping him to an Employ sit
for a Gentleman, and at the same time promised to be grateful; Mr. William, who
never wants complimental Civility, told him, that he would assist him in what
lay in his Power, and mentioned to him several Places that he might endeavor
to get; but knowing none then Vacant, he desired he would meet him on the
Morrow, when he would bring a Man (meaning his Cozen Harry) whom the Cobweb
Laws cannot consine, though in close Confinement* who knew of Forty to be
disposed of. The next Day, according to appointment, they all met, and Harry
cajoll'd my ^^quirer, and fitted his Humor to a T --; indeed he must be o^ a
very stingy Temper whom he cannot please, for he is really a very sensible
Gentleman. My Inquirer's Desires were made known to him; and Harry (who never
parts with a Man, but he leaves him a plausible prospect of effecting his
Designs) laid down such Assurances upon Promises made in his Favor, that my
Gentleman began to believe at such a Day he might enter into Pay or Sallery;
but before he parted, Harry had nicely examined, though at a distance, how his
Stock was, either to Bribe or Purchase, and in a Day or Two was to give my
Enquirer a positive Answer; but I had almost forgot to tell you, that just at
parting, Harry bore up to him, and told him, that though he would serve a
Gentleman gratis with his Labor, yet there would be Expenses; to defray which,
he expected he should bring him Ten Guineas the next Morning. My Enquirer,
buoyed up with hopes, came the next Morning with ready Rhino in his Pocket, had
immediately Admittance into a Room spread with old Carpets, that the Man at the
Three Roses had refused to Stitch Cards on. Presently honest Harry, who like
the Hungry Jew, watched the falling Manna, came in, and accosted him with, Sir,
I Have done your Business, for I was with my Lord last Night, and to serve you,
spent my own Interest, so effectually, that I had his Promise on your Behalf:
Upon these words the Manna dropped into his Hand, which Harry never kept till the
following Day, for fear it should turn Sower: My Enquirer's moving Hand having
reached Ten, at which number Harry's Allarm stood, it immediately rung a Peal
in Division about Places, for half an Hour together, That he that wrote the
present State of England in the Year, 1694, was a Block-head compared to him;
for he has not mentioned a quarter of the Places and Imploys, that Harry named
to my Enquirer, and gave him the choice of any of them: He that put an
Advertisement for the Sale of Horses, cannot in a Months time name so many
Horses to be sold, as he pretended to know Imploys: My Enquirer, amongst the
many Texts this Parson Quoted, pitched upon Two or Three which served to his
liking; and when Mr. Harry had done talking, he told him, such or such would
suit his Education, and agreed with his Humor. Oh, says Harry, those are not
as yet Vacant, but they will be perhaps before the Parliament rises; for they
are resolved to suffer very few Members of the House to be in Imploys, wherein
any Branch of the Revenue is to be managed; and since it is certain some will
part with their Places rather than to be turned out of the House, your study
must be, how to get into one of those they Abdicate; to effect which, you must
try to engrati^te your self with a S -- of S --, with Three of the L -- of the
T -- at least: And the thoughtful Gentleman, who, by much Labor of his Brain,
hammers out things in a great Perfection, to be known and well recommended to
the P -- C --; for some Imploys must be granted in C --: Now, the fittest Man
upon Earth to be your Solicitor there, is W. E. who, though he is Foundered in
his Feet, has a natural Assurance to tell a Story plausibly to any Nobleman,
though it is seldom mind^d; he is Old-Dog with the Ladies and Boys, and their
constant Solicitor: Besides, he may be, from his own Interest, very serviceable
to you; for I know, the other Day he helped a Footman to a Place, and took but
Half a Crown for his Labor.

'Twill also be requisite for you to learn Decimals and Gaug^ng, and make
Application to the C -- of E --; Or to the L -- of the A --. Or to the C -- of
the C -- But you must not neglect making Application to several particular
Persons, who always seem in an hurry, as if they had the whole concerns of the
Nation to manage: Amongst which, there is honest Tony, who seldom gives the C
-- of P --, and E --, much trouble to draw up a Report; A. R. is not duly
Elected. I must beg Pardon, when I say, it is hard that so understanding a
Gentleman; one that knows how to take all Advantages, should not be in the
House, no Man being sitter to caution against Deceits, than the -- He has been
serviceable to the Nation by the project of packing of Hay; by the manage of
which, Horses Eat less than usual, and their Beliies were taken up, without
Belly-cloaths, the smell did their Business, yet Tony had but 3l. a Load, for
what cost him 25s.

His Principles may be guessed by his Practice; and he has declared his
Sentiments, how People that would thrive, should manage themselves; and designs
(if he may be believed) to instill the same Principle^ into his Children; for
he told an honest Gentleman, that if he had a Son, he would advise him to
flatter and dissemble with all Mankind; never to speak Truth but when it was
for his Advantage: With this worthy Gent. 'twill be necessary to be acquainted,
if you have Money to purchase an Employ under the M -- of the H --; for every
one of them that were in his reach, he has either sold, or been a Broker in the
matter: You need make no Interest to him by Intercession of Friends; for he has
no respect to Persons, Principles, or Qualities; but like a late deceased
Knight, whose Wit (by mistake so called) lay in bold Examinations of Scripture
passages; buffonly rediculing what was beyond his shallow Capacity to
understand) has regard only to the Money, let it come from Williamit^,
Iacobite, or Devil: Besides him, there is another you should be acquainted with,
that is a blinking Fellow, a mere pretender to the Law, who could scarce Read
(allowing Breviations) at the Exchequer Bar: He, by his Pretensions, one would
think had the disposal of 40 considerable Places; indeed he has most of the
Gentry at his beck, though it is a shame to see how poor spirited some of them
are, to cringe and creep to him, whom most honest Men avoid; though there is a
broad mixture in this Man of Knave and Fool, yet he so manages by Tricks and
Lies a certain Person in whose Power it is to make you one extraordinary; that a
Trial ought to be made of his Interest: And sure, by some of these, with my
Assistance, (which you shall never want, a Man of your Birth, Education, and
Ingenuity) cannot miss of some Employ or other. Now, Sir, I Have told you what is
to be done, use your endeavor; and when you have fixed upon your particular,
come again to me, and I (as Mr. Houghton says) can help. My Enquirer, with his
Head full of this Council, takes leave, resolving to meditate on it, and put it
in Practice; but going down Stairs, he saw a written Paper which Harry's
Servant had dropped; and being curious, took it up and put it in his Pocket to
Read at Leisure; the first opportunity he had he opened the Paper, and found as
follows: Answers, Excuses, and Observations, to be got by heart, and used, as
occasion offers, by my Servant Robin.

If a Man (...) hard early in a Morning, with a Cane in his Hand, believe him a
Creditor, and the first tim^ answer him, that I am not well, and you dare not
Disturb me; to Countenance which, be sure two or three days in a Month, tie a
Rag upon the Knocker of the Door. The Second time, I was sent for about earnest
Business, to any busy Nobleman you first think of. Afterward say for me, as
you would have others say for you to whom you Owe Money; but be sure you ^be
not caught in a Lie, for People are too apt to believe that Courtiers Servants
Lie; though they speak Truth, if their Desi^es be'nt Complied with. If it be one
that wears a Sword, it is Ten to One but it is either some body I am in
Combination withal to Cheat another, or that he himself is to be Cheated, him
presently admit, for from such, Corn comes to the Mill. If it be one whose
Company I have shunned, ^^nd him to some Tavern or Coffee-house out of the Verge
of the Court, where to be sure I never go but on a Sunday.

Some part of the Paper had been torn off, but one may be certain, he had
learned the whole Lesson by the variety of Shams and Excuses he had constantly
ready. Bless me, how was my Inquirer Surpised at the Reading it! and began to
conceive that he was fallen into the Hands of a Tongue-Padding, Cheating
Courtier; but finding his Counsel in some measure ought to be followed, he was
resolved to make Applications as he was directed. In a short time by Friends or
Money, he was little or much Recommended to almost ^ll Fortune's Darlings, that
had the Disposal of any Employs; one or other of them he was almost continually
waiting on with the Recommendation of my Lord such an one, Sir such an one; or
honest Mr. such an one; and every one to whom he was Recommended, like true
Courtiers, spoke him fair: One promised the next thing that fell; another
promised to take Care of him; a Third, out of Kindness, would have him Qualify
himself, that upon any Opportunity he might jump in: A Fourth took Money in
part; and a ^ifth invited him to Dinner, which Gentleman it must be said of
him, did him more Kindness than all the rest; for after he had waitt^d half a
Year, he found their promises to be only Air; for when the first had power by a
Vacancy, to be sure he said, He was pre-ingaged. The Second's care was to avoid
him. The Third Gentleman would not give him Opportunity to Jump, continually
Selling Reversions. The Fourth did his Business but in part, for he could never
get all his Money again. Thus Shuffled off from one to another, by fair Words
and Promises, he spent a great deal of time, and all his Money to no purpose;
meeting with so many Disappointments, and really wanting Necessaries, and
reflecting on the Usage he had met withal, and dreading the Poverty he saw
approaching, he had fallen into Despair, but that he had still the Happiness to
carry in his Mind, the Thoughts of Futurity, from which he resolved as much as
possible to be Content; and to strengthen him in his Acquiessing, and
Resignation to a Supreme Will, he often went to Church; but one day going into
St. Martin's, tho early, the Surly Clark refused him admittance into a Pew,
which so mightily concerned him, that he went to his Lodging, and whilst the
Thought continued, he Wrote the following Verse*

To what Extremities am I dr^ven,
When Parish-Clarks bar my Converse with Heaven,
As much as in the surly Rascals lie;
Who by the Face, the Pocket do des^ry,
And Sine Pence, admittance they deny!
These under Graduate Peter's of the Church,
Would S^ll to Simon the Heavenly G^^,
If to their A^arice and Humor lest;
Perhap* the M^r did my Misfortunes know;
Afraid to Trust me, who^^^ ^uch did One.
Denied adm^ttance, ^^st (...), that I s^^^ld pray
Blessings, f^r w^^^h they th^^g^t P^n^ver P^y*
Having long Racked his Brain^, and Spent his Money and Time in Vain, his peery
Landlord by a Writ, secured him a safe place in the Marshalsea durante Vita,
unless a Compassionate Parliament release him by an Act of Grace.

Fed up with Hope by such, his Money's spent,
But has no greater Prospect, than is L^nt
To needy N^blemen, (...) it is return,
Who seldom Pay a Debt, but to the Vrn.
Place-Brokers to Enquirers still speak Fa^,
Blow up a Bubble Globe, which (...) to (...)
Like Lottery Proj^ctors ^raw a Scheme,
H^w Thousands may be got,
If, if they Draw the Lot,
But Hit, or Miss, there^s P^ofi^ s^^ll to them*
FINIS.

