O Raree-Show, O Pretty-Show: OR, THE CITY FEAST.
ON a Day of great Triumph, when Lord of the City,
Does Swear to be Honest and Just, as he is Witty;
And Rides through the Town, that the Rabble may Shout-him,
For the wonderful Merits he carries about-him;
B'ing an Honester Man I Will be bold for to say,
Than has sat in the Chair this many a day.
Like the rest of the Fools, from the Skirts of the Town,
I Trotted to Gaze at his Chain and his Gown.
With legs in a Kennel, quite up to the middle
In dirt, with a Stomach as sharp as a Needle,
I stood in the Cold, clinging fast to a Stump,
To see the Wisakers march by in their Pomp.
At last heard a Consort of Trumpets and Drums,
And the Mob crying out, Here he comes, here he comes.
I was carr'd by the Crowd, from the place that I stood-in,
And the Devil to do (...) was all of a sudden.
The first that appeard was a grear Tom-a-doodle,
With a Cap like a Bushel, to cover his Noddle,
And a Gown that hung dragling through every Puddle;
With a Sword and a Mace, and such Pagentry Pride,
And abundance of Formal old Fopry beside.
A Troop of grave Elders, O then there came by,
In their Blood-Coloured Robes, of a very deep die,
On Jennets the best that the Town could afford,
As Tame all as Lambs, and as Fine as my Lord,
With very rich Saddles, gay Bridles and Cruppers,
Would never have been made but for such City Troopers.
Like Snails over a Cabbage, they all crept along,
Admired by their Wives, and Huzza'd by the Throng.
The Companys followed, each Man in his Station,
Which every Fool knows is not worth Observation;
All clothed in Furrs, in an Ancient Decorum,
Like Bears they advanced, with their Bag-pipes before-'em;
With Streamers and Drums; and abundance of Fooling,
Not worth the Repeating, or yet Rediculing:
So I Will bid adieu to the Tun-belly'd Sinners,
And leave them to Trudg through the Dirt to their Dinners.
At last I considered 'twas very foul play,
That a Poet should Fast on a Festival Day;
I therefore resolved it should cost me a fall,
But that I would Drink my Lords Health at a Hall:
For why may not a Poet (thought I) be a Guest,
As welcome as Parson, or Fool at a Feast,
For the sport of a Tale or the sake of a Jest.
I mixed with the Music, and no one withstood-me,
And so Jostl'd forward as cleaver as could be.
I passed to a very fine Room, thro'a Porch
'Twas as a wide as a Barn, and as high a Church;
Where Cloths upon Shovel-board-Tables were Spread,
And all things in order for Dinner were laid;
The Napkins where folded on every Plate,
Into Castles and Boats, and the Devil knows what.
Their Flaggons and Bowls made a very fine show,
And Sweat-meates, like Cuckolds, stood all in a row.
They walked and they talked; after some Consultation
The Beadle stood up, and he made Proclamation,
That no one presume, of a Member, till after
He Is dined, to bring in his Wife or his Daughter.
Then in comes the Pasties, the best of all Food,
With Pig, Goose, and Capon, and all that was good.
Then Grace soon was said, without any delay,
And as Hungry as Hawks they sat down to their Prey.
The Music Struck up such a Bory advancing,
As the Polanders Pip'd, when their Cubs were a Dancing.
Then each tucked his Napkin up under his Chin,
That his Holy Day Band might be kept very clean;
And pined up his Sleeves to his Elbows, because
They should not hang down, and be greased in the Sauce.
Then all went to work, with such Rending and Tearing,
Like a Kennel of Hounds on a Quarter of Carri'n.
When done with the Flesh, then they Clawed of the Fish,
With one hand at Mouth, and the other in the Dish.
When their Stomachs were Cloi'd, what their Bellies denied,
Each clapped in his Pocket to give to his Bride;
With a Cheese-cake and Custard for my little Johnny,
And a handful of Sweetmeats for poor Daughter Nanny.
Then down came a Blade, with a Rattle in's Skull,
To tickle their Ears, when their Bellies were full;
After three or four Hems, to clear up his Voice,
At every Table he made them a Noise,
Of Twenty Four Fiddlers were all in a Row,
Though the Singer meant Cuckolds, I Would have them to know,
Then Londons a Gallant Town, and a fine City,
It Is Governed by Scarlet, the more is the Pity.
When Claret and Sack had trould freely about,
And each Man was Laden, within and without,
The Elders arising, all Staggered away,
And in Sleeping like Hogs, spent the rest of the day.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, School.


