A COMEDY, CALLED The Marriage Broaker: OR, THE PANDER.

Written by M. W. M. A.

AD ARDUA PER ASPERA TENDO
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the year 1662.

The Speakers.
Old Goodwit; Uncle to Crab, and his Guardian. Crab; a young Heir. Elisa;
Sister to Crab. Young Goodwit; a Traveller. Winifrid; Daughter to old Goodwit.
Friendly; a Complete Gentleman. Shift; his Name speaks him. Derrick; the
Marriage-Broaker. Dick; a Falconer. Grace; one that would fain be Honest. Tom
Dove; a Huntsman. Lydia; a Whore. Hog; a Pander. Cunnimonger; a Bawd. Budge; a
City Justice. Whittington; a Draper* Constable. Two Sergeants.
The Scaene, London.

The Marriage-Broaker.
Actus primus.
Scaena prima.
Enter Crab the young Heir, Goodwit, and Dick the Fa^coner. Goodw. COme Mr.
Crab, tell me how you do like
The glory of the City, and the States
Adorn her. Say, is she belied by Fame,
Above the truth of wonder and delight.

Cr^b. ^a^ch it is a brave place; what do thou say Dick?


Dick* You ko^w the rich complexion of my no^e
Could n^^e abuse the sent of Country air;
It does (...) Reason, and inspire
Br^^^^^ (...) ear^^^ spirits: but tell us now,
Where (...) gentle girls, those coming (...)

(...) (...) of my self; in faith I Will see
Then (...) Sir, you are yet to learn
(...) on earth;
(...) moyet unknown
To those who want the skill to show where they
Do rise and set, and where appear at noon;
Which wander, which are fixed the wandering star
Keeps not one sign ever, but what is now
In Virgo, or the sign of maidenhead,
May before long be seen in Gemini.

Dick Faith I do think the maidenhead a sign
To all ^all'd She Is, before that they have dwelt
Three years in the tender ^eenes; a sign I mean*
Barely without the thing

Y^Go. How old I pray
Was your dear mother then, when you were got;
If she called you her heir.

Di k. Sir, I am called
Her heir apparent, though I Am not my fathers:
He was a Knight they say, my mother was
A circumstance of my good Ladies chamber,
Who at fifteen, for better and for worse,
Was to the Falc'ner put for to be manned;
When his good Master did it to his hand.
'Twas said I came^* months before my time,
Yet had I Dad's n'own nose, n'owo eyes, and forehead too;
Though 'twas too narrow for his fair a ^iring.
But I am counted of the Falc'ner's ^i^y,
Who trained me up in his own learned skill.

Y. Goodw. That is to lure and ly.


Crab What Is this toth' Wenches?


Y. Goodw. Sir, I was showing they were wandering statrea.
Always in motion; but their Caterer
Will soon direct me, whom I Am sure to find
At an old countreyman's of his, who sells
Pierce aguardienty and tobac^o.

Dick. Pray sir what is he you call their Caterer?


Goodw. He Is one who makes provision for the belly^
Squire of the Placket, he who in elder times
Was free of this deep secret mystery.
By the black Character on's Pagan face;
And his unchristned sword was easily known.
But now --

Crab. No more Sir, of these dreadful sights,
Their shadows will affright me in my dreams.

Goodw. For your sweet comfort Sir, the thin I mean
Is a tame beast, yelep'd Captain H g;
One that is so gentle, you may boldly stroke him
The courteous kick to him's a friendly greeting
The whip a pleasing titillation;
The bastin^do is his dear delight.
The grand disgust adort, and the aggravio,
He suffers with a Captain's grand couragio.

Crab. In Faith I love this Captain horribly;
I long to greer him with my courteous heel,
To bore his nose, and thankfully require
His noble kindness with his dear delight.
O bravely rythm'd in faith! now do I think
How the Gallants will hugg me all, and call me
The noble spark of Sussex: in the country
The people there will point at me, and say.
That Is he that beat the Captain Sirrah, you
Remember to report my brave archievements.

Dick O, fear not Sir; I warrant you I Will sing
Your praises most Poetically; swear
You worsted Captain Peek at 15. weapons.

Goodw. What will thou say thy Master fought a prize?


Dick. I mean that to the field he challenged him
At twenty weapons, came off clear at all,
Without a scratch or sear; then I will show,
How drinking with another Captain, you
Did tweak him by th'nose about the room,
And make him hold your most victorious stirrup

Goodw. What must his horse then keep him company?


Dick. Sir, I do now omit, how searehing then
His Captainship, faces about, he did
Eject him with disgrace into the street;
Where 'twas my luck to hold my Master's steed,
That the Soldado might perform my task.

Crab. Gramercy Dick in faith; this shall be worth
A copie-hold to thee, yfa^th la

Dick. Thanks, good Sir, but will the Captain Caterer
Take the battoon so kindly; I never thought
Patience a Soldier's virtue until now.
Running away and patientnesse did come
I do believe, in fashion both together.

Goodw. Troth Falconer thou have flown the truth toth' mark.
But this procurer is indeed no Captain,
Only he served one, robbed of his outside;
And where he was not known, usurpt't the name.

Crab. Though I came hither for to see the Wenches,
Yet I will bea^ this Captain first; you shall
Entreat me hold my hands, and beg my pardon;
Make us both friends in ^ack, and ever after
We Will love like children and be bed-fellows.

Dick. This is his life at home, kissing his m^ids,
Bearing his men, which must not strike again.
Come shows some Girls, for I do know my Master
Fain would give his cod piece-poin^s to be at her.

Good Come follow me I warrant you I Will show
You game enough but do not you turn tail

Crab. How (...) turn tail? ^hy wherefore (...) me we h^^^^;
But let us alone, I warrant you I Will towze
And mowze them too.

Goodw. So so then, come away.


Exeunt. Act 1. Scaen. 2.
Enter Derrick and Shift. Der. Make me beholding to you, Sir I pray,
To let me know who did direct you to me:

Shift. Let my thanks wait upon your pardon, Sir;
He Is one that is in your debt, and happily
Would not be known to send a second debtor.

Der. Faith if you come to borrow, you mistake;
And I am richer then I thought my self,
If any man be in my debt.

Shift I mean, no debt of money, but of happiness,
And rich content in the unvalued blessing
Of a sweet, loving, beauteous, virtuous wife.

Der. It Is possible, though I think our trade
Is laden more with curses then with prayers.

Shift Of what occupation then do you
Style your self free.

Der. Faith of the dealing trade,
We are called Merchants of the Maidenhead:
Though often I confess we do put off
Frail ware instead of whole, that is naught to us:
Cavea^ empror; we do promise only,
For the outward, do you mark me, for the
Outward alone; as if some youthful Gallant,
(Suppose your self) should now desire my grave
Experience to direct him to a W fe
That Is fair and rich^ and young, I am resolved
It I present him w^^^ these properties;
I do profess no ^kill in medicine Sir;
And ^is above my skill to know who at
Fifteen do make maid's water, and who not;
Who have a worm breeding in the tongue, who eat
Musk comfits when they kiss whom secret Ills
Molest, which none but mother midnight knows.

Shift. Leave these to my discovery, if she
Be young and fair, and rich, (but chiefly rich,)
That drug shall cure her other Ills beyond
The skill of charming Grandam Water-witch.

Der. He who profe^^ himself so much in debt
To my direction, might have made you know
The clime where my Intelligence does reign
Which Kents-^ike bounds upon the East, the West
Is by the river Arun limited;
The North by an imaginary line,
The South is by the Sea confined; within
This round what beauties shine, my skill can show
Their number and degrees, now I do breathe
Within a fo^rain air.

Shift. He gave me then
To know as much, nor is it my desire
To have my bliss thrown in n^y arms: I Will travail
For it meet it, or pursue it flying;
Only lend me your aid.

Der. Sir, what I^lend
I nere exact again, only I take
My Interest beforehand; but yet first
Besides your goodly person which I Will make
Your Mistress dote upon before she sees,
Let me know how I shall report you else,
Your name wealth, country, birth and parentage,
What Joyn^ure?

Shift. I have that will please a woman;
Send me to one has power to dispose
Of her own ourwards, as you use to call um;
I have my self that shall deserve her, and
An active brain to boot^ shall win her too.

Der. Pray give me leave to tell your fortune, Sir.


Shift. Read me a good one then.


Der. Good as the stars
Will yield; in whose decrees you are inrol'd,
An English younger brother, whose Estate
Consists in his annuity and wit:
The stars do ^ell me your annuity
Is sold, and that your wits are roming after.

Shift. After what romes my wit?


Der. After your tongue.
Which romes before your wit; would any man
Whose words were ushered in with knowledge say,
He Would win a wife by his good parts alone?

Shift. Rich men like crafty knaves do need no bro^kers;
Had I but land and gold, I Would never seek
To your grave wisdom for direction:
But to be short, enrich me with a wife,
And claim an equal share in all my fortunes.

Der. I think that face would tempt a lusty widow


Shift He that does woo a widow hunts the wind,
They are too often gone over to be caught
By younger Brothers, they have learnt a trick
To cheat the elder now; besides I would
Not go a beaten road

Der. Last night I heard
News from my Diocese, that the great Heir
Of Sir John Crab lately deceased, is straid
Wi^h one who calls himself a traveller,
In The absence of a careful uncle, whom,
His brother left a Guardian to his Child.

Shift. The traveller has married her by this
I warrant you

Der What married the Heir male


Shift. What Is the Heir male to me?


Der We show you Sir.
He has a sister.

Shift. I let us hear of her.


Der. Her Father living feared that she did love
A Gentleman, whose Father's land he bought;
He being sick, with tears besought his brother
He would not this slip of fruitless race
Ingrafted in his stock, and by his prayers
Does with a promise of his faithful care;
This uncle (says my news) intends a quest
Of his lost Ward, arrived as he does hear
Out of the country in this little world
Of London

Shift. I do apprehend the rest;
That as the traveller enric'd away
The Nephew, his Guardian being absent;
So I should steal away the Niece, while he
Seeks for the Nephew.

Der* Still your tongue prevents
Your wit. His trusty Huntsman he has sent before
To purchase fair and specious lodgings, meaning
To show his Niece the City Shift. Heard you not
My nose crack Sir, I feel it out of joint
Already: for if she do see the City,
Musk-millions of rich gallants will besiege
Her Fort, and my cake's dowe.

Der. Rye dowe to make
Your Image on, to be the Ident's Idol.
What does your active brain, your worthy self
Despair? fear not, she shall not dwell so long
I'th^town, nor her acquaintance be so cheap
To every cringer, but believe me I
Am poor in leisure now, see me again
Twixt twelve and one, till then adieu,
'Farewel.


Exit Derick Shift. This fellow though he be no Doctor, yet
(...) a Fee, the silver key, if my
(...) friend belyes him not,
(...) only his intelligence but makes him
^^ar nothing by the year to thousands well
^^pe will please him, so, he gets no hire
(...) he deserve it; the old fox may cheat,
(...) it is a science in Ordinaries preached.
^^^al to lending to be over-reacht.

Exit. Act I. Scaen 3.
Enter young Friendly and Phyllis. Friend Sister we are not poor, my bare
annuity
^^^l keep's alive, and had we less, content
^ll make us rich, if our confined desires
^^sh only to be what we are, they want
(...) wealth, who disregard it, those who ask
(...) daily alms do show that we are rich,
(...) we could think so, and compare our state
^^^h theirs, who have to give, cannot be poor.

Phil. Not poor? what is a bare hundred pound a year?
^ot half the tithe of what my father sold.

Friend. He who desires no more then what is enough,
^^rrows from smaller, and from greater sums
^^th equal joy; he who does drink no more
^^en will extinguish thirst, is pleased as well
^^th a small spring as with a swelling stream.
^^d were we stripped of all, of all forlorn;
^^re's none can be so poor as he was born.

Phil. Our want with this Philosophy does well
^gree; but yet I hope your constancy
^^^l yield it a far less uneasy task
(...) commend poverty, then suffer (...)

Friend Not so, for Wit is heaven's gift to those
Are shapt of purer clay; but patience
Each noble mind bestows upon it self.

Phil Brother, I must confess my misery
The less, by your example of a j^st
And worthy scorn of F^^une's injuries.
But the rich blessing of Elisa's love
Does swe^ten your calamitie^; while I
Wanting inviting Dowry, may receive
Unwe come pra^ses for my Chastity:
A virtue now clean worn out of fashion,
Though few commend their abstinence from meat,
Who fall because they have not what to eat.

Friend. The hopes of my Elisa did expire,
When for a legacy her dying rather
Doomed my evilement from her blessed sight:
But he can never divorce our souls, last night
Her heavenly shape in a most lively dream
Shadowed my fancy; I then saw, or thought
I saw, but sure I s^w the Queen of Love
Give her a milky Dove, fellow to that
She sold to her Anacreon for a hymn,
From which she borrowed instantly a quill,
With which she writ such lines of love, the words
Distilling loy, as if they stowed from
A pen that is snatched from Cupid's wing; she folds,
And seals the ^etter with a bleeding heart.
The witness of the truth She writ, and then
First superscribing it. To her best friend
Friendly; she gav't her winged messenger
To bear, when swelling joy laboring for room,
Dissolved my sleep, and (as the Poet sings)
I wak't, and so all this was but a dream.

Phil. Thus the Idea of the Saint which loves
^id honors you, presents it self both day
and night to banish careful thoughts: but I --

Friend. Complain not sister that you are forsaken;
You told me fortune blessed you with the sight,
Where you last summe^d, of ^he wealthy Heir
Who lords it ^ow in my inheritance.
Who swort by's Grandsire's and his Grandam's Saint,
He loved you dearly

Phil. He did swear indeed,
But so rustically.

Friend I never heard
Of a Court fashion yet in Swear^^g.
And besides the Proclamation forbids it:
Unless he will bestow his Charity on the poor a new way.
But you must give me leave to tell you sister,
Your carriage toward him, ill became your fortune,
That when the land your father sold was thrown
Into your lap, so proudly you refuse it;
Nor was Elisa's brother worthy scorn.

Phil. What would you have me marry with a fool?


Friend. Great ladies now keep things with baubles sister,
And you may teach him wit and manners too;
And win a fame for bringing up a husband.

Phil. It Is sin against a woman's modesty,
To appear yiedling at the first assault:
But if young Crab do woo again, although
Of an Ill name, he shall not want a glance.

Enter Dove. Dove. My old young Master, and my sweet young Mistress.
Give me your golls -- these are the sweetest kisses
I had since I did see you last.

Friend. Tom Dove welcome to th'town.


Phil. This may be Venus Dove,
And then the dream is out.

Dove. You do not dream,
I am indeed Tom Dove, your father's Huntsman;
Who with his land for an appurtenance
Bequea^h'd me to the next new Master, I
Am now of counsel to the fair Elisa,
Who in his letter sends you news and comfort.

Friend. O my presaging thoughts, do I now w^ke?
Or did I th^n but dream? the seal agrees

Kisses the Seal. On which I thus and thus do taste, and seal
My loy, e're I can mask my happiness.
Dove O Mistress, my young Master sings your praises
Most melodiously, he holds the fish,
Your beauty did make water in his mouth.

Phyl Fie Thomas, don't belly you Mistress manners.


Dove. I mean that you did make his mouth to wa^er.
And when he can clare home, he did nothing
But sing and cap^r and caper and sing
I Will give away my lam^es, and sell away my dammes
To ^uppe with an Ewe so bonny.

Phyl. Well, let him keep his sheep's head to himself,
And I will keep my maiden head. But what
Are the effectual Ingredients
Of your amazing Letter, which do work
So strangely with my brother.

Dove. There is that,
Will moisten his mouth too, something to purge
His melancholy, and make the heart dance.

Friend. Elisa and her uncle coming up
So suddenly!

Dove. I do believe they are
Arrived by this, two days are since expired
He received news, his lodgings were provided;
Which time my idle care has burnt away
In buying knacks and toys for your sweet Mistress
And her appendix, though my first charge was
To visit you, but I do hope. --

Friend. Your pardon
Timely prevents your suit, but yet the loss
Of her wise brother does amaze me, how
Think you to hunt him out? my advice is
To wind thy Horn about the town, he knows
The summons.

Dove. Therefore he'l^ not appear. Besides,
The Citizens may take it to themselves;
And I may pull the heard about my ears.

Phyl. Indeed I think him creeping in the horn
Already; if he be not soon reclaimed,
The Gallant has a most becoming face
To grace the lesser end.

Friend. Come leave your flouting.
Tom, when your news has received thanks within.
Then take your leave to wait your Master's coming.

Exeunt. Act. I. Scaen. 4.
Enter Old Goodwit, Elisa, and Winifred. Old Goodw. Niece, your are welcome to
the Theater
Of fond delights, the school of vanity;
Where various sights seduce the gazer's eye:
There to be good where nothing tempts to ill,
Is a faint virtue of the weakest minds,
This is a place will try your Constancy;
Where if it stand unshaken being assailed,
As it stood firm where there was naught to shake it;
Though you do not increase your store of virtue.
Yet you shall purchase glory in reserving
Those graces which were loved, admired at home.

Elisa. Sir, paying first the thanks which my duty owes
Your loving care, my promise shall secure
Your fear, who am the Mistress of a heart
Shall stand unshaken as a rock, against
The fury of the waves, amidst that Sea
Of which (they say) Venus her self was born.

Old Goodw. I will not sin against the soul of goodness,
In doubting yours. Daughter you have a fair
Example, let your imitation
Wait on her virtues.

Win. Sir, I took her for
My guide, since I first followed her, and am
A servant to her worth, and your commands.

Old Goodw. You shall do well, my man has taken fair
And spacious lodgings for us. I do wonder
They could not hold him to expect our coming.
If he fly out, and my came Dove prove wild,
I Will clip his wings; my niece and daughter, I
Must provide questers to retrive the stray.
If in my absence Dove return, let him
Know who is displeased, and why.

Elisa. Uncle he shall.


Old Goodw. And hear you, Win? forget not you your charge.


Exit. Win. My care is ever servant to your will.


Elisa. Come Cousin, let me hear this secret charge.


Win. You do not long I hope.


Elisa. Not for ripe cherries
In winter, or for oysters in the dog days:
But I must taste this secret.

Win. I believe
The relish will displease, but now I think on it.
Last night I had the sweetest dream, me thought --

Elisa. I will not give a farthing for your thought;
What task was that my uncle charged you with?

Win Then I Will disclose what I did mean to keep
Close as my maidenhead; a sweet young gallant
Catching my work, did feel his wantonness
Revenged with my sharp needle, on which chance
He writ such piteous verses in the blood
Which my Steeletto drew; t'wod grieve your heart
To hear his sad laments, he finely swore
My little Instrument was Cupid's dart.
And though the god were blind, his darts could see,
Therefore he said my needle had an eye:
Then he protested the blood wherewith he writ
Came from his heart, which he did call the spring
Of Love and Sorrow.

Elisa. Cousin you are unkind,
To cheat me with delays; your father did
Appoint me your example: when I pray
Did you find me a niggard of my thoughts?
Are you not conscious of all my secrets,
As if you dwelt within me; I love not
This niceness, but if needs we must be strangers.

Win. Pray heaven I have not gotten you with child.
I Am sure you have no other bedfellow.

Elis. Yes Win, I have; whom might I once embrace*
A man of rich desert.

Win. Benedicite! a man lie with us, and I feel him not?

Elis. You often have known me name my servant Friendly,
It Is he I mean, his virtues dwell with me:
And the blessed shape enshrines them to my thoughts
Is ever present; you have seen his tokens,
Heard our loves first beginning, but now you --

Win. No more, if you will be ignorant of nothing,
Prepare your ears to hear unwelcome news;
My charge is to preserve you from the sight
Of him you daily see, who nightly lies
With you, your Filendly; whom my father hears
To be in town, and sears you will find a way
To let him know of yours; my office is
To intercept his visit.

Elis. Will you then
Prove traitor unto love? Cousin beware,
His godhead will revenge your treachery;
But yet you know him not: if he should act
Our tailor's man, or bring us women's knack^
To sell, how would your skill discover him?

Win. My father told me of a mole he had
By his right eye, that sign will betray him.

Elis. That mole was given by the god of love;
Who lighting once a taper at his eye,
The bashful Lad putting it by, received
That ornament which Cupid cauteriz'd;
Who unto those who wear his livery
Will be propitious in their worthy Loves*

Win. May he have fortune equal to his wish;
And if you can devise a way to see him,
And I not forfeit my obedience,
My aid shall not be wanting.

Elis. Now I am
Restored* I will go study, he shall act
Some new adventure to advance our hope
Shall shame times past, instruct the time to come.
Fxcunt.
Act. II.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Derrick. Der. I do suspect that I do wait at home
For some poor needy Gallant, whose estate
Consists in his good clothes, a handsome face,
And a clean leg to boot; I did forget
To ask his name, but I do swear it is
Unworthy of my knowledge; if he pass
His hour, he shall find my word is cancelled.

Enter Shift. Shift. I Have justly kept my time Sir.


Der. Then time cannot
Say you have kept her ill.

Shift. And time keeps me as well.
For I do live extempore.

Der. I have been looking over my list, to fit
Your turn; which does contain of maids fourscore,
Between 15. and five and twenty, three
From thence to 30. after which time, they
Are counted maids of the Religion.

Shift. Pray Sir let us see this map of Maidenheads.


Der. For my own memory I Will produce it;
I did describe my contemplations
For my own use, and not for others study.
puts on his spectach^ I must put on my seeing instruments,
For to survey this land of Amazons.

Shift. I fear you do see double with those eyes,
And may mistake 2. thousand pound for one.
Pray look for me the most alluring outward.

Der. I shall, the first Region comprehends
The maiden beauty, called Virginia:
And this is thought to be a fertile land,
New only wanting the good husband's tillage.

Sh ft. That should not want, were I it is Governor.


Der. To each my sure experience has affixt
Their portion, feature, age, their birth and breeding.
This other side I have designed for Widows,
Called by some the Island of Japan,
A rich and open country; though some think
It Is not the sweetest air; this is divided.
Amongst Widows of the first, second and third head,
The portion of which last is counted barren.

Sh ft But there are Widows of more heads then three.


Der. True, but my page does fill with none but those
Which are in danger, Sir, of Matrimony.
Those of the fourth head solace may themselves
In what is past, and with their toothless gumms
Chew on the pleasures of their youth, but few
Can grace 5. fingers with five wedding-rings.
And the example of the wife of Bath
Is in my reading singular.

Shift. I see
That your inquisitive experience
Has left a blank for more discoveries.

D^r. A wight did come to me for help,
As you do now, did find my other map, and writ
Terra incognita in the empty space.

Shift. What Is that I pray?


Der. That Is land undiscovered,
Which does invite us unto farther search.

Shift. But there are some unmarried, neither maids
Nor widows, are all such Utopians
In your Geographie?

Der. If you desire
One that is so qualified, I Will fit you too.

Shift. No Sir, I only did desire to know
Their place and order in your table.

Der. These
Are registered alone in my black book;
Of these m^ Diocese does yield but few,
And those transpla^^ ^^d to the city first,
Thence sent unto the place from whence they came.

Shift. Pray Sir instruct me fully in your table;
What mean those lines are drawn hither from thence?
Right and oblique, to and again, much like
The picture of a ship.

Der Where I am known,
They called my ship; for on the welcome Eve
Of Valentine, once every year, I draw
My Table new; then I expunge those names
Belong not to my office, and adopt new.
When unto those complain of want of wives,
They use to say that Derrick's ship's come home.

Shift. But for the lines.


Der. These I may rightly call
Lines of proportion, which do point you out
The equal matches in the ods of portion.

Shift. I understand you not.


Der. As for example,
This oblique line drawn from the letter I
Annexed unto a maid that is fair and young,
Whose whole estate is but an hundred pound;
And ending in the letter O prefixed
Unto a widow of the second head
That Is valued at a thousand, does demonstrate
These matches Geometrically even.

Shift. Trust me your Schemes most mathematically
Exact and curious: but I pray demonstrate
A true proportion in the difference
Of Dowry 'twixt the maids.

Der. This does appear
In these lines which are perpendicular;
As thus, the line which falls from the same I,
Upon the letter T, annexed unto
A maid that wants an ey^^ and Elder by
Ten years, though she exceed 9^ hundred pound,
Does show the Matches most exactly equal.

Sh. Give me old one eyed I with her full weight,
Then young I with two eyes, so much too light;
Let Us hear a reason of your confident
Assertion.

Der. Suppose their age were equal,
Y five years younger, and I five years elder;
Divide nine hundred into equal parts,
Fifty, besides four hundred in a part.
T is the worse two hundred for the want
Of her one eye, add hereunto five years
You did substract, and she is worth two hundred
And fifty more, there you have half the sum;
From I deduce five years, and count her eye
Into the match, and the whole summ's abated.

Shift. Somewhat obscure, but yet I apprehend.
Five years Increase can make a wife the cheaper
By one in five, then an eye wanting can.

Der. Most righteous truth, O age, age, age in women;
It Is their chief fear, because the scorn of men.

Shift. And which in all your List wish you me to


Der. Faith here is one, if you could like her nose;
She Is rich enough.

Shift. What ailes her nose?

Der. There grows
A mole upon it so like a bunch of grapes.
That if you love um you can scarce forbear
The tasting, when her mother was with child
With her, longed for grapes, at the first minute
Some smell disliking her; she stopped her nose;
And this they says the cause: but it is time I
Put up my pipes^ This Gentleman is needy.

Shift. Good Sir, before you ease, let us see the place
Of her you said was coming to the City.

Der. She with her uncle, as I hear's arrived;
She Is my Inprimi^, nineteen years her age,
Her Dowry full 500. pounds a year.
Besides her plate and jewels.

Shift. Good Sir inform me,
Where Is her lodging;

Der. In my pocket now.
Make me beholding to you for your name,
Before we part.

Shift. My name does call me Shift.


Der. It truly calls you then, a cleanly Gentleman,
I shall report you so. Farewell.

Shift. Nay Sir,
We Will greet in Sack before we part, I ^we
A greater debt to your discourse^ that wine
Unlocks his breast, but shall my wits refine.

Ex. Act. II. Scaen. 2.
Enter Goodwit, Hog, Crab, Falconer. Goodw. Captain, how fare the Ladies of the
Lake?
Your Mistresses by the Thames side, those Sirens,
Whose beauty and enchanting voice invite
The heedlesse passenger, do they reside
At their old shade? or have they changed their shore?

Hog. To shame the devil, their dilapidation
Has made them stand in need of reparation:
They are now in reedifying Sir.

Goodw. What new ware have you then come in, you dare
Command to an old friend or a new: will give
The highest price.

Hog. Sir I have fresh and new,
Was never yet broke up to see the Sun,
My good old Mistress Niece, one newly weaned
From milking, and who has not yet forgot
To rise betimes in the morning, she is now
Learning to swear and talk bawdy, poor fool;
I never saw a worse proficient:
But she is dear, she must not yet fall down
Unto the hackney price.

Goodw. Let thy old Mistress
Know, I have seen the Indies since I saw her,
And brought home gold untried, survey that Gallant,
He is a man of gold.

Hog. Of gold untried, You mean.


Falcon. The Captain does abuse you Sir,
You hear him say, your metal is untried:
Let his ears feel the valor he suspects.

Crab. His looks are too Captainical for me,
They kill at least a mile before he is seen;
Thou know that I am merciful, for once
I Will pardon him, tell him my clemency.

Fale. Yes, with a witness; Captain, or Captain not,
Know that my Master's of approved might;
He sl^w the Sussex dragon in the field.

Good. Put in, without an Allegory too.


Fale. I know not what your Allegories mean,
But I am sure he slew him; yet I see
Him couch his conquering lance against the beast,
Which now with many doublings does advance
His speckled belly against the hardy Knight;
I Will leave the rest unto a Poet's quill.

Hog. A Poet's fiction merits no belief.


Fall. This is a story, and you must believed;
The skin of the foul fiend is to be seen
In his great hall, would make the blood recoil
Out of your meazeled face, think you I lie?

Crab. O do not anger him; indeed it is true,
I dare not in the dark pass through my hall,
For fear of seeing it.

Good. The Captain shall,
Believe the wonder, and report it too.

Fale. It Is his best way; this is his eleventh labor,
And this wild boar shall be the twelfth, if he
Injure his valor with the least suspicion.

Hog. I Will not believe upon compulsion neither;
But for the Senior Don Francisco's sake,
I will embrace his worth.

Crab. O by no means,
My worth loves no embracing, I shall never
Abide that look, Dick.

Fale. Then't shall not offend you,
Hogs face about.

Hog. Dog's face come out* I will
Not turn my back for thee not He^cules.

Good. Nay then I see we must arrest his arms,
Captains should teach their soldiers to obey
By their example.

Crab. Good Senior hold him fast,
Awake my sleeping courage, now I come,
My courteous valor greets the Captain's bum.
He kicks him.
Good. I fear you will beat a hole into his drum.


Falc. It Is good to remove the cold theums from's stomach;
But I believe the physic does not work;
He spits for it, give him the other dram.

Hog. My stomack's not so cold, but this foul wrong
Has soon inflamed it; shall the noble race
Of Boca di la porca be disgraced,
And suffer with an asses patience?

Falc. Divorce your hand* good Captain, from your hilt,
Or with his breath he will blow you into Atoms.

Hog. I care not for his strongest blasts, he will find
The Hog foreseeing can prevent the wind.

Crab. For once I Will buy your patience with a Fee,
Nay keep your distance, for this price you shall
Report that I subdued your stubbornness
To my subjection, and did make you yield
Your slavish neck to my insulting heel.

Hog. I will proclaim your bounty, equal to
Your valor Sir, and both superlative.
This shall buy sacrifice for good S. Crispin,
St. Martin's play-fellow, this day is his;
The night to Crispianus is designed.

Crab. Is this day Crispin's* and I not know it?
Frolic my hearts, this day is my birth day;
I do remember't very well, between
The hours of twelve and one in the afternoon,
That Is about this time, I Am about one and twenty:
Here Is think for to buy sacrifice, we will make
A merry night for Crispianus sake.

Good. You now like a new Officer should show
Your power, this one and twenty'th Crispin should.
Heighten your thoughts, and infuse new designs,
To make your servants and your tenants know
They now are subject to a new Lord and Master.

Crab. And well remembered: Dick, you said you spied
My uncle here in town, no matter what
His business is, but you shall take my horse and
Ride to my Farm in the wild, command my Baily
To sell a hundred weathers, but be sure
You bring the money instantly.

Falc. Before that he has fold ena, he will never do it.
Besides, he fears your uncle.

Crab. I will send
My uncle and him both packing, if they
Displease me, here is my Father's seal, go write
And I Will subscribe, make haste, the moon does shine;
I do not mean to sleep 'till thy return.

F^l. Let not my slowness make you loose your sleep^^
But if I fall, blame sun, or the knave baily.

F^^^. Gord. When you are ready you know where to find us.


Crab Captain, you shall not see the gentle croft
This night; I Will be your Saint, and bun^^h Crispin
And Crispinnus from the Calender.

Hog. Sir by your leave, a Crab must first be boiled.
Before he can be written in red letters.

Good. He Is written in red letters there already.
St. So^ ^n Cancer is his holiday.

Crab. Well, leave your scossing; when we have dispatched
This Embasie, we will burn away the day.
And night to boot, in wenching, drink, and play.

Goodw. The thought of one and twenty has transhap't him;
This humor does become you, let it not cool;
Who Is chaste and sober now, is thought a sool.

Ex^unt. Elisa. How? you a lawyer, that is very strange.


Dove. Truer then strange, ^'me sure ^^^ve spent my Fee,
Before that I have made my motion,

Elisa. What motion mean you?

Dove. That Is a strange thing,
You must be Judge too.

Elis. That is nothing strange,
It Is long ago since I knew how to judge
'Twixt one that weighs his word and he which speaks*
What others not himself does understand.

Dove. My meaning's that my motion's unto you.


Elis. It Is very likely then that you shall speed.

Dove Nay but I shall not, and besides I will not.


El. You are an honest Lawyer to your Client.


D^ve. Honest as any Lawyer of them all.


Else. But what is the motion?


Dove. It Is for a sufer.


Elis And what is his sure?


D^ve. Your humble Orator
De^^es a he^^^ng in the Chancery of Cupid.

Bles. He Is a fool, for love does keep
No court of conscience, but for your sake
His su^e shall be no sooner heard then ended;
But now in earnest say who is this suter?

Dove It Is not an hour since the old Placket-broaker
Our neighbor Derrick sends for me to a tavern.
Commends the worth of a young Callant to me:
Who worthily bestowed the pains to lay
Him fast asleep; this Gallant is my Client;
If Detrick lies not, he can easily spend
Two hundred pound a month.

Elis. It Is no great skill.
To spend a thousand. e're since I was 13.
This knave has talked of sending suitors to me,
But when is this day of hearing?

Dove. Instantly,
Soon as his Barber can wash in soap,
And wring him, sirk up his forehead, Hight him
And dight him, point his beard, excite his wit;
Have at you then in faith.

Elis. I am prepared;
O ^he mysterious arts, and ways of love?
While others with unmanly care do plume
Their starched looks, to bait the heediess eye;
My Friendly to a^chieve his hopes, must take.
A-shape that is loathed and fearful in their eyes,
Who know not what is concealed in the disguise.

Dov How Mistres^l these are miseries indeed.


Biis. Thomas, you know Venus has signed my love
With her own seal, to know him if he stray.

Dove. His mole you mean.


Elis. You guess aright, my uncle
Discovered to my cousin Win this mark,
Which must exelude him from my sight, or she
Forfeits a father's blessing; therefore he
Shall serve me in a Blackamoor's disguise.

Dove. I apprehend the rest, that be my care;
This is my Client knocks, I will retire.
knocks within.
El. Be within hearing you may take him.
If that the siege be hot, or last too long.

Enter Shift. Dove. Sir you are welcome, Venus prosper you.


Shift. Lady, I have brought a servant to you, sent
By one whose wishes gladly wait on yours.

Elis. Sir, let me beg your pains, to carry back
His gift with thanks, which do attend his care.

Shift. Sweet do not slain your beauty with a sin.
To scorn the offered presence of a friend.

Elis. If you do think me haughty or ingrate,
I Will not unlade you Sir of your opinion;
You have free leave to carry hence that burden.

Shift. I would not, fair one, carry hence your scorn,
Which does oppress me with a heavy load;
Rather let it afflict me here, the slave
Your friend did send will sadly bear your yoke,
Though I dare say he may deserve your favor.

Elise. Pray Sir let us hear his worthy properties,
Dances he on the rope, or tumbles, wears
He a fool's coat to make his mistress merry?

Shift. All these, it is his desire to be a fool;
That Is to be fortunate: and now he is like
One dancing on the ropes, ready to fall;
And only ballast with the pole of Hope;
But if you will see him tumble, you shall find
Him active in his vaulting, and he will run
Through a small hoop with great agility.

Elis. I may take money to show him Sir,
Will pay his hire, and keep his Mistress too.

Shift. He Will keep her like a Queen; the envious Sun
Shall not with Rays (which yield to here is) impair
Her guarded beauties; the earth, air and sea
Shall pay their tribute to her taste, her bed
Shall be as soft as air, as Phoenix nest
Perfumed; and as the sun breaks from the East,
So shall she rise, and where she shines, the day
Shall be more bright by her peculiar ray.

Elis. He must have richer qualities can do
These fea^s, can he not sing and fiddle too?

Shift. He Will sing his Mistress worth, and he will play
Such music, she will laugh incontinent,
If she will vouchsafe to be his instrument:
But the best quality my truth can boast,
Is my service, love, and loyalty.

Elis. Why do you name your self? are you that servant?
Pray speak the name of my good friend that sent you.

Shift. I am that he, that sent and brought my self.
Know dearest Lady, it is the property,
And the reward of worth, that 'twill not be
Concealed* your fame invited me to see,
To love and honor you, and to present
My person and my fortunes for a gift.

Elis. They need no fortunes who are so l^dow'd:
Nature and art have so enriched you,
That you should injure them, to throw you merits
On any that is unable to deserve,
Or to require them; and let me beg of you
To add this more unto your rich deserts,
My pardon of their too unequal welcome.

Shift. She Is taken, taken by the art of man;
My pretty sweetness, taste my elemency
In this absolving kiss; this seals thy pardon;
Musk, civet, ne^t^r, marrow of them all,
And all that is sweet do in her kisses meet,
These kisses are dry sweet-moats, pretty mouse,
They Will not extinguish thirst, nor cool the heat
Of panting love, let us in private feast
Our mutual desires with liquid cates.
And juicy gawdles of unvalued rates.

Elis. This fellow sure is ti^vall'd from himself;
Friend if you are at home, I Would speak with you.
Think not a tavisht le^sse a pattern of love;
It is a favor which I Will not deny
To the bare outside of a Gentleman,
Which you do seem to wear; but know, ^ude sit,
That your ungentleness denies your self
That cur^e^ie is owing to your shape.
For my sake practice manners, or else choose
A Mistress who will suffer your abuse.

Enter Dove. Dove Did you call; Eli I ^^^ant so; wait me in.


Exeunt; manet Shift. Shift. She Is gone, fled, vanished, so are all my hopes;
Shame ghost the counsel of this broaking fool;
Whose sober thoughts were so precisely nice,
They concealed where this wealthy beauty shined,
But when the spirit of the Sack had thawed
His frozen tongue, in hope to share the pray,
He speedily unfolds her whole condition,
And counsels me to look; my son, says he,
This is a name of prosperous presage
With me, which I vouchsafe to give to those
Are by my care promoted to a Bride.
My Son, first know that Love a warfare is,
Where the Commander fights with stratagems
And courage, he does bribe the Officers
For to betray their charge; if this not take,
He springs the wall, that valor may prevail
In those designs, where subtilty did fail:
So when thou woo'st, see those are near thy Mistress;
The Chamber Secretary, or the man
Carries her private errands, (then he sent
For the ^oman of the dogs to practice on)
But if this fail, ^ssay to make a breach,
Women are brittle Clay, and made to yield*
Where manhood shows his standard in the field.
This he called counsel of War May he thrive,
Like to the sage advice he did contrive.

Enter Dove. Dove What, at your afternoon's devotion sir?


Shift Yes, I was praying, Sir, for the adversity
Of the old knave that made us two acquainted.

Dove Believe me, prayer is now out of fashion;
But let not that poor fool afflict your brain;

Shift. But I may send my wishes after him;
Cassandra's misery still wait on him;
May truth he speaks, wander, and never find
Any believing eat to entertain it,
That when he preaches youth wi^h vows
And sinowy succulent to wealthy widows,
They may be infidels to all his doctrines;
Be he the marked Owl, hooted and cried
Into contempt by all the country youth
That is unwiv'de, and may all maids that see
This cheating vizor vow virginity.

Dove. Suffer this shadow vinish from your thoughts.
And be advised by me; let not your hopes
Cool in a saint discouragement, because
Your Mistress gave no adieu at parting;
'Twas only a maid's niceness, not to seem
Too soon overcome; invade her with some gift
May speak your love to him, win here is to you.

Shift. I did invade her, and that fiercely too;
But that is the miscrie, she does not love
Invading; and if gifts could take her, freely
I made a tender of my self and fortunes.

Dove Coureship exactly needy, let her know
The richness of your love; dear Sir your bounty
To me makes me your friend and servi^our;
I know a Blackamoor whose properties.
Your knowledge will confess, deserve promotion,
He sings well, dances, fences, and to grace
These qualities, he can va^icinate
Your Fortunes, and the dark events of Fate,
Unhappily.

Shift. Yet happily his skill
May fail; but why such pains to paint
This smootie piece, with beauteous praise? if you
Can paint the Devil white, what is that to me?

Dove. I Will tell you what, he now does mourn his want
Of service, in the loss of an old Master.

Shift. He Is of the mourning color, right indeed,
And d^de in grain; but truly I need none,
That tells strange fortunes, or laments his own.

Dove. Nay if you are so wise, at once to spell
And scoff my purpose, good Sir farewell.

Shift. Be not offended friend, if my despair
Make me inquisitively suspicious
Of any powerful means, for to advance me
In the high favor of the blessed Elisa.
But what for Loves sake of this Blackamoor?

Dove. Advance him in the service of your Mistress,
His honest thanks will twenty ways requite you;
He will belly your Fortunes, swear what lordships
Do call you Master, and what goodly houses
Do mourn your absence, what delightful gardens
Will freshly spring upon your wedding day,
Being quickened with your Bride's desired ray;
Then he will show how you bestow your time;
How you do number minutes by your sighs,
And that your tongue each quarter strikes Ilisa.

Shift. Thanks honest friend; but do thou think she will
Accept him from me?

Dov. If his proper worth
Did not commend him, yet her manners can
Not well refuse what courtesy bestows.

Shift. I prithee send him to me speedille.


Dove. Within this hour we will wait you at your lodging.


Shift. 'Till then adieu; this is good husbandry.
To give what is dear to keep, and cheap to buy.

Exeunt. Act III. Scaen. 1.
Enter Crab, Lydia, Goodwit, Mrs. Cunnimeng^r, Hog. Crab. Cheer up my little
melancholy mouse,
This is the hour which blessed the fatal world
With my auspicious birth, cheer up I say;
I will reward this joy, here is gold to buy
Thee pins, here is more to purchase busks* and laces;
And for thy Aunt, here woman hold thy hand,
Here Is price for suppage; you noble Frank, and you
Captain, with this and this, carouse a health
Unto your Sovereign, that is I; this day
I Will be your King.

Goodw. Marry and shall, great Sir,
For Neptune in his regions cannot show
A fairer King

Hog. Then your Highness is.

Mrs. Cun. May happiness be my fellow handmaid
Unto your worth, which crowns you King of bounty.

Hog. Fond woman, leave thy timorous devotion,
Awake my drowsy blade, and boldly dare
Blind Fortune to forsake this royal wight,
That is to be her self unfortunate.

Crab. Treason against my royal Majesty,
Good subjects all arrest the treacherous fleet.

Lyd F^e Michael, are not you ashamed to draw
(...) naked sword in so great a presence?

Hog. If I thought any treachery, may you,


Hog. If I thought any treachery, may you,
Your Aunt, and all the women of the City
Prove honest; that is, may I be quite undon.

Crab. For once I Will pardon you my own mistake,
But for the honor of the day; this sword
Shall not be wak't in vain, come kneel you all,
Your loyal tie becomes you, which I Will honor
By dubbing you all Knights and Ladies rise
Sir Francis Curtis, and Sir Captain Hog,
Knights of the noble order of the Crab:
Rise you a toothless Lady of the same.

Goodw. Under your pardon, liege Lord, you might
In more decotum dub Sir Michael Hog
With sword of Baeon, then with Knightly arms.

Crab. Your pardon graciously prevents your chiding.
Because you begged it e're you did offend.
You are too bold to interrupt my course,
And I do make my Queen to kneel too long.
Arise my Empress, for a day,
My love, my dove, for ever and aye.

Goodw. Now Mrs. Cunnimonger, thy dull faith may see
What I often told thee, that I was thy better
Genius, to guide good fortune to thy home;
Whose blindness else could never find the way;
In gratefulness let thy devotion then
Build Altars to my bounty, and enshrine
Your great protecting power in beds of down;
On which your humbleness must sacrifice
The first fruits of mature beauties, and their
Sweet maiden honors to my just desires.
Which merits more then naked thanks can pay.

Mrs. Con. Sir I am wholly yours, what would you more?


Good. What would you more? is thy cold putrid corpse
An equal recompense, to my rich desert?
You should have wrack't your ingrate fancy, to
Devise a thousand ways for my delight.
You should incontinently send this meazled page
To cater for my taste, untasted beauties;
But now you are wholly mine, what should I more^

Mrs. Cun. My meaning was, that my endeavors sweat
For your content, and all I can call mine
I freely prostitute to your command.

Hog. And fear not Sir, I will present you fruits
In full maturitie, readle to fall;
But never yet did suffer bruise by falling;
Yet stirred with your gentle breath, their fall
Shall (as your servant) lowly wait your call.

Goodw. Then I will gild thy fangs, officious swine,
And thou shall wear my cloth of richest bice,
Shall make thee known by the right famous name
Of the blue Boar of the Bank-side; but while
We talk away the day, our Sovereign
Is still as night; awake, most mighty Sir,
And bless us with the story of your dream.

Crab. Why I was thinking how unkind, and most
Unnatural fool, my wretched father was.
And that which grieves my Highness most, they say,
I am so like him.

Mrs. Cun. Let not untimely grief
Eclipse the birthday of your Majesty;
It Is in your power to be like whom you please,
Now then be like your self, that is a King.

Crab. I wi l be like to any man, before
Such an old, doting, and penurious drivel.

Lyd. Now by my truly it does ill beseem
Your sonship to revile your father thus.

Crab. Peace Chicken; I may call him any thing
Now he is dead, and would that I had known
Him such a coxcombe while he was alive.
I would have better tutour'd him, in faith l^.

Goodw. Though Princes need not show a reason of
Their sayings* yet, dread Sir, give us to know
The cause of this opinion of your father.

Crab. First then you shall swear I am not like him.


Hog. What e're ill manner'd tongue dares to affirm,
Our royal Prince is like the Clown his father;
This often well approved steel defies him,
Whose righteous point shall stop the mouth of slander.

Good. Sir, by your worth and virtues I do swear,
This confirms you most unlike your father,
Who never was guilty of worth or virtue.

Mrs. Cun. Sir, I do swear you are most like to him
Whom most you ever loved, your lovely self.

Crab. Whom best I ever loved, is naught to thee;
^me sure 'twas not my father: but whom now
I love and ever shall, is my sweet Queen,
Who now must kiss the book before she swear.

Lyd. Then by my maidenhead I swear, for I
Have learned to swear by nothing else, that you
Are so unlike unto your worthless Sire,
That loving you I hate his memory.

Crab. Then listen Knights and Ladies to my tale,
My doting daddie (most unworthie he
Of such a hopeful son) when he lay sick,
(Most worthy he for to be ever sick,
But that he was more worthy to be dead:)
Fearing his death was nigh, in foolish spite.
Deprived his heir the blessing of his life.

Mrs. Cun. O cruel man, O most unnatur^^ father!


Crab. First, on that blessing which he then di^ fear
Would be his last, he charged me I should never
(Unless I were perplexed with suites in Law.)
Behold this glorious and delightful City,
Which he then called expensive, proud and vale

Hog. O most ignoble slander! and the foul
That ever stained the mouth of Gentleman.

Crab. But that he is descended from my self,
My roial self, he were no Gentleman;
But that is not all; next this, my son, said he,
Abstain from stranger women, that is as I
Interpret it, taste not fair Lydia's sweetness.

Good. I rather think he meant that you should feast
Upon no other dainties, she must be
No stranger to you; is she not your Queen?

Crab Faith I could give thee leave to beat (...) Frank,
If I did love it; what a dolt was I,
To think my Lydia was a stranger to me?

Goodw. Your royalty has power to absolve
It self, great Sir, from a far greater crime.

Mrs. Cun. Well, if your father's cruelty did lay
Any more such commands upon your Youth,
It will become your age and noble virtue,
With speed to disobey his cruelty.

Crab. Thy words persuade me: if they do not come
Under the name of counsel, I Will not be
Counseled by any she in Christendom.

Mrs Cun. The heavens bless thee from all other counsel
But what thy own discretion shall suggest.

Crab Well said, this night we will sup with thee, here is gold
To buy engendring meats. I like my Father?
My Lydia adieu until the evening.

Lyd. May mirth still wait on you till your return.


Mrs. Cun. Farewell till then, sweet man, and I Will take care
That then, than thee there is none shall better fare.

Exeunt Cun. and Lydia. Crab, Come noble Frank, how shall we overcome,
Or (as some say) beguile these tedious hours?

Goodw. Nay as you please, this day your Kingdom lasts;
You may command these winged posts to fly
With greater speed, or slowly for to wait
Your will; but if you please, we will hear a Play.

Crab. Content in faith, they say they are brave things.


Good. They are the truest Image of all Humors,
Manners, Conditions; there you may behold
The many winding arts of subtle slaves,
Who ^ike a Cu^tle do conceal their fraud
In th ir own Ink, while they exonerate
The old suspicious Father's purse, to store
The thriftlesse Sons; here may you see the vain
And boasting Soldiers, talking wounds and scars,
To comfort his long fasting steel with
Of some ensuing bloody feast, and here
Is seen presented the penurious Heir.
The lively image of his Father's manners,
As the Comoedian is of his; but you
Are made of purer clay, sifted and strained
From all your Father's dregs; whose tender age
Did nere own Folly for to feed the Stage.

Crab. Thou know I am no Niggard, and my Father
Was wont to say I had a Courtly humor,
To which he often did profess such hate,
As now* me thinks, I long to be a Courtier.

Goodw. Sir, the first Element of a Courtier is
To be in Debt, the Cris cross is the last.

Crab. Let me alone, I Will learn that lesson quickly
If that thy care will purchase me a Book,
I mean a man of legible belief.

Goodw. Doubt not of store of Horn-books in the City;
But know, that my presaging care prevents
Your wishes; I appointed to observe
This road and hour a Draper, whom I meant
To practice Courtship on my self, and if
Enter Whittington You please, he is your Book, and you may read
Faith in his looks; and timely here he coms,
Mr. Whittington, a good and happy day
Shine fair success unto your Busy thoughts.

Whit. They meet with good success in meeting you,
And I will that days happiness commend,
Which blesses us with the sight of an old friend

Good. I now pronounce you happy in a new,
That is, I will enrich you with the knowledge
Of this deserving Gentleman, whom when
You have read thoroughly, you will maintain, that all
Are Dunces which are ignorant of him.

Whit. Grant me your favor, noble Sir, to study you,
That I may thrive in goodness by the great
Example of your most amazing worth.

Crab. I am no Conjuring book, to be locked up
From public view; you have fair leave and free,
Lo I un^lasp my self unto your reading

Good To grace you Sir, his outward worth alone
Shall fill large pages in your Commonplace Book;
Where at your leisure, you with joy may read
Your self enrolled in number of the Faithful.

Whit. He Will highly grace me; would he try my Faith?


Crab Gramercie honesty; when I am Sheriff,
I Will prove thy Faith for half a hundred Liveries.

Goodw. Mean while make trial of his Faith for one,
You see my upper garment's course and thin,
Make me in this your servant, and by the Faith
Of Mr. Whittington I Will ever call you Master.

Crab. Thou injur'st much thy self, to take upon thee
This dear condition, and thy friend to boot,
That do prevent his bounty by thy suite;
For that which he should pray thee to accept,
Command my word, for as my word commands

Good. Let it be of the finest black I pray Sir,
And, for you know I am no Hypocrite,
D pose for an equality of Plush;
I love to have my garments like my self,
Though plain without, yet richly lined within.

Whit. It shall be done Sir, and upon my credit,
The outside shall be like your self, that is,
A traveller from Spain; although I dare
Say, that the nappe shall not be worn so bare.

Crab. I pray you Sir acquaint me with some time
Of leisure you can grace me at my lodging;
Some urgent business now calls loudly on us,
Or else this afternoon should not divorce us.

Good. That was well spoken Sir and gracefully.

Whit. To wait on you, each minute yields me leisure,
Who now am more your servant then the times.

Good. Each morning does confine him to his studies.
You cannot miss him then within, since you
Have made him now more bookish then he was.

Whit. His nobleness commands my often visits;
But at this time my business equals yours,
Though I in all things else am most unequal;
Therefore I Will beg your leave to take my leave.

Crab. Farewell till next we meet, my faithful Friend.

Good. Adieu kind Sir; come Master lets away,
It Is almost time we now were at the Play.

Exeunt. Enter Dove and Elisa. Dove Prepare your eyes and ears, the Scaene is
ready;
Your servant acts the Blackamore so well,
You cannot easily know him for your Friendly.

Elis. Not know him? it is a slanderous untruth,
To say a slight disguise can hide his graces:
Were he involved within a cloudie mist
By some mysterious charm, a lover's eye
Can chase away those mists, and make them sly
Like to a veilding vapor before the Sun.

Dove. Well I am sure, if that he had not bin
Of mine own making, I should nere have known him;
And, but we Pain^ers by our trade do fear
No colors, sure his l^oks had scared me,
So they will you, if that you not consider
The inside of the Gypsy is your Friendly.

Elis. It Is not his out side that I loved him for,
Though he be most beyond expression lovely;
For were he truly so as he is painted,
Love should shake hands with Joy for to embrace him:
But truly say, how this disguise becomes him.

Dove. When I had finished half my smooty piece,
I did present him with a Glass, wherein
He might behold, and wonder at my skill;
Me seemed that I had learnt the art to frame
In one space various shapes, for such was he;
Half white and red, and half a Blackamore:
But lo, in him blushing usurpt the place
Of Wonder; 'twas a pleasant sight, to see
On the one side a graceful modesty
Repose her self upon a bed of roses;
When on the other, the pure sanguine streaming
Striving to overcome the Injury
The Painter did him, made him appear to be
Just like a Negro blowing of a coal.

Elis. For love's sake make no sport of our misfortunes;
What is all this unto my question?

Dove. I Am showing how he becomes his vizor;
When I had fully finished all my work,
He then begins to practice servile gestures,
He seemed to me to have forgot himself,
It (...) no wonder then if you not know him.

Elis. Pray strike no more on this ill sounding string;
Thy self have seen his modesty to shine
Through his benighted looks, and do thou think
His o her graces are less eminent?
Think thou an envious cloud can quite eclipse
Or darken the bright glory of the Sun?
They only yield a shade, so does this die
Of my best Friendly like a shadow, make
This outward glory greater to appear.

Knockwithin. Dove. I say no more -- these are your servants knock.

Exit Dove. El. Well, let them in; O heaven, how shall I keep
My countenance, when Friendly is so changed;
But when my Love's disguised look's unknown,
Love pardon me, if I not keep my own.

Enter Shift, Friendly, Dove. Shift. Lady vouchsafe a servant from me, whose
desert
Does lay just claim unto so high preserment.

Eli. I dare not trust your commendations Sir,
You did deceive me in the last you brought me.

Shift. Therefore my care has sought out one, whose worth
Will expiate my former Injury.

Elis. Where is this man of men you so extol?

Shift. Lo this is he, whose waiting humbleness
Does speak both his condition and desire.

Elis. What do you mock me: have you brought this Glass
To show my feature. I confess not fair;
Yet not so foul as you would make my soul.
Shift Fair, do not overthrow me with your scorn,
Now overthrown with sorrow, for my fault.
Giving this servant for a taste to show
Your rich perfections by comparison,
Though judging proof will find his service can
Deserve, if nothing else, at least to serve you.

Elisa. What strange device is this? or what new way,
That sons of night should serve us in the day?

Friend. Think Lady, that with vigilant delight,
My care shall act your pleasure day and night.

Dove. Vouchsafe his service Mistress, let him be
Your black Postillion, and a lively Emblem
Of darksome night that ushers in the day.

Elis. First let me know his properties kind Sir.
Pray you what name does sign your Blackamore?

Shift. His name was once thuano hence he is
What your sweet goodness now shall please to call him.

Elis. Thuano, can thou cross thy arms and sigh:
Or have thou learnt to personate a sorrow,
To darken more thy darkened countenance?
Have taught thy eyes to weep, as if thy tears
Did strive to wash thee into red and white?
Can thou exclaim on cruel Beauty; cry
Ay me! with a most sad dejected grace?

Shift. What have I done? sure she would fain persuade
This smooty Blackamore to be my rival.

Elis. Can change with art the tenor of thy looks?
Now casting up thy wretched eyes to heaven,
As if from thence thou mean to beg for pity;
Now fixing them on earth, as if thou had
Seen Mercy drop, but lost it in the fall;
Can thou profoundly now be perjured too?
For know Thuano, all this thou must do,
And swear that so does he who did present thee:
Yet none can personate these graces truly,
But he who feels the passion which he acts.

Shift. She does abuse me, evidently mock me;
Lady, the Page I praise has worthier gifts
Then those you name his skill holds in his hand
The little Statute-book of heaven can read
The Stars decrees, and show what they intend
Of weal or woe.

Friend. Pardon me, noble goodness,
That I am dumb so long unto your quaeries,
Which do so feelingly describe my state,
That in them I may read the lively picture
Of the commanding passion in my breast;
For know, (if you will others fortunes know
Before your own) that once it was my lot
For to be loved; O most unworthy I,
For to be loved by one so good, so fair!
Whom yet my youthful carelessness or pride
Did so neglect, that love did in revenge
Blast me with this deserved deformity.
But seeing in my punishment, my fault,
And looking back upon the happiness
I had so wretchedly forsook, I then
Too late began to love, though yet (they say)
Her love continues still; but sooner shall
The night and day be one e're I Will bestow
This foul Thuano on so sweet so fair,

Elis. Loves penance is but short, if you repent;
Sir I accept your gift, whose worth does less
Measure my thanks then your more worthy love,
I now will take my leave, to study how
I may require --
Exit.
Shift. The thanks you leave behind,
Are far above the gift you carry hence.
Courage, my heart; she cannot be unkind,
If that her words be image of her mind.

Exe^^t Enter Crab, Goodwit, Cunnimonger, Lydia. Crab. My pretty Lydis, I have
seen to day
The cruel'st sight, it grieves my heart to speak't.

Lyd. And I to hear't; I pray you talk of mirth,
I cannot endure these tales of cruelty.

Crab. But I must tell it too; a handsome woman,
'Cause the King's son in love would ly with her
Against her will, would needs go kill her self.

Lyd. What did she kill her self against her will ^


Crab. I say against her will he say with her:
I have forgot the foolish woman's name.

Goodw. It was Lucrece the chaste, a primitive
Roman, who in the humor of the time,
Did in vainglory kill her self for Fame;
But know, out soil breeds none so desperate.

Cun 'Faith and the Romans too are now more wise.


Good. And thou say true, for they who read her story,
And in their antic Arras see her bleed,
Pity her Folly, and not praise her deed.

Crab. Well I am sure she was a handsome wench,
And but for shame, I could have found my heart.

Good. A wench Sir, 'twas a boy did personate
Unto those times, a well becoming fate.
But then was then, and women now are women.

Cun. And you say true; for is it not think you
A most unnatural thing, for any woman
To stab her self (...) well, had my Lydia bin
That Lucrece, you sweet sir, that sweet King's son --
Ent. Falconer. I Will say no more, but truly you shall sinde
Her neither to her self, nor you unkind.

Crab. I hope so, else I must with sorrow si^g,
Why should passion lead the blind?
'Cause my Lydia proves unkind.

Falc. This is vile music, not to be compared
With the melodious bleating of my sheep.

Good. What means the man? I hear no sheep but one.

Falc. It Is true, while you now spoke, but one did bleat;
But if you heard a hundred chime together,
You Would swear it were most admirably sweet. Shakis his bag.
How like you this my hearts? do not exceed
The Quire of paul's, or all t^^ holy bells
Which most devoutly sing the time of the day?

Crab. 'Faith Dick this sheepish harmony is sweetest,
When they are penned up in these norrow folds;
But where is my Ring, the token that I sent?

Falc. The stubborn Ballie swears that he will keep it
To show your uncle for his own discharge;
But who regards the bait, that has the fish?

Cun. It Is a wise sentence Richard, and a true;
But this is now no time for sentences,
It Is eight a clock, and supper stays for you.

Fal^. And let it stay; I know you long to sup
Upon my mutton: but where is all my thanks
For my good speed? does it deserve no more,
That by a trick I changed my tired ^ade,
To hasten my return, that by my wits
I took the prey out of the Harpies foot,
Who strongly gript it, 'till I boldly swore,
You would undo him and his Family;
And showed his bag and wallet in the stars;
Does not all this deserve a welcome home?

Cun. Sir you are welcome home most heartily.


Falc. That Is not enough: you now ought all do penance
For your neglect; you Mrs. Cunnimonger,
And Mr. Goodwit too, shall wait on me
This night at Supper; Lydia I pardon
For my good Masters sake, him for his own:
So Lydia, seal this pardon with a kiss.

Crab. O traitor, villain, sacrilegious villain!


Falc. Nay it is decreed, and she must offer't too.
Or else farewell, this purchase is my own.

Cun. Ala^ sir what is a kiss? what would you do
If his desert should ask a greater thing?

Crab. If it must needs be so, I prithee sweet
Lydia, dispatch me quickly from my pain.

Lyd Sir I obey your prayers, not his commands.

Falc. Here, take the price of my felicity.


Crab. And be thou honored with our order more,
Thy careful speed dubs thee a knight of the post:
Thy office be, for to begin the way,
While I behind do wipe thy kiss away.

Extunt. Enter old Goodwit (with a letter and the ring,) Dove. Old Good.
Cheated by fools and villains? this is fine;
And my wise Baily thinks he has done well,
Because he kept this token, when he should
Artest the slave which brought it, and now here
He writes the threats which overcame him well,
I will go down to prevent further ills,
Be it your care for to retrive the stray.

Dove. I warrant you, if sense and skill can do it.
This afternoon a little business called me
Into a Draper's shop, whom I did find,
Booking a debt, to which was superscrib'd
My straggling master's name, though he indeed
Was but a surety (as the Draper told me)
For the poor sneak which did entice him hithe^,
Who now it seems is casting of his skin,

O. Good. Employ your time and study to reinde
This suake from his Caduceus, the main staff,
Which does support him, and unsinuace
Him from that breast that gives him lively heat.

Dove. Sir, I have won upon this Citizen
To know their lodging and their daily haunt,
And for some future courtesies of hope,
He will arrest this Snake, in's cloak of credit
As soon as it can warm him, and will free
My Master, whom I mean for to secure
From the inquiry of this noisome viper.

O. Good. Be speedy in your course; I hope you see
Your charge already, to insafe my niece
And daughter in my absence, from the busy
Courtship of idle suits, and to find
My nephew in this peopled wilderness.

Dove. This is my ta^k alone, your Niece and Daughter
Will find sussicient guard in their own virtues.

O. Goodw. Well, now the night invites to bed, betimes
In The morn, my jorney, and your charge begins.

Exeunt. Act. IV. Scaen. 1.
Enter Dove and Falconer. Dove. Fortune and Love befriend me; my old Master
By this has left half of his way behind him;
And though I am still doing, my success
Does call me idle, my young wandering Squire
Lay not at home to night, and hereabours
Should be the place they supt at, if my draper
Be not deceived in his intelligence;
Ent. Falc. But soft^ who have we here? the Falcner, nay
Slink not away good Richard, here are none
But friends and fellow servants; why do look
About thee so, does any man pursue thee?

Falc. No, no, but who had thought to meet thee here?


Dove. Not thee I dare to swear, but tell me how
Our Master does, and his refinde seducer;
Does his new upper weed become him trimly^

Falc. Does he speak out of knowledge, or by chance?
'Faith. Tom my Master's well, exceeding well,
Looks and lives like himself, that is like an heir
Delivered from ^nition, but what means
Your riddle of new weeds, and trim seducers?

Dove. Would neither thou nor I knew what it meant.
But I will pose you with more riddles yet;
Are there not certain femal ghosts do walk
This quarter, silken some, and some of stusse;
Some single, some in couples, and some squir'd,
But above all, is not the house you supt at
Feat sully haunted? are these riddles too?

Falc. It Is well we left the Country; sure they do
Begin to study witcheraft here of late:
Art thou awake? or do thou dream of ghosts?
I dare to swear here is greater store of flesh
Then spirit, but if any such there be;
Thou art a huntsman, take but a little pains
If that they cross this quarter, thou may prick um.

Dove. I do not mean to hunt them to the buttock;
But tell me truly, what severe necasions
Calls thee abroad out of thy nest so ear y?

Falc. I had as good confess, he knows already:
The truth is, Tom, my Master's to be married,
I now go for a Priest to do the feat.

Dove. How? married? and you go for the Vicar
Of hell to join em for there the match was made:
If thou wast one bore witness to the contract,
Now in the name of all the Fu^^e^, tell me
What Is she must be my Masters Succuba.

Falc. I was not much mistaken, I did think
He was a Witch, he proves a^ on^urer.
I Will show thee what she is, by showing what
We are, that is to say, her servant's servants;
There Is a Court riddle Sir for you to pick;
She Is one that is taken with my Master's wit,
As he is taken with her chastity:
A sine young thing, that newly puts out tewen,
Such excellent game, that mighty love would change
Himself into Merlin to enjoy her.

Dove. Do not thou talk of game, when I Am in earnest,
And be thou honest, else the gallows shall
Make a short end of all thy knaverie,
For stealing of the Farmer's nag^ by whom
(Speak truth upon thy peril) was my Master
So suddenly inveigled to his ruin

Falc. Fear prompts me to speak truth against my nature:
Now as I live Tom, I Will not lie; there dwells
Within that house, a pretty handsome Tit,
Whom out wise Master fain would he withal;
He Is very hot upon the spur, but she
Being instructed by her cunning Aunt,
Thanks him, and takes him up again at pleasure.
Something she gives him leave to do, but not
What most he would; and so at once she does
Inflame his sharp desires and tame them, briefly,
She vows he nere shall ly with her, before
He marries her, which he resolves to do.

Dove. But I do mean to cross his resolution;
Your task must be for to forget your errand,
See him no more till noon, at your return
Any excuse will serve, and so farewell
Exit Falc. I shall not need your aid to my designs,
I never shall be able to redeem him
By my own power, I must require my master
And fellow servant Friendly to assist me.
Nor dare I trust this villain, here is a toy
In town to seek him, with a barn to boot;
I will direct her to him, she shall call
His arrant togueship before a man of worship,
And there with open mouth cry out for marriage;
Where he shall take his choice, whether he will go
To Church or Prison, for he will nere be able
To purchase bail for keeping of the child.
So there is one impediment dispatched;
Yet I forget the aid ^promis'd to
The Draper in his suit unto Elisa,
Who with his painted mole by this is acting
Her servant Friendly, whom I said was ^^avail'd.
In which disguise he thinks to win her too*
But (...) must now deprive the Black a more
Of all this much, in seeing of his shape
Usu p'^; while he stands mu^e to hear another
Courting his dearest M stress in his name.
But why do I thus talk away the day,
When I should do^ lest time be vainly spent,
To redress ills which care might once prevent.

Exit. Enter Crab, Lydia, Cunnimonger, Goodwis, and Hog. Crab. Come Lydia, now
the time draws nigh, when we
With worthies male and female shall enrich
The needy world; this morn I sent unto
A cunning man to learn the fittest time
For to engender W^^s in, he replies,
This night 'twixt twelve and one, do not omit
Thy nuptial duties, the stars counsel it;
If that thou will beget a wit transcendent,
This night is Hermes lord of the Ascendent;
Well soon I mean for to invite the wits,
Or as thou call'st them Frank, Deipnosophists,
Unto my bridal supper; where I will
Have nothing but brains diversely cook't
Of birds, beasts, fishes, tith-pigs, and woodcocks;
Our drink shall be brisk c^^iet, for to refine
The Infant's sparkling ^ngenie! but now
Where shall we find a cook of w^^^ that has
Not had his education in the kitchen,
Whose brain's not overeast, with mistie clouds
Arising from the steam of grosser meats.

Cun. I'lt be your cook Sir, and though I do say it,
I have as good a wit of a gross body,
As any woman ever need to boast of.

Good. Never take care for choosing of your cook.
The very dressing of the brains will make him w^^^i^.

Hog. Take you no thought for cook, or cheer, leave these
To mine and my old Master's care; you now
Must feast upon your sweet delicious wife,
^he will be meat and medicine to you, for her sight
Alone, the shaking ague will affright;
And soon at night, if you do not awry go,
She Will ease you suddenly of the ^entigo,
Yea before Galen, she will cure the fever
With her down belly, and her thighs of bever.

Crab. How (...) bever do thou call them: I am sure
That they were Felt last night; but do you hear*
Do not you call my Lydis my wife,
It is a name, the country people use.
No^ shall she call me husband, therefore Frank,
P^ethee devise some fine Poetic names,
To dart at one another before strangers.

Good. What do you think, if you were called the Seal.
And she your wax? on whom in every kiss
You thus may seal the Image of your love. kis. her

Lyd. Pray heaven I may wax worthy of his love
But trust me Sir, you do me injury,
To think his love has made so slight impression
Within my breast, that it may be defac'r,
Like to a fading image made in wax.

Goodw. How think you Lady then, if you were called
His Cynosure, the say'ers stars by which
They find their way thorough the pathless seas;
By this they frame their course, you Sir must be
The Pilot, which does steer by her blessed light
Alone, unto ^he haven of your bliss:
Or if you will be an Astronomer,
In every kiss thus you may take her height.

Kisses her. Crab Me thinks this Cynosure's a pretty name, I pret^^ce tell me
what it signifies.


Goodw. It signifies properly the dogs tail.


Crab. Ha, ha, ha; it is the best jest was ever heard or read of.


Good. It Is a good jest indeed can raise such mirth;
But my wit's hood winkt, for I cannot find it:
I pray Sir tell us where the jest does lie.

Crab. Where it doesly? is it not evident,
That thou did kiss the dog's tail. I shall ne^e
Love her again 'till thou have changed her name.

Good. You liked this well until you understood it;
That you may learn from hence how happy it is
Sometimes for to be ignorant; what then
If she were called your Touchstone you her straw,
For as ^^e Touchstone does examine metals,
So will she prove what metal you are made of;
And as the straw does to the Touchstone skip,
So hu^ must you skip nimbly to her lip;
Kisses her Thus must you cling in every kiss you give her:
B^t a^^ve all the name of Lydia move me,
'Cause Lapis Lydius signifies a Touchstone.

Crab. I like your reasons well, but not so well
Your often kissing, therefore hence, forbear.

Good. Touchstones the of^ner rubbed, do draw the better.


Crab. Fairly put off, well, so it is decreed;
A Parliament of wits could not devise
More fitting names confirmed with greater reasons.

Sings. To day the Priest shall make it a law,
That I shall be thy only straw,
The virtue of whose Kiss shall draw,
Besides my self no other straw.

Lyd. Sings The Touchstone's black and so am I*
The Touchstone's hard, and so not I;
The Touchstone does the metal try,
And as the Touchstone so will I.

Hog Sings. As soon in straw is kindled fire,
So you in flamed with desire;
Yellow's the straw, yet I suppose,
That you will never wear yellow hose.

Cun. I have no voice to sing, yet I will say
That this is Straw's and Touchstone's bridal day.

Goodw. Sure Hermes now is climbing to his height,
Who does inspire your wits to versifie;
I would the Priest were come, for any time
This day will serve to do the trick you talked on!

Crab. I, to get Wits, and I do mean to call
All my boys Strawes, and all my wenches Touchstones.

Enter Dove and Friendly. Dove. Master, heaven give you joy, fame sings that you
Are toward a wife, and I have brought a Priest^

Good. Your office bids you welcome, so are you.


Fr. I thank my office then, let him thank you.
But know Sir, that I am no Priest, but servant
Unto a sister of this Gentleman's;
She Is now in town, and does by me invite him
This day to dine with her at her own lo^ging.

Crab. I prithee tell her she shall dine with me;
She shall have gloves to boot, and you, and you*
And now I think on it, she and my cousin Win
Shall be my bride maids, prithee tell um so.

Fr. First I must tell you, that I do not mean
To make a fruitless errand; my adventure
Is to redeem you from these Harpies claws.
Good Prithee how many Harpies are there here*

Friend. E'ne a full mess, of every sex a pair.


Good. Peace, or I Will teach your Gipsie-ship some manners.


Dove. Would you would teach your self some honesty;
Vncloud your brow Sir, for it is not a frown
Can fright us from our purpose; therefore Sir,
Resolve to leave this shop of sin and shame,
This furnished ware house of Iniquity.

Crab. Honest Tom Huntsman, have but patience.

Lyd. Is this a Huntsman Sir? now out upon him.
He smells most vilely of the kennel; such a one
As this same fellow is, and sixteen couple,
Did eat my father quite out of the country.

Dov. It Is cheaper keeping a whole host of dogs,
Then one such costly fizling hound as you.

Cun. Now out upon thee naughty man, profane


Dog. driver, call heaven's creatures fizling hounds?


Dov. And sal^ Bitch too, for such are she and thou.


Good. This idle rogue would fain be beaten sure.


Enter two Sergeants. Dov. I would indeed, it is one part of my business.


Hog. You shall not go without your e^rand then.


1. Ser^. Hold friend^, as you are men, this open house
Promised the ending of some feast, but weo
Are come to the beginning of a fray.

Dov. About your business friend, that is the man.

2. Serj. Sir, the King greets you well.


Good. I Am glad he is well.


Cun. Ye are two paltry knaves, thus to intrude
Into a private house; good Gentlemen,
Free a poor widows house from these vile catch-poles.

Dove. Away Sir, we will free't from honest men.

Execunt Dove, Friendly, Crab. Good* Vnhand me Sirs, I mean to put in bail.


1. Serj. Discharge the debt Sir, that is your only bail.


Cun. Why what is the debt? here is one will see you paid;
Oh me! he is gone, but I will follow him.

Exit. Good. I prithee Hog assist me against these villains.


Hog. Loose him, or else by Termagaunt I will.


2. Serj Will ye be pork or bacon, I Will provide
A feast for Pluto; hence, unless you mean
The Furies shall make Puddings of your guts.

Lyd. Good friends do not abuse the Gentleman.


1 Serj. We Will not abuse him chicken, for thy sake
We Will see him where he shall be safe enough.

Hog. Come Mrs. Lyddi, let us in, you see
It is not in our power for to help him.

Good. Let your unmanner'd gripe unseize my shoulder,
Or I will time your heads into a nooze,
As Hipponax did Bupalus, or buskined
Archilocus Lycambe, I will rogues.

2 Serj. That Is a good jest I swear, I Would fain see that;
This fellow's sure in a Poetic rage.

Good Or if your fears make you decline the rope,
I Will brand your name with profound infamy.

1. Serj. Profound infamy? what a fine word's that;
Go Do You grin ye dog? would I were loose again.

2. Serj. No sir, the dog's name's holdfast, that you will find.

Ent. Cunnimonger. Cun Kicked, beaten, cheated of my guest? was ere
Poor woman thus abused; but which is worse,
My silly Niece fondly restored the bag
Of which she once was Lady Treasurer.

Good. This is ill news, my hopes lay in that bag;
Sweet Mistress lend me for an hour or two
The seasonable price of my releasement,
You know my friend will faithfully repay't.

Cun. Alas good Sir, what would you have me do?
You know how poor and nakedly we live,
All I can lend's my pity and my prayers.

Good. Thy pity proves me wretched, and thy prayers
Do make me hopeless, for they will nere be heard.
Keep your devotion till your Carting, Madam,
And leave me to the mercy of these fiends.

Cun. Sweet man, I have no power to part from him.


Goo. Then stay there still, my kind affliction.


1. Serj. Come Sir, you see your hopes, please you walk?


Good. Yes, lead me on unto my Purgatory;
Yet stay a while and hear a word of reason.

2. Serj. Let it be brief reason then, very brief.


Good. It Is only this, I know by circumstance,
You are employed by draper Whittington.

1. Serj. It Is very true, if this be all, let us walk.


Good. The debt which you arrest me for is owing
^or this same cloak I wear, the debt is young,
This the first day of wearing; give you him
His cloak again, and me my liberty.

2. Serj. He did give us no such commission sir,
Yet what lies in our power we will befriend you,
We Will place you where he shall be sure to find you;
That if his pleasure be to visit you,
You may your self deliver the condition.

Good. If this be all your kindness, march away;
Farewell old noble true-penny, farewell.

Cun. Farewell sweet man, I cannot choose but weep.


Good. Now I am yours, yet still my mind is free,
To triumph over Fortunes injury.

Exeunt. Enter Friendly, Elisa, Dove. Friend. Believed, 'twas no small task to
get him off.


Elis. Where have you disposed of him in love's name?


Friend. Where he must learn loves lesson, with my sister.


Elis. I hope that he will learn by her example:
But what is the reason Dove, you did warn me
Of my new suitor, whom you sent, who does
With confidence usurp my Friendly's name;
And why did you direct him to a Painter,
Who trimly made his mole on the wrong side?

Dov. Only sweet Mistress, for to make you merry.


Elis. Thou did not miss thy aim, for I did laugh
To see my fruitless labors. When I could
By no mean^ make him think he was not Friendly,
But when I called for water, for to prove
Whether he would endure the test; Lord how
The Gallant chas'^. But yet my Cousin Win
Thought all this while I did but counterfelt,
Until she saw a just disdain possess^
My brow. Then she indeed began to blame
My unkind entertainment of a stranger.
To her I left him then to make amends,
For that wherein my rudeness did offend;
And if I am not in loves art mistaken.
(As sure I am not) my sweet Coze is taken.

Dove. May heaven say amen unto your guess,
Then am I master of my ends* for he
I^ rich and thrifty, and I yet may live
To see my Mrs. Win my Lady M^yoresse.

Friend. Faith I do long to see how much he is like me.


Elis. Indeed it is pity sor^o interrupt em.
Did you not say you knew my other su^er*

Friend. Hang him a slave, which rents his hackney chin
To city falling-stars, and toothlesse madams.
But I will sowee him for his s^welnesse.

Elis. He is more saucy yet then you do think;
Now I received this Letter, pray you read it.

Friend. reads it. Fr. I am not ignorant how well you love me*
And Lovers know what Lovers most desire.
I hear your Uncle's not in town. I leav't
Unto your wit for to beguile your Cousin,
And meet me soon a^ Mrs. Cunnimongers.
I Will read no more! mouster of goatish boldness;
May he first twine with Scorpions. ^or love's sake
Tell me of what complexion are my hose?

Elis ^^me jealous of my self, although not guilty
Of word or look, which cattled less then scorn.

Dove. I Will solve this riddle. But this very morning
I met him here, inquired how well you liked
H^^ Blac^ a ^ore. I did reply the truth,
And added this which I did think wa^ true,
(And which no doubt'^ the cause of his presumption)
That you did love him better for his gift.

Elis. You should have said that I did hate him less.
But now I hate him most, who thinks me false.

Dove. The carriage of this business leave to me,
I Will sit him with another bed fellow,
Only lend me your name to bring him on.

Elis. Be sure my honor do not suffer in it.

Dove. It Is in your power to secure your honor.
What sitter time then this to tie that knot,
Which only fate is able to untie?
Your Uncle's absent, and your Nee^e employed;
Let this hour execute the heavens decree,
And the Priest join their hands whose hearts agree.

Friend. I dare not to dissent from his advice,
Seeing time it self does seem to counsel us.

Elis. Thy goodness (Friendly) won me, let thy virtues
Guide me, for them I ever will obey.

Dove he speedy then, for time makes no delay.


Exeunt. Enter Phillis and Crab. Crab. Hard hearted Tigre, unkind Adamant.


Phil. You are mistaken sir, my name is Phillis.


Crab. O thou have killed me with thy cruelty.


Phil. Have dead men learned to walk and talk again?
Trust me, I nere saw ghost yet better sed.

Crab. It Is true, I live, but yet a dying life.


Phil. Leave your book-wooing sir, you do not do
It handsomely, If you will love by art,
Your careless habit must proclaim your passion;
Your hat without a band, Garters unti'd,
Your trayling Cloak, dejected look, cross arms,
Should be dumb arguments of your affection.

Crab. If this be all, I Will quickly prove I love.
Hat be no more acquainted with a band,
Garters be never ti'd again, and thou
My careless Cloak be witness of my woe,
While thus I look, and thus I cross my arms.

Phil. Next you should sing loves power, and your misfortune,
Which lord it over you in a dismal ditty.

Crab. I Will sing no song but this. Phillid^ flouts me:
Yet now I think on it, summer last, when first
I saw you. I compiled this sugared sonnet
Phillid^ was a fair maid,
He Sings. As fresh as any flower;
Whom Harpatus the Heardsman pr^y'd
Might be his Paramour.

Phil. But Philliday was all to coy
Ph sings For Harpatus to win,
For Corin was her only joy.

Crab. Prithee sweet heart, let me be Corin then.


Phil. Sir, I will not require your love with scorn.
Your love ha^h purchased mine, on this condition,
I must command your house. Welcome my friends,
Keep shocks, and monkeys, para^s, parakitot^^,
And all things else I like for my delight.
Wear clothes befitting your estate, my birth,
You shall keep what retinue I think fit.
What horses, coaches, litters; and what not*
And when I please you must be lorded too.

Crab. I will be any thing which thou will have me.


Phil. You shall be nothing then, which not becomes you*
I know lords not so rich, nor half so wise.

Crab. Touchstone farewell, thy Straw bids the^ adieu.


Ent. Dove singing. Dove sings. Come, come away, to the Temple I say,
And celebrate this Wedding day.
Your sister, master, and your brother, mistress
This day are to be married, and expect
Your company to grace the Nuptials.

Crab. To morrow I do mean they shall grace ours.
Tom, she is mine own, my Wit at last has won her.

Dov. Make it one business then, let us have and get
A License, though it is late in the afternoon;
I have procured a Priest apochtyphal,
Who not regards the hours Canonical.

Crab. A men say I.


Phil. In troth so do not I.
Did you not say that you were dead? I will
Not dance the shaking of the winding sheet.

Crab. I am revived again, my pretty duck;
But I do wonder where my Falener is.

Dov. I met him and his doxy marching now
With Mr. Constable, before a Justice;
When he is at leisure, doubtless he will find you out.
Mean while your own occasions beg your have.

Crab. Come then away, god Cupid be our speed.


Exeunt Enter Justice Budge, Falconer, Grace, Constable. Budg. Sir* how durst
you get this maid with child?


Falc. May't please you sir, it is a native valor*
Derived upon me from my ancestors.

Budge. Well sir, well, I Will teach you not to have
The fear of grace before your eyes, I will.

Falc. That lesson I have learnt already sir;
And practiced too, and to say truth, with us
We use to fall to without saying grace.

Budge. The truth is, thou art an ungracious varlet;
It Is well for thee my wife is not at home,
She Would ring thee a peal should make thy ears to tingle;
Mr. Constable knows she can speak well.

Constable. For wit she is the glory of hersex,
And fame does sing her worthy to be wed
To one alone, who sits in justice seat;
Her tongue is tipped with Eloquence, for this
And for her other gifts, the city rings on her.

Bud. And well it may, you know she is a Bell,
That is, you know her name is I sabell.

Constable. Now by my Joan* a witty Apophthegm.


Bud. And fellow what say thou? this it is to shed
My wit amongst unlettered Animals.

Falc. Blame rather sir the height of your conceits,
Which are exalted far 'bove humane sense.

Constable What do thou call his worship nonsense?


Budg. Let that alone, and go we to the purpose;
Fellow, wilt have this woman to thy wife?

Falc. My name is Richard sir, and I will have her,
With the same will I did appear before you.

Budg. Well, if thou will not have her to thy bride,
I mean to have thee married to Bridewell.

Constable. It Is good again, incomparably good!
Fall Good do you call' til' me sure it is bad for me.

Budg. Woman, how do thou use to call thy name?


Orac. My name is Grace, an it shall like your Worship.
Budg. It likes my worship well, but this vile fellow
Wants grace, and yet rejects it when it is offered.

Constable. This is still good, better and better still;
Si^ra, how do thou like his Worship's wit?

Falc. I think his brain is like a lottery,
Where blanks and prizes most unequally
Are mixed; his common talk I call the blanks,
His jests the prizes, of which also are
Twenty of little worth, for one of value;
Of which first sort when now there were drawn three,
Your tongue was trumpet to the lottery.

Constable. Sir, this is open Scandalum magnatum.


Budg. See where my Clark and's Mistress are come home.
That he may quickly write his Mittimu^.

Falc. Pray stay your Journey friend, rather then so,
I Will marry this same small impediment.

Budg. That might have served your turn, but now you are
To be committed for a petty Treason,

Falc. Will you your self be judge in your own cause?


Budg. And who so sit as I? for who will do
Sir Roger Budge more right then Justice Budge?

Falc. Then here upon my knee I humbly beg,
That you will be merciful as you are wise.

Grace. And I, that you will be Just as merciful;
That is, that you will make him marry me.

Budg. He has his pardon upon this condition.
Come rise my friend, I Am pleased with thy submission:
And Grace I thus will grace in greeting her. kis.
This night you all shall sup with me, where we will set
Confirm the match, and I believe it is time,
For now me thinks my stomach 'gins to chime.

Exeunt. Act. V. Scaen. 1.
Ent. Shift and Hog. Shift. Shame and perdition fall upon this gypsy.
His false predictions are like oracles,
Deceiving with their Ambiguity.

Hog. What alles the man? sir, have unquiet dreams
Troubled your rest to night, that you thus talk
Wildly of gypsies, and predictions;
Of oracles and ambiguities.

Shift. I Will tell thee Hog, I had a fortune lately
Told me, which did imply I should Enjoy
Her, unto whom I often had su'd in vain,

Hog. Your Fortunes true for you have often su'd
Unto my Mistress Lydia in vain.
Because her nights were at too dear a rate,
Yet you have found her threwn into your arm's.

Shift. I do confes't, and therefore I complain
Upon my Fortunes ambiguity,
Which I applied unto a wealthy heir,
Whose maiden zone I hoped for to untie.

Hog. I hope that Lydia made you sport enough,


Shift. I Will not deny't, yet the mistake does vex me,
Though it is my Joy I am not gulled alone

Hog. If to Enjoy fair Lydia alone,
You call a gull, then you are gulled alone,

Shift I mean this gypsy has deceived others,
(If it be lawful to believe a Huntsman)
For tolling this sweet Ladies fortune, whom
But now I named, before a Cityzen
Who did usurp the name of her old servant,
He said within three nights she should Embrace
The man whom she would honor with the style
Of Husband, whom she present did behold
Though his disguise did then conceal his person,
Which the vain gull applied unto himself,
When I more justly may the Fortune claim,
Because I am not what my outside speaks me.

Hog. How can that be, seeing you were not present?


Shift. She might behold me present to her fancy.
This meaning only my thoughts looked upon.

Hog. For shame leave talking of these galleries,
The truth is this, the Huntsman whom you named
Did purchase you the pleasure of this night,
Remember now you told me in the Evening
When you were drunk with wine and Joy, you meant
To Wed this beauty, which you came to meet,
But found contrived in bed before you came,
S^y then sir, will you marry Lydia?

Shift. Thou know she has a foolish property
Might make me pardon my self this mistake,
Yet I regard not that which nicer men
Do blame; the thing I might dislike in her
Is, that she is poor, but yet to show, that I
Am a Philosopher, I Will marry her.

Hog. Nobly and wisely spoke, and cheer your heart
Though she be poor, she cannot make you poorer

Shift. This consolation my Philosophy
Does likewise teach me, but I Will tell thee news,
I have a husband in the pickle too
For thy old Mistress, one of her own trade,
For both of them do live by coupling sexes,
He in old Saxon's called a march-maker.

Hog. Good sir for once do you usurp his office
To make this decent match, and I Will assist you.

Shift. I do arrest thy promise, yesterday
I hear his worship sought me at my lodging,
But first I Will give him a preparative.

Hog. I Will give him that shall work I warrant you;
First I Will advance my Mrs. wealth and virtues,
Then sweat the greatness of my own revenew's,
Which I gain only by the Fees of suitors.

Shift I do not doubt thy art, go and prepare
Thy Mrs too, within this hour or two
I Will send him, until then adieu.

Hog. Farewell.

Exeunt Enter Falconer and Grace. Falc. And why will thou needs have me marry
thee?


Grace 'Cause I would have you make me an honest woman.


Falc. Why do thou think all married women honest?


Grace. I cannot tell, but surely I am one
If I am brought a-bed in matrimony.

Falc. Is that the point? but tell me when you are married.
How think you to maintain your honesty?

Gra. You know the Justice promised us last night
His worships license to sell ale in the city.

Falc. Now you have hit it; was it ere heard that women
Maintained her honesty by selling ale?

Gra. Surely I hear it is a thriving trade.


Falc. Surely but not to thrive in honesty;
For if she be not open as her tub,
My Hostess takings will be very small,
Although her lanted ale be nere so strong.

Gra. I will do any thing which you will have me.


Falc. Then first I Will have you to release our contract,
Then I will have thee travel into Ireland,
There thou mai'st make a nurse, it is better far
Then live by the muddy trade of selling ale,
And thank my bounty, which has qualified
Thy Inabilities for this Employment.

Gra. Did not you swear that you would marry me?


Falc. I have done better chick, far better, for
I Have layn with thee, which I had rather do
Twice twenty times, then marry the but once.

Gra Ay me, and shall my love be thus requited?
Yet know it is not in your power to leave me,
The Justice now is witness of the contract,
Who I am sure will see it executed.

Falc. Now thou have truly said, what marriage is,
That is, an execution, well, then since
It will no better be, lets quickly set
All things in order, and be executed.

Gra. As nimbly as you can good Richard, for
My time draws near, and I desire to be
An honest woman e're I am delivered.

Falc. Lets find my Mr. first, I do not mean
To leave him and his service to sell ale,
Where I last left him, thence, they say the devil
Fetched him away, and sure he has been there
For they look all as if they had been frighted,
And still he may be there, for they do talk
As if they were possessed, come, let us go,
And when my Master's found, appoint the day
When thou wilt be married and I will obey.

Gra. Then this shall be the day, I Will be thy guide
To find thy Mr. and more guess beside.
Exeunt Enter Shift and Derrick.
Shift. The have of your return, I fear has made
You leave more weighty business unperformed

Der. Care of your good makes me forget my own,
Yet in one day, (for know my clients do
Observe my day) I have directed ten
To their preferment, two to reputed maids
Which I do rank alone in my black book,
Three unto widows of the second head,
And five to maids of just maturity.

Shift. Pray Mr. Detrick are not you allied. unto the famous headsman of your
name.


Der. Somewhat I am, but what is the cause you ask?


Shift. Because by you there is contrived the loss
Of many maiden heads.

Der. You Are merry sir,
For know our trades do differ much, as much
As the extremes of torment and delight,
My office is not staind with blood, and those
Who suffer by my means do live to thank me,
I beg no pardon for my fault, before
The maid's deprived of her virginity.

Shift. Yet you may ask forgiveness afterward
Of those who curse your pains, and find the hell
Of marriage worse then a decollation.

Der. You shall want cause I hope for to comeplain,
When you shall see your flying love return
To meet you, that you freely may enjoy her.

Shift. Thanks unto both our pains, that I have done
Already, our close kisses have been warmed
With the soft flame of love, and I have sealed
The match so sure, that it does need no witness.

Der. Forget not him then that procured your bliss.


Shift. I am so full of joy, that you shall make
Your own conditions, and besides I will
(Be you not wanting to your self) in your
Own way require you with a wealthy widow.

Der. I am not yet so frozen, but my blood
Will heat without a fever, be then pleased
To give me a full knowledge of my hopes.

Shift. She has a servant, who was sometimes mine,
And still desires to be so, for the love
I paid to his deserts, which he requires
In promising his aid to win his Mistress.
But you have happily prevented him,
And therefore no man fitter then your self
To Enjoy the benefit was meant to me.

Der. I cannot but confess my self most fit,
And therefore I Will assent unto your offer.

Shi You shall take letters of my commendation
To my old servitour, his name is Hog,
One whom his Mistress justly does regard.

Der. Let me alone for to commend my self;
I Will only take your letters for to purchase
My free admittance, then condemn my cunning
If my own courtship do not win the widow.

Shift. Well may you speed, I Will presently go write.


Der. Though it is no need, I Will help you to indite.


Enter Goodwit. Exeunt Good. How strangely fortune guides my destinies?
It is not yet five moons since I lived fice,
Yet in a foreign haven, now I breath
My native air, but want my liberty,
Which method of my fate, yet lets me see
Some likeness in this contrariety.
For Spain to me was but a wider prison,
From whence there was no way unto my freedom,
But in a hazardous capativity,
Glad in a floting prison to be in immured,
Since 'twas my safety to be so confined
Where I did fear more dangers, then I now
Do suffer, and so the bounteous heavens became
My Schoolmasters while they my mind prepared
For future sorrow, by foregoing its;
And taught me, that my later sufferings
Are little blessings by comparison:
But that which lessens not my misery
In this constraint, is the society
Of a good old man my fellow prisoner,
The Rhe^orick of whose love, would needs persuade
I have no cause of sadness, and I think
I have the less, because I think he loves me,
And why I know not, but lo here he comes.

Enter Freeman. Free. Come I must chide you, 'cause you will be alone.


Good^^ I take this place to be a monastery,
And we are all monasticks by our order.

Free. This is a feigned derision of your fortune,
I see your thraldom makes you melancholy.

Good. Sir, I have learned that there is nothing free
But what is infinite. Captivity
Is the inheritance of all things finite;
Nor can we boast our liberty, though we
Are not restrained by strong holds, when as
The neighboring air confines us, and each man
Is thraldom's perfect emblem, for in all
The soul is captive, and the bodi's thrall.

Free. Well can I see, that this Philosophy
Is not the argument of true content,
But constrained patience, which seeks reasons why
We ought to suffer, what we cannot fly:
But give me now to know my pardon first
Being granted for my curiosity.
Did fate or choice acquaint you with this gallant,
Who now unworthily does see you want?

Good. I cannot without thanks recount the love
Of that good man, with whom I traveled, he
Was the sole guide and guardian of my youth,
I was his only care, his pupil, son,
So he, so all called and accounted me,
And I were most ingrate did I deny
My self his son, whose love made me his heir.

Free. This answer's strangely wide from what I asked.
Now I am showing how this good old man
Being very sick, and ready for to pay
The debt he owed to nature, called me to him
And counseled me for Eng^and, to receive
Some moneys owing him, but above all
To find a father: fate only lent him leave
To name his dwelling, and that done, he dyed.

Free. Still you seem forgetful of my question.


Good. I now was coming to it? when I had spent
Those sums, my forward'st creditours would pay,
Then I began to seek a father, where
My Father did direct me, there I found
You Mr. of the house, but this young gallant
(As I then learned) his Fathers only son
Who late had purchased both the house and land,
I thinking then my Father was the seller
Meant with a sweet revenge to pray upon
The buyers heir, and therefore I entice't
His folly to the City, but now I
Do justly suffer for my foul intents.

Free. However then you mist him, you shall find
A Father in that house, half uncle to
This vain expensive gallant, now your cozen.

Good. But how can you assure me in this truth.


Free. My self is witness of the time, when you
Were first committed to the careful trust
Of him who since adopted you his son,
My old friend Curtise, to confirm your faith,
Know. I am prisoner for a debt is owing
Unto your uncle this young gallants Father,
Which I was surety for, his rigor made
Me obstinate, but dying, he bestowed
This debt upon your Father, who is willing
To grant my freedom at an easier rate,
And I of him to purchas't at a greater.

Good Thanks unto heaven and you, who thus have lightened
My sorrows by the knowledge of a Father,
I have debts owing, which would set me free,
That I may now go see him, for if I
Am son unto the Guardian of this heir,
He Is now in town with his fair niece and daughter.

Free. I can command the price of both our freedoms.
And be you ruled by me, you shall enjoy
A greater happiness then liberty,
By a new bonda e but a sweeter,

Good. If our thoughts agree, your promise crowns my wishes.


Free. When we are free. I will unfold the riddle
Before your Father, therefore my first care
Shall be we may enjoy an open air.

Exeunt. Enter Hog and Derrick. Hog. Sir, for my good old masters sake, I will
Do what I can, but this our little fort
I^ so besieged with suitors, that I fear
The Governness will be constrained to yield
By open force, if she be not ensnared
By some strange stratagem of Poetry.

Der. I care not this for all their ribaldry,
I never read of widow, won by ryming.

Hog. This and another thing will do the feat
Infallibly, but you shall hear a copy
Sent her this morning, which you will confess
Is very dangerous, thus it begins,
Even as the heedless fly, seeking to taste
The liquor glutinous, is taken fast
Within the galli-pot, so wretched I
Am caught, alas! by my viscosity,
Laboring for life in love-lime, such is my lot
For to be drowned in Cupids galli-pot,
Then call me as I am, it is all I crave,
Sweet widow, thy entangled gally-slave,
Who prays to heaven, that by the stars direction
We of two simples may make one confection.

Der. This rascal talks like an Apothecary.


Hog. He talks sir as he is and it is more likely
He will be worth his words, though he do promise
Miracles in these verses following.
I am no common suitor, thou shall see
I can do wonders by my faculty;
My d^ugs thy you h and beauty shall ressore,
Level thos^ wrinckles, which age'gins to score
Upon thy furrowed brow, thy fading hue,
Cold blood, decaying limb^, I will renew;
Ceruss of asses milk and Mercury,
Lac Virginis, but pedling trifles be
To what I use; I give not by my art
Color alone, but strength to every part,
Which work when I have finished in thee, then
I Will Idolize thy beauty with my pen.

Der. And when this Idoll's set up by the Noddy
I Will be the man shall worship her with my body.
You see sir, I can time too for a need.

Hog. Sir I am glad of your abilities.
Which may prevail, if that his threatening lines
Writ in poetic rage, do not over come her,
When you have heard them with a judging ear,
You cannot blame her if she love for fear:
Thus he goes on.
Yet know he begs who may command; my skill
Can temper for thy scorn a draught shall fill
Thy veins with rage, till thou have spent a night
In my Embrace, and dulled it with delight,
I ove-salle's cropped by Circe and Medea
Which Sagana with bold Canidia
Gathered by moonlight in mount Esquiline
Are but weak Philters, if compared with mine?
Then think upon my power, and yield thy heart
Rather toth' prayers of love, then strength of art,
Your humble friend and servitour* John Pestle.

Der. This Pestle shall never pound in the widows mortar.
I care not for his sorc'ry, he conjures best
Can raise an active spirit in her circle.

Hog. It Is that his verses threaten, had she seen um
I know not what effect they might have taken.

Der. Has she not seen um then? nor ever shall;
Thus ought seditious lines, haretical,
Snatches um, And Magical doctrine to be abolisht.
and tears um,
Hog But for you friend, your ears shall feel. that they
Are guilty too, of hearing of this doctrine,

Der. Nay, prithee honesty be not offended,
Here is a quarter Iacobin to buy
Thee cooling Iulips to allay thy choler.

Hog. I am appeased, now listen to the way
How to obtain my Mrs. first you must
Take no denial, women often yield
Sooner to importunity then reason.

Der. Like to the warlike Ram I will assail her
So fiercely, that she shall not dare resist.

Hog. The very name of Ram is ominous,
aside May you prove none of those whose tongues are stout
And threaten much before the onset, when
They come to fight, their noses fall a bleeding;
Now know my Mrs. chiefly in her match
Regards delight, promise enough of that;
It Is the best widow lime, you apprehend me.

Der. I warrant thee I Will pay her debt is due
By reverend Solons law, that's thrice a month.

Hog. Wise Solon was a fool, I do perceive
You know not the commandments of love;
If you could do no more then Cybels Priests,
Talk like a Satyr, or you will never win her,
Promise enough, but if your Impotence
Fall in performance, be it at your peril.

Der. Thou art too young to teach me how to woo,
I have prevailing Canons of my own,
Prithee begin the way unto thy Mrs.

Hog So you might prove a warlike Ram indeed.


Der. To her I mean, not into her, that is
Go thou before, and I will follow thee.

Hog. My apprehension does obey you sir.


Exeunt Ent. old Good. Crab. Elisa. Friendly. Phillis. W^ittington. young Good.
Frema^. Dove. Old Good. Cozens, heaven send you joy of your own choice,
As much as Mr. Friendly and his sister,
He has deserved my Niece by freeing of
My Nephew from the hands of bawds and villains,
And covered this with a new benefit
In giving him his fair and virtuous sister.

Friend. Thanks unto heaven and you, I do enjoy
My hopes, my sister more then she could wish.

old Good Thank heaven alone, you know my brothers will
Did bind my care to hinder you, next I
Confirm my daughters choice, joy to you all
As much as I conceive for the return
Of my long absent son, by thee no grief
Shall trouble the just gladness of this day
which is augmented by your liberty.
Kind Mr Freeman, unto whom I owe
Next heavens blessing, that I see my son.

Free. And I do owe to him that I am free,
It Is for that goodness I saw shine in him,
I pay to you what rigor can exact.

Goodw. Good Sir when your bag's unsealed, we will divide
Were I extreme to you I were ingrate.

Free. I need no such requital, I have wealth
Enough, I only beg to be all^'d
To both your virtues, by the marriage
Of your best son unto my only daughter,
Vris and modis, I will make her worth
Five thousand pounds, this is my sum to both.
young Good. Sir, let me beg your favor for to seal
Your blessing with this grant, mine eyes have seen,
While she did daily visit her old Father,
More excellence united in her breast
Then there is scattered in all woman kind,
I never saw her but me seemed, an Angel
Did come to comfort us, in our constraint,
she is all good, virtue it self Incarnate.

old Good. But how are you assured, that she who is
The Mrs. of such noble worth, does love you?
yo Good Such sweetness cannot want mercy, and her face
Silently tells me, she is full of grace.
A thousand graces on her polisht brow
The throne of love, do lead their stately measures
And lower millions dance in either eye,
Their active rounds, with nimble majesty,
And if my love to her do not deceive me,
I saw love lighten from those eyes on me.

old Good. May your success, prove your love does not err.


Free. My prom se shall secure him, for I know
Her love of him, she thinks her only virtue.

Enter Falcner and Grace. Falc. Lordings and Ladies save you save you all
My good old Mr you are welcome first
Unto the City, and I beg my pardon
For the late cheat I pratis'd on the Farmer,
Next, I invite you all unto my wedding.
Cr. Faith Richard as your manners gave me leave
To marry first, so they might wish me joy too.

Falc. To explate my fault I wish you double
Joy. Joy and Joy; that is, Joy upon Joy:
For I confess I heard it by your neighbors
And that my sometimes Fellow Francis is
My good old Mrs. son, and my young Master.
For which I Joy, and wish him also Joy.

Yo Good. I thank you Richard, but is this your Bride?


Grace For want sir of a better I am she.


Fall. Peace my Incarnate frailty am not I
Thy head, then give me leave to speak sir this
Is she, that frivolous thing I must call wife.

Ent. Hog (in a strange disguise, a Torch in his hand) Shife, Lydia, Derrick,
and Cunnimonger, (following hand in hand.) Elder. Good. But soft, what have we
here, a mask!


Hog. Least any here, who has been musled up
In ignorance, and never yet did sup
Of the Poetic Fountain, should mistake me,
Who ever thinks thus from the mark is wide all,
For I am he is guest at every bridal:
Welcome god Hymen, I am he does lead
With my directing torch, the Bride to bed,
Where she with trembling joy does long to taste
Those cares from which she hitherto did fast

Shift Now Mr. Hymen you are out, my Bride
Does know the relish of the thing you wait on.

Hog. I was not out till you did put me out,
But by my godhead ^e begin again.
The news of joining of more loving hands
(Joy bless the time) in matrimonial bands,
Has filled the mouth of fame, and therefore hither
I bring these paires that with you altogether
I may be present, suffer thein to be here,
And they shall recompense with mirth your cheer.

Old Good. God Hymen's welcome and the guests he brings.
You sir, I am informed have been a suitor
Unto my Niece, and that regard will claim
An invitation, my old neighbor Derrick
Has as much right as your divinity
For to be present at these nuptial's.
For besides him we know no other Hymen;
Then mix your selves with us, and let us all
Contend who shall exceed in mirth, and may
The Brides sweet brows presage a glorious day.

Hymen waves over his couples to the other side with his Torch. Hymen's
EPILOGUE.
Joy and content to all that fill
The round, we beg not to our skill
A solemn clap, but only hope
We have arrived at our scope,
That Is your unfain'd delight, this we
Do still account our chiefest Fee;
And that we wish to every guest
As great as at our bridal feast,
That the reflection of your mirth
May bread in us a second birth
Of equallity, while gladly we
Exeunt Do give your smiles a plaudite.
omnes. FINIS.

