TWO very USEFUL and COMPENDIOUS Theological Treatises: The FIRST showing The
NATURE of WIT, WISDOM and FOLLY.

The SECOND describing The Nature, Use, and Abuse OF THE TONGUE and SPEECH,
Whereby principally WISDOM and FOLLY are expressed.

Wherein also are diverse Texts of SCRIPTURE touching the respective Heads
explained.

By RICHARD WARD, Preacher of the Gospel at Bushey in Hartford-shire.

Prima Sapientia est, Vita Laudabilis, and apud Deum Pura Men's, per quam Puri
puro junguntur, and Sancti sancto sociantur.

Nazianz. in Apolog. Wisdom is the Principal Thing, therefore get Wisdom, and
with all thy gettings get Understanding.

Prove. 4.7. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard near the little North Door, 1673.

TO THE TRULY HONORABLE, COLONEL TITUS, ONE OF His MAJESTY'S Bedchamber.
Much Honored and Worthy SIR,
THese two short Treatises must either have come into the World without a
Patron; (which at first I thought) or must shelter themselves under your
Patronage, which upon second thoughts, I have presumed to do, for this Cause:
In the Dedication of Books Authors usually aim at such Mecaenas's, as either
they have some Ecclesiastical Relation unto, or have been long acquainted with,
or have been greatly obliged unto; or such as are able to understand and judge,
of what is written, whether Corrupt or Sound, whether chaffy or solid; or such
as are able, in regard of their Parts, Place, and Power, to give countenance,
and patronage to the Books dedicated unto them. Now Sir, You above all the
Friends I have, may most justly challenge the Patronage of this Piece, in all
the forenamed regards. For

When your high Employments, and important Affairs will permit you to be in the
Country, you are then under my Ministry.

I have had the honor and happiness to know you, to be thoroughly known unto
you, and intimately acquainted with you, for many years.

You have been a constant Friend, yea as a Patron to me and mine.

Your singular Parts, general Learning and knowledge, and transcendent
Judgment, makes you abundantly able to understand and judge what Books are of
worth, and which are worthless; what Books are profitable, and which are
useless; what Books are Orthodox, and which are Heterodox: And therefore if
this short Manual be approved by you, I hope it will please the most and best.

Again, so eminent is your place in the State, and so great your Power, through
the Favor of His Majesty, your Princely Master, for your extraordinary parts,
personal worth, and singular Faithfulness and Loyalty; that you are fittest and
best able to patronize this poor Infant, that flies unto you, as its only
Guardian, for Protection.

Concerning these two Treatises presented unto you, be pleased to observe, That
Books may be distinguished by these four Notions; some are to be spit out, some
to be swallowed, some to be eaten, and some to be chawed.

I. Some Books are to be spit out; as impertinent, erroneous, heretical, lying,
scurrilous, scoffing, seditious, and obscene Discourses, and the like; which
neither afford any lawful Pleasure, or true Profit unto the Reader; but rather
bring with them a danger unto him. These Books I say, are not to be relished,
but rejected, lest the Appetite by them should be infected.

II. Some Books are to be swallowed; as Romances, Histories, Poetical Fictions,
and all such Books as are written only for the Solace and lawful Refreshment
of the Mind; these are perfunctorily to be perused, and cursorily to be read.

III. Some Books are to be eaten; as Books concerning Morality, Nature, Liberal
Sciences, Illiberal Arts, and the like; these may diligently be read, and
carefully studied, in respect of their benefit, but yet neither in such manner
or measure, as if those only were the Breasts of true Nourishment, or Books
most worthy our study.

IV. Some Books are to be chawed, and scriously ruminated and pondered; as
those which are written for the understanding, explicating, and applying of the
Sacred Oracles of God; because these minister Comfort to the Mind and spirit
seasonably; these suffer no inordinate Affection to domineer over the Will
imperiously, yea these tend wholly to the spiritual and effectual
accomplishment of the Reader; wherefore such Books are most diligently, and
principally to be studied. Now of this nature, and kind are these two
Tractates, which I here present to your favorable and judicious perusal;
wherein my endeavor has been, that there may be as many Sentences as Lines;
and that it may be a serious and sinnewy Piece without any affectation.

Dear and highly honored Sir, that your Health and Life may be long continued,
and your Honor and Happiness increased, is and shall be the hearty Desire and
Prayer of,

SIR, Your much obliged, and most Humble Servant, Rich. Ward.

To the READER.
Courteous and Christian Reader,
WHen I remembered that memorable saying of Tully, Pudeat illos qui ita in
studiis se abdiderunt, ut ad vitam communem nullum fructum proferre possint: A
man should not cloister up himself in his Study, for private but public
profit; not only for the increase of his own Knowledge and Learning, but for
the augmentation of the spiritual benefit, and advantage of many others: Yea,
when I considered, that nothing concerns us more, next to Gods glory, than the
salvation of our Souls; (Matthew. 16.26. Luke 10.20.) and that the Sacred Oracles
of Holy Writ were able to make a Christian wise and perfect unto salvation; (2 Timothy 3.16.) I thought it my duty, in what I was able, to endeavor to promote
the benefit of those who desire to abound in all spiritual Knowledge. Now what
I do intend, and have here attempted, to this end and purpose is, the
Explicating, Explaining, and Applying, of some material Heads, or Words
mentioned in the Bible. And if these two short Treatises be kindly accepted, or
generally well approved of, by thee, gentle Reader, then I shall be emboldened
to handle some other Scripture Words, both Dogmatically, Practically, and
Polemically, as I have done these, in small Volumes or Tracts.

In a Book worth reading and observing, there are three things principally
required: A Plain and easy Method; Sound and Orthodox Matter, or Necessary and
Saving Truths; and a good Pen, or neat and handsome Expressions. The two former
of these, kind Reader, thou will find in this small Manual, but the last thou
must not expect; seeing the Lord, who diversely distributes his Gifts, for the
good of his Church and children, has not made me like Aaron, of an Eloquent
Tongue, or enabled me to express my self in a high soaring Style. Wherefore, I
entreat thee, Courteous Reader, to accept of the few Talents which the Lord
has lent me to improve; and to expect sound and soul-saving matter from me,
but strong lines, neat phrases, polite and eloquent Expressions, sweet and
mellifluous Words from others. I naturally affect Matter more than Words, and
sound Sentences than set Speeches: My study is to express Multa paucis, much
Matter in few Words; and my care is, in whatsoever I write, to keep such a
measure, that it may neither be so brief, that it cannot well be understood,
nor so tedious as to breed dislike. Because little Gates suit best with a small
City, I will therefore here, by way of Preface, say no more but this: Thy
Pleasure and Approbation, good Reader, will be my Pains, and thy Dislike my
Ease; wherefore I will neither commend nor discommend what I have here writ,
but commending thee unto the Lords Gracious Protection, and this Book to thy
kind Acceptance, I bid thee in the Lord

Farewell.
A TREATISE OF Wit, Wisdom and Folly; AS ALSO OF WISE MEN and FOOLS, BOTH
Natural, Political, Moral and Spiritual.
CHAP. I. Of Wit.
I WILL neither here treat of Wit as a Poet, by Romances, and Fictions; nor as
an Orator, by high Encomiums, and Hyperbolical praises of Wit; nor as a
Buffoon, by quirks of Wit, to abuse, disgrace or flatter any; nor as a Jeaster,
to tickle, and delight the Readers fancy; but as a Divine, to instruct men
concerning the Nature, Use, and Abuse of Wit. Now herein I will 1. Treat of Wit
in general. Then 2. Of evil Wit, or Wit abused. Then 3. Of good Wit, or Wit
well used. And 4. I will then improve what is handled, and hinted at, by way of
Application.


Paragraph I. Of Wit in general.
In this Section we have four things to consider of, viz.

FIRST, The Divisions, or Kinds of Wits: namely, Wit is either Forced or
Natural.

I. There is a Forced Wit, viz. when men do things Invita Minerva, or work
against the grain: concerning these Seneca says, Enforced Wits never answer or
satisfy expectation; and that labor is in vain, which Nature repineth at, or
opposes. II. There is a Natural Wit, viz. when a man does a thing Pingui
Minerva, or, readily. This is either Extraordinary, or Ordinary.
I. There are Extraordinary Natural Wits. Now concerning these it is said, If
ground be moderately enriched with Soil, it bears plentifully, but if the dung
lie too thick upon it, it sends forth ordinarily abundance of weeds. Thus
moderate Wits often bring forth good fruit, when very quick Wits, and rare
natural parts abound with weeds; as many rare Wits have produced or brought
forth nothing but Plays, or scurrilous Poems, or Devilish Doctrines, or
damnable Heresies: as Summi Philosophi summi haeresiarchi, the greatest
Philosophers were the archest heretics.

2. There are Ordinary Natural Wits. These are either I. Evil, and Abused: or
and both are either II. Good, and well used. and both are either 1. More Ripe
and quick, or, 2. More Heavy and dull.



First, some say, a good, ripe, and quick Wit has three Degrees: viz.

I. Of Hope: this is in Children. II. Of Practice: this is in Young Men, and is
perceived, 1. By a desire to Learn. And 2. By a quick Conception, and
Apprehension. And 3. By a ready Expression and Answer. And 4. By a good Memory.
And
III. Of Perfection; to wit, of Parts: this is in the elder sort, when they
quickly conceive, faithfully remember, and fruitfully put in practice those
things which they have learned.
Secondly, there is an Ordinary Natural Wit which is more dull and heavy; and
these Wits often prove of great worth, e.g. Archelaus the Philosopher, learning
Geometry of Hipponicus, was so dull, and yet became so well learned, yea so
singular and excellent in that Art, that his Master would say, Surely Geometry
fell into his mouth as he gaped. Demosthenes was very hard to conceive, and yet
none more famous than he among the Grecian Orators: upon the sudden he could
not declaim, and being thereunto entreated would answer, Non sum paratus, I am
not prepared. As Vessels or Glass Bottles of a narrow mouth, do more
difficultly receive, but more surely retain the Liquor; so Wits that do more
slowly conceive, for the most part do most surely remember. Wit gotten by
industry, though it be very hard in conceiving, yet it is not hasty in
forgetting.

SECONDLY, Observe, what the Nature of Wit in general is; namely,

I. It makes much of a Little. The Sophists of Greece could by their Eloquence,
and copiousness of Wit, make of a Mouse an Elephant, and of a Molehill a
Mountain. Castilic. in his Courtier, lib. 2. says, I have heard of some men so
witty and eloquent, that they have not wanted matter to make a Book in the
praise of a Fly; others in the praise of a Quartane Ague; and another in the
praise of Baldness.

II. Wit is not evil if well employed: for as Tully would have in his Orator,
Aliquid redundans, and amputandum, some chips to be paired off, from the
sounder timber; so a man had better have somewhat too much Wit, than something
too little; rather something redundant than wanting.

III. It is the Nature of great Wits to stand much upon their credit; as the
best Musicians are most hardly entreated to play. Cicero should once have
pleaded upon small warning, but by an unexpected occasion it was deferred to a
longer time, and the news thereof was brought him by his servant Erotes; at
which he so rejoiced, that he made Erotes of a Bond man a free Citizen of Rome.
Plutar.

THIRDLY, Observe, what the Nature of very ripe Wits for the most part is;
namely,

First, oftentimes soon ripe soon rotten; as those Women who conceive and bring
forth too soon, do soon wax old, as the Indian Calingae do, who bring forth at
five years old, and die at eight, as Pliny says, li. 7. c. 2. or as Trees
exceeding fruitful do soon wax old; so Wits soon ripe, and very quick betimes,
do often (not always) decay quickly and flag: or, excellent Wits are seldom
long lived, and the best things on earth do soonest decline and fade. As Fire
the clearer it burns, the sooner it goes forth; so Wits the more illustrious
and ripe they be, the shorter usually is their continuance amongst us.

Secondly, Ripe Wits are often too forward; for as the Sallow Tree does cast
off her seed before it be ripe, whereupon Homer calls it, A Spoil-fruit: so
some Wits too soon ripe, will take upon them to teach and write before it be
meet.

Thirdly, oftentimes ripe Wits are barren of good fruits: for as the Olive Tree
is long a growing, but brings forth excellent fruit, and the Sallow-ttree
presently shoots up, but is barren; so it is usually with Wits too soon ripe.
As the Vine watered with Wine is soon withered; as the blossom in the fattest
ground is soonest blasted; and as the Goat, the fatter she is, the less
fertile; so the more Witty that many men are, the less happy they prove in the
end.

Fourthly, Ripe Wits are oftentimes very fruitful in Vice; for as in great
Forests mighty wild Beasts are bred; so in great Wits great Vices do too
frequently spring up: and as the freshest colors soonest fade, the keenest
Rasor soonest turns his edge, the finest Cloth is soonest eaten with the
Moaths, and the Camebrick sooner stained than the course Canvas; so the most
pregnant Wit is soonest perverted. Or as the sleetish Fish swalloweth the most
delicate bait, the highest towering Hawk traineth soonest to the Lure; so the
wittiest Brain is soonest inveigled with the sudden view of alluring vanities:
Or as the fine Crystal is sooner crazed than the hard Marble, the greenest
Beech burns faster than the driest Oak, the fairest Silk is soonest soiled,
the sweetest Wine turns to the sharpest Vinegar, the Pestilence does soonest
infect the clearest complexion, and the Caterpiller cleaves to the ripest
fruit; so the most delicate Wit is soonest allured with small inticements unto
vice, and most subject to yield unto vanity. Fire (an Element so necessary,
that without it man cannot live) does as well burn the house, as burn in the
house, if it be abused; Treacle does as well poison as help, if it be taken out
of time; Wine if it be immoderately taken does hurt the Stomach, inflame the
Liver, and mischief the Drunkard: Physic does destroy, if not well tempered
and compounded: Law does overthrow and condemn the just, if it be not rightly
expounded; Divinity does mislead, if it be not truly delivered; poison is
extracted out of the Hony-suckle by the Spider, and venom out of the Rose by
the Canker: and even so the greatest wickedness is drawn out of the greatest
Wits, if they be abused by will, or entangled by the World, or allured by Women.

Fifthly, Ripe Wits are oftentimes very fickle and inconstant. As there is
nothing more smooth than glass, yet nothing more brittle; nothing more white
than Snow, yet nothing less firm; so there is nothing more trim than Wit, yet
nothing more fickle. As Polypus upon what Rock soever he sits, turns
himself, or becomes of the same color with the Rock; or as the Bird Piralis,
sitting upon a white Cloth is white, upon green, green, and changes his color
with every Cloth; or as our changeable Silk, turned toward the Sun has many
colors, and turned back, the contrary; so Wit shapeth it self to every
conceit, being constant in nothing but in inconstancy.

FOURTHLY, Observe, that gross Diet, and immoderate Feeding are the Impediments
of Wit; and contrarily, choice diet, and temperance are helps thereunto. Thus
much for Wit in general.

Paragraph II. Of Evil Wit, or Wit abused.
In this Section I will only observe two things, viz.

FIRST, that Wit abused may be compared to these three things:

I. To Weeds; for as many wild weeds growing in a Field, although naught of
themselves, yet are the signs of a fertile and fruitful ground, if it were
tilled; so many acts, qualities, and practices which are naught of themselves,
do argue no barren Wit, if it were rightly ordered, and well employed. And

II. To Owls; for as they see better in the night than in the day: so some are
more witty in devising mischievous matters, than in inventing things good,
profitable, and praise worthy. And

III. To Crabs; for as the Sea-Crab swimmeth always against the stream; so Wit
abused striveth always against Wisdom.

SECONDLY, Observe, that the Evils, and evil Fruits and effects of Wit abused,
do either respect Others, or Our selves.

First, some Evils, and evil Fruits of Wit abused do respect Others For I.
Sometimes a good Wit ill employed, is dangerous in and unto a Commonwealth.
And II. Sometimes it is hurtful to particular Persons; for Man's Wit is of it
self so corrupt and perverse, that by counterfeiting and dissembling, one may
easily beguile and abuse another, having one thing secretly hid in his heart,
and outwardly says and does the quite contrary. The fiction of the Sirens, was
this in the Moral, Pleasant Wits vitiated in accustomed lewdness; who therefore
were feigned to be Monsters of a parted nature, who with sweet tunes enticed
men to destruction.


Secondly, some Evils, and evil Fruits of Wit abused, do respect Our selves: For

1. In general; sometimes Wit is hurtful to a Man's self: as Oedipus his
cunning Wit in resolving Sphinxes Riddle, did but betray him to the fatal
Marriage of his own Mother. And 2. Particularly; these three Evils, and evil
Fruits do follow Wit abused:
I. It oftentimes makes a man more prone to Love, Lust, and Lewdness. In the
sweet Bud the eating Canker dwells; and the forwardest Bud is eaten by the
Canker ere it blow.

II. Oftentimes it makes a man blasphemously overween; as one Alphonsus,
mentioned by Herold and the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 6. cap. 7. said, Si ille a
principio creationis interfuisset Dei consilio, nonnulla melius and ordinatius
disposuisset: If he from the beginning of the creation had been Gods
counselor, he had disposed some things better and more orderly.

III. Wit oftentimes makes a man abuse Scripture: as Prateolus, with some
truth, and more malice, says of Origin, P. 377. Dum ingenio suo nimium
indulget, dum so plus cunctis sapere praesumit, quasdam Scripturas novo more
interpretatur. Hence Wit sometimes is the cause of error: Ex magnis ingeniis
magni errores; great errors have not come but from great Wits.

Paragraph III. Of good Wit, or Wit well used.
In this Section we have five things to observe, and consider of, viz.

First, Observe that Wit well used may be compared to these three things.

I. To the Fish Trochus; for as it (as Pliny says, lib. 9. cap. 52.) does
conceive of it self; so some through the happiness of their Wit, do, as it were
infuse into themselves the seeds of all Learning, and by their own industry
become learned. These the Grecians call (...), teachers of themselves. And

II. To Bitumen; for as fire skippeth thereunto, so soon as it comes near it,
by reason of the cognation, and near affinity that is betwixt them, as Pliny
says, lib. 2. cap. 108. so Wits born to Learning, do readily, and forth with
take it. And

III. To Chalk; for as certain grounds have in them merle, white earth, or
chalk, by which they are manured and fatted, so an honest and good Wit has
that in it, which can enrich and better it self.

Secondly, Observe that three things argue a good Wit, viz. A good invention, a
quick conceit or apprehension, and a ready answering: as ^mpedocles, saying, He
could not find a Wiseman; Xenophanes presently answered, No wonder, Nam
sapientem esse oportet qui agnoscat sapientem: For none can find a Wiseman but
a Wiseman: intimating, that his want of wisdom made it hard for him to find out
a wiseman, and not the want of wisemen.

Thirdly, Observe that the excellency of a Wit well used does appear by these
two particulars.

I. It is better than a well-formed, and well-featured body. For by how much
the more the interior senses are more precious, and the gifts of the mind more
excellent than the exterior organs and instruments of the body: by so much the
more is Wit to be preferred before the outward proportion of lineaments.

II. It is better than strength. The Captain Consalvo Fernando in the last war
at Naples, performed great exploits, but rather by policy than any great power,
whereby he always overcame in battle: and desirous to manifest to the world,
how he was aided by his subtle practices, took for his Impress a Cross-bow
bent with a rack, and thereunto this Posie, Ingenium superat vires, Wit excels
strength. Paul. Jor.

Fourthly, Observe that there is a threefold Use of good Wits. For

I. Sometimes they serve for convincing men of their iniquity and folly. One
asking Demaratus, who was the honestest man in Sparta? he answered, He who
resembles thee least. And

II. Sometimes they serve for restraining men's curiosity, in civil, and
spiritual things. One asked an Egyptian, what he carried folded and covered so
close up? He answered, It is therefore wrapped up, that thou might not know.
Another asking, what God made before he made heaven? was answered, He made hell
for such inquisitive persons. And

III. Wit sometimes serves for the composing of History; as Salust was much
commended for the dexterity of his Wit, especially in writing his History.
Petrus Crinitus.

Fifthly, Observe that the helps unto a good Wit are of two sorts. For

First, there are some helps unto a good Wit: these are either false or true.

I. There are false and evil helps, as wine; which some say, is a special means
to beget Wit; Vinum acuit ingenium; but Wit procured by Wine is for the most
part like the sparklings in the cup when it is filling, they brisk it for a
moment, but immediately die. Wine is such a wherstone for Wit, that if it be
often set thereon, it will quickly grind all the steel out, and scarce leave a
back where it found an edge.

II. There are true and good helps for the begetting of Wit; as keeping company
with good quick Wits, living in a good air, and observing a good diet. Acutiora
ingenia, and ad intelligendum apertiora eorum qui terras incolunt eas, in
quibus aer sit purus ac tenuis, quam eorum qui utuntur crasso coelo atque
concreto: quinetiam quo utaris cibo, interest ad mentis aciem. Cicero 2. de
not. Deor.

Secondly, There are some helps for the bettering of a good Wit: as I.
Learning: for Wit without Learning is like a tree without fruit. And II.
Practice or use; for as iron and brass are the brighter for wearing; so that
Wit is most ready which is most employed.


Paragraph IV. The improvement of Wit: or, the practical part thereof.
In this Section we have some things to consider of by way of exprobration,
some by way of instruction, and some by way of exhortation.

First, Three sorts of men are to blame in regard of Wit, viz.

I. Those who trust to their own Wits: for he who trusts most to his own Wit,
seems (says Plato) to be most ignorant. And II. Those who are proud of their
Wits; if Hermes says true, that an humble witty man is hardly to be found,
then this fault is frequent, and common with Wits. And III. Those who prefer
their own wit before the wit of others. As he is foolish who prefers the
blossom before the fruit, the bud before the flower, and the green blade before
the ripe ear of corn: so he is unwise who prefers his own wit before the wisdom
of all men.
Secondly, From, concerning, or in regard of Wit, we may learn these ten
lessons.

1. That oftentimes the best and ripest wits are most and soonest tainted with
some folly, vanity, iniquity or other: for Nullum extremum ingenium sine
dementia: Scaliger: there was never any great wit without some spice of folly.
As the sweetest Rose has its prickle, the finest Velvet its brake, and the
best Flower its bran: so the sharpest wit has some corruption mixed with it:
and as the sweetest Wine makes the sowrest Vinegar, so the best Wits corrupted
prove most pernicious. Nullum ingenium potest ess^ magnum, antequam baheat
aliquid admistum furoris. Senec. de tranquil. anim. As the sweet Rose soonest
withers, the firest Lawn has the largest mote, the most orient Pearl is
soonest blemished, the chiefest Buds soonest nipt with frost, the sweetest
Flowers sorest eaten with Cankers, and the whitest and softest of the Seres
wool fretteth soonest and deepest; so the ripest and youngest Wits are soonest
overtaken and overthrown with folly.

2. We may learn, that Wit is sometimes an enemy to Wisdom. Nihil odiosius
sapientiae acumine nimio. Raleigh. There is nothing more injurious or odious to
true Wisdom than an affected worded wittiness, which makes a weighty discourse
liable to Diogenes censure, of a Tragedy much commended: That it had been a
good one, if a man could have seen it for words.

3. We may learn, that the best and quickest wits require some rest and
refreshing. Lipsius says, Ingenia vegetativa must have suos recessus, strong
and lively wits must have their retreit, or intermission of exercise: and as
warlike or battle Rams recoyl back to return with the greater force: so does
the mind unto study after pause and rest; not altogether unlike to a Field,
which by lying fallow, becomes far more fat and fruitful. Hence Seneca says,
Recreation of wits ought to be allowed, for when they have a little rested,
they oftentimes prove more sharp and quick.

4. We may learn, that Wit sometimes dwells in a little body, sometimes in a
sorry lodge. Homer in his description of Ulysses, makes him of a little
stature, but of an excellent wit: and on the contrary, he sets forth Ajax, with
a corpulent and tall body, but very simple in mind and judgment. The fifth
Queen of the Lydians was Mirrha, who was so little of body that they called her
a Dwarf; but in quickness of Wit she was so high, that they called her a Giant.
Strabo. Apis acriter pungit, and mel conficit: sic in parvo corpore anima
ingeniosa, and accerrima viget, and doctrinae suavitatem profert. Glos. in
Eccles. As it was said of bald, hooknos'd, crook-footed Galba, That only his
wit dwelt ill: so often it is seen, that a course curtain covers a rare
picture; an earthen pot contains a sovereign elixar; a crooked body, an upright
mind; and no pleasing outside an excellent wit. Potest ingenium fortissimum ac
beatissimum sub qualibet cute latere: Pot^st ex deformi humilique corpusculo
formosus animus ac magnus exire. Non enim deformitate corporis foedatur animus,
sed pulchritudint animi corpus ornatur. Senec. ep. 77.

5. We may learn, as Diogenes says, that the wit of man is apt to all
goodness, if it be applied thereunto. And

6. That wit has always been highly esteemed. Ingenium quondam fuerat
pretiosius auro.

Wit was of old, more worth than gold. 7. We may learn, that wit seldom seems
of much worth without wealth. For as an edge cannot be any thing worth, if it
have nothing to cut, and as Miner cannot work without metals; so Wit cannot
thrive without wealth. Or, as it nothing avails to be a cuning Lapidary, and
to have no stones to work with, or a skilful Pilot, and have no ship, or a
thrifty man, and have neither money nor stock: so it is to little purpose to
have fine dexterity of wit, except there be wealth to maintain and show it.

8. We may learn, that there are diversity of Wits; for some cannot profit
under some Masters, but can under others: Some Wits are better managed by
force, and some by fair words.

9. We may learn, that Wit is sometimes lost with age. When Hermogenes was but
fifteen years old, he was said to be an approved Sophist; but afterward he
utterly lost the habit of that faculty; whence Antiochus Sophista said of him,
Hermogenes is become in his old age a child, who in his childhood was an old
man.

10. Lastly, we may learn that a true good Wit is constant in goodness: for as
the Sun shines upon the dunghill and is not corrupted; the Diamond lies in the
fire, and is not consumed; the Crystal touches the Toad, and is not poisoned,
and the bird Trochilus lives by the mouth of the Crocodile, and is not
spoiled: so a perfect Wit is never bewitched with lewdness, nor enticed to
lasciviousness.

Thirdly, Four things are required of us in regard of Wit, viz.

I. To have a special care of, and regard unto the Wit of our children: for as
Mortar is to be straight-ways used, because it quickly dries; so the Wit of a
child is forth with to be endued with literature, and wholesome counsel, lest
growing stubborn and hard, it do not admit the hand of a fashioner. The more
fruitful the earth is by nature, the more it is corrupted, if it be neglected:
So Wits the more pregnant they are, the more vices they bring forth, if they be
not rightly instructed. As the Potter fashioneth his clay when it is soft; the
Sparrow is taught to come when it is young; and the Iron being hot, receives
any form with the stroke of the Hammer, and keeps it being cold for ever: so
the tender Wit of a child, if with diligence it be instructed in youth, will
with industry use those qualities in age.

II. It is required of us, to have a low conceit of our own Wit; for he best
perceives his own Wit, who though his knowledge be great, yet thinks himself
to understand little.

III. It is here required of us, to labor and endeavor to learn wisdom.
Socrates says, that man is very unhappy, who has Wit and will not learn
Wisdom; for the best Wit without heavenly Wisdom, makes us either the devils
instruments to trudge upon his errands and to drudge in his service, or his
implements to wear his coat, to make him pastimes: and therefore let him who
has a quick and capable Wit, so give his mind to the study of spiritual
knowledge, that by his Wit he may reap not only pleasure but profit, and that
not only external but internal. Abscondere talcutum in terra, est acceptum
ingenium in terrenis actibus implicare, and non lucrum spirituale acquirere.
Chrysostom. sup. Matthew. 25.

IV. It is required of us, in regard of Wit, to study how to make a right use
thereof. Note here, In the Levitical Law, Deuteronomy. 21.10, 11. etc. there are
directions for the usage of a Captive taken to wise. Now by way of allusion:
this Captive-woman is Wit, as yet unsanctified, or Wit without Wisdom: when
speeches are witty, whilst the behavior is wicked; when deeds are in
congruities, whilst words are Apothegms. In this case this must be done, the
hair must be shaved, and the nails pared; that is, we must take off the abuse
of wit, and pare off such evils as usually are concomitant, viz.

1. Blasphemy, in jesting with the sacred Scriptures, And 2. Lasciviousness, in
wanton discourses and Poems. And 3. Insolence, in trampling on men of weaker
parts. And 4. Contention, in making Policy to eat out Piety: for this being
done, Wit is become Wisdom, and then we may marry her, and use her as our own.
Thus much briefly for Wit.
CHAP. II. Of Wisdom and Prudence.
IN this Chapter I will 1. Treat of Wisdom and Prudence in general. Paragraph
I. 2. Of carnal and humane Wisdom in particular. Paragraph II. and III. 3. Of
spiritual Wisdom in special. Paragraph IV.


Paragraph 1. Of Wisdom and Prudence in general.
In this Section we have two main things to observe or consider of, whereof the
first is more Doctrinal, the other more Practical.

1. In the Doctrinal Part we have these eight things to open and unfold.

1. That Wisdom in the Word is Referred to many: As

First, to God essentially: as Luke 11.49. The Wisdom of God said, I will send
them Prophets, etc. And Romans 11.33. O the depth of the wisdom of God! Yea, God
is said to destroy the wisdom of the wise, and that for these three causes.

I. For the epidemical and general iniquity of a People. Isa. 3 2. Jer. 49.7.
And II. For the formality, and hypocritical worship of a People. Isa. 29.13,
14. And III. For their craft and cruelty against his People. Isa. 44.25. But
having to handle the Wisdom of God in my Tract of Divine Attributes, I here
wave it.
Secondly, wisdom is referred to Christ personally: as, Luke 2.52. Jesus
increased in wisdom. Thus Wisdom, that is, Christ does call I. To men, and the
children of men, Prove. 8.4. And II. To fools, and foolish men, Prove. 1.22. and
8.5. and 9.1, 4. And III. To all in general, whether high or low, rich or poor,
wise or simple. Prove. 1.20. and 8.1. etc. But having to handle the wisdom of
Christ, in the History of his Life, Death, etc. I here omit it.


Thirdly, Wisdom is referred to Things, or irrational Creatures: And thus I.
Job refers Wisdom privatively, or negatively to the Ostrich, Job 39.20. And II.
Agur the son of Jakeh, Prove. 30.24. refers wisdom affirmatively to some
creatures; saying, There are four small things in the earth, which are wise,
yea, full of wisdom, viz. 1. The Pismires are a people not strong, yet they
prepare their meat in Summer. 2 The Conies are a people not mighty, yet they
make their houses in the rock. 3. The Grasshoppers have nothing, yet go they
forth all by bands. 4. The Spider takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings
Palaces.



Fourthly, Wisdom is referred to rational, incorporeal, and immortal creatures,
as Angels, 2 Samuel 14.20. My Lord is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel of
God.

Fifthly, Wisdom is referred to rational, corporeal, and mortal creatures; that
is, both

I. To People. Note here, the Grecians boast (as Paufanius says) that all the
Wisemen were of Greece; but the Oracle of Apollo pronounced, that the
Chaldeans, and the Hebrews only had wisdom parted and divided betwixt them.
Indeed if we consult the Oracles of God in this point, they plainly teach us,
Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep my commandments and do them; for this is your wisdom and
understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall say, Surely this great
nation is a wise and understanding people. Thus the people who are most
obedient unto God, are in Gods esteem the wisest people.

II. Wisdom is referred to Persons: as

First, To children: Prove. 10.1. A wise son makes a glad father. But

Secondly, To women; and that either I. Ironically; as, Judge. 5.29. Her wise
ladies answered her, etc. Or II. Truly: Prove. 19.14. and 31.26. A wise and
prudent wife is from the Lord. Note here by the way the marks and properties
both of a wise son, and of a wise woman.


I. The marks and properties of a wise son are these. 1. He rejoices the heart
of his Parents, Prove. 1.10. 2. He will obey the instruction of his father,
Prove. 13.1. 3. He keeps the Law of God, Prove. 28.7.
II. The marks and properties of a wise woman, are 1. Negatively; not to sooth
up people in their humors and vain phancies; as the Mother of Siseraes wise
Ladies did, Judge. 5.29. 2. A wisewoman builds her house, Prove. 14.1. that is,
takes pains to profit her family, and to do that which concerns her duty in
her house. And 3. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace is in
her tongue, Prove. 31 26. that is, her tongue is as a book, whereby one might
learn many good things, she delighting to talk of the Word of God.

Thirdly, Wisdom is referred to men, 2 Chronicles. 1.10, 12. Prove. 12.16, 23. and
13.16.

II. Observe how many ways this word Wise and Wisdom is taken: namely

First, I might say, with some of the Schoolmen, that Wisdom is taken four
manner of ways, viz.

I. Communiter, commonly: and thus Wisdom signifies a general knowledge of
things. II. Minus communiter, less commonly: and thus Wisdom signifies the
knowledge of eternal things. III. Proprie, Properly: thus it signifies the
knowledge of God according to holiness. IV. Magis proprie, more properly: thus
it signifies, An experimental knowledge of God. Bonavent. 1. d. 35. q. 1. l. 3.
Or,
Secondly, I might, with some others, say, That Wisdom is taken five manner of
ways, viz.

I. For Theology, which we acquire by the study of the holy Scriptures. Brul.
quaest. 3. Prolog. 1. sent. II. For Love and Charity, Scot. in. 3. III. For a
certain intellectual and speculative virtue, among all intellectual habits the
most noble, Arist. 6. Eth. IV. For a supernatural knowledge immediately infused
by God, Holkot and Dion, in divin. V. By the Moral Philosophers, Wisdom is
taken for a collection of all virtues, whether intellectual or moral. Senec.
Thirdly, We may say, that Wisdom is taken seven manner of ways, viz.

I. For circumspection and watchfulness; or, for a prudert and circumspect man,
who can forecast things, and foresee dangers and evils to prevent them; as,
Matthew. 10.1^. Be ^ise as serpents. Ephesians. 5.15. Walk as wisemen redeeming the
time. II. For true Piety and Holiness; or, for a godly person who fears God,
and obeys his Word; Give admonition to the wise, Prove. 10.1. and 9.9, 10. and
17.10. III. For self-conceitedness; or, for one who swells and is pust up
with an opinion of wisdom: 2 Cor. 11.19. Because ye are wise: This is spoken
Ironically: as also, Prove. 3.7. Isa. 5 21. Romans 12.16. IV. For humane Learning;
or, for Astronomers, Magi, Wisemen, and Persian Priests: as, Matthew. 2.1. There
came wisemen from the east; that is, such as were Learned in the Sciences of
this World. Dan. 1.4.17.20. Acts 7.22. and 1 Cor. 1.17. Note here, that the
Learned of all Nations were called Wisemen, even among the Jews; Matthew. 23.34.
I send you prophets, wisemen and scribes; but among the Greeks, they were
called, Lovers of wisdom. V. For subtlety and craft; or, for a subtle and
crafty person; as, Exodus 1.10. Let us work wisely: And 2 Samuel 14.3. They
brought a wise woman, etc. VI. For skill and cunning; or, for an ingenious and
cunning Artificer, Exodus 28.3. and 35.10. And VII. For diabolical and magical
Art; or, for Magicians and Sorcerers, Genesis 41.8. Exodus 7.11 Pharaoh called
forth the Wisemen. From what is said in this last particular, (Thirdly) we may
learn that this word Wisdom is 1. Sometimes taken ironically; as III. 2.
Sometimes improperly; as V. VII. 3. Sometimes properly; as I. II. IV. VI.

III. Observe how some places of Scripture are to be understood, in which
mention is made of Wisdom: as

Quest. 1. What is meant by Wisdom in Job 26.3? Do thou counsel him who has
no wisdom?

Ans. Some Schoolmen have observed that this word Wisdom is taken four manner
of ways, viz.

I. Sometimes for one of the seven gifts of the holy Ghost. II. Sometimes for
the knowledge of Divine things, and the mysteries of faith, which is either
acquired by diligence and study, or wrought in man freely by God. III.
Sometimes for the knowledge of moral and civil things; and is the same with
political prudence, and the knowledge of ruling others. And IV. Sometimes for a
through knowledge of all the Liberal Arts and Sciences, especially of the
Metaphysics. Now Job seems to be endowed with all, or the most of these
Wisdoms.
Quest. 2. What is meant by Wisdom in Eccles. 8.1. The Wisdom of a man does
make his face to shine?

Ans. It may signify either Divine or Political Wisdom. For

First, Divine Wisdom (which is faith, or the saving knowledge of God) makes a
man's face to shine: And that 1. Because it so opens a man's eyes that he can see
things, which neither corporal eyes, nor humane reason can comprehend. 2.
Because it makes a man merry; for he must needs be cheerful, who by faith sees
God to be his. 3. Because it makes his outward conversation beautiful and
bright.


Secondly, Political Wisdom makes the face to shine: And that 1. Because it
directs men in their external actions. 2. Because it makes a man amiable in the
eyes of all: for he who prudently and considerately manageth all his affairs,
is acceptable to all men, and commended by all.


Quest. 3. What is meant by Wisdom in Romans 8.6. The wisdom of the flesh is
death?

Ans. 1. It is called wisdom, though it be but a foolish thing, because it
seems so unto them.

Ans. 2. The word (...), translated wisdom, signifies, that the best thoughts,
the best desires, affections, and endeavors, that be in any natural man, even
those which come most near to true holiness, are not only contrary to God, but
even enmity it self. If my studious Reader would see, how the gross and corrupt
reading of the old vulgar Bible, is disliked by diverse Learned Jesuits upon
this place, and what indeed is the true meaning of these words, The wisdom of
the flesh is enmity against God; I refer him to Chamier, tom. 3. lib. 1. cap.
3. fol. 5. 10, 11, 12. and lib. 16. cap. 9. fol. 293. 3. etc.

Quest. 4. What is meant by (...), Phil. 1.7?

Ans. 1. Sometimes it signifies intelligence; (...).

2. Sometimes sentire, judicare, to think or judge.

3. Sometimes curare, to regard.

4. Sometimes sapere, to savor the things which are of God, Romans 8.5. Now in
Phil. 1.7. it is taken either I. For curare, as Zanchy thinks, because (...) is
added, and not (...); and because (...) follows. Or, II. For sentire, as Beza,
and the most understand it; because (...) is added, and (...) is put for (...);
and (...) is added, lest those who are weak should complain, that they were
excluded.


IV. Observe, whence these words, Wisdom and Prudence came: namely I. Prudens
quasi providence; the true prudent man is the true provident man, who provides
for this life present, and that to come: Or, as Aquinas says, Sumit nomen a
providentia, sicut a principaliori ejus part, etc. Thom. 2.2. q. 47. art. 13.
Prudence takes her name from Providence, as from the principal part thereof,
because as Providence so prudence does dispose of every thing unto some end.
II. Sapientia dicitur a sapio, quod est, recte sentio: or according to Guil.
Sco. in lib. d. 34. and qu. Prolog. Sapientia, Wisdom, come from a threefold
word, viz. 1. Vno modo a sapere, in quantum illuminat intellectum: unde sic
solum actum in tellectus importat. 2. Secundo modo dicitur a sapore, in quantum
inflammat affectum, and sic proprte dicit actum voluntatis. 3. Tertio modo
dicitur quasi sapida scientia, and hoc modo dicit tam actum intellectus, quasi
praecedentis, quam actum voluntatis, quasi sequentis.



V. Observe that there are two sorts and kinds of Wisdom; to wit, Divine and
Humane, of both which afterward particularly and fully.

VI. Observe that Wisdom and Prudence are by diverse diversely defined and
described, viz.

1. Tully, lib. 4. Tusc. defines it thus: Sapientia est rerum divinarum
humanarumque scientia cognitioque, quae cujusque rei causa sit, ex quo
efficitur, ut divina imitatur, humana omnia inferiora virtute ducat.

2. Aquinas 2.2. q. 47. art. 13. defines it thus: Prudentia vera and perfecta,
est qua consiliamur, judicamus, and praecipimus, quae ad bonum finem totius
vita humanae-pertinent, and solis bonis convenit.

3. Augustine. de Trinit. 14. defines it thus: Sapientia est divinarum
humanarumque rerum cognitio, studio been vivendi conjuncta, vel ordinata.

4. Aristotle, lib. 1. Rhetor. defines it thus: Sapientia est multarum and
mirabilium rerum scientia: and lib. 1. Metaph. Sapientia est cognitio primarum
and altissimarum causarum.

5. Wisdom in the general view of the simple word may be conceived to be some
quality, sufficiency, and habit, singular and elevated above that which is
common, be it good or evil.

6. Some say, Wisdom is a knowledge of humane and divine things, and the causes
of them.

7. Some say, Wisdom and Prudence is a virtue, which is evermore conversant,
and busied in searching out the truth.

8. The Philosophers distinguish Wisdom into

(...), Sapience, which they define to be, the knowledge of all divine and
humane things, so far as they fall within the scantling of man's reason. And

(...), Prudence, which they restrain to the ordering of humane affairs.

9. True Wisdom is a heavenly light, set up in the soul by the Spirit of God,
whereby it discerns the general truths concerning God, our selves, the state
of the Church, the privileges of Christianity, and such like; or, in short, It
is a right divine apprehension of spiritual truths.

Prudence is a kind of sharpness of spirit, whereby the Spirit of God directs
the soul, referring the right general principles to particular cases. Or,
Prudence is an application of the general knowledge of general things to
particulars, and is an ordering of the life in particular exigences and cases
in a right order, according to the direction of the Spirit.

10. To those who ask, What is wisdom? the Scripture answers

1. It is Wisdom to use but few words, Prove. 10.11. and 15.2. and 17.27. And

2. To hearken to counsel, Prove. 12.15. and 17.12. And

3. To think modestly of our selves, Romans 12.3. and 1 Cor. 3.8. Prove. 26.12.
Isa. 5.21. And

4. To be meekly affable Prove. 14.29. Jam. 3.17. And

5. To remember the last things, Deuteronomy. 32.29. And

6. To prefer those things which are most excellent, Phil. 1.10. Luke 10 41. And

7. To abhor all sins, Prove. 10.23. and 14.9. and 15.21. And

8. To be religious; as, Prove. 4.11. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom:
where Solomon calls Religion, Wisdom; to teach us, That true Religion is true
Wisdom, Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 1.7. Deuteronomy. 4.6. and 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. Acts 6.3. All
true wisdom is hid in Christ, Colos. 2.3. and is therefore learned only in the
knowledge of Christ. Two Corollaries we may hence deduce.

Corol. I. Learn hence, that they are to blame, who would reconcile godly and
worldly wisdom. Non been convenient; they are Antagonists, never to be made
friends, Romans 8.6, 7. and 1 Cor. 1.18, 20, 23, 25. and 2.14. and 3.19. Indeed
there is a Serpentine Wisdom which is commended, Matthew. 10.16. But it is called
either.

I. Divine skill, or experience, Romans 16.19. Or, II. Civil discretion, or
moderation, Tit. 2.2, 5. Col. 4.5. Or, III. Christian precaution: and that both
1. From the persuasions of evil men, Ephesians. 4.14. And 2. From their malice, Acts
19.31. and 1 Samuel 18.14. But 3. Not by wicked cunning and craft, Joh. 5.13.
Ezekiel. 28 4, 5, 7. Isa. 29.15, 16. and 30.1. And therefore true Wisdom consists
in godly simplicity, 2 Cor. 1.12.

Corol. II. Learn hence to labor for true Wisdom and knowledge. Note here,
that there is a fourfold knowledge, viz.

First, There is a knowledge of our selves, though there be no good in us.

(To know thy self, thou labour'st but in vain,
There Is nothing in thee worthy half the pain.)
Yet it is good to know our naughtiness; and therefore we should know these six
things.

1. That we are miserable; being sold under sin: lying under the sentence of
condemnation: and waiting for the hour of execution and eternal death, except
God, by his prerogrative royal, freely remit and pardon us, Psalm. 17.^. Ephesians.
2.1. And

2. That we are so weak, that we cannot help our selves at all, in regard of
spiritual edification, or eternal salvation. And

3. That we can neither will, nor seek good. Apoc. 3.17. And

4. That if we do seek God, we do it coldly, and are quickly weary. And

5. That we usually deceive our selves by our idle dreams, and vain delusions,
Isa. 28.14. And

6. That our lives are short and uncertai, Luke 12.21.

Secondly, There is a knowledge of God the Father, etc.

1. The knowledge of his Law, that we obey it, Ephesians. 5.17. And

2. Of his purity, that we may imitate it, Ephesians. 5.26. And

3. Of his wrath and jealousy, that we may not provoke it, Psalm. 11.6. Habak.
1.13. And

4. Of his Power, that we may tremble before him, Matthew. 10.28.

5. Of his justice, and immutability, that without delay we may be reconciled
unto him, Matthew. 5.18. Jam. 1.17. And

6. Of his (...), and love to mankind; for though we are elected in Christ, yet
the decree of election comes from God, Tit. 3.4. God the Father electing us
unto salvation in God the Son.

Thirdly, There is the knowledge of God the Son: this is either Theorical or
Practical.

I. There is a Theorical knowledge of Christ, viz. that salvation comes not 1.
From us, or our merits, Psalm. 49.9. But 2. From Christ only, 1 Cor. 1.31. Hebr.
10.20. Acts 4.12. Or,


II. There is a Practical knowledge of Christ, viz. when we are experimentally
sensible of Christ in our hearts, 1 John 2.1. Cant. 2.16. Psalm. 63.1. Romans
8.38. This is to know the Lord, John 17.3. Hebr. 8.11. and this knowledge is
twofold, viz.

1. The knowledge of Christ as ours, 2 Timothy 4.8.

2. The knowledge of Christ crucified, 1 Co. 2.2. and 1.23. and of his death
and resurrection, Romans 4.25. For

I. The knowledge of his death, Romans 6.6. will teach us to die to sin, Gal.
5.24. and to the world, Gal. 6.14. and 2 Cor. 4.10.

II. The knowledge of his Resurrection unto life, will teach newness of life
unto us, Romans 6.11. Gal. 2.19, 20. And that 1. In sincerity, Phil. 1.10. And 2.
With alacrity, Isai. 58.13. Psalm. 122.1.


Fourthly, There is the knowledge of God the holy Ghost: And that I. How he
enlightens us, 1 Cor. 2.11. etc. and 13.12. And II. How he sanctifies us
within, 1 Cor. 6.11. And III. How he directs us without, Job 28.28. Prove. 28.7.
Romans 8.9. to 14. And IV. How he seals us, 2 Cor. 1.21.


11. And lastly, concerning the Definition of Wisdom, and what it is, I say,
That although it be difficult to show what Wisdom is, yet I shall endeavor it,
not after my own brain, but from the Wellhead of Wisdom. Note here,

I. I might say, that Wisdom commonly is said to be threefold, viz.

First, Natural; this was singular in Adam, as appears by his naming of the
Creatures, Genesis 2. admirable in Solomon, 1 King. 4.33. rare in Aesculapius in
regard of Physic; in Ptolomy in regard of the Stars; and in Aristotle in most
Arts and things. The Ancients taught this Natural Wisdom, to Pythagoras and
Socrates. This is either 1. Good: Or, 2. Evil; when it is used to Magic or
Witchcraft.


Secondly, There is a Moral Wisdom: This is either

I. Philosophical; which was begun by Socrates, and more completed by Phocion.
Or,

II. Divine; laid down in the Law of God.

Thirdly, There is a Political Wisdom; this Plato taught; and Aristotle all the
three. This Wisdom teaches

I. How to rule and govern, Psalm. 72.1, 2. Aristides taught this. And

II. How to submit and obey. This Political Wisdom is either

1. True, lawful, honest and profitable: Or,

2. False and Machiavellian. But

II. I will in describing of Wisdom take this course; viz. it may be divided
either 1. According to the subject in whom it is. Or, 2. According to the
Object.


FIRST, According to the Subject, Wisdom is twofold; viz. either,

First, in the Understanding; for the Vnderstaending enquires, what is true and
false, and is Index sui and obliqui. This some refer to religious Wisdom, but
it belongs to all sorts: Or,

Secondly, In the Will; for the affection enquires, what is good, and what is
evil. This Wisdom is twofold; viz.

I. Honest in respect of others. And

II. Profitable in respect of our selves. Hence 1. We come to know what things
are truly good. And 2. By what ways and means we may come to the fruition, and
enjoyment of those good things: because otherwise our Wisdom avails us nothing.


SECONDLY, According to the Object, three things are to be understood
principally, in true Philosophy; viz.

1. The world. 2. Our selves. 3. Our God.
1. Wisdom must reach us to understand the world; that is, the occurrences and
casualties thereof, and the men themselves therein. Two things are here to be
learnt, viz.

First, To take heed of evil things; that is,

I. That we do no evil injury, or wrong unto any.

II. That we do not suffer any evil, or injury to be done unto us by any. Here
we must labor to know our enemies, and how to avoid them; to foresee evils
and casualties, and to prevent them.

Secondly, To provide good things; and that 1. For our selves. And 2. For
others: that is, we must know how to converse profitably with others. This is a
Moral virtue.


2. Wisdom must teach us to know our selves. Here also are two things to be
learnt.

1. What we are. 2. What things we want.
First, We must learn what we are; and that

1. In nature; viz.

1. Mortal in body, immortal in soul. And

2. Full of sin, and subject to the wrath of God for sin. And

3. That we have a rebellious nature in us which is still alluring us unto that
which is evil, Romans 7.5.23.24.

4. That we are so weak as we can neither, I. Free our selves from Gods wrath.
Nor II. Resist our corrupt lusts. Nor III. Do any thing that good is.


2. We must learn, what we are in grace, and whether we be truly partakers
thereof, or only dream so, Isa. 29.8.

Secondly, We must learn, what things we want, viz.

I. We want not riches, Prove. 30.8. nor honor, nor pleasure, Luke 16. But

II. These three things we truly want.

1. God, his Love, and reconciliation unto him by Christ. This is our Delphian
sword, Romans 8.32. 2. We want grace in our selves, Psalm. 143.10. Colos. 3.15. 3.
We want help, whereby we may both procure, and preserve for ever these two, God
and Grace. Thus Wisdom must teach us, the world and our selves.
3. Wisdom must teach our God unto us: this is the chief thing of all to be
known and learnt. Now the knowledge of God is either,

1. Practical and experimental; of which by and by. Or,

2. Theorical; this knowledge teaches

I. What God is: now his nature is revealed in the Attributes of his power,
vision, love, truth, justice, anger, immutability. And

II. What he requires and loves; as to obey his Law, to be holy, to turn unto
him, to adhere unto him, etc. And

III. What he threatens to bring upon the wicked, that we may learn to fly
from the wrath to come, Deuteronomy. 32.29. And

IV. What he promises to the godly, viz. grace and glory: that we may
endeavor after these things.

VII. Having showed the Acception, Derivation, Division, and Definition of
Wisdom, I now come to note some differences concerning it, viz.

First, Observe how Wisdom and Prudence are distinguished; namely,

I. Some say they are distinguished in Objects, because Sapiontia, Wisdom,
consists in sciendo, in knowing; but Prudentia, Prudence, consists, in utendo,
applicando, in using and applying that which we know, unto the good, either of
our souls or bodies. In this sense Wisdom respects the speculative part, and
Prudence the practick.

II. Some say they differ in modo acquirendi, because Wisdom is infused, but
Prudence is acquired: Wisdom is freely given by God, but Prudence is procured
and obtained by industry, pains, experience and observation.

III. Some in a manner make them both one, saying, That Prudence stands in the
enquiring after truth, but Wisdom in the acquiring of truth. Hae duae virtutes
(veritatem prudenter quaerere, and sapienter invenire) ita sibi implicatae
sunt, and unitae, ut una sine altera esse non possit. Prosp. de vita contempl.
cap. 29. and Canisius 592. These two virtues ( prudently to seek after truth,
and wisely to find it out) are so involved one in another, and so close knit
one to another, that the one cannot be without the other.

Secondly, Observe how Wisdom and Policy differ: namely, Wisdom makes a man
constantly keep the high-road way of Justice and Judgment, doing every thing
upon Scripture grounds and rules: Policy directs men, when need is, to turn
into odd bypath, sometimes using the help of the Foxes skin, and sometimes of
the Lions paw.

Thirdly, Observe how Wisdom and Philosophy differ: namely thus, as money and
covetousness differ, that the one desires, the other is desired; so Wisdom and
Philosophy differ: for that is the reward and effect of this; and this comes,
and that is come unto.

Fourthly, Observe how Natural and Spiritual Wisdom differ: namely, in the very
foundations. For

1. Natural Wisdom is built upon Reason and Judgment, and our own
understanding. But

II. Spiritual Wisdom is founded upon the Word and Will of God: and therefore

1. Spiritual Wisdom is commanded and commended, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Acts 6.5. and 1
Cor. 2.6. and 12.18. Ephesians. 1.8.17. And

2. Worldly Wisdom is sometimes permitted, and sometimes-praised. Solomon was
wise naturally, Joseph politickly, and both commendably, 1 King. 2.6. Note
here, that this natural or worldly wisdom is twofold; lawful and unlawful; and
these two differ not, Re, vel natura, indeed, or in the very nature or essence
of them, but only Ratione, in subjection to the will of God: and therefore if

I. It be subject to the Law or Will of God, as a handmaid thereunto. it is
good, 2 Cor. 10.5. And

II. If it will not be subject to the word and will of God, it is evil.
Wherefore Humane Wisdom is a let unto faith, and a hinderer of regeneration,
because it is very difficultly subjected to the Word and Will of God. For

1. It is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. And

2. It contemns and despises Religion; and that either

I. Because it is but foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18, 21. and 2.14. Or,

II. Because it is an abject thing, or a thing below him, and too base for him
to stoop unto, because he is wiser than the simple Gospel.

Fifthly, Observe how Wit and Wisdom differ: namely, Wit is rather a quality,
or faculty infused, showing it self in childhood; Wisdom is a quality, or
faculty acquired, by learning, observation, time, experience, and the like; and
shows it self most in age, and ripe years.

Sixthly, Observe how Sapientia and Intellectus, Wisdom and Understanding
differ: namely, Bonaventure, d. 35. l. 3. says,

I. Intellectus ad solum intellectum pertinet, etc. the understanding belongs
only to the understanding, but Wisdom belongs both to the understanding, and
the affections.

II. Quia Sapientia est cognitio, and amor Dei, etc. because Wisdom is the
knowledge and love of God, according to certain conditions proper and peculiar
to him; but the Understanding according to some conditions common to god and
the creature.

Seventhly, Observe, because it is said of Christ, Isa. 11.2, 3. The Spirit of
the Lord shall rest upon the flower of Ishai, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge, and
of the fear of the Lord; it may therefore be demanded,

How do Wisdom, Understanding, and knowledge differ?

Ans. 1. The Master of the sentences, lib. 3. did. 35. from Augustine,
distinguishes them thus.

I. Saptentia, Wisdom, is referred to the contemplation, and delectation of the
eternal truth only.

II. Intelligentia, Understanding, is referred to the speculation of the
Creator, and the invisible creatures.

III. Scientia, Knowledge, is referred to the right administration of temporal
things, and to a good conversation among wicked men. Musculus in hune locum
takes exception against this.

Ans. 2. We may safely thus expound, Isa. 11, 2.3.

1. Wisdom, is in respect of things divine.

2. Understanding, of the first principles.

3. Sciences, of conclusions.

4. Counsel, of things to be done.

5. Fear, makes men decline from that which is evil. And

6. Strength, confirms them to overcome the difficulties wherewith well-doing
is beset. So then, seeing the Spirit of God, who is the giver of all these
virtues, is promised to rest on our Savior Christ, we may undoubtedly resolve,
that there is no virtue pertaining to Man (neither including in it
imperfection, as Faith and Hope, nor presupposing imperfection in him who has
it, as Repentence, which presupposes the penitent to be a sinner) but it was
found in Christ's humane Nature, and reasonable Soul, and that (in regard of the
habits) even from the very moment of his incarnation.

Eighthly, Observe, because Solomon's prays, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. Give me now wisdom
and knowledge, that I may go in and out before this people; it may be asked,
What difference is there between Wisdom and Knowledge? Or, how do Sapientia and
Scientia, Sapience and Science, Wisdom and Knowledge differ.

Ans. 1. Wisdom is the knowledge of divine things, but Science of humane. Hence
Augustine. sup. 1 Cor. 12. says, Sapientia est in contemplatione aeternorum;
Scientia vero in occupatione temporalium: and lib. de Triuit. Haec est
Sapientiae and Scientiae recta distinctio, ut ad Sapientiam pertineat
aeternarum rerum cognitio intellectualis, ad Scientiam verd tempor^lium rerum
cognitio rationalis.

Ans. 2. Knowledge directs us to see, what is to be done, and what not to be
done: but Wisdom directs us, how to do things duly, conveniently, and fitly.
Or, Knowledge is of generals, Wisdom of particulars.

Ans. 3. Aristotle says, Scientia a diligentia, Sapiontia a Deo; Science is
had by diligence: but Wisdom and Prudence comes from God.

Ans. 4. They may in 2 Chronicles. 1.10. both signify, the spirit of direction, for
the governing of the Common Wealth.

Ans. 5. Scientia, Knowledge, or as Tremellius reads it; Notitia, is the
understanding of the Laws, what is equitable and just, and of the duty of
Magistrates, both subordinate and supreme. For it behooves Magistrates to study
and endeavor to know the Laws by which they should govern, 1 Samuel 10.25. and 2 Chronicles. 23.11. Deuteronomy. 11.18. etc. Nations are not to be governed Ad placitum, as
Magistrates please or list; but according to the Laws of the Land: and
therefore it is necessary, that they should know those Laws. Hence some eminet
Lawyers have written abbreviations of the Statutes: yea hence young Gentlemen
are brought up at the Inns of Court and Chancery, that in some way or other,
they may be serviceable to the Nation, and useful in their generation.

Ans. 6. Sapientia, Wisdom, in 2 Chronicles. 1.10. signifies Prudence, Moderation
and Discretion in governing. For

I. There is much variety in governing, and in the administration of justice:
there is much difference of men; much diversity of causes; several degrees of
sin; and the Magistrate himself must not be always of the same disposition and
temper, nor carry himself alike to all; but should be more mild and gentle to
some, more rigid and severe to others.

II. Magistrates being exposed to the eyes of all men, like a City set upon a
Hill, must needs suffer much disgrace, and reproach, if they lack moderation,
discretion and wisdom in governing. And

III. The danger is great both to Magistrates and People, for those to be
destitute of Wisdom to govern: for if they fail therein, the Commonwealth
falls with them. Plato knowing very well, that no humane government could be
established, without that Wisdom and Knowledge which Solomon prayed for, said,
Commonwealths shall be well and happily governed, when they are governed by
wise and learned men; or by those who employ their studies to wisdom. Hence we
find in Histories, that many ancient Commonwealths, were never in a more
happy, safe, peaceable and prosperous state than when they were governed by the
Philosophers themselves, and did receive their Laws and Ordinances by their
means, or from them; as the Mitylenians did from Pittacus; the Cretenians from
Pythagoras; the Egyptians from Mercury or Osyris; the Bractiens from Zoroastes;
the Persians from Oramasus; the Carthagenians from Caremundus; the Athenians
from Solon; the Scythians from Zamolxis; the Cretensians from Minos; the
Lacedaemonians from Licurgus; the Romans from Numa Pompilius; the Greeks from
Orpheus; and the Hehrews from Moses and Aaron. History teaches abundantly,
that many Emperors and Kings, who have been eminent for Wisdom, Understanding
and Learning, did themselves usually minister justice to every man, and did
exercise the place of a judge in their own proper person. Of this number were
Augustus Caesar, Vespasian, Domitian, Aurelius Victor, Marcus Aurelius,
Trajane, Justinian, Antonius, Saracula, Frederidk, and many others. Thus much
for the differences concerning Wisdom.

VIII. Observe that wisdom may be compared to these four things.

I To a Serpent, Matthew. 10.16. (Be wise as serpents) for as a serpent when he
is within the danger of man, above all parts of his body keeps his head from
blows, which he does either, by gathering his body into a circle, or hiding it
in a hole, suffering his other parts to be beaten: so if any persecution happen
unto us, Wisdom teaches us to hide our Head Christ, that taking the blows upon
our selves, we may safeguard the faith received of him, by the loss, if need
be, of our bodies, Hilar, in Matthew. Epiphanius, haeres. 3^. says, The wisdom
of the serpent is seen in two things; In defending his head, with yielding his
body to strokes; and in his drinking: for when thirst oppresses him, and he
goes to drink, he does not take his poison with him, but leaves it in his
Den: thus our Wisdom should be, in time of persecution and temptation, rather
to deliver to the sword and fire all that we have, than to hazard and endanger
our head, that is, to deny Christ. And when we go to the place of public
Worship, or to prayer, or to receive the holy Mysteries, we must not carry with
us, in our cogitations and minds, maliciousness, envy, lust, or any evil
whatsoever.

II. Wisdom may be compared to the Sun, or to the Light; for as the Sun is the
eye and soul of nature, by which all things are discerned, begot, nourished,
increased and cherished; so is Wisdom in the world, as Politian says, in
Lamia. See Eccles. 2.12, 13.

III. Wisdom may be compared to the stone, called by the Lapidaries Corneolum,
which being hanged about the neck, or worn on the finger, does help in
disputation, does mitigate wrath, and does stay a flux of blood: F. Johan. a.
S. Gemin. For thus, Wisdom does profit in disputation to find out the truth, to
repress anger, and to stay our proneness and readiness to sin.

IV. Wisdom may be compared to the herb Amomum; for as that herb is powerful
against the stings of Scorpions, does refresh the eyes, and assuage the pain of
the entrails: So Wisdom does profligate the deceits of Heretics, does comfort
the eyes of the mind, and in grief does cheer the sad heart. Thus much for the
Doctrinal part of Wisdom in general.

II. In the Practical Part, we have some things to observe, or consider of by
way of Reprehension, some by way of Instruction, and some by way of Exhortation.

I. In regard of Wisdom and Prudence sixteen sort of Persons are to blame: as

1. Those who are not wise for themselves. Parum sapit qui sibi non sapit.

2. Those who esteem not wise sentences, although they nearly concern them.
Simonides being at a banquet with Pausanias, he desired him to utter some
precepts of Wisdom; whereat he laughing, said, Remember thou art a man; which
saying he then slighted, but afterward in his misery, with great sorrow
remembered. Theophrast.

3. Those who neglect wisdom and wise sayings, when they once reflect upon
them. The report, says Aristippus, of Wisdom and Virtue, is good in a Tyrants
opinion, so long as he thinks, that nothing which is spoken or done, be
repugnant to his affections, and lust; for like a sick man, he judges and
esteems nothing good, which agrees not with the scent and taste of his own
loathsome appetite.

4. Those who being wise in the Theory, give evil example in practice. Marcus
Aurelius says, A wiseman meriteth more punishment for a light deed done
openly, than a secret murderer. As dead flies cause to stink and putrify the
Ointment of the Apothecary; so does a little folly him who is in estimation for
Wisdom. Eccles. 10.1. Many are wiser doctrinally than practically. Sol non
omnes, quibus lucet, etiam calefacit: sic sapientia multos, quos docet quid sit
faciendum, non continuo etiam accendit ad faciendum. Aliud est multas divitias
scire, aliud est possidere; nec notitia divitem facit, sed possessio. Bern.
sermon. 31. in Cantie. As the Sun shines upon many whom it does not warm, so
Wisdom shows many what is to be done, whom she does not inflame with a desire
of doing. As it is one thing to know what money is, and another to possess it;
and as the knowledge of money does not make a man rich, but the possession
thereof; so the knowledge of wisdom does not make a wise man, but the practice
of the rules thereof.

5. Those are to blame, who rather desire to seem wise, than to be so; whereas
it is much better to be wise indeed, than only to seem so.

6. Those who hold, Fato Prudentia minor, That Prudence is inferior to Fate;
whereas, Sapiens dominabitur astris, Wise men rule the Stars; and, Nullum numen
abest si sit Prudentia; Fortune has no power over Wisdom; that is, those who
look to the first causes, seeing the Providence of God in all things, and
acknowledging his hands in the least dispensations, ascribe nothing at all
either to Fate or Fortune.

7. Those are to blame who color wickedness with the name of Wisdom. The
Italians unable to excuse the great faults, treacheries, cowardice, and
dissimulation of their Nations, go about to color their villainies, with the
name of Italian Prudence. As the rude Poet Cherillus had nothing to be noted in
his Verses, but only the name of Alexander; or that rural Painter Daretus any
thing to cover his deformed Ape, but a white curtain; so many have nothing to
shadow their shameless wickedness, but a show of humane Wisdom.

8. Those are here faulty, who are much wiser in other men's matters, than in
their own. As some cannot see things which are very near them, but can well
discern those things which are further off: so some men are more wise in the
affairs of others, than in the things belonging unto themselves.

9. Those are blameworthy who complain of Wisdom. When Tully saw all public
events to make against him, he complained, O turpem senectutem, O me nunquam
sapientem! I would I had never lived to be old, I would I had never known what
Wisdom meant.

10. Those are to blame who are wise to do evil, Jerem. 4.22. And

11. Those who glory in their Wisdom, Jer. 9.23.

12. Those who oppress and tyrannize over others, through presumption of their
own wisdom, Isa. 47.10. or, who trust so much to their wisdom, that thereby
they are emboldened to injure others. And

13. Those who despise wisdom coming from a poor person, Eccles. 9.16. And

14. Those who think, as Solomon did, to keep their wisdom, though they follow
unlawful pleasures, Eccles. 2.3, 9. And

15. Those who wholly employ and exercise their wisdom in finding out things,
tending more to pleasure than profit, as Solomon for some time did, Eccles.
1.16, 17.

16. Lastly, they are faulty, who inquire after divine truths by humane means,
as 1 Cor. 1.22. The Greeks seek after Wisdom; that is, they look for, and hang
upon reasons and arguments, such as humane wisdom does afford, to persuade them
of the truth of the Gospel, which all men ought to believe simply, because of
God who speaks it, without argumentation or humane persuasion.

II. The Lessons to be learned from, concerning, or in regard of Wisdom, are
either negative or affirmative.

I. The negative Lessons are these three:

1. That it is not true Wisdom which is without practice; for as a hand is no
part of a man, except it can do the office of the hand; so Wisdom is no part of
a Wise man, except it be employed as it should. And

2. That there is no wisdom or understanding against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. And

3. That there is no Wisdom in the grave, Eccles. 9.10.

II. The affirmative Lessons are these nine.

First, We may learn, that in the multitude of Wisdom there is much grief,
Eccles. 1.18. For

I. The fuller of wisdom any man is, or the greater meafure of wisdom any man
has, the more severe, solemn, and inclined to grief, and melancholy he is. And

II. The wiser any man is, the more causes he has of grief and anger: as he
who daily sees many unworthy things which he cannot amend. And

III. The more perfectly any knows, by the wisdom of God, how evil the things
of this life are, and how good the things of the life to come, the more he
grieves to be subject to those present calamities, and to be so long absent
from these joys.

Secondly, We may learn, that we should be wise unto two things, viz.

I. Unto Sanctification; or, to that which is good, Rom? 16.29. that is, we
must labor to be so furnished with knowledge and wisdom, that we may embrace
good, eschew evil, and beware of the deceit of false Prophets. And

II. Unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. that is, we must labor for such a measure of
spiritual Wisdom, that we may behold and know Jesus to be the Christ, and our
Savior, Joh. 17 3.

Thirdly, We may learn, that the heart is the seat of true wisdom; whence
prudent men are called, wise in heart, Prove. 14.33. and 16.21. and 23.15. And

Fourthly, That they are most miserable, who are destitute of wisdom, Joh 4.21.
Prove. 10.21. And

Fifthly, That those who despise wisdom are fools, Prove. 1.7. And

Sixthly, That Wisdom cannot be acquired or obtained, without much sweat and
labor, Prove. 2.4, 5. Eccles. 7.17. and 11.6. Hence those who increase wisdom
increase sorrow, Eccles. 1.8. that is, Wisdom and Knowledge cannot be come by,
without great pain of body and mind; for when a man has attained to the
highest step of Wisdom and Knowledge, yet is not his mind contented.

Sevently, We may learn, that many moral wise men have been entangled in Cupids
snares. Gratian was in love with Tamira; Solon with a Grecian; Pittacus left
his own wife, and was in love with a bondwoman, which he brought from the
wars; Periander, Prince of Achaia, and chief Philosopher of Greece, at the
persuasion of his Concubine, slew his own wife; Anacharsis the Philosopher,
loved so dearly a woman of Thebes, that he taught Philosophy unto her; Architus
Tarentinus, the Master of Plato, and Scholar of Pythagoras, busied his mind
more to invent the Art of Love, than to employ it in Virtue and Learning; and
Gorgias Leontinus, who in his time was eminent for Learning, had more
Concubines in his house, than Books in his study.

Eighthly, We may learn, that Wisdom is good with an inberitance, Eccles. 7.13,
14. For the understanding of this observe, that there are four sorts of men in
the world, viz.

I. Some have neither riches nor wisdom: these are the worst of the four. II.
Some have riches without wisdom: these are next to the worst. III. Some have
wisdom without riches: these are better than the former. IV. Some have both
wisdom and riches: these are the best of all, and the persons which Solomon
there speaks of.
Ninthly, we may learn, that it is lawful for us, to gather Wisdom from the
Heathens: or, the Books and Writings of the Heathens are meet and fitting to be
read, for the attaining unto Wisdom. Three thing are objected against this, viz.

Obj. 1. The Scriptures alone are sufficient unto salvation; what need have we
then of foreign help?

2. St. Paul, Colos. 2.8. seems to condemn Philosophy: Brware lest any
deceive you through Philosophy.

3. Julian the Apostate thus objected, Cur abhorrent Christiani a sacrificiis
Gentilium, cum non abhorrent a libris eorum? Why do Christians abhor the
Heathens sacrifites, seeing they do not abhor the Heathens writings?

Ans. 1. The Scriptures are indeed alone sufficient for such things as belong
unto salvation, neither to any such end do Christians crave help from the
Heathens; but they use them only as supplies, concerning things belonging unto
this life: therefore as Kings and Princes use the service of Artificers,
Husbandmen and Cooks for inferior services; so it is not unbeseeming a
Christian, to make use of the Gentiles inventions.

Ans. 2. St. Paul does not simply condemn Philosophy, as that which consists
of Physical, Moral, or Political principles and observations; but he speaks
against that erroneous part of Philosophy, and vain speculation, as in the
adoration of Angels, and such like; and the Apostle expounds himself in the
next words, saying, Let no man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit.

Ans. 3. There is not the like reason between the writings and the sacrifices
of the Heathens; for their Books may be read without hurt, seeing in the
reading of them one may choose the good, and refuse the evil: but their
sacrifices are altogether evil and idolatrous: and yet the things in
themselves, which they offer in Sacrifice, the abuse set apart, Christians
abhor not, as Wine, bread or flesh, for they are the good creatures of God:
but the abuse of them to most filthy idolatry, we abhor and condemn.

Ans. 4. Notwithstanding therefore whatsoever is, or can be objected, there is
a lawful and commendable use of humane Arts and Learning among Christians; like
as Moses made use of the Egyptian, and Daniel of the Chaldean Learning, and St.
Paul in his Writings of the sayings of Heathen Poets. A poor man finding the
tag of a point, and putting it into his pocket, one asked him, What he could do
with it? He answered, What I find all the year (be it never so little) I lay it
up at home till the years end; and then with all together, I every New Years
day add a dish to my Cupboard. Thus he who from every thing that occurrs, and
from every Book that he reads, collects something, as the Be from every Herb
and Flower gathers Honey, shall in time get a treasury of Wisdom.

III. Observe, that the Duties required of us in regard of Wisdom, are either
Negative or Affirmative.

FIRST, The Negative duties are these five.

First, We must not glory in wisdom though we be wise, Jer. 9.23. or, we must
not vaunt, brag and boast of our own wisdom, Isa. 10.13. Because the Lord will
visit such in judgment, and the fiery indignation. Ibid.

Secondly, We must not restrain Wisdom to our selves: or, think our selves only
wise, Job 15.8.

Thirdly, We must not use our Wisdom principally, for the raising or enriching
of our selves, Prove. 23.4.

Fourthly, We must not be conceited of our own wisdom; or, be wise in our own
eyes, Prove. 3.7. Romans 12.16. and that for these five reasons.

1. Because God has denounced a woe against all such, Isa. 5.21. 2. Because
that is the way to become a fool, Romans 1.22. 3. Because such wisdom is
foolishness, 1 Cor. 3.18, 19. 4. Because there is more hope of a fool, than of
such an one, Prove. 26.12. And 5. Because the Lord knows, that the thoughts of
such wise men are vain, 1 Cor. 3.18.20.
Fifthly, We must not lean to our own wisdom, Prove. 3.5. and that for these
three reasons.

1. Because many err, when they think they walk right; many sin when they think
they do no harm. The Princes of Pharaoh thought it was no hurt to commend Sarah
unto their Lord, and yet God plagued them for it, Genesis 12.15, 17. Abimelech
thought that he did no evil in taking of Sarah, but yet the Lord threatens him
for it, Genesis 20.2, 3. Other examples we may see hereof in these places, 1 Samuel
13.9. and 15.13. and 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. Yea certainly diverse observe sundry
superstitious customs, who think they do well in so doing. Many think
scurrilous words to be honest jests: Many think that lawful recreations may be
followed. as men follow their callings; and that there is no hurt in them,
although they spend too much time therein, yea are thereby often moved unto
anger and oaths. And therefore seeing it is so usual for men to sin, when they
think they sin not, we should not rely too much upon our own opinions. And

II. Satan will not suffer us to see our errors, until we are gone so far
that we cannot return. As the bullet out of the piece kills before the crack
admonishes; so Satan possessing the mind, does not open the eyes to behold
danger, till the soul be flain. As a man in shipwreck being asleep, is not
awakened from his sleep, till he be cast out of the Ship into the Sea; so man
possessed by Satan, and sleeping in sin, is not awakened (if the devil can
hinder it) until he be brought to utter destruction. And therefore we must not
be too obstinate in our own ways and opinions, lest we be but deluded by
Satan, and hood winked in a wrong way. And

III. We should be very cautelous and circumspect in our ways and works, and
not rely too much upon self-conceits; because, as in a wilderness there is but
one true way, and many false; or, as in a man's body, there is but one health,
and many sicknesses; so in the soul, there be many ways of errors, and but one
of truth. For there are sins I. Both 1. Of the right hand; as heresy,
superstition, blind-zeal; and the like. And 2. Of the left hand; as atheism,
profaneness, impurity, injustice, intemperance, and the like.
II. There are sins both 1. Internal, of the heart. And 2. External, of the
tongue and life.
III. There are sins both 1. Of omission, and neglect of our duty. And 2. Of
commission, doing what we should not.
IV. There are sins both 1. Circumstantial, as the occasions and appearances of
evil. And 2. Substantial, as the breach of any Precept of the Moral Law.



SECONDLY, The Affirmative duties required of us in regard of Wisdom, are many:
as

First, To deplore our want, and bewail our weakness of Wisdom, as, Prove. 30.3.
Agur with grief says, I have not learned Wisdom, nor attained to the knowledge
of holy things.

Secondly, It is our duty, or required of us, to acknowledge, that all singular
Wisdom comes from the Lord, Dan. 2.20, 21, 23. And

Thirdly, to pray unto God for it, Jam. 1.5. And

Fourthly, to hear the Call, and obey the Commands of Wisdom, Prove. 20.1. etc.
and 5.1. and 8.1. and 2.2. and 3.21. and 22.17.

Fifthly, It is our duty, or required of us to prize Wisdom, as Prove. 7.4. Say
unto Wisdom thou art my Sister, and call Understanding thy Kinswoman. And

Sixthly, To acknowledge, that it is better to follow Wisdom, than our own
corrupt affections: as Eccles. 2.12, 13. I turned to behold Wisdom, and
madness, and folly: then I saw that there was more profit in Wisdom than in
folly: as light is more excellent than darkness.

Seventhly, It is our duty to seek Wisdom: as Prove. 2.4, 5. If thou seek
Wisdom as Silver, and searchest for her as treasures, then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. Note here,
before Solomon exhorts any particularly, in that Book of the Proverbs, he lays
down three generals, viz.

I. The scope of the whole Book, to wit, to teach or give Wisdom unto men,
Chap. 1.2.3.4. II. He removes two Remoraes out of the way, viz. 1. False
Wisdom, which is placed in rapine and fraud: Chap. 1.10. etc. 2. The contempt
of true Wisdom: Chap. 1.20. etc.
III. He shows the benefit and profit of true Wisdom: and that in two things:
viz. 1. It leads unto good things: Chap. 2.1. to 11. 2. It frees from evil
things: Chap. 2.12. etc.
IV. Then he adds exhortations and arguments: Chap. 3. etc.
The place above mentioned, Prove. 2.4, 5. is in the number of those things,
unto which Wisdom leads; and therein two things are considerable: viz.

I. A Condition, wherein three things are laid down: viz. 1. The Subject,
Wisdom. 2. The excellency of this Wisdom: it is a treasure. And 3. The pains we
must take for the finding of this treasure; we must call, cry, dig, and search
for it. Then
II. We have there a double promise, viz. 1. We shall understand the fear of
the Lord. 2. We shall find the knowledge of God.

Quest. What Wisdom, Understanding and Knowledge does Solomon there exhort us
to seek and search for?

Ans. 1. There is a Wisdom which is false, feigned and in opinion only; and
there is a true Wisdom. Now feigned Wisdom is not Wisdom, but a double folly.

Ans. 2. There is a good Wisdom, and a Wisdom which is evil and worldly. Now,
the evil is not Wisdom, but foolish craft, because it deceives none so much as
a man's self; as the Legend is of Lycas the Usurer, who was enjoined by his
Confessor, to set a barrel by him, and for one year, to put a little stone
thereinto every time he cozened, deceived, or wronged: and at the years end
breaking open the barrel, to see how many stones were therein, he found only
one great one: of which accident his Confessor made this interpretation: Thou
think oh Lycas, that thou deceivest many, now thou find, that thou
deceivest but one, and that is thy self.

Ans. 3. There is a Philosophical and Humane Wisdom, and there is a Divine.
These are Species of the same Genus: or rather, the Philosophical Wisdom (as it
is right) is a member of the Divine.

Ans. 4. I speak here of that true Wisdom in general, which is the way unto the
knowledge of God.

Eighthly, It is our duty, or required of us, to praise God for any measure or
degree of good Wisdom, or knowledge which we have: for when we have attained to
some degree thereof, we must take heed that our Wisdom turn not like the waters
of Jordan, which run into the dead Sea; but that it may be like those waters
which come from the Sea, and return to the Sea again; that is, our Wisdom must
return to the praise of him who gave it.

Ninthly, It is our duty, or required of us to labor and endeavor to be Wise:
or, to apply our hearts unto Wisdom: Psalm. 90.12. or to labor to know it both
dogmatically and practically. Prove. 1.2. and 4.5.7. and 18.1. and 23.23.
Eccles. 7.27. Euclidis of Megara desirous to hear the Wisdom of Socrates, who
read Philosophy at Athens, between which two Cities there was such mortal
enmity, that no Citizen of the one durst be seen in the other, without great
danger, disguised himself like a woman, for the love of Wisdom, and so heard
Socrates. Thus he made good, what Plutarch says, That as he who extremely
hungreth and thirsts, can by no means be pulled from his victuals, till he
has satisfied his appetite; so all other things are to be neglected of him,
who thirsts after Wisdom; because he who is wise, is wise for himself, Prove.
9.12. that is, he may and should make use of his Wisdom; not for others only,
but for the right direction also of his own ways: or, he who is wise, will
endeavor to apply his Wisdom for his own good and benefit. And therefore
Bernard so heartily wishes and desires, that men were wise, seeing nothing is
more profitable for them than Wisdom; O utinam saperes, and intelligeres, as
novissima provideres: saperes quae Dei sunt, intelligeres quae mundi sunt,
provideres quae inferni sunt: profecto inferna horreres, superna appeteres,
quae ad manus sunt contemneres. Bern. in quadam Ep.

Tenthly, We must learn Wisdom from others, other things, and other creatures.

I. We must labor to be wise by others: for by another faults, wise men
correct their own offenses. Feliciter sapit qui alieno periculo sapit. Plaut.

II. We must labor to be wise by passed perils: for as a skar does warn us to
take heed of a wound: so Prudence in the consideration and memory of passed
dangers, does make us more wary and cautelous.

III. We must learn Wisdom from the creatures; e.g. Hearts, when they feel
themselves wounded, do run to the herb Dictamnum, and presently the arrow
falls out: Bears, because their eyes often grow dim, thrust their heads into
Beehives, that being stung till the blood follow, the grossness of the humor
may be purged: the Lizard being to sight with the Serpent, places himself not
far from a certain herb, and as often as he perceives himself to be wounded by
the Serpent, so often he runs to the herb, and presently returns to the
combat as whole as a Fish: the For cures himself with the juice of the Pine
tree: the Tortoise having eaten the flesh of a Vipor, avoideth the hurt of
poison by eating wild Margerom: the Serpent does cure his eyes by feeding on
Fennel: the Hedg-hog makes two holes in his cave, the one toward the North,
the other toward the South, and when the North Wind blows, he stops the
hole, and looks to the South, and when the South Wind blows, he opens his
hole toward the North. Thus Man being a rational creature should by Wisdom
learn to foresee things to come; to know what is hurtful for him, that he may
prevent and avoid it, and what is good for him, that he may seek and enquire
after it.

Eleventhly, and Lastly, It is our duty, or required of us to moderate and
regulate our Wisdom according to these four rules.

Rule I. Be wise unto that which is good, Romans 16.19. or, be wise in Christ, 1
Cor. 4.10.

Rule II. We must do what we can, when we cannot do what we would; the
prudential part of a man being to do as well as he may. Palinurus in Virgil, (
Aeneid. lib. 5.) finding that he could not sail against the wind into Italy,
steered his course by the approbation of Aeneas into Sictly. Thus it is a great
point of Wisdom, and the prudential part of a man, when he cannot sail by a
fair wind where he would, yea should, to tack about and sail by a sidewind, or
at least to cast anchor where he with most safety may; however to strike sail,
rather than to perish in the storm, and to sit down contented with what he can
do, when he cannot do what otherwise he would. -- Quo fata trahunt,
retrahuntque sequamur. Virgil.

Rule III. Be wise according to sobriety. As God appointed the Jews a measure,
how much Manna they might gather, so S. Paul appointed the Romans a measure,
how much Wisdom they might gather, let every man understand accrding to
sobriety, Romans 12.3. that is, we must think of our selves, and our gifts
modestly, not using our gifts proudly with disdain of others, but humbly
considering, whence we have our gifts, to what end, that we must give account
of them, and that they are very imperfect. The Jewish measure of Manna was as
much as an Omer would hold, what they gathered over turned into Worms and
putrefaction. Thus the Wisdom which men gather beyond sobriety does no good,
but puff them up and corrupt them, and put them upon strains of Machiavilian
Policy. Wisdom not well regulated, is like a dangerous knife in a mad-man's
hand. Meat indigested for want of exercise, will rumble in the stomach; and
Wisdom not ballast with sobriety, will elevate the brain: Serpentine wisdom and
Dove-like innocence must go hand in hand together, or else we shall drown in
our own wisdom, like a candle that is extinguished in its own tallow.

Rule IV. Live as Wise men, and walk wisely, Ephesians. 5.15. Two things are here
note-worthy.

I. Why we must walk wisely; namely, because he who walks in his wisdom shall
be delivered, Prove. 28.26.

II. What it is to walk wisely: namely,

1. To receive, and entertain the doctrine of salvation, which is the wisdom of
God in a mystery, confuting the errors, and convincing the folly of all worldly
wise men. And

2. To deny our selves, and our carnal wisdom, and reason, and to bring every
thought in obedience to the Gospel. And

3. To account our selves strangers and pilgrims here upon earth, and so to use
this world, as though we used it not. And

4. To know that we are not Lords of our Lands, wealth and goods, but only
Stewards to account for them; and therefore so to dispense and distribute them,
that we make friends of unrighteous Mammon, that when it fails us, they may
receive us into everlasting habitations. And

5. To seek the Lord while he may be found, and not to defer our repentance
from day to day. And

6. To be sure to provide for our eternal state, whatsoever becomes of our
temporal; and to prefer the salvation of our soul, before the gaining of the
whole world. And

7. To examine daily our spiritual estate, and to enform our selves truly how
we stand in the Court of Heaven, whether in or out of Gods favor. And

8. To observe to what sins we are most subject; and where we are weakest,
there continually to fortify our selves against Satan's batteries. And

9. In all weighty occasions, especially such as concern our spiritual estate,
to ask counsel of God, and take direction from his word. And

10. To consider the special works of Gods providence, in the carriage of the
affairs of this world, and make use thereof to our selves. And

11. To meditate upon the Law of God all the days of our Life; and consider
their blessed end who keep it with their whole heart; and their accursed death
who transgress it. Thus we see, what Duties are required of us in regard of
Wisdom. Now that we may be the better enabled, and more encouraged, to perform
these Duties, four things are very considerable.

I. The Nature and Properties of Wisdom in general. 1. II. The Marks and Signs
of Wisdom. 2. III. The Means to be used by us, if we find not these Signs in
us. 3. IV. The Benefits, Fruits and Effects, which by wisdom will redound unto
us, if by those Means we obtain it, or attain unto it. 4.
1. The Properties of Wisdom are either Negative, or Affirmative.

1. The Negative Properties of wisdom are these four.

I. It is not arrogant: Pythagoras would not be called Sophum, sed Philosophum,
a wise man, but a Lover of wisdom. One bought a draught of Fish of certain
Fishers in Milesia, whose hap was to take within their net a golden Tripos,
which the Fishermen refused to give their Chapmen, saying, they bargained for
fish. The matter was brought before the Magistrates, who were commanded by the
Oracle, to give it to the wisest man; whereupon first it was given to Thales,
he gave it to Bias, Bias to Pittacus, until it came to Socrates, who gave it to
Apollo. Valerius. Plato in Apolog. relates the story thus, The Oracle
commanding that the golden Trivet should be given to Socrates, as to the wisest
man on earth, there being engraven on it, when it was found, Sapienti, Give to
the wise, or the wisest man, The Athenians presented it to Socrates, who said
Revera solus Deus sapiens est, if it must be given Sapienti, to one who is
truly wise, then to Apollo, the God of wisdom, because he only is truly wise.

II. Wisdom is not polluted by pleasure: for as the wine called Maroneum, which
Homer mentions, being mixed with twenty times so much water, keeps his own
strength; so true wisdom is not corrupted, nor lessened, by the honor, riches,
or pleasures of this life.

III. Wisdom does no evil; Malum non facere, is a true property of good wisdom.
And

IV. So is also Scandalum non dare, so to live that we give no offense, neither
to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God.

2. The Affirmative Properties of true wisdom are likewise four: viz.

First, true wisdom is very active: The Lacedaemonians made the statue of
Apollo, their god of wisdom, with four ears, and four hands, to show, that
wisdom should be much in hearing what she ought to do; and much in acting what
she knew was to be done.

Secondly, true wisdom is like a Mulberry-tree. In some old Medals there is, as
a Hieroglyphick of Wisdom, a Mulberry-tree, having a Crane upon his branches,
and on the stock thereof a Janus with two heads; to teach us, that a wise man,
in a matter of wisdom proceeds I. Warily not rashly; like the Mulberry-tree,
which is the last that ^blossometh, that her blooms may not be blasted with the
nipping frosts. And II. In watching as the Cranes do, who have always their
Sentinel. And III. In casting their eye, both with Prometheus, upon what is to
come, and with Epimetheus, upon what is past, like that Italian King Janus.


Thirdly, another property of true wisdom is described, by Ferdinand Duke of
Bavaria, who, to represent the nature of Wisdom, caused upon his coin to be
engraven or stamped, Prudence, like a wise Virgin, seated on the back of a
Dolphin, holding in her hand a balance with this Motto, Cognosce, Elige,
Matura, Know, choose, execute quickly; that is, 1. The Virgin says, You must
know. 2. The Balance, You must ponder, and elect with mature deliberation. And
3. The Dolphin says, You must set a seal upon your business by a prompt
execution.


Fourthly, true Wisdom is an excellent thing; and the orcellency thereof may be
discovered, or described, both generally and particularly.

I. In general; the Poes to declare the excellency of this virtue, feign wisdom
to be a woman, and to be born of no mortal creature, but of Jupiter himself:
whom Painters so set forth, that on what side soever any one beholding it did
stand, whether before her, or behind her, he had a full sight of her. Cipsius
says, Vt animan nisi anima non capit, sic sapientem nisi sapiens: and this he
borrowed from ^enophon, who describing the excellency of wisdom says, There is
nothing harder in this life, than to know a wise man: and his reason was this,
because as nothing can take up the soul but the soul: so one wise man cannot be
known but by another wise man. Wisdom is called Origo virtutum; the Queen of
all other virtues; the salt of our lives; the sauce and luster of our actions.
Prudence is virtues eye, which beholding the haven, makes the wise man betimes
to lay up his treasure in heaven.

II. The excellency of wisdom may particularly be held forth, or made out,
either by the rule of contraries, or, by a direct draught.

1. Eccontrario, by the contrary; for as the eye without light can neither see
it self, nor judge of any thing else; so the soul that lacks wisdom is brute,
and knows nothing.

2. The excellency of wisdom may directly be made out gradually; that is
Positively, Comparatively and Superlatively.

FIRST, The excellency of wisdom does Positively show it self thus.

First, Wisdom is a good thing, so good that she her self makes her self to be
beloved. As we do not approve the science of Physicians for the Art sake, but
for the health it brings; so wisdom, which is the art of well living, would not
be desired, if it effected nothing; but now it is deservedly desired, because
it is, as it were, the work-mistress of all joy and delight, and the fountain
of all felicity Yea wisdom is not only good in her self, but also good to
other; not to some few, but to all who possess and enjoy her, whether high or
low, rich or poor. Sapientiae studium aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus
aeque: Aeque neglictum pueris, senibusque nocebit. Lipsius. Omnibus sapienti^,
scientiaeque nomen gratum est and dulce, and res ipsa non solum optata, sed
etiam salutaris. Ascham. Non aliam putes esse sapientiam, nisi veritatem, in
qua tenetur and cernitur summum bonum, nullo loco est, nusquam deest, foris
admonet, intus docet, dementes in se omnes in melius commutat, a nullo in
deterius commutatur. August. de^lib. arb. Wisdom is so good, that she makes
many good, none can make her evil.

Secondly, Wisdom is a most necessary thing, without which we neither
profitably know what we have done, nor prudently what we should at present do,
nor providently what we should do for the future. Wisdom brings to our memory
what is past; wisdom teaches us how to dispose of our affairs at present;
wisdom makes us to foresee things to come: therefore Ad been esse, to our
well-being, she is absolutely necessary.

Thirdly, the excellency of wisdom appears by her train attending her, or
associates accompanying her; for she never goes alone, but is always honorably
attended. Seneca says, Upon true and perfect wisdom, wait continually these
two handmaids, Humility and Sobriety: and elsewhere the same Author says, The
wise man is temperate, the temperate man is constant, the constant man is a
true and well tempered man, and he who is such is a blessed man.

SECONDLY, the excellency of wisdom does thus Comparatively show it self.

First, Wisdom is much better than Nobility of birth, because without wisdom.
nobility is little worth. The ornaments of wit are much fairer than the badges
of nobility; because nobility without wisdom, is but as a soul without a body;
or as a painted sire, which beautifies and becomes the wall, but gives no heart
to the beholder.

Secondly, Wisdom is better than Strength, Eccles. 7.21. and 9.15, 16, 18.
Seneca says, Power and might is in young men, but wisdom and prudence in the
aged: as if he would say, old men can do more by their wisdom, than young men
by their strength; and therefore in wars, old men and young, wise men and
strong should be listed together. An Emblematist ( Andreas Alciatus, lib. Embl.
page 144.) by an acute Emblem endeavors to show, how admirable and excellent a
thing it is, for wisdom and strength to go hand in hand in war. His Impress or
Emblem is, Diomedes and Ulysses, two of the Grecian Worthies; the former
whereof he supposes to be wise, politic and prudent, able to advise, counsel,
contrive and manage a war; and the latter strong, courageous and bold; yea,
able to atchieve any feazible enterprise, or exploit. His Word or Motto is,
Vnum nihil, duos plurimum posse, One is as good as none, but two can do much.
The Emblem is expressed in these verses.

Viribus hic praestat, hic pollet acumine mentis,
Nec tamen alterius non eget alter open:
Cum duo conjuncti veniunt, victoria certa est.
When one is strong, the other very wise,
To help each other they must nor despise.
For when both Strength and Wit conjoined are,
Then crowned victory does follow war.
Thus indeed, Wisdom and Strength are both necessary in war, but better is
wisdom without strength, than strength without Wisdom. Quintus Catulus did his
Country as much good by his wisdom, as Cneius Pompeius by his valor; for of
small force is the war abroad, unless there be good advice at home. Cicero. The
Lacedaemonians made more account of an exploit done by policy, than by arms:
therefore when their Captains by their politic stratagems had overcome any,
they sacrificed to their gods an Ox, but if by force, a Cock. Hence Thucidies,
when Archidamus the Lacedemonian had overcome the Arcadians, and was highly
applauded for his victory, said, Praestantius erat, si illos prudentia quam
viribus superassemus. Plutarch. in Lac. I had rather we had overcome them by
wisdom, than by strength. That which man's strength cannot bring to pass, wit
and policy will soon dispatch. If the stars of Castor and Pollux appear
severally the one from the other, it portendeth ill hap, or a storm; but if
they be seen jointly together, it prognosticateth good luck, or fair weather.
Thus when Strength and wisdom concur and meet together in an Army, it is a
good Omen, and presage of good success; but if might be severed from wisdom,
and strength lack wit and policy to rule it, it will then quickly overthrow it
self.

Thirdly, Wisdom is better than the most precious earthly things: that is,

I. Wisdom is better than riches; for he who enjoys wealth without wisdom,
possesses care for himself, envy for his neighbors, spurs for his enemies, a
prey for thieves, travel for his person, anguish for his spirit, a scruple for
his conscience, peril for his love, woe for his children, and a curse for his
heirs; because although he knows how to gather, yet he wants skill to dispose
what he has gotten.

II. Wisdom is more precious than gold, Prove. 16.16.

III. Yea than Pearls, Job 28.18. And

IV. Than Rubies, Prove. 8.11. Wisdom is better than precious stones; and all
pleasures are not to be compared unto her: as Solomon thus comparatively
praises wisdom; so does Menander, saying, (...): there is no possession more
precious than Wisdom; the sum whereof consists either in Actions or Sayings.

1. Illa clara est sapientia, non quae in verbis volat, sed quae virtutibus
constat. Greg. in mor. To be conversant in and about, and to practice virtuous
actions, is a special point of wisdom. Prima Sapientia est vita laudabilis, and
apud Deum pura men's, per quam puri puro junguntur, and sancti sancto sociantur.
Nazianz. in Apolog. The chiefest wisdom is an unblameable life, whereby pure
minds are united to the most holy God.

2. In lingua sapientia dignoscitur. Eccles. 4.24. By the speech Wisdom shall
be known, and Learning by the word of the tongue: (...). Menander. The speech
is first found with every wise man.

THIRDLY, The excellency of Wisdom is Superlatively discovered thus.

I. Wisdom is a, or the principal thing, Prove. 4.7.

II. Wisdom is the best of virtues: of all the gifts of God, Wisdom is most
pure; she gives goodness to good people, she pardons the wicked, she makes
the poor rich, the rich honorable, and such as unfeignedly embrace her, she
makes like unto God. Hermes. It was the saying of Bion, Prudentiam tanto
caeteris virtutibus antecellere, quanto caeteris sensibus praestaret visus,
etc. Laert. li. 4. c. 7. Wisdom as much excells the other virtues, as Sight
excels the other senses. The eyes give light to the whole body; and there is no
virtue without wisdom; How can the just man give to every one his own, except
wisdom teach him what is due to every one? Yea wisdom preserves other virtues
from perishing. Thus much for the Nature and Properties of Wisdom in general.

2. The Signs of true Wisdom are either Negative or Affirmative.

First, The Negative Signs are these two;

1. To abstain from evil, Job 28.28. Prove. 14.16. And

2. Not to be proud, Job 12.3. Isa. 10.13. and 47.10. and 1 Timothy 3.6. The fool
is proud of his self-conceited wisdom, but the true wise man is humble. For

I. He sees how many things are hid from his knowledge; as when the day is
broken, or the Sun risen, the traveller sees how much ground he has yet to go.
Hence he grieves for his ignorance. And

II. He knows himself more and better. Vera Sapientia non superbientes reddit,
sed lamentantes. Greg. True Wisdom makes not men proud for what they do know,
but sorrowful for what they know not. Quae tollit lumen humilitatis non est
vera Saplentia. Greg. The less humility, the less Wisdom, Jam. 3.17. Eccles.
8.1. And therefore he who is proud of his knowledge is not truly wise. Romans
12.2, 3.

Secondly, The Affirmative Signs of true wisdom are these twelve.

I. A filial fear of God, Job 28.28. Prove. 14.6.

II. Good and gracious words seasoned with salt: for as the Box-tree has
always green leaves: so wisdom has always grateful and acceptable words, Prove.
23.9.

III. A knowledge of our want and ignorance. Diogenes was asked in a kind of
scorn, What the reason was, why Philosophers haunted rich men's houses, and not
rich men Philosophers studies? He answered, because the one knew what they
wanted, not the other. Socrates being pronounced by the Oracle of Delphos, to
be the wisest man in all Greece, put it modestly off thus: There is nothing in
me to verify the Oracle, save this, that I am not wise, and I know it: and
others are unwise but ignorant thereof.

IV. To know our selves: it was the saying and golden sentence of Plato; (...),
to know a man's self is true wisdom; to be ignorant of a man's self is true
foolishness.

V. To listen to counsel and instruction is a sign of wisdom. The French say,
Sage est celvy qui croit a qui bien l'admonneste: wise is the man who believes
him that gives him a good warning. And Solomon says, To listen to the counsel
and instruction of the word of God, is wisdom, Prove. 1.5.

VI. Circumspection is also a sign of wisdom. Argus the son of Aristo, or
Aristor, was feigned by the Poets to have an hundred eyes, thereby noting his
great wisdom and circumspection. And

VII. Peace and quiet. Seneca Epist. 59. ad Lucil. says, He may be termed, and
is wise, who is replenished with joy, is glad, and moderate, who feels no
passion, but lives equal with the gods. This is a Stoical error; but to labor
as much as in us lies, to have peace with all men; to live quietly with our
neighbors; and to endeavor after peace and tranquillity in our own hearts, is
a sign of true wisdom. And

VIII. So is also Patience. The Emperor Octavian asking that learned
Philosopher Pisto, wherein a man shows himself to be most wise? He answered,
there is no greater proof to know a wise man, than if he be patient to suffer
the ignorant: for in suffering an injury, the heart is more helped by wisdom,
than by knowledge. And

IX. Humility and lowliness. Mention was made before of the humility of
Socrates; by whom, or whose example it evidently appears, that the most wise
are the most humble; as the higher the Sun is, the lesser is the shadow, Prove.
11.2. With the lowly is wisdom. And

X. Meekness and gentleness; as Jam. 3.13. Let him show his works with meekness
of wisdom, that is, such wisdom as makes meek, and is joined with meekness.

XI. A sure sign of Wisdom is, when all our Learning, Knowledge, Understanding,
Prudence. Observation, Experience and the like, are all reduced to such a
practice, as makes for the better ordering, squaring and directing of our lives
and conversations. Externa illa doctrinarum, sermonis, and linguarum sperno ego
valde nisi cum prudentia quadam, and recta judecit norma conjuncta dirigantur
ad usum vitae. Lipsius. He only is to be called wise, who is discreet in his
words, resolute in good purposes, and unblameable in practice. The French say,
Au fait, et non au front, e homme sage se juge. By his doings, not by his face
the wise is to be judged. Haec summa vel potius una est Sapientia, Deo obsequi,
and infixum habere animo, ab eo dirigi. Lipsius. Philosophi factis, non verbis
sumus, nec magna loquimur sed vivimus. Our wisdom is a prudence of works, not
of words, says Cyprian lib. 1. de patientia. Ille mihi videtur esse sapiens,
qui pauca quidem de virtute animi commonet and proloquitur, plura autem in suis
actibus, atque operibus ostendit. Greg. in mor. Deuteronomy 4.6. Keep my statutes, and
do them, for that is your Wisdom.

XII. The last, though not the least Sign of Wisdom is, to seek after grace,
and to provide for glory. They are the wisist men who labor most for grace:
Prove. 2.4, 5. because they who so labor for it, shall obtain it: ibid. and
because it is a thing of so high price, that it is well worth seeking, Psalm.
49.17: and 1 Pet. 1.4. I will conclude these Signs of Wisdom, with a saying of
Pythagoras, which in an old Book I have found thus rendered.

He is not wise, who knowing he must hence
In worldly buildings makes great erpence:
But he who builds for the world to come,
Is wise, expend he never so great a Sum.
3. In case we do not find these Signs of true Wisdom in us, observe, by what
Means we may attain thereunto: namely, the Means to obtain, or attain unto true
Wisdom, are either Negative or Affirmative.

I. Negative, to wit, no natural thing can effect it: as Job 28 20, 21. Whence
then comes Wisdom? and where is the place of Understanding, seeing it is hid
from the eyes of all the living, and is hid from the fowls of Heaven? Job
hereby means, that there is no natural means, whereby a man may attain to
heavenly Wisdom, which he means by the fowls who fly high. Or

II. Affirmative; these Means are of three sorts; viz. Natural, Spiritual and
Celestial.

FIRST, Some Means there are to attain to true Wisdom, which are Humane and
Natural: as

First. To remember, that the wisest were once as ignorant and unknowing as we.
Nihil magis ad percipiendam Sapientiam mentes erigit, quam quum eos, quos in
Sapientia clarescere miramur, aliquando parvulos and indoctos fuisse meminimus.
Glos. in Prove. 4.

Secondly, Experience, Memory and Learning; for I join these together, as some
other have done before me. Dr. Carron says, Prudence arises from these two
properties, Experience and History. Vsus me genuit, matter peperit memoria, sed
memoriae anima historia. Experience is, as it were, the father of Wisdom, and
Memory her mother: for as experience does beget Wisdom as a father, so memory
nourishes her as a mother; for in vain were experience, if it were not kept in
memory; and both experience and memory are helped and furthered by Learning.
The experience of an old man makes him wiser than a young, because he has
seen and known many more things than the other, and yet he sees and knows
only things of his own time; but the learned man sees not only his own times
experience, but what has been done by his Ancestors, yea since the world
began. Affranius an old Poet showed of whom Wisdom is begotten, in these
verses, which were set over the porch of the Temple, where the Senate of Rome
most commonly assembled.

Vsus me genuit, matter peperit memoria.
Sophiam me Graii vocant, vos Sapientiam.
Memory the mother of true Wisdom is:
Experience her Father is I wis.
Aristotle Phys. ^. says, Sedendo and quiescendo anima fit prudens: that is,
by study and learning a man becomes wise. Wisdom, says one, was begot by
nature, nourished by experience, and brought forth by Learning.

SECONDLY, Some Means there are whereby true Wisdom may be attained unto, which
are Spiritual; as these six.

First, the fear of God, Job 28.28. Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 1.7. and 9.10. For this
fear 1. Excludes the contempt of God, and a preposterous security of flesh and
blood. And 2. It makes us attent, and willing to listen to the instruction and
direction of the word of God, Acts 2.31. and 9.6. And 3. It works in us a
desire and care, to shun and avoid those things which are evil, and displeasing
unto God, Prove. 8.13. and 14.27. and 15.33. and 16.6. And 4. It begets in us a
desire of, and endeavor after piety and holiness; whence the fear and service
of God are joined, Deuteronomy. 6.1. Josh. 4.24. And 5. It makes us studious of
righteousness toward our neighbor, Acts 10.2. And 6. It prepares the mind for
the love of God, after we come to the faith of his grace in Christ. Thus
religious fear is a Means unto true wisdom.


Secondly, another Spiritual Means is, to be fools that we may be wise, 1 Cor.
31^, 19. that is, we must acknowledge, that hitherto we have been foolish,
preferring vain and idle things before divine. Now there are two signs of
foolishness.

I. To prefer childish things, as babies, rattles, toys and the like, before
those things which far excel them, as gold, jewels, and possessions of lands.
And

II. To deride and scoff at those things, which are both good in themselves,
and good in regard of us. Now there are also two sorts of mockers.

1. Open and impudent, who with a black and diabolical mouth scoff at holy
things. And

2. Secret, who say nothing, but inwardly and in their sleeve, laugh at, and
deride the folly of the Saints, who are so careful to mortify themselves, and
so strict in the service of God; because they think a man may come to Heaven
without all this stir, and they are more nice than wise, who make such a hard
and difficult matter of it.

Thirdly, Another Spirituael Means is the word of God. Xenophon could say, the
frequenting of public worship is the way unto Wisdom; which saying was thus by
one poetically expressed.

In place where men of God do commune ever,
Fools become wise; and prudent men prove wiser.
We must remember, that true Wisdom comes from above, Jam. 3.17. and is
opposite to the wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8.6. etc. Jam. 3.15.17. And therefore
it is to be learned in the word, which is the Cask-net wherein this rich
treasure of Wisdom is locked, and whereof the Lord has the key; for he only
makes men truly and aright to understand the word, and therefore we should be
frequent in the reading and hearing thereof.

Fourthly, Another Spiritual Means is, Prayer and Supplication unto God. Wisdom
comes from God, and is learned and obtained by Prayer, and included in the
word: and therefore we must pray fervently unto God for that eye salve, whereby
we may be enabled so to understand the Scriptures, that we may learn spiritual
Wisdom from them. It comes from God, Jam. 3.15. therefore if any lack Wisdom
let him ask it of God, Jam. 1.5. Elias was a man subject to the like passions
that we are, yet he prayed, and the heavens were opened, and gave rain, Jam.
5.17. So though we be men subject to many sinful passions; yet if we do but
pray fervently and frequently unto God, he will open the heavens, and shower
down the drops of spiritual Wisdom upon us in great plenty.

Fifthly, Another Means is the instruction of Christ: as Prove. 4.11. I have
taught thee in the way of Wisdom. And

Sixthly, To endeavor after wisdom: that is, to seek her as silver, and to
search for her as for hid treasures: Prove. 2.4. Qui thesauros effodit, terram
rejicit, foveam in altum facit, sedulus insistit, donec inveniat quod quaerit;
sic qui thesauros Sapientiae invenire desiderat, omne pondus terrenum a se
rejiciat, in se fossum humilitatis faciat, nec quiescat donec inveniat. Glos.
Hier. sup. Prove. 2. Wisdom is like a thing fallen into the water, which no man
can find, except he search at the bottom with a great deal of pains.

THIRDLY, There are celestial and heavenly Means unto, or causes of true
Wisdom, viz. the Lord, or the all wise God, Job 28.7. and 38.36, 37. Psalm. 5.6.
Prove. 2.6. Seneca says, Si pulcher es, lauda Naturam, si dives, lauda
fortunam, si sapiens es, lauda teipsum: Praise nature for thy beauty; fortune
for thy riches; but thy self for thy Wisdom. This saying not pleasing
Victorinus (as being indeed grossly false) he mends the matter thus: Si sapiens
es, principaliter lauda naturam, nam natura facit habilem, ars facilem, usus
vero potentem; if thou be wise praise nature: this also is false, except he
mean natura naturans, or the God of nature. For, as the Lord granted the office
of baptizing to many, but kept the power and authority to remit sins in baptism
only to himself, as John says, He it is who baptizeth with the Holy Ghost: so
also he gives speech to many, but Wisdom to a few, to whom he will, after what
manner, and in what measure he pleases; that all may know and acknowledge,
that he is the original and fountain of all true Wisdom. Thus much for the
Means thereunto.

4. Observe, what the Benefits, Fruits and Effects of true Wisdom are, that we
must take so much pains, and use so many Means, for the obtaining thereof:
namely, they are such as respect either others or our selves.

1. The Benefits and Fruits of Wisdom, in regard of others, do either respect
People or Persons.

First, Some Benefits of true Wisdom respect Cities or Nations. For,

1. Wisdom preserves Cities and Nations from ruin. The Athenians being divided
and banded into three contrary parts and factions, Solon would not join himself
with any one of them, but kept himself indifferent to all, seeking by all means
to reconcile them together: in the end being chosen their Umpire and
Arbitrator, by his Wisdom he reformed their State, and placed them in greater
glory than before. Alexander about to destroy the City of Lampsacus, Anaremenes
his master came toward him, intending to desire him to spare it; but the
Monarch imagining wherefore he came, did swear that he would not grant his
request; who thereupon besought Alexander to destroy Lampsacus, which request
by his oath he could not grant: and so by this policy he saved the City. Valor.
Scornful men, says Solomon, bring a City into a snare; but wise men turn away
wrath, Prove. 29.8. There was a little City, and few men in it, and a great King
came against it, and compassed it about, and built forts against it; and there
was found therein a poor, and wise man, who delivered the City by his Wisdom,
etc. Eccles. 9.14, 15, 16.

II. Wisdom helps to govern a Nation. Among the Romans was a College of wise
men, called Augures, by whose authority and Wisdom the State was sometimes
governed, and never better than at that time. Varro Lycis the Pythagorean
invented Laws for Epaminondas, Plato for Dion, Aristotle for Alexander,
Anaragoras for Pericles, Pythagoras for the Princes of Italy, and Agrippa for
the Emperor Octavius: so useful and profitable have wise men always been unto
Princes, in the governing of their people.

Secondly, Some Benefits of true Wisdom respect particular Persons; as

I. Wise children rejoice parents, Prove. 10.1. and 23.24. and 29.3. The joy and
rejoicing of Parents, is a fruit and effect of childrens prudence.

II Wise men make their companions and associates better. For as sweet odours
(according to Philo. lib. de somn.) by their fragancy do sweeten all the places
near unto them; so a wise man does make all those better who converse with him.

III. Wisdom sometimes helps to deliver from danger an innocent person: e. g.
Demosthenes knowing the innocence of a poor woman drawn into judgment, with
danger of being overthrown or cast in her suit, saved her by his great Wisdom:
for two strangers having given her a good round sum of money to keep with this
condition, that she should not restore it to the one, except the other were
present; within a while after, one of them came very sorrowful, feigning that
his companion was dead, and bringing some counterfeit token thereof with him;
whereupon he so persuaded the poor woman, who meant simply, plainly and
honestly, that she restored the money to him: afterward the other came, and
demanding the money also, brought the woman before a Judge, who being without
hope of escaping, Demosthenes answered for her, That the money was ready, and
she ready to restore it, so that he brought his fellow, because as himself
confessed, she ought not to give it to the one without the other.

II. Some Benefits, Effects and Fruits of true Wisdom do respect our selves;
that is, either in regard of the life to come, or this life?

First, The Fruits and Benefits of Wisdom, which respect the life to come are,
that those who are wise shall shine as stars in Heaven, Dan. 12.3.

Secondly, the Fruits and Benefits of true Wisdom which respect this life, are
either general or particular.

I. General: as, 1. Wisdom is profitable, both for others, as was showed
before, and for a man's self, Job 22.2. And 2. It is the best and readiest way
for the obtaining of our desires. Homer in the whole discourse of his Odysses,
where Minerva always accompanied Ulysses, gives us to understand, that
Prudence ought always to guide a man in the attaining to the end of his
enterprise. 3. By Wisdom a man is made better, Prove. 19.8. He keeps Wisdom to
find goodness.


II. The particular Benefits, Fruits and Effects of Wisdom, are of five sorts;
viz. either Martial, Moral, Political, Corporal or Spiritual.

FIRST, Some Benefits of Wisdom are Martial, and respect War; as Victory: for
Wisdom in war does exceedingly conduce to conquest. Agesilaus King of
Lacedemonia, after great losses sustained by Epaminondas, the General of the
Thebans, said to his men, that they should not greatly regard, or care for the
multitude of their enemies, but bend all their forces against Epaminondas only;
because none but wise and prudent men are valiant, and the cause of victory:
and therefore if they could destroy him, they should undoubtedly have the rest
at their devotion and mercy, as indeed it came to pass in that battle which
they fought together; wherein the Lacedaemonians half discomfited, one of those
who fled being pursued by Epaminondas himself, turned suddenly back upon him,
and slew him; whereupon the rest took such courage, and the Thebans were so
dismayed, that the victory remained with Agesilaus. Experience has proved it
in all ages, that Wisdom has more conduced in war to victory, than might; and
that Archimedes in his study, and Demosthenes in his gown, can more dangerously
trouble their enemies, than the Syracusians and Athenians in their armor. A
wise man, says Solomon, goes up into the City of the mighty, and casts down
the strength of the confidence thereof, Prove. 21.22.

SECONDLY, Some Fruits, Effects and Benefits of true Wisdom, are Moral; and
these are either in our selves, or come from others.

First, Some Moral Benefits and Fruits are in our selves; as these two.

I. Wisdom helps and rectifies nature: Socrates being (according to the
judgment of some Physiognomers) given to all manner of wickedness and lewdness,
by the study of Wisdom reformed himself, and became (as Plato says) a good
example or pattern of a very just and good man.

II. Wisdom helps and regulates the life: for as a Captain guides his Army, a
Pilot his Ship, God the world, and understanding the soul; so Wisdom tempereth
and guides the felicity and state of this present life. As the Bevers of
Pontus do bite off their cods, when they are hunted, because they know that for
them they are pursued; so Wisdom teaches a man to cast away those things, for
which he is endangered. As Tin separateth brass and lead from gold and silver:
so Wisdom distinguishes good from evil, and discerns things profitable from
hurtful: or as the sense of smelling discerns good savours from ill smells;
so Wisdom discerns good things from bad. As the North Wind is vehement in the
beginning, but milder at the end; and contrarily, the South Wind is mild in the
beginning, but vehement at the end: so they who take matters in hand
boisterously, have no good success: but they who with Wisdom begin to order
their lives and actions, and so continue, with good success make an end of what
they do, and finish their lives with credit. When Wisdom, says Solomon,
enters into thine heart, and knowledge delights thy Soul, then shall counsel
preserve thee, and understanding spall keep thee, etc. Prove. 2.10. etc. that
is, the word of God, true Wisdom shall counsel and teach thee how to govern thy
self and life.

Secondly, Some Moral Benefits and Fruits of true Wisdom, come from others: as
do these four.

I. Love: for true Wisdom gets and gains the love of many; for as the Loadstone
by a certain secret and hidden force, does draw Iron unto it; so Wisdom by a
secret reason does draw the minds of men unto it. Plin l. 35. c. 10. The
pleasure of a King, says Solomon, is in a wise Servant, Prove. 14.35. Hence
Wisdom and Favor are joined together, Acts 3.10. And the Lord gave him Wisdom
and favor in the sight of Pharaoh King of Egypt. And

II. Praise and commendation: as Prove. 12.8. A man shall be commended for his
Wisdom. And

III. Glory: as Prove. 3.3^. The wise shall inherit glory. Hence wise men have
been esteemed as Gods: Sapientia similis est diis immortalthus: Lipsius.
Sapience makes a mortal man like to the immortal gods. Magna est dignitas
Sapientiae, quae Soeratem summo Deo coaequat. Apuletus, de Deo Socratis.
Prudentia sui possessores efficit Deo similes. Iamblichus ap. Stob. ser. 3. de
Prud. And therefore better is a poor and wise child, than an old and foolish
King, Eccles. 4.13. and much more highly honored and esteemed. How honorable,
and how venerable, yea, of how high esteem have wise men been of old, though of
a lower value in our times? How highly was Homer honored amongst the Grecians?
Solomon amongst the Hebrews? Lycurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians? Phoroneus
among the Greeks? Ptolomeus among the Egyptians? Livy among the Romans? Cicero
among the Latins? Apollonius among the Indians? and Secundus among the
Assyrians? Cato for the great love which he bare unto Wisdom, entertained
Athenodorus; Ulysses, as Homer says, embraced Carylas; Pyrrhus esteemed
Artemius; Trajane desired Plutarch; and Scipio Panetius; who were learned in
all sorts of learning, and eminent for Wisdom. The Grecians had their
Philosophers, the Persians their Magi, the Indians their Gymnosophists, the
Egyptians their Priests, the Hebrews their Prophets, the Assyrians their
Chaldeans, the Latins their wise men, the French their Druides; all which in
every of those Nations, and throughout all the world, were renowned for their
Wisdom, and profound learning.

IV. Wisdom procures and preserves a good name: for as great Obe^^skes are
squared by great labor, and placed by the exceeding industry, strength and wit
of man, but being once placed, endure infinite ages: so it is somewhat hard to
obtain a good name, but having got one by virtue and wisdom, it never dies; as
appears by the instances in the former particular.

THIRDLY, Some Benefits, Fruits and Effects of true Wisdom, are Political. Now
these either

First, Come from others; as preferment: for Prove. 17.2. A wise servant shall
have rule over a lewd son, and shall divide the heritage among the brethren. Or

Secondly, are in our selves: as,

I. Wise men shall prosper and have good success: or what is done by Wisdom,
shall have a good issue, and turn to the good of the doers thereof: as Prove.
16.20. He who is wise in his business shall find good. Eccles. 10.10. If the
Iron be blunt, and one has not whet the edge, he must then put to more
strength; but the excellency to direct a thing, is Wisdom: that is, without
Wisdom whatsoever a man takes in hand, turns to his own hurt. And

II. Wise men do not want: hence Crates the Theban delivered a stock of money
to his friends upon this condition, that if his children should prove fools,
they should therewith be maintained; but if they became learned and
Philosophers, then to distribute it to the poor. Epicurus blamed those who say,
Sapientem seipso esse contentum, and propter hoc amico non indigere, etc. A
wise man is so absolute and rich in himself, that he needs no friend. For the
understanding hereof observe the distinction of Chrysippus, who says,
Sapientem nulla re indigere, and tamen multis illi rebus opus esse; contra etc.
A wise man wants nothing, yet has need of many things; and contrarily, a fool
has need of nothing (not knowing how to use any thing) but wants all things.
The Wise man has need of hands and eyes, and many things for his daily use;
but he wants nothing, because to want is of necessity, and there is nothing
necessary to a wise man: therefore although he be content with himself, yet he
has need of a friend, and he desires to have as many as he can, not that he
may live happily, for he can so live without friends. Senec. ep. 9. Diogenes
proved, that a wise man wanted nothing, by this argument. Deorum omnia sunt;
Deorum autem amici sunt sapientes; and amicorum communia sunt omnia. All things
are Gods; wise men are the friends of God; and all things amongst friends are
common: therefore all things are wise men's. Laert. lib. 6. This argument is
something like S. Paul's Sorites; all things are yours, because you are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. That wise men want nothing, might further
be proved from Aristotle, Laert. li. 6. Sapientem sibi sufficere, eo quod omnia
quae sunt aliorum, sunt and hujus qui cum omnibus habet amicitiam, and amicitia
facit omnia communia. So Ambros. Ep. 36. ad Constan. Quocunque sapiens
accesserit, sua omnia, totus ei mundus possesslo; quoniam toto (...) quasi suo
utitur.

FOURTHLY, Some Benefits, Fruits and Effects of true Wisdom, are Corporal,
belonging to the Body: as

First, The wise man of all other is most free. Seneca blames Cicero, for
calling himself semi liberum, half free: Nunquam mehercule sapiens in tam
humile nomen procedet, integrae semper libertatis, and sui juris, etc. I never
heard a wise man in so low a key, he being entirely free, and at his own
disposing, and much higher than others: Quis enim supra cum esse potest, qui
supra fortunam est? For who can be above him who is above fortune?

Secondly, the wise man of all others is most safe. For I. Wisdom preserves a
man in foreign Nations: as Alcibiades, in what Country soever he was, by his
Wisdom he kept himself out of danger. And II. From the power and force of
enemies. Ad constantiae nostrae asylu^ te voco, and ad arcana illa sapientiae
Templa, cujus tectum si semel subis and penetras, tectum ego te habeo ab omni
vi, ab omni host. Lipsius. He who once houseth himself under Wisdoms roof, is
sheltred from the might and malice of his enemies. And III. From tyrannical
commands. Petilius enjoined upon pain of death, by his Sovereign, to make an
Ass speak, Knowing it to be a matter impossible, demanded seven years time for
the effecting of it; hoping that in that time either the King, or he, or the
Ass would die.


FIFTHLY, Some Benefits, Fruits and Effects of true Wisdom, are spiritual, and
respect the inward man. These are either General, or Particular.

I. General; as, Wisdom makes man happy and blessed: Prove. 3.13. Blessed is the
man who finds wisdom, and who gets understanding. Or

II. Particular, as

First, Wisdom preserves from Satan. As the Doves know the manner of the
flying of the Hawks; that is, if he be of those which fly aloft, then the Dove
will sit still, if of those which take to the ground, the Dove will fly away;
so Wisdom teaches us to be as wise to watch Satan's manner of temptation, how
to avoid, and prevent him, where and how he means to assault us; lest at any
time he should circumvent us, 2 Cor. 2.11.

Secondly, Wisdom preserves from sin and evil, Prove. 16.20.23. and 2.10.16. and
7.4, 5. For as the Plow rooteth out of the earth all brambles and thistles;
even so Wisdom rooteth all vices out of the mind.

(If any should object, wise men do often that which is wicked.

Seneca answers, Epist. 90. Multa sapientes faciunt, qua homines sunt, non qua
sapientes: wise men do many things as they are men, not as they are wise men.
Particularly

I. Wisdom preserves a man from covetousness: for as the root of a Reed being
powdered, and laid upon the stem of Fern, does cause that stalk to wither: and
contrarily, if the root of the Fern be powdered, and laid on the stalk of the
Reed, that stem dies: so Wisdom does root out of the soul, and destroy the love
of money; and in like manner, the love of money does destroy, and root out
Wisdom. And

II. Wisdom preserves a man from treachery against, or, from betraying his own
Country. Themistocles being banished Athens, and forced to go into Persia, was
entreated by the King, to show him the state of his Country; but he wisely
besought him, to respite him one year, to learn the Persian Language, and then
he would tell him. Valerius.

Thirdly, Wisdom is a remedy against death; or, wisdom makes men to despise
death; and ought therefore of all men to be embraced, as the best remedy
against the fear of death.

Fourthly, Another Spiritual Benefit and Fruit of true Wisdom, is knowledge and
understanding: for Prove. 14.18. The Prudent are crowned with knowledge: and
10.15. with understanding. Wisdom makes a man rightly to understand the
administrations and dispensations of God, toward good and bad in outward
things, Psalm. 108.43. Who is wise will observe these things.

Fifthly, The last Spiritual Benefit of true Wisdom, is joy: for as by our taste
we relish things below here upon earth; so by Wisdom we taste those things which
are above in Heaven. Thus much for Wisdom and Prudence in general.

Paragraph II. Of Evil, or Carnal Wisdom.
In this Section, we have some things to consider of, which are Doctrinal, some
which are Practical, and some which are Polemical.

The Doctrinal Part.
In this Part we have these three things to observe, or consider of.

FIRST, The Names or Epithets which are given to Carnal Wisdom: namely, 1. It
is called, Earthly Wisdom: Jam. 3.15. that is, such Wisdom as earthly-minded
men have. And 2. Devilish Wisdom, Jam. 3.15. that is, such as men learn from
the devil, not from God. And 3. Sensual Wisdom, Jam. 3.15. Fleshly Wisdom, 2
Cor. 1.12. and the Wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8.6, 7. that is, such Wisdom as
unregenerate men are endued with: all whose wit and reason, as well as their
will and affections, savours only of earthly things. 4. It is called, Man's
Wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.4. And 5. The wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19. And 6. Wisdom
of words, 1 Cor. 1.17. and 2.1.4. that is, affected eloquence, or pompous and
painted speech, whereby carnal men use to show forth their carnal wisdom. 7. It
is called, Wisdom of the world: 1 Cor. 1.20. and 2.6. that is, such
understanding of divine things as men may attain unto, by virtue of natural
wit, without the revelation of the Spirit: or, the wisdom of this world,
signifies the knowledge of things pertaining to the world; which wisdom is
foolishness, 1 Cor. 3.19.


SECONDLY, Observe, that this evil, wicked and Carnal Wisdom is threefold, viz.
either

1. Ironical, and called Wisdom by way of derision; as Judge. 5.29. and 2 Cor.
11.19. Ezekiel. 28.3. Thou art wiser than Daniel, etc. this he speaks by a
Sarcasm, or derision: for Daniel had declared notable signs of his Wisdom in
Babylon, when Ezekiel wrote this: and verse. 12. Thou art full of Wisdom, etc.
in which words he derideth the vain opinion and confidence, that the Tyrians
had in their riches, strength and armies. Or

2. Diabolical; this Wisdom is twofold: to wit, either

I. Inherent in the devil; for he has still the Wisdom of an Angel, which is
very great in all natural things, and causes; yea in spiritual things, in
regard of the Theorical and doctrinal part; as, the devils believe, and
tremble, Jam. 2. Or

II. Derived or flowing from the devil: of this kind is the Wisdom of Sorcerers
and Magicians, Exodus 7.11. Or

3. Carnal: this Wisdom is either internal or external.

First, There is an internal evil wisdom: as I. Evil affections: Romans 8.6. The
Wisdom of the flesh is death: where by Wisdom is meant affection, Lust and a
desire of sin. And II. Self-confidence; when men hide their counsels, and so
craftily conceal their wicked plots, that inwardly they boast and rejoice, that
they shall prevail, Exodus 1.10. Let us work wisely.


Secondly, There is an external evil Wisdom: this is either

I. Real, and in works: this is twofold:

1. Crafty: now this false, crafty and lying Wisdom, whereby men go about, and
endeavor to deceive, overreach, undermine, or supplant others, is diame rally
opposite, yea an enemy unto Christian simplicity, which must be without fraud
or guile, Exodus 1.10. John 1.47. And

2. Cruel: this Wisdom says, Mortui non mordent, dead men cannot bite; and
therefore it is good to kill. Irish men (some say) never think a man slain
outright, till his head be off.

(Like the wild Irish, who never think one dead,
Till they can play at football with his head.)
And thieves never think themselves safe, until he be killed, whom they have
robbed; because if he be once murdered, he cannot then accuse them: whereas if
he should live he might bring them to Tyburn. Or

II. There is an external evil Wisdom, which is verbal, and in words, and may
be called arrogant wisdom: to wit, when men will undertake to judge of those
hidden and secret mysteries, which God has reserved unto himself; thinking
themselves wise enough to render a reason of all the Lords dealing with man.
This indeed is that which is taxed and taught, Romans 12.3.

1. We must think soberly of our selves. Now we shall be sober, if we take not
that upon us which we have not, nor brag of that which we have, 1 Cor. 4.7.

2. We must not be wise above that which is convenient. In the Greek there is a
most elegant paronomasie, in three words of like sound, (...) and (...), which
cannot be expressed in any other language; whence the Greek Scholtast observes,
that S. Paul sometimes uses choice figures of Rhetoric, to show that he was
not ignorant of that Art; and yet not over-frequently, that he might retain the
simplicity and Majesty of his Apostolic style.

THIRDLY, Observe the Nature of this Wisdom; namely, that it is very weak in
divine things. 1 Cor. 3.18, 19, 20. it is enmity against God, Romans 8.6, 7. and
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.20. and therefore our faith stands not in the wisdom of
men, 1 Cor. 2.5. but in the power of God. Hence worldly wise men are hardly
drawn to believe in Christ, Joh. 7.48. and if they do they blush to confess
him, John 12.42. the reason hereof is, because the measure of a thing is that
which contains the thing measured; and therefore what they cannot contain,
comprehend and take up, they cannot measure and judge: the shallow shell of
man's brain, cannot contain the Ocean of the Deity: the natural man cannot
understand infinite and spiritual things; as God, his truth, and true Religion:
and therefore cannot judge aright of them.

The Practical Part.
In this Part we have something to consider of by way of Exprobration, some by
way of Instruction, and some by way of Exhortation.

1. Those are here to blame, who judge of Gods ways by man's Wisdom; though
herein they should not lean to their own understanding, Prove. 3.5. Hence some
dispute against the Mercy, some against the Wisdom, and some against the
Justice, of God.

First, Some thus dispute against Gods Mercy.

Object. 1. If Tire and Sidon had enjoyed the Gospel, they would have believed.

Ans. It is probable that after this, the Gospel being sent unto them, they
were converted thereby.

Object. 2. If Christ would have come down from the Cross, the Priests and
Scribes would have believed: Mark. 15.32.

Ans. Those who will not hear the word of Christ, will not believe though he
rise from the dead, Luke 16.31.

Obj. 3. Why does the Lord exercise his children with so many afflictions,
tribulations and trials? does God delight in the whipping and scourging of his
children? Ab optimo nil nisi bona; can any thing but good come from the most
good God? Were it not better for the Lord, to lead his servants and people in
pleasant paths unto Heaven?

Ans. Those who thus object, understand not, I. That these things make for Gods
glory. And II. For the augmentation of the sweetness of good things, when
enjoyed after evil. Olim haec meminisse juvabit.


Secondly, Some thus dispute against the Wisdom of God.

Object. Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora; why does not
the Lord call all his elected ones at the first hour? Why did he suffer Paul
(being a chosen vessel in the election of Grace) to dishonor him so long? Why
does he permit wicked men to live so long, and to dishonor his holy name so
much?

Ans. All these things make for Gods glory; that is, 1. The Conversion of Paul
when a persecuter, makes for the glory of Gods power and mercy. And 2. The
permission of reprobates is, for the declaration of his long-suffering and
patience.


Thirdly, Some thus dispute against the Justice of God.

Object. Why does God damn those to whom he has not given power to work out
their salvation? Why does the Lord suffer his servants to be spiritually weak,
when he can make them strong?

Ans. God does all things for his own glory, Prove. 16.4. and therefore he has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens; Romans 9.15.18. and what he
does, he does justly, Romans 9.14. he having that same power over all, that the
Potter has over the clay, Romans 9.20, 21, 22. Yea we are injurious to God, in
taxing him for what we do our selves: e. g.

1. We kill Sheep and Oxen for their fels, fleeces and flesh.

2. We kill Birds, Hares, Deer, Bears, etc. for our pleasure in hunting and
hawking; and yet they are innocent creatures, and were not made by us. And

3. We make vessels and utensils to break, and for dishonorable uses; and may
not the Lord do thus? I now conclude this, that the Wisdom of the flesh is
foolishness, with one instance taken from Periander, one of the seven wise men
of Greece; who I. Slew his wife Iysides, for a strumpets sake. And II. He lay
with his mother Cratea wittingly. III. Cum uxore mortua rem habuit. And IV. He
committed many cruel acts.


II. From, concerning, or in regard of Carnal Wisdom, we may learn these three
Lessons.

FIRST, That it is dangerous to have an opinion of Self-wisdom: Prove. 3.7. and
26.12. Isa. 5.21. and 1 Cor. 8.2. and 3.18. For I. Our own eye will quickly
deceive us, and we shall be too partial in our own cause; for every man's way
seems good in his own eyes. II. True Wisdom does teach us, to acknowledge our
ignorance; as Socrates said, Hoc unum scio, This only I know, that I know
nothing: and Capnio knew all things the first year he came to Athens; the
second year he doubted of many things; but the third he said, he knew nothing
at all. III. The end of Wisdom and knowledge is not, that we may boast thereof,
but that we may learn to imitate and practice what we know.


SECONDLY, We may here learn that the Wisdom of the flesh is an enemy to
regeneration: Romans 8.6, 7. and 1 Cor. 1.26. and 3.18. Now if it be demanded,
whether all Wisdom as an impediment to faith, and an enemy to the new birth, be
condemned or not?

I answer, no; for Wisdom is manifold.

I. Some say, that there is a five-fold Wisdom; viz. Natural, Moral, Political,
Diabolical, and Spiritual.

II. Some say, that there is a double Wisdom; viz.

1. Honest and harmless. And 2. Crafty and fraudulent, which consists in
dissimulation and counterfeiting; but this cannot be called Wisdom properly,
being neither Pharisaical, not Philosophical Wisdom.
III. Wisdom indeed is twofold: viz.

1. Spiritual and Divine, which comes from God above. And 2. Carnal and Humane
or Natural, which consists partly in a natural towardliness, and ripeness of
wit; and partly in an artificial acquisition by study and knowledge. But of
this wisdom in the next Paragraph.
THIRDLY, We may learn that carnal Understanding and Wisdom is condemned of
foolishness with God; or the wisdom of the world proves folly. Cruelty is
forbidden, courage is commanded: we may partake the good of the Lion, but not
the evil of the Lion. It was and is a gross mistake of Nicholas the Florentine,
that those properties of the Dove, to be without gall and guile, have been the
bane of Christendom, whilst the enemies thereof have taken advantage of their
simplicity, to ensnare them, and of their pity to devour them. Indeed,
imprudent simplicity, and cowardly pity may disadvantage the prudent, but not
the courageous; yea sincerity in the end will overcome infidelity, and pity
will triumph over cruelty. None ever dealt more plainly than Christ, none was
dealt withal more deceitfully; none used more pity, none was used more cruelly;
but what was the issue? He proved the wisdom of his enemies, plain folly; and
their fury turned to his greater glory.

-- Sapientia prima, Stultitia caruisse. Horat. Ep. 1. There was never any
crafty wit, that was not unto himself a snare; nor cruel heart, whose hands did
not give himself the deadliest wounds in the conclusion. Dovelike simplicity is
not folly; neither is the Wisdom of the world the true Wisdom; Isa. 29.14. and
1 Cor. 1.20. and 3.18. For I. This worldly wisdom can neither discern between
things that are more excellent. Nor II. Can provide for the soul; and therefore
the fear of God is true wisdom, and other things are but foolish, and as such
condemned; that is, First, The judgment of the worldling is but foolish, Psalm.
14.1, 2. And Secondly, His prayer is but foolish, Eccles. 4.17. And Thirdly,
His hope is but foolish, Mat. 7.26. And Fourthly, His obedience is but foolish:
as we see by the foolish Virgins, Mit. 22.5. And therefore



1. We must not walk as fools, but as wise men, Eccles. 5.16.

2. We must not presume of humane wisdom, or of our own Prudence, Romans 12.16.
For that will not avail us at all (if alone) unto Salvation.

3. We must not despise the simple ones of the world, if they be pious and
prudent in obedience; for such fools are better and wiser than the wisest of
the world.

4. We must labor to acquire and procure godly Wisdom, Joh. 17.3. Colos. 3.16.
Jam. 3.17.

5. We must not acquiesce in our own judgment; that is, neither

I. In judging of felicity, or, what happiness is; because our carnal wisdom
will teach us 1. That the rich are happy; whereas indeed it is the righteous,
Luke 12.21. and 1 Timothy 6.18. And 2. That gain is godliness; whereas godliness
is gain. Neither


II. Let us rely upon our own judgment, in judging of Religion: for carnal
reason understands nothing but that which is prositable; whence Religion is
made an handmaid to gain and reason.

III. In regard of Carnal Wisdom, it is our duty, or required of us, to take
heed thereof. Three things we have here carefully to consider of, viz.

First, Why we must beware thereof: namely, for these two reasons.

I. Because in faith, and matters of Religion, it makes men curious, and puts
them upon the search of curious and secret things, rather than profitable: yea
makes them to doubt of the promises, 2. Pet. 3.4. And

II. Because in obedience and conversation 1. It is opposite to God, and cannot
be subject unto him, Romans 8.6, 7. And 2. It makes men run mad after sin, Jer.
4.22. Jam. 3.14, 15. because it cannot patronize and defend it. And 3. It
excuses those faults which it cannot defend. Isa. 30.1.


Secondly, Observe what the Fruits and Effects of Carnal Wisdom are; namely,
these three: I. Blasphemous thoughts against God. II. Injurious dealing with
others. And III. High conceits of a man's self. These three are most clearly
confirmed from Ezekiel. 28.4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 17.


Thirdly, Observe what the Evils of Carnal and Worldly Wisdom are; namely,
Malum vel est Culpae vel Poenae: Evil is twofold, of Sin and Punishment; and
both these come from Carnal Wisdom.

I. There are some Evils of Sin which come from Carnal Wisdom: as,

I. It is the cause often times of raising, and waging unjust Wars: for (as one
says) the only mother of extreme mischief, and first original of unjust and
injurious Wars, was Worldly Wisdom.

II. It makes men comply with persons, occasions and times, more than
Christianity or a good Conscience will permit. Plutarch says of Alcibiades,
wheresoever he was, and in what Country soever he sojourned, he could by his
Wisdom easily frame himself to the manners of that people. Such another was
Marcus Antonius; for at Rome he would live like a Roman, and would seem a right
Senator; but in Egypt none more licentious.

III. In general: Carnal Wisdom often persuades us amiss, Exodus 1.21. Romans
1.21. For,

1. Carnal Wisdom does not understand, neither can take up spiritual things, 1
Cor. 2.14.

2. Those spiritual things which Carnal Wisdom understands, she approves not
of, they being foolishness unto her, 1 Cor. 1.18. and 2.14.

3. Carnal Wisdom seeks help, succor, and safeguard, either in her self, or
the earth, or in these present things, and not from God: but the godly
contrarily, Psalm. 11.1. and 16.8. and 23.4. and 73.25, 28. And therefore the
best and truest Wisdom, is to deny our own Wisdom, Psalm. 121.1. and 125.

II. There are some Evils of Punishment, which come from Carnal, and Worldly
Wisdom. For I. God takes such Wise men in their own craftiness, Job 5.13. and 1
Cor. 3.19. And II. God will destroy the Wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19. And
III. God will make such Wisdom foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.20. And IV. God has
chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1.27. Thus
much for the Practical part of carnal and worldly Wisdom.


The Polemical Part.
Concerning Wisdom these two things are controverted: 1. Whether Wisdom be good
or evil? 2. Whether it be good or evil, Alta sapere?


Qu. I. Whether is Wisdom good or evil?

Answ. Concerning Wisdom, the Scripture indeed seems to speak contrarily: for
Isaias condemns it, and Solomon commends it.

First, The Prophet Esaias, Chap. 5. 21. says, Woe to the wise. Now for the right
understanding of these words, I will briefly propound and resolve three doubts,
viz.

Doubt 1. Is Wisdom evil, that the Prophet there says, Woe to the wise?

Ans. Certainly no: for it is so far from being evil, that as the principal
good it is first to be sought, lest through ignorance we should err, Prove.
1.20. and 9.1, 2.

Doubt 2. Why then does not the Prophet say, Woe to the proud, to lovers of
themselves, to self-conceited persons, and to those who are falsely opinionated
of their own wisdom, rather than, Woe to the wise?

Ans. The Prophet does this to show, that there is a sort of Wisdom which we
must beware of. For there is a wisdom of the flesh, and of the spirit, Romans
8.6. a supernal and infernal wisdom, Jam. 3.14. a wisdom which leads unto good,
Romans 16.19. and a wisdom which leads unto evil, Jer. 4.22. and therefore
worldly wisdom as evil is to be avoided, Romans 8.7, 8. For

I. The Lord thinks this wisdom foolishness, 1 Cor. 3.19. And

II. Threatens to overthrow it, Isa. 29.14. and 44.25. And

III. Does it indeed, Job 5.3. Romans 1.22. Exodus 1.10. because. Non bone
convenient, Reason and Religion, a Linsy-woolsy garment, an Ox and an Ass, God
and Belial, the Ark and Dagon, Light and Darkness, Iron and Clay, do not well
agree together, 1 Cor. 1.18, 25.

Doubt 3. What wisdom does the Prophet Esaias there condemn?

Ans. That which a man has in his own eyes, in his own opinion. Woe unto them
who are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight, Isa. 5.21.
where he teaches us. Not to lean too much to our own judgment, Prove. 3.5.7.
and that 1. Because it will make us stop our ears against the truth, and
counsel of the Word, Prove. 26.12. And 2. Because it makes men violent, Prove.
12.15. and 17.12.


Secondly, Solomon highly commends wisdom; saying, The Wise man fears and
departs from evil, Prove. 14.16. and. Blessed is he who finds wisdom, Prove.
3.13. because she is of most precious esteem, Job 28.28. Prove. 2.3.8.11.
Eccles. 2.13. Now for the reconciling of Solomon who commends, and of Esaias who
seems to condemn wisdom, observe, that there is a double Wisdom, viz.

I. Divine; this is praised by Solomon, and described by S. James, 3.17. Flumen
ex Eden in parts quatuor divisum, significat quatuor virtutes. Prudentia
contemplationem veritatis, etc. August. de great. con. Manich. 2.10. Est fons
vitae, fons spiritualis gratiae, fons virtutum caeterarum, ad vitam aeternam.
Ambros. de Parad. ca. 3. Wisdom is the fountain of Life, spiritual grace, yea
of all virtues necessary unto salvation. Therefore this Wisdom is not
condemned, or accounted as evil.

II. There is a Wisdom which is Humane and Carnal, or, the Wisdom of the flesh:
this does not commend us to God, but is condemned by God; and of this the
Prophet Esaias speaks.

Object. Humane Wisdom and Prudence is both commended and commanded, Math.
10.16. Be wise as Serpents. Yea Solon, Lycurgus, Thales, Socrates, and diverse
others, are highly extolled for their wisdom. As Plutarch says of Fabius and
Marcellus, that they were Gladius and Clypeus reipublicae. so we may say, that
Wisdom is both the sword and buckler of the Commonwealth. Besides Wisemen have
spoken many things of God, and that well: as Hermes, the Sibyls, Plato, Seneca,
and diverse others: yea even humane wisdom was given by God unto Solomon as a
great blessing: how then can it be evil?

Ans. Wisdom and Prudence is either,

First, Natural: this sort of wisdom Solomon exceeded in. Or,

Secondly, Philosophical: This is either, I. Moral, teaching virtues: in this
sort of wisdom, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle were very famous. Or II.
Political: this is twofold, viz.


1. That which consists in feigning, counterfeiting, dissembling and
supplanting. Or, 2. Sincere, which consists in governing, preserving, and the
like. To conclude this first controversy, I will lay down two Positions, as
undoubted truths, viz.
I. Crafty and deceitful wisdom is odious and abominable unto God. II. Humane
wisdom is unable, and too too weak to acquire salvation.
Qu. II. Whether is it lawful, Alta sapere, to be wise in high things or not?

Ans. I. The Scripture herein seems to speak contrarily. For, 1. In Coloss.
3.2. it is said, Sapite ea quae sursum sunt, be wise in the things which are
above. 2. In Romans 12.16. it is said, Non alta sapientes, be not wise in high
things.


Ans. II. There is no true contradiction in those places; for in the former, to
be wise in those things which are above, is so to contemplate and meditate of
Heaven and Heavenly things, that though our bodies be on earth, yet our hearts
may be in Heaven: And in the latter, Altum sapere, either signifies to be proud
of, or puffed up by knowledge, or, to desire to know those things which are not
lawful, or expedient to be known. Now here the Rule is, Non plus sapere, quam
oportet sapere, sed sapere ad sobrietatem: Let no man presume to understand
above that which is meet to understand; but that he understand according to
sobriety, Romans 12.3. In those words we are forbidden two things: 1. (...), or
(...), to be wise, or understand, supra modum, above measure. 2. (...), or
(...), to be wise, or understand, Praeter id, above that which he ought to
understand.


First, concerning (...), or (...), we may observe these six things.

I. The Apostle being about to teach unto, and admonish them of great and high
things, makes way for his doctrine, by removing wordly wisdom out of the way,
and by teaching true wisdom.

II. A man is said to be wise supra modum, above measure, when he aims at
toohigh things, and reaches at things above his reach; as Adam and Eve did,
when they desired to be as God, Genesis 3. and as Lucifer who presumed to seat
himself in Gods throne, Jude 6.

III. This wisdom is called (...), self-love, and self-conceitedness, Romans
11.20. Prove. 3.7. and 26.12. Joh. 9.41.

IV. This wisdom seldom goes unpunished: as Vzzah was stricken dead for staying
the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.7. and Heliodorus scourged for entering into the Holy of
Holies, 2 Match. 3.24.

V. Hence came these Proverbs: Noli alte sapere; Ne quid nimis; Tuo te pede
metire.

VI. Such as this is the wisdom of those, who deny the Scriptures, and who will
undertake to Preach and expound the Scriptures, being ignorant both of tongues
and arts

Secondly, Concerning (...), or, (...), observe, that this is when we
understand Aliena, things besides what we ought to understand. Now these are of
two sorts: viz.

1. Some things are Aliena, strangers from the Gospel. 2. Some things are
Aliena, strangers from us.
I. The wisdom of the world is Alienum, a stranger from the Gospel. Hence, 1.
The Gospel condemns this wisdom, Romans 8.6, 7. and 1 Cor. 2.14. and 1 Cor.
1.10.22.26, 27. And 2. This worldly wisdom condemns the Gospel, Gal. 5.11. and
1 Cor. 1.18, 21. And 3. The nature of this worldly wisdom is, to teach what
pleases it self, not what is consonant to the Word of God, Levit. 10.1, 2.


II. Some things are Aliena, strangers from us; these are of two sorts, viz.

1. Such things as are unprofitable for or unto us; as when with Martha, we
busy our selves about many things, and neglect that one thing which is most
needful for us. And

2. Such things as are too high for us: this is the sin of curiosity; as when
we busy our selves about unnecessary things, and neglect those which are
necessary. Protagoras wrote a book, De gestis inferorum: the Papists have many
strange fictions of Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory. Augustine being asked what God
did before the creation of the world? answered, Fecit gehennam curiosis, he
made Hell for such curious ones. Hence came the Proverb, De Deo credendum, non
inquirendum. Empedocles by going too near to Aetna, and Pliny by searching too
narrowly into the secrets of Mount Volusius, were destroyed. Phaeton by
presuming to guide the Chariot of the Sun, was struck dead: and Icarus by
presuming to fly was drowned. Hence came those Proverbs, Ne ultra columnas
Herculem; Ne Suitor ultra crepidas: Quae supra nos nihil ad nos. Thus much for
Carnal and Worldly wisdom.

Paragraph III. Of good and Commendable Wisdom.
In this Section we have some things to consider of by way of Explication, and
some by way of Application.

I. Concerning, good, lawful, commendable, and warrantable Wisdom, we have
these five things to observe, or consider of.

1. The Division thereof. Note here that Humane Wisdom may be considered of:
either

I. As it is infected, poisoned, and corrupted by Saphan; and so it is evil,
and unlawful; as was proved in the preceding Paragraph. Or,

II. As it is a natural faculty, and humane understanding: and as such may be
called Good. Now this is either private or public.

First, There is a good, lawful, laudable Humane Wisdom, which is private;
whereby a man wisely orders and manages his conversation, and Life. This
private wisdom is in all threefold: viz.

I. E^ ^ordinary; as Wisdom to expound dreams, visions, and the like, Dan.
2.20, 21, 23. and 5.11, 14. And

II. Accidental; it is a Proverb among the French, Et qui par son peril est
sage, Celuy est sage mal heureux: he who is wise by his own folly, may be
called unhappy wise. And

III. Ordinary; to wit, wisdom acquired by study, experience, and practice.
This again is threefold: for it either belongs 1. To Arts and Sciences; as
Matthew. 2.1. Acts 7.22. This wisdom is common both to good and bad men. Or 2. To
Crafts and Callings; as Exodus 20.3. and 35.10. Or, 3. To Virtues, and is called
Moral wisdom: which in general makes a wise practick man, Matthew. 10.16.


Secondly, There is a good and laudable Humane Wisdom, which is public; and
is fourfold.

1. Ecclesiastical; this wisdom makes a man a good Governor in, or over the
Church, and flock of Christ, committed to his feeding, care, and charge. And

2. Oeconomical, or, Domestical: this wisdom makes a man a wise Householder. And

3. Martial, or Military: this wisdom makes a man a good Captain, or Commander.

4. Political; this is twofold, viz.

I. Regal and Supreme; this wisdom makes a wise King. And II. Legal and
Subordinate; this makes a wise Statesman. In this Political wisdom observe
three things.
1. That sometimes it is abused; as it was by Achitophel, and is daily in all
States, by Statesmen, Politicians and Machivilians, Prove. 21.30.

2. That sometimes it is well used, as 1 King. 3.28. They saw the wisdom of God
was in him to do justice, 2 Samuel 23.8.

3. That to the true and right using of Political wisdom is required the
knowledge of God, as Prove. 8.12. I wisdom dwell with prudence, and I find forth
knowledge and counsel: As if the Holy Ghost should say, Except a man have
wisdom, which is the true knowledge of God, he can neither be prudent, nor a
good Counselor.

2. Observe, which the chief Parts and Points of wisdom are; namely,

I. Solomon, and his Kingly Father David say, That the first degree of true
wisdom is, a holy fear of God, Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 9.10.

II. Wilson in his Art of Rhetoric, page 16. b. says, The chief parts of
Wisdom are these three: 1. Memory, which calls to mind those things which
were done heretofore, and by a former remembrance gets an after-wit, and
learneth to avoid deceit. 2. Understanding, which sees things presently done,
and perceives what is in them, weighing and debating them, until the mind be
fully contented and satisfied. 3. Foresight, which is a gathering by
conjectures, what shall happen, and a perceiving of things to come, before they
do come.


III. Aristotle Laert. l. 5. says, Tria ad parandam sapientiam potissimum
necessaria, Naturam, doctrinam, and exercitationem; Nature, Learning, and
Exercise or use are the most necessary things unto true wisdom.

IV. The Latin Orator says, Primus ad sapientiam gradus, est seipsum noscere;
quod ut omnium difficillimum est, ita long utilissimum: the first step unto
wisdom is, to know our selves, which is not more hard than profitable.

V. Lactantius says, the chief points of wisdom are these two: 1. To discern
that which is false. 2. To know that which is true: I may say of these five
particulars. Quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant, If one of them satisfy
not the doubt, all together will.


3. Observe, whereabout good Wisdom is conversant: namely,

First, Some say, (I affirm it not as a truth) that as in a living creature,
the first and chiefest part is the head, the second the breast, and the third
the secret parts; and as in the Soul, the first and chiefest part is rational,
the second irascible, and the third concupiscible: so Wisdom is the first and
chiefest virtue (to wit, of the three last Cardinal Virtues) and it is
conversant about the head, and the rational part of the Soul: the second is
Fortitude, which does establish the heart, and is busied about anger; and the
third is Temperance, which is conversant about the concupiscible faculty. Phil.
Jud. li. 1. Leg. allegor. So that as Gold is the most precious among metals, so
is Wisdom among Virtues, that is, it excels Fortitude and Temperance.

Secondly, In general again, As the Sight is conversant about all things
visible, and the Hearing about all things audible; so Wisdom is conversant
about all kind of beings and essences. Pythagor. apud Stob. Sermon. de virt.
Geometria, Arithmetica, reliquaque in speculatione sita, and scientiae sunt,
and circa entia versantur: at Sapientia circa omnia genera entium. Etenim
occupata est sapientia circa omnia quae sunt, ceu visus circa omnia visibilia,
and auditue circa omnia audibilia. So Senec. Epist. 71. Sapientia res trahit,
non verba, de divinis humanisque cogitat, de praeteritis, de caducis, de
aeternis, de tempore.

Thirdly, Wisdom is conversant about Herbs, Plants, and the natures of them.
God gave Wisdom to Solomon, to dispute of all Herbs and Plants, even from the
Cedars in Lebanon, to the Pellitory root that grows out of the wall.

Fourthly, Wisdom is conversant about Military and Martial affairs. Men praised
the prudence of Fabius, because he broke the point of Fortune, and hindered the
advancement of Hanibal by delay, by shunning to engage with him in fight, and
by attending his advantage. When Casar took upon him the government of the
Gauls, he waged war there ten years, guided by unspeakable prudence which was
accompanied with so much diligence, that by his wisdom and endeavor, he
subdued 300. Nations, took 8000 Towns, and in many battles discomfited 3000000
men. Eutropius.

Fifthly, Wisdom is conversant about Government, Whether.

I. Ecclesiastical, in well ruling and governing both National Churches, and
Parochial Congregations. Or

II. Domestical, in well ordering of a family, both in regard of Wife,
Children, Servants, and Estate. Or,

III. Political, in well ruling and governing Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Note
here, Wisdom is conversant about the rule and government of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, two manner of ways, viz.

1. For the obtaining thereof, or attaining thereunto. Julius Caesar the first
Roman Emperor, by his Wisdom and Prudence prepared his way to so great a
Monarchy, by reconciling together Pompey and Cassius, two of the greatest Roman
Senators, by whose favor he obtained afterward the dignity of Consulship,
Plutarch. Suetonius writing of the foresaid Caesar says, He gloried in his
good fortunes, but the bringing of his great enterprises to pass, was by his
wisdom and experience in the affairs he undertook. Philip of Macedon being in
hostage three years together, learned so much wisdom of Epaminondas, that
thereby he got into his hands the Monarchy of all Greece, and a great part of
Asia. Curtius. And

2. For the just and right Administration thereof. Solon with the knowledge of
wisdom governed the Athenians, Lycurgus the Lacedaemonians, and Parmenides the
Eleati. Romulus the first King, and founder of the City of Rome, chose 100. of
the eldest and wisest in the same Country, by whose wisdom he willed it should
be governed. Patritius. Tully (in Prolog. Rhet. 1.) to this purpose says, Ad
Rempublicam plurima commoda veniunt, si moderatrix omnium rerum praesto est
sapientia, hinc ad ipsos, qui eam adepti sunt, laus, honor, dignitas, confluere
debent; in hac enim excolenda, sita est vitae honestas, and in negligenda
turpitudo, Wisdom in government procures honor to the Ruler, and profit to the
Ruled. Hence Moses says, Deuteronomy. 1.13. Bring men of wisdom and understanding,
and knowledge among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you. As he
should not take a Lute in his hand, who is ignorant in or of Music; so he
should not take Rule and Sovereignty upon him, who is not endued with wisdom
and prudence. As the Cyclops having his eye thrust out, stretched cut his hands
hither and thither without any certain aim: so a great King, or mighty
Potentate, who wants wisdom and prudence, undertaketh all his affairs with
great hurly burly, and without any judgment.

4. Observe, that the Wisdom and Prudence of Princes and Rulers consists in
these four things.

I. In providing for the public Worship of God. 2 Chronicles. 2.12. Ezra 7.25. And
II. In carrying themselves according to the dignity of their high and
honorable calling, 2 Chronicles. 2.12. And III. In wise and prudent speeches, 2 Chronicles. 9.3.6.23. And IV. In the Administration of Justice, and just Judgments,
1 King. 3.28. Prove. 10.26.
5. Observe, wherein true and good Wisdom consists: namely,

First, Bonaventure says, Sapientia in cognitione, and affectione aeternorum
consistit. Wisdom consists in the knowledge of and love unto spiritual things.

Secondly, Some say, Wisdom consists in these three things.

I. To deliberate well. II. To resolve well. III. To execute well.
Thirdly, Antonius (in vita sua) says, Wisdom consists in these three
things: I. To behave our selves well toward God; this is done by the
mortification of our passions. II. To behave our selves well with men; this is
done by bearing with them, forbearing of them, and doing good unto them. And
then III. To have our ears prepared, to hear our selves evil spoken of.


Fourthly, The Scripture faith, that true wisdom consists in these five things:

I. In justifying God in all his Judgments, and acknowledging that we have
deserved double of what we feel, Job 11.6. And

II. In a holy fear of God, Psalm. 111.10. And

III. In hearing, and bearing threatenings as from God, Mic. 6.9. The Lords
voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy Name, etc. That
is, when God speaks to any City or Nation, the godly will acknowledge his
Majesty, and consider, not the mortal man who brings the threatening, but God
who sends it. And

IV. In hearing, and obeying the Word, Will and Law of God, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Prima
sapientia est vita laudabilis, and opud Deum pura men's, per quam puri puro
junguntur. Nazianz. in Apolog. And

V. Wisdom consists, in adhering and cleaving unto God, and resting upon him,
Hos. 14.10. Thus much for the Doctrinal Part.

II. Concerning the Applicative part of good Wisdom, we have some things to
consider of by way of Instruction, some by way of Exhortation.

I. From, concerning, or in regard of good Humane Wisdom, we may learn these
two Lessons.

1. That two things a man cannot do by his Wisdom: viz.

I. Not make the Hawk fly, Job 39.29. And II. Not know God in the Wisdom of
God, 1 Cor. 1.21.
2. We may learn, that no Humane Wisdom at all, can bring us to the knowledge
of God or Christ. For

I. There is no need of Humane Wisdom for the learning of Christ, but there is
a necessity of Divine Faith. He who desires to come by Christ unto glory, must
labor for Faith, not Humane Wisdom; for the simple ones of the world may be
saved; and therefore Humane Wisdom is not necessary: but without Faith none can
be saved, and therefore Faith is simply necessary.

II. Humane Wisdom only understands, perceives, and takes up humane things, and
not divine, 1 Cor. 2.14. for flesh and blood cannot reveal spiritual things
unto us, Math. 16.17. But the knowledge of God and Christ is true wisdom, Joh.
17.3. And therefore humane wisdom cannot bring us to the knowledge of God, or
Christ, or the Gospel. The Philosophers understood something of the Creation of
the World, of the immortality of the Soul, and of the dignity and excellency of
the mind; but they were wholly ignorant of the fall of Adam, of the sacrifice
of Christ for sin, and the like Theological truths; wherefore unto the
knowledge of Divinity more than humane wisdom is requisite.

III. Humane Wisdom makes men proud and puffs them up, 1 Timothy 3.6. but those
who would be saved must be humble, and learn to deny themselves, Matthew. 15.24.
And therefore humane wisdom is so far from bringing us to Heaven, that it is a
means to debar, and keep us from thence, as follows by and by.

IV. Humane Wisdom makes men more indocible of spiritual things. Those who are
great Scholars in humane Learning, are ashamed to be taught Divine Lessons of
those who are inferior to them in knowledge; and therefore in this regard
also, humane wisdom does rather hinder us from, than help and further us to
eternal life.

II. The Duties required in regard of good Wisdom, do either respect and
concern Rulers in particular, or All in general.

I. These five things are required of Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, in
regard of Wisdom.

1. To beg wisdom earnestly of God, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. And 2. To exercise their
wisdom in the administration of Justice and Judgment, 1 King. 2.6. and 3.28.
and 2 Chronicles. 9.5. And 3. To speak of, and utter wisdom to their servants,
people, and strangers, when they commune with them, 1 King. 4.34. and 10.6. and
2 Chronicles. 9.7. And 4. To show their wisdom in promoting Gods Worship and
service, Ezra 7.25. And 5. To teach wisdom to inferior and subordinate
Magistrates, Psalm. 105.22.
II. The Duties required of All in regard of Wisdom, are either Affirmative, or
Negative.

First, The Affirmative Duties are these two: 1. To bless God for the wisdom
and prudence of their Princes and Rulers, when they are prudent and wise, 2 Chronicles. 2.12. And 2. To labor for good and true Wisdom. Two things are here
considerable, viz. the Impediments and Helps.


I. The Impediments of good Wisdom are these three.

1. Love of Women, or subjection unto them. Marcus Aurelius says, It is not
possible for that man to obtain wisdom and knowledge, who is in bondage to a
woman. And

2. Love of folly, and natural ignorance. Qui se diligit stultum, non proficiet
ad sapientiam, nec fiet quisque qualis esse cupit, nisi oderit qualis est.
August. de verit. relig. He who loves folly will never be wise; and he will
never have that wisdom which he should, who does not hate the ignorance that he
has. And

3. Self-conceitedness is a main impediment of wisdom. Seneca says, Multos
pervenire potuisse ad sapientiam, nisi eo se pervenisse putarent. Many might
have attained to wisdom, but that they think they have attained it already,
Intus existens prohibet alienum; that which is already within, forbids the
receiving of any more. The heart may be so full with a conceit, that it will
sooner burst than receive any more. It is impossible, that ever he should be
wise, who thinks himself wise enough already: It is impossible for him to
learn, who conceits his Learning to be already great enough. Ad veram
sapientiam pervenire non possunt, qui falsae suae sapientiae fiducia decipiunt.
Greg. in mor. They therefore who would grow in wisdom, must say with Socrates,
Hos unum scio, me nihil scire; I know this one thing, that I know nothing.

II. The Helps unto good Wisdom are either 1. False, as the tree of knowledge,
Genesis 3.6. Or 2. True: now these Helps are either Natural and Humane, or
Spiritual.


1. The Humane and Natural Helps are these eight.

1. Learning and study, for it is hard to be wise without them.

Totius prudentiae compendium in Literis continetur. Si respublica regenda est,
si praelia committenda sunt, si castra mutanda, si machinae erigendae, si
renovandi aggeres, si propugnacula facienda, si militiae cultus, si reverentia
Legum, si finitimarum gentium amicitiae sunt servandae, Libri haec omnia
erudiunt ad perfectum. Princeps quidem sine literis est navis sine remige, and
volucris sine pennis. Pet. Ravis. in quadam Epist.

2. Years and old age are a great help unto wisdom, Job 12.12. and 32.7. And

3. Good Tutors and Instruction, Prove. 9.9. and 21.11. Give admonition to the
wise, and he will be the wiser. Alexander Severus was a very wise Prince, which
he attained unto, by the counsel, pains, and instructions of that learned
Lawyer Vlpianus; so that it appears that good Instruction and Instructors are
Helps both to get wisdom, and to increase it.

4. Sometimes the punishment of others is a Help unto wisdom; as Prove. 21.11.
When the scorner is punished, the foolish is wise; so 19.25. that is, the
simple and ignoranc learn, when they see the wicked punished. And

5. Sometimes gentle Reproofs and stripes, Prove. 29.15. The rod and correction
give wisdom.

6. Experience is a great help unto wisdom; for all is but Lip-wisdom that
lacks Experience: and therefore Aristotle says, A young man cannot be
solidly wise, seeing wisdom requires experience, which for want of years young
men cannot have. And

7. To converse with Wise men: Prove. 13.20. He who walks with the wise, shall
be wise.

8. The favor and affection of great men, or, Preferment from men in place, is
a help unto wisdom. As the earth nourishes the root of the tree, but yet the
Sun brings forth the blossoms, and if storms hinder not, he with his wholesome
heat ripeneth the fruit, and makes it pleasant: Even so, study and labor
brings in knowledge, which by the comfort or encouragement of Princes is more
cheerfully increased and prosecuted. And if envy or displeasure hinder not, the
countenance of great ones will make wisdom and learning increase, to the
comfort and profit both of Church and State.

2. There are two Internal and Spiritual helps unto wisdom; as

I. The Sacred Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. And

II. A sincere and humble denial of our own humane wisdom, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any
among you seem to be wise, let him be a fool that he may be wise. Thus much for
the Affirmative Duties required of All.

Secondly, The Negative Duty is this, None must be proud of their wisdom;
because God hides the Gospel from Humane Wisemen; or the knowledge of the
Gospel from those who swell great with humane wisdom; as Matthew. 11.25. Father I
thank thee, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, etc. Two
things are here to be observed, viz.

1. The Truth hereof. 2. The Grounds hereof.
First, That God hides the knowledge of the Gospel from those who swell great
with humane wisdom.

I. Appears thus, because God takes away his helping hand from unworthy
persons, and that two manner of ways: viz.

1. Sometimes Outwardly by prohibiting the Pastors to preach, Matthew. 10.5. Acts
16.7. And 2. Sometimes inwardly, by not blessing the Word Preached, unto the
hearers thereof. And
II. It is clear from hence, because God gives two things to his Children, viz.

1. A Prop, whereby he protects, preserves, and supports them, against Satan,
the World, and Flesh. Hence the Devil could not touch a hair of Jobs head
without permission. And

2. Help, medicine, relief, and eye salve, that is, illumination, whereby they
are enabled to understand the Word. He opens their eyes, he awakes them out of
sleep, he enables them to behold the Light, Joh. 3.19. and without this the
Gospel is but a dead letter.

Secondly, Observe, how carnal or humane wisdom (which is not simply vicious or
evil) can hinder a man from the knowledge of God, and Christ and the Gospel,
viz.

I. We need not enquire and seek what it is that hinders us from the knowledge
of God, (for the corruption of Nature which is both in Fools and Wisemen does
this) but rather, what it is that moves God to pass by, and refuse to redeem
some from the common destruction, which all men are subject unto by the fall of
Adam; and that is, his own glory, Prove. 16.4. Now those whom the Lord denies to
help or succor by his grace, cannot rescue or aid themselves at all by any
humane wisdom or knowledge: and this humane wisdom may be said to hinder us
from divine knowledge, and eternal glory, because it cannot help, further,
succor, or enable us to attain thereunto. And this Calvin thinks to be the
true meaning of the point, and particular in hand; That it hinders from,
because it conduces nothing unto the spiritual knowledge. But it is something
more.

II. Certainly, natural wisdom it self, hinders us from the knowledge of God,
and salvation, or that knowledge of God which is salvation, Joh. 17.3. or, we
must acknowledge, that there is something in the wisdom of the flesh, which
hinders from Faith; for there are two things in him who learns.

1. A simplicity of believing: this is necessary in him who would learn,
according to that of Aristotle, (...), a Scholar must believe what his master
teaches; and with Pythagoras his Scholars, (...), our Master says so, must be
of great reckoning, and weight with him. A Scholar can never learn well, who
calls the truth of that in question, which is taught; or, rather, who will
not believe what is taught; and herein humane wisdom hinders men from faith,
seeing it will believe no more in Religion, than is plain and demonstrative by
Reason. There is nothing true in Divinity, which is either false in, or
contrary to Reason; but yet there are many deeps in the divine mysteries of
God, which the Plummet line of humane Reason cannot fathom or sound; there are
many things in Religion above reasons reach, which are therefore to be believed
by faith, because they cannot be apprehended or comprehended, much less
demonstrated by Reason. Now, I say, the natural wise man will believe no more
than he can take up by natural reason, although it be taught, and confirmed
(...), from the Word of God. Thus humane wisdom hinders us from believing all
those saving truths, which the shallow shell of man's brain is not able to
contain, or comprehend.

2. In Scholars who desire to be great and good Scholars, there is a certain
curiosity of disputing, and propounding doubts and Queres; which is commendable
in humane Learning, but not in divine, although it be too frequent with those
who are somewhat in humane Learning, and wisdom, and to such this is a great
impediment, because worldly, or humane wise men, despise the simplicity of the
Gospel, and the low and plain style of the Scriptures: That great learned man
Aristotle, rejected the Pentateuch. Multa asserit, pauca probat, because Moses
did only positively lay down things, and not demonstrate them from the
principles of Philosophy. Thus much for good and commendable Wisdom.

Paragraph IV. Of Spiritual, and dessrable Wisdom.
In this Section, we have something to observe which in Doctrinal, and
something to consider of which is Practical.

I. In the Doctrinal part, I will only observe these three things.

1. The Names given to this Wisdom. 2. The Division thereof. 3. The Definition
thereof.
1. These Names or Epithetes are given to spiritual wisdom.

1. It is called, All wisdom, Ephesians. 1.8. He has abounded toward us in all
wisdom; that is, he has abundantly shed his grace on us, in all sorts and
kinds of heavenly wisdom, 1 Cor. 13.2. 2. It is called, wisdom which is from
above, Jam. 3.17. that is, A wisdom which comes from God, not from the World,
or Satan. 3. It is called, hid wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.7. We speak the hid wisdom;
that is, the Gospel which is hid from natural men. 4. It is called, the wisdom
of God, 1 King. 3.28. that is, singular and excellent wisdom. 5. It is called,
Treasures of Wisdom, Col. 3.1. that is, exceeding great plenty, and store of
heavenly and divine knowledge.
2. Divine create Wisdom is either,

1. Angelical, or, the wisdom of Angels. Or,

2. Spiritual, or, the Wisdom of Men. This Wisdom is sometimes called
Evangelical, or, the knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel; sometimes
Spiritual and sometimes Celestial; as Jam. 3.15, 17. And thus Wisdom is taken,

I. Sometimes for the Habit, or the internal grace: as Ephesians. 1.8. and 2 Timothy
3.15. He has abounded toward us in all Wisdom: where by Wisdom is meant the
knowledge of faith, by which the Elect see, and behold God, to be their Father
in Christ. So Psalm. 19.7. Prove. 4.5, 7. and 2 Timothy 3.14. Get wisdom, get
understanding; where by Wisdom is meant the sound understanding and knowledge
of the Word, to make men wise to salvation, 1 Cor. 2.7.

II. Sometimes Spiritual Wisdom is taken for the act, or external exercise and
practice of Wisdom; as Prove. 10.13, 21, 23. Psalm. 90.13. Fools shall die for
want of Wisdom; that is, destitute of godliness, and the true fear of God,
wherein a great part of Spiritual Wisdom consists.

3. Concerning the Definition of this Wisdom observe two things.

I. Spiritual Wisdom in general, is a Wisdom above nature, which descends
from the Father of Lights, and which directs us so to order and govern our
short life here, that thereby we may gain eternity hereafter; so to worship and
serve God in Christ in this world, that we may reign with him in the world to
come.

II. According to our Saviors words, Matthew. 7.24, 25. He who hears my Word, I
will liken him to a Wise man: We may define Spiritual Wisdom thus:

True Wisdom is to keep and observe the Word and Commandment of God, Deuteronomy.
4.6. Prove. 2.1. to verse 9. and 4.1. Yea, that obedient hearing is true Wisdom,
is verified by Psalm. 32. which is entitled Maschil, or, David's Learning, and
is indeed a notable Psalm of Learning, containing the sum of all Religion;
which by David is reduced to these two heads, his Repentance, and his new
Obedience. Yea, it further appears that obedient hearing is true Wisdom, by
these three reasons.

1. Because it makes us Wise, Psalm. 119. part 13. yea wise unto salvation,
Coloss. 3.16. 2. Because it is the All wise God who gives this Wisdom, Prove.
2.6. Coloss. 3.16. Jam. 1.5. 3. Because the whole nature of Wisdom is included
herein. For the proof hereof observe, that in Wisdom there are these two things
required.
I. For a man to be careful of himself And

II. For a man to prefer the best, most excellent, and most prositable things:
now he who hears and obeyes the Word of God, has a true care of himself, his
estate, and condition; and does give the pre-eminence to the best things,
Matthew. 26.16.

II. In the Practical Part, we have something to consider of by way of
Instruction, and something by way of Exhortation.

1. From, concerning, or in regard of Spiritual Wisdom we may learn these
Iessons:

First, That the Lord exhorts and leads his children unto this Wisdom, Prove.
4.11. Ego docui, duxi, I have taughs thee, I have led thee: so Luke 1.17. Deuteronomy.
32.29. Psalm. 94.8. Prove. 1.20. and 2.3.4. and 8.5.10.33. and 4.5. and 27.11.
and 29.3. 1 King. 3.10.

Secondly, We may learn, that true Wisdom is not attained unto, except the Lord
teach it unto us, Prove. 4.11. Ego docui, I have taught thee; and Job 28.20,
etc. Prove. 2.6. and 1 Cor. ^2.4.8.11. Psalm. 34.11, For

I. We have it not of our selves, Jer. 10.14. and 51.17. Psalm. 49.20. Jam.
3.15. But

II. The Lord has Wisdom, yea in him dwells all Wisdom, Job 12.13, 16. Psalm.
147.5. Prove. 8.14, 22. Romans 16.27. and 1 Timothy 1.17. And

III. God is the object of Wisdom, Joh. 17.3. and 1 Cor. 2.11. Therefore,

IV. None can teach it but he. It was he who gave it to Joseph, Acts 7.10. to
Solomon, 1 King. 3.12. and 4.29. to Paul, 1 Cor. 3.10. and 2 Pet. 3.15. to
David, Psalm. 71.17. and to all the Elect, Ephesians. 1.18. Luke 21.15. Acts 6.10.
Wherefore,

V. Wisdom is to be sought only of God, Ephesians. 1.17. Jam. 1.5. Job 12.13, 16.
Cant. 8.2. For

1. We must not presume of our selves, or persuade our selves, that by our own
power we can procure it, Job 32 8. and 1 Samuel 18.14. But

2. We must seek it of God, and that I. By Prayer, Psalm. 143.10. And II. By the
Word, Eccles. 12.9. Malac. 2.7. And


3. The Lord gives it: I. By his Word, Psalm. 119.9. and 2 Timothy 3.15. And II. By
his holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.11. And


4. The Lord gives Wisdom, both I. For our selves. And II. For ours; that is,
both 1. For our people, Coloss. 1.9. And 2. For our children, 1 Chronicles. 22.12.



Thirdly, We may learn, that Spiritual Wisdom is true riches, Prove. 8.11, 18.
and 16.16. Job 28.15, 16, 17, etc. Prove. 14.19. Ephesians. 1.8. For I. This Wisdom
directs the Life, Prove. 1.3, 4. and 2.9. Eccles. 2.13, 14. And II. Preserves
from danger, Prove. 2.7, 11. and free; from the fear of casualties. For 1. It
stumbles not in the use of means, but in all leaves the success to God, in whom
is the best security. And 2. Nothing comes unlooked for, because it always
expects what may come to pass, and accounts the good which happens as gain.
III. Wisdom honors him who has it, Prove. 1.9. and 8.18. and 3.16, 22. and
4.8, 9. And IV. It frees from sin, Phil. 1.9.10. And V. It confounds our
enemies, Luke 21.15.


2. Concerning Spiritual Wisdom these Duties are required of us.

First, Those to whom God has given it, must be thankful unto him for it;
that is, both I. When he offers, and holds forth Wisdom unto them, Prove. 4.4.
And II. When he bestows Spiritual Wisdom upon them, Dan. 2.20, 21, 22.


Secondly, It is the duty, or required of those, who have wise Pastors or
Preachers of the Word, highly to esteem them, 2 Chronicles. 9.23. Romans 10.15. Luke
11.49. For

I. Their Wisdom is the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.6. And II. It is given unto
them by God, to teach us, Malac. 2.7.
Thirdly, It is the duty of all, to take heed of Folly, and spiritual
foolishness, Prove. 1.22. and 9.6. Jer. 4.22. For I. Fools are contemptible, and
more vile than earth, Job 30.8. And II. They are a heaviness to their Parents,
Prove. 10.1. And III. They are hurtful to themselves, Job 5.3.


Fourthly, It is the duty, or required of all, to labor for true Spiritual
Wisdom. Three things are here considerable, viz. the Signs, the Fruits, the
Means.

1. The Signs of true Wisdom are these eight.

1. True Wisdom is powerful or strong, not fleeting or wavering, Ephesians. 4.14.
It leads men to perfection, Hebr. 13.1. and feeds them not with milk, Hebr.
5.12. And therefore they who waver and stagger in Religion are not wise.

2. True Wisdom is free, and is neither tied to a man's own opinion, nor to the
opinion of others. Many are pertinacious in their own opinions: many will swear
what some say, and hold whatsoever such or such teach: but true Wisdom is
always prepared and ready to be taught; and therefore Papists, and all who are
obstinate in a blind opinion are not wise.

3. True Wisdom is serious and grave: many seek after frivolous things; many
labor to make ropes of sand; many find a knot in a rust; a Tailor, whom I
know, beat his brains, how of Tape to make a Coat (like Christ's) without seam;
and how with Cork under his feet, he might walk (as Christ did) upon the water:
but true wisdom is busied in the study of the mysteries of Religion, 1 Cor.
2.10.

4. True Wisdom is general, in all things: many are pussed up because they are
wise in some things; but true Wisdom is ignorant of no profitable thing. It is
a Panoplia, a Delphian sword, a general antidote, and a sovereign Elixar,
Wisdom 7.24. And therefore the truly Wise man I. Is never afraid, Psalm. 23.4.
and 3.6. Nor II. Altered, or removed from his purpose or duty.


5. True Wisdom is honest, that is, it is never used either

I. To the Injury of another, Psalm. 15. Or

II. Unto Fraud. The Wisdom of the world is, to hide the sense by the words,
and to make false things seem true: but Sapientia justorum est, mentem verbis
ostendere, nihil callide simulare. True Wisdom never separates Verum a bono,
that which is true from that which is good. Quid aliud sapientia quam veritas,
in qua tenetur bonum? August. de lib. arb. Jer. 8.9. And therefore the Wisdom
of the world is diabolical, Jam. 3.14. and odious unto God, Romans 8.6, 7. Ezekiel.
28.4.

6. True Wisdom is practical, not verbal, Jam. 1.23, 24. Apollonius laughed at
the Gymnosophists, because their Wisdom was only words: for true wisdom, Pauca
loquitur, sed plura ostendit operibus. Greg. Vera sapientia primo mores purgat,
deinde verborum gratiam ministrat, Cass. ep. l. 3. And therefore he is not
wise, who knows much, or many good things, but he who does the good things he
knows, Joh. 13.17. This is true Wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4.6.

7. True Wisdom rules and governs where it is. It suffers not rebellious
affections, Romans 7.15, 19, 23. but reigns King-like, Romans 6.12. Coloss. 3.15.
and 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Gal. 5.24. And therefore they are fools who walk in the
lusts of concupiscence, Eccles. 6.9. For how can he be a wise man, who submits
himself to slavery, and that willingly? 2 Pet. 2.14. A wilful wicked man can
be no wise man.

8. True Wisdom is spiritual. Here I must out-go Philosophy, and speak Wisdom
among the perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6. This Spiritual Wisdom teaches many things which
the Philosophers do not: as I. The Corruption of the Mind, proceeding from
Original sin; whereas the Heathen Philosophers think, that Reason is a
sufficient bridle for concupiscence. And II. Redemption by Christ, Ephesians. 1.9.
And III. Justification by Faith, and Imputed righteousness. And IV. Eternal
Communion with God. Indeed the Heathens had some dreams and debates about the
Fortunate Islands, and Elysian fields. But 1. They had no knowledge of the
Communion of Grace, 1 John 1.3. or of Christ, 2 Cor. 13.5. or of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16. Nor 2. Of the Resurrection of the Body.



2. Observe, what Fruit and Benefit we may expect from Spiritual Wisdom, in
case we sinde these Signs thereof in us: namely, it shall be rewarded with
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Blessings.

I. True Wisdom shall be rewarded with temporal blessings, as riches, long
life, and honor, Psalm. 91.14. Prove. 3.15. to 19. and 21. to 25. and 24.14.
Dan. 11.32. and 2.3. And

II. With spiritual blessings, as grace and peace, 2 Pet. 1.2. and John 17.3.
where by life eternal is understood grace, by a Metonymie of the Essect; Quia
vitam efficit, because it works Life: Quia radi^ and origo vitae, Cyril. Quia
gustus est vitae aeternae, Brentius. And

III. With eternal blessings, Prove. 3.13, 18.

3. Observe, the Way and Means unto Spiritual Wisdom, in case we do not find
the forenamed signs thereof in us; namely, We must disclaim our own Wisdom,
and seek that which comes from above.

First, We must deny and disclaim our own Wisdom. Note here. Acts 18.24, 25,
26. was an eloquent man, mighty in the Scriptures, zealous and courageous in
teaching, and yet willingly submits himself to be instructed of Aquila and
Priscilla; which may teach us, That the true way unto tru^ Wisdom is, to
renounce our own, Prove. 3.5. Romans 12.16. M^ximum obstaculum est propria
arrogantia, nimium sapere. Calvin. s. 1. Joh. 3. For

I. It is Pride not to confess our ignorance, or to think, as many in the world
do, that we are ignorant of nothing. Augustine calls this renouncing of our own
Wisdom, Docta ignorantia, a learned ignorance; and the Pharisees did prejudice
themselves for the want of it, Joh 9.41.

II. As it is pride for men, to be conceited of their own Wisdom, so it is
foolishness, Irov. 26.12. and 1 Cor. 1.19.

III. Carnal Wisdom is death, Romans 8.6. Isa. 5.21. Matthew. 11.25.

Secondly, If we desire to be made partakers of Spiritual Wisdom, we must seek
it, and dig and delve for it, Prove. 2.4, 5. Note here, this phrase shows these
two things; 1. An ardent Desire. 2. An earnest, and unwearied Endeavor; to
teach us, That true wisdom cannot be got, or gained without great and much
labor, Eccles. 7.27. and 11.6. For


First, In general. God has ordained, that we shall have nothing without
pains, or, the sweat of our brows, Genesis 3.19. and 2.15. Prove. 31.27. And has
promised to bless the diligent hand, Prove. 12.11. and 14.23. and 22.29. Psalm.
128.2. especially in spiritual things, Joh. 6.27. Phil. 2.12.

Secondly, We must seek Wisdom, because it is neither in, nor of our selves,
but from God, Jam. 1.17.

I. Not of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. But II. From God, Prove. 2.6. and 28.5. Yea
III. From the Holy Ghost, Genesis 41.38. Job 33.8. Exodus 28.3.
Thirdly, Truth is difficult to find out; as Democritus said, Veritas in
profundo; and therefore we must seek it diligently if we would find it, Eccles.
8.17. Psalm. 73.17. Hieron. s. Prove. 2.4, 5. says, Qui fodiunt, terram
abjiciunt, in profundum penetrant, and indefesso desudant. Four things are here
considerable: viz.

1. If we would find Wisdom, we must have our Instruments in a readiness, the
Word and Prayer. 2. We must cast out, cast away, the earth; that is, earthly
thoughts. 3. We must dig deep by divine Meditation. And 4. We must persevere in
seeking, till we find what we seek for. I will thus conclude this Virtue and
Chapter of Wisdom.
I. Take heed of all evil and wicked Wisdom. And II. Of being proud of humane
and natural Wisdom. And III. Of resting upon, or trusting to Moral Wisdom. And
IV. Let us labor to the utmost of our power, for that Spiritual Wisdom, which
is mentioned and notably described by S. James 3.17. The wisdom which is from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without judging and without hypocrisy. In this
description of Spiritual Wisdom, we have these nine particulars.
1. It comes from God, not from the World, or Satan. 2. It is pure, not mixed
with temerity and malice. 3. It is peaceable, and studious of concord, and
making it between others. 4. It is gentle, not bitter and sour, but facile and
courteous. 5. It is easy to be entreated, and to be obsequious to the honest
command or request of others. 6. It is full of mercy, not fierce, cruel and
rigorous, but pitiful toward the infirmities of others. 7. It is full of
good works, doing much good out of a zeal to Gods glory, and charity toward
men. 8. Without partiality, not putting such difference between persons, as is
contrary to the faith of Christ. And 9. Without hypocrisy, unfeignedly, and in
a godly simplicity, loving God, and his brethen.
Thus much for Wisdom and Prudence.

CHAP. III. Of Discretion.
DIscretion being a branch of Wisdom and Prudence, I therefore here insert it;
and concerning it, I will briefly consider of, and observe these eleven things.

1. Observe, that this word Discretion is referred, I. Sometimes to God; as
Jer. 10.12. and 51.15. and thus it signifies the wisdom which God declared in
making and disposing the World, and the several parts thereof, to his glory,
and man's good. And II. Sometimes to Men: as Genesis 41.39. There are none of
understanding and discretion like unto thee, said Pharaoh ^o Joseph.


2. Observe, that there are two kinds of Discretion: to wit;

First, There is a Divine Discretion; as Jer. 10.12. He has stretched out the
Heavens by his discretion.

Secondly, There is an Humane Discretion: this is either, I. In Worldy Matters,
as Isa. 28.26. God does teach the Husbandman discretion. Or, II. In Matters of
Religion: this either, 1. Is severed from true goodness, as Mark 12.34. Jesus
perceived, that the Scribe answered discreetly. Or 2. Is conjoined with it, as
Genesis 41.39.



3. Observe, what Discretion is; namely

I. Discretion is a skill enabling a man, to improve himself in all his
affairs, and whatsoever he is, or has, to best advantage, according to
variable circumstances and occasions. Discretio est in dijudicandis rerum
causis provida, and humanarum mentium ratio moderatrix. Isidor. in Synonymis.

II. Discretion is neither wit, nor wisdom, nor learning, nor any Art, Liberal,
or Mechanical; but it is that which shows how to govern them all conveniently,
and every other thing with them. In cunctis nobis semper debet praeesse
discretio, and quasi moderando singulas discernere voluntates, ne opinio
verisimilis fallat, ne decipiat sermo versutus, ne quod bonum est malum, ne
quod malum est bonum esse eredatur. Bern. ser. 24. super Cant. Again, Id. ibid.
Discretio quippe omni virtuti ordinem ponit, modum tribuit, decorem and
perpetuitatem confert. Est ergo discretio non tam virtus, quam quaedam
moderatrix virtutum, ordinatrix assectuum, and doctrix mo^um.

4. Observe, how Wisdom and Discretion differ, viz.

I. They are joined together, Genesis 41.39. There is none so discreet and wise as
thou art; and therefore it seems they differ not much.

II. Wisdom stands in a bare contemplation of things excellent, gathered from
Principles and conclusions; but Discretion is for practice; and therefore is to
be preferred before Wit, Art, or Learning; and only comes after Goodness in
worth; for Goodness may be separated from a (...), or partial discretion, Mark
12.34.

5. Observe, how Knowledge and Discretion differ: namely, Knowledge is the
treasure of the mind; but Discretion is the Key without which it lies dead, in
the dullness of a fruitless rust.

6. Observe, what the Nature of Discretion is, viz.

I. It is a gift of God, Isa. 28.26.

II. It is a gift best becoming the servants of God, as Psalm. 112.5. A good man
will measure his affairs with discretion.

III. It is a gift of that nature, that it is most needful and necessary for
the Ministers of the Word; who must know how to give milk to Babes, and strong
meat to Men; and when to be sons of thunder, and when sons of Consolation.

IV. Discretion is a main part of true wisdom. It is storied, that a Father who
had three Sons, being desirous to try their discretion, gave to each of them
an apple, that had some part of it rotten: The first eats up his Apple, rotten
and all; the second throws the whole Apple away, because some part of it was
rotten: But the third picks out the rotten, and eats that which was good; and
thereby approved himself the wisest of the three. Thus some in our days, for
want of discretion, swallow down all that is taught them, whether sound or
rotten, true or false: Others reject all that is taught them, because though
many things be true, yet somewhat is false and unsound: some who are the wisest
and most discreet, tr^e doctrines by the Word of God, and then choose the good,
and refuse the evil.

V. Discretion is of that nature, that it is the guide of all Religious
actions. Cassianus collat. 2. cap. 2. tells us, that diverse ancient Fathers
came to S. Anthony, and asked him, What Virtue did by a direct line lead to
perfection, that so a man might shun the snares of Satan? He requiring every
one to speak his opinion, one said, Watching and Sobriety; another said,
Fasting and Discipline; another said, Humble Prayer; another said, Poverty and
Obedience; and another, Piety and works of Mercy. Now when every one had spoken
his mind, S. Anthony answered, All the Graces mentioned by you, are indeed
excellent, but Discretion is the chief of them all. For this is Auriga
virtutum, Bern. the guide of all virtuous and religious actions, and the
Moderator and Orderer of all the affections. Toll discretionem and virtus
vitium erit, Isidor. Whatsoever is done with Discretion is virtue, and what
without it is vice. Discretio virtutibus modum imponit, sine qua, etc. Pet.
Ravis. An ounce of discretion is worth a pound of Learning; for as zeal without
knowledge is blind, so knowledge without discretion is lame; like a sword in a
mad man's hand, able to do much, apt to do nothing. He who will fast must fast
with discretion; that is, he must so mortify his flesh, that he do not kill
it: he who gives Alms to the poor, must do it with Discretion, Omni petenti
non omnia petenti, Gorchan. s. Romans 12. he must give to every one who does ask,
but not every thing that he does ask: He who prays must do it with discretion,
observing Pla^e and Time; Place, lest he be reputed an hypocrite; Time, lest he
be accounted an heretic. Thus Discration is the Guide of all Religious
performances.

7. Observe, by whom Discretion is approved; namely, I. Sometimes Christ
approves of man's discretion, Mark 12.34. And II. Sometimes men approve of men's
discretion, Genesis 41.39.


8. Observe, who should be dissreet, namely, I. Men, Isa. 28.26. And II. Women,
that is, 1. Beautiful Women, Prove. 11.22. And 2. Young Women, Tit. 2.5.



9. Observe, when Discretion is truly good for us; namely.

I. When Wisdom enters into our hearts, Prove. 2.10, 11. And II. When Knowledge
is pleasant unto our soul, Prove. 2.10, 11.
10. Observe, that the benefits, fruits, and effects of Discretion, are these
two: 1. It defers anger, Prove. 19.11. 2. It will preserve us, Prove. 2.11.


11. From, concerning, or in regard of Discretion, we may learn these four
things:

First, That the French say, Vne once de discretion vaut mieux qu'une liver de
hardiesse: An ounce of discretion is better worth, than a pound of hardiness:
For man's Will, without Discretion to put limits thereto, is like a blind
Horse, without a bridle to guide him aright; he may go fast, but runs to his
own overthrow: and while he mends his pace, he hastens his own mischief.

Secondly, We may learn, that Discretion, and ripeness of judgment is gotten
by four Means, viz. God, Nature, Diligence, and Conversation.

Thirdly, We may learn, that these six virtues frequently accompany Discretion.

1. Judgment: but Discretion and Judgment are ordinarily taken for one and
the same, as: sal. 112.5. He guides his affairs with discretion, or judgment,
And 2. Advisement; but discretion and advisement are also ordinarily taken for
one and the same, Prove. 1.4. Knowledge and discretion, or advisedness. And 3.
Prudence; but these also are usually taken for one another: as Prove. 19.11. The
discretion or prudence of a man defers his anger. And 4. Knowledge, Prove. 1.4.
And 5. Understanding, Prove. 2.11. And 6. Wisdom, Genesis 41.39. sound Wisdom,
Prove. 3.21.
Fourthly, We may learn, that in regard of Discretion these five things are
required of us.

1. To get it, Prove. 1.4. 2. To keep it, Prove. 3.21. 3. To regard and prize it,
Prove. 5.2. 4. To be discreet, in guiding and managing of our affairs, Psalm.
112.5. 5. To be discreet in all the acts of Virtue and Devotion. Plerumque
virtus quum indiscrete tenetur, amittitur; quum discrete intermittitur, plus
tenetur, Greg. 29. mor. Qu^^quid boni cum discretione seceris, virtus est;
quicquid sine discretion^ gesseris, vitium est. Virtus enim indiscreta pro
vitio deputatur. Isidor. li. de Synodis. Discretio virtutibus modum imponit,
sine qua virtutes sunt vitia; nam si adsit timor and non discretio, transit in
desperationem; si dolor, in amaritudinem; si amor, in adulationem; si spes, in
praesumptis nem; si laetitia, in disso^i^tionem; si ira, in furorem. Petr.
Ravis. in quodam serm^ It was the saying of that famous Chancellor of Paris,
Bonum est mel cum favo; sapor scilicet devotionis, cum moderamine discretionis.
Gerson. Honey is good with the honeycomb; and so is the savor of Devotion,
when it is seasoned with a discreet mixture of moderation. Thus much for this
word Discretion.
CHAP. IV. Of Wise Men.
COncerning these, we have some things to consider of which are more
speculative, and some which are more practick.

The Doctrinal Part.
In this Part I will only observe these six things.

I. Observe, that there are four sorts of men in the world, in regard of Wisdom
and Prudence. For, 1. Some are more wise than discreet and prudent: these know
much more than they practice, or apply unto themselves. 2. Some are more
discreet and prudent than wise; though these know little, yet they practice
what they know. 3. Some are neither wise, discreet, nor prudent; these are
Idiots, careless and assectedly ignorant ones. 4. Some are both wise, discreet,
and prudent; these are the true and knowing Christians, Prove. 8.12. I wisdom
dwell with prudence.


II. Observe, that there are three fort of spiritual Wise men. For 1. Some see,
and know of themselves what is right, and can follow it. 2. Some swerve from
the right Way, through infirmity and weakness, but know how to renew themselves
again by Repentance. 3. Some are weak in knowledge, obedience, and faith, but
very forward to listen to good counsel, and the instruction of the wise.


III. Observe, when a Wise man differs not from a Fool; namely.

I. Not in his Infancy. Nor II. In his Sleep. Nor III In Silence; for in the
two former we are all fools; and in silence all are wise.
IV. Observe, that Wise men and Fools differ in many, very many things, viz.

1. The ancient Physiologers said, that the Sun was sed with salt water, and
the Moon with fresh; to teach us, That Wise men seek for bitter things, so they
be profitable; but Fools follow those things which are pleasant and delectable.
2. Fools do not foresee a tempest but too late, when they receive harm by it;
but Wise men do foresee and take heed: Fools, for the most part, learn by
woeful and sad experience; but a Wise man does avoid the evil foretold, Prove.
22.3. 3. Fools are contented in fair weather, or Prosperity; but a Wise Man
does well bear, and behave himself in either fortune. 4. Plato says, Sapientia
vita, ignorantia mors est, etc. Wisdom is Life, ignorance death: wherefore the
Wise man lives, because he understands what he does; but the ignorant person is
dead, because he does he knows not what. 5. Chrysippus says, A Wise man
wants nothing, and yet has need of many things: but a Fool has need of
nothing, because he can make use of nothing, but wants all things: or, the
Fool longs for what he lacks, and is not contented with, neither well uses
what he has; but the Wise Man rests well contented with what he enjoyes, to
the utmost good improves it, and is not troubled for the want of what he has
not. 6. A Fool in a day shall be known by his anger; but he who covers shame,
(that is, bridleth his affections) is wise, Prove. 12.16. 7. A Wise Man
concealeth knowledge; but Fools publish foolishness, Prove. 12.23. 8. It is a
Pastime to a Fool to do wickedly; but Wisdom is understanding to a man, Prove.
10.23. 9. Every Wise Man will work by knowledge, but a Fool will spread abroad
folly, Prove. 13.16. 10. The Wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way; but
the foolishness of fools is deceit, Prove. 14.8. 11. The foolish will believe
every thing; but the prudent man will consider his steps, Prove. 14.15. 12. The
foolish do inherit folly; but the prudent are crowned with knowledge, Prove.
14.18. 13. A fool despises his fathers instruction: but he who regards
correction is prudent, Prove. 15.5. 14. Rebuke a fool and he will hate thee; but
rebuke a Wise Man, and he will love thee, Prove. 9.8. 15. Wisdom is in the face
of him who has understanding; but the eyes of a Fool are in the corners of the
world; wandering to and fro, and not seeking after wisdom. 16. A reproof enters
more into him who has understanding, than an hundred stripes into a fool,
Prove. 17.10. 17. If a Wise Man contend with a fool, whether he be angry or
laugh there is no rest: that is, he can bear no admonition, in what sort soever
it is spoken, Prove. 29.9. but give admonition to the wise, and he will be
wiser, Prove. 9.9. 18. A fool pours out all his mind; but a Wise Man keeps
it in till afterward, Prove. 29.11. 19. The Wise Man's eyes are in his head: but
the fool walks in darkness, Eccles. 2 14 20. The heart of a Wise Man is at
his right hand; but the heart of a fool is at his left hand, Eccles. 10.2. that
is, the Wise Man does all things well, and justly, but fools do contrarily. 21.
The words of the mouth of a Wise Man have grace; but the lips of a fool devour
himself, Eccles. 2.12. 22. The Wise Man builds his house upon the rock; but
the fool upon the sand, Matthew. 7.24, etc. 23. Wise Men have Oil in their Lamps;
but fools have none, Matthew. 25 2, 4.8, 9.
V. Observe, to whom, or what Wise Men may be compared; namely, 1. Worldly Wise
Men may be compared to the Owl; for as she sees in the night, but her eyes
dazzle in the day; so Worldly wise Men, in the matters of the world are
quicksighted enough, but in spiritual and heavenly things are blind, 1 Cor.
2.13. Qui amant in tenebr is ignorantiae verfari, similes sunt avibus illis,
quae nocte volant, hae Lucem oderunt, amant tenebras. Theodoret. 2. The
spiritual Wise Man is compared to a Builder, who built his house upon a rock.
Matthew. 7.24, etc. And 3. To a Mulberry Tree; for as that tree does first bring
forth some fruit, and then some blossoms as Peraldus (art sum. virtut.) says:
so a Wise Man first brings forth works, and then words. And 4. To the Adamant;
for as that cannot be broken; so the mind of a Wise Man cannot be daunted or
enfeebled. And 5. To a Pylot; for as they observe the winds, lest they be
crossed by them; so a Wise man does observe the affections of his mind, lest
he be overcome or mislead by them. 6. A Wise man may be compared to the Stars;
for as they go a contrary course unto the world, as Seneca says; so a Wise man
does not conform himself to this wicked world, but to the Sacred Word of God.
7. As the Planet Mercury never moves far from the Sun, albeit it be one of the
wandering Planets, as Pliny says: so a Wise Man will by no means wander from
honesty, or go astray from the Sun of righteousness. 8. As the Birds Halcyones,
in the midst of Winter, do make the Sea calm, not only for themselves, but also
for others, as Pliny says: so a Wise Man in the most turbulent times, does not
only preserve unto himself the tranquillity of mind, but also makes others
quiet and peaceable. 9. A Wise Man may be compared to a Snail; for as Snails go
slowly, neither do touch any thing, nor move themselves any way, before they
assay it with their horns, as Pliny observes; so it is meet that a Wise Man be
considerative and discoursive, by leisure and advice taking matters in hand,
having first had some understanding of them. And 10. As the leaves of the Shrub
Rhododendros is poison unto some Cattle, as Goats and Sheep, but to Men are a
remedy against the venom of Serpents: so that which brings destruction to
fools, as adversity and misery in outward things, a Wise Man turns to his
good and welfare.


VI. Observe, the Number of Wise M^^: namely,

I. They are many in conceit, and in their own opinion. Laertius tells us,
that in old time there were but seven Wise Men in the world; but now it is hard
to find severs fools. Aristarchus scoffing at the great number of Sophisters in
his days, said, That in old time, hardly could there be found seven Wise Men
in the whole world, but in our days, quoth he, much ado there is, to find so
many Fools; men in these days being so wise in their own eyes.

II. There are few indeed who are truly wise. When Supputius in Pontanus, had
traveled all over Europe, to confer with a Wise Man, he returned at last
without his errand, and could find none. Anton. dial. Cardan concurrs with him,
li. 3. de sapient. Pauci ut video sanae mentis sunt; few there are, for ought
that I can perceive, well in their wits. Tully to the same purpose says,
Stulte and incaute omnia agi video: I see all things to be done foolishly and
unadvisedly. Antisthenes invited many guests to the banquet of Wisdom, but none
would come save Diogenes; whereupon being angry that none would taste of his
learned cheer, he would have excluded Diogenes, who the more he was forbidden,
the more he came. Job complains, 1^.10. I do not sinde one Wise Man among you.
Thus much for the Speculative, or, Doctrinal Part.

The Practical Part.
In this part we have some things to consider of by way of Reprehension, some
by way of Instruction, and some by way of Exhortation.

I. In regard of Reprehension observe two things, viz.

First, Observe, that natural and worldly Wise Men err in these three things.

I. In understanding spiritual things carnally, as John 3.4. and 6.52. and
8.52. II. In judging things by the outward appearance, or by the event as Jobs
friends judged him an hypocrite, because God afflicted him: so Matthew. 27.43.
And III. In thinking God like unto us, Psalm. 50.21. because they are ignorant
of the power, mercy and long-suffering of God, Matthew. 22.29.
Secondly, Observe, that Wise Men are to be blamed in, or for these three
things.

I. In giving evil example, or, for being wicked. Marcus Aurelius in his speech
to the Tutors of his Son Commodus, has these words: We ordain and command,
that more grievous punishment be given to the Sage, for one fault only,
committed by him publicly, than to the simple man for a greater offense
secretly committed. And

II. In being proud, or, for being self-conceited of their own wisdom. Guevara
in his Dial. of Princes, l. 2. c. 9. fol. 97. b. says, Though a man think
himself to be wise, yet he should not esteem his neighbor a fool; for there is
none so wise, but he may use and employ it all: for I never saw any man so wise
of himself, but that he needed the counsel of another. Summa cura providendum
est, ne accepta sapientia, cum ignorantiae tenebras illuminat, lumen
humilitatis tollat, and jam sapientia esse nequit, quae etsi locutionis virtute
fulgeat, elationis tamen velaminae cor loquentis obscurat. Greg. in mor. If
ignorance be expelled, and wisdom learnt, take heed thou be not proud of thy
Wisdom; for Wisdom of speech does not so much adorn a man, as pride because of
Wisdom does blemish him.

III. Wise Men are to be blamed, in or for refusing to impart their Wisdom to
others. Socrates, though otherwise very wise, yet herein I hold him
blameworthy, That he would not benefit others by his Writings: for being
entreated by his Scholars, to write those excellent, humane, natural and moral
things, which he knew and taught, he refused it; and that, as he said, for
these three reasons:

1. Because the Paper and Ink would be of more worth, than the things written
thereon.

2. Because, as he blamed many things in the Writings of others, so perhaps
many would do his: and therefore because he would be blamed by none, he would
write nothing. And

3. Because Wisdom ought to be written in men's hearts, and not in beasts skins,
to wit, Parchment. But Plato his Scholar, knowing and remembering, Bonum quo
communius eo melius; that the more common a good thing is, the better, did
therefore write well nigh all that his master Socrates taught. This last reason
I once found in this old Verse.

Wisdom and Science which are pure by kind,
Should not be written in Books, but in Mind:
For Wisdom in Books with the Books will rot,
But writ in the Mind will nere be forgot.
II. From, concerning, or in regard of Wise Men, we may Learn these five
Lessons.

First, That Carnal Wise Men are vain: as 1 Cor. 3.20. The Lord knows the
thoughts of the wise that they are vain: that is, Such as excel in natural
gifts, who are the choicest, and most picked men, even the very flower of the
rest, even the thoughts of these are vain.

Secondly, We may learn, that the children of this world are wiser in their
generation, than the children of God, Luke 16.2, 8. And

Thirdly, That Spiritual Wise Men may be ignorant of worldly things: for as the
Wisest Grammarian may be found a fool in Black-smiths work, and as the
skilfullest Pilot may be found unexpert in the Art of Physic; so he who is
wise in those things which appertain unto God, may be a fool in those things
which concern the world.

Fourthly, We may learn, when a Wise Man is best known; namely,

I. Guevara, in his Book concerning Courtiers, ca. 5. f. 121. says, Wise Men
are never known, (that is, they are then best known) but among fools, and light
persons. Contraria jurta se posita, white is never so white, as, when it is
drawn upon black.

II. The French, by way of Proverb say, Au milieu des perils la prudence
reluit: Wisdom does shine in the midst of danger; and a Wise Man is best known,
In mediis periculis, when he is surrounded with evils.

III. Alexander Severus says, A Wise Man is best known in injuries and wrongs;
because it often comes to pass, that there is much more Wisdom shown in
dissembling a wrong, or in passing by an injury, than in revenging it.

IV. Seneca says, that a Wise Man is known at a double time, viz. when he is
wronged, and when he is praised: for he will not lightly be angry for a wrong
done unto him, nor be proud when he is praised.

V. Aristotle says, there is a threefold time, when a Wise Man is known, viz.

1. When he makes his enemy his friend. 2. When he makes the Ignorant learned.
3. When he makes the Dishonest man good.
Fifthly, We may learn, what the Properties of Wise Men are; namely,

1. Mala intelligere, to see, perceive, and understand evils and dangers; for
men must not be willingly blind, but learn to foresee evils to come. And

2. Mala ignoscere, to do evil to none, but to pardon and forgive those, who
offend and injure us. And

3. Suspicari, to suspect evils from evil men, especially from those who hate
us: for Christ would not commit himself unto the Jews, Joh. 2.24. And

4. Evitare, to avoid peril, and not to run into the Lions mouth. It is Wisdom,
says Hierom, s. Matthew. 10.16. Insidias vitare, to endeavor to avoid the
traps, gins, snares, and trains, which are laid for us Sapientia vera firma
est, non tamen elata: non timet pericula, sed nec provocat, aut lacessit. Lips.

He wisely hopes, and gainfully despairs,
Who fears no ill, and yet all ill bewares.
5. Sapientis est primam causam quaerere: A Wise Man looks not at the stone
thrown, but at the hand which throws it; not at the instrument, but first
cause. Hence Seneca says, Epist. 13. Initium rerum omnium sapiens, non exitum
spectat; initia in potestate nostra sunt, de eventu fortuna judicat.

6. The Wise Man is always peaceable and quiet. Talis est sapientis animus,
qualis mundi status super Lunam, semper illic serenum est. Senec. Epist. 59.
The mind of the Wise Man, is like that part of the world which is above the
Moon, for there it is always clear, and free from clouds. Sapientia ars
vivendi putanda est, quae moestitiam pellit ex animis, quae exh^rrescere metu
non sinit, qua praeceptrice in tranquillitate vivi potest cupiditatum ardore
restincto, Tul. li. 2. de fin. Sapientis est nihil admirari quum accederit,
nihil ante, quam evenerit, non evenire posse arbitrari, Cicero. Ep. The
property of a Wise Man is, to think nothing which happens, or comes to pass
strange, nor before it comes, think it cannot come; and hence preparing himself
for, and arming himself against all changes and chances whatsoever, his mind
is not molesied, nor his spirit troubled, with any thing that befalls him, but
is full of tranquillity and calmness in all conditions whatsoever.

7. The Wise Man is a resolute and resolved man. Selimus the Son of Bajazet, a
Wise Man though a tyrant, was often heard to say, He is not worthy to be called
Wise, who will not shortly and out of hand dispatch that thing which he has
once determined to do: because through procrastination and delay, the good
occasion or opportunity is often lost.

8. The Wise Man is a constant man, in goodness always the same, in all
things, in all places, at all times, with all persons. As Phidias could not
only make Images of Ivory, but also of Brass, Marble, and Wood; so a Wise Man
will show his Virtue, in Riches, in Poverty, in his own Country, in
Banishment; whether he be Captain or Soldier, sound or sick, or in what estate
soever he be, he will behave himself wisely and commendably. Pliny says, As
Nature shows her self no less admirable in making a Gnat, than in forming an
Elephant: so a Wise Man both in great and small matters shows his excellency,
and excellent Wisdom, lib. 11. cap. 2. As a good workman is not only a Workman
in one matter, or thing alone, but in all things belonging to his Art; so a
Wise Man is constantly good in all things, and in all occasions and
occurrences, whether prosperous or adverse. Sapiens non semper it uno gradu,
sed una via. Senec. The wise man walks always in one and the same way, though
not always one and the same pace. The Stoics went a little too far in this
particular, when they said, (as Seneca relates it) that a wise man never
repents himself of what he has done, neither ever changes his counsel, or
reformeth his actions. A wise man must not persist in error, nor persevere in a
wrong way, but change his counsel if truth and equity require it. Eutropius
tells us, that Severus the Emperor, for his stable Wisdom, knowledge, and
judgment, was called Severus pertinar. Stability and constancy is good in that
which is good, but evil in evil.

9. A wise man is master of himself. Phocion one day speaking his mind in the
Council chamber of the Athenians, against the enterprizing of a certain War,
and seeing his advice so greatly to displease them, that they would not give
him leave to utter his mind, he spoke freely unto them in this manner; You may
peradventure, O Athenians, force me to do that which ought not to be done, but
you cannot constrain me to speak any thing contrary to my opinion, which ought
not to be spoken or Counseled.

10. The Wise man is circumspect in all his actions. Eutropius says, that
Antonius the meek, was a very wise and virtuous Emperor, and so well advised
in all his doings, that he never repented him of any thing he did.

11. The wise man looks backwards and forwards. Marcus Aurelius writing unto
the fourteen Tutors of his Son Commodus, has these words; The Wise Man who
has understanding ought to think of that which is past, and by much wisdom to
provide for that which is to come: for he cannot be counted wise, who is
careful only in one thing. Thus Terence, Adelp. 3.4. O Demea, isthuc est
sapere, non quod ante pedes modo est vivere, sed etiam illa quae futura sunt
prospicere: to be wise is not only to take knowledge of those things which are
present, but also to foresee, and to provide for those things which are to
come. For as they who sail with successful winds, have instruments ready,
whereby they may arm themselves against a storm: so Wise Men in prosperity,
will prepare themselves to bear adversity.

12. Another property of a wise man is Tacere, to hold his peace, and keep his
own counsel. Aliquando bonum est verum celare, August. It is lawful sometimes
to conceal some Truths. A man is not bound by his own babbling to betray
himself, it being the part of a fool to utter all his mind, Prove. 29.11. And

13. Patienter far, to endure patiently and contentedly the evils which lie
upon him. And

14. Sincere profiteri, to profess Christ and Religion in sincerity, not in
show; in truth, not in hypocrisy.

15. The property of a wise man is to love those who rebuke him, Prove. 9.8. and
25.12. And

16. To lay up Knowledge, Prove. 10 14. And

17. To endeavor to increase in Wisdom, Prove. 18.15. And

18. To consider well ere he act. Plotinus says, It is wisdom to think upon
every thing, before we execute it; and as the Proverb is, to look before we
leap. Bias says, Considera, and postearem aggred^re, Laert. First weigh and
then work; first consider and then act.

19. The Wise Man is a Law to himself. Antisthenes the Athenian says, Non
vivit sapiens ju^ta I^ges ah hominibus conditas, sed juxta normam virtutis,
etc. The wise man does not live according to the Edicts or Laws enacted by man,
but according to the rules and dictates of virtue. For he does not avoid evil,
because man's Law forbids it, but because reason it self does dissuade from the
doing thereof. Laert. lib. 6.

20. Lastly, it is the property of a wise man to be wise for himself. Non sapit
qui sibi non sapit: Ille sapit qui sibi sapit, Euripides. As he is not wise,
who is not wise for himself; so he is wise, who is wise to himself, Prove. 9.12.
Thus much for the Lessons to be learnt from, or in regard of Wise Men.

III. It is required, or the Duty of all, to labor to be wise, or wise men.
Many things in regard of Wise men might offer themselves to our consideration;
I will only instance in, or insist upon these seven.

1. Observe, who those seven Wise men were, which the Grecians so much boast
of; namely, The seven Sages, or Wise men of Greece, who were renowned
throughout all the world, were these:

1. Thales Milesius, who invented the Card to sail by: he was born at Myletum
in Greece.

2. Solon, who gave the first Laws to the Athenians, and judged no man happy
before his death. He was born in the Island of Salamine.

3. Chilo of Lacedaemon, who was Ambassador into the Orient for the Athenians.
He was born at Lacedaemonia.

4. Pittachus, who was not only a Philosopher, but also a Captain of the
Mytilenes. He was born at Mytilene in the Isle of Iesbos.

5. Cleobulus, who descended from the ancient line of Hereules. He was born at
Lind in the Isle of Rhodes.

6. Periander, of whom Historiographers doubted, whether his Philosophy or
Tyranny were greater. He was King of Corinth.

7. Bias, who was Prince of the Pyraneans: he was a learned Philosopher, and a
valiant Soldier, who overcame the Metinenses: This battle was the first that
any Philosopher of Greece fought. He was born in the Haven Town of Priene, in
the Country of Ionia.

2. Observe, who are truly termed prudent and wise men; namely,

1. Great men are not always wise, Job 33.9. But

2. The wise in heart are prudent, Prove. 16.21. And

3. Those who abstain from evil are wise. Socrates being asked, Quinam
prudentes essent? who were wise men? he answered, Qui non facile delinquunt,
They who are not given unto, or who carefully avoid sin.

4. Those who win Souls are wise, Prove. 11.30.

5. Those who refrain theirs Lips are wise, Prove. 10.19. and 17.28. And

6. Those who receive and obey Directions and Precepts, Prove. 10.8. and 12.15.
And

7. Those who gather in Summer, Prove. 10.5. And

8. Those who keep and observe the Commandments of God, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Solomon,
Prove. 1.5, 6, 7. and in many other places of that Book, does usually call good
and godly men wise, and wicked persons fools, and that for these three reasons:

I. Because there is Folly and Madness in all Wickedness.

II. Because the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: as both making men
careful to learn their duties, and having also a promise of direction in the
way that they should choose. And

III. Because true piety and goodness are hereby freed from the reproach of
folly, and simpleness, cast upon them by worldly wise men: For as the Heathen
wise men counted the Doctrine of the Gospel foolishness, so worldly wise men
judge all true conscience of it, and obedience unto it, to arise from want of
wit, and superstitious simplicity. But let men say what they will, the Gospel
is the wisdom of God; and the obedience of it the wisdom of Gods people ( Deuteronomy.
4.6.) in his sight, and in all theirs who judge aright; which to neglect, and
true happiness in it, is the madness of folly.

3. Observe, that many in the Word have been commended for their Wisdom: to
wit, both Jews, Gentiles, and Christians; yea both public and private persons
of all.

I. Among the Jews are commended,

1. These public persons; Solomon, 1 King. 2.6 and 3.28. Jeshua, Deuteronomy. 34.9.
David, 2 Samuel 14.20. Joseph, Genesis 41.39. Ezra, 7.25. And

2. These private persons; David when he kept his fathers sheep, 1 Samuel 16.18.
and the woman of Abel, 2 Samuel 20.22.

II. Among the Gentiles are commended Sergius Paulus the Deputy, Acts 13.7. and
diverse others.

III. Among the Christians only is true wisdom, and spiritual prudence: and
therefore to instance in them, or give examples of wise Christians, is
needless, and endless.

4. Observe who are destitute of wisdom; or, who are not wise men: namely, 1.
Those who justify themselves before God are not wise, Job 4.17, 21. 2. Fools
are destitute of Wisdom, Prove. 1.7. and 10.21. and 17.16. 3. He who despises
his neighbor is not wise, Prove. 11.12. 4. Scorners are destitute of wisdom;
for though such should seek it, yet they find it not, Prove. 14.6. 5. Those who
reject the Word of the Lord are not wise, Jerem. 8.9. And 6. Those who are
given unto, or deceived by wine, Prove. 20.1.


5. Observe, who must, or should be wise, namely,

I. Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 1.13. and 2 Chronicles. 2.12. As Socrates by the Oracle of
Apollo, was held the wisest man among the Heathen: so Solomon by the testimony
of God, was the wisest man upon earth, 2 Chronicles. 1. Be wise now therefore ye
Kings, Psalm. 2.10.

II. Ministers must be wise; and therefore are called, wise stewards, Luke
12.42. that is, they must have skill, to fit, and to give to every one within
their charge, his due portion of food, agreeable to his strength, and age; that
is, Milk to whom milk, and strong meat to whom strong meat belongs. If Solomon
a Magistrate, and Ruler over bodies, desired Wisdom above all worldly things,
then how much more should Ministers desire it, who are set over men's Souls? Non
aurum, non divitias, non terrenam gloriam Solomon a Deo petiit; sed ut sciret
populum Dei regere and judicare. Si hoc eligit Rector corporum, multo magis hoc
eligere debent Rectores animarum, ut ingressum ad fidem, and egressum ad fidem
populo Dei demonstrent, Gloss. in Lib. 1. Reg.

III. Old men should be wise, Job 12.12.

IV. Children should be wise, Prove. 10.1. and 29.3. And

V. All men should be wise, Prove. 1.20. etc. and 8.1. etc.

6. Observe, for whom men should be wise: namely, for themselves as well as for
others. Wise men should not be like Shell-fishes, which breed Pearls for others
to wear, but are sick of them themselves; nor like a Mercury Statue, which
shows the way to others, but stands still it self; nor like a Whetstone which
sharpeneth the knife, but is blunt it self; nor like Plutarchs Lamtae, which
have eyes abroad, but are blind at home: for he who is wise, should
principally be wise for himself; and be like the Cynamon-tree, which lets not
out, or spends all its sap in leaves and fruit which will fall off, but keeps
the principal part of its fragrancy for the Bark which stays on. It were small
happiness for a man, to heal others, and be incurably sick himself; to save
others by his wisdom, and to lose his own Soul by his folly and iniquity; like
the Ship, Acts 27. which was broken to pieces it self, but helped the
Passengers safe to shore; or like those who built the Ark for Noah, and were
drowned themselves. An Orator having wisely and bitterly declaimed against
folly, and had scoffingly put the fool upon his Auditors; one of them said,
Sir, your discourse of folly may well be divided into three parts: to wit, in
one you have declaimed against all men; the second you have bestowed upon us;
and the third you have kept to your self. Thus they who commend wisdom to their
Hearers must keep some for themselves. For a man to have a full brain, and an
empty heart; a Library of Divinity in his head, and not so much as the least
Catechism in his Conscience; is, as if one were to tell heads, and to number
the company, but should forget to reckon himself. If an Inheritance were to be
divided among many children, no Coheir would set out the portions of the rest,
and forget his own. When a man gives away all temporal things, we say, he has
a kind heart; but in the distribution of Spiritual things, to leave our selves
none, argues not a kind but a stupid heart. Bonum sui dissusivum. Arist.
Heavenly knowledge is not lost by communicating, for we may give all and keep
all: And therefore we must not with Martha, care for many things on the behalf
of others, and never mind that one thing of Mary, the care of our own
salvation, Luke 10.41. but pray unto God to enable us, to give so much
spiritual wisdom and knowledge unto others, as may make them rich in grace, and
yet keep so much for our selves, as may make us rich in glory.

7. Lastly, observe, what the Badges, Marks, and Signs of a true Wise man are:
namely,

1. True Wisdom consists not in opinion, but in truth, Prove. 26.16. Romans 12.16.
Job 37.24. The fool thinks himself wise; but the wise man thinks not so of
himself; as was proved before in Socrates.

2. A wise man covers shame, Prove. 12.16. that is, he bridleth his
affections. And

3. He concealeth knowledge, Prove. 12.23. and knows when to be silent, Amos
5.13. Job. 13.5. And

4. He works by knowledge, Prove. 13.16. And

5. He understands his Way, Prove. 14.8. And

6. He considers his steps and goings, Prove. 14.15. And

7. He regards correction, Prove. 15.3. And

8. He foresees destruction, and labors to prevent it, Prove. 22.3. And

9. Tully says, A wise man is neither Adversis rebus oppressus, nec elatus
secundis, as a Gentleman of our Nation once writ to an Earl.

Such one is ware by what degrees he climbs,
Rather pleasant than proud in high estate,
Far bolder than abasht in lowering times,
And can in both right well uphold his state.
Which many would, but few can do, or none,
Of which small sort I wish your Lordship one.
10. Alexander Severus says, by Wisdom is marked and discerned, the words,
acts, and demeanor of all men: Whence I may say, That a Wise man may be known
by his Words, Works, and Carriage.

First, By his Words: for as we see (says Socrates, ap. Stob. Sermon. de Virt.)
the beautiful Pictures, when the gate of the Temple is open; so we perceive
excellent representations of Virtue, when a Wise man opens his mouth. Wisdom
is a tree which springs from the heart, and bears fruit in the tongue. The
mouth of the righteous will speak Wisdom, and his tongue will talk of
judgment, Psalm. 37.30. and 49.3. In the lips of him who has understanding
Wisdom is found, etc. Prove. 10.13, 31. Note here, that these eight benefits
come from the words, tongue, lips, or speeches of Wise men:

1. Under Parables and dark speeches they utter profound Wisdom, Prove. 1.6. And
2. The tongue of the wise is health, Prove. 12.18. And 3. The Instruction of a
Wise man is as the wellspring of life, to turn away from the snares of death,
Prove. 13.14. 4. The Lips of Wise men preserve them, Prove. 14.3. 5. The tongue
of the wise uses knowledge aright, Prove. 15.2. 6. The lips of the wise do
spread abroad knowledge, Prove. 15.7. and increase doctrine, Prove. 16.21, 23. 7.
A Wise man with his words will pacify wrath, Prove. 16.14. And 8. The words of
the wise are like goads, and like nails fastened by the masters of the
Assemblies, which are given by one Pastor, Eccles. 12.11.
Secondly, A Wise man may be known by his Works and actions; for true Wisdom
teaches us, as well to do well, as to speak well. It suffices not a lover of
Wisdom to reprove the vices of others by words, but it is necessary for him to
do himself that which he requires others to do. Like as the sick man who
asks counsel, and is taught by the Physician, is never the nearer health,
except he take the medicine: so he who is instructed in Wisdom, and follows
not the same, is never the better therefore, but loses the health of his body,
and the blessedness of his soul. And therefore Aristotle says, Desire not to
be wise in words, but in works: for wisdom of speech wastes with the world,
but works wrought by wisdom increase unto the world to come. Wisdom sometimes
signifies Prudence and Discretion, enabling men to perceive what is fit to be
done, according to the circumstances of time, place, persons, manner, and end
of doing, Eccles. 2.13, 14. I saw that there is profit in Wisdom, for the Wise
man's eyes are in his head. And 1 Samuel 16.18. He is a man of War, and wise in
matters.

Thirdly, A Wise man may be known by his Carriage and deportment, in all
places, at all times, and with all persons. Wisdom garnisheth riches, and
shadoweth poverty. With the well-advised is Wisdom, Prove. 13.10. Acts 13.7.
Socrates exhorted all his Scholars unto these three things; Vt in Animo
haberent prudentiam, in Lingua silentium, and in Vultu verecundiam: Maxim.
Sermon. 41. To have Wisdom in their heart, Silence in their tongues, and
Bashfulness in their countenance. Thus much for these words, Wit, Wisdom,
Prudence, Discretion, and Wise Men. I come now to treat of their contraries,
viz.

Folly, Foolish, Foolishness, Fools,
Silly, Simple, Unwise, Imprudent,
Inconsiderate, Indiscreet, Rash.
CHAP. V. Of Folly, Foolishness, Foolish.
COncerning these, I will briefly hint at some things which are more Doctrinal,
and some which are more Practical.

The Doctrinal Part.
In this Part I will cursorily consider these three things:

First, To whom Folly is referred: viz.

1. Sometimes to Angels, Job 4.18.

2. Sometimes to Men, 1 Samuel 25.25.

3. Sometimes to Beasts. Zebra in Africa is a beautiful creature, much like a
Horse, but so simple, that a man may come within shot of them at pleasure, and
may shoot three or four of them before they will make away. Again, there is a
beast in Africa called Dabuh, ( Solinus cap. 33. calls it Celphos) which is
like a Wolf, but in his feet and legs, wherein it resembles Man; which is so
simple and foolish, that with a Song and a Taper, they who know his haunt, will
bring him out of his Den, and captivate his ears with Music, whilst another
captivates his legs with a Rope.

Secondly, Observe, that there are three sorts of Folly, viz.

I. There is a good and warrantable folly, 2 Cor. 11.1. And

II. There is a natural folly, Prove. 13.16. and 14.24. Thus it is folly to hop
against the hill, and to strive against the stream. And

III. There is an evil and wicked folly: thus the name of folly is given, 1. To
Rapes, Genesis 34.7. Judge. 20.6, 10. 2. To Sacrilege, Josh. 7.15. 3. To Incest, 2 Samuel 13.12. 4. To Foolish Reasonings, Job 42.8. 5. To a Life void of Religion,
Psalm. 49.13. 6. To the Instruction of Fools, Prove. 16.22. 7. To him who answers
a matter before he hears, or fully understands it, Prove. 18.13. 8. To wicked
words, Isa. 9.17. And 9. To false teaching, Jerem. 23.13. and 2 Timothy 3.9.


Thirdly, Observe, that there are four sorts of foolishness, viz.

I. It is a foolish thing for a man to live in such a condition, as he would be
loath to die in. And

II. To expose his life to the danger of losing it for a thing of no price or
value. And

III. To choose evil before good, when both are propounded to a man's choice.
The Rabbis say, (it may be a Legend) that when Moses was a child, King
Pharaoh setting the Crown on his head, he threw it on the ground, and trampled
upon it; whereupon the King took a firecoal out of the fire, and held a piece
of Gold in his hand, bidding him take one; whereupon he taking the coal, and
refusing the Gold, they all concluded that he was a Fool. And

IV. It is a great foolishness for a man to sell a large Patrimony for a dish
of broth; as Esau sold his birthright for a mess of Pottage

The Practical Part.
In this Part, there are some Lessons to be learnt, and some Duties to be
performed.

I. From, concerning, or in regard of Folly, we may learn these eight Lessons:

1. Who must not turn to folly, viz. Saints, Psalm. 85.8. And

2. Who promote and advance folly, viz. they who are hasty of spirit, Romans
14.29.

3. We may learn, why folly prevails so much with men; namely, I. Because they
repulse her not valiantly, endeavoring to be freed from her. II. Because they
will not give credit to those things which were found out to be true, and
taught by Wise men. And III. Because they lightly pass over things of great
importance. Senec. ep. 59. ad Luc.


4. We may learn, that it is lawful to study it dogmatically, Eccles. 1.17.
and 2.3. and 7.25. And

5. That Wisdom is better than Folly, Eccles. 2.13. And

6. That a little folly defameth and disgraceth him, who is in estimation for
wisdom and glory. And

7. That folly is often highly esteemed, when those who are rich in Wisdom and
Virtue are little set by, Eccles. 10.6.

8. We may learn, that folly procures punishment, Psalm. 38.6. Prove. 10.8, 10.
and 7.22. For

I. The Lord bewails our foolishness, Prove. 17.21. and 19.13. and therefore it
is blamed, Mark 7.22. and fools exhorted to learn wisdom, Prove. 1.22, etc. And

II. Foolishness is loved, till stripes come, Prove. 22.15. and 5.23. and 13.19.
and 19.29.

II. The Duty here required of us is, to lay aside folly, and to labor to be
wise. Two particulars are here distinctly to be handled: 1. To labor to be
wise. 2. To lay aside folly.


FIRST, It is our duty to endeavor to wax wise, Psalm. 94.8. Prove. 5.1. To
which purpose let us consider and do these four things.

First, Let us be humbled for our sins, Mich. 6.8. Joel 2.13. Jam. 4.9. And

Secondly, Let us labor to redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.15. And

Thirdly, Let us consider our ways, Prove. 28.26. Plueimi non eunt, sed
feruntur. Senec. We must not be violently hurried, and ride poast in our
spiritual warfare and journey, but walk circumspectly with fear and care, Prove.
14.8, 15. Ephesians. 5.15. And

Fourthly, Let us endeavor to know our selves, and our own sins. Multi alios
non seipsos; number plus amas, etc. Chrysostom. s. Matthew. 7. Many know others better
than themselves; and the sins of others better than their own; but yet they
will love themselves best. Summa Philosophia (...): Hugo Vict. The best
Philosophy is to know our selves. Quo minus se novit, minus displicet. Gregor.
The less a man knows himself, the more he loves, and the better he likes
himself. And therefore let us consider, what these two Fathers say:

I. Gregory says, We should consider these four things, Vbi fuisti, es, eris,
non es?

1. What we once were, for the time past. 2. What we now are, for the time
present. 3. What we shall be, for the time to come. 4. What we are not, which
we should be.
II. Bernard says, we should consider these three things, Quis natura,
persona, vita?

1. What we are by nature?

2. What we are in our persons?

3. What we are in our Lives? We must diligently examine, what our natural
condition is; what our personal constitution is; and what our life and
conversation is.

SECONDLY, It is our duty, to labor to remove Folly and Foolishness far from
us, Prove. 8.5. and 9.6. Two things are here considerable: 1. Wherein Folly, and
Foolishness consists. 2. The fruits and effects of Folly.


I. Folly and Foolishness consists in Five things, viz.

First, Non considerando, in not considering, Psalm 92.6. Isa. 57.1. Eccles.
2.14. Luke 2^.25 Isa. 44.19. that is,

I. That nothing comes by chance, 1 King. 22.34. And

II. That Gods hand is in all our afflictions, Psalm. 14.1. Isa. 19.12. And

III. That the Cause of all is sin, 1 King. 8 38. This is the worst of all,
Prove. 17.10. and 23 35.

Secondly, Non caute ambulando, in not walking watily, Jer. 4.22. and 5.4.
Prove. 27.22. that is, 1. By not Fearing, Psalm. 119.120. Prove. 16.6. Jonah 1.16.
And 2. By Laughing in the time of Lamentation; by being merry in the time of
mourning, Prove. 15.21. Isa. 22.12. Amos 6.6. Eccles. 7.6. Isa. 28.9.


Thirdly, Non respiciendo, in not regarding the frailty of Life, Psalm. 90.12.
And therefore Apoplexies, Plague, Pestilence, and such diseases as cut men
suddenly off, are sent abroad into the world.

Fourthly, Mundane sapiendo, in studying only worldly wisdom; in minding only
worldly things, Romans 1.22. Isa. 10.12, 13. Exodus 1.10. and 1 Cor. 3.18. And

Fifthly, Male curando, in curing spiritual maladies amiss: that is,

I. By avoiding the Effect not the Cause. Many are afraid of the Plague, who
never fear sin: although if they sin, their conscience will follow them, as the
shadow the substance, and clamor continually against them. And

II. By presuming to abide in their sins; and the phrase of Fools, Psalm.
107.17. (Fools are afflicted by reason of their sins) seems to denote this; as
if he should say, Fools will not forsake their sins, until they be compelled
by scourges, as follows in the next particular, viz.

II. The fruits and effects of Folly and Foolishness are these eight: 1. A Fool
wants understanding. 2. He cannot be taught, being incapable. 3. He cannot
weigh and consider things as they are, Deuteronomy. 31.22. Eccles. 4. the last, or,
5.1. 4. He cannot walk or work by rule and pattern, Gal. 6.16. 5. He cannot put
a difference between thing and thing. as between Brass and Gold, or, Glass and
Crystal, Romans 1.28. 6. He knows not times and seasons, when it is time, or fit
to do such or such a business, and when it is time to be left undone. 7. He
does not forsee the events of things, neither considers the danger of his
folly, as Prove. 7.22, 23. And the fool followed her straightwayes, as an One
that goes to the slaughter, and as an ^diot to the stocks for correction, till
a dart struck through his Liver; and as a bird hastes to the snare, not
knowing that he is in danger. Herodotus tells of Psilli, a foolish people, who
being displeased with the South wind, for drying up their waters, would needs
take up arms against it; but while they marched on the sands to meet their
enemy, it blew so strongly, that raising a drift of sand, it overwhelmed them,
whereby instead of a victory, they met with their graves, as a just reward of
their folly. 8. Affliction is an effect of folly, Psalm. 107.17. Fools are
afflicted for their sins. Sinful Folly brings forth sorrow; or, foolish
impiety, or impious folly produces punishment, Isa. 42.24. and 50.1. and 59.2.
Jer. 5.25. Prove. 13.6. Jer. 44.2, 3. For


First, The Law obliges the Lord to punish sin, Genesis 2.17. and 1 Cor. 15.56. And

Secondly, Sin is the seed of punishment, Hos. 8.11. And

Thirdly, Only Faith and Repentance frees us. And therefore, let us examine our
sins; that is, I. Our own sins, not the sins of others. And II. Our crying
sins. And III. Our confidence and boldness in sinning, Jer. 43.2. And IV. Our
craftiness and cunning. And V. Our occult and secret sins; whether 1. Such as
yet are hid from our selves, Psalm. 19.13. Or, 2. Such as we desire to hide from
the Lord, Psalm. 90.8, Jer. 16.17. Mich. 3.16.



CHAP. VI. Of Fools, and Vnwise's
IN this Chapter, as in the former, we have both a Doctrinal and a Practical
Part to consider of.

The Doctrinal Part.
In this Part we have these six things to observe, and consider of:

1. Observe, who are unwise; namely,

First, Sometimes some people, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Hos. 13.13.

Secondly, Sometimes some persons. Now these persons ^ro said to be Unwise.

1. He who will wade through the River which he has not sounded, unless he can
either swim well, or have help at hand.

2. Stultus, ab obliquo qui cum discedere possit,
Pugnat, in adversas ire natator aquas. Ovid.
When dangers may be shunned, I reckon him
Unwise, who yet against the stream will swim.


3. He who is ungrateful to God, Deuteronomy. 3.26.

4. He who protracts and delays his Repentance and Conversion unto God, Hos.
13.13.

5. He who is not converted to the Faith of Christ, Romans 1.14.

6. He who is negligent and careless of his Conversation and Life, Ephesians. 5.17.

7. He who is illiterate, and ignorant, Romans 1.14. or, who either wholly wants
the knowledge of the truth, or having it, does not submit himself to be ruled
by it, Ephesians. 5.17.

8. He who labors to allure others to sin, Prove. 9.13.

9. The carnal and unregenerate man is unwise, 1 Cor. 2.14. Prove. 2.3. Jam.
1.5. And so is

10. The blind and ignorant man, Ephesians. 4.18. Psalm. 14.1, 5. and 49.20. And

11. He who will not be reproved, Prove. 12.1, 15.

12. He who neglects his time, Ephesians. 5.8. Romans 13.11. Prove. 10.23. and 14.9.

13. He who communicates with the works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. Isa. 52.11. and
2 Cor. 6.16. And

14. He who walks not circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15. Coloss. 4.5. Matthew. 10.16.
Now for a double cause these are called Unwise, viz.

I. Because they labor for, and endeavor after things which bring them no
profit, or spiritual advantage at all, Isa. 55.2. And

II. Because they pursue and practice those things which will be their ruin;
as Adam sold Paradise for an Apple, and Achan lost his Life for a Garment.

2. Observe, that the Hebrews have three words for a Fool, viz.

I. Evil, that is, a curious fool. II. Chesil, that is, an inconstant Fool. And
III. Naval, that is, a wicked Fool.
3. Observe, how the Scripture may be freed, and cleared from contradicting it
self, in regard of diverse passages mentioned therein, concerning Fools; e. g.
Christ, Matthew. 5.22. says, we must call none Fool; now in thus saying he
contradicts his Father, Himself, some Prophets, some Apostles, and some pious
Persons.

Ans. 1. God, Prove. 12.6. calls wicked men Fools, and it is lawful for him so
to call them.

Ans. 2. Christ, Matthew. 23.17, 19. calls the Scribes and Pharisees, Fools, and
blind guides; and Luke 24.25. he calls the two Disciples, Fools: contrary to
his own doctrine, Matthew. 5.22. Now for the reconciling of these we must note,
That as the true Christian, and child of God, does consist of a double nature,
viz. Carnal and Spiritual, so there is in him a double Anger, namely, Carnal
and Spiritual. Now the carnal anger is the fruit of the flesh. and of man as he
is corrupted; and therefore is sin and death, Romans 8.6. and as evil is
forbidden by Christ, Matthew. 5. But the spiritual anger is the fruit of the
Spirit, unto which the faithful are led, and moved, that thereby sin may be
amended, and vice reformed: and by this Spirit was Christ led unto this
spiritual anger, against the Pharisees, and his two Disciples, which is rather
to be called Christian Reproof than anger. When wicked men are angry, they are
transported with fury and rage; not that thereby they may amend those with whom
they are angry, but that they may oppress, disgrace, or undo them. This was
the anger of the Jews against the Prophets, and the Promised Messiah: And that
anger which proceeds from pride, hatred, contempt, and a desire of revenge, is
absolutely forbidden as sinful, Matthew. 5. but this Prohibition does not take
away either public or private reproofs, which are joined and accompanied with
love. And thus Christ out of his love unto the Pharisees, and his Disciples,
and his duty to God, as he was a Prophet, and his desire that they might be
amended, calls them fools, blindo guides, and slow to believe.

Ans. 3. The Prophet David, Psalm. 94.8. says, Understand ye brutish among the
people: and ye fools when will you be wise? Where note, that words being the
signs of the conceptions of the mind, the fault in words is to be considered
by the intention and affection of the heart, and therefore when these words are
spoken, not with a mind or intent to calumniate, disgrace, or contemn our
brother, but to instruct and Christianly to reprove him, for his amendment,
then they are not sin.

Ans. 4. S. Paul says, O ye foolish Galathians, Gal. 3.1. and plainly calls
the Cretians liars, and slow-bellies, Tit. 1.12. but herein he is not contrary
to Christ; for Matthew. 5.22. is to be understood of them, who charge men with
folly, with a mind to reproach them, by way of revenge. For we must not call
any Fool in hatred, contempt, and anger, because Christians should look upon
all men as their brethren; as our Savior there, Matthew. 5.22. says plainly,
Thou must not in anger call thy brother fool.

Ans. 5. Concerning Abigail, who 1 Samuel 25.25. called her husband Fool, and for
her vindication in so doing, we assert these two things.

First, That Abigail, in calling her husband Fool, did no more than became her,
and was fit then to be done, all things considered. For

I. Her husbands foolishness was known, insomuch that thereof he had his name;
so that she did not reveal his secret infirmity, but only speaks of that,
which was in every ones mouth.

II. She was forced to call her husband Fool, to deliver him from imminent and
present destruction: As Surgeons, to save the whole body, sometimes cut off
a part; so she to save Nabals life, calls him Fool.

Secondly, Though Nabal was a Fool, as his name signifies, yet it must be
understood with this distinction: There is a foolishness which proceeds from a
natural defect in the wit; such fools are to be pitied; but Nabal was not such
a fool. There is another kind of fools, to wit, when men are given over unto
all lewdness and wickedness, and are blinded with their own impiety, Romans 1.22.
now such a fool was Nabal, who is therefore called A man of Belial: that is, a
wicked and lewd man.

4. Observe the meaning of these two places, where this word fool is mentioned.

I. Prove. 17.21. The father of a Fool can have no joy. For the understanding of
these words note, that the Hebrews usually imply, or understand more than they
express: as Exodus 20.7. The Lord will not hold him guiltless who takes his Name
in vain: that is, he will certainly and severely punish him; so Prove. 24.23. It
is not good to accept persons in judgment; that is, it is very evil: so there
Prove. 17.21. The father of a fool rejoices not; that is, he is very sad.

II. Deuteronomy. 32.6. O ye fools and unwise. For the understanding of these words
observe, that the Lord seems to say, 1. O fools, why do ye not consider, what I
could do unto you, if ye would but obey me? And 2. O fools, why do ye not
consider what I can do unto you, if you will not obey me? And 3. O fools, why
do ye not consider, how loath and unwilling I am to take the rod into my hands,
and to punish you for your offenses?


5. Observe the several sorts and kinds of Fools; namely,

First, I might say, there are these four: 1. Some are fools in that which is
evil, but wise in that which is good. 2. Some are fools in that which is good,
and wise in that which is evil. 3. Some are fools, both in regard of good and
evil. 4. Some are no fools in regard of the dogmatical knowledge either of good
or evil.


Secondly, I might say, that there are these four sorts of fools:

I. Some are fools, but think not, or know not themselves to be such. Seneca
ep. 50. ad Lucil. speaking of his wives fool Harpaste, says, She suddenly lost
her sight, not knowing that she was blind, and therefore would often ask leave
to go abroad, because the room was so dark.

II. Some think themselves fools, who are not such.

III. Some are fools and think themselves such, 1 Cor. 3.18.

IV. Some are thought to be fools who are not such, 1 Cor. 4.10. Eum qui sit
justus ac bonus, stultum esse: Carneades apud Cicer. de repub. lib. 3. and
Psalm. 69.7. For thy sake Lord am I counted a fool. Now good and godly men are
thus esteemed of the world, because they stand so much upon matters of
Conscience, and are so careful in all their dealings, to keep faith and a good
Conscience toward God and man. Facilem esse inique ad divitias viam, quo die
bonae mentis poenituerit. Demetr. apud Senec. not. qu. lib. 4. Praef. If Gods
children were not so strict and strait-laced; if they would not stand upon nice
points and terms; if they would not stick to lie and dissemble with Ananias and
Sapphira, Acts 5.1, 2. to belie and beguile, as Ziba Mephibosheths man did his
Master, 2 Samuel 16.1, 2. to swear and forswear with profane Antiochus; to steal
and purloin with Micah, Judge. 17.2. to oppress and murder, when they have
power in their hands, with wicked Ahab and cursed Jezabel, 1 King. 21. they
might as well come to wealth, as many worldly men do, who scrape and gather
much goods together by these means. And because they dare not be wicked for
wealth, and mischievous for money, therefore by the world they are accounted
fools and mad men.

Thirdly, I might say, that there are five sorts of Fools. For, 1. There are
natural Fools, who are deprived of the use of reason. 2. There are illiterate
fools, who are ignorant of humane Literature and knowledge. 3. There are
perverse and wilful fools, who will not learn either by teaching or
correction. 4. There are conceited fools, who persuade themselves that they are
wise, when they are otherwise. 5. There are spiritual fools, who are wise in
temporal things, but foolish in such things as concern Gods glory, and their
spiritual edification.


Fourthly, I might say, that there are these five sorts of fools.

I. Some are fools in regard of years; as Infants and young Children: Folly is
not charged upon these, because the time of Wisdom is not yet come.

II. Some are fools in regard of the weakness of their Intellectuals, from
their birth; these we pity, and name Idiots, Job 5.2.

III. Some are Fools in regard of some accident, disease, or casualty, viz.
such as lose the use and exercise of their reason, by some sickness or grief;
these we bewail, and call Mad men, Lunaticks, and Phrantick men.

IV. Some are Privative Fools, because deprived of the means of Learning and
knowledge. And

V. Some affect folly and ignorance; and though much taught, yet through
wilfulness, and a contempt of wisdom, remain in their foolishness; these are
the worst fools of all.

6. Observe a double Difference between Wise men and Fools, viz.

1. Wisdom looks to some things which are present, some which are to come. This
differenceth a Wise man and a Fool; the first begins in the end, the other ends
in the beginning.

2. Wise men are like Timber trees in a Wood, here and there one; Fools are the
greater number. Thus much for the Doctrinal Part.

The Practical Part.
In this Part we have some things to learn, and some things to do.

I. From, concerning, or in regard of Fools, we may learn these thirteen
Lessons.

1. Many particular Iessons may be learnt from Prove. 26.1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. if my Reader will please to consult and consider the place.

2. Three Lessons more may be learnt from Prove. 19.1, 10. and 24.7.

3. We may learn, that some die like Fools; that is, basely, cowardly, without
resistance, 2 Samuel 3.23.

4. We may learn, that fools die as well as wise men, Psalm. 49.10. And

. 5. That excellent speech becomes not a fool, Prove. 17 7. And

6. That fools are dangerous in their rage, Prove. 17.12. And

7. That a fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, Prove. 17.28.

8. We may learn, that these two things are the bane of fools;

I. Ease and Idleness, Prove. 1.32. II. Prosperity, Prove. 1.32.
9. We may learn, when fools are best known, viz. the Sage is not so well known
among the Sages, nor the Fool among the Fools, as the Sage is among Fools, and
Fools among Wise men.

10. We may learn, what the Lot and Portion of Fools is; namely, I. Correction
by the Magistrate, Prove. 7.22. and 26.3. And II. To be Servants to the Wise,
Prove. 11.29. III. To be a grief to their Parents, Prove. 17.21, 25. And IV. To
be the cause of their own ruin, Prove. 18.7.


11. We may learn, what the Marks, and Properties of Fools are; namely,

I. The Negative Marks are these two: 1. Not to improve the Means of Knowledge,
Prove. 17.16. And 2. Not to be bettered by Correction, Prove. 17.10. and 27.22.


II. The Affirmative Marks and Properties of Fools are these: 1. To love
simplicity, Prove. 1.22. 2. To return to his folly, Prove. 26.11. 3. To love ease
and idleness, Prove. 1.32. 4. To be ignorant of the Works of God, Psalm. 92.6. 5.
To be easily seduced to Error, 2 Timothy 3.6. Romans 16.18. 6. To be full of words,
Prove. 10.8, 10. 7. To be easily enticed to sin, Prove. 7.7. and 9.16. 8. To
believe every word or thing they hear, or is told them, Prove. 14.15. 9. To
rejoice in folly, Prove. 5.21. 10. To be extreme in their rage, Prove. 17.12. 11.
To make it a sport to do mischief, Prove. 10.23. 12. To think their own ways
right and good, Prove. 12.15. 13. To be always meddling with what concerns them
not, Prove. 20.3. 14. To lay open their own folly, Prove. 13.16. 15. To rage and
be confident in what he does, Prove. 14.16. 16. To despise the instruction of
their Superiors, Prove. 15.5. 17. To utter all his mind, Prove. 29.11. 18. To
trust in his own heart, Prove. 28.26. 19. To be given to contention, Prove. 18.6.
20. To have no delight in understanding, Prove. 18.2. 21. To glory in their
shame: e. g. There are women in Diu, who by art die their teeth black, esteeming
themselves so much the more beautiful; and therefore go with their lips open,
to show the blackness of their teeth. 22. To be much in purpose. Among many
other evils, Folly has likewise this, that it begins always to live, never
makes any progress in a virtuous course. Senec. Fools are much in purposing,
little in performing.


12. From Lipsius we may learn, Insipientes non debent verfari in publicis
rebus: that fools are unfit for public affairs, or weighty employments.

13. We may learn, who are truly said to be Fools; namely,

First, Some say, these seven sorts of persons are justly called Fools:

1. Qui tautum minatur, ut non timetur: he who only threatens, that none may
fear him, or stand in awe of him. 2. Qui tantum jurat, ut non credatur: who
therefore swears that none may believe him. 3. Qui tantum dat, ut depauperatur:
who gives Alms for that end, that himself thereby may be impoverished. 4. Qui
seipsum negligit, dum ab aliis negligitur; who is regardless of himself,
because others slight him. 5. Qui affligitur de re quam emendare nequit; who
sadly afflicts himself for that which he cannot in the leass help. 6. Qui rem
sibi impossibilem facere nititur; who endeavors to do that which is
altogether impossible for him to do. 7. Qui en credit, quae verisimilia non
videntur: who confidently credits those reports which are most improbable, and
unlikely to be true.
Secondly, Aeneas Sylvius says, that these three sorts of men may well be
called Fools: de curial. miser. Stultus qui quaerit, quod nequit invenire;
stultus qui quaerit, quod nocet inventum; stultus qui cum plures habet calls,
deteriorem deligit.

I. He is a fool, who seeks what he can never find. II. He is a fool, who
seeks that, which being found will do him more hurt than good. III. He is a
fool, who having variety of ways to bring him to his journeys end, takes that
which is worst.
Thirdly, We may say, that some are Fools Comparatively, some Positively.

1. Those are fools comparatively, who (though they be godly yet) have much
ignorance and unbelief remaining in them, Luke 24.15. 2. These are fools
positively and simply, viz.
1. Idiots: in these we have two things to consider of: to wit,

I. Who is an Idiot, or Natural fool; namely, Fitz-herbert says, By the Laws
of the Land, he is counted a Natural, who has not wit enough to number Twenty,
or to tell his age. Calvision and Corvinus, could not remember the four
Elements, and after a sickness forgot their own names.

II. Observe, what the Properties of a Natural fool are; namely,

First, He is not capable of knowledge; for Precepts will no more profit a
fool, than beauty does the blind, or Music the deaf.

Secondly, He will shoot his Bolt as well at a Bush as at a Bird: he will
censure and pass his verdict on the good and bad: he will give his judgment on
actions he understands not, sometimes well, sometimes ill: sometimes he will
miss the But, and sometimes hit the Mark: e. g.

I. Sometimes the fool does miss the But; as Pamur a foolish fellow, having
lost a small Boat, sued or threatened to sue every one for it whom he met
withal.

II. Sometimes a fool hits the Mark: e. g. When a Gentleman, none of the
wisest, told our King Henry 7. that he found Sir Richard Crofts, (who was made
Banneret at the battle of Stoke) to be a very Wise man: the King answered, he
doubted not of that in the least, but he marvelled much, how a fool could know
a Wise man. When King Francis I. of France, was about the invading of Italy, he
consulted with his Council, where he might best enter Lombardy. Some advising
one way, some another; his Fool standing by, and hearing their consultation,
said, they were all fools; For, says he, you all advise the King how to enter
into Italy, but none of you takes care how he shall get out again. Though this
for a time was counted but a fools Bolt, yet it proved too true afterward; for
in that journey the King was taken, and sent Prisoner to a Castle in Spain,
called Madrillo. Lupoldus having raised an Army of 20000. horse and foot, for
the assistance of his Brother Frederick Duke of Austria, against Lodovick Duke
of Bavaria; and having marched with his Army to Egree, intending to pass over
the Mountains, to subdue some, who sided with, and assisted his Brothers
enemies: he consulted with his Council of War, by what way, or passage he might
best steer his course, and direct his journey toward the Switzers? While they
were busy in consulting, a fool called Kune de Stocken, standing by, hearing
their advice, and resolving to shoot his bolt, he told them, he liked not their
counsel, because they all advised, how they should enter into the enemies
Country, but none advised how to come out again, after they were entered. In
conclusion, as the fool said, so they found it true; for Lupoldus with his
Army, entering too far into the enemies Country, a great part of his Host was
lost and slain, though he, with a small party made a shift to escape. The King
of France warring against our King Edward 3. in a Naval sight, our victory was
so great, that of 30000 Frenchmen, few or none escaped alive; and 200. Sail of
Ships were taken, out of which many leaped into the Sea. Those about the King
not daring to tell him of his great loss, his Fool being in his presence,
talking of many things, among others, brake out into a vehement railing against
English men, calling them Cowards, Dastards, etc. with many such opprobrious
words. The King not knowing whereunto the fools words did tend, he asked him
why he called the Englishmen such Weaklings and Cowards? The Fool answered,
Because the fearful and cowardly Englishmen had not the hearts, to leap so
lustily, and numerously into the Sea, as our Normans, and French Gentlemen had.
By this the French King perceived, that his Navy was overcome. Thus, as the
French, in a Proverb say, Un fol enseign bien aucunefois un sage: The Fool
sometime does teach the Wise.

Thirdly, The Natural Fool is jealous. We read, that a Consul of Rome, gave his
daughter named Julia, in marriage to a Fool, because he was endued with great
possessions. This fool was not long married, before he became so exceedingly
jealous of his beautiful wife Julia, that he beholding one day her fair and
Crystal neck as she stooped to pull on her shoe, he fell into such a
suspicious fury, that presently he thrust her through with his sword; verifying
the saying of Castymachus, That a fool deprived of reason, is no other but a
mad man bereaved of his sense.

Fourthly, A Natural Fool is silly. Now this property is referred, 1. Sometimes
to a People, Hos. 7.11. 2. Sometimes to Men, Job 5.2. 3. Sometimes to Women, 2 Timothy 3.6. 4. Sometimes to Doves, Hos. 7.11. 5. Sometimes to Asses. It is
observed in the silly blockish Ass, that when he sees a Wolf, he lays his
head on his side, thinking that because he sees not the Wolf, the Wolf cannot
see him; but the Wolf having this advantage, sets on the blind side of him,
and so easily destroys the silly Ass.


Fifthly, The Natural fool usually is rash. Note here, some demand, Whether in
War is Rashness or Moderation better?

Ans. Historians say, in an assault Rashness is very available, but in
preserving and defending it hurts more than profits; wherefore Moderation
is said to be the Mother of Continuance of States and Kingdoms.

Sixthly, The Natural fool is Inconsiderate. Note here, that Inconsideration is
the same in a manner with Ignorance, and differs from it only as the privation
of the act, differs from the privation of the disposition. Inconsideration
therefore in spiritual matters is often a sin, and is opposed to watchfulness
and circumspection. When therefore we are bound to watch and attend, if we do
not consider what we do, and what is our duty to do, we are said, willingly
not to understand, Isa. 1.3.

Inconsideration is sometimes voluntarily chosen in it self, Amos 6.10. and
sometimes it is voluntarily chosen in its cause, Matthew. 13.22. Now we are said
to will a thing in its cause, when we would one thing, from which another
follows: e.g. He who delights in drunken company and meetings, would be drunk;
he who gives himself to sleep and ease, would neglect his business; he who sets
himself to please men, would displease God, Gal. 1.10. By inconsideration men
are carried to their eternal ruin without any striving: even as Hawks are
carried hooded very quietly, which if their sight were free, would never leave
bating, till they had broken their lines, or utterly tired themselves with
striving.

Seventhly, The Natural fool is Indiscreet. Now Hierom, ad Rust. Monach. says,
Qui mittit in altum Lapidem, recidet in caput ejus; that an undiscreet person
is like a man, who throws up a stone rashly in his humor, which falls down
again upon his own head, to teach him more wisdom. Sigismond King of Hungary,
warring upon Bajazes, the Earl Deu commanding the French forces, set upon the
Turks, before the Horsemen of Hungary, Germany, and Servis could come up to
their relief: the Turks giving back, as overmatcht, the French rashly pursued
them so far, that presently by a Turkish stratagem, they were all hemmed in,
and cut off. Turk Hist. So the Turks warring upon the Venetians, Novellus the
Venetian General, ordered his son to give the onset upon the Enemy, who
violently assaulting them, and they retreating, he, contrary to his Fathers
directions pursued them so far, till he and his party were surrounded, and
environed by their enemies, and cut off. Thus Idiots are Fools positively and
simply: and so likewise are

2. Those who utter slanders, Prove. 10.18. And

3. Those who seek the hurt of the innocent, 1 Samuel 26.21. And

4. Those who are seduced by false Teachers, Galat, 3.1. And

5. Those who believe not, Matthew. 25.2. And

6. Those who hear the Word but obey it not. Matthew. 7.26. And

7. Idolaters, Romans 1.22. And

8. Natural men, Psalm. 14.1. etc. Tit. 3.3. And

9. As he is a foolish Mariner, who seeing a Fish in the Sea, leaps into the
water to catch her, which together with his Life he loses; so they are fools
in grain, who for the gain of toys and vanities, lose an eternal Kingdom: To
lose a Crown of Gold for a counterfeit one, is more than a childish fondness or
folly.

10. Octavian the Emperor asking Pistro the Philosopher, Who among all the
living, was the most fool? he answered, In my opinion, I take him to be most
fool, of whose words comes no Profit; for he is not so very a fool, who
casts stones against the wind, as he who utters vain words.

11. Those are fools positively and simply, who see danger, and yet run into
it; Sciensque, vidensque pereo; like the Birds of Cholchos, which see the net,
and yet fly to the stale; and like the Tortuse, which loves the Sun, and
delights in the heat thereof, although it breeds his bane. Such as these are
more foolish than the Mouse, who if she see the trap will not follow the train;
or, the Fish, which will not swallow the bait, if she see the hook.

12. Those are positive fools, who hold opinions, or give commands contrary to
all sense and reason: As the Philosopher who held that Snow was black; and as
Alexander the great, who thought himself a God, and would be honored as a God,
although he felt himself to suffer hunger and thirst, to be subject to sorrow
and sickness, to be sensible of wounds and pain, and not to be able to keep
himself from drunkenness.

13. Those are simply and positively fools, who refuse that which is best, and
choose that which is worst: as the Swine which delights more to wallow in the
mire, than to wade in clear water: as the Raven which feeds more greedily on
loathsome carrion, than on pure grain: as the she Wolf who chooses the foulest
for her mate: as Aesops Cock that preferred a barley Corn, before a precious
Pearl: as Venus who matched her self with Vulcan: as Euphinia forsook famous
Princes, and joined her self in marriage to an infamous bondslave; and as
Sirichia the Princess of Denmark, rejected Princely Potentates, and married her
self to a poor Peasant.

14. Covetous men are Fools; as Luke 12.20. Christ says to the covetous rich
man, Thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken away. For the understanding
of that place, I will propound three Quaeres, viz.

Quest. 1. Has not Christ forbidden us to call any man Fool, Matthew. 5.22. Why
then does the Lord call this man fool?

Ans. 1. Christ did not forbid God the Lord to call any man fool, for he may
justly do it. But

Ans. 2. He forbids man to call his Brother Fool. Note here, that it is lawful
for one man to call another fool;

I. If he be sent, or commanded by the Lord to do it: as the Prophets and
Apostles sometimes were. And II. If he do it in love, and with a meek respect
of his Brother. But III. He must not so call him in anger, or with a purpose to
disgrace him; as was said before.
Quest. 2. What does this phrase, Thou fool, import or show?

Ans. These two things:

I. That the carnal man is but a fool. If it be here objected, that many carnal
men be wise, subtle, and crafty; I answer, It is most true, for so was this
covetous fool, Luke 12.17. but for all their wisdom, they are but fools to God,
and Idiots in spiritual things, Romans 8.6.

II. This phrase, [Thou fool] there imports, that folly and foolishness is
imputed to him, as an evil, or vice; for by this appellation, Fool, he is taxed
for being a fool.

Object. Is it not said, That Wisdom is evil, 1 Cor. 1.26. how then do we say,
that foolishness is evil?

Ans. There is a double foolishness, and contrarily a double Wisdom, viz.

I. Some are foolish to the world, and wise to God; foolish in earthly things,
and wise in heavenly. Now though these are good and commendable fools, Romans
16.19. yet we must observe, that we are not commanded simply and absolutely to
be fools in worldly matters, but rather to be wise as Serpents, Matthew. 10.16.
that we may the better avoid danger.

II. There are some who are foolish to God, and wise to the world; foolish in
heavenly things, but wise in earthly. These are fools in grane, Luke 16.8. Mat.
11.25. and 1 Cor. 3.18.

Quest. 3. Why was that rich man called Fool, Luke 12.26. and wherein was he
foolish?

Ans. He was a fool for these three things:

I. Because he rejoiced in his riches; or, his folly appeared, in his joy and
rejoicing for his riches; seeing he is but a fool, who rejoices that his Corn,
and Wine, and Oil increases, Psalm. 4. For it is not the part of a Wise man, to
rest in his riches, to place his felicity in them, or to set his heart upon
them, Psalm. 62.10, 11. Luke 12.15. and 6.24. and 1 Timothy 6.8.

II. Because he thought his riches to be certain, and that they should continue
with him, and he with them, for the space of many years. For there is no
possession on earth, or any earthly Possessions certain, Psalm. 37.36. and 92.8.
and 103.16. Prove. 27.24. and 11.28. and 22.2.

III. Because he prepared himself to live, not to die; he prepared for a long
life, not for a short and sudden death; or, because he took pains, and made
provision for Life, not for death, which he should first have prepared for.

15. Wicked men are Positive Fools, Psalm. 73.3. and 5.4. The foolish man shall
not stand in thy sight. Note here, that the name of Fool is usually in the
Word, given to wicked men, for these four reasons.

1. Because they lack indeed true Wisdom, or, that understanding which should
direct them unto the true good. And 2. Because they are wholly affected,
transported, and delighted, with vain and childish things, placing their
felicity and happiness in them. And 3. Because being set on, by a certain
madness of mind, they are carried headlong unto all manner of wickedness. And
4. Because like fools, they applaud themselves in their own misery.
16. Lastly, Atheists are Positive Fools, or, positively called Fools; Psalm.
14.1. and 53.1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. For the
understanding of these words; I will first give the sense and meaning of them:
and then resolve three questions concerning them.

Observe here, that this phrase, To say in the heart, has a threefold
acception, or signification. For

1. Sometimes it signifies, to purpose certainly, Genes. 8.21.

2. Sometimes to have doubtful and perplexed thoughts about salvation, Romans
10.6. And

3. Sometimes to set down a thing inwardly, or, within ones self; as there, The
fool has said in his heart, etc. These words are not to be taken, as if any,
how wicked, foolish, or mad soever, did indeed think or resolve that there was
no God, (for the notion of a God, that there is one, is more deeply and surely
printed and settled into man's soul, than that it can ever be blotted out; no
people being so barbarous but have acknowledged it) but impudent sinners would
gladly have it so, and fain would think it so; yea, they live so securely, as
if there were no God; forgetting his Power, Justice, and Providence; and going
on in a wicked race and course without any regard of these, as the verses
following (which describe their course of Life) do plainly expound it.

Quest. 1. How is this Atheistical fool described there by the Psalmist?

Ans. 1. By his deeds which are abominable, verse. 1, 2, 3.

2. By his understanding and affections: He neither understands nor seeks after
God, verse. 2.

3. By his devotion, he calls not upon God, verse. 4.

4. By his needless fear of the wicked, where God is not; verse. 5. And

5. By his contempt of good men, and their counsel, verse. 6.

Quest. 2. How did David know the hearts of men to be evil, that he says, The
fool has said in his heart, etc?

Ans. 1. This he knew by the judgment of God, or, by divine inspiration. God
knows the heart; and He inspired the Prophet in the writing hereof; whence
David knew the Pravity of the heart of wicked men. Yea,

Ans. 2. David knew this by their wicked actions. From the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks; outward actions demonstrate the inward affections;
corrupt streams argue a corrupt fountain: a man may have an outward pure life,
but a polluted heart; he cannot have a polluted and impure life and a clean
heart. Wherefore by the wickedness of their hands, David knew the iniquity of
their hearts.

Quest. 3. Why or in what regard is the wicked Atheist, or natural man called
Fool: The fool has said in his heart, etc?

Ans. He is called Fool both Privatively and Positively.

I Privatively, not because he is destitute, or deprived of the faculty of
natural wit and wisdom; but

1. Because he wants the knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. And

2. Because of those things which he knows, he wants that effectual
approbation, and assent, which should make spiritual things relish unto him;
or, truly profit him, Romans 8.5. And

3. Because he wants the affect of subjection, and obedience, even in those
things, which in some measure, in his judgment he approves of, Romans 8.7. And

4. Because he is not careful to keep himself from the greatest dangers, i.e.
sin, the occasions, and evils thereof, Prove. 7.7. and 22.23. and 14.15, 16. And

5. Because he is not only destitute of true wisdom, but is also incapable
thereof, Prove. 17.10, 16, 22, 27.

II. The wicked Atheist is called Fool positively; and that

1. Because he is endued with most depraved, and perverse opinions, and
principles. For his mind is not like a New Table Book, wherein nothing is
written; but like a Leaf wherein is nothing but blots and blurs; it being
replete with the habits of all errors, Prove. 24.9.

2. Because he is delighted in this his natural, carnal, and sinful condition,
and pleases himself therein, Prove. 1.20. and 8.5. and 9.6. and 12.15.

3. Because he sleights, rejects, and hates the offer, and tender of true
wisdom, Prove. 13.19.

4. Because he delights in the exercise of folly and foolishness, Prove. 10.23.

5. Because he loves to scatter, and show abroad his folly, yea to communicate
it to others, Prove. 12.23. and 13.16.

6. Because he contemns, and opposes the means of instruction, and knowledge,
Prove. 15.5.

7. Because he abuses those means which principally lead unto true Wisdom,
Prove. 26.9. And

8. Because he appli^^ all the powers and faculties, both of Soul and Body, to
the practice and exercise of wickedness, Prove. 6.12, 13, 14. Thus much for the
Lessons which may be learnt, from, concerning, or in regard of Fools.

II. The Duties here required do either respect and concern Fools, or us in
regard of Fools.

I. These two things are required of Fools: 1. To labor to understand wisdom,
Prove. 8.5. and to be of understanding hearts, ibid. 2. To listen unto Christ,
who is true Wisdom, Prove. 9.4.
II. The Duties required of us in regard of Fools, are either Negative or
Affirmative.
First, the Negative duties are these three.

I. We must not be afraid of them. Certain young men rushing in one night upon
Democritus, thinking by their disguised faces, voices, and bodies to make him
afraid; he being no whit dismayed, said only unto them, Will you never leave
playing the Fools?

II. We must not speak in the Ears of Fools, Prove. 23.9. and that

1. Because they will despise the wisdom of our words, Prove. 23.9. And 2.
Because Wisdom is too high for a fool, Prove. 24 7.
III. We must not answer a fool according to his folly, Prove. 26.4.

Secondly, the Affirmative duty required of us is, to answer a fool according
to his folly, Prove. 26.5.

Quest. Solomon saying Prove. 26.4, 5. Answer not a fool according to his
foolishness, l^st thou also be like him. Answer a fool according to his
foolishness, l^st he be wise in his own conceit: it may be demanded, How do
these two verses accord, or, how may they be reconciled?

Ans. 1. The Antith sis is not simply in Answering, but in the manner of
answering, as appears by the reasons there given. For verse. 4. teaches us to
be wise in all our talk with fools, and diligently to observe, what, how much,
when, and how to answer them, or not; Lest if these circumstances should not be
observed, we should be thought as foolish as they. Or, Solomon forbids us, when
we talk with fools, to speak foolishly, or foolish things as they do; and if
they reproach or speak evil of us, we must not answer them in their own
language, rep^ying evil for evil. In verse. 5. Solomon teaches, that the
forementioned circumstances being observed, we may answer a fool, namely when
he glories in his foolishness, or folly; or, when for his own good it is
required, that we should show him, that he is but a fool.

Ans. 2. Solomon in those two verses shows, when we should answer to these
railing speeches, and when not; that is, when it tends not to the good of the
railer, nor to the profit of the innocent who is reproached, then it is good to
hold ones peace. Thus Hezekiah held his peace, when Rabsache railed, 2 King.
19. And our Lord held his peace, when he was accused before Pilate, John 19.9.
But when the answer is profitable to the railer or fool, then we are to answer
him; or, if the Truth be impaired by our silence, or our enemy be emboldened to
insult the more, then we are bound to answer, John 18.23. Acts 23.3.

Ans. 3. There are two sorts of Fools, viz.

I. There are natural fools; these must not be answered according to their
folly, verse. 4. II. There are self-conceited fools; these must be answered,
lest they ween themselves wise. Thus much for Fools.
CHAP. VII. Of Simple, and Simplicity.
NOte here in the first place, that in Scripture there are words Mediae
significationis, which have a double sense; and these a Translator must take
heed, how he renders: as Pethi is taken in an evil sense, for foolishness;
Prove. 1.22. and in a good sense for simplicity, as Psalm. 116.6. The Lord
preserves the simple.

Note again, that Simplicity is either Proper or Figurative.

I. There is a Proper Simplicity, or a Simplicity properly so called, which is
not compounded of diverse things; and by how much the further it is from
composition, the more simple is it thought to be. In this sense, the essence
and nature of nothing besides God, can properly be said to be simple. II. There
is a Figurative Simplicity which is threefold, viz. 1. Which deserves no
praise. 2. Which deserves dispraise. 3. Which deserves much praise.

I. Where is a Simplicity which deserves no praise; as foolishness and
ignorance of many things; as Sedulius, Apol. (...) de simplicitate Minoritarum,
tells us, of Friar Ruffin^ (...) out of mere simplicity, cut off a living Hogs
foot, ^^^^ress for a sick man; and boiled his Birds in the feathers. He who is
simple in this sense, is called in Scripture Jahius, a fool or simple fellow,
Prove. 1.22.

II. There is a Simplicity which deserves dispraise: this is evil simplicity;
and therein three things are observable: viz.

1. The Division thereof; namely, That Simplicity which is evil, foolish, and
contrary to Wisdom, is twofold; viz.

First, Negligent; when a man does not take heed to himself, and beware; I.
Lest he should be hurt or harmed by any. II. Lest he should be deceived by
error, Ephesians 4.14. Or III. Lest he should be seduced unto sin, Genesis 20.5. and 2 Samuel 15.11.


Secondly, sluggish and idle; when a man does not labor, I. For knowledge and
understanding, Hos. 4.6. Ephesians. 5.15. Now from ignorance come errors; whence the
Papists and some others, persuade men to neglect hearing, reading, studying,
and the means of knowledge; because as he who is altogether ignorant of the
true way, may easily be persuaded to take any path, and made believe by every
man he meets, that every false path is the right; so those who are ignorant of
the divine truth, may be seduced, and quickly led aside by any into humane
errors, Romans 16.18. II. That is called sluggish and idle simplicity, when a
man does not strive, and wrestle against sin, and his own corruptions: for
although we must commit and commend our selves unto God, yet we must sight
against sin, and our inbred corruptions even unto blood, Hebr. 12.4.


. 2. Observe, what the fruits and effects of evil simplicity are; namely, 1. To
be easily led into error, Romans 16.18. and 2 Timothy 3.6. 2. Correction and
punishment, Prove. 7.22. 3. To hurt themselves by their maligning of others, Job
5.2. 4. To be of weak judgment in the time of trouble, Hos. 7.11. 5. To
inherit folly, Prove. 14.18. 6. To fall inconsiderately into mischief, Prove.
22.3. 7. To be easily drawn unto evil, Prove. 5.23. and 10.8, 10.


3. Observe, by whom, or what the evil are made wise; namely, I. By the Word of
God. Psalm. 19.7. and 119.130. II. By listening to wise sayings, Prove. 1.4. III.
By seeing and observing the correction, and affliction of others, Prove. 19.25.
and 21.11.


III. There is a Simplicity which is a great virtue, and excellent; and
therefore worthy of all praise. This Simplicity is good, and those in whom it
is, and to whom it belongs, are called Perfect, Genesis 17.1. and S. Paul calls it
godly simplicity, 2 Cor. 1.12. both because it comes from God, and is practiced
before God without hypocrisy. In this Simplicity, these seven things are
considerable.

I. Observe that this good simplicity is predicated of, or attributed unto,
both the Creator and Creatures.

1. As it is given to God the Creator, I may handle it, in a particular Tract,
of the Divine Attributes. 2. Creatures are either Irrational, or Rational.
I. Simplicity is attributed to some Unreasonable Creatures, as to Do^es,
Matthew. 10.16. Be simple as Doves; that is, be innocent and harmless, thinking
evil of none, neither intending evil, or offense unto any, in thought, word, or
deed; and yet, be wise as Serpents, who have great subtlety in saving, and
defending themselves from harm: that is, every one should labor for so much
Wisdom, as may preserve him from the hurt of false Prophets. II. Good
Simplicity is attributed to Reasonable Creatures as Men, Romans 16.19. and 2 Cor.
1.12.
II. Observe, that three things may be predicated of this godly simplicity, viz.

1. That it is easily and ordinarily derided and scorned, 1 Cor. 4.9. 2. That
it is easily deceived, Genesis 29.25. Matthew. 10.16. for charity suffers all
things, and believes all things, 1 Cor. 13. And 3. That it is easily and
usually oppressed, wronged, and injured, Hebr. 10.34.
III. Observe, that this word Simplicity signifies these four things, Romans
12.8. Distribute with simplicity.

I. Faithfulness without deceit; not cosening the needy. II. Humility without
pride; not seeking our own Praise. III. Gentleness without sierceness; not
giving the poor bad Language. IV. Uprightness, without respect of persons, not
preferring one before another; where necessity is equal.
IV. Observe, what Simplicity is; namely, It is open truth, without wrinkles,
fetches, and compassings: or, It is a virtue which does properly and plainly
speak, and do such things as are true, right, and declared in acts and common
Life. Or, good simplicity is an enemy to deceit and fraud.

V. Observe, that the Extremes of true and good simplicity are, feigned
simplicity, and doubleness in manners and conversation.

VI. Observe, wherein godly simplicity does consist; namely, in these six
things.

First, in a sincere judgment, Ephesians. 1.18. when the eye of the understanding
is enlightened.

Secondly, in a sincere disposition; that is, I. When a man is without
dissimulation, deceit, or fraud, John 1.47. Genesis 25.27. and 1 Pet. 1.22. II.
When the heart is sincere and single, Act. 2.46. and 1 King. 9.4. For God loves
not a heart and a heart; and therefore we must not have two hearts. And III.
When the heart is liberal and free, Romans 12.8.


Thirdly, in a heart enlightened from above, Ephesians. 5.15.

Fourthly, in a tender Conscience, and a fear to sin or offend God. He
therefore who desires this good simplicity, must be of a circumcised heart,
which is sensible of the least sin, and of a cowardly Conscience, which fears
to commit the least evil, Genes. 39.9. Job 1.1. and 2.3. Romans 16.19. and 1 Cor.
14.20. Phil. 2.13.

Fifthly, in a single tongue: he therefore who desires this good simplicity
must avoid all lying, and deceitful speeches, and take heed of being double
tongued, Job 33.3. and 2 Cor. 1.12. and 11.3. Ephesians. 6.5. And

Sixthly, in a boldness unto that which is good; not being hindered, either by
employment, danger, or fear, but courageously and considently professing and
serving God, Prove. 10.29. Acts 4.19. and 5.29.

VII. From, or concerning this good simplicity, we may learn these two things:
1. That the Lord will preserve the good simple ones, Psalm. 116.6. And 2. That
the Simplicity of the heart, is the way unto true Light, 2 Cor. 1.12. and 11.3.
Phil. 2.15.


Thus much for Wit, Wisdom and Folly; Wise Men and Fools. Now because the
Tongue is the Instrument, whereby Wisdom and Folly are usually discovered; and
because Wise Men and Fools by their Tongue and Speech are chiefly discerned; I
therefore proceed to the second Treatise.

The Words fully handled and explained in this first Treatise, are
Alphabetically these: DIscretion, Page 95 Folly, Foolishness, p. 116 Fools, p.
121 Inconsiderate, p. 132 Prudence, p. 13 Rash, p. 133 Simple, Simplicity, p.
140 Unwise, p. 121 Wisdom, p. 13 Wise Men, p. 100 Wit, p. 1


The things handled, hinted at, and falling in by the by, in this first
Treatise are these: FEar, the excellency thereof, p. 53 Magistrates, Rulers,
their duty, p. 29.80. and 83 Sin, the kinds and punishment thereof, p. 38. and
121


The Scriptures particularly and plenarily expounded and explained in this
Tract are these: DEuter. 21.10, 11. p. 13 and Deuteronomy 32.6. p. 125 1 Samuel 25.25.
p. 124 2 Chronicles. 1.10. page 29 Job 26.3, 4, 5. p. 17, and 139 Psalm. 14.1. and
53.1. p. 136 Ps. 94.8. p. 124. and Ps. 107.17, 18. p. 121 Proverb. 1.5, 6, 7.
p. 111. and chapter 2.4,5. p. 39. and p. 94. and chapter 3.5, 6, 7. p. 37. twice. And
chapter 17.21. p. 125 Eccles. 1.18. p. 34. and chapter 7. 13, 14. p. 35. and chapter 7. 21.
p. 4^. chapter 8.1. p. 17. chapter 9. 15, 16, 18. p. 47. Isa. 5.21. p. 72. and chapter 11.
2, 3. p. 27. Matthew. 5.22. p. 123. and chapter 7. 24, 25. p. 89. and chapter 10. 16. p.
30. and 142. chapter 11. 25. p. 85. and chapter 23. 17, 19. p. 123 Luke 12.20. p. 135
John 17.3. p. 93 Acts 18.21, 25, 26. ibid. Romans 8.6. p. 18. and chapter 12. 3. p.
42. 66. chapter 12. 8. p. 143. chapter 12. 16. p. 37. 74 1 Cor. 3.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
p. 54. and 61 Galat. 3.1. p. 124 Ephesians. 5.15. p. 43 Phil. 1.7. p. 18 Coloss.
2.8. p. 36. and chapter 3.2. p. 74 Jam. 3.17. p. 93


The End of the First Treatise.
THE SECOND TREATISE, OF THE Nature, Use, and Abuse OF THE TONGUE AND SPEECH.

Quum Lingua non restringitur, nequaquam ubi ceciderit, Jaceat, sed semper ad
deteriora descendat.

Gregor. li. 16. Moral. He who keeps his Mouth and his Tongue, keeps his
Soul from Sorrow,

Prove. 21.23. LONDON, Printed by E.T. and R.H. for Will. Miller at the gilded
Acorn in St. Paul's Churchyard, over against the little North Door. 1673.

A TREATISE OF THE Nature, Use, and Abuse OF THE TONGUE and SPEECH.
THE Tongue, Lips, and Mouth of Man, being in a sort Synonyma, in use,
signification, and our usual manner of Speech, I will in this small Tractate,
hint or touch particularly thus at each of them.

1. Of the Tongue, Chap. I. 2. Of the Mouth, Chap. IV. 3. Of the Lips, Chap. V.
4. Of Words and Speech, Chap. VI.
CHAP. I. Of the Tongue.
LIug^a, the Tongue is not a Sense, but the Organ of the Sense of Tasting. Now
concerning this Organ o^ Member observe these two things.

I. That though the Tongue generally in Scripture signifies speech, yet if I
should here treat, of all sorts, of good and evil words, that then this
Treatise would swell into a Volume: and therefore reserving the handling of
those to another place, (if this Manual find general and friendly acceptance) I
will here treat only of these words, Tongue, Mouth, Lips, Speech, and Words.

II. Observe, as the sum of this whole Chapter, that Tongues are either

1. National, called Languages, Sect. I. Or, 2. Spiritual, called
Extraordinary, or the gift of tongues, Sect. II. Or, 3. Natural or Corporal,
called Ordinary Tongues, Sect. III. Now these are either.
I. Evil, and abusive Tongues. Or II. Good, and well used Tongues. In both
these we have both 1. The Doctrinal Part to consider of, Chap. II. And also 2.
The Practical, Chap. III.

SECT. I. Of National Tongues, or Languages.
Five things, concerning these, I will here observe, viz.

First, which was the first Mother Tongue, or Language. Psammeticus King of
Egypt, caused two Children to be closely brought up by a Goat-heard, who should
cause Goats to give them suck, but not permit them to hear any humane voice.
After two years the children uttered the word Beck, Beck, which was indeed the
note that they had learned from the Goats; but because the Phrygians called
bread Beck, therefore Psammeticus ascribed to them the priority of all Nations
and Language; Herodot. li. 2. Thus Melabdim Echebar, the great Mogor, made the
like trial of 30. children, whom he caused without hearing of any man, to be
brought up; but they never spoke any Language, Relat. regn. Mogor. Johan.
Orani. Doubtless as Hebrew was the first Language, and the Tongue which all the
world spoke before the building of Babel; so all Lauguages are now learnt by
imitation and study; insomuch as, if Children hear no Language they will speak
none at all (whence those who are deaf are dumb) and what Language they first
hear, they will first learn.

Secondly, observe, that Tongues are either Mother tongues, or Dialects. Mother
tongues are those, out of which many Dialects (as it were so many branches) are
drawn. Now these branches, or Dialects, of one Mother tongue, have some
affinity one with another; but between the Mother tongues themselves is neither
affinity, nor any correspondence.

The Mother tongues which are so wholly different one from another, are Eleven
in number; whereof four are more noble, the other seven of less dignity: Those
we call the greater, These the lesser Mother tongues. The same word in the
original tongue, by diverse inflexious and variations makes diverse Dialects: e.
g. The Latin call a Son-in-law Gener, the Italian Genero, the Spanish Yerno,
the French Gendre.

The four chief Mother tongues, (as some say) are Latin, Greek, Dutch, and
Slavontan: the seven lesser Mother Languages are

1. The Albanian, of a people in the mountains of Epirus. 2. That of the
Cossaches, and Tartars. 3. The Hungartans, who came out of Asia into Europe,
with the Huns. 4. The Language of the people of Finland, near to which is that
of Lapland. The fifth is the Irish. The sixth is the Welsh. And the seventh is
Biscay. But
There are three Tongues which are in a more especial manner famous over all
the world, The Latin, Greek, and Hebrew: The first Propter regnum, because of
the Monarchy of the Romans; who as they subjected the people, whom they did
conquer, to their Laws and Customs, so did they force them to learn their
Language. The second Propter Doctrinam, because in it, the great Philosophers,
and Wise Men of the world, left the Monuments of their Wisdom and Learning to
posterity. The third Propter Deum, because in it God delivered his Law, and the
Interpretation of it by Moses and the Prophets, to the people of Israel his
Chosen. The Latin is a common tongue; the Greek a copious tongue; but Hebrew
the most ancient and holy Tongue; for antiquity, the tongue of Adam; for
sanctity, the tongue of God. In this tongue God spoke to the Patriarchs and
Prophets; in this tongue Angels spoke to men; in this tongue the Prophets wrote
the Old Testament; and in this tongue, it is thought, shall the Saints speak,
and sing Praises unto God in Heaven.

Thirdly, observe, that there have been some learned men in all chief
Languages; as

1. In Hebrew, Moses, David, Solomon, Isay. 2. In Greek, Homer, Plato,
Herodotus, Demosthenes. 3. In Latin, Cicero, Caesar, Salust, Virgil. 4. In
Italian, Boccace, Petrarch, Ariesto, Tasso. 5. In Arabic, Aben-rois, Eldebag,
Avicen, Ibnu-farid. 6. In Dutch, Peuther, Luther, Bucer, Butrick. 7. In
Spanish, Guevara, Boscan, Granada, Garcilaco. 8. In French, Marot, Amyot,
Rousard, Plessic. 9. For England and Scotland, I dare not presume to namo four
of each, lest every one should tell me, That there were many fours as excellent
as those.
Fourthly, observe, that teachers of Tongues and Languages should be prized;
and the study of tongues should be encouraged. David made a Statute in Israel,
that they who tarried by the Stuff, should have equal share with those who went
to battle. The Professors of the Tongues are they who keep the stuff, and they
should be as well rewarded, as they who go into the field, and fight in the
Ministry.

Fifthly, observe, that it is hard to alter the Language of a Land. William the
Conqueror caused the Laws of our Land to be set down in French, and all
pleadings at Law to be in French, and children at Schools to be taught only
that Language, thinking thereby to alter our Mother tongue into French, but was
not able to do it. Now as it is difficult, to change the tongue of a Land, so
it is no easy matter, for a siranger to speak a Language as perfectly as a
Native: whence The phrastus, for speaking too much the mere Athenian tongue,
was of a simple old woman known not to be of Athens.

SECT. II. Of Spiritual and Extraordinary Tongues.
Concerning these Tongues, mentioned Acts 2.3. I will propound six Quaeres.

Qu. 1. From those words, And there appeared unto them Cloven Tongues, etc. it
may be demanded, Why were Tongues given?

Ans. 1. For the pulling down of Spiritual Babel.

2. For building up the mystical Jerusalem: and therefore he who employeth his
tongue, in furthering the false Church, and hindering the true, had better have
no tongue in his head; for such a tongue is set on fire from Hell, not from
Heaven.

Qu. 2. How may Ministers know, whether they have the gift of Tongues or not?

Ans. 1. If their Tongues be the Pens of a ready Writer, and that they can
readily speak of the things which they have made unto the King, preaching in
season and out of season, Psalm. 45.2.

2. If their Tongues be not double, but cloven Tongues, able to divide the Word
of God aright, and to give every man his portion in due season; that is, mercy
to whom mercy belongs, and judgment to whom judgment.

3. If their cloven Tongues be of Fire; that is, used rather to gain souls,
than to win applause, or gather wealth.

Qu. 3. Why did the Holy Ghost appear like Tongues?

Ans. 1. Because the tongue is a Symbol of the Holy Ghost proceeding from God
the Father. For as the tongue has the greatest cognation, and nearest affinity
with the Word, and is moved by the word of the heart, to express the same by
the sound of the voice: so the Holy Ghost has the nearest affinity that can be
with the Word God, and is the expresser of his voice, and the Speaker of his
mind, and will unto us.

2. Because as the Tongues are the sole instruments of knowledge, which convey
the same from man to man; (for though the Soul be the fountain from whence all
wisdom springs, yet the Tongue is the channel, and the Conduit Pipe, whereby
this wisdom and knowledge is communicated and transferred from man to man:) so
the Holy Ghost is the sole Author and teacher of all truth. For though Christ
be the Wisdom of God, yet the Holy Ghost is the teacher of this wisdom unto men.

Qu. 4. Why did the Holy Spirit manifest himself in the likeness of Fiery
Tongues?

Ans. 1. To show his affinity with the Word, such as is between the fire and
light; the Word is the true light which enlightneth every man that comes into
the world; and there the Spirit descended in the likeness of fire.

2. To show, that as by the tongue we taste all corporal meats, drinks, and
medicinal potions, so by the Spirit we have a taste of all spiritual things.

3. To teach us, that as by the Tongue we speak, so by the Spirit we are
enabled to utter Magnalia Dei, the wonderful works of God, and the Mysteries
of his Kingdom, Matthew. 10.20.

Qu. 5. Whether was this true fire or not?

Ans. The fire by which these Tongues were enlightened, was not earthly, but
heavenly: and therefore it is there ( Acts 2.3.) said, As of fire.

Qu. 6. How was the multitude of Tongues and Languages a punishment, at the
destruction of Babel, when the diversity of Tongues is promised, Mark 16.17.
and performed to the Apostles, Acts 2.3. and Apostolical Church, as a great,
and rare gift, of the good Spirit of God?

Ans. It was not the multitude of Tongues, but the confusion of Languages,
without understanding one another, which was the punishment of their pride. But
the gift of Tongues was a power given miraculously to the Apostles whereby they
were enabled to speak diverse tongues, to their own understanding, and the
understanding also of others. Whilst the people built Babel, Genes. 11. they
were struck with such confusion of speech, that one could not tell what another
meant, as by Dubartas is elegantly expressed in these Verses.

Bring me, quoth one, a Trowel, quickly, quick:
One brings him up a Hammer. Hew this Brick
Another bids, and then they cleave a tree.
Make fast the rope, and then they let it flee.
One calls for Planks, another Mortar lacks:
They bring the first a Stone, the last an Age.
One would have Spikes, and him a Spade they give.
Another asks a Saw, but gets a Sieve.
Thus crossly crossed, they prate, and point in vain;
What one has made another marrs again.
Nigh breathless all, with their consused yawling,
In bootless labor, now begins appawling.
But it was not thus with the Apostles; for at the Feast of Pentecast, they
spoke the wonderful things of God in tongues which were understood both by
themselves, and by those also of those tongues, and languages, as we see Acts
2. The confusion of Languages at Babel was a punishment, and that a great one,
sent for the scattering of the people through the whole world; but this
knowledge of new tongues, was a gracious gift, given for the gathering of the
Church; for by the benefit of this gift, the Gospel was preached to every
creature, and all Nations were gathered unto the unity of Faith. But of this
more fully afterward, Chapter VI.

SECT. III. Of Natural, Corporal, and Ordinary Tongues.
In these we may observe, I. Some things in the Dostrinal Part, for the
informing of our judgment. And II. Some things in the Practical Part, for the
directing of our Lives.


CHAP. II. The Doctrinal Part.
IN this Part, I will

1. Divide Tongues; Paragraph I. Then 2. Hint at some things concerning the
Tongue in general; Paragraph II. Then 3. Treat of Evil Tongues in particular;
Paragraph III. And 4. Of Good Tongues; Paragraph IV.
Paragraph I.
In the Word of God, I read of five sort of Tongues; as

I. There are spiritual and supernatural tongues, Mark 16 7. Acts 2.3, 4. II.
There are Wise tongues, Prove. 12.18. III. There are Religious tongues, 2 Samuel
23.2. IV. There are Stammering tongues, Isa. 32 4. and 33.19. V. There are
wicked and naughty tongues, as namely, 1. Crafty and deceitful tongues, Job
15.5. and 20.12, 16. Psalm. 50.19. and 52.4. and 120.2. Mich. 6.12. 2.
Flattering tongues, Psalm. 5.9. Prove. 6.24. and 28.23. 3. Mischievous tongues,
Psalm. 10.7. and 52.2. 4. Naughty tongues, Prove. 17.4. 5. Froward tongues, Prove.
10.31. 6. Double tongues, 1 Timothy 3.8. 7. Perverse tongues, Prove. 17.20. 8.
Muttering tongues, Isa. 59.3. 9. Lying and salfe tongues, Psalm. 109.2. and
120.3. 10. Cruel and revengefull tongues, Psalm. 57.4. and 64.3.8. Jerem. 9.3.8.
11. Backbiting tongues, Psalm. 15.3. 12. Proud, presumptuous, and boasting
tongues, Psalm. 12.3, 4. and 73.9.

Paragraph II.
Concerning the Tongue of Man in General, I will only in this Doctrinal Part
observe five things.

1. That it is called, Glory, Psalm. 30.12. That my glory may praise thee. For
the full understanding of that place observe, that (...) the Hebrew word there
used, signifies to be honored; hence the Adjective (...) signifies honorable,
or honored; and the Substantive (...) honor; and the Participle, honored.
Now some read those words Adjectively, for honored, as if the Kingly Prophet
had said, Every good man, O Lord, will sing to thee, and endeavor to set forth
thy praise. But some more truly read them Substantively, Glory; as Hierome,
the 70. Tremellius, and the old Latin Bible; and thereby is meant the Tongue;
as Usal. 16.9. and 57.8. and 108.3. Genesis 49.6. And the reason hereof is either,

First, Because God is to be glorified with the tongue. Or, because

Secondly, the tongue is the glory and honor of men. Or,

Thirdly, because the Tongue is a treasure, and (...) is often taken for
riches. From this name Glory given unto the tongue, we may learn, That God is
not only to be worshipped with the heart, but with the tongue also, Romans 10.10.
Psalm. 35.28. and 66.17. and 119.171. Now the reasons hereof are these six:

I. Because we owe our selves wholly unto God, and therefore our tongues should
praise him, as well as the rest, Romans 12.1. and 1 Cor. 6.19.20. and 2 Cor. 7.1.

II. Because Vox Index animi, the tongue is the Interpreter, and Index of the
mind, Matthew. 12.34, 35.

III. Because the tongue is ordained for the glory of God, and the glorifying
of him, Jam. 3.9. and therefore we abuse the tongue if we dishonor God
thereby, or therewith.

IV. Because our Brethren are to be edified with our tongues.

V. Because we incur danger by our tongues; for we must give account for every
idle word, Matthew. 12.37. And therefore we must keep our tongues, Prove. 13.3.
and 21.23.

VI. Because the tongue is a powerful member; life and death being in the
power of the tongue, Prove. 18.21.

1. The tongue is powerful unto evil; hence it is called, a swords point,
Prove. 12.18. a sharp sword. Psalm. 57.^. a sword and a dart, Psalm. 64.3. a
scourge, Job 5.21. a knife, Psalm. 52.2. a sharp arrow, and burning coals, Psalm.
120.4. a serpent, and poison, Psalm. 140.3. and an Aspe, or Viper, Romans 3.13.

2. The tongue is powerful unto good; hence it is called, A tree of life,
Prove. 15.4. and therefore David prays, that the Lord would open his lips, that
his tongue might set forth his praise, Psalm. 51.15.

2. Observe what the Tongue is, both in regard of the beart and life; namely,

I. In regard of the life, Nazianzen says, Lingua dimidiam humanorum vitiorum
partem sibi vendicat: half the wickedness that man commits, the tongue is
guilty of. Bisil. in Psalm. 32. goes further, saying, Tota vita nostra Linguae
delict is est reserta; all the crimes committed by us, through the whole course
of our Lives, may be justly charged upon the tongue.

II. In regard of the Heart, Ambrose says, Lingua ^st speculum mentis, index
animi: the tongue is the Index, Interpreter, and glass of the mind, for out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. The strokes in Music answer to
the notes that are pricked in the rules. The Anatomists teach, that the Heart
and Tongue hang upon one string. And hence it is That as in a Clock or Watch,
when the Wheel is moved, the Hammer strikes, so the words of the Mouth answer
to the motions of the heart: and when the heart is moved with any perturbation,
passion or affection, the hammer beats upon the bell, and the Mouth sounds,
Psalm. 45.1. Romans 10.10. Luke 6.45. The reason, why so many are tongue-tied in
their devotions to God, is, because they are hide-bound in their hearts; they
cannot bring forth without, because they have no stock within; their words
stick in their Mouths, because they have no form in their hearts. When the Pump
goes, we shall soon know what water is in the Fountain, whether clear or muddy;
when the Clapper strikes, we may guess what metal is in the Bell. Thus the
tongue of man becomes the Interpreter of his heart; the inward motions of the
mind have vent at the mouth, as sparks from a furnace, and the Souls
conceptions are brought forth by its busy Midw^sry. The Tongue is the Key that
unlocks the hearts Treasury, out of whose abundance it speaks; so that the
corruption of men's minds (not much unlike the inflammation of a Fea^er)
ordinarily breaks forth, and blisters upon the tongue. He who is rotten in his
heart, is commonly rotten in his talk; and as evil words corrupt good manners,
so they also discover corrupt manners; as a soul stomach bewrayes it self in a
stinking breath, so does a wicked heart in wicked communication: and on the
other side, As a Parrot is known by speaking like a man, so by sanct fied
discourse, we are known to be spiritual; for where grace is in the heart, it
will manifest it self in holy, heavenly, and savoury speeches.

3. Observe, when we must hold our tongues, and when not: namely,

I. We must held our tongues,

1. When the Lord talks and disputes with us, Job 6.24. 2. When our betters
are in presence; or, when our Superiors are speaking, Job. 29.0.
II. We must nor hold our tongues,

1. When we see the people of God in danger of perishing, Hesth. 7.4, etc. 2.
When we ought to sing praises unto God, Psalm. 137.6.
4. Observe here one difference between a Wise man and a Fool; the wise man
has his tongue in his heart, and therefore knows when to speak, and when to
be silent; but the Fool has his heart in his tongue; for a Fools tongue is
like the Buoye of an Anchor, you shall find his heart by it wheresoever it lies.

5. Heathens will teach us. Why God, or Nature, or the God of Nature, has
given us but one tongue. Zeno hearing a young man full of words, said, Aures
habemus duas, and os unum, ut plura audiamus, loquamur perpauca, Laert. lib. 7.
We have two ears, and one tongue, to teach us to hear much and speak little.
Dem^sthenes being asked, Que causa esset unius tantum linguae, and geminarum
aurium? Why man had two ears, and but one tongue? answered, Quoniam duplo magis
audire homini expedit, quam loqui. Stob. Because men should hear as much more
as they speak. Anaragoras reading a Lecture to his Scholars, of the frame of
Man's body, said, Nature has given us two feet, two hands, two eyes, two ears,
and but one tongue; to teach us, that in our going, feeling, smelling, hearing,
and seeing we may be as long as we will, but in speaking we should be as scant
and sparing as is possible.

Paragraph III. Of Evil and Abusive Tongues.
Concerning these Tongues, five things may be observed, or considered.

1. A Popish Author who is much delighted with the cadence of words, says,
That there are sundry sorts of Evil Tongues: viz.

Lingua mollis per adulationem.
Acuta per detractionem.
Rubea per incautam locutionem.
Mobilis per verborum vartationem.
Clausa per invidiam and indignationem.
For there is a Tongue Adulatorum,
Dissamatorum,
Jactantium,
Duplicium,
Invidentium.


But I wave, and pass by these.

2. Consider, what an evil tongue is like, or whereunto it is compared, or
resembled, viz.

I. To a Sword, which kills Comminus, near hand, Psalm. 42.10. Jer. 18.18. Or,
as the Sword wounds, so the tongues of reproaching men cut deeply into the
credits and reputations of their brethren: but, as Pythagoras says, Gladii
plagam quam linguae leviorem esse; ille enim cerpus, haec animum vulnerat. Val.
Max. the harm done by the Sword, is much less than that which is done with the
tongue; for the Sword only wounds the body, but the Tongue the mind.

II. Because the Sword does mischief only near hand, not far off, therefore the
Tongue is compared to an Arrow, which kills Eminus for off, Genesis 49.23. and
can hit at a distance. For revilers do not ill offices only to those of the
Town or Parish where they live, but to others far remote.

III. An Evil Tongue is compared to a Razor, Psalm. 52.2. such an one as will
shave, or take off the least hair; for a reviling tongue will not only take
advantage of every gross sin committed by others, but those Peccadillo's, the
least infirmities, which others better qualified cannot so much as discern.

IV. An Evil Tongue is like unto a Serpent, which bites privily, and leaves
poison or venom in the wound; for it slanders so secretly, and with such
probability of truth, that though the wound be cured, yet Aliquid adhaerebit,
the fear will remain.

V. Pittachus said, that a man's tongue was like the Iron point of a Lance, but
a bad tongue was more dangerous than that; because the point of a Lance can
only hurt the flesh, but an evil tongue pierces the heart.

VI. A naughty tongue is like an unbridled Colt: for as it is hard to rule and
hold in an unbroken and unbridled Colt foaming and chafing in the midst of his
race: so it is much more difficult to restrain an unruly and malicious tongue.
Whence Theophrastus said, That he would sooner trust an untamed Horse, than a
wicked tongue. Nemo non metuit insidere equo infreni, at plus est periculi a
lingua essreni. Laert. l. 5. c. 2. For although men are afraid to ride a
mettled Horse without a bridle, yet they should more fear, (as more perilous)
an unbridled tongue.

VII. Pliny li. 11. ca. 25. compares an evil tongue to a Night-raven, thus; As
the unlucky howling Night-ravens, envying the rest of man, disquiet him with
their nightly ill-sounding shriekes, cries, and unpleasing notes; so a virulent
and venomous tongue does always disperse something abroad, to the disturbance
of the quiet, peace, and concord of some or other.

VIII. Chrysostom, hom. 9. op. imperf. compares a malicious tongue, to a spark
of fire; for as one spark may make a great fire, and do much mischief: so an
evil tongue is often the cause and rise of great suits of Law, and much discord.

IX. The Lord likens an ill tongue, to a Rod, Prove. 14.3. And

X. To Juniper Coals which burn most hotly, Psalm. 120.4.

3. Consider, that the Tongue is many ways abused, and the abuses of the
tongue are mostly severely punished. Note here, that men abuse their Tongues
sive manner of ways: viz. both

1. In regard of God. And 2. In regard of godliness. And 3. In regard of the
godly. And 4. In regard of themselves. And 5. In regard of their neighbor.
First, men abuse their Tongues to their hurt, in regard of God two manner of
ways. viz.

I. By using blasphemous speeches of God; as Pythagoras said, in the beginning
of one of his Books; That of God he would say nothing, whether there were any
or none; for which words he was banished by the Athenians. Some children
sitting together at the School, fell into communication of God, and what he
was; one said, He was a good old Father; to whom another named Dennis Benfield,
a little girl replied. He is an old doting Fool; which Girl going the next
day to the Market, as she came home, she was so stricken, that all one side of
her was black, and she became speechless, and so died. For.

II. Men abuse their Tongues, in regard of God, by swearing, and blasphemous
Oaths. In the time of our K. Edward 6. the story is note worthy, of that
profane young Gallant, who being notoriously given to swearing and
blaspheming, and despising all Christian admonition, would say, that three
words before his death would save him. One day riding with company, swearing
and blaspheming as he was wont, his Horse leapt over a Bridge into an arm of
the Sea: whereupon his man seeing him in imminent danger of drowning, cried to
him, Master, Master, remember your three words; who presently cried out, Horse
and man and all to the Devil, and then sunk, and neither of them was ever more
seen. For. Again, there was a Serving man in Lincolnshire, who was always
wont to swear, Gods precious blood, and that for every trifle; and though he
were often reproved for it, yet he still persisted in his wickedness, until
the Lord struck him with sickness; yea then he could not amend, but hearing one
day the Church Bell tolling, when the anguish and pangs of death were upon him,
starts up in his Bed, and swore, By Gods blood this Bell tolleth for me:
whereupon immediately the blood issued from all his joints, not one free, in
great abundance, and so miserably died. Peter Stubs Book Printed, 1531.

Secondly, Men abuse their tongues, ludendo cum sanctis, by jeasting with holy
things; as Cavalier Casio the Bolognian Poet, wore in his hat, in a great
Agate, the descension of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles; and being demanded
of Pope Clement, (with whom he was very familiar) wherefore he wore that Dove,
representing the Holy Ghost, and the fiery tongues upon the heads of the
Apostles? he answered, Not for any devotion, but to express a conceit of love.
For having been long enamoured of a Lady, and ungratefully handled of her, not
able any longer to support her crafty delays, nor the expenses bestowed on
gifts and presents, I figured the Feast of Pentecost, meaning thereby, I repent
of the cost bestowed on my Lady. Thus he durst dally with this high mystery.

Thirdly, as men abuse their tongues, in regard of God, and Godliness, or holy
things, so also in regard of the godly; and that three manner of ways: viz.

I. By false accusations; thus three men conspired against Narcissus Bishop of
Jerusalem, a man who led a godly and blameless life; and charged him with a
very heinous crime, all three confirming their accusation by oath:

The first wished, If it were not so, as they said, that he were burnt; this
wish presently came to pass, for his house in the night being set on sire, he
and his whole family were burned.

The second wished, that he might die of the Jaundice; and presently after was
taken with the same disease from head to foot, and died thereof.

The third wished, that he might lose his eyes; who after seeing what was
befallen those twain, repented and confessed the conspiracy against Narcissus,
but by excessive weeping for his wicked oath, he at last lost his eyes. Eusebius.
li. 6. ca. 8.

II. Men abuse their tongues in regard of the Godly, by mocking them in their
Christian speeches: e. g. In the days of Qu. Mary, as James Abbeyes was led by
the Sheriff to execution, he distributed his money and clothes, (to his shirt)
to the poor, exhorting them to stand fast in Religion, and entreating them to
pray for him. A servant of the Sheriffs mocked him, bidding the people not to
regard his speeches, he being but a mad heretic, with such like terms; and as
one continued in his godly admonitions, so the other persevered in his
blasphemies. Now this godl^ Martyr was no sooner burnt, but the blasphemer was
struck with a frenzy, by Gods hand, and ran about the Town of Bury, pulling
off his clothes, and casting them away, and crying, Thus did James Abbeyes, the
true servant of God, he was a good man, and is saved, but I am damned: and thus
continued till he died. Fox.

III. Men abuse their tongues in regard of the Godly, by reviling, miscalling,
and slandering of them: as one Leaver, a Plough-man, railing against that good
Martyr, said, That he saw the ill-favored Knave Latimer, when he was burned,
and that he had teeth like a Horse; at which time and hour as near as could be
gathered, the son of the said Leaver desperately hanged himself. Fox. Now as
the North wind drives away the rain; so does an innocent Life the slandering
tongue. For, as Hierom says, An Arrow shot from a Bow sticks not in the hard
Rock, but rebounding back again with violence, hurts him who shot it: and
therefore none should slander the innocent. As he does ill who sets a house on
fire, and he also, who when he may quench it, does not, but much more he, who
coming to the flame, warmeth himself at it: so he does evil, who speaks
wrongfully evil of others; and he also who does not silence a slanderous
tongue, when he may; but much more he, who takes occasion, by a detracters
words, to spit forth more poison of defamation against the godly.

Fourthly, men abuse their tongues in regard of Themselves three manner of
ways; viz.

I. The abuse of the tongue is taught, Ephesians 4.29, 30, 31. where we see that
corrupt communication grieves the good Spirit of God; and by such words, we
give place unto the Devil; and hurt both others and our selves.

II. Men abuse their tongues, by ungodly acclamations, speeches, and cries; for
crving out is an abuse of the tongue, and it oftentimes happens through great
choler and anger, Ephesians. 4.31. In the days of K. Edward 6. certain English
Soldiers, being by a tempest cast upon the Sands, on the coast of France, gave
themselves to prayer, and commended their Souls to God, as in so great danger
it was meet; but one amongst the rest desperately and profanely minded, went
apart, and cried out saying, twice, or thrice, O Gallows claim thy right. Now
the said party (as God would have it) escaped the present danger among the
rest, and living some short space in France, after a while returned into
England, where within six months he was hanged for stealing of Horses. Perkins.
A Spanish Soldier being angry with his wife, who was great with child, wished
that she might bring forth an infernal Devil; soon after she was delivered of a
Son well and right shaped in the lower parts, but most misshapen in the upper;
for the eyes were in the forehead, the mouth wide, black and gaping, the ears
long and hanging down, like a Hounds, on the head two crooked Horns, and the
shape of the upper parts, not much unlike a Satyr. Wierus.

III. Men abuse their tongues by vaunting, boasting, and vainglorious
speeches: as Xerres once said, That if the Sun and Moon would not obey him, he
would surely punish them: for which proud words, an handful of Grecians
subdued a vast Army of his. Thus when Sophocles sent Ajax to fight against
Troy, he bid him fight, but withal to pray to God for victory; no said Ajax,
Deo vincant ignavi, Let Cowards overcome by Gods helping hand, but I will
subdue my enemies by my own power.

Fifthly, men abuse their tongues in regard of their Neighbors, or of Others,
six manner of ways; viz.

I. By bitter speeches; as when men who be at variance, give out grievous words
one against another, Prove. 12.18. Ephesians. 4.31. II. By wrangling and contentious
speeches; as when between parties disagreeing, neither will yield, but both are
obstinate, Phil. 2.14. III. By threatening speeches, or menacing words against
others, Ephesians. 6.9. IV. By girding and taunting at others, by close and secret
nips, although there be no open railing. V. By back biting: as Psalm. 15.3. He
who backbiteth not with his tongue, etc. By these words the Kingly Prophet
would teach us, that the wantonness and wickedness of the tongue, is a vice too
vulgar, and universal, and excludes men from the Kingdom of God, Jam. 3.2.
Psalm. 15.3. Now the reasons hereof are these two. 1. Because words seem to hurt
less than deeds, therefore men more usually, and universally sin by word than
deed. 2. Because men ordinarily and naturally do rather give way to fained
excuses, than to many other sins.
VI. Men abuse their tongues to the prejudice of others, by rash,
inconsiderate, unadvised, and tatling speeches: as the City of Athens was taken
by Sylla the Roman Dictator, who by his Spies was admonished, of the prattling
of certain old men, in a Barbers shop, where they talked of a certain place of
the Town, which was weakest, and worst defended; upon which information Sylla
with all his force, assanlted the City in that place, and took it. The
unadvised talk of one only man, was the cause why Rome was not delivered from
the tyranny of Nero, and why many were put to death by him. For that man seeing
one of the prisoners that was taken by the Tyrant, to be dismayed, because he
should be put to death, willed him to pray to God, that he might escape but
until the morrow only, and then he should have cause of rejoicing. The
Prisoner to save his own life, declares and reveals those words to Nero, who
thereupon suddenly seized upon the Conspirators, and put them to death. Thus we
have seen, how many sundry ways, the Tongue of man is abused, and how severely
the abuses of the tongue are punished.
Qu. 1. Does the abuse of the Tongue deserve Hell fire, or destroy the soul?

Ans. 1. Our Savior says, Matthew. 5.22. Whosoever shall call his Brother fool,
shall be in danger of hell fire.

Ans. 2. Pomerius says, Convitia, reproachful words, are venial sins when they
are thus qualified: I. When they are given by Superiors, by way of correction
or reproof. II. When they proceed not from hatred, but from the levity of the
mind. III. When they proceed from a smallor light anger, and not from
unbridled, or immoderate rage. IV. When they proceed from no desire of
disgrace; that is, although a man use some reproachful or disgraceful words
unto his brother in his anger, yet he does it not with a purpose or intent to
disgrace him. V. When by the reproachful words which are given, our brother is
not much disgraced.


Ans. 3. Pomerius says, Maledicta, evil speeches and maledictions are but
venial sins, when thus occasioned, or uttered.

1. When they proceed from a good cause, or some call from God. 2. When they
are pronounced against, or reflect upon him only, who has deserved to be evil
spoken of. 3. When they are occasioned for a trifle, or a matter of no great
moment. 4. When they are from a sudden undeliberated heat of passion. These
respects, Pomerius thinks, do so allay, and qualify the poison of the tongue,
that it will not prove mortal unto us.
Ans. 4. We have a more sure Word of Prophecy to resolve, and establish us in
this particular, than the opinion of an erring Papist, and that is the Word of
God, which teaches us, what to think of railing, reproachful, and cursed
speeches, by these four particulars.

I. The Scripture commands us, if we desire to approve our selves to have put
on Christ, then to put on the virtues contrary to such speeches; as Coloss.
3.12, 13. But on therefore as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another; and
forgiving one another. All these are contrary or opposite to reproaches, and
evil speakings; and therefore if the one be commanded, then the other is
forbidden: if one be an argument of an Elect Vessel, the other is of a
reprobate, at least for the present. And therefore whether simply taken, or
according to Pomerius his qualifications and restrictions, they are no venial
sins.

II. The Scripture prohibits these, Ex consequenti, by a necessary consequence:
Ephesians. 4.21. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good, etc. that you grieve not the Holy Spirit of God. Now none will
deny, but that reviling and wicked speeches, are corrupt communication, at
least tend not to edification, but rather offend God. The Apostle seems plainly
thus to argue; Those speeches which are corrupt, and edify not the hearers,
are displeasing to the pure Spirit of God, and become not Christians: But
railing, reviling, and reproachful speeches are corrupt, and tend not to
edification; and therefore they are unbeseeming Christians, displeasing to the
holy Ghost, and consequently, (in their own nature) lethal, not venial.

III. The Scripture dislikes all speeches of this kind, because they argue,
that there is neither grace in us for the present, nor hope of glory for the
time to come.

1. That man who gives way to these abusive speeches does thereby testify,
that his heart is not seasoned, or sanctified with true grace, Jam. 1.26. If
any man seem religious, and bridleth not his tongue, he deceives his own
heart, and his Religion is in vain.

2. That man is as yet no heir of glory, 1 Cor. 6.10. Be not deceived, for
railers and revilers shall never enter into the Kingdom of God. I conclude this
particular with this plain Syllogism. That which excludes us both from grace
and glory, is mortal and not venial; but railing, reviling, and reproachful
words, (not being repented of) exclude us both from the participation and
possession of grace, and all true hope of glory; therefore they are no venial
sins.

IV. These kind of speeches are directly and positively forbidden by God in
his Word; and therefore are no venial sins in their own nature, 1 Pet. 2.1.
Ephesians. 4.31.

Qu. 2. Why do the abuses of the tongue destroy the Soul? or, why shall they be
punished with Hell fire?

Ans. 1. Because the tongue was given us for other ends, and speech is only
naturally given to men, and that for this end, that thereby they might perform
those duties which God requires of them: viz.

I. We must bless and praise God with our tongue, Jam. 3.9. II. We must confess
Christ with our tongue, Romans 10.10. III. We must invocate, and supplicate the
throne of grace for mercy, with our tongue. IV. With our tongue we must confess
our sins unto God. V. We must speak the truth with our tongue, and hold forth
the truth in our words VI. We must edify our brethren with our tongue, and by
our words and talk, endeavor to benefit and better others, Ephesians. 4.29. Coloss.
4.6. These (...) duties God requires of us, and for the performance of these
duties God in much mercy has given us (not as unto the other creatures, dumb
and silent tongues, but speaking tongues: and therefore he who shall thus far
^esr^nd the Lord of his expectation, as to make this ra^e member an instrument
of wickedness, shall be punished by the Lord, for this abuse thereof with Hell
fire.
Ans. 2. The abuses of the tongue shall be punished with Hell fire, because
such speeches are evil in themselves. Hence Michael contending with Satan
about the body of Moses, durst not use any railing speeches, but only said, The
Lord rebuke thee, Jude verse. 9. The Lord best knowing the iniquity of such
words, and how prone we are unto them, has showed his infinite mercy, and care
toward us, in the preventing of them, by the framing, fashioning, and placing
of the tongue. God does nothing in vain, and therefore he would have the sons
of men to anatomize the tongue, and to read some profitable Lecture upon every
particle thereof: e. g.

I. The tongue is placed in the head, in the midst of the senses; to teach us,
that our words must be wise, grave, weighty, and discreet.

II. The tongue is hedged, or fenced in with a double wall; viz. of earth and
of Stone; the Lips being as the earthen wall, the Teeth as a stone wall; to
teach us, that we must set a watch over our Lips, and keep our tongues as with
a bridle; yea be cautelous and circumspect in our words, that nothing may break
through our Teeth and Lips, which is either displeasing unto God, or disagreeing
unto our profession, or disgraceful unto our brethren.

III. The tongue is simple and undivided: men not being like Serpents double or
cloven tongued; to teach us, that we must speak the truth always for truth is
but one, and we have but one tongue, and therefore it should always utter the
truth.

IV. The tongue is tied below, but has no ligaments above; to teach us, that
our tongues must be much more prone and ready to speak of heavenly and
celestial things, than of terrestrial and earthly: frequent in discoursing of
those things which are above, but more sparing of those which are below.

V. The tongue is of a soft, not hard, cauly, or tough nature; to teach us,
that our words must be mild. soft, gentle, and not proud, reproachful, cruel,
disdainful, and the like. These and the like things the Lord would have us to
ruminate upon, in our tongues, that so it may be a means to make us more wary
of our words we being naturally so prone to break forth (upon all occasions and
provocations) unto unchristian speeches, which are both displeasing to our
Father, hurtful to our Brother, and mortal to our selves. And therefore if we
would not defile our tongues, provoke our God, extinguish Grace, grieve the
Spirit, and inflame and kindle the sire of Hell, for the burning of our selves,
we should carefully abstain from all railing, reviling, and reproachful words;
not saying in our anger unto our Brother, either Racha, or thou Fool. And as
all Sailers are wont to have all dangerous Places noted and deciphered in their
Maps, by which their Ships might be endangered, and hazarded, that they may
avoid them; so we ought to have all kind of corrupt speeches noted, and set
down, that our tongue may not offend in, or be endangered by any of them. Thus
much for the abuses of the tongue.

^. Consider the nature of a naughty tongue, in these seven particulars.

1. It declares and discovers the whole Malice and rottenness of the heart,
Matthew. 12 34. 2. There is no sort of sin, but in some regard or other at least,
the tongue Fath some hand, or acts some part, Jam. 3.8. 3. The tongue is a more
ready instrument for the acting and exercising of any wickedness, than the
other members of the body are, Jam. 3.5. The Adulterer cannot act his
wickedness without a companion, nor the murderer without some bloody instrument
or other, etc. but the evil speaker has always a weapon ready, and an
occasion to use it, is never long wanting. 4. The tongue has a double
naughtiness; for it both kindles wrath, and is wrathfully kindled, Jam. 3.6. 5.
It is very hard to bridle it, Jam. 3.8. 6. It pierces deep, and wounds to the
quick, Prove. 12.18. and 18.8. and 2^.22. Psalm. 120.3, 4. and 140.2, 3. 7. The
malice, and biting of a venomous tooth, does so rankle, and fester, that it is
very hardly cured, Prove. 30.14. Jam. 3.8. ^ssundit mala Lingua v^^us atrum.
Virgil. Maxima pars invid^ae nascitur ex intemperantia linguae. Erasm.
5. Consider, that as an evil, slanderous, and perverse tongue is a sign of a
very wicked man, Psalm. 52.2. so to speak well of none, but ill of all, is a
sign of a very wicked tongue. It is commonly known, that Scarabs and Flies
swarm to the galled part of a poor Pack-horse, and there sit feeding upon that
worst part of his flesh, not once meddling with the other sound part of his
skin. Just thus do the malicious tongues of Detractors; for if a man have any
infirmity in his person or actions, that they will be sure to gather unto, and
dwell upon; whereas his commendable parts, and well deservings, are passed by
without mention, without regard. Now what do they get by this? It must needs be
a filthy creature, that is always feeding on stinking carrion. Pl^^y not.
hist. l. 7. c. 2. makes mention of a certain people in the Indies, upon the
River Ganges, called Astomi, who have no mouth, but do only feed upon the smell
of Herbs, Flowers, etc. Though the truth of this may be uncertain, yet this is
most sure, that there is such a generation amongst us, who when they should
speak well, are like men possessed with a dumb Devil, and have no Mouth, no
Lips, no Tongue at all: but if it be to blaspheme God and the King, or to
back-bite and slander their neighbor, they have tongue enough and to spare.

Thus much for Evil Tongues.

Paragraph IV. Of Good Tongues.
The Popish Author, mentioned before concerning E^il Tongues, does thus (after
his manner) de cribe Good ones. Lingua est Mollis and delicata,
Rubea and colorata.
Acuta, and more gladii figurata,
Plicabilu, and ad movendum quam.
Plurimum applicata,
Inclusa, and dentium circuitu vallata.


And therefore the language of our Lips should be Mollis p^r benig nitatem,
Colorata per honest ^^em,
Acuta per severitatem,
Plicabilis per sagacitatem,
Inclusa per custodiae sedulitatem.


Or, the Tongue of our Discourse should be Mollis per compassionem,
Rubea per dil^ctionem,
Acuta per correctionem,
Plicabilis per discretionem,
Clausa per coerctionem.


But passing by these jingles, we may say, That the virtues of a Good Tongue
are these five:

1. Verity, or veracity, whereby we embrace and love all true sayings and
sentences, in Religion, Arts, and Sciences; and in all our talk, and
conversation, speak the truth, and what i^ agreeable to the matter in hand,
carefully, and conscientiously, in all our serious discourses, avoiding all
l^es, false opinions, and vain Sophistry.

II. Constancy which constantly professes, retains, maintains, and defends the
truth.

III. Humility; when it is d^cible, not arrogantly speaking of it self, nor
obstinately defending any untruths, or false opinions but professing our
willingness to learn of others to be admonished by others, and to yield to
those who will teach us better, if we have erred either in our talk, or tenants.

IV. Taciturnity; when we do not unadvisedly talk and tattle of every secret,
and weight truth in all places, or before any persons, but know when it is
fitting to speak, and when to be silent.

V. Vrbanity; when all our words are humane, civil, courteous, meek, mild, and
gentle. Thus much for the Doctrinal Part.

CHAP. III. The Practical, and Applicative Part.
IN this Part, or Chapter, we have three things to consider of: 1. Who are to
Blame in regard of the Tongue, Sect. I. 2. What we may Learn from the Tongue,
Sect. II. 3. What is Required of us in regard thereof, Sect. III.


SECT. I.
Those are to Blame, in regard of their Tongues, who any ways, or in any sort
abuse them. Now to what was said before, concerning the abuse of the Tongue, I
add, That four sort of persons are here faulty; as

First, those who in the service of God, use a strange tongue, as the Papists
do. For the justifying of their Practice, Lorinus the Jesuit says, sup.
Levit. 10. It behooves every one to handle Sacred things, Juxta ritum in
Ecclesia particulari approbatum, Lat^no Lat^nos, G^ae^o Graecos, etc. according
to the approved ri^es in every particular Church, the L^^^nes in Latin, the
Greeks in Greek, etc.

Ans. If Lorinus by the Latins understand all who were counted of the Latin
Church, viz. all who inhabit in those Western parts, as the Greek is the East
in Church, (as it is certainly his meaning) then it will fall out quite
contrary to his observation. That to use a strange tongue in the service of
God, such as is the Latin to the vulgar people, who understand it not, i^ to
bring in a str^nge Language into the Church of God, as is evident by (...) Cor.
14.4.11, etc. to 20. Upon which place Ambrese ^^^th, Tacere deb^t in Ecclesia,
qu^ ling^^ l^qu^tur quam (...): He should hold his peace in the Church, who
speaks with a tongue which himself only understands.

Secondly, those are to blame, who use their tongues to wicked purposes; as
swearing, lying, cursing, bla pheming, backbi^ing, slandering, jea^^ing which
is not convenient, and the like. And thus also,

Thirdly, are they, who are mute in good things. Fish have no tongues at all,
as other creatures have, or they have imperfect and silent tongues, according
to the Proverb, (...) P^scis, as mute as a Fish: the reason is, because there
can be no voice uttered in the water: for the a^^^ is (...) to the making of a
sound; neither have (...) any use of the tongue for taste, because Fish without
chewing, swallow down their meat, and so seem not much to be desighted in the
diversity of tastes. Now herein they are like to Fish, who are mute and silent
in good thin^^^ ^s it was said of Arsatius, who succeeded Chry^^^^^m, and was
an old dottril of 80. years, Quem Pisces (...), ranae agilitate superabant,
whom the Fish excelled in utterance, and the Frogs in nimbleness. An^on ^^^m.

Fourthly, those are to blame, who think, that words are but wind, and they
may use their tongues as they list: as Psalm. 12.4. Our tongues are our own.
Note here, that is not true which the wicked there say; for though they say
Their tongues are their own, yet they shall one day gnaw their tongues for it
Apoc. 16.10. for their lips and tongues are not their own, but his who made
them; who though he pe^mit them ordinarily to use them at their peril, yet when
he will, he either silenceth them, or forms such words by them, as the wicked
of their own accord would never have uttered. Was Saul's tongue his own, when by
the gift of Prophecy he sounded forth the Praises of God? 1 Samuel 10.11. and
19.24. Was Pilates Wives tongue her own, when relating her dream to her
husband, she charged him to have nothing to do with that righteous o^e? Matthew.
27.19. Was Balaams tongue his own, when intending to curse, he blessed the
people of God? Numb. 24.5, 6, 7.8. Was Caiaphas tongue his own, when he
delivered that Prophecy, It is expedient that one man die for the people? Joh.
11.50, 51, 52. Was Victorinus tongue his own, who after he had long defended,
and pleaded for the gods of the Gentiles, became a forward, and faithful
Professor of Christ, and his Gospel? And therefore wicked men's tongues are not
their own.

SECT. II.
The Lessons to be learnt, from, concerning, or in regard of our Tongues, do
either respect God, or Satan, or Wicked men, or Our selves, or the Tongue it
self.

1. In regard of God, we may learn these two Lessons.

I. That all the words of the tongue are known unto God, Psalm. 139.4. II. That
the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Prove. 16.1.
2. In regard of Satan, we may learn, that his enmity is principally bent
against the tongue and speech, that being the most excellent member in the
body, Matthew. 9.32. and 12.22. Mark 9.25. Luke 11.14. Or, that Satan
principally endeavors to bind the tongue, that being an Insirument both of
Gods glory, our own good, and our brethrens edification. For

I. God is glorified by the Prayers, Praises, and pious speeches of the tongue.
And

II. We are helped thereby; the Prayers, Praises, and pious speeches of the
tongue, being means to increase Gods grace in us, to obtain blessings from God,
and to confirm us more and more in the Worship, Service, and Work of God.

III. By the Profession of the Tongue, we give a good example and encouragement
to our brethren; by our prayers for them, we may withold judgments from
them, and draw down blessings upon them; by our seasoned and sanctified
discourses, we may establish them, and ground them more and more in the most
holy Faith, and truth of Religion. And therefore Satan observing, how
profitable an Instrument the tongue is, both in regard of Gods glory, our good,
and our brethrens edification, does labor and endeavor to tie and silence it.

3. In regard of Wicked men we may learn, that their tongues are apt to evil
speaking: as Jude verse. 10. But these speak evil of those things which they
know not.

Qu Whom, or what did these wicked ones speak evil of?

Ans. 1. Some refer it to Magistrates, verse. 9.

2. Some to the Law of God, which taxed their wantonness, verse. 5.

3. Some understand it generally, because the Apostle speaks distributively,
Qu^^qu^d sit; whatsoever it is that they are ignorant of they speak evil of and
whatsoever they know, they de^^le. So that the sense and meaning is the same;
viz. They speak evil of Religion, or of their pious brethren, or of the
Magistrates themselves, or of all these. So that from hence we may learn; That
the tongue of the wicked is very prone to cursing and evil speaking: or,
cursing and evil speaking is a sign of a wicked man. For, I. It comes not from
the Holy Spirit, for he rather cools the heat, humbles the mind, and teaches
the tongue words of love. But II. It comes from Satan, Jam. 3.6. And III. It
springs either 1. From the contempt of Magistrates. Or 2. From the envy of
their brethrens praises; because they are dispraised thereby; as Commodus hated
and punished those who commended Aurelius his Father. Or, 3. From pride,
because we will not be drawn from our own judgment, Romans 12.16. Phil. 2.2. Or
4. From a wicked desire to sin. Or, 5. From the ignorance of the Law, and Word
of God.



4. In regard of Our selves, we may learn these five Lessons.

I. That if we would live long, and see good days, we must refrain our tongues
from evil, Psalm. 34.13. and 1 Pet. 3.10.

II. That Life and Death are in the power of the tongue, Prove. 18.21.

III. That he who keeps his tongue, keeps his Soul from trouble, Prove.
21.23.

IV. That as the Can^elion draws nothing into the mouth but air, and nourishes
nothing in the body but Lungs; so some are Religious only in their tongues and
discourse, not in their hearts and lives.

V. We may learn, that we must give an account for the use of our tongue, or
how we use it. The tongue is a Talent lent unto us, which we must render a
reckoning for; and therefore we m^^^ speak unto profit. Some say, we harm none
by silence, but a man may deny Christ by silence, when he professes not; and a
man kills his brother whom he edifies not, having a call thereunto. And
therefore we must learn to use our tongues aright, both in regard of God and
^en.

First in regard of God we must use our tongues;

1. In professing of him, Romans 10.10. 2. In praying to him. 3. In praising of
him. 4. In speaking of Religion, Psalm. 71 24. and 119.172. 5. In vows and
promises made religiously unto him, Psalm. 116.12.
Secondly, in regard of our Brethren, we must use our Tongues to H^aling and
Restoring words.

1. To Healing words; when our necessary Reproofs are like Salt and Vinegar,
Psalm. 141.5. Prove. 24.25. 2. To Restoring words; and that when I. We pacify
their anger, by soft answers, Prove. 15.1. and 25.1^. II. When we comfort their
sorrowful hearts, by Christian consolations, Prove. 16.24. III. When we teach
their eyes Instruction, Psalm. 51.13. Prove. 16.21, 23. and 20.15. and 31.26. IV.
When we teach their feet how to walk; 1. By exhorting them in general, Hebr.
3.13. 2. By teaching in particular: I. Those of our own Family; as Wives,
Children, and Servants. And II. Our Friends and Kindred. And III. Our
Neighbors.



5. In regard of the Tongue of man, we may learn these Lessons.

I. That it is a most unruly member, Jam. 3.5, 6.

II. That the tongue of a virtuous woman is the Law of kindness, Prove. 31.26.

III. That a soft tongue does soonest prevail, Prove. 25.15.

IV. That the tongue of the just is as choice Silver, Prove. 10.20.

V. That the tongue of the wise is health, and uses wisdom aright, Prove.
12.18. and 15.2.

VI. That a wholesome tongue is a tree of life, Prove. 15.4.

VII. That the Tongue is either a very good, or a very bad member, Laertius
tells us, li. 1. ca. 9. that Anacharsis being asked. Quid esset in homine
pessimum, and quid optimum? which was man's worst part, and which his best?
answered, Lingua, the Tongue A sop being sent by his Master, to buy all the
best Meat he could get in the Market, bought all Tongues; and being sent again
to buy all the worst, he bought again all Tongues; and being demanded, Why he
did so? answered, That no flesh was better t an a go d Tongue, nor any worse
than a bad. And most true it is, as Bias told Amasis King of Egypt, The Tongue
is the best, and worst member of the b^dy; for the most part, an unruly
mischievous member, I ambit and laedit, Plutarch. a killing and destroying
member: I ingua mali pars pessima servt, Juvenal: a dangerous weapon, and the
worst of all other weapons; for the stroke of a Sword may be born off, and the
shot of an dirow may be shunn d, or if not, the wounds may be healed; but there
is no way to escape a poisoned tongue no salve to cure it.

VIII. We may learn, that some have been punished in their tongues, for their
Virtues, some for their Vices: e. g.

1. Anthony caused the head of Cicero to be set before him, when he was at
meat; and his Wife Fulvia pulled out the tongue thereof, and wore it in her
hat, for his zeal and affection to the Commonwealth. Plutarch.

2. The Egyptians did ever cut out his tongue, who disclosed any secret, or
revealed any practico to the enemy. Diodor. Stc. And thus, as the Proverb is,
Some pay a fine for their tougue.

IX. We may learn the use of the Tongue; and that both in General and
Particular.

1. In General; men's Tongues are very useful for them; for therewith a man
does complain of his want and poverty; therewith a man does implore help and
seek remedy; and therewith a man does utter his injuries and wrongs, and
desires redress. It is an admirable thing to consider, how great variety there
is in the tongue; for with that sometimes we speak gravely, sometimes
jestingly, sometimes sharply, sometimes lovingly, sometimes harshly, sometimes
sweetly; Lingua a ligando, Rhoding. the Tongue has its name from Binding,
because a man seems to have the mind of his brother (as it were) in his hands,
or rather in his tongue, to bind or lose as he list: for sometimes with the
tongue a man does incense and exasperate his Brother, and sometimes therewith
pacify him; sometimes we persuade, and sometimes we dissuade with the tongue;
even as though it were in the power of the tongue, to make our neighbor do
what we desire.

2. The Particular Uses of the Tongue, are either Natural, Political, Moral, or
Spiritual.

First, the Natural Uses of the Tongue, are these two;

I. Lingua convenit in duo opera naturae; scilicet gustum, and loquelam: Arist.
de Anima, li. 2. Lingua est propter sapores percipiendos, and literas
exprimendas: Id. de Animal. li. 11. The tongue of man is useful for Taste, and
Speech; for Relishing what we eat and drink, and for the teaching of Arts and
Sciences.

II. The Tongue distinguishes man from all other creatures. For

1. The words of Angels are borrowed; they assuming strange bodies when they
spoke unto men, which by and by they laid aside: but men speak with their own
tongues. 2. The Sea Monsters which have the form of men, or women in part,
speak not, neither are heard to utter any language as men do. 3. The notes of
Birds are not called Words, or Speech, because they understand not.
Secondly, I inguam babet homo, ut communicet aliquid alteri. Arist. de Anima,
li. 3. The Political Use of the tongue is this, That we express our minds unto
others by our tongues. Vox index animi.

Thirdly, the Moral Uses of the Tongue are these three: 1. With our tongues we
utter hidden, and secret knowledge. 2. With the tongue we pacify and appease
wrath, Prove. 15.1. as Jacob did with Esau. 3. With our tongues we give both
sweet comfort, and sound and safe counsel unto our brethren, which very hardly
would be expressed by signs, if we were dumb.


Fourthly, the Spiritual Uses of the Tongue are these:

I. With the tongue we discourse with the Lord; as Adam, Jacob, and Moses did
often.

II. The tongue teaches God, Christ, the Gospel, and the Promises of the Word
unto us: for Preaching is the Power of God unto salvation, 1 Cor. 18.21. Romans
10.17. But there can be no preaching without a tongue or speech.

III. By the colloquies, conference, and discourses of the tongue, both divine
knowledge and grace is increased.

IV. With the tongue we glorify God, Jam. 3. and by the tongue we set forth
the praises of God, and therewith give him thanks for all his benefits. This
Use of the tongue is showed, Psalm. 45.1. My tongue is the Pen of a ready
Writer, to sing forth the praises of the King, that is, Christ: For, 1. The
tongue ought to be exercised in the praises of God, as the Scribe is exercised
in writing. And 2. The tongue should do much good in a short time, as a ready
Scribe, in a small time, can write much. And 3. The tongue must daily be
reformed and refined, as the Scribes Pen must ever and anon be amended.


Thus much for the Lessons to be learnt from, or concerning the tongue.

SECT. III.
In the last place observe, that the duties required of us in regard of the
tongue, do either respect God, or his Word, or Sin, or our Tongues.

First, in regard of God, these duties are required of us,

1. We must profess God with our tongues, Romans 10.9, 10. and 14.11. Phil. 2 11.

2. We must speak of the righteousness of God, Psalm. 35.28. and 71.24.

3. We must sing praises unto God with our tongues: Psalm. 51.14 and 6.17. and
126.2. Thus so soo^ as the Devil was cast out of the man, Muth. 9 33. the dumb
man speaks; to teach us. That being once free from Satan, we must be mute no
longer, but our mouth must be open, and our tongues loo^ed, to set forth the
Pra^^es of the Lord, 2 Cor. 4.13. Note here, what Satan attempts for our hurt,
and what Christ effects for our good

I. Satan, linguam vel compescere, vel corrumpere, Muscul. super Matthew. 9. he
will either corrupt the tongue, by corrupt and evil words, or he will endeavor
to curb the tongue, from good and gracious words. So long as the Devil is in
the heart, the tongue is fruitful in wicked words, but barren in good.

II. Christ in mercy does these two things.

1. He opens the mouth, and unties the tongue. And then 2. Does sanctify the
tongue, and make it a special instrument of Gods glory, filling it with holy
and heavenly words.
Secondly, in regard of the Word of God, these two duties are required of us.

1. To have the Lords Word in our tongue; or, to speak of his Word, 2 Samuel
23.2. Psalm. 119.172. And 2. To speak of Wisdom, Psalm. 37.30.
Thirdly, in regard of Sin, it is required of us, to put all iniquity, and
deceit from our Tongues, Job 6.30. and 27.4. Psalm. 34.13. and 39.1.

Fourthly, the duties required of us in regard of our Tongues, are either
Negative, or Affirmative.

I. The Negative duties are these two;

1. The tongue must utter nothing against God. As Gordius was led to the place
of punishment, he was exhorted by some to leave his opinion, to renounce his
Religion, and to save his life; to whom he answered, That the tongue ought to
speak nothing that is injurious to the Creator thereof. P. Diacon.

2. Chilon said, Non committendum est, ut lingua praecurreret animum; our
tongue must not run before our wit: we must, before we speak, think and
consider, what is most sitting and necessary to be spoken. ^a^rt. l. 2. c. 4.
Nescit enim vox missa reverti, there is no recalling of our words once uttered;
as the Lord Cook once said occasionally at the Council Table; Before the words
are spoken they are mine, but being once spoken they are every man's, to
interpret, and put what sense upon them he list.

II. The Affirmative duties are these three.

First, to take heed of all evil speaking; both

1. Against Magistrates. And 2. Against Ministers. And 3. Against Professors.
And 4. Against the Laws of Religion; i.e. of the Sabbath, lying, swearing,
purity, and profession.
Secondly, It is our duty, to be humbled for the iniquities of our Tongue. Note
here, that the Tongue offends against God, against our Brethren, and against
Our selves.

First, the tongue sometimes sins against God; that is, I. Against his
Truth: thus Atheists, and Heretics offend, Psalm. 14.1. and 53.1. II. Against
his Majesty; thus the blasphemer offends; and that, 1. By profaning his Name
by swearing. 2. By deriding his Word, and the Ministry thereof. 3. By scoffing
at Sabbaths, Profession and Ordinances; as Ismael and profane Esau did.
III. Against his Purity; by lascivious and wanton words, Ephesians. 4.29. and 5.3.
Col. 3.8. IV. Against his Justice and Mercy; 1. By murmuring against him. 2. By
unthankful words



Secondly, the tongue sometimes sins against our Brethren, and that

I. Against his Fame and Credit; and that 1. By calumnies, reproaches, devising
false reports, and then uttering of them. 2. By delighting to speak of true
calumnies; and divulging and publishing abroad the disgraces and infirmities of
our Brethren: whereas charity covers a multitude of sins. And 3. By scoffs,
taunts, jeers and mocks, Prove. 9.12. and 22.10.
II. Against his Person; and that 1. By rage and anger. 2. By threatening. 3. By
chiding, brawling, quarrelling, etc. Coloss. 3.8. and 1 Pet. 2.1.
III. Against his Estate, by lying, deceitful, and crafty words, Ephesians. 4.25.
Coloss. 3.9. and 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. and 1 Pet. 3.10.
Thirdly, our tongues sometimes sin against Our selves; and that, 1. By lying
jeasts, jeasting lies, and idle brags. 2. By vain, and idle words, Matthew.
12.36. 3. By sudden and rash speeches, Eccles. 5.1. 4. By multiplicity of
words, Prove. 10.19. and 17.27, 28. and 29.11. Eccles. 5.2. 5. By words tending
to treason, insurrection, sedition and rebellion, whereby our precious lives
are brought into danger.


Now for all these iniquities of the tongue, we ought to humble our selves.

Thirdly, it is our duty, to keep, curb, restrain, and bridle our tongues.
Seven things may here briefly be hinted at, viz.

I. That it is our duty, to keep our tongue with a bridle, Jam. 1.26. Or, to
accustom our tongues only to modest, loving humble, holy, and pure words. This
we shall do, if we always carry a humble and holy mind; a mind full of love;
and a mind and heart which is always obliged to the obedience of Gods Word.
Anaxagoras observes, that it is not without reason, that nature suffers the
eyes, ears, hands, face, and other parts of the body to be bare and open to the
view, whereas the tongue is environed with jaws, and mured with teeth, and
closed with lips; because hereby she would have us to understand, that there is
nothing in this life that has more need of watch and ward, than man's unbridled
tongue. And therefore we must moderate our speeches, and speak little, Eccles.
5.1. we must keep the door of our lips; Psalm. 141.3. a man should not be, Vir
labiorum, Job 11.2. a man of lips, or of much talk, but must restrain his
tongue with a bit or bridle.

II. Consider, that this is principally to be done in public meetings. Chilon
admonished. Languam cum alias semper, tum praecipue in convivio continendam,
quod ill^c cibus and potus invitet ad intemperantiam. Porro ubi plus est
periculi, ibi major est adhibenda cautio. Laert. lib. 1. cap. 4. Though the
tongue must always be carefully kept, yet more especially at public Feasts;
because plenty and variety of meats and drinks, do excite and provoke us unto
intemperance; and the greater our danger is, the more must be our care. Zeno
hearing a young man too full of tongue, and talk at a Feast, said, Aures in
linguam defluxere; that his ears had slipped into his tongue, because he spoke
more than he heard. So Demosthenes hearing another full of tongue at a great
Feast, said, Si multum saperes non multa loquereris. Stob. If thou were very
wise, thou would not talk so much as thou do.

III. Observe, that to bridle, keep and curb the tongue, is a very heard and
difficult thing. Socrates, hist. tripart. lib. 8. cap. 1. and Marul. lib. 4.
cap. 6. report a story of one Pambo, a plain ignorant man, who came to one who
was learned, and desired him to teach him some one or other of the Psalms.
Whereupon he began to read to him, Psalm. 39.1. I said, I will look to my ways,
that I offend not with my tongue. This verse being read, Pambo shut the book,
and took his leave, saying, He would go learn that point first. When he had
absented himself for the space of some months, he was demanded by his Teacher,
when he would go forward? He answered, That he had not yet learned his old
lesson; and to one who asked the like question, nine years after, he gave the
same answer. Such a hard thing it is to rule this unruly member, the tongue,
which must be kept in with bit and bridle, bolts and bars. But of Pambo another
writes, that he learnt his lesson so well, that he never spoke word which he
repented, nor which grieved any, nor at which any exception could be taken.

IV. Observe, though it be hard to bridle the tongue, yet it is good: Non alia
est melior res quam custodia linguae. Senec. yea so good, that nothing is
better in moral things.

V. Every good thing is not generally commended and praised, but to set a watch
over the lips, and to keep the tongue, as with a bridle, is a most commendable
and praiseworthy thing. Theana being demanded, What married Wife deserved most
praise? answered, She who meddles only with her rock and spindle; is faithful
to her husband, and keeps her tongue in quiet. Athenaeus. Gazeus Com. in
Cassian. relates of Thomas Aquinas, that when he was a young man, he was so
careful over his words, and watchful over his tongue, that he was called by his
fellow Scholars and Students, Bos^mutus, a dumb Ox: but Albertus Magnus
perceiving by his disputations, the greatness of his wit, and thereupon judging
to what his silence tended, gave this sentence of him, Bos^ste talem aliquando
edet mugitum, ut sonum ejus totus Orbis exaudiat. This Ox will at length make
such a lowing, that all the world shall hear the sound of it; which afterward
proved true in his Writings. Thus where the tongue is kept at a bay, and shut
up within the compass of a careful gevernment, the soul is kept from many
troubles, and the mind freed from many distractions, which do usually attend
upon intemperate talkings.

VI. This virtuous quality shall be rewarded. The heathens made Harpocrates a
God, because he could command his tongue: and this virtue leads to felicity,
because he who keeps his tongue keeps his soul.

VII. Observe that the means which we must use for the curbing of this little,
fiery, and unruly member, the tongue (which often sets on fire the whole course
of nature) are these four.

1. Rule the tongue by reason; for as Rivers have banks, that they may not
overflow; so reason is to be the stay of the tongue, that it exceed not in
talk. Again, as a bridle does direct a horse, so reason should regulate the
tongue.

2. We must study to answer, and learn to speak well, Prove. 15.28. that is, let
not our words be rash and inconsiderate, but deliberate, weighing and pondering
the nature and quality of our words before we speak.

3. We must strive and endeavor to speak mildly, gently and calmly, that our
words may pacify wrath, Prove. 15.1. and break the bone, Prove. 25.15. Frangit
ossoum, i.e. durissimum and rigidissimum: gentle and mild words will mollify
the most hard, rigid, and cross nature. Tremel. sup.

4. We must learn to speak holily and purely, Ephesians. 4.28. Col. 4.6. and so
accustom our selves to Christian conference, and religious discourse, that it
may become habitual unto us.

Thus much for this member of man's body, the tongue.

CHAP. IV. Of the Mouth.
COncerning the Mouth, I will briefly observe these four things.

First, that Mouth is referred in the Word, 1. To God, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Jer. 23.16.
Lam. 3.38. 2. To Christ, Joh. 19.29. 3. To men, Deuteronomy. 31.19, 21. 4. To Satan,
Apoc. 12.15, 16. 5. To Antichrist, Apoc. 16.13. 6. To Idols, Psalm. 115.5. and
135.16, 17. 7. To Beasts, Dan. 6.22. Heb. 11.33. Jam. 3.3. 8. To Birds, Genesis
8.11. 9. To the earth, Apoc. 12.16.


Secondly, observe, that we must put two things out of our Mouth, viz.

I. All guile. 1 Pet. 2.22. II. All filthy communication, Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 3.8.
Thirdly, observe that three sorts of persons are to blame, in regard of their
Mouths: viz.

1. Those who do not confess with their Mouths the Lord Jesus, Romans 10.9, 10.
2. Those who curse and revile with their Mouths, Romans 3.14. Jam. 3.10. 3. Those
who draw nigh unto God with their Mouths, but not with their hearts, Matthew.
15.8. Matthew. 7.6.
Fourthly, observe, that when just occasion is offered, we must open our mouth.
Note here, that the Scripture uses this phrase, when men speak deliberately
and advisedly, as Acts 10.34. Then Peter opened his mouth and said: so Matthew.
5.2. Jesus opened his mouth and taught them, etc.

Qu. Why does the Evangelist use this Periphrasis, circumlocution, or needless
phrase? Can any speak without opening of his mouth?

Ans. 1. It is an Hebraism, He opened his mouth; that is, Exorsus loqui,
Calvin. sup. He begun to speak: thus S. Peter, when he had heard upon what
occasion, and why Cornelius sent for him, Opened his mouth and said, Acts
10.34. that is, begun to preach unto them. True it is, the Jews did not always
use this phrase, of opening the mouth, when they meant to express the beginning
of a speech, but only when they were to speak of some weighty and serious
matter, as Psalm. 78.2. Prove. 31.8, 9. Open thy mouth for the dumb, yea, open
thy mouth and judge righteously; that is, be careful to speak, and plead the
poor man's cause who is oppressed. Thus Gualter, sup. thinks, that the Hebrews
only used this phrase in such cases of moment; but Beza thinks it is not
universally true.

Ans. 2. This phrase is there ( Matthew. 5.2.) used to show the original of the
Prophecies, and the predictions of the Prophets, that it was Christ, who opened
their mouths; as if the Evangelist would there say Christ now opened his own
mouth, who of old opened the mouths of the Prophets, August. S. Dom. in Monte.
Or,

3. This phrase may there be used, to show that Christ taught some, and
sometimes without opening his mouth, and that either by internal revelations,
or inspirations, or visions, or by his works, and external miracles, Chrysostom.
sup.

4. Or this phrase does show, that Christ was wont to keep his mouth shut, and
to open it only when there was need, as Psalm. 37.30. Prove. 10.11, 31. teaching
us hereby two things, viz.

I. That we ought to set a watch over our mouths. II. That we ought liberally
and freely to open our mouths, to preach the Word of God, and Gospel of Christ,
being called thereunto.
CHAP. V. Of the Lips.
COncerning lips, these five thing are considerable.

First, that lips in the Word are referred

1. To God, Joh. 11.5. and 23.12. Psalm 84.34. 2. To Christ, Psalm. 45.2. Cant.
5.13. 3. To the Church, Cant. 4.3, 11. and 7.9. 4. To Men, Deuteronomy. 23.22.
Secondly, there are sundry sorts of lips. For

1. There are deceitful lips, Prove. 24.28. And 2. Dissembling lips, Prove.
26.23, 24. And 3. Stammering lips, Isa. 28.11. And 4. Adulterous lips, Prove.
5.3. And 5. Hypocritical lips, Isa. 29.13. And 6. The lip of truth, Prove.
12.19. And 7. Perverse lips, Prove. 4.24. And 8. Lying lips, Psalm. 31.18. and
120.2. Prove. 10.18. and 12.22. And 9. Proud lips, 2 King. 19.28. Psalm. 12.4.
And 10. Joyful lips, Job 8.21. Psalm. 63.5. And 11. Flattering lips, Psalm. 12.2,
3. Prove. 7.21. And 12. Unfeigned lips, Psalm. 17.1. And 13. Cruel and
mischievous lips, Psalm. 59.7.12. and 140.3, 9.
Thirdly, two sorts of persons are here to blame.

I. Those who speak unadvisedly with their lips, Psalm. 106.33. II. Those whose
lips talk of mischief, Prove. 24.2.
Fourthly, From concerning, or in regard of the lips we may learn many lessons,
viz.

1. That our own lips must not praise us, Prove. 27.2.

2. That the lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, Prove 10.32.

3. That the lips of the righteous feed many, Prove. 10.21.

4. That he who refraineth his lips is wise, Prove. 10.19.

5. That the lips of the wise disperse knowledge, Prove. 15.7.

6. That the lips of the wise shall preserve them, Prove. 14.3.

7. That wisdom is found in the lips of him who has understanding, Prove. 10.13.

8. That the lips of the godly are full of grace, Colos. 4.6. For

1. The words show the heart, Prove. 14.7. Matthew. 12.36. Jam. 3.2. 2. The tongue
is powerful, either for good or evil, Prove. 18.20. and 15 1. Jam. 3.6. 3. A
good tongue is profitable to others, Prove. 10.21. and 16.13. and 22.11. And 4.
Preserves a man's own l^fe, Prove. 13.3. and 21.23.
Fifthly, many things are required of us in regard of our lips; as

1. To keep all the lawful promises and vows, which proceed out of our lips,
Deuteronomy. 23.23. 2. To depart from those in whom are not the lips of knowledge,
Prove. 14.7. 3. To keep knowledge with our lips, Prove. 5.2. 4. To keep our lips
from speaking guile, Psalm. 34.13. 5. To desire the Lord to keep the door of our
lips, Psalm. 141.3. 6. To declare the judgments of God with our lips, Psalm.
119.13. 7. Not to refrain our lips from speaking of the word and works of God,
Psalm. 40.9. 8. Not to speak of idolaters with delight and love, Psalm. 16.4. 9.
Not to sin, or speak wickedly with our lips, Job 2.10. and 27.4. Prove. 8.6, 7.
10. To desire the Lord to open our lips, that we may set forth his praise,
Psalm. 51.15. 11. To rejoice with our lips when we sing unto God, Psalm. 71.23.
12. To utter the praises of God with our lips, Psalm. 63.3, 5. and 119.171. or,
to praise God with the calves of our lips, Hos. 14.3. Note here, why the
Prophet there mentions only lips, The calves of our lips, which are our words:
namely,
I. Because Christ who is the Word, delights in our words.

II. Because our tongue is our glory, and that whereby we glorify God.

III. Especially because our tongue is that which excites others; it being a
trumpet of praise ordained of God for this purpose. Thus the Prophet mentions
the calves of our lips, partly because our tongue or words stir up our selves
and others, and partly because God delights in words of his own dictating.

CHAP. VI. Of Words and Speech.
I will not in this small Tractate meddle, either with the Word of God, the
holy Scriptures, or with words, talk and speech, as attributed to God, or with
the words of Christ, because all these are referred for another work. I speak
here of words and speeches only as referred to men; and will take in, and
handle these voices (they being in a manner Synonymaes) thus Alphabetically
disposed.

Commune, Communication, Conference.
Discourse, Language, Said, Sayings, Spoke,
Speech, Talk, Words.
Speech may be considered, either

First, in regard of the habit or faculty; and so it is called Language and
Speech. Sect. I. Or,

Secondly, in regard of the act or exercise. Now as thus considered, I will I.
Hint briefly at these words, Commune, Communication, Conference, Discourse.
Sect. II. Then II. Treat something more fully of these, Say, Sayings, Spoke,
Talk, Words. Herein I will observe 1. The Dogmatical and Doctrinal part. Sect.
III. 2. The Practical and Applicative. Sect. IV.



SECT. I. Of Language.
To what was said before, concerning Languages, Chap. 1. I will here add a word
or two.

Note here in the first place, that those Languages which were Propagines and
Dialects of the Hebrew, were understood by the Jews, when they heard them
spoken, and when they read them: but they understood not the strange Languages,
which had small affinity with the Hebrew. When Laban and Jacob make a covenant,
Genesis 31.47. Laban calls the heap of stones, Jegar-sahadutha, in the Aramean
tongue, which had small affinity with the Hebrew; but Jacob called it Galeed.

Object. If there was but little affinity between the Aramean language, and the
Hebrew, how is it that they say 2 King. 18.26. Speak to thy servants in the
Syrian language, for we understand it.

Ans. They might understand it, for they were Courtiers, and Statesmen, and so
learned it, as we now learn the Italian, French, and Spanish tongue. Abraham's
servant spoke to Nachor in the Aramean language, he being born in Damascus,
which was in Cylo-Syrta: and we may think that Nachor and his house understood
the Hebrew Tongue, being of the posterity of Heber, and keeping that tongue as
Abraham did, who came out of Vr of the Chaldees; because Laban there, Genesis
31.47. called the heap of stones, Jegar-sahadutha (which were Syriack words)
The heap of witness. Therefore the Hebrews say, Talmud Babylon, Let not the
Syriack tongue be vile in thine eyes, because it is found in the written Books
of the Word.

Note again, That in Israel they had sundry Dialects; as some said, Shibboleth,
others said Sibboleth; hence the Ephroimites were discerned by their lisping;
and Peter by his speech was known to be a Galilaean. Thus about Jerusalem they
had a peculiar dialect of their own, Acts 2.8. for some of them said Aceldoma,
and others Akaldama: and so Judge. 18.3. they knew the Levite by his peculiar
dialect.

Note again, Sextus Cheronensis, li. de diverse. Linguar. says, That the
Tuscanes were the first who called the natural tongue of the Country, the
mother tongue (that is, the tongue of our Mother) because we take it from our
Mother which brings us forth, and from our Nurses who give us suck; whence
Children learn to call their Nurses Mother. Now indeed, in regard of our Native
Language, the Land of our Nativity is our Mother; but in regard of Foraign
Languages, Schools, learned Authors, and Translations, are our Nurses, to whom
we are more beholden for knowledge than to our Mother; as Nolanus observes,
That by the help of Translations all Sciences had their Original. The Hebrews
hatched Knowledge, Greece did nourish it, Italy clothed and beautified it, and
the Arts which were left as Wards, in their minority, to the People of Rome, by
Translators, and elaborate Authors, like most faithful Guardians, are now come
to perfect age and ripeness.

From Scripture we may observe these three things concerning Language.

First, what is meant thereby; namely,

I. When it is named alone, it signifies any Idiom, or proper kind of speech,
spoken by any people, or Nation whatsoever: as Genes. 11.1, 6. Nehem. 13.24.
Hest. 1.22. and 3.12.

II. When Pure is added thereto; as Zeph. 3.9. then it signifies sound, and
true doctrine.

III. When Canaan is added to Language, then it signifies, either

1. The Hebrew tongue, wherein God was served by his people, while they dwelt
in Canaan. Or 2. Fellowship with Gods people in Doctrine, and Worship, Isa.
19.18.
Secondly, Observe, that at first there was only one Language, Genesis 11.1, 6.
which one universal Language was confounded and changed into many several
Languages, at the building of Babel, Genesis 11.7, 9. by the ever-blessed Trinity,
Genesis 11.8, 9. and that for the pride, arrogance, and insolency of the world,
Genes. 11.2, 3, etc.

Thirdly, Observe, how the confusion and diversity of Languages was a curse, or
punishment, seeing the variety of Tongues is promised as a rare blessing, and
singular gift of the Holy Ghost, Mark 16.17. namely,

I. The multitude and diversity of Languages, in and by it self, was not a
punishment. But

II. That confusion which was among them when one could not understand another,
Genesis 11.7, 9. etc. was the punishment.

III. There was a great difference between the confusion of Languages at Babel,
and the gift of tongues, promised and given unto the Apostles, by the Holy
Ghost. For

1. The gift of Tongues was a faculty of speaking so, as that both they could
understand themselves, and others could understand them; i. e. they could
knowingly, and with understanding speak to all people, and Nations, in their
own language, Act. 2. But at Babel one could not understand another, Genesis 11.

2. The confusion of Languages at Babel was a punishment, inflicted upon those
persons for the dispersing, and scattering of them, throughout the world; but
the gift, or knowledge of Tongues was given, for the gathering together of the
Church, Isa. 19.18. Joel 2.

SECT. II. Of these words, Commune, Communication, Conference, Discourse.
Note here, that this word Cenference

1. Sometimes signifies, to consult, and advise with, as 1 King. 1.7. Act.
4.15. and 25.12. and Gal. 1.16. And 2. Sometimes it signifies to discourse; as
Galat. 2.6.
Note again, what manner of communication, conference, and discourse we must
use; namely,

1. Yea, yea, nay, nay, Matthew. 5.37. And

2. Such as is good in it self, Ephesians. 4.29.

3. Such as may be profitable for the edification of others, Ephesians. 4.29.

4. Such as is wise and judicious, Psalm. 37.30.

5. Such as is seasonable, and suitable to the present occasions and times,
Prove. 25.11. And

6. Such as may minister grace unto the hearers. Ephesians. 4.29. For such discourse
as this, must be loved, liked, and listened unto. Plutarch. li. de animal.
tells us, that Dionysius the tyrant, being one day at his Table, discoursing
with Chrysippus of sundry Moral and Philosophical points, one presented him
with certain Sugar-cakes; whereupon Chrysippus ceased discoursing, and
persuaded Dionysius to fall to his Cakes: to whom he answered; Proceed
Chrysippus, and give not over; for my heart is better contented with thy sweet
and sugared words, than my tongue or taste can be pleased with these Cakes; for
these only please the Pallat, but good discourse does rejoice and comfort the
heart. It is said, that Junius coming into a mean Countrey-mans house, spoke so
feelingly of Christ, that the poor man perceived, knowledge only would not
suffice unto salvation; and thereupon thinking of his own condition, he was
converted truly to God.

These voices, Say, Said, Sayings, Speak, Speech, Talk, Words, I will, for
brevities sake, join together; and therein observe both the Doctrinal and
Practical Part.

SECT. III. The Dogmatical, and Doctrinal Part.
Sayings; concerning this word observe these two things.

First that this word mentioned, Luke 1.65. and 2.19. in the Original, is
(...), which in both those places signifies Things, not Words, or Speeches; as
does also (...); Luke ^^.4. Now (...) and (...) do not signify Things from the
Greek signification of those words, but from the Hebrew, because [dabar]
signifies both a Thing and a Word.

Secondly, observe, that there are four sorts of Sayings; viz. Wicked, Idle,
Good, Excellent.

I. Wicked Sayings are such, as tend either to the dishonor of God, or the
offense of our neighbors.

II. Idle Sayings are such, as neither honor God, nor profit man.

III. Good Sayings are such as do good, or at least are spoken to that end
that they might do good, or administer grace unto the hearers.

IV. Excellent Sayings are such, as the wisest men have selected, for the best
Axioms of any sentence, or the infallible principles of any Art; or the
Mottoes or Parables of the Learned, which are like the Stars of the first
magnitude in the Firmament, more remarkable than all the rest. These Excellent
Sayings are either Moral, or Theological.

First, We read of many excellent Moral Sayings; as those two of Tyranus;
(whom Aristotle for his eloquence, and utterance called Theophrastus) We may
better trust an unbridled Horse, than an unruly tongue. Again, Time well
improved is a precious treasure. Thus the sentences of the Greek Sages, were
excellent Sayings, and as such are remembered, and recorded to this very day; as

1. Of Bias; (...), wicked men are many; this not only Plato testifies in
Timaeo, but Christ also himself affirms.

2. Of Solon; (...); the End shows who are happy: and Pliny, li. 14. ca. 10.
assents hereunto, saying, One day judges another, and the last day judges all.

3. Of Chilo; (...); know thy self; this, as Plato says, de Leg. li. 3. c. 9.
was written in letters of gold upon the Portals of Apollo's Temple: and Juvenal
affirms, that it came down from Heaven; because if men knew themselves, they
would not be proud, malicious, and inordinate as they are.

4. Of Cleobulus; (...), Modus est optimus, Keep the golden mean.

5. Of Pertander; (...), all things are possible to the industrious.

6. Of Pittacus; (...), know the time, and lay hold upon the occasion. And

7. Of Thales; (...), Sponde, prope est damnum; Fly Suretiship. Though these
be wise Sayings, yet none of these, nor any saying of the Heathens, is
comparable to that of Solomon, Eccles. 12.13. Fear God, and keep his
Commandments; because to fear God, is the beginning of wisdom, and to keep his
Commandments, is the perfection of all happiness.

Secondly, Although every Saying of Scripture be faithful and worthy, yet
there are only four so called in the Word; viz.

1. Tit. 3.8. This is a true saying, That they who believe in God, must be
careful to show forth good works.

2. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13. This is a true saying, If we be dead with Christ, we
shall also live with him, etc.

3. 1 Timothy 4.8, 9. This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be
received, That Godliness is profitable unto all things, having a promise of
this life present, and of that which is to come.

4. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a true saying, and worthy to be received, That Jesus
Christ came into the World to save sinners. Two things are here considerable:
1. What a faithful saying is. 2. How it is worthy to be received.


I. Selneccerus says, Quod apud Deum est decretum and conclusum, and quod apud
homines est securum and tutum, fraudeque carens, hoc (...) est: that which is
decreed and concluded by God, that it shall come to pass, and what is sure and
certain with men, void of all ambiguity, guile, and contention, the same is a
faithful saying. And such is this, That Christ came into the World to save
sinners.

II. This saying is worthy of all acceptance; i. e. It is worthy to be Heard,
Believed, Obeyed, and Propagated.

1. Faith comes by hearing; and therefore we must hearken to this Saying, that
our souls may live. 2. We must not only hear this Saying, but we must believe
it, this being the right receiving of Christ, Joh. 1.12. 3. We must not only
say, We believe this Saying, but we must obey it also; endeavoring faithfully
to do what the Lord requires of us unto salvation. 4. We must propagate this
saying to others, That Christ came into the World to save sinners.
Talking.
Concerning this word observe, That there is a threefold Talking, viz. Literal,
Metaphorical, Ironical.

First, There is a Literal, and real talking, which is either Extraordinary, or
Ordinary.

I. There is an Extraordinary and miraculous real talking. Thus

1. God talks with man, Numb. 11.17. Deuteronomy. 5.24. etc. And 2. With, or to
Christ, Matthew. 3.17. and 17.5. John 12.28. And thus, 3. Angels talk with Man,
Judge. 6.17. And thus 4. Moses and Elias talked with Christ, Matthew. 17.3. Mark
9.4.
II. There is an Ordinary Literal, and Natural Talking: this is either Divine,
Spiritual, or Humane.

First, there is a Divine Literal, and Natural Talking: thus Christ talks, and
that both

I. With God his Father, John 12.28. and 17.17, etc. And II. With Men; that is,
1. Sometimes with his Apostles, Joh. 14 30. 2. Sometimes with a mixed multitude,
Matthew. 11. 3. Sometimes with particular persons, Joh. 4.27. and 9.37.

Secondly, there is a Spiritual literal, and Natural Talking: thus Man, I.
Sometimes talks with God, by Prayer, or verbal Soliloquies. II. Sometimes with
Christ; thus his Apostles talked with him on earth, and we by prayer, now when
he is in Heaven.


Thirdly, there is a Humane literal, and Natural Talking: thus man talks with
man.

Secondly, there is a Metaphorical Talking: thus

1. The Instructions of Parents are said, to talk with children; because they
are as counsel, advice, and directions unto them, Prove. 6.20.22. And

2. Meditation, and self-examination is called Talking: Psalm. 4.4. and 77.6.

Thirdly, There is an Ironical Talking; thus by a Sareasm, or by way of
derision, Baal is said, to talk, 1 King. 18.27.

Say, Speak, Speech, Words.
Many things may be observed from Words and Speech in this Dostrinal Part; as
namely,

I. What a Word or Speech is; viz. Verbum est quod adsignificat tempus, cujus
nulla pars significat separatim, and est nota eorum quae de alto dicuntur,
Arist. Or, Dicere, to speak, or, to say, is properly, Verbum producere, to
utter some Word.

Object. Against this it may be objected; A man may speak, and yet not utter a
word; for Matthew. 9.33. The Dumb man spoke.

Ans. The Evangelist there retains the former name which the man had, when he
was dumb; viz. The dumb man; and this was very frequent in those places and
times, to retain the same name, although there were some change wrought in the
person. Hence mention is made, of Matthew the Publican, (when he was none) and
Simon the Leper, (when he was cured) and harlots and sinners, when they were
converted. Now two reasons may be given, why these retain their old names, when
they were changed into new men, and indeed were not such: viz.

I. This was done for the amplification of the miracle, or to show the power of
Christ, who could make men contrary to what they were by nature; who could make
a covetous man liberal, and a persecuter a professor.

II. This was done, because none are perfectly freed from evil, the relics of
sin remaining in all: and therefore all should strive and labor, daily to
increase in grace more and more.

II. Observe, that Words, Speech, etc. are referred, I. Sometimes to Man, as
Job 13.7. and 15.3. II. Sometimes to Angels, Judge. 6.17. Zach. 1.13, 19. III.
Sometimes to God essentially, Number. 11.17. IV. Sometimes to God personally; that
is, 1. Sometimes to God the Father, Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. And 2. Sometimes to
God the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 10.20. John. 16.13. Act. 6.10. 3. Sometimes to
Christ, God the Son, Matthew. 22.15. John 14.30. Now Christ speaks unto us five
manner of ways; that is,



I. He speaks unto us in his Word, converting us thereby: thus he spoke to the
Eunuch, Acts 8. and to Lydia, Acts 16.

II. He speaks unto us in Meditation, and holy thoughts, infusing his Spirit
into us.

III. He speaks unto us in Prayer, answering our requests, 2 Cor. 12.9.

IV. He speaks unto us in Faith, assuring us of our justification, Hebr. 12.24.
and Adoption, Romans 8.15, 16.

V. He speaks unto us in our striving, struggling, and wrestling against sin; by
strengthening us with might in the inward man, and enabling us to trample Satan
under our feet, Romans 16.20.

III. Concerning the sense, meaning, and signification of the words mentioned,
these doubts may be propounded.

Qu. 1. What is meant by Speech, 1 Cor. 1.5. You are enriched by Christ in all
speech, and knowledge?

Ans 1. Some by Speech there understand eloquence: see the Marginal Note.

2. Some the gift of Tongues. Pomeran. Calvin.

3. Some the Profession of Religion.

4. Some the Word of God preached. Ambros. Titleman: in this sense Speech is
the same with knowledge,

5. Some by Speech understand zealous, religious, and well ordered discourse;
and in this sense it differs not much from the third interpretation, the
Profession of Religion.

Qu. 2. From Romans ^.5. it may be demanded; How many ways is this phrase used
or taken, I speak as a man; or, after the manner of men?

Ans. The use of that phrase is threefold: viz.

I. When we speak or teach after the common manner of men, Romans 6.19. Galat.
3.15. II. When we would avoid the suspicion of boasting, 2 Cor. 11.16, 17. And
III. When we would shun blasphemy, or blasphemous speeches against, or
concerning God; as there, Romans 3.5.
Qu. 3. What is meant by this word Said?

Ans. 1. Sometimes it signifies a Word uttered, Matthew. 9.4.

2. Sometimes a word conceived in the mind, Psalm 14.1.

3. Sometimes an uncreated, and effectual Word, Genesis 1.3. John 1.2.

Qu. 4. What is meant by this word Say?

Ans. 1. Sometimes it signifies to promise, Luke 23.43.

2. Sometimes to affirm, and pronounce. Matthew. 18.3.

3. Sometimes to think in the heart or to intend, and will a thing, Genesis 27.41.
Exodus 2.^4. Acts 7 28.

4. Sometimes to decree and command, Genes. 1.3. Psalm. 148.5.

Qu. 5. What is meant by this word Speak; or to speak?

Ans. 1. Sometimes it signifies, to utter some word with our mouth, thereby to
express the inward thought, Genesis 34.2.

2. Sometimes to declare, witness, and signify ones mind by another, Psalm.
62.12. Exodus 20.1. Jer. 10.1.

3. Sometimes to utter some weighty thing with deliberation, Psalm. 49.3.

4. Sometimes to declare, and make plain something, which was spoken before;
Galat. 4.1.

5. Sometimes to speak with authority by way of enjoining, Romans 12.3.

6. Sometimes to preach, Acts 11.20. and 14.1.

7. Sometimes to think, or muse upon a thing, Mark 5.28. Matthew. 9.3.

8. Sometimes to confess with our tongue before men, what we believe with our
heart before God, Psalm. 116.26. and 2 Cor. 4.13.

9. Sometimes to work and effect something, Hebr. 12.24.

10. Sometimes to sue and seek unto God, either for our selves or others, 1 Samuel 1.12, 13.

IV. Observe, with whom, or to whom men and women speak; namely, 1. Sometimes
with God: as Exodus 20.33. and 34. Chapters. 2. Sometimes with Christ, Mark
6.50. 3. Sometimes with Angels, Zach. 1.13, 19. 4. Sometimes with men; that is,


First, sometimes men speak to, or with themselves, Gal. 1.10. Crates seeing a
young man walking alone by himself, asked him, Quid illic solus faceret? What
he did there alone he answered, Mecum loquor, I am talking to, or with my self.
Crates hereto replied, Cave, rogo, and diligenter attend, ne cum homine malo
loquaris: have a great care, I pray thee, that thou do not hold talk with a
knave. Senec. ep, 10.

Secondly, sometimes men speak with one or other particular person; and thus

I. Sometimes subjects talk with Sovereigns, 1 King. 1.7. And II. Sometimes one
Brother with another, Genesis 4.8.
Thirdly, men sometimes speak with many, or diverse together; and thus

I. Sometimes one or two talk with more, Acts 4.15. and 25.12. Gal. 2.6. II.
Sometimes a Father talks with his Children or family, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Psalm. 71.24.
III. Sometimes a brother talks with his brethren, Genesis 45.15. IV. Sometimes a
man speaks with his enemies, 2 King. 18.20, etc. V. Sometimes a man speaks with
his neighbors, acquaintance, and friends, Hest. 6.13, 11. Job 11.2.
5. Sometimes Men speak with Women; that is, I. Sometimes Men speak with Women,
Judge. 14.7. II. Sometimes Women speak with Men. III. Sometimes Women speak with
Women; as Luke 1.40, 42.


Qu. How many ways does Man speak with Man?

Ans. 1. I may say, that Man speaks with Man three manner of ways, viz.

First, sometimes Superiors speak with Inferiors. Thus

1. Kings speak with their People, Dan. 1.19. and 3. and 6. chapters. 2.
Masters speak with their Servants, Genesis 24.2, etc. 3. Prophets and Ministers
with Lay Persons, Exodus 14.15. and 16.12. and 25.2. 4. Parents with their
Children, 1 Samuel 2.23. and 1 King. 2.1, etc. 5. Patriarchs speak with Heathens,
Genesis 23.8.
Secondly, sometimes Inferiors speak with their Superiors: thus

I. People speak with their Ministers, Exodus 20.19. II. Subjects with their
Sovereigns, Exodus 6.29. and 7.2. and 1 Samuel 9.25. and 18.22. III. Children with
their Parents, 1 Samuel 19.3. IV. Servants with their Masters, Genesis 24.33.
Thirdly, sometimes men speak with their Equals, Genesis 34.6. and 42.24. Psalm.
64.5. Job 4.2. Thus we see, how man speaks with man, in regard of the Persons
speaking. Now

Ans. 2. If we consider their conference, communication, or manner of speaking,
then we may answer, that man speaks with man two manner of ways; viz.
Wickedly, and Warrantably.

First, sometimes Men speak with Men Wickedly and Vnwarrantably: thus

1. Sometimes Man speaks unto Man blasphemously, 2 King. 18.22, 30, 35. And 2.
Sometimes boastingly, arrogantly, and proudly, 1 Samuel 2.3. and 2 King. 18.24,
25, etc. 3. Sometimes treacherously, Genesis 4.8. Psalm. 64.5. 4. Sometimes
disorderly and vainly, Tit. 1.10. 5. Sometimes mischievously, Hest. 6.13, 14.
Prove. 24.2. Eccles. 10.13. 6. Sometimes uncharitably, Psalm. 69.26. 7. Sometimes
unprofitably, Job 15.3. And 8. Sometimes hypocritically, Job 13.7. Ezekiel. 33.30.
Secondly, sometimes Men speak with Men Warrantably: thus

1. Sometimes Man speaks unto Man, by way of counselling and advising of him, 1
King. 1.14. And 2. Sometimes by way of entreaty and persuasion, Genesis 34.8.20.
Judge. 14 7.
Ans. 3. If we consider the subject matter of our Talk, whereof we must speak,
then I may answer, I. That we must speak and talk with men of the Statutes and
Commandments of God, Deuteronomy. 6.7. And II. Of the Praises of our God for his
Mercies, Ephesians. 5.4. And III. Of the Righteousness of God, Psalm 71.24. And IV.
Of the Works and doings of the Lord, Psalm. 77.12. and 105.2. and 119.27. And V.
Of the Might and Power of God, Psalm. 145.11.


V. Concerning the division, and sorts of Speech and Words observe these five
things:

First, Bonaventure^d. 12. a. 2. q. 1. l. 3. says, that Dicere, to say, or
speak, is twofold. For

I. Sometimes it signifies Ore proferre, to utter something with the tongue.
And II. Sometimes asserere, sive affirmare, to assert or affirm a thing. Numb.
26.3.
Secondly, others say, Dicere tripliciter invenitur, that to say, or speak, is
taken three manner of ways, viz.

1. Sometimes Essentialiter; thus it signifies, Intelligere, seu declarare, to
understand, or declare. Anselm. 2. Sometimes Pure notionaliter; and so it is
nothing else, than Verbum gig nere. Aquin. 1. P. q. 34. a. 1. ad 2. 3.
Sometimes it is taken neither purely Essentially, nor purely Notionally, but
includes both. Thus Dicere est notitia a se producta omne declarabile
declarare. August. 15. de Trinit. ca. 14.
Thirdly, we may say, that Words or Speeches are either Divine, or Humane.

I. There is a twofold Divine Speech; viz.

1. Natural; this is Sermo simplex, or Sermo Deus, the Word God, John 1.1. And
2. Scriptural; this is Sermo multiplex, or Sermo Dei, the Word of God, John
17.17.
II. There is a Humane Speech; this is likewise twosold: 1. Good, Ephesians. 4.29.
Coloss. 4.6. 2. Bad, Prove. 15.1, 2.14. Psalm. 64.3.


Fourthly, from the Letter of the Sacred Oracles of God, we may say, that there
are diverse, and sundry sort of Words: For

1. There are welcome Words, Genesis 21.30.52. and 1 Samuel 18.26. 2. There are
unwelcome Words, Genesis 27.34. and 1 Samuel 21.12. 3. There are innocent, and
harmless Words, Genes. 37 8. and 42.16. 4. There are alluring and enticing
Words, Number. 22.7. Judge. 16.16. 5. There are wilful, obstinate, and disobedient
Words, 1 Samuel 8.21. 6. There are Parabolical Words, 2 Samuel 14.3.19. 7. There
are reproving or reproaching Words, 2 Samuel 3.8.
Fifthly, we may say, that Words and Speeches are either

1. Good in themselves. Paragraph I. Or 2. Evil in themselves. Paragraph II. Or
3. Doubtful; that is, sometimes Good, sometimes Evil. Paragraph III.
Paragraph I. Of Good Words.
There are five sorts of Good Speeches and Words; viz.

First, Courteous and friendly; now as the Arteries convey the blood throughout
the body, so men from mind to mind convey affections by friendly conference and
discourse.

Secondly, there are mild and gentle Words, which are prevalent both with
Beasts and Men.

I. The Indian Sheep called Lama, being much used to carry heavy burdens, will
often grow resty, and lie down with their burdens, and will not be provoked to
rise, and go on their journey, for the most sharp blows and beating that can
be given them; but good words and fair dealing, with gentle entreaty, will
prevail to make them travel, sometimes diverse hours together.

II. Plutarch. in Moral. says, as Musicians make the sweetest melody by the
gentlest touch; so a mild and gentle speech does more prevail with people, than
a harsh or crabbed. The Ancients were wont to place Mercury and Venus in one
and the same Temple; to signify, that mild and gentle speeches do exceedingly
beget amity and Love. Lips.

Thirdly, there are wise, discreet, and prudent Speeches, 1 Samuel 25.24. Now in
all speech, words and sense are as the Body and Soul; the sense is as the life
and soul of Language, without which all words are dead. Hence Tully says,
Dicere recte nemo potest, nisi qui prudenter intelligit, without understanding
and wisdom, none can speak well.

Fourthly, there are sound, sententious, and rational speeches, not empty or
frothy. Pittacus was wont to say, that a dry and thirsty ear must be washed
with a sentence that is good to drink; and that speech grounded upon strong
reason is able to content and satisfy the hearing. Worthy of memory is that
speech which Phocion used to Leosthenes, who by an eloquent and very lofty
Oration, persuaded the Athenians to war: Thy words (quoth he, to him) young
man, may fitly be compared to Cypress-trees, which are great and tall, but bear
no fruit worth any thing.

Fifthly, there are spiritual and Saint-like Words; or good and gracious, holy
and heavenly speeches. I will here instance only in one speech, and resolve a
scruple. Mr. John Hooper, that famous Martyr, being in Prison for the Truths
sake, had these heavenly expressions in one of his Letters: Imprisonment is
painful, but Liberty upon evil conditions is worse; the Prison stinks, yet not
so much as sweet Houses where the fear of God is wanting; I am kept alone, and
solitary, and it is better so to be, and have God with me, than to be in the
company of wicked men: Loss of Goods is great, but loss of Grace and Gods
favor is greater: I cannot tell how to answer before great and learned men,
yet it is better to do that, than to stand naked before Gods Tribunal; I shall
die by the hands of cruel men, but in losing this Life, and finding Life
Eternal I shall be happy; neither the felicity, nor adversity of this World is
great, if compared with the joys and pains of the World to come. Such Speeches
as these become us.

Qu. Because I said, that our Words and Speeches must be Heavenly, and such as
becomes Saints, it may be demanded, Shall we use any Lan uage, or Speech in
Heaven? And if so, then whether shall all the Inhabitants of Heaven speak one
Language; and if so, then what Language shall that be?

Ans. The Scripture teaches, that the Saints in Heaven shall praise and
glorify God with their Tongue and Voice, Apoc. 7. and elsewhere in that book,
and it is most likely that all the Host of Heaven shall speak one Language.
For, 1. All the Saints and faithful, shall then and there be one People, in
one and the same Country. 2. The Triumphant Church shall not be worse in her
estate than the Militant; now the time was when all the Militant Church had one
Language. 3. The diversity of Languages was a judgment and punishment
inflicted upon the World; but God will inflict no punishment upon the
Triumphant Church. 4. It is most probable, that the Language which all shall
speak in Heaven, is Hebrew, the first Language of all. But seeing the Scripture
is silent in this particular, I will prosecute it no further.


Paragraph II. Of Evil Words.
There are four sorts of Evil Words, or Speeches: viz.

1. Some are contrary to Holiness. I. 2. Some are contrary to Righteousness.
II. 3. Some are contrary to Sobriety. III. 4. Some are contrary to Discretion,
and Prudence. IV.
I. Some Words are contrary to Holiness: as swearing, blasphemy, scoffing at
holy things, (the handling of these I reserve to another place) and
profaneness: this is either Indicative, Imperative, or Optative.

First, there are Profane Indicative Words: e. g. Luther. s. 1 Cor. 15. tells
us. That there was in Germany a person of a wicked life, who had the Devil
always at one end of whatsoever he spoke; he was often reproved for this by
his friends, and exhorted to leave that wicked kind of speech, but all in vain.
Now continuing this evil, and profane custom, it happened, that going once
over a Bridge, he fell down, and in his fall uttered these words, Horst up with
a hundred Devils; which he had no sooner spoken, but the Devil whom he called
for so often, was at his elbow to carry him away. Wierus tells us, that Anno
1551, at Megalopole. near Voildstat, it happened in the time of the celebration
of the Feast of Pentecost, that diverse persons setting themselves to carouse,
and drink immoderately, a Woman in the Company commonly named the Devil in her
Oaths; who being so often called upon, came of a sudden, snatched her up,
carried her into the Air, and then threw her dead upon the ground.

Secondly, there are Imperative profane speeches. Luther in his Conferences
tells us, That diverse Noblemen striving together at a Horse-race cried in their
course, Let the Devil take the last. Now the last was a Horse that broke loose,
whom the Devil hoisted up into the Air, and carried clean away.

Thirdly, there are Optative profane Speeches: e. g. Henry Earl of
Schwarthurg through a corrupt custom, used commonly to wish, he might be
drowned in a Privy; and as he wished, so it happened unto him, for he was so
served, and murdered at S. Peter's Monastery in Erford; Anno 1148. Albort
Kirantz. Chron. Saxon. li. 6. The like befell a young Courtier at Manifield,
whose custom was in any earnest asseveration, to say, The Devil take me if it
be not so; and accordingly the Devil indeed took him whilst he slept, and
threw him out of a high window; but by the Providence of God he had no great
hurt, and by Gods grace he learnt to bridle his tongue better for the future.
Cyriac. Spangenb. in elegantiis veteris Adami.

II. Some Words, or speeches are contrary to Righteousness; as lying, brawling,
backbiting, (these I here silence) and the like, Apoc. 21.8. and 22.15. I will
here only instance in these three:

First, there are Treacherous, and Treasonable Words, Genesis 34.18. Catosby and
other fugitive English, meeting at Dunkirk to plot the ruin of our K. James,
and his Posterity; Mr. Thomas Piercy came to them, and his first word was;
Shall we always, Gentlemen, talk, and never do any thing?

Secondly, there are Fawning and Flattering Words, which are often very
prejudicial. For as white Silver draws black lines, so sweet slattering Words
often breed sharp torments.

Thirdly, there are scandalous, contentious, and slanderous Words, Genes.
39.19. and Prove. 26.21. As the coal makes burning coals, and wood a fire, so
contentious words kindle strife. In these words, Solomon would teach us, That
scandalous and contentious speeches are fertile seeds of greater evils, Prove.
15.8. and 29.22. And therefore,

1. We should bridle our tongues, Psalm. 39.1. Job 31.1. And that

I. Because it is the way unto long Life, Psalm. 34.13. II. Because it is the
honor of a man, Prove. 20.3. and the contrary is otherwise, Prove. 18.6. III.
Because it will preserve us from Affliction, Prove. 21.23. and 13.3.
2. We should give mild and gentle answers, Prove. 15.1.

3. We should use the Means to be preserved from Contention; that is, 1. We
should take heed of Wine, Prove. 23.29. And 2. Of Malice. And 3. Of Self-love,
and Self-conceit. And 4. We should bridle our tongues, as was said before. 5.
We should stop our ears against all Slanders cast upon good and godly Men. 6.
We should not rashly believe every Tale and flying report.


III. Some Words are contrary to Sobriety; as filthy or lascivious words or
songs, Ephesians. 5.4.

IV. Some Words are contrary to Prudence, Discretion, and Wisdom: as

First, foolish and undiscreet Words: Demonax hearing a certain man talking
very foolishly and imprudently of diverse matters, he said unto him; Majore
studio auribus quam lingua uteris; thou should rather use thine Ears than
thy Tongue.

Secondly, there are Ignorant Words; Seneca tells us, that Demetrius would say,
that ignorant and senceless speeches. were no more regarded of him, than the
breaking of wind, because a noise from above, and below differed not much.

Thirdly, there are unprofitable, and ineffectual Words; as one says, You may
as well go stand upon the beach,
And bid the main stood bate his usual height.
Or even as well use question with the Wolf.
Or the poor Ewe bleat for the simple Lamb.
You may as well forbid the Mountain Pines
To wag their high tops, and to make no noise.


When they are fretted with the gusts of heaven; As to persuade such or such an
one, to such or such a thing, etc.

Fourthly, there are bragging and boasting Words, 1 Samuel 17.11, 23. After the
defeat of that great Armado in 88. the Duke of Ossuna presented himself before
the King of Spain, with a Distaff at his side, and a Spindle at his back,
instead of a Sword and Dagger: the King perceiving and understanding hereby,
that Dux foemina facti, a Woman had foiled them, hastily stepped to the Altar,
and taking a silver Candlestick up in his hands, swore a monstrous Oath, That
he would waste all Spain, yea his whole Indies, to that Candlestick, but he
would be revenged on England. But through Gods mercy, those high vaunting
words, were but the effects of his malice, without Englands ruin.
Nehuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27. and Sennacherib, Isa. 37.11, 12, 13. are examples of
bragging and boasting men; but as Pliny says, and as the event showed, Praeter
ostentationem and ventosam jactantiam nihil habent superbi; Proud braggers are
like the reports of Ordinance, they blaze and crack, and smoke and stink, and
vanish away.

Fifthly, there are rash, and unadvised Speeches, which are often prejudicial,
yea mortal to the speaker; as one Walker, a Grocer in London, was beheaded, in
Smithfield, by the command of K. Edward 4. for saying, He would make his son
heir of the Crown; meaning his House which had that sign. Thus a Gentleman of
Normandy, confessed to a Franciscan Friar, that he was once minded to have
killed K. Francis I. of France: the King being advertised hereof by the
Franciscan, sent the poor Penitentiary to the Parliament of Paris, where he
received the sentence of death. Certain Thieves and Murderers were thus taken,
and known by their too unadvised prating: for having slain the Poet Ibycus, and
robbed him, for a long time they were not descryed; but at last it thus fell
out, that being at a Public Solemnity in the Fields, and hearing a great noise
of Cranes in the Air, one of them scoffingly said to his fellow, (not thinking
that any had overheard him) Hark fellow, these are the witnesses, that Ibycus
said, should disclose his death; this being heard, they were apprehended,
examined, and upon their confession hanged. Now the cause of the Thiefs speech
was this: When they were going about to kill Ibycus, he seeing a company of
Cranes fly over his head, said. You Cranes shall bear witness of my death.
Plutarch. Thus the saying of Solon appears to be true, That much hurt comes to
Beasts because they are dumb, but more to many Men because they can speak.

Paragraph III. Of Doubtful Words.
There are some Words and Speeches which are neither simply good, nor simply
evil, but of a Doubtful signification, being sometimes taken In malam partem,
in a bad sense, sometimes In meliorem, in a good: e. g.

First, there are curses and evil speakings. Note here, that of cursings and
evil speakings there are many causes. For

I. Some do it out of private hatred. This is the worst of all.

II. Some out of perverseness of nature; as in ordinary sudden scolding. Thus
wicked men often speak evil of Magistrates.

III. Some out of rudeness of nature; who are so ignorantly, and rustically
brought up, that they neither know how to speak civilly, nor how to carry
themselves courteously. These are called Corydons.

IV. Some out of Carelessness and Negligence of speech; as when a man for want
of care and circumspection speaks irreverently to a Magistrate, or some public
person, or to any Brother.

V. Some out of Zeal, against odious vices. Thus the Scripture is wont to call

1. Those who are cruel, Lions, Wolves, Dogs; and

2. Those who are perverse, and wilful, Vipers, and deaf Adders. And

3. Those who are filthy and unclean, vomiting Dogs, and wallowing Swine, etc.
Now this being approved of, both by the practice of Christ, and his Holy
Spirit, we may learn from it; That it is lawful to inveigh against wicked men,
by strengthening our Reproofs with such manner of names as these. Cant. 2.15.
Zeph. 3.3. Matthew. 7.15. and 3.7. and 23.27. ^uk. 13.32. Acts 20.29. and 2 Timothy
4.17. Names are like Pictures which to the life describe the nature of things,
and better and more aptly represent them. Names are like Fables, Parables, and
Hieroglyphics. setting before our eyes more fully and plainly the nature of
vices; and therefore such Names are as lawful as Emblems. Again, it is not the
Name, but the malice that makes the reproach; and therefore when there is no
malice in the heart, there is no hurt in the Name. Yea, the end of these Names
is the conviction of error, and the demonstration of vice: as the craft of
Herod, the cruelty of Nero, the hypocrisy of the Pharisces, the Viper like
impiety of some Parents, and the uncleanness of Swine, etc. Thus cursing and
evil speaking is sometimes taken in a good, and sometimes in a bad sense.

Secondly, there are Ambiguous and doubtful Words; or abstruse, and mysterious
Speeches, which are hard and difficult to understand. These are

I. Sometimes affected, but not praised; as Melanthus said of D^ogenes his
Tr^gedy, A man cannot see the Matter for Words, Plutarch, And Augustus said,
That doubtless Antonius was mad, Qui scripsit ea quae mirentur potius homines,
quam int^lligunt. Suet. in Octav. ca. 86. who writ so, that men should rather
admire at what he writ, than understand it.

II. Sometimes Speeches are obscure and dark, for the exercise of men's Wits; as
Christ's Parables, and Sampsons Riddles. This I enlarge not; because Heidfeldius
in his Sphinx, page 769. 933. 943. 956. 1005. gives us diverse instances of
these commendable Riddles.

III. Some ambiguous sayings, or sentences tend to the ruin of others: e. g.
Mortimer comforted K. Edward 2. his Keepers, with this sentence, Nolite
occidere Regem timere bonum est: or, Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est:
Tho. de la Moor.

To shed King Edwards blood
Refuse to fear, I count it good.
Dioclesian being told by Druas his Concubine, that he should be Emperor when
he had slain a Boar, gave himself much to hunting, and slew diverse wild Boars;
but seeing no success to come thereof, would often say, Ego apros occido, alius
pulpamento fruitur; I kill the Boars but others eat the flesh. Afterward
seeing Aper (who had killed Numerianus the Emperor) and swearing to the
Soldiers, that Numerianus was unjustly slain, he drew his sword, sheathed it
suddenly in Apers bowels, and then (having slain the Boar indeed) he was chosen
Emperor. Eup. Vopisc.

IV. Some ambiguous sayings and sentences tend to the detriment and ruin of a
man's self: e. g. Hugh Pulath Bishop of Durham, in the Reign of K. Richard I.
though he was old, yet he presumed that he should live many years more, because
Godrick the Hermit told him, that he should be stark blind seven years before
he died; which he understanding of a Corporal blindness, but the Hermit of a
Spiritual, he was taken away by death, before he thought of it, or was prepared
for it: Matthew. Par. and Polyd. Virg. Wickham Chaplain to K. Edward III. being
made Overseer for the repairing of Windsor Castle, caused these three words to
be inscribed upon the great Tower, Hoc fecit Wickham; This made Wickham; which
words had lost him the Kings favor, and undone him, if he had not construed
them thus; That he did not make the Work, but the Work made him. Virgil made a
Head to speak, of which he once demanded, What he should do in a certain
business or purpose? The Head answered, That if he kept well his Head, he
should return in safety: but that day the Sun shined so hot, and so chafed, and
overheated his brain, that he died thereof. Walter Earl of Athol, being told
by some Witches, and Sorcerers, that he should be crowned, suborned certain
bloody Traitors, to murder K. James I. of Scotland, at Perth; for which he was
crowned, not with a Regal Crown, but with a Crown of red hot Iron, which being
clapped upon his head, he died in excessive torments. Pope Sylvester 2. being an
Inchanter, asked the Devil one day, How long he should be Pope? who answered,
He should not die until he had said Mass in Jerusalem. He rejoiced at this,
purposing never to see that City. But afterward in Lent, saying Mass in the
Church of the Holy Cross, called Jerusalem, he was there taken with a violent
Fever, whereof in great torment of soul he died. John de Pineda.

V. Some ambiguous sayings and Sentences, tend either to the praise, or
disgrace of some; as the pointing of these Verses following, will make them
either sound forth the praise, or utter the disgrace of Ladies.

Dames are endu'd with Virtues excellent
What man is he can prove that they offend
Daily they serve the Lord with good intent
Seld' they displease their husbands to their end
Always to please them well they do intend
Never in them one shall find shrewdness much
Such are their humors, and their grace is such.
VI. Some dark and obscure speeches tend, either to reduce men from error, or
to leave them without excuse: e. g. Math. 21.25. Luke 11.30. The Baptism of
John whence was it, from Heaven, or from Men? So Matthew. 22.42, 43. If Christ be
the Son of David, how then does David call him Lord?

Thirdly, there are prolix, tedious and long Speeches; as it was said of
Anaximenes, That he spoke Pauca multis, Little in much, having a flood of
Words, and a drop of Matter and Reason. Laert. Dum otiosa verba cavere
negligimus, ad noxia pervenimus. Greg. Mor. li. 7. c. 17. Great talkers
discharge too thick to take true aim. But, Non est multiloquium, quando
necessaria dicuntur, quantalibet sermonum multitudine ac prolixitate dicantur:
August. Praef. ad Retract. When the subject matter, or substance of the Speech
is necessary, weighty, and difficult, then it is not to be judged prolix and
tedious, though the Speech be long, and many words therein be used: for Christ
preached a long Sermon, Math. 5. and 6. and 7. Chapters; so did Peter to the
Jews, Act. 2. and to Cornelius, Act. 10. and Paul preached till midnight, Act.
10.7.

Fourthly, there are short and concise Speeches, which contain Multa paucis,
much matter in few words. These are sometimes

1. Short and bitter: as Jeroboam said concerning the Prophet of the Lord, who
came unto him. Take him, 1 King. 13.7. And 2. Sometimes short and sweet,
comprehending much in a little; as the Decaiogue, Lords Prayer, and the Creed
commonly called the Apostles. Thus Chilo the Lacedemonian, was so brief in his
discourses and talk, that concise speaking was from him named Chilonia.
Fifthly, there are Words and Speeches often reiterated and repeated; which
when not praiseworthy, are called Battology, and Tautology, but when necessary
and commendable, Repetitions: Quod frequenter dicitur, conturbat audientem.
Arist. Top. 5.4. But of these kind of Speeches elsewhere.

Sixthly, there are resolute and confident Words and Speeches, which are
sometimes good, as 1 Samuel 17.32, 34, etc. Hest. 4.16. and sometimes evil: as a
Friar Minor, in K. Henry 4. days, being taken in a Plot against the King, was
asked, What he would do, if K. Richard were alive and present? he confidently
answered, That he would fight for him till death against any one whosoever; for
which words he was drawn and hanged in his Friars weeds. Speed. Thus much for
this chief particular, the Division and Kinds of Words and Speeches.

VI. Concerning Words and Speeches, we may observe some differences: viz.

First, there is a difference between Speech and Voice; for, as Trismegistus
says, Speech and Voice differ exceeding much; Speech being proper to men, but
Voice being common to many other living creatures: and Aristotle Polit. 1.
says, Nullum animalium a natura habet sermonem, nisi homo. By nature, of all
living creatures man only speaks. Hence, perhaps, the Heathens called Mercury,
(the President of Speech) Deorum, hominumque interpres.

Secondly, observe a difference between these Speeches, Loqui in aliquo, and
loqui in aliquem.

1. Loqui in aliquo, is, when the Spirit of the Lord speaks inwardly to the
Prophets: as Hos. 1.1. The Spirit of the Lord spoke in me; that is, inwardly
revealed his secrets to me.

2. Loqui in aliquem, is to rail against one: as Numb. 12. Miriam loquuta est
in Mosem; that is, she reviled or railed upon him.

Thirdly, there is a double difference in speeches, viz.

I. Sometimes in regard of the Speakers; for the same speech from sundry men's
mouths, differs as much, as the flight of an Arrow from the arm of a Giant, and
the hand of a Child. As many a good tale is spoiled in the telling, so
pronunciation, utterance, and eloquent expressions, make ordinary stories very
pleasant and delightful. Latymer said of a young Scholar, who had preached one
of his Sermons; That he had gotten his fiddle, but not his fiddlestick.

II. Sometimes in regard of the things spoken: for in some men's discourses, one
cannot see matter for words, and in some scarce words for matter. Homer in his
Iliads, has appointed unto dreams two doors, a door of Horn (which was the
door of Truth) and a door of Ivory, which was the door of Deceit: for Horn may
be looked through, but Ivory is not transparent. These Doors may well be applied
to the Words and Speeches of men, which are as the Indexes and Tables of the
Heart: for to some the Mouth is a door of Glass, which is soon broke open, and
easily gives way to a multitude of words, wherein the folly of their hearts
and minds is discerned; to others it is a door of Brass, firm and solid in
keeping in their words with more care and circumspection, and showing the firm
solidity of their hearts and minds. Modum verborum quibusdam tenere, diffietle
est. Curt. lib. 6.

VII. The last thing considerable in the Doctrinal part, concerning our Words
and Speeches, is, what they are like; or, whereunto they may be compared or
resembled: Namely,

1. Unto the Sun; for as the same Sun does melt wax, and harden clay; so the
same Speech does make some better, and some worse, according to the diversity
of dispositions.

2. Unto the Lodestone, for as the Lodestone does not draw any thing unto it
but Iron, although many other things be much lighter; so the Speech of some
does not move all, but only those who are inclined to embrace that which they
are persuaded unto.

3. Unto Salt; for as Salt moderately sprinkled on meat does season it, and
adds a liking to our taste: so if we mix our Speech with some antiquity,
authority, grave saying, or witty conceit, it does much adorn our discourse and
talk.

4. Unto a Vine; for as in a Vine, whatsoever is taken from it by pruning, is
added unto the fruit; so the fewer the words of the wise are, the graver are
the sentences.

5. Unto Nettles; for as those weeds sting, though they have no pricks, so
Words pierce though they have no points.

6. Unto a Sword; for as one metal is to be tempered with another in
fashioning, or making a good blade lest being all of steel it quickly break, or
all of iron it will not cut; so Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci:
that Speech takes best, and pleases most, which shows both Wit and Art,
Learning and Skill, Pleasure and Profit.

7. Plutarch says, that our Words and Speeches ought to be like Gold, which as
it is then of greatest price and value, when it has least dross in it, so a
few words ought to comprehend great store of substantial matter and
instruction. Thus much for the Dogmatical, and Doctrinal Part.

SECT. IV. Of the Practical, and Applicative Part.
In this Section, we have these three things to consider of.

1. Who are to blame in regard of their words and speeches. Paragraph I. 2.
What we may learn from words or speeches. Paragraph II. 3. What is required of
us in regard of our words and speeches. Paragraph III.
Paragraph I.
There are many sort of persons to blame in regard of words and speeches: viz.

I. Those who never talk of heaven, or heavenly things. The upper roof of the
mouth is called Coelum; but many have no Heaven in their mouths, no upper part,
but a lower, never speaking but of these base and low things.

II. Those who will stand to what they have said, be it never so false or
foolish. For, as Seneca says, It is an arrogant and silly perseverance, to
say, that which I have spoken once, whatsoever it be, I will abide by it; and
make good my word.

III. Those who hear many good speeches, but forget all. Plutarch in Graec.
Apotheg. says, As Arras clothes, when they are wide opened, do plainly show
the pictures wrought in them, but being lapped up do conceal and hide the same;
so many a speech, which is aptly composed, well pronounced, sufficiently filled
with pithy sayings, and solid matter, is heard by some, who lets it all slip
quite out of their mind, Jam. 1.23, 24.

IV. Those are faulty, who speak evil of any: Tit. 3.2. whether it be, 1. By
censuring, Romans 14.10. Gal. 5.15. Jam. 4.11. Or, 2. By reviling or reproaching,
Matthew. 5. Or, 3. By any kind of piercing and bitter words, Prove. 12.18. Or, 4.
By rendering reviling for reviling, 1 Pet. 3.9. Or, 5. By whispering evil of
others secretly, Psalm. 41.7. Or, 6. By wresting the words of others for evil,
Psalm. 56.5. Or, 7. By speaking evil of dignity, Jud. 8. Or, 8. By reproaching
Gods servants, and revili^g his Ministers, Col. 3.8. and 1 Cor. 4.13. and 2
King. 2.23.


V. Those are also to blame, who deride men in misery, Joh. 30.1. And

VI. Those who take a pleasure in brawling and contention, Psalm. 52.4. Jam.
4.1. And

VII. Those who boast of their mischievous words, Psalm. 52.1. And

VIII. Those who are given to complain of their neighbors in all places, Jam.
5.9. And

IX. Those who are more in word than deed: as Epictetus complained, that there
were many who would be Philosophers, so far as a few good words would go, but
were nothing for practice. So when Palaelogus, Emperor of Constantinople, sent
his Ambassadors into France and England, for aid against the Turks, Tilius,
Chron. de regib. Francorum, says of his success in France, Verbis and
promissis tantum adjutus est; and Speed says, of his entertainment here in
England, under Henry the Fourth, that he sped not here much better, his request
of armed aids, being answered only with words and promises. Demades compared
the Athenians, to Jews trumps, Ex quibus si linguam detrahas, reliquum inutile
exit, Stob. from which if you take the tongue, the rest is of no use.

X. Those are to blame, who regard and delight more in words than matter. As
some, in an Apothecaries shop, regard only the fragrancy of the smell, but care
neither for the goodness of the Preserves, nor the virtue of the Purgatives;
and as Plutarch in Moral. says, As many mind nothing in Plato and Demosthenes,
but the purity of the Attick style and phrase; so in a Speech or Sermon, some
observe nothing but the aptness of the words, the neatness of the phrase, the
strength of the expression, the Rhetoric of the speech, etc. Nihil tam facile,
quam vilem plebem and indoctam volubilitate linguae decipere, quae quicquid non
intelligit, plus miratur. Hier. ad Nepot. Nothing is more easy than to deceive
children with fair words, and volubility of speech. Lipsius says, As men plant
Sycamores, and some other trees, only for their shade, or shadows sake; Sic in
aures nostras sermones tantum delectantes, etc. So the itching ears of some are
delighted only with pleasant speeches.

XI. Those are here faulty, who slight, and lighty regard what they speak,
saying, Words are but wind. Bernard thus instructs these: Levis quidem sermo,
quia leviter volat, sed graviter vulnerat; leviter transit, sed graviter urit;
leviter penetrat animum, sed non leviter exit; leviter profert, sed non leviter
revocatur; facile volat, ideo charitatem facile violat. Wind over-whelms many a
stately Ship, and blows down many a tall Cedar: a pistol bullet, and a dart are
but small things, yet they wound mortally: a small spark may kindle a great
fire; words are quickly uttered, not quickly recalled; evil and injurious words
easily pass into the ears, but do not easily pass out of the mind; because
words are easily uttered, therefore they easily break the bond of charity.

XII. Those are to blame, who too critically and pedantically affect words,
cadences, etc. Aulus Gellius says, There are some, Qui verborum minutiis rerum
frangunt pondera, who by syllabical minutes of words, overthrow the weight of
the matter. Hence Cicero, lib. 2. ad Attic. says, As women smell best, when
they smell of nothing, but what is natural about them; so that speech is best
adorned which wants affectation.

XIII. Those are to blame, who ordinarily are given to many words, or much
talk. This is sometimes called babbling, sometimes loquacity: which we may say,
thus differ.

Babbling is, when fools talk much; or, when many words are used foolishly, Job
35.16.

Loquacity is, when many more words are used by any, upon any occasion, than is
either requisite or necessary.

First, Concerning babbling, we have these five things to consider of, or to
observe.

First, that babbling comes either

1. From drunkenness, Prove. 23.29. Or, 2. From folly and foolishness, Prove.
15.2. and 18.7. Or, 3. From pragmaticalness, and a desire of meddling in and
with other men's matters, 1 Timothy 5.13.
Secondly, consider the nature of a babbler: viz.

1. He is a stinging Serpent, Eccles. 10.11. 2. He is busie-body, 1 Timothy 5 13.
3. He is a fool, Prove. 15.2. and 18.7.
Thirdly, observe that there are three sort of bablers. For, 1. Some are such,
but not so called. 1 Timothy 6.20. 2. Some are called so, but are not such, Acts
17.18. 3. Some are such and so called, Prove. 23.29. Eccles. 10.11.


Fourthly, we must carefully avoid all babbling;

I. In all Scholastic and Philosophical disputations, 1 Timothy 6.20. and 2 Timothy
2.16. II. In our ordinary discourse, Prove. 23.29. Eccles. 10.11. III. In
prayer, Matthew. 6.6, 7, 8. And that 1. Because heathens babble in prayer, Matthew.
6.6, 7. 2. Because God knows our wants before we speak, Matthew. 6.7, 8.

Fifthly, in regard of babbling it is required of us, to shun and avoid it, 1 Timothy 6.20. And that

I. Because bablers increase to more ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2.16. II. Because the
words of bablers fiet as a Canker, 2 Timothy 2.16. And III. Because bablers
multiply words without knowledge, Job 35.16.
Secondly, concerning loquacity, we have these six things to observe, or
consider of.

First, that Plutarch thus defines it, Loquacitas est linguae ambulachrum, and
ingenii labyrinthus, per varios casus, ^stuosas syrtes, and Maeandros flexiles,
auditorum animos abstractura.

Secondly, loquacity argues folly. Thales was wont to say, Multa verba
nequaquam arguere hominem sapientem, etc. Erasm. lib. 7. Apoph. Much talk, or
many words, does not prove a man to be wise: for a wise man never speaks but
when necessity requires it, and when he does speak, he expresses his mind,
opinion and judgment in as few words as possibly he can. But the fool has no
regard at all, to the circumstances either of time, place, or persons, but by
his laquacit, undiscreetly, foolishly, and rashly ut: ers things which should
rather be concealed and kept in.

Thirdly, loquacity exposes men to scoffs, scorn, and contempt. e. g. The
Samian Ambassadors being sent to the Lacedaemonians, made a long and tedious
Speech unto them; in answer whereunto, the Senators said, Media sumus obliti,
postrema non intellerimus, quia prima non meminimus. Plut. in Lacon. Apoph. We
have forgotten the middle part of your Speech, and we understand not the latter
part of it, because we do not remember what you said in the beginning. So a
certain Orator talking upon a time with Aristotle, was so prolix and tedious in
his speech, that at length he craved pardon, for holding so long discourse with
so wise and learned a Philosopher. Aristotle merrily answered him, Good friend,
thou have no cause at all to ask me pardon, because I took no heed to what thou
said. Laert.

Fourthly, the greatest talkers are the least doers; as the French say. Grand
diseurs sont souvent les plus petit faiseurs: Those who do speak most, often do
least. Canibus imbecillibus mos est, quanto plus defecerunt virium, tanto magis
latratibus indulgere. Senec in Pro. Mastiffs which bark the most, bite the
least.

Fifthly, much talk is the cause of much evil. Charillus being asked, Quam ob
causam Lycurgus tam paucas leges tulisset Lacedaemontis? Why Lycurgus gave so
few laws to the Lacedaemonians? He answered, Quoniam pauca loquentibus, paucis
etiam legibus est opus. Plut. in Lacon. Because few laws are sufficient for
those who use but few words: implying, that many evils spring from many words.

Sixthly, from, concerning, or in regard of loquacity, we may learn these seven
lessons.

1. That much talk, and abundance of words, is hurtful for a man's self, Prove.
13.3. and 18.7. And

2. That it is a sign of a fool, or foolish person, Prove. 15.2. and 18.7.

3. That a man given to much talk, or abundance of words, is but a tatler, and
busie-body, 1 Timothy 5.13.

4. That men full of talk are not to be justified, Job 11.2.

5. That much talk tends to poverty, Prove. 14.23.

6. That a man full of talk is full of vanity. A prating Barber asking King
Archelaus, Quomodo te tondebo? How he would be trimmed? he replied, Silently,
Plut. lib. de curiositate. Surely in much talk there cannot choose but be much
vanity: seeing loquacity is the sistula of the mind, ever running, and almost
incurable. Tertullian, lib. de Anima, cap 45. expressing the nature of dreams,
says, Conspice gladiatorem sine armis, vel Aurigam sine curriculis, etc. Look
but upon a Fencer without weapons, and a Coachman without his Chariot, acting
and practicing all the postures and feats of their skill; and we shall see
sighting and stirring, which is but an empty moving and gesturing; and those
things seem to be done, which are not seen to be done, being done in the acting
of them, but not in essecting any thing by them: So it is in many words, there
is often much fencing, but no weapons wherewith the enemy is wounded: much
seems to be said, but it is to no more purpose than if nothing were said, all
being only an empty moving of the tongue. And if there be any matter of worth
in the multitude of words, it is but by chance; as when a blind man shoots many
Arrows, perhaps one may be near the mark; so in multiplying of many words,
perhaps some of them may carry some weight, and solidity of matter; but usually
in a multitude of words, there is no multitude of matter, and in the idle
tossing of many words, what can there be but a fullness of folly, when a fools
voice is known by them. Eccles 5.3. -- Foliis leviora caducis Verba. Ovid.
Amor. 2. Therefore every man should be a Phocion, or Pythagoras, either to
speak briefly to the point, or not at all: or like them of Creet, to show more
wit in his discourse than words, and not to pour out of his mouth a flood of
the one, when he can hardly wring out of his brains a drop of the other.

7. We may learn, that men's talk is mostly according to their Callings; as
Propertius says, Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator,
Enumerat miles vulnera, pastor oves.
That is, every man talks of his own pleasure, care and prosit; as the Hunter,
and Falconer speaks of their sports, the Ploughman of his team, the soldier of
his march, colors and wounds, and the mariner of winds and storms, Thus we see
who are to blame in regard of words and speeches.

Paragraph II.
From, concerning, or in regard of words and speeches we may learn these eleven
Lessons.

1. That it is an infamous thing, and a disgrace, to be the common talk of
people, Ezekiel. 36.3.

2. That, Periculum est dicere non solum falsa, sed etiam vera, si is ea, non
quibus oportet, insinuet: Ambros. in Psalm. 118. It is dangerous for a man, not
only to speak false things, but also true, in case he speak those things which
ought not to be spoken. Now this comes to pass four manner of ways: viz.
either through Flattery, or Avarice, or Boasting, or unwary Loquacity.

3. That as neighing is proper to a Horse, barking to a Dog, bellowing to an
Ox, and roaring to a Lion; so speech is proper to a Man. Philo, li. de somniis.

4. That our Words will at one time or other make a discovery of our hearts;
or, as Plutarch says, No man can so change himself, but that his heart may be
sometimes seen at his tongues end.

5. We may learn, that our understanding and wisdom may be discerned by our
Words and Speeches. For Imago animi, sermo est; qualis vir talis Oration. Magnum
est vocis and silentii temperamentum. Senec. in Pro. Vanus sermo, vanae
conscientiae est index. Mores hominis Lingua pandit; qualis sermo ostenditur,
talis animus approbatur. Hugo l. 1. de anima. As Protogenes the Painter knew
Apelles by one line, although he had never seen him before; so by a man's Speech
his wisdom and understanding may be known. Speech is the Image of the mind;
and such as the man is, such is his talk; for out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks.

6. We may learn, from Thesilius, that rude ordinary Words which are profitable
and true, are better than eloquent and sweet words, which tend to deceit and
flattery. And

7. Nescit vox missa reverti. Horat. Quod dictum est, non potest amplius sumi.
Arist.

Post semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum. Mant. Words once uttered cannot
be recalled, Isa. 45.23. and 55.11.

8. We may learn, what manner of talk we must avoid; or what we must not speak;
viz.

1. We must speak no corrupt talk or communication, Ephesians. 4.29. and 1 Cor.
15.33. 2. We must talk no Foolish talk, Ephesians. 5.4. 3. We must talk no Obscene
talk, Ephesians. 5.4. Col. 3.8. 4. We must not swear in our talk, Matthew. 5.37. 5. We
must speak no evil one of another, Jam. 4.11, 12. 6. We must not speak all our
mind, Prove. 29.11. 7. We must use no evil, fraudulent, or deceitful talk, 1
Pet. 3.10. 8. We must use no Lying talk, Col. 3.9. 9. We must in our speeches
use no blasphemy against God, Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 14.1, etc. 10. We must not in
our talk use any Imprecations, or Curses against our Rulers, Exodus 22.28. 11.
We must not in our speeches use any Jeasting which is inconvenient, Ephesians. 5.4.
12. We must not make any rash Promises, or Vows unto God, Eccles. 5.2. Now
there are three reasons, why we must beware, and avoid all evil speeches: viz
I. Because perverseness in the tongue, is a breach in the spirit, Prove. 15.4.
II. Because evil speakers shall not inherit Heaven, Ephesians. 5.4, 5. III. Because
he shall see good Days, who refrains his tongue from evil, and his lips from
guile, 1 Pet. 3.10.

9. We may learn, that there is a time to speak and a time to be silent,
Eccles. 3.7. Est tempus quando nihil, est tempus quando aliquid, nullum autem
est tempus in quo dicenda sunt omnia. Hugo. There is a time when we should
speak nothing, there is a time when we should speak something, but there is no
time wherein we should speak all things: because he is a Fool who utters all
his mind, Prove. 29.11. Tempus tacendi and tempus loquendi, discreta
vicissitudine pensanda sunt tempora, ne aut quum restringi lingua debet, per
verba se inutiliter solvat; aut quum loqui utiliter potest, semetipsam pigre
ristringat. Greg. l. 7. Moral. Octavian the Emperor asked Pisto the
Philosopher, when men should speak, and when they should be silent? He
answered, When speech is profitable, then we should speak; when speech is
hurtful then we should be silent. And therefore there is a great deal of
discretion to be used both in our speeches and silence, lest we hold our peace
when we ought to speak, or speak when we should rather be silent. Thus S. Peter
kept silence, while Cornelius spoke, but when he had done, Then Peter opened
his mouth, Act. 10.34. For the right understanding of those words observe, That
doubtless (...) Periphrasis is not idle, or vain, but shows either

I. Some serious thing; as Matthew. 5.2. Psalm. 78.2. Acts 8.35. Or,

II. A wonted silence, and accustomed taciturnity, except when some serious
occasion requires speech, Prove. 31.8, 9. Hence S. Paul entreats the Ephesians,
6.19. to pray unto God, to give him utterance, that he may open his mouth
boldly. And in this sense, it is there, Acts 10.34. taken: to teach us, That
the door of our lips should be shut, but when urgent occasions require our
speech, Psalm. 39.1. Prove. 17.27. Jam. 1.19. For

1. Many Words is the badge of a fool, Prove. 15.28. Eccles. 5.2. And a tongue
full of words utters much folly, Prove. 10.19. Acts 5.3. Jam. 3.6.

2. We must be accountable to God for every idle Word, Matthew. 12.36.

3. He who keeps his tongue is perfect, Psalm. 17.3. Jam. 3.2. And therefore let
us learn to bridle our tongue, and to have the Bit always in our mouth; that
is,

I. Let us always take heed of all evil Words; whether, 1. Blasphemous Words.
Or 2. Scoffing or reproachful Words. Or 3. Impure Words, Ephesians. 5.3. Or 4.
Contentious Words. Or 5. False and lying Words. Or 6. Vain and Idle Words.


III. Let us speak opportunely, and seasonably when we speak, Prove. 15.23. And

IV. Wisely, Coloss. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29. Psalm. 37.30. Prove. 10.11, 31.

10. We may learn, that God observes, marks, and remembers our Words. Three
things are here to be hinted at: viz.

1. That God does it. 2. Why he does it. 3. What Words he observes.
First, God observes, marks, remembers, and takes notice of our Words, Matthew.
6.32. and 12.36. For

I. God is to be glorified by our Words, Jam. 3.9, 10. but evil Words corrupt
good manners, and dishonor God. And

II. Vox Index Animi, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and
therefore our Words will witness against us at the last day.

Secondly, there are three reasons why God observes our Words: viz.

I. Because he takes notice of all things, his knowledge being infinite; and
therefore also of our Words. II. Because he expects that we should glorify him
in our Words; and therefore he marks whether we do it, Romans 10.10. Col. 4.6.
III. Because all sinful Words offend him, therefore he observes all our Words,
that he may punish those which are not good.
Thirdly, God hears, and marks both our bad and good Words.

I. God hears and observes all our evil and wicked Words: as 1. All our
murmurings, grudgings, and repinings, Exodus 16.6, 7, 8. Number. 14.27. and 16.41.
2. All our blasphemous and Atheistical Words, Psalm. 14.1. and 53.1. 3. All our
insulting Words, Ezekiel. 35.12, 13. 4. All our bragging and boasting Words, Psalm.
10.5, 6. Isa 47.8. 5. All our threatening and cruel Words, 2 King. 19.23. Isa.
37.29. 6. All our idle Words, Matthew. 12.36.
II. The Lord hears all our Good Words: as 1. All the Prayers we offer up unto
him, Psalm. 50.16. Isa. 65.24. Apoc. 8.3. 2. All our mournful Ditties, Psalm.
56.8. Exodus 3.7. 3. All our Penitential Words, Jer. 31.18. 4. All our Pious and
Religious Words, Malac. 3.16.

11. Lastly, we may learn, that by our Words and Speeches we may know whether
we be freed from Satan or not. Three things are here to be examined by us: viz.

I. Examine if we have no tongue; that is, 1. If we have no tongue to praise
God. 2. If we have none to profess Religion. 3. If we have none to pray unto
God, Jam. 2.4. 4. If we have no tongue to explain our mind, or to counsel our
brother. If in all these we be dumb, then it is a sign that Satan is not cast
out of us; for if he were, then (as Matthew. 9.33.) the dumb would speak.


II. Examine, if we have not a filthy, impure, and corrupt tongue, which
continually belcheth out polluted Words, either against God, or Man, or our own
Soul? Certainly this argues a corrupt and carnal heart; as Matthew. 15.19.

III. Examine, if we so speak, that thereby we approve our selves to be freed
from Satan; that is,

First, do we praise and honor God with our tongues? and that

1. For all his works of mercy showed toward us, whether spiritual or
temporal; whether concerning our Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation,
Justification, or Sanctification?

2. Do we praise and honor God, by acknowledging him only to be the true,
everliving, and everlasting God, who is most worthy to be praised and served?

3. Do we praise and honor God, by professing his Name and Truth before Men,
and that in the most perilous times and places? Dan. 3. and 6. Acts 4. and 5.
Psalm. 69.30.

4. Do we praise and honor God with our tongues, by holy Exercises, delighting
to sing Psalms, to confer, and to speak of God?

Secondly, do we pray unto God with our tongues? He is not worthy of a tongue
or of mercy, who is negligent in this duty: Yea, in fitting place, the lips are
not to be neglected in prayer, because the tongue does restrain straggling
thoughts: that is, although a man may pray internally with the heart, without
the tongue, yet when conveniently, and without any hypocritical ostentation, we
can use the tongue to express the desires of the heart, we should; because it
is a means to stay the heart, and to preserve it from wandering cogitations.
Although Hannah spoke not aloud, yet she spoke when she prayed, as appears by
the moving of her lips, 1 Samuel 1.

Thirdly, do we reconcile our selves unto our Brethren with our tongues? Matthew.
5. Do we pacify their anger with our soft answers? Prove. 15.1.

Fourthly, do we comfort our Brethren with our tongues? For this is the most
sweet, and comfortable use of the tongue in regard of our Brethren, both in
temporal and spiritual distresses.

Fifthly, do we counsel and advise our Brethren with our tongues? and that

1. Amanter, lovingly, not in anger or hatred, but in love. And 2. Prudenter,
wisely, from our hears, and out of good understanding. And 3. Confidenter,
boldly, not fearing their anger, or hatred, if we have any warrant or call so
to do?
Sixthly, do we speak purely and gravely, that so our words may add grace unto
the hearers? Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6. For by thus using our tongues, we shall
approve our selves to be free from Satan. Thus we have seen, What we may learn
from, concerning, or in regard of our Words, or Speeches.

Paragraph III.
Concerning the duties required of us, in regard of our Words, or Speeches, I
will briefly touch at these three things: 1. How we must speak. I. 2. Why so.
II. 3. What the Ornaments of Speech are. III.


I. The Duties required of us, in regard of our Words or Speeches, are either
Negative or Affirmative.

First, the Negative duties are these.

I. We must not use any evil or corrupt talk. Hermes says, Thou should
neither suffer thy hands to work, nor thine ears to hear, nor thy tongue to
speak any thing that is evil. S. Peter says, we must not give way to any kind
of corrupt communication, 1 Pet. 3.10. S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.3. lays down three
sorts of such Words. Particularly, 1. We must shun all Swearing and Blasphemy,
Col. 3.8. 2. All unclean, and Obscene Speeches, Col. 3.8. Ephesians. 5.3. 3. All
profane and godless words, Ephesians. 5.3. whether spoken in opposition of the
Deity, or Religion, or Purity. 4. All uncomely jeasting: for we must not Ludere
cum sanctis, jest with edge-tools: Col. 4.6. because all evil words shall be
punished, Prove. 13.2, 3. and 21, 23.


II. Let not our Words be rash: Eccles. 5.2. or, we must not speak hastily or
rashly, Prove. 13.3. and 17.28.

Secondly, the Affirmative duties are many; as namely,

1. In general, we must endeavor to speak well, or aright. Afronius the
Philosopher, being asked. What he knew? answered, To speak well: being demanded
again, What he had learned? answered, To speak well: being asked the third
time, What he taught? he said, To speak well. Sabell. Now hereunto four things
are to be learnt: viz.

I. How we must order our speech or talk to Kings and Rulers; namely, Aristotle
sending Calisthenes, a disciple and kinsman of his, unto Alexander the Great,
gave him this Lesson in charge, That very seldom he should have any talk, (and
when he had, to be sure that it was pleasant) with that man who carried in the
tip of his tongue, the power of life and death. Am. Marcell. lib. 18. c. 3.

II. How we must speak to those whom we teach; viz. as Aristotle says, we must
observe a measure in our discourse and speech with such; because if we be too
brief, we shall not be well understood; and if we be too tedious, we shall not
be well born in mind.

III. How we must frame our discourse and talk with strangers, or those whom we
are not acquainted withal: viz. When thou talkest, says Socrates, with one
whom thou know not, be not too full of words, till thou perceive, whether he
or thou be better learned; if thou be better, then speak the more boldly; if
he, then keep silence, and learn of him.

IV. How we must order our speech unto all; viz. as Pythagoras advises; Hear
much, speak little, be courteous in speech, and answer aptly. Think first, then
speak, and last of all fulfill what thou speak.

2. In general, as houses without doors are unprofitable, so are men who have
no rule or command of their tongues: Plutar. in Mor. and therefore we must set
a watch over our Words, Prove. 13.3. and that for these three Reasons:

1. Because he who keeps his mouth keeps his life, Prove. 13.3.

2. Because he who keeps his mouth, keeps his Soul from trouble, Prove.
21.23.

3. Because evil Words are a great evil. Plato in his Laws says, We command,
that women be pardoned, for all the evil actions they commit, in case they
amend; but we will that no fault be remitted, which is committed by the tongue;
because actual sins flow from our frail Nature, but the sins of the tongue from
malice.

3. In general, we should labor to be so rich in all necessary understanding
and knowledge, that we may be able to answer every one, Col. 4.6.

4. In general, we should shut our mouths with silence, or, take heed to our
Words, Psalm. 39.1. and 112.5. Prove. 17.27. Jam. 1.19. For

I. Vox Index animi, our Words are the Expositors of our Mind, Matthew. 12.34.
Luke 6.45. Prove. 15.2.23.28. Eccles. 5.2. And

II. Many evils come from the Tongue and Words; and therefore we had need be
careful of our Speeches, Jam. 3.6. Ephesians. 5.5. Psalm. 17.3. Jam. 3.2. Prove. 13.3.
and 21.23. And

III. In many words is much wickedness: Prove. 10.19. Psalm. 51.15. And therefore
Silence and Taciturnity is good; and all evil Words are carefully to be
avoided, Psalm. 34.13. and 141.3.

5. Let our Words be few, Eccles. 5.2. Jam. 1.19. Pliny, lib. 35. cap. 10.
says, As Timanthes is praised for this, that in all his works, more always
was to be understood, than was painted; so that speech is best wherein many
things are left to consideration, and few amply discoursed of; and wherein
there is more matter than words. Pythagoras says, Ne multis verbis pauca
comprehendas, sed paucis multa. Stob. sermon. 33. It is more commendable, and
asks more skill, to express much matter in few words, than little matter in
many. Thus Julius Caesar having quite routed Tharnaces in the first conflict,
with a Laconical brevity, thus writ unto the Senate, Vent, vidi, vici; I came,
I saw, I overcame. Plut. in Apoph. This duty Solomon teaches, Prove. 17.27. and
S. Peter, 1 Pet. 4.11. One saying to Zeno Citticus, Breves esse Philosophorum
sententias; that the Philosophers were short and sententious, or, that their
sentences were short: answered, Vera praedicas, oportet enim, and syllabas
illorum, si fieri possit, esse breves. Veritas multis verbis non eget: and
firmius tenemus quae paucis verbis comprehensa sunt. Laert. Thou faist well,
for their sayings and sentences should be as brief, as the subject or matter
will bear; seeing Truth needs not many words, and our memory best retains those
things which are comprehended in few words. Now the Reasons, why our Words must
be few are these:

I. Because many Words,

1. Betray the Foolishness of the heart; or are the sign of a Fool, Prove. 15.2.
Eccles. 5.3. And

2 Beget offenses in words: or, are not without sin, Eccles. 5.2, 6. And

3. Lessen a man's Reputation and Esteem. Pithias Duke of the Athenians, though
he were so noble, stout, and valiant, that he was beloved of his people, and
feared of his enemies, yet in the end, as Plutarch says, the abundance of
words obscured the glory of his Heroical deeds. And

4. Because many Words provoke God unto Anger, when they are foolish, false,
sinful and rash, Eccles. 5.2, 6.

II. Our Words must be few, because the Lord in heaven hears all our Words,
Eccles. 5.2. And

III. Because we must give account unto God, for every idle word, Matthew. 12.36,
37. And

IV. Because, as the French say, De pou de mots viennent de grands effects; Often
of few words, many great effects ensue; as Exodus 32.1. And

V. Because few words are an Argument of Wisdom, understanding, and knowledge,
Prove. 17.27. Ulysses in Homer is made a long-thinking man, before he speaks.
Those who are Nobly and Royally brought up, says Plutarch, learn first to hold
their peace, and then to speak. Epaminondas is celebrated by Pindar, to be a
man who knew much but spoke little. Demacatus being long silent upon the Bench,
one asked him whether his silence proceeded from Ignorance, or Folly? He
answered, A Fool can never hold his peace. So one saying to Solon, Illum ideo
non loqui, quia insanus esset: he answered, Nullus stultus tacere potest: nimia
enim ioquacitate stultitia hominum proditur. Brus. li. 3. cap. 25. And Ambros.
1. de Offic. says, Quamplures vidi loquendo in peccatum incidisse, vix
quemptam tacendo; ideoque tacere posse, quam loqui difficilius est. I have
known many offend by speaking, scarce any by holding their peace; for it is
more difficult to be silent than to speak.

6. Let our Words and Speeches, be pious, prudent, discreet, and apt, Prove.
15.2. and 20.15. Sapiens non solum quod loquitur, sed etiam opportunitatem
loci, and temporis, and personae quum loquitur, diligenter inquirit. Gregor. in
Prove. 15. A wise man considers both what he speaks, and the circumstances of
time, place, and person when he speaks: yea he speaks fitly, aptly, and to the
matter or occasion, Prove. 15.23. and 25.11. Now the Reasons, why our Words must
be thus discreet, prudent and pious, are these five.

I. Because the Lord knows all our words, Psalm. 139.4. And

II. Because such words are a precious Jewel, Prove. 20.15. and 25.11. And

III. Because such words are good, Prove. 15.23. that is, when well meant, and
discreetly spoken, otherwise not. For quum intentionem bonam locutio cauta non
sequitur, ipsa pietatis propositio in transgressionis vitium vertitur. Greg.
li. 5. Mor.

IV. Because by such Words we shall approve our selves to be truly wise, Prove.
15.2.

V. Because we must either be justified or condemned by our words, Matthew.
12.37. For as a Vessel is known by the sound, whether it be whole or broken, so
men by their speech are discerned whether they be good or evil. Ingreditur mors
per ostium tuum, si falsum loquaris, si turpiter, si procaciter, si uti non
oportet, loquaris. Ambros. lib. de Virg. By our words we may know whether we
are, or shall be happy or miserable.

7. Let us well weigh, and ponder our words, that it may be said of us, as one
says of Tacitus, and as Scaliger of Virgil, E cujus ore nil temere excidit,
that no unadvised, or inconsiderate word ever fell from his lips. Epictetus, in
Enchiridio, says, In omni negotio nil adeo prospicere debet, quam ut tutum
securumque sit quod agis. Est autem tutius tacere quam loqui. In all our words
we should seriously consider, whether what we speak be safe and good; for it is
better to be silent, than rashly and inconsiderately to speak. Ambrose, 1. de
Offic. advises well, saying, Jugum sit verbis tuis and statera atque mensura,
ut sit gravitas in sensu, in sermon pondus, atque in verbis modus. We should
set bounds and limits to our speeches, and so weigh what we speak, that the
matter may be grave and solid, the words weighty and few. So Aulus Gellius li.
8. says to the same purpose, Sapiens sermones suos praecogitat, and examinat
prius in pectore, quam proferat in ore. The wise man weighs all his words, and
ponders them in his mind, before he brings them into his mouth. Socrates says,
A man has power over his words till they be spoken, but after they be uttered,
they have power over him. And therefore a man ought to consider before what he
will speak, lest he utter something which afterward he will be sorry for, and
repent. Particularly, these three things we should ponder, and well weigh in
regard of our Words.

I. Quid loquamur? What we may speak, and how our words should be seasoned with
salt. Coloss. 4.6. And

II. Quo tempore? when we may best, and most seasonably, and prositably speak,
Eccles. 3.7. Romans 14.1.

III. Quo fine? For what end we must speak: viz. that we may add grace unto
the hearers, Ephesians. ^.29. and benefit those to whom we speak: for we had better
keep silence, than not speak to the benefit of our hearers.

8. We should always speak truly, Job 6.29, 30.

9. Let our words be opportune, and spoken in due season, Prove. 15.23. and
25.11. For a word seasonably given, like a Rudder, sometimes steers a man quite
into another course, 1 Samuel 25.22. etc. Acaticus the Philosopher, being at a
Feast, where he spoke not a word, was asked after Dinner, the occasion of his
silence? whereunto he answered, It is better for a man to know his time when to
speak, than it is to know to speak: for to speak well is given us by nature;
but to know the fittest and best time to speak, proceeds from wisdom.

10. Let our words be always gracious, and seasoned with salt: or, our speech
should be seasoned with the salt and savor of grace, Prove. 15.2. Luke 4.22.
Eccles. 10 12. The words of the mouth of the Wise man have grace, Coloss. 4.6.
Let your speech be gracious always, and powdered with salt. Three things are
here to be considered.

First, what it is to be gracious always in speech; namely, Our speech is
gracious, when it is so uttered, that the graces of God wrought in the heart,
by his Holy ^pi^it, are as it were pictured, and painted forth in the same;
speech being the Image of the heart. Or, to be gracious always in speech is,
to spe^k graciously at all times, in all places, on all occasions, in all
companies, in all the ^empers and dispositions of the heart, as in anger,
mirth, fear, sorrow, and hope, still to maintain gracious speech, from a
gracious mind, after a gracious manner, to a gracious end; to stir up grace, to
manifest grace, and to edify them who hear us.

Secondly, there are five reasons to be considered, and observed, why our Words
must be thus gracious: viz.

1. Because our tongues must be sanct^fied as well as our Hearts. 2. Because it
is a sign, that our heart is seasoned with grace, if our tongue be with
gracious words. 3. Because if it be otherwise, it is a sign that the Devil
rules in our hearts, and that our tongue is set on fire by Hell, Jam. 3.6. 4.
Because it is an excellent thing in it self, Prove. 20.15. 5. Because it leads
to blessedness both here and hereafter, Prove. 13.2. and 22.11.
Thirdly, there are two rules to be observed, if we desire, that our speech may
be gracious, and may minst^r grace to the hearers: viz.

I. Premeditate what is profitable to be spoken, that so our heart may guide
our tongue. Prove. 16 23.

II. Let us sanctify, and offer up our speeches unto God by Prayer; that is,
pray that the Lord would guide our tongue. Prove. 16.23.

1. Lastly, let our words be such as tend to edification. Eccles. 12.10. and
4.29. Let your communication be good, to the use of edifring, that it may
minister grace unto the hearers. For the understanding of those words observe,
that the Text there reads, (...), Ad edificationem usus, to the aedification
of use, that is, to the use of edification, by an Hypallage; as in that of
Ovid; In nova fert animus, mutatas dicere formas,
Corpora --


Note again, the Apostle there, Ephesians. 4.29. requires two conditions in all our
discourses: viz.

I. That they be useful and profitable for the Edification of our brother.

II. That they be gracious; that is, such as may piously delight the hearers,
refresh their m^nds, and beget a holy friendship betwixt speaker, and hearers.
Thus much for the first particular, How we must speak.

II. The Grounds, why we must be thus careful of our Speech and Talk, are
these three.

1. Because a man reaps good by being so, Prove. 13.2. 2. Because a wholesome
tongue is a tree of life, Prove. 15.4. 3. Because the lips of the righteous feed
and profit many, Prove. 10 21.
III. These five Graces or Virtues following, beautify and adorn our Speech
and Talk.

I. Reverence; or a reverend regard had in all our speeches both of God and
Man; that is, when speaking of God, we do it with reverence, Deuteronomy 28.58. and
speaking of Men we do it with respect, according to their places, qualities, or
persons, 1 Samuel 1.15.

II. Modestly; viz. when we are urged, or constrained, to speak of the good in
us, or done by us, 1 Cor. 15.9. for this must not be spoken proudly, or
boastingly, Prove. 27.2.

III. Meekness; when we either answer, or reprove any, 1 Pet. 3.9.

IV. Sincerity, or speaking the truth always sincerely, Levit. 19.17. Ephesians.
4.25. And

V. Charity; having in all our Speeches such a due regard to the good name of
our Brethren, that we do not at all injure, or blemish their reputation, Levit.
19.16. and 1 Cor. 13.7.

The Marquess of V^sto, being sent upon a Design or Expedition by the Emperor
Charles 5. and thinking (after his return with applause and Victory) to take
some rest; was presently chosen General of the whole Army: ( Antonio Daleva the
former General being dead) whereupon he caused this Device to be figured in his
Shields, Two Sheaves of ripe Corn, with this Motto, Finiunt pariter renovantque
labores; One Work being done
A new's begun.


This Emblem suits and sorts very well with my thoughts; for if these two
compendious Tractates, find kind acceptance and approbation, I shall be
encouraged to proceed in the Explication and Application of these words,
Knowledge and Understanding, (which are usually taken for, and signified by
Wisdom and Prudence) both Natural, Moral, and Spiritual; together with their
Contraries, Blindness, Ignorance, and Darkness.

FINIS.
(...).
Say not, My hand this Work to end has brought;
Nor, This my Virtue has attained to:
Say rather thus, This God by me has wrought:
God's Author of the little good I do.
Pibrac. quad. 5. The Words fully handled and explained in this Tractate, are
Alphabetically these.
Babbling, Page 218 Commune, Page 193 Communication, ibid. Conference, ibid.
Discourse, ibid. Languages, Page 150. and 190, 191, 192 Lips, Page 187, 188
Loquacity, Page 219 Mouth, Page 186 Said Page 194, etc. Say, Page 194, etc.
Sayings, Page 194, etc. Speak, Page 194, etc. Speech, Page 194, etc. Talk, Page
196 Tongue, Page 149, 150. 153, etc. Words, Page 203, etc.
The SCRIPTURES particularly and plenarily expounded in this Tractate, are
these.
GEnesis 11.7, 8. Page 154, 192 Genes. 31.47. Page 191 2 King. 18.26. ibid.
Psalm. 12.4. Page 174 Psalm. 15.3. Page 165, 166 Psalm. 30.12. Page 156 Psalm.
45.1. Page 180 Ecclesiastes 10.12. Page 233 Hosea 14.3. Page 189 Matthew 5.2.
Page 186 Matthew. 5.22. Page 166 Matthew. 9.33. Page 197 Mark 16.17. Page 154, and
192 Acts 2.3. Page 153 Acts 10.34. Page 147, and 223, 224 Romans 3.5. Page 198
1 Corinthians. 1.5. Page 199 Ephesians 4.21. Page 167 Ephesians. 4.29. Page 233
Colossians 4.6. ibid. 1 Timothy 1.15. Page 195 Jude verse. 10. Page 175, 176
These Books following are printed for, and sold by William Miller at the
Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North Door.
JVenal with Cuts, by Sir Robert Stapylton, Knight, fol. Elton on the
Colossians. fol.

Knowledge and Practice: Or, A plain Discourse of the Chief Things necessary to
be known, believed, and practiced, in order to Salvation. Useful for Private
Families. The Third Edition revised and corrected. By Samuel Cradock B.D.
Rector of North-Cadbury in Somersetshire. 4o.

Emblems Divine, Moral, Natural and Historical. Expressed in Sculpture, and
applied to the several Ages, Occasions, and Conditions of the Life of Man. By a
person of Quality.

The Christian Monitor, earnestly and compassionately persuading Sinners unto
true and timely Repentance, by the serious view of the seven following weighty
considerations. 1. The stupendous love of God unto man in Christ Jesus. 2. The
great danger of Despair, and greater of Presumption. 3. The sweetness, easiness
and pleasantness of the ways of God. 4. The falsehood and flattery of the ways
of sin. 5. The safe, joyful and blessed state of the Righteous. 6. The
dangerous and most deplorable state of the wicked. 7. The shortness and
uncertainty of life, terrors and amazements of an unprepared Death, and
Eternity of punishments after Death. Generally useful for all Private
Families. By Tho. Fettiplace, Dom. Pet. Cant.

Dod on the Lords Prayer. quarto.

Medice Cura Teipsum, or the Apothecaries Plea against Doctor Christopher
Merret. quarto.

Fettiplace, the Souls narrow search for sin. Oct.

English Dictionary, or Expositor, the twelfth Edition, Revised and enlarged,
by S. C. duod.

Complete Bone setter. oct.

Templum Musicum, or the Musical Synopsis. oct.

The famous Game of Chess-play. oct.

Shelton's Tachygraphia Lat. oct.

Clark about Comfort which Gods children have, or at the least earnestly desire
and long after whilst they are in this world, together with the obstructions
of comfort, and the removal of them. duod.

Jeofferies New Years Gift. duod.

Divine Examples of Gods severe Judgments upon Sabbath Breakers in their
unlawful sports, Collected out of several Divine Subjects, viz. Mr. H. B. Mr.
Beard, and the Practice of Piety: a fit Monument for our present times, etc.

A brief Remembrancet, or the right Improvement of Christ's Birthday.

A second Sheet of old Mr. Dod's Sayings, or another Posie gathered out of Mr.
Dod's Garden.

The Hunting for Money the first part.

The Hunting Match for Money the second part.

At the place aforesaid you may be furnished with most sorts of stitched Books,
as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Speeches, Declarations, Letters, Orders,
Commissions, Articles; as also with Books in Divinity, Church Government,
Sermons; and most sorts of Histories, Poetry, Plays, and such like, etc.

FINIS.

