God's great and wonderful work in Somersetshire, the charitable Farmer
miraculously Rewarded
Happening at Welling within three miles of the City of Wells this last
Harvest, where an honest Godly Farmer having sold most part of this last Summer
and Winter great quantities of Corn to the poor in their distress at five or
six shillings the Bushel, when the Market price was ten and eleven shillings;
for which he was much derided and scoft at by his Rich Neighbors, he was
recompensed by an extraordinary crop of Wheat, the like was never before heard;
of each stalk of straw having diverse full large ears, some nine, ten, and
thirteen, but generally ten ears on every straw throughout the field which was
ten Acres and upwards; of which ears are to be seen at diverse Coffy-houses by
the Royal Exchange, and at other places in London, Published as a grateful
acknowledgement to the goodness of Providence, and to stir up all into Faith in
God, and charity toward their poor Neighbors from the consideration of so
Remarkable an example.

The tune is aim not too High.


^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
Some being put to such great want and need
on pease and beans like horses they did feed,
Poor little children stands with weeping eyes
and few there is that does regard their cries,
In Somersetshire an honest man do dwell
who always loved poor people very well,
When some beguile widow and fatherless
this man relieved many in distress.
When wheat was sold at Markets round about
for ten or eleven shillings a strike throughout,
Unto the poor this man be did not grudge
to sell for five and six his love was such.
The second part
to the same Tune.
Which made poor people flock to him a main
for half their charge with bread he did maintain
Besides what he could spare he freely gave
unto the poor they need not stand to crave.
For which some rich men envied him full sore
and said be simply parted with his store,
And told him plainly if he would not given over
he might be forced to beg from door to door
To which this good Samriitan did say
I shall not want for this another day;
For when the Lord does send man blessings store
he is no more then stuard for the poor.
Besides quoth he Scripture it does Record
he which gives to the poor lends to the Lord,
And God above will pay him ten times more
then what in charity he gave the poor.
And now to see the mercies of the Lord
what love he to his servants does aford,
A wonder strange I Am going now to name
it will amaze ye all to hear the same.
For this same man had such a crap of wheat
the like no mortal man before did reap,
Nine, ten, eleven, and thirteen ears it yield
On every stalk or straw throughout the field.
Ten akers and above of this same ground
that bare this wheat the like not to be found.
The Corn is good and heavy in the head
and eats as well as any's made in bread.
In threshing now they find so much in store
as ere they did in ten years craps before,
It makes all stand amazed for to see
how God has blessed this man's charity.
Hundreds of people round about there came
to see this wonder that heard of its Fame,
Both old and young both rich and poor does cry
the like was never seen with mortal eye.
Look on the Picture and hear take a view
of this same pattern which is carved true,
It plainly shows the several ears that grew
upon one straw believe for it is true.
You covetous misers which does grip and grind
the poor, which can of you no favor find
Poor laborers that works hard day and night
to stop their wages many takes delight.
And you that has great yearly rents come in
to love the poor it is high time to begin,
Do good with what the Lord has given to thee
and God above will thy Rewarder be.
But pride and Taverns now has all the gain
and poor men's cries in heart they do disdain,
How many pounds do some spend on a whore
and will not give one shilling to the poor.
So to conclude of this here I have penned
hoping the truth does no body offend,
But keep in mind still what to you I say
the King and beggar both are lumps of clay.
By L.W.
FINIS.
With Allowance.

London Printed for F. Coals, T. Veres, J. Wright, and John Clarke.


