THE PIOUS MAN'S PRACTICE IN PARLIAMENT TIME. OR A SEASONABLE AND necessary
Tractate, concerning the presages, and causes of a Commonwealths ruin, and the
ways, and means to preserve a Church, and State, in prosperity, plenty,
purity, and peace. By R. WARD, utriusque Regni in Artibus Magister; and
Preacher of Gods holy Word at Stansteed Mount-Fitchet in Essex.

Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact together: whether the Tribes of
the Lord go up: for there are set thrones of judgment: Therefore pray for the
peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, and let us all say, peace be within thee,
and let us all seek her good. Psalm. 122.3. etc. LONDON. Printed by T. Cotes
for P. Cole, at the sign of the Glove and Lion in Corne-hill near the Royal
Exchange. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND NOBLE BROTHERS, AND HIS WORTHY, AND MUCH
HONORED Patrons, Sir John Mainard Knight (together with his Religious and
virtuous Lady) and Timothy Middleton Esquire.
Honorable Patrons, although there is often no proportion between the Giver
and Receiver; yet there should be between the Giver and the Gift. This I
speak, that you might please to accept of a small Gift, from a mean and poor
Giver, although you have deserved not meanly, but mightily of me. If the world
admire, that I should have two Patrons, and never had but one living; they must
know, that I neither could, nor would hold two, although by you two, I had two
given. And therefore in duty I am bound as well to acknowledge my engagement to
you, my Honorable Patron, Sir John, although I refused your Living, as I am,
and do to you, my Noble Patron whose offer I willingly embraced.

Not only duty, custom, and tha^kfulnes requires that I should dedicate this
work unto your Worships, but also policy, and necessity: for by how much the
more unworthy the Treatise is, by so much the more it craves worthy Patros, to
protect it; and who more worthy then the Patrons of the Author? The Lord has
abundantly enriched you both, both with temporal blessings, and eminent
endowments of learning, and natural parts, and also with the love and
honorable respect of those among whom you live. And therefore seeing the
Republique is like to receive such benefit from you both, this unpolished, and
rough-hewen Discourse does beg your serious view, because therein you may read
Morbum, Medicinam, and Medicum, both the Maladies, and Remedies of a
Republique, and who are appointed, and destined by God, both for the
preservation of Churches and States, in purity, prosperity, and peace, and
also for the reforming, and redressing of what is amiss. As Architecture
teaches, that there should be in buildings a symmetry, and decent proportion,
between the Gate and Fabrique: So Oratory tells, that there should be in
Speeches some Analogy, between the Exordium, and Narration. Wherefore, that I
may not put a large preoemium before a little Tractate, I will draw to an end:
but first I must entreat your Worships to be pleased to take notice. That
future obligements do not disanul and make void former engagements: and
therefore, although for your clear handednesse in your free and favorable
presentations, you deserve me wholly, and whatsoever I can do; yet in regard
that this work was behight, and dedicated unto another Worshipful, and worthy
friend the last Parliament, when it should have come forth, if the sudden
dissolution thereof had not stopped it: I have made bold with you, and him, to
join him with you in the Dedication, though in several Epistles. Thus with my
hearty prayers to God, for the corporal and spiritual health, and eternal
happiness of you and yours, entreating you to accept of this small Tractate
until time produce some more worthy work, I humbly take my leave. Remembering
till death.

Your much obliged, and devoted Chaplain Richard Ward.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND HIS REALLY Approved, Cordial Friends, THOMAS AUSTEN
Esquire, and his religious Consort.
Worshipful, and Worthy Friends, this Brat, being begot, and bred, receives
breath, life, and growth in your House, is (according to Law) returned unto you
for relief, and shelter: being confidently assured, that they who have been
such sure, and firm friends to the Father (in this Iron age, when such
friends, are no less rare than black Swans) will give houseroome and
entertainment unto it for his sake. This Hulke, and poor Pinnace, was builded,
and meanly rigged a while since; and when it was ready to be put to Sea, a
storm came, which made it lie by the Lee. But the weather now, so clearing up,
that it promises a calm; I have adventured, and exposed it to wind, weather,
and the censuring World; hoping that those who will come abo rd of it, and
trucke with it, will find some commodity in it, worth as much as the Merchant
Venturer, the Stationer will ask them for it. The reasons why I now shroud
this Parliamentary practical preparation, under your roof, are these:

First, because it was hatched, and flidged in your house. And

Secondly, because it was at first devoted to your Patronage. And

Thirdly, because your many, extraordinary, private, and bountiful expressions
of true love, and constant friendship, call for public acknowledgement, and
thankfulness. And

Fourthly, because I was not so much, by much, encouraged by any, for my pains
undertaken in my first Work, as by you; whose large liberality, and liberal
bounty, for that Book, deserves a better reward than this toye now tendered
unto you: But Vltra posse non est esse, such as I have, I give: and I beseech
the Lord (who has promised to reward whatsoever is done to a Disciple in the
name of a Disciple) to reward the kindness, bounty, and real expressions of
love, which I have found from, of, and in you, upon the estate, bodies, and
souls of You both, and Yours. And this shall be the faithful prayer of him
who will always acknowledge Your free and undeserved favors, and ever remain

Your unfeigned and much bounden friend RICH. WARD.

THE PIOUS MAN'S PRACTICE IN PARLIAMENT TIME.
THere is a time Eccles. 3.1.2. The Prooemium.
(says Solomon) for all things, and a season for every purpose under the
Heavens, A time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to be merry, and a time
to mourn, a time to feast, and a time to fast; a time to pray, and a time to
praise; a time to beg blessings of the Lord, and a time to bless the Lord,
for blessings bestowed; and a time to be silent, and a time to speak; and
words spoken in due season, are like Prove. 25 11.
Apples of gold in pictures of silver.

When Athens was straightly besieged, and so stoutly assaulted, that they within
the walls were hardly bestead, and in no small jeopardie, Diogenes tumbled his
Tubbe up and down; thinking it unfit for him to be idle, when the greatest,
and best of the Citizens were in agitation and arms. And therefore the honor,
beauty, and crown of our Kingdom, being now assembled (by Gods good
providence, and his Majesty's gracious permission) in high Court of Parliament,
for our spiritual, and temporal good, and comfort; it is not fit that we
should be idle Spectators, or addle Contemplators, of their grave, godly, and
serious consultations; but rather pious Actors, and Abettors with them: yea,
zealous and cordial Assistors of them.

If you demand, Question.
What shall or can we do?

I answer, Answer.
pray, for that is all we can do.

If you further enquire, Question.
What, or how must we pray?

I must then entreat you to turn unto Psalm 60.5. Answer.
and to hear reverendly, to attend religiously, and to observe carefully, the
Instructions, Text.
and Directions, which (by the Instruction, and Direction of the Lord) I have
from thence to deliver unto you. The words are these. The parts of the Psalm
are three, viZ. Psalmus paretim est (...), queribundusvel expostulatorius,
partim (...), praecativus, partim (...), consolatorius.


Save with thy right hand, and hear me.

This Psalm is partly Expostulatory, and full of complaints; partly
Supplicatory, and full of requests; and partly Consolatory, and full of hope.

First, our Kingly Prophet expostulates with God, and complains unto him, of
the desertion and distress of the people of Israel, which fell out in the time
of Saul, after he had rejected him (verses 1.3.10.) and which happened unto
them, by the seditious actions of Abner and Isbosheth, after Saul's death, verse
2.

Secondly, the sweet Singer of Israel does pray unto God to deliver him, and
his people out of all their distresses, and to remove far from them all their
evils, verse 1.2.5.31.

Thirdly, the Psalmist does partly comfort himself with this hope, that the
Lord (in his due time) will deliver him, and his people, and return again unto
them, with the blessings of peace, and prosperity in his hand; (verses,
4.6.7.8.9, 10.12.) and this hope springs from a serious consideration of the
promises of God made unto him, verse 4.6.

The text is part of the second part of the Psalm, 2. Reasons why David now
prays unto God.
and is an entire, and perfect prayer. And two reasons are given by our holy
Penman, why he thus, at this time prays unto God: to wit.

First, Reason. 1.
because the godly Israelites, who were now in distress, were the Beloved
people of God, Mary sends this message unto her Lord, in the behalf of her
Brother Lazarus, Master, John 11.3.
he whom thou love is sick; intimating thereby, that she confidently
believed, that those whom he loved he would help, when they were distressed.
And thus does our Princely Prophet in this place; They oh Lord, whom I pray
for, are thy beloved: and therefore, That thy beloved may be delivered, save
with thy right hand, and hear me, verse 5.

Secondly, Reason. 2.
because all humane help was vain (verse 11.) But the Lords assistance is
never in vain. Man's importunity, is Gods opportunity: Man's worst time, is the
Lords best season, Nullumtempus occurris Deo.
Man's help comes often too late, but the Lords never: for it is never too late
for him to help. And therefore seeing man cannot succor, the Prophet turns
him to the Lord, thus craving assistance at his hands; Give us help from
trouble, for vain is the help of man, (verse 11.) and save us with thy right
hand, (in the text) for thou oh Lord art able to do for us, above all that we
are able to ask or think. Ephesians. 3.20.


The text may be divided either, The Logical divisi, on of the text. Petitie,
Repetitie.
Logically, or Theologically.

The words Logically dichotomize themselves into these two parts: viz.

1. David's Petition. 2. His Repetition.
First, his suite is laid down in these words: Save with thy right hand.

Secondly, his request is repeated in the words following, and hear me.

1. He shows what his suite unto the Lord is: viz. Salvation, or Preservation.

2. He then desires that his boon may be granted, and request answered. Hear
me.

As from one root springs oftentimes many branches: (...)
so from the first branch of my text sprouts up more parts then words (if we
respect either the Original, or Latin Translation) or as many parts as words,
if we eye and view our English version. In the Hebrew I find only two words: a
in the Latin three: Serva dextra tua.
in the English five Save with thy right hand.
; answerable thereunto, there are these five parts: to wit.

First, Supplicans.
the person praying; and that is, David.

Secondly the person to whom he prays; Supplicatus.
and that is, Jehovah, verse 1.

Thirdly, Supplicatio.
the prayer, or request it self; and that is, for preservation.

Fourthly, Pro'quibus
the persons for whom he prays; viz. himself, and his people.

Fifthly, Modus.
the manner, how he desires to be saved; and that is not by any weak, feeble,
frail, evil, or indirect means, but by the Almighty might, and potent power
of the Lord of Hosts. And thus you have the Logical Analysis of the words. Now,

Theologically they may be thus resolved; The Theological partition of the Text.
to wit,

1. How can Religion be better expressed then by patheticall, and faithful
prayer? And such is here offered up.

2. Who is more fit to pray, 1. Sam. 13.14.
then the Prophet David, a man after Gods own heart? And he it is who here
prays.

3. Who is more worthy to be invocated, and called upon then the Lord Jehovah,
the Mighty one? And it is he to whom the Psalmist here makes his suite and
supplication.

4. What can a man desire for himself, in regard of his outward man, which is
better then salvation or preservation? And this is the substance of the
Prophets present suite.

5. How can a man better express his Christian affection, then by remembering
in his prayers the afflictions of Joseph, and those who are in distress and
misery? And these the sweet Singer of Israel does not forget, but implores the
Lords divine assistance, and help both in the behalf of himself, and his
people, who were now heavily afflicted and distressed.

6. By what means can any be better preserved from distress and evils, then
by the Almighty power, and outstretched arm of God? And this is the alone
Sanctuary which David flies unto for succor, as is apparent by his own words,
Save with thy right hand.

7. And lastly, How can a man better express his zeal, and ardour in his
prayers, then by doubling and redoubling, by iterating and reiterating
emphatically his requests? And therefore the son of Iesse does pray and pray
again: first shows what he desires, then desires that his suite may be
granted, and him self not dismissed, and sent empty away.

By this time (beloved) you see, The forenamed divisions rejected.
that if I should either follow the Logical or Theological partition of my
text; that the truths deducible from thence would be many, and the time taken
up in the explicating and unfolding of those truths would be long. And
therefore I will neither trace the Logical steps, nor tread the Theological
path; but with what brevity, and succinctnesse I can possibly, I will first
break the bones of my Text, and secondly, labor so to pick out the marrow
thereof, that both you and my self may be comforted, and corroborated thereby.

For the orderly dissecting or breaking up of the Text, we must observe (as at
first we observed) that in the words two things offer themselves to our view;
to wit, 1. The Prophets petition. A third Analysis of the text.
2. The repetition thereof.


1. In his petition are two things clearly expressed; to wit,

First, Materia, the substance or matter thereof, and that is salvation. Save.

Secondly, Modus, the manner how he desires to be saved; and that is, by the
Lords right hand.

2. We have the Repetition of his request in these words, and hear me.

From the whole words we have three particulars diligently to observe, or
three words to explicate and expound, if we desire to attain to a true sight
of the sense and meaning of the text: The sense and meaing of the Text.
namely, What is meant by saving, by Gods right hand, and by hearing; and we
must note, that each of these has a double acception, and signification in
Scripture.

First, Salvation twofold.
there is a twofold salvation mentioned in the word, viz.

1. Spiritual or eternal of the soul: as James 1.21. and in diverse places.
He is able to save your souls. And,

2. Corporal or temporal of the body: as Joshua 10.6. and in many more
texts. Save thou us, oh Lord, and help us: and of this salvation, the text
speaks, Save i. e. Preserve, succor, relieve, and help us with thy right
hand.

Secondly, Gods right hand taken two ways.
the right hand of the Lord has a double acception also; For,

1. Sometime it signifies his authority and power: as Psalm 110.1. 1. King.
2.29.
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy foots-stoole. And thus Solomon set his Mother on his right hand,
that being the chiesest place next unto himself. And,

2. Sometimes it signifies the might, strength, force, and fortitude of the
Lord, as Exodus 15.6. Thy right hand oh Lord is glorious in power; thy right
hand oh Lord, has bruised the enemy, i. e. As men bruise and break a thing
with the strength of their hands, even so does God his enemies by his power.
And in this sense is right hand taken in this place. Save with thy right hand.
i. e. Preserve and deliver us by thy strengh, might, and mighty power.

Thirdly, Hearing taken two ways.
hearing likewise has a double sound, and significations, in sacred Scripture.
For,

1. Sometimes it is taken (...), properly, and literally; and so it signifies
to take up, or perceive something, with the sense of hearing, and thus sounds,
noyses, and words are heard. And,

2. Sometimes it is taken (...), or (...), after an humane manner, for our
better understanding; and thus it signifies to attend, mark, or listen. When
we declare any thing to negligent and heedlesse cares, we usually say, you
hear not what I say i. e. you do not attend unto, or mark the things
declared. So the Prophet here desires, that the Lord would not lend a negligent
ear unto his prayers, or slight his requests, but that he would be pleased
mercifully to hear, and graciously to grant his suite and supplication. Hear
me, i. e. that is, attend oh Lord, and listen unto me, and to my prayers.

Thus in your hearing, The Propositions arising from the text.
and to your understanding, with a threefold hammer, I have sufficiently
broken, and bruised the bones of the text; set us now suck the marrow which
lies before us, and seriously ponder these points, which are obvious and
conspicuous unto us, from the words thus expounded, explicated, and unfolded,
viz.

Proposition. 1. First, although the godly have promises from God of
protection, yet they must not idely expect it, but wrestle, and tugge with God
by prayer for it.

Proposition. 2. Secondly, God sometimes brings his best and chosen people into
great distresses and dangers, exercising them with great calamities and
miseries.

Proposition. 3. Thirdly, all changes, chances, mutations, and maladies, which
fall upon any Church or State, Kingdom, or Commonwealth comes from God.

Proposition. 4. Fourthly, it is the Lord, and he alone, who protects Princes
and people, Countries, and Commonwealths.

Proposition. 5. Fifthly and lastly, when any calamity or misery is either
seared, or felt, either inflicted upon the backs, or hanging over the heads of
any Commonwealth, Church, State, or Nation; or when any special blessings are
desired in the behalf thereof: that it is then the duty of all the pious, and
zealous members of that Church and State, both to desire, and endeavor; both
to labor and pray for the obtaining of the blessings desired.


How naturally all these points arise from this present portion of holy writ,
we shall see (God willing) when we come to the particular handling of them: I
will begin first with the first, which is this,

That although all the faithful flock, Doctrine. 1. Psalm. 91.10.11.12, and
125.1.2. and 121.1.2.3. etc.
and peculiar people of God, have many great and gracious promises made them in
his word, by himself, of protection and preservation from, and in evils; yet
they must not idely expect the performance of those promises; but earnestly
pray that they may be made good unto them. How naturally this note arises
from the text will easily appear, How the point is deduced from the Text.
if we do but observe, that the Lord had made special and particular promises
unto this his beloved Prophet; which were not hid from him, but made known
unto him, and understood by him; and yet notwithstanding, he wrastles and
wars with God, for the blessings promised, doubling and redoubling (as it
were) his blows upon him, in the text. Save Lord with by right hand, and hear
me. Yea, it is further worth observing, to this purpose; that our Princely
Prophet makes mention of Gods promises made unto him in the 4. and 6. verses,
and makes his prayer unto God in the 5. folding up (as it were) the petition
which he puts up unto God, in the midst of the promises made by God unto him.
The Lord makes promises of mercy unto David, and David prays the Lord
(according to his promises) to be merciful unto his servant. The Lord
promises to protect and preserve his anointed; and his servant beseeches him
to perform his promises made unto him. God is faithful in his promises, and
David doubts it not. God remembers what he has promised, and to whom; and
David questions it not: yea, although he confidently believe that the Lord is
faithful and true; and all his promises firm and certain, yet he prays
again and again for the performance of them.

The truth of the point proposed will appear four manner of ways; The point
proved 4. manner of ways.
to wit, 1. By some clear testimonies of Scripture. 2. By some examples
recorded in Scripture. 3. By some arguments extracted or deduced from
Scripture. And 4. By the removal of some rubs laid in the way contrary to
Scripture.

First, The point proved first by testimonies of Scripture.
the Scripture testifies unto us, that although we have many and great
promises made in the word, yet we must not be idle, but industrious and
diligent in prayer, and other religious duties. Saint Paul, 2. Corin. 6.18.
shows what gracious promises the Lord makes unto us: and 2. Cor. 7.1. he
subjoynes, Having therefore such promises made unto us, let us cleanse our
selves from all pollution, both of the flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness
in the fear of God. The Author to the Hebrews. ( chap. 4.9.) Hebr. 4.1.
says, There remains a rest to the people of God, and adds, verse 1. Having
therefore a promise made of entering into this rest, let us take heed, lest by
any means we come short thereof; Saint Peter (2. Epist. 3.14.) admonishes the
Jews, 2. Pet. 3.14.
of the promise of heaven, and glory; and exhorts them to labor, that those
promises may be made good unto them.

Secondly, The point proved, secondly by examples in Scripture.
if examples will move us, then a cloud of witnesses will surround us: For look
upon David, or the Ps. of David, and there we shall see him praying for the
enjoyment of good things, and the removal of evils, even when he makes mention
of Gods promises, Genesis 25.2.
as was showed before. Look upon Isaac, and we shall see him praying unto the
Lord, to bless Rebecca with children, although God had promised it, both to
his Father Abraham, and himself. Romans 4.16.
Look unto Abraham and we shall see him desiring and praying for the
performance of Gods promises. Look unto Moses and Solomon, Deus. 1.11.
and we shall see the one praying unto God to perform the promises which he
has made unto his people Israel, and the other, which he made unto his servant
David. Observe but Elias, 2. Chrac. 1.9.
and we shall hear him first praying for fire from heaven, and then water, 1.
King. 18.37.44.
although God had made him a promise of both.

Thirdly, The point thirdly confirmed by reasons or arguments.
as the point at first propounded, has been proved by some testimonies of
Scripture, and examples in Scripture: so may it be also further confirmed by
some arguments or reasons deduced from these, viz.

First, Reason. 1.
in general, because means must be used for the obtaining of the things
promised: for God himself has ordained; yea, commanded that it should be so,
if we desire to attain to the end of our desires and wishes, and to obtain
the end of the promises; yea, if we neglect the means, we tempt Gods
providence, and so sin against him, which our Savior dared not to do, that
not being Gods way, but the Devils. The Lord promises to add fifteen years
to Hezekiahs life: now shall Hezekiah therefore neglect to eat, Matthew. 4.
Isaj. 38.5.
drink, or sleep, or expose himself to apparent dangers; because Gods
promises are true, and he shall enjoy life so long, let him disorder or abuse
himself as he pleases? Certainly, this he must not do, but contrarily use
the means carefully which God has ordained for the preservation, and
conservation of his life. And therefore although the children of God have many
promises confirmed unto them, of protection and providence, yet they must pray.

Secondly, Reason. 2.
more particularly, because prayer is the ordinary condition of the promises,
or the ordinary means appointed by God for the obtaining of his promises and
our desires: Prayer is our Cornu copioe, which affords unto us whatsoever is
good; our Delphian sword, whereby we overcome all our spiritual enemies: our
Aurum potabile, or true Elixar, which raises us up from death unto life: our
Alexipharmacum generale, or precious drug, which is good for all sicknesses,
all sores, all maladies, all miseries. Prayer is Causa and conditio sine qua
non: the cause and condition without which we cannot, and by which we may
obtain any thing at the hands of God, as is evident from that remarkable place
of our Saviors, where three promises are made to three precepts, Marth. 7.7.
all denoting and aiming at one and the same thing. Ask, and ye shall have;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. In these
words something is expressed, and something employed. That which is expressed is
this, Ask by prayer, and ye shall receive what you ask; Seek by prayer, and
ye shall find what you want; knock by prayer, and the ears of the Lord, and
the door of mercy shall be opened unto you. That which is employed in this, No
asking by prayer, no receiving; no seeking by prayer, no finding; no knocking
by prayer, no opening. And therefore seeing prayer is the condition of the
promises, we must not neglect prayer, if we desire the enjoyment, and
accomplishment of the promises. Objection.


Against this it may be objected, Many men obtain many things with out
prayer: therefore prayer is not the condition of the promises.

The Antecedent is proved by these three instances: namely,

First, wicked men who never pray (at least aright) have, Ioh 21.7.8.9.10.11.
what their hearts desire; according to the saying of Job. The wicked are old,
mighty, blessed in posterity, and with presperitie, etc.

2. Infants enjoy many blessings and mercies, and yet praynot. Yea,

Thirdly, the children of God in their mature, and riper years, receive many
favors and pledges of divine love, when they are negligent in this duty of
prayer.

First, to the first I answer, Answer 1. (a) Peter, Galatin.
with Rabbi Solomon. In omniloco, in quo invenis pro boeretic is objectionem,
invenies quoque medicamentum illius in latere ejus. ( a) Whenever; or
wheresoever thou happenest, or meetest with any place, passage, or verse of
holy writ, which might serve an Heritick to ground an objection upon, contrary
to the truth of that sacred volume; look but about thee well, and within a
coyts cast, or within a verse or two of the place objected, thou shall find an
answer to the objection, and a wedge to cleave the knot. Thus he, and thus he
truly; for the objection was built upon verses 10.11. of the 21. Chapter of
Job, and in the 13. verse of that Chapter, the next verse save one: we have
the Hammer which mawles the objection: viz. They spend their days in wealth,
and in a moment go down into hell. Psalm. 73.18.
The answer to the first instance (in a word is this) God gives good temporal
blessings unto wicked men in his anger, as a curse, fatting them up therewith
unto slaughter; and therefore they have small cause to brag, or to be proud
of those things.

Secondly, Answer 2.
to the second instance, I answer two things: to wit,

1. Infants cannot pray as yet: and therefore God requires it not of them. And,

2. Infants do pray by crying. Psalm. 147.9. Ps. 145.15.
The Ravens cry unto God (that is, pray after their manner) and he feeds
them: and thus Infants pray when they cry.

Thirdly, Answer. 3.
to the last instance, I answer: That the mercy of the Lord is like a great
deep, and that he measures not his mercies by the bushel of our merits,
giving many good things unto us, when we are negligent to pray: but this is
more then he has any where promised, the promises being conditional, and
depending upon the condition of prayer, as was proved before. And therefore if
we would be sure that the promises shall be made good unto us, we must not be
negligent, but diligent, constant, frequent, and fervent in prayer.

Thirdly, Reason. 3.
this may likewise be proved by an Argument, A majore ad minus, A majore ad
minus.
taken from the greater to the less. viz.

We are taught by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 6.10. to pray. Fiat voluntas tua:
Thy will be done; now, although he principally speak there. De voluntate
mandati, of his revealed will; yet, voluntas decreti, his secret will is not to
be excluded, as is evident by our Lord himself; who prays himself, Mat.
16.39.
as he commands us to pray: and expressly speaks of the Decree, purpose,
and secret will of God, in these words: Father, not my will, but thy will be
fulfilled: that is, oh Lord, I have prayed, that this Cup might pass from me,
but let it not be as I would have it, but as thou have determined and decreed
it should be in thy secret will.

I frame the Argument this: Argument.
We must pray that the secret will of God may be fulfilled; as we proved even
now: Therefore much more that his promises may be performed unto us. The
necessity of the connection appears thus, Because (as follows afterward) the
Decrees of God are absolute, his promises are but conditional.

It may here be demanded, Question.
is not this petition idle, and vain? Will not God fulfill whatsoever he has
decreed, whether we will or not? Does not Saint Paul say (speaking of his
secret and hidden purposes, Romans 9.19.
and decrees) who has resisted (or can resist) his will?

First, Answer. 1.
certainly the Decrees, and secret Determinations of God, are like the Decrees
and Laws of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be nullified, or made void;
but in his appointed time shall surely be accomplished. But yet,

Secondly, Answer. 2.
there are two things required of all, in regard of Gods secret will, and
Decrees: namely,

1. A desire conjoined with prayer, that we may subscribe, assent, Two things
required of us, in regard of Gods secret Decrees.
and freely submit our selves unto the will and decrees of God without
murmuring. There is in us so much corruption, and self-love, that we are
naturally ready to repine and murmr against God, when his actions cresse our
affections; and his will is repugnant to ours: and therefore we desire that
the Lord would please so graciously to assist us by his grace, and strength,
that we may patiently bear what afflictions and crosses soever he has
decreed to inflict upon us, and to exercise us with all; when (according to his
Decree) he does bring them to pass, and lay them upon us. And,

2. Because in the Lords secret will, he has certainly decreed both the end
and the means; both what blessings he will give us, and what evils he will
remove from us, and free us from: and also what means we must use for the
enjoyment of those good things, and escaping of those evils: therefore we must
humbly beseech the Lord to give us grace, and strength, to fulfill the
conditions that he has decreed shall be fulfilled in us, in some part, before
we shall obtain the blessings which he determines to give us. And thus we
see what we require in regard of our selves, when we desire that Gods secret
will may be performed and fulfilled: as also, that we must use the means of
prayer, if we desire to partake the promises. Now,

Fourthly, Reason. 4.
and lastly, this is further evident thus, Because the duty of prayer is good
in it self, pleasing to our most good God, and good and profitable for us. The
substance, and subject matter, both of this point and text, being prayer, I
must necessarily expatiate, dilate, and enlarge my self in this reason,
something more then in the former.

Three things are here particularly to be handled, viz.

1. That prayer is good in it self. 2. That it is acceptable unto God. 3. That
it is profitable to our selves
First, prayer is a duty, Prayer a good duty in it self.
good in it self, and therefore is not to be omitted, although we enjoyed
whatsoever our hearts could desire. If the Lord in much mercy should withold
no good thing, but all evils from us, shall we therefore neglect good religious
duties? God forbid.

That prayer is good, The proof
appears thus: to wit,

1. Because God in the Old Testament, and Christ and his Apostles in the New,
have commanded us to pray; Ps. 55.15. Esa. 55.6. Luke 18.1.
and therefore prayer must needs be good: For all the Commandments of the Lord
are holy, just, and good Romans 12.12.
. And,

2. Because prayer is a principal part of his worship Luke. 2.37
, and was always both under the Law and Gospel, esteemed by him, as one of his
best, and most acceptable sacrifices Psalm. 50.14. and 141.2 Hosea 14.2. Heb.
13.25. Rov, 5.8. Argument.
: and therefore doubtless it is good.

From these two particulars, I will frame one Categoricall argument for the
confirming of the thing affirmed: viz, that prayer is good in it self.

That which all men were commanded to do, both in the time of both in the time
of the Law by the Father, and in the time of the Gospel by the Son; and which
is a principal part, both of Legal and Evangelicall worship; that must needs
be good.

But prayer is such as has been proved in the foregoing particulars.

Therefore prayer is good. Prayer is pleasing and acceptable unto God.


Secondly, as prayer is good in it self: so it is also acceptable unto God, as
appears thus: to wit,

1. The proof.
God (as we showed even now) commands it: and therefore certainly it is a
duty pleasing unto him, when it is performed well. Shall a father command his
Son to do this or that, and not be pleased with him when he has done it
according to his will? Certainly a good Father will not so do: and therefore
our good and heavenly Father will accept of, and be pleased with that which
himself prescribes, especially if it be performed according to his will. And,

2. The Lord loves to be sued, and sought unto by prayer; and therefore it is
clear that it is pleasing unto him. The more often we go unto him by prayer,
the more welcome we are; the oftener we beg the more liberal he is: the
oftener, and harder that a man shakes the fruit tree, the more fruit falls; and
the more importunate, instant, and incessant we are, the more grateful we
are unto him, and may be the more certain to be heard, if we crave those
things which are agreeable to hsi will. And,

3. By prayer unto God, we show our dependence upon him; and that we neither
trust in gold nor, in the wedge of gold; neither upon any Egyptian reed, nor
adhere unto any arm of flesh: but place our whole trust, hope, confidence, and
dependence, in the Lord our God. Prayer is Conversso cordis and Deum. August.
the turning of the heart unto God, or reflection of the soul upon him: for by
prayer we acknowledge that the Lrod takes care for us, and that it is he who
gives all good things unto us, as follows by and by.

Now this is so pleasing to the Lord of Glory, for a man in all difficulties,
distresses, and straits, to cleave close unto him, and in the greatest
extremities to cling unto him, and trust in him, Job. 13.15.
as Job did, that he has promised to take care for all those who thus
confidently cast their care upon him: and never to forsake those who thus
adhere unto him: neither to fail those who seek for help, and succor from
him alone, etc.

IV. It is further evident thus, that prayer is pleasingunto God, because they
who rightly call upon him, do acknowledge him to be Allwise, All-mighty,
All-good: More particularly.

1 They who rightly call upon the Lord, do acknowledge him to be Omniscient,
one who knows best of all, all their wants, and necessities, etc.

2 Omnipotent, one who is able to supply all their wants, to satisfy all their
desires, to relieve all their necessities, and to remove all their evils, etc.

3 All good, i. e. one who is most bountiful and liberal, ready to give what
we crave, in as much as it is necessary for us; and the alone Author, the
gracious giver, and the liberal doner of every good gift, Iame^ 1.17.
and every perfect being. From these four particular proofs, Argument.
I will (as before) draw one true and clear Syllogism, for the strengthening
of the assertion which I undertook to prove, viz: That Prayer is pleasing unto
God.

That which God commands, and loves: that which argues our dependence upon him,
and proves and testifies him to be, Omniscient, Omnipotent, All-good, and the
Giver of all good; that must needs be pleasing, and acceptable unto him.

But Prayer is such as was proved in the ofure foregoing particulars.

Therefore prayer is pleasing and acceptable unto God, and consequently must
not be omitted or neglected, although we were neither sensible of any want or
any woe.

Thirdly and lastly, Prayer is good and profitable for us.
as prayer is good in it self, and pleasing to our good God, so is it also
good, and profitable unto our selves, as appears thus

1 Prayer is a means to increase, The Proof.
exercise, corroborate, and confirm our faith: therefore it is profitable for
us. When some necessity or occasion pricks forward the child of God to pray,
he considers that his Father has again and again Psalm. 50.15.
promised in his word to hear him, Mat. 7.7. Ioh. 14.13. and 15.14, and 16.23.
Jam. 1.5.
when he calls upon him: and by faith believing these promises, he is
encouraged to pray, and by praying his faith is exercised, faith and prayer
mutually helping one another. Yea, as by prayer faith is exercised, and set on
work, so also thereby it is increased, as appears by the Apostles pithy
ejaculation. Luke 17.5.
O Lord increase our fiath; as also thus, As the seed and habit of faith comes
from God, so does also the augmentation and increase thereof: Ex iisdem
nutrimur, exquibus generamur.
and the means to obtain this, Vsus promptos facit.
or any other mercy from God, is prayer, as was showed before.

Reason 2. Habits we know increase, and get strength by acts. Use makes men
perfect. Scribendo discis scribere, loquendo loque.
By writing and speaking much, we learn at length to wtite and speak,
readily and well; and therefore faith being exercised by prayer, must needs
also be increased thereby. Saint Paul exhorts the Colossians to labor that
they may beconfirmed, fixed, rooted, and grounded in the most holy faith Col.
1.23. and 2.7.
: Now by what means may this be obtained? Our Savior answers hereunto (by his
own example) by prayer. Peter (says he) I have prayed for thee that by faith
should not fail. Luke 22.32.
As if he should say, Thy faith will be so shaken by the bitter blast; of
through trying temptations, that it will be in danger to fail and decay; but I
have prayed for thee, that thou may be firm in faith, and faith confirmed,
and fixed in thee Cristi actio est nostri instructio.
Christ's action is our instruction: and therefore if he pray that Peter's faith
may be like the Cedars of Lebanon, which the winds cannot root up: then by
this means of prayer, we also should labor to confirm, and strengthen our
faith, against all temptations and tribulations whatsoever.

To conclude this particular. If prayer be a means to exercise, augment, and
establish our faith: then is it profitable for us. But it is proved to be such:
therefore it is profitable for us. Now.

II. Prayer does corroborate pious affections in us, yea increases, and
nourishes in us the love of God. For as he who loves b or in prayer, to talk
and discourse with God, and desires to be private with him when occasions will
give leave, does truly testify that he loves him: even so those private
heavenly soliloquies of the soul does augment this love. Or, as mutual
society and discourse does nourish affections, so the lo of God is augmented
by frequent and fervent supplications. The more that friends know the cordial
affections one of another, the more dearly, and entirely they love one
another; and thus is it betwixt God and the righteous, according to that of the
Psalmist. They that know thee, Isal. 9.10.
will (love and) trust in thee. The oftener we converse with the Lord, the
better we shall know, both what he is in himself, and what unto us: and the
more acquaintance we have with him, the more shall we be acquainted with his
love unto us; and the more we are acquainted with the power, purity, majesty,
felicity, and glory of our God, the more we shall trust him, and delight to
acquaint our selves with him: the clearer sight we have of his love unto us,
and the nature thereof, the more will we burn in his love: for as the
bellows blows the sparks into a flame: so fervent prayers, fiery
ejaculations, and divine speculations and contemplations, inflame all the
affetions of our souls with love unto God. And therefore ceries, it is very
profitable for us, And

III. Pure prayers produce sure solace, and a sorrowful supplication begets
solid consolation: according to that of the Poet, Cura precum matter, Sphinx
matrem sua filia pellit,
O felix matter, filia quamque pia est.
that is, Care is the mother of prayer, but by and by the daughter shuts the
mother out of doors, Care, anxiety, grief, and misery, moves and teaches us
to pray: and pious prayers expels all grief and anguish out of the soul.
When men are afflicted, then they pray, and prayer in affliction swalloweth up
care and sorrow in victory. The Father says, Bernard. sermon. 32. ^ Cantic.
Quoties me oration quem paene desperantem susceperat, reddidit exultantem, and
presumentem de venia! That is, I have often fallen upon my knees to make my
suite unto my Lord, with a heart well nigh overwhelmed with the weight of my
sins: but I arose with joy, and returned with comfort, and sure confidence,
and confident assurance of the mercy of God, and remission of my sins. ^ Sam.
1.15.18.
And this we see also clearly in Hannab. Eli seeing her lips move, but hearing
no petitions utered, reproves her for, or charge herw ith drunknesse:
whereunto she answers. I am not drunk, but I am a woman of a sorrowful
spirit; but after she had commended her self, and commenced her suite unto the
Lord, the text says, She went away, and did eat, and her countenance was no
more sad. Prayer begets confidence in the soul, and confidence engenders
peace and tranquillity of conscience: and therefore prayer is profitable for us,
and comfortable unto us. And,

IV. Prayer is like Jacobs Ladder, by which we mount up unto God: and in this
Ladder are four stages, steps, or degrees: to wit,

1 Necessity constrayneth us to pray, and need makes us run unto God: that
is, when we are in a strait, then we turn straight unto God, if there be any
grace or religion in us. And

2 The precept of God commands us to pray; and he who has absolute dominion
and power over us, imposes this duty upon us. And therefore, if there be any
fear of God before our eyes, this will be a second cord to draw us forward
unto prayer. And

3 The promises of God treasured up in the Word, do so certainly assure us to
be heard, that with cheerfulness and comfort we power out our souls, and lay
our hearts open before God, Esa. 37.
as Hezekiah spread hsi letter before him, when he said, See Lord, reard and
consider, And

4 Faith obtaining that which is desired and promised, in certain hope, before
it be actually acquired, or possessed, stays the soul upon God, and causes
the heart to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

If we desire to ascend, or to mount this Ladder more nimbly, then let us step
thus.

First, when necessity pincheth, and poverty paineth us; then we pray.

Secondly, when the Divine precepts enjoyne us to call upon God, then we obey.

Thirdly, when the promises of the Word assure us, that our prayers shall not
be as water spilt upon the ground, or sent forth in vain, but successful and
prosperous, then we fly with swift wings unto God.

Fourthly, when faith engages her self for the Lord, and becomes his
Suertie, that all his promises (whether they concern temporal blessings, or
spiritual graces, or eternal glory) shall in his due time be made good unto
us; then we are content to wait patiently the Lords leisure, and to rest
quietly under the shadow of his wings, until he puta new song of rejoicing
into our mouths, Psalm. 40.1.3.
and satisfies the desires of our hearts.

From these four particulars I will frame one general argument (as I did in
the rest) for the confirming of the thing affirmed; Argument.
to wit, That praer is profitable unto our selves.

That which is a means to exercise, increase, and confirm our faith; that
which begets pious affections, and augmenteth the love of God in us, and brings
comfort unto us, and us unto God, that must needs be profitable for us.

But prayer does all these, as was showed in the four foregoing heads.

Therefore prayer is profitable for us.

Now from he three maine branches of the fourth Reason, I will also extract one
plain Syllogism, for the proof of the Proposition first propounded, viz.
That Prayer must nto be neglected of us, or omitted by us, although we had a
promise of mercy from God.

That which is good in it self, Argument.
and pleasing unto God, and good, and profitable for us, must not be neglected,
or omitted by us, although we had a promise that our wants should be supplied,
and our evils removed.

But Prayer is such a thing as was showed before.

Therefore it is not to be neglected, or omitted by us, although we had a
promise that our wants should be supplied, and our evils removed.

And thus I have confirmed, and strongly (yea I hope convincingly) proved the
truth of the Proposition, The fourth proof of the point.
both by testimonies, and texts of Scripture, and by examples recorded in
Scripture, as also by Reasons, and Arguments deduced from Scripture: and the
fourth proof of the point only remains, namely; the removal of these
rubbes, which are laid in the way contrary to Scripture: For,

First, Object. 2.
some Philosophers and Heretics object, the Scripture says, That God knows
our wants: Luke 12.30.
and therefore we need not pray for the supply of them.

This follows not; for we are not Narratores, Answer.
sed Rogatores, not declarers, but desirers: not Publishers, but Petitioners.
Now it is one thing to tell a thing unto one, who is ignorant thereof, and
another to desire a thing of him who knows our wants: and therefore we must
pray, and explain, and express our wants unto God, although he know them
perfectly before we pray. A similitude.
The beggar thinks it not enough, that the rich man sees him to be naked, and
knows that he is in misery, and almost hunger-starved: but thinks it good
policy, yea very necessary, to move him by his tears and prayers, to add
action to his knowledge, and to supply the wants which he sees him to suffer.
And thus must we do, For the Lord stays until we pray; that being the
ordinary means of attaining our desires. Yea although he know our wants before
we pray, yet he will take no notice of them until we pray; and therefore we
must by prayer make our wants known unto him.

It may be objected again, Object. 2.
If the Lord have made any promise of giving any good thing unto us, Psalm. 77.8.
he will certainly perform it; Psalm. 77.8.
For his promise never fails: therefore we need neither pray for the
performance of the promise, nor for the enjoyment of the thing promised.

First, Answer 1.
the Lord only promises unto us Generalia, general things: as I will be
their Gad; 2 Cor. 6.16.
and I will be thy exceeding great reward Genesis 17.1.
: and whom I once love, I love unto the end Ioh. 13.1.
: And the like: and therefore we should make our particular wants known unto
the Lord by prayer, And

Secondly, Answer 2.
when the Lord promises some particular blessings, such promises are not
generally to be extended, or applied unto all the faithful, but only unto
some: as for example. The Lord promised that those who trusted in him should
have their life given them as a prey in all places: Ier. 39.18. and 45.5.
and yet holy Zachary was slain: and Kingly Esaias was dissected with a saw.
And therefore, if particular promises shall not literally be made good to every
particular pious person: then every one should make his own particular case
particularly known unto the Lord by prayer. And

Thirdly, Answer 3.
when the Lord promises any particular blessings, either generally to all, or
particularly to some only, be promises those things conditionally: for
although the Decrees of God be Categoricall, yet his promises are but
Hypotheticall; and made upon some condition, which must be accomplished, if we
desire the thing promised. Now this condition is prayer, as we sheed before:
and therefore we must pray for the possession of the things promised unto us.

It may yet further be objected. Object. 3.
The Dectees of God are sure, and the end is appointed; and therefore vain is
prayer, and all the means that man can use.

First, Answer 1.
some answer here to the Antecedent negatively. Thom. Angl. in c. 25, Genesis
That Gods counsel, purpose, and predestination is conditional, Deus non
praedestinat talia absolute, sed sub congruis conditionibus: God does not
predestinate such things absolutely, but under certain conditions. Thus he,
but thus must not we answer: because Gods purpose of election and
predestination, is without any condition: as the Apostle says, That the
purpose of God might remain, Romans 9.11.
according to Election, not by works, but by him that calls. In which words
he shows clearly. That Gods election stands not by any condition in him
that is called, but by the will of the caller.

Secondly, Answer. 2.
others answer, Praedestinationem Sanctorum precibus juvari possE, quoad
effectum, licet impediri non possit. That Gods predestination may be helped in
respect of the effect by the prayers of the Saints, though it cannot be hindered
Thom. Aquin. 1. par qn. 23. art. 8.
. Thus he, but not we dare thus answer; because the Apostle says, Who was his
Counceler, or who gave unto him first, Re. 11.35.
and he shall be recompensed? Intimating that the Lord was neither assisted in
his eternal counsel, neither that he can be helped in the execution thereof.

Thirdly, Answer 3.
Greg.
others answer, That God so predestinates eternal life, ut postulando
mereantur accipere, that yet it may be merited by prayer; etc. as Aquine
speaks, that God does (creaturis dignitatem causalitatis communicare)
Communicate to creatures the dignity of being causes. Romans 11.6.
But I allow not of this Answer neither: because the Apostle calls election
of grace, and if it be of grace, it is not of works; therefore works, as
causes cannot be subordinate to election of grace.

Fourthly, Answer. 4.
I answer to the consequent, admitting willingly the Antecedent; That if we
must not use the means where there is a decree, then we must neither eat, nor
take physic, nor apparel our selves, nor follow any trade, nor sow seed, nor
the like; because God has decreed whether there shall be plenty, or scarcity,
whether we shall have health or sickness, poverty or riches, yea how long we
shall live.

Fifthly, Answer 5.
to the consequence I answer again. The decrees of God are certain, therefore
prayer and all means are vain and idle: follows most falsely; for the use of
the means is decreed, as well as the end: and therefore means must be used,
because the Decrees are certain. As God (I say) has predestined the end, so
he has likewise ordained the means and way leading thereunto; therefore by
faith, hope, prayer, and patience, the elect are brought to be partakers of the
happy end; not as causes procuring the same, but as means to assure them
thereof: for these are fruits of our election, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy. 2 Timothy 1.9.
So Ambrose upon these words of the Apostle, who has saved us, etc. not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and grace, thus
infers; Quomodo redintegraretur, praedestinavit, quo tempore, per quos, qua
ratione salvari possunt, ut neque merito suo, qui salvantur, neque horum, per
quos vocantur, sed Dei Gratia istud donum praestari videatur per fidem Christi.
That is, God has predestinate how a man should be restored, at what time, by
whom, and by what means he should be saved, that neither by their merit that
are saved, nor theirs by whom they are called, but by Gods grace this gift is
bestowed by faith in Christ.

Sixthly, Answer 6.
we do not use the means, as though they were sufficient, Opere operato, by
the bare use of them, to procure unto us, the blessings and good things
desired, or promised; (for means are but means, and not efficient causes) but
we use the means in expectation of a blessing from God, in the use of them
Neh. 4.9.21. and 2 Chronicles. 32.6, etc.
.

Seventhly, Answer 7.
the Decrees of God are certain, therefore men's prayers, and all human
means are idle, follows not; for we use not the means for this end or cause,
that we may change, Esa 45.10.
or alter the decree of God (for we know that he declares the end from the
beginning, and from ancient times the things are not yet done, saying, My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure) but we use the means and
pray, or the means of prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5.
for these causes, to wit,

1 Because God has sanctified the means, therefore they must nto be
neglected: and has ordained the means, therefore they must be used if we
would be without excuse. And,

2. Because God has annexed promises to the use of the means. Mat. 7.7. etc.
1. King. 8.38.
. And thus much for the confirmation of the truth of the point, and for the
confutation of the cavils, urged against it. I will now apply it,

First, Use. 1.
A majore ad minus, Is it so then, that where we have promises of mercy and
blessings, we must pray, then much more where we have none: as for example.
Suppose we had a particular promise in the word of God, totidem verbis, that
God would bless this our present Parliament according to our desires; yet we
should pray and pray again, for the performance of that promise and blessing
promised: How much more then when we have no such promise?

If it be objected, Objection. 1 Mat. 18.19.20.
we have a promise, That where two or three are gathered together in the name
of Christ, there the Lord has promised to be present. I answer,

First, Answer. 1.
I grant that this promise may be extended and applied to all Christian
Convocations, Congregations, and Assemblies, conveened and met together to
consult of those things which may concern the good of the Church and State
wherein they live. And,

Secondly, I grant likewise, that not only two or three, Answer 2
but two or three hundred are now convocated, and assembled in the name of
Christ, in the high Court of Parliament, for Christian and Religious ends.

Thirdly, if I should grant also, Answer 3.
that this promise is directed, and reflects directly upon this Honorable
Assembly; yet we must pray for the presence both of the power and grace of
God, to be with them according to his promise; for we are unworthie of those
blessings which we will not vouchsafe to pray for. But,

Fourthly, the truth is, Answer 4.
that this promise is hypotheticall, or conditional; and therefore if we
continue Ponere obicem, to lay stumbling blocks in the Lords way, to provoke
him unto wrath, to fulfill, and fill full to the brim, the conditions of
vengeance, but not of mercy; we then cannot expect the performance of this
promise; for promises which are conditional (as all revealed promises are)
shall not be performed (or at least, we cannot be assured that they shall be
performed) unless the condition be in some measure fulfilled.

If any Pharisee should now stand up and say, Object. 2.
All the Congregation, and people of England are holy; Number. 16.2.
as once Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, said of the people of Israel: or, that we
here in England, have performed all the Lords will, and done whatsoever he
commanded us, 1. Sam. 15.14.
(as Saul once said of himself) and therefore we know that all the promises
of the Lord shall be made good unto us. I then answer,

First, Answer 1.
that if it were so truly, it should be so certainly; if there were nothing
wanting in us, there should be nothing wanting in the Lord. If there were no
provocations in us, there would be no corrections, or correcting rods in the
Lords hand. If we indeed did thus fulfill the conditions, God in truth would
then fulfill his promises. But,

Secondly, Answer 2.
I must answer with Samuel to Saul. If it be thus as you say, then what means
the bleating of these Sheep, and lowing of these Oxen? Let us confess our
sins, and give glory to God; Let us acknowledge in all Christian humility,
that there are little Sheep, and great Oxen amongst us, who bleat, and low
loud in the ears of the Lord. Is there not amongst us here in England,
speaking sins, and silent sins; public sins, and private sins; great
sins, and small sins; crying sins, and tongue-tyed sins; sins of
infirmity, and sins of perverseness and obstinacy? Have we not sins
both in our Superiors, and inferiors; in our professors, and profane
persons; in our rich, and poor; in our Church and State; yea, in the Court,
City, and Country? Certainly, if any place, degree, rank, or quality;
should with Pilate wash their hands, and publish their innocence; it would be
like Pilates washing indeed, a proclaimer of their guilt, not of their purity.
Jonah. 3.5.
And therefore seeing our sanctity does not deserve a blessing, but rather our
sins a curse: if we desire a blessing upon this Honorable Assembly: We must
then not urge or plead our merits, but do as the Noble Ninivites did: to wit,

1. Repent us truly of all our sins; not excusing, but accusing our selves:
not extenuating, or denying, but amplifying, and acknowledging our iniquities.
Let us consider the nature and number of our sins, the quantity and quality
of our transgressions, against whom we have sinned, and what we have merited
for so sinning; that the serious consideration of these, may breed and beget in
us, sighs and sobs for our sins, and bring forth tears of true repentance.
As a soldier is no body without his armor; nor armor without a soldier: so
prayer is nothing without fasting, nor fasting with out prayer. Chrysostom. hom.
15. in Mat.
In a word, let us from the heart, and with the heart, bewail the sins we
have committed, and never turn any more to the sins we have bewailed. Let us
wash our souls with the tears of contrition, and never any more pollute them
with the stains of sin. And,

2, Let us fast, and humble our selves in dust and ashes, let the inward sorrow
of the heart be expressed outwardly in the life; let the body abstain from
meat, and both body and soul from sin; that we may be the better prepared
for prayer, which two should always go together.

3. Let us pray, and that mightily unto God, for the pardon and remission of
our sins, the removal and aversion of evils, and the continuance of all
graces and mercies: especially for the prosperous success of this long-desired
Parliament. Oh let us here wrestle with manfull wrastlings, and tugge with the
Lord, even the Almighty God of Jacob, for a blessing upon their consultations
and meeting; yea, let us not let him go, until he have granted this our
request: let us again and again, with the most intent ardour of our
affections, humbly beseech the Lord, so by his all-wise and all-good
providence, and Almighty power, to order and dispose of this business, that
no sinister accident, or occasion may cause the dissolution, or breaking up
thereof, until religion and peace be established in Church and State, and all
the greevances of the Commonwealth be redressed, and whatsoever is amiss in us
in some good measure rectified. And,

4. Then let us hope for mercy, 2. Cor. 7.10.11.
and favor from God; that is, let us repent with a repentance never to be
repented of: let us sorrow for our sins, with a sorrow never to be sorrowed
for: let us humble our selves sincerely in dust and ashes before the Lord: Let
us pray with strong cries unto him for a blessing, and blessed success upon
this Noble and religious Assembly; and then trust in him who is faithful in
all his promises, and confidently exspect that our prayers shall be heard, our
suite granted, and our desires satisfied: but of this more by and by.

Secondly, Use. 2.
let us hence further be persuaded to use the means diligently and
constantly. This Use is deduced and derived thus, If the faithful flock and
peculiar people of God, must not idely expect the performance of those promises
which God makes unto them; but must labor by prayer for the fulfilling and
accomplishment of them: then it is our duty to use the means, if we desire a
happy event.

Two things we have here particularly, and a part to consider of; to wit, That
means must be used, and that we may then expect what God has promised.

First, ordinary and lawful means, must ordinarily and lawfully be used. Now
in this branch we have four particulars, particularly to point out unto you:
to wit,

First what Means are: here note, The definition or description of Means.
that Means are so called of the middle place which they hold, between the
efficient and final causes, or the Agent and Act: serving the one, for the
furthering and atchieving of the other. And so all creatures, whether persons,
or things, come under this account, in respect of him, from whom, and for whom
all things are. And thus whatsoever we are commanded to use, or do use
lawfully, for the attaining of any lawful thing, which is desired by us; or
wanting unto us, or necessary for us; it is called Means. And,

Secondly, The necessity of the Means.
we must now consider the necessity of Means, and the use thereof. We must
not say with that profane person. Si salvabor, salvabor, si damnabor,
damnabor; if God have writ my name in the Lambs white book of life, then I
shall never see death, do what I will: on the contrary, if God have writ my
name in the black book of reprobation, then I shall never come unto
salvation, though I use all the means thereunto that possibly I can. Let us
not say, Homo proponit, Deus disponit. We may purpose and practice what we
will, but the purpose of God shall stand, and his providence does dispose of
all things: for although this be most true, yet so is this also. That secret
things belongs unto God, and revealed things unto men. And therefore let us not
look to that which we can never see, nor pry into that which we can never
understand, nor enquire after that which we can never find out; I mean the
Decrees, purposes, and secret will of God: But let us look to his revealed
will, and precepts, and therein we shall see the necessity of the use of
ordinary and lawful means. The necessity of the means appears two manner of
ways unto us: to wit, 1. Because it is evil to neglect the Means. 2. Because
it is good to use the Means.


1. To neglect lawful and ordinary Means is evil, it being either,

1. Desperateness, when a man is without hope of reaping good by them:
although God have annexed, and promised a blessing unto the use of them. Or,

2. Unthankfulness unto God, who provides them as helps against our
infirmities, and wants. Or,

3. Sloth, when a man will not trouble himself with the use of the Means,
although the Lord have commanded the use of them. Or,

4. A presumptuous tempting of God, when a man expects good without the use of
them: for we tempt God in his promises, when we hope to enjoy what we
desire, although we neglect the use of those lawful means which God has
allowed, and commanded us to use. The Devil tempts Christ thus to tempt the
protection, Mat. 4.7.
and providence of God, but he would not; and therefore no more must we: but
acknowledge that the neglect of lawful and ordinary means is evil and
sinful. And,

2. As the necessity of good means appears by the evilnesse of the neglect
thereof, so also by the goodness of the careful use thereof. For,

1. In the diligent use of natural means, (as meats, medicines, apparel,
circumspection, and the like) we show most wisdom, and that we are not like
beasts without understanding.

2. In the careful use of supernatural means, as Prayer, Fasting, the Word,
Sacraments, and the like, we show most grace, and that we are not as men
which know not God. But of this by and by in the fourth particular: viz. what
means we must use.

Thirdly, Two Cautions concerning the use of the Means. Caution 1.
we have here further two Cautions to be observed in the use of the means;
namely,

1. In the use of the means remember the end. Separate not those which God
has conjoined; sever not the means from the end, nor the end from the means.
A similitude
A messenger must not so mind his way that he forget his errand. To separate
the means and end whereunto ordinarily they lead, is vanity in all courses:
but in divine matters, or matters of much moment, mere madness. He who
sins without repentance, and yet hopes to escape hell, separates the end
from the means. He who expects heaven without faith and obedience, separates
the means from the end which he aims at. And those who look to the Court of
Parliament whereunto they are called, and consider not the end wherefore they
are thereunto called ( viz. the Glory of God, the honor of his sacred
Majesty, the prosperity of the Commonwealth, the welfare of the Commons, the
peace of the land, and the advanceme^t of true religion) separate the end from
the means. But, Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos; My tractate may be called the
pious man's practice in Parliament time; not the duty of Parliament men, and
therefore these not belonging much unto us, being above us, I will therefore
pass them by, and pass unto the second Caution which concerns us: namely,

2. Ascribe not too much to the means used. Caution 2.
Here observe that we ascribe, and give too much to the use of the means two
manner of ways: to wit,

1. When we conceive and hold the means so necessary, that we fall into the
use of unlawful means, as Saul did, when he went unto the Witch at Endor; 1.
Sam. 28.17.
and Ahaziah, when he sent unto Beelzebub the God (or Idol) of Ekron. 2. King.
1.2.
When there is any thing amiss in Church or Commonwealth, we must not for
the rectifying thereof, have recourse to insurrections, rebellions, seditious
practices, or any unjust, or unwarrantable courses, but only unto lawful
means; as making our moan to Magistrates, and commencing our complaints unto
them, and making known our greevances unto Parliaments, and the like. And,

2. We ascribe too much to the use of the means, when we attribute help unto
them, or trust in them: as Asah, 2. Chron. 16.12.
who did not only use Physic (for that was lawful) but trusted in the
Physicians, which was unlawful. And hence sometimes the means fail, and
succeed not: as we see in Gehazies laying his Masters staff upon the child.
Wherefore, 2. King. 4.31.
if we desire the continuance, and prosperous success of this Parliament; let
us not trust in it, but in God by it: Let us not ascribe any thing unto the
means, nor place any confidence in the means, but only desire the blessing
of God upon them, and upon all their consultations. Let us look upon God as
the alone Author, and gracious Giver of all good, and beseech him so to direct,
instruct, and assist those his servants and instruments, that he may do much
good unto us by their means. For if we shall look no further than the
assembly, or persons assembled, and expect a blessing upon their endeavors,
without having an eye to the blessing and assistance of God, we should then a
scribe too much to the means used. And thus much for the Cautions.

Fourthly, The means to be used is Prayer.
consider we now what means must be used by us for the obtaining of the end of
our desires and wishes.

The means which our Text teaches us to use, for the removal of evils, and
the obtaning of the promises, is Prayer. Here therefore therein observe only
two things (and that very briefly) viz. 1 What prayer is. And 2. How it must be
so qualified, that it may be a means to procure unto us our desires, and Gods
promises.

Prayer may be thus defined: Definition of Prayer.
It is the colloquie, or discourse of the soul with God: or it is the
spiritual assent of the soul unto God, begging at his hands those things
which concern his glory, the salvation of our souls, the preservation of our
bodies, lives, and estates, according to his will, in, by, and through the
merits of Christ.

If it be demanded, Question.
how may we be certain, that our prayers which we power out before, and offer
up unto the Lord; shall be heard, and granted? I answer briefly from the Text.

First, Answer 1.
pray unto one who is able to help us, as poor men beg of rich, and not of
the poor, so let us direct our supplications, and send up our requests unto
the Lord our God, who is omnipotent, able to do whatsoever he will in heaven
and earth; and above all that we are able to ask or think. For thus does our
holy Prophet in the Text, O, God save us with thy right hand. And,

Secondly, let us be such, Answer 2.
as God has promised to help. The person here praying unto the Lord, Psalm.
119.
is David, who served him with a perfect heart, and kept his Commandments with
his whole heart; and therefore the Lord did preserve him, Ioh. 9.31.
according to his promise made unto him. This was a truth so clear, that a
blind man could see it, that God hears not finners, but if any man be
righteous, him he will hear. And therefore let us hear God, if we desire that
he should hear us. Let us purge our selves from sin, as he commands, and
then he will preserve us as he has promised. Let us sincerely serve him, and
he will surely save us. And

Thirdly, Answer 3.
let us ask such things as he has promised to give, and grant, or which are
agreeable unto his will, and pleasing unto his Majesty. Matt. 6.13.
The Psalmist prays here for preservation from evil, and our Savior teaches
us to pray. Deliver us from evil: and therefore it is agreeable to the will of
God that we should pray for protection against evils, and for the removeall of
them when they lie upon us. And

Fourthly, Answer 4.
let us pray unto God in that manner, that himself has prescribed; that is,

1 Let us pray for others; not for our selves only: as David here does. And

2 For general blessings let us pray generally, when two consent together,
Mat. 18.19.
and offer up their prayers with one accord, their voice is heard. And

3 Let us pray fervently. That bird is held best, that sits upmost in the
neast, and draws in most spirits: and those are the best petitioners, who are
still gaping up to heaven fervently by prayer. It was said of Luther, Quod
voluit, potuit: He was so fervent, and zealously earnest in his prayers unto
God, that he could obtain any thing at his hands. Luke 18.11.
And

4 Let us continue and persevere in prayer until our suit be heard, and
supplication granted, or the will of God revealed concerning the thing which we
pray for. To sum up all this in few words, let us all labor that our persons
may be pleasing and acceptable unto God; and our hearts and lives purged from
all pollution of sin, and beautified, and adorned with purity and sanctity:
and then let us all cry mightily unto God, (because vis unita fortior, many
faithful persons joining together in fervent prayers, do quickly prevail with
God) Let us all (I say) pray, yea let us all pray fervently unto our God (who
is able to help us) for the good success of this present Christian assembly,
and let us continue these our prayers for the continuance thereof, and a
blessing thereupon, until the Lords will be revealed concerning the event,
fruit, and effect thereof. Thus we have done with the former branch of this
last Use, to wit, That means must be used: the second and last only remains,
namely, that we having used these means, which God has commanded, and as he
commanded, we may then confidently expect the blessings and mercies promised
and desired; which was the second general.

What has God promised? Question. Answer. Mat. 18. Ioh. 14.13. and 15.16. and
16.23. Iam. 1.5.


That where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the
midst of them: and that whatsoever we ask of him, in the Name, and for the
sake of Christ our Lord, we shall receive. And therefore let us with one
tongue, one voice, one mind, one heart, from the heart, and with the utmost
intention of the heart, pray unto God, in the name of his dear Son, and our
sweet Savior Jesus Christ to bless, prosper, assist, aid, direct and
sanctify, all those who are assembled, both for Church and commonwealth, and
to make the Assemblies successful, according to our desires, and necessities:
and so to instruct, and enable them, that such wholesome laws may be enacted
and established by them, that we may enjoy the blessings of peace, unity,
concord, prosperity, and the preaching of the Gospel in purity and sincerity.
Amen, Amen.

Proposition. 2.
The first Proposition being thus finished, I proceed unto the second, viz.

That the Lord exercises sometimes, his most beloved people, and Nations, or
his chosen National Churches, and dearest commonwealths, with great
afflictions, calamities, and miseries. Or, those Churches and commonwealths
which have been sometime, or for a long time, the people of God, and above all
other people most beloved of him, are sometimes brought by him into great
distress, and most gievous desertion. Or, the Lord does sometimes severely
punish, sometimes wholly desert, sometimes for a long while forsake a people
that has been dear unto him.

How naturally this note arises from the Text, How the point arises from the
text.
will easily appear, if we do but observe these two things, in the Psalmists
supplication. viz.

First, for whom he prays: namely, for the people of Israel, the Lords chosen
people, who were so dear unto him. And

Secondly, Preservation twofold.
for what he prays: to wit, for salvation, or preservation. Now this is
twofold, and accordingly thereunto we pray for it two manner of ways, For 1
Sometimes we pray to be preserved from some evil, either feared by us, or
hanging over our heads. Deliver us from evil. And 2 Sometimes we pray for
preservation out of, or deliverance from some evil, which afflicts us, pains
us, lies upon us, and is felt by us. And of this preservation the Text speaks:
as is clear from verses 1.2.3.10. The Proposition proved. 1 By the
comminations of the Word. 1 Samuel 12.22.25. Exodus 3. and 4. and 5. Deuteronomy.
32.10.16.19.22. Hos. 12.14. and 13.1. Ier. 11.16, 17. Lament 2.15.16. Ezech.
16.8.15.27.39.46. Revel. 2. and 3. and 4.2 By examples.
Save O Lord with thy right hand, that is, Preserve thy beloved and chosen
people by thy power, who are now grievously afflicted by thy heavy hand. The
truth of the Proposition may be evinced.


First, by these, and the like comminations, and threatenings of the Lord. The
Lord will not forsake his people, for his great Names sake: because it has
pleased the Lord to make you his people. But if ye do wickedly ye shall
perish; both you and your King. And

Secondly, by these and the like examples, viz: of Israel in Egypt: and
afterward: and of Ephraim, and of Judah; and of Jerusalem, and of the Church
of the Jews: and of many more particular National Churches: And

Thirdly, by these and the like similitudes, 3 By similitudes.
when the body is impure, it must be purged. When the dross obscures the gold,
it must be melted and refined. When the house is nastie it must be swept. When
our clothes are foul, they must be washed. When the sore or wound is
gangrened, or festered, it must be corroded, lanced, or cut. When tares
overspread the come, or weeds over-runne the herbs, there is need of sharp
hooks, Mat. 3.12.
and weeding knives. And thus when a Church gathers soil, and is spotted with
sin, and overspread with impiety, the Lord then (and not without need) does
purge it by the fire of affliction. As children who are loved, Heb. 12.7.8.
are by correction reduced, reformed, and reclaimed, from their wicked
practices: So when the people of God erres and goes astray, the Lord with the
rod of correction calls them back from their errors. And

Fourthly, the truth of the point will appear, by an argument a majore ad
minus, 4 A majore ad minus.
viz. The Lord does sometimes most grievously afflict his elect, and peculiar
servants (I mean the members of the invisible and spiritual Church) as both
experience and Scripture does abundantly testify: and therefore no wonder if
he afflict outward and visible societies. And

Fifthly, it is clear from the donation, 5 From the Lords donation.
and expectation of the Lord: for he having showed more mercies, and afforded
more means unto them than unto other Nations, does correct their iniquities
with a rod, and their sins with scourages, as follows by and by. And

Sixthly, 6 From the nature of God. Ier. 18.7.8. Ezech. 18, 20. Ier. 22.24. Act
10.34.
this also appears from the nature of God; who is no respecter of persons, but
infinitely just, and in his justice will not suffer sin to go unpunished, no
not in those who have been in his esteem, as the signet on his right hand.

If this be thus, Question.
then how can the Covenant which the Lord makes with his people be true?

The Covenant of God is twofold; Answer.
namely either

First, with the Catholic, and true invisible Church; and this Covenant is
most firm, sure, and certain. Exodus 6.4. Ierem. 31.32. Isaiah 54.10. and
61.8. Ezech. 37.26. Or

Secondly, with some persons, or particular societies, families, kindreds, or
the like, Genesis 17.7.9.10.11.13.14. and this covenant is twofold, to wit, either
1 Tropologicall; and such was the Covenant which was made between God and
Abraham's seed; for thereby were not meant literally his seed, according to the
flesh, Zac. 11.10.
but figuratively the children of his faith. Or 2 Hypotheticall, and
conditional: and such are all the Covenants which the Lord makes with any
People, Nation, or Lanauge, Exodus 19.5. Deuter. 4.7, 8, 9. And therefore if
they fulfill not the condition of the Covenant, the Lord may justly cast them
off; without any just impeachment or breach of covenant.


Seventhly and Lastly, 7 From the nature of sin.
it is evident that the Lord sometimes deserts, and casts off that people which
were once precious and dear in his sight, from the nature of their sins;
viz. because of all sins theirs are the greatest, and worst. The falls, and
faults of Christians (after they have embraced, and known the Gospel) are
worse than the failings of Heathens, and infidels, who are not instructed by
the Word. And as their sins are greater, so shall also their punishment be;
for he who knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with more
stripes, than he who offends ignorantly. Infidels have only the Law of nature,
but Christians the Law of God, Infidels only the light of nature, but
Christians the light of the Gospel. Infidels had only Idolatrous Priests, and
Moral Philosophers to teach and instruct them: but Christians are taught by
the true Ministers and Messengers of Christ. In Insidels there is an invincible
ignorance (the mere natural man not being able to understand spiritual
things) but in Christians a vincible, 1 Cor. 2.14.
they being taught by the Gospel, which is the ordinary and ordained means of
knowledge. The sins of Heathens do not so much embolden others to do the
like, as do the sins of Christians. Neither do the sins of those so much
scandalize Religion, or dishonor God, as the sins of these. And therefore if
we here in England commit the sins of Heathens, Infidels, Indians, Jews, or
Turks, we are worse then any of them (Godhaving done more for us, and given
more unto us, than for, or unto them) and we may justly expect greater plagues
to be powered down, and more direful and dismal judgments to be inflicted
upon us, then are ordinarily executed upon the most wicked unbeleeving wretches.

Because, Question.
the Lord is just in all his judgments, and righteous in all his ways, it may
therefore be demanded; Why the Lord afflicts those places which sometimes he
prized?

First, Answer 1.
sometimes he does this for the trial of his servants. Here we musty note,
that calamities and miseries are either, 1. Two sorts of calamities.
Corporal, which are generally, indefinitely, indiscriminately, and without
difference, inflicted upon all, or some of all sorts: as plague, pestilence,
famine, sword, sickness, and the like. Or, 2. Spiritual, as heresies,
schisms, errors, and persecution; and these the Lord permits sometimes to
overrunne a National Church, or State, for the trial of his faithful flock
Casta est quam nemo rogavit: that is, As a Woman is not known whether she
will stand chaste, till she has been sollcited of vicious men, and then she
is discerned: Chryso. (...) in Epist. Romans
so the says of the Church is not well known, until by heresies, errors, the
coming of Antichrist, and persecution, she be thoroughly tried. But here were
must note again, that this trial is not for the Lords sake, as though he knew
not who were his, or what his were, or what was in their hearts (for the Lord
knows even our very thoughts, long before they are conceived, but it is for
our sakes, and the sakes of others, viz. that the Church may see whether we are
sincere, or hypocritical, whether builded upon the rock, or upon the sand:
and that we may be the more purged, refined, and confirmed by these trials.


Secondly, Answer 2.
although (as we have showed) the Lord sometimes afflicts his children (by
some spiritual afflictions) both for their trial, and also that their says
thereby may be like fined gold; yet he never lays any common corporal
calamity upon any State or Nation, but for sin: and therefore we answer now
secondly to the foregoing Question, that when God powers down the Viols of his
wrath upon any people, land, or language, that it is for their sins
committed, and their continuance in sin. For as no Nation is so dear unto
God, but a presumption of continuing in sin will separate them from him;
Ezech. 18.24.
as we proved before: so no Nation that ever was dear unto God was rejected by
him, but for their iniquity, obstinacy, impenitencie, Chrysostom. hom. 32. oper.
amperf.
and hardness of heart. As a wife is not put from her husband, but only for
fornication: so no people, Church, or State is put from Christ, but only for
transgression. And therefore if the Lord should give us in this land, at this
time a stone for bread or a Scorpion for fish; that is, answer us with a curse,
when we pray for a blessing; and cross our expectation in the success of this
honorable Parliamant; and when we desire to be refreshed with his mercies,
cause us to drink the cup of his fury; and when we crave peace in Church and
State, permit sedition and schism, to rend our bowels out of our bellies: If
(I say) the Lord in his justice should thus deal with us, we must confess,
and acknowledge, that we have no more, no not so much, as we have deserved,
long ago for our many great, and heinous sins.

For application of this, Use.
let no Church or Nation whatsoever trust to any external covenant,
privilege, prerogative, or precedent mercy, or favor whatsoever. This may be
applied to the Churches both of Rome, and England.

First, The proposition applied to the Church of Rome. Revet. 1.11. Ephesus.
Smyrna, Forgamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia Laedicea.
let not the Church of Rome brag of, or adhere to this, that once she was a
true, yea pure, and beloved Church: for so also were once the Churches of
Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica, yea those seven Oriental Churches mentioned,
Revel. 1.2.3. all which are now utterly subverted, and rooted out. There have
been fair and flourishing Churches in Macedonia, Asia, and Africa, as well as
Rome, which now are wholly deserted: and the reason is, because if once the
doctrine of a Church become to be fundamentally corrupted, then the Church is
rejected: and Saint Paul does admonish the Church of Rome, of this very thing.
Because of unbelief the Jews were broken off, and thou stand by faith.
Romans 11.17.
Be not high-minded but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches,
take heed lest he also spare not thee. Yea, Histories tell us, That that proud
City Rome, who has lifted up her head above all others, and usurped a tyranny
over Nations, has been humbled for all her pride, and impoverished for all
her riches, and made a prey unto many Nations. It was sacked and ransacked
twice by the Visigothes, taken once by the Herulians, surprised by the O
strogothes, destroyed and rooted up by the Vandales, annoyed by the Lumbards,
pilled and spoiled by the Grecians, and whipped and chastised by many others;
and we hope are long, that she shall receive the last blow of the indignation
of the most Mighty, to throw her headlong into everlasting, and horrible
desolation. And for matter of Religion, I should desire no easier task, then
to prove: That the present Religion of the Church of Rome does substantially,
and sundamentally differ from the Religion professed by Rome in the Apostles
time. But because I speak of our selves, and our own Commonwealth, I will
therefore pass over Rome, and apply what has been said unto our selves.

Secondly, The Proposition applied to the Church of England.
let not the Church of England, nor any person therein boast of, or trust unto
any outward privilege, or prerogative whatsoever. A Quaere, or two may here
be made: as namely,

First, some may demand, Question 1.
What outward things any person or Church either adhere unto, or presume of, or
trust in?

First, Answer 1.
some trust to their outward works performed, as the Papists in their Tenet O
peris operati, of the work wrought. But we must not adhere to these: for many
Philosophers were eminent, and singular for moral virtues; and Herod did many
things, and yet perished at the last for ought we know. Acts 4.12. Romans 12.6.
Yea, the Scripture testifies abundantly, that there is no way unto salvation,
but only by faith in Christ. And,

Secondly, Answer 2.
many trust to their outward profession, or rely upon this, That they are
members of a true Church. The Rabbis tell us, That when all the world besides
(who were without the Arc) perished in the deluge; Og, the King of Basan, got
astride upon the Arc, and saved himself by riding thereon. Thus (as the
Prophet says) many ride a stride upon the Church, crying Templum Domini,
Templum Domini, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and hope to be
saved because they are within the palle of a true Church, and make profession
of the true Religion. But we must not trust to this neither, that being not so
old as true, which Saint Augustine says, Multi in Ecclesia, qui non sunt de
Ecclesia; There are many who are within a true Church, which are not of the
true Church: many are members of the visible Church, Exodus 12.38
who are not me^mbers of the invisible. It is said, A great multitude of sundry
sorts of people went out of Egypt with the people of Israel. Now as among these
Israelites there were many other people mingled, which were to have no part in
the inheritance of Canaan: so there are many hypocrites, and carnal men in the
visible Church, which shall have no part in the Kingdom of God: for many are
called, but few be chosen. Again, as in this great mixed multitude, there were
four companies, viz. First, of those who were fighting men. Secondly, of weak
persons, as women, and children. Thirdly, of strangers. Fourthly, of beasts and
cattle: so in the Church of God. or in any true visible Church, there are,
First, such as are strong in faith. Secondly, the weak and frail. Thirdly,
hypocrites, which in outward show join themselves to the Church, as those
strangers did. Fourthly, carnal, and worldly men, profane persons; yea Devils
incarnate, which may be compared unto beasts. And therefore let neither there
all of us, in this land, in general, nor any of us in particular, trust unto
this, that we are members of the Church of England, which is a true Church, and
professes the truth, and true Religion.

It may here now be demanded, Question 2.
Does no prerogative belong to a true outward visible Church? or, are we never
a whit the better for being within a true Church, which purely professes the
truth.

There is an external prerogative of a true external Church, Answer.
which is not to be contemned, or despised. The Prophet David had rather be a
doore-keeper in the house of God, Psalm. 8.4. Romans 13 1.2. etc. and 9.4.
then to dwell in the tents of wicked men; because the Christian every way (as
the Apostle says) has great privileges, above Heathens who are without the
Church: For in the Church are the means of grace and salvation offered; Psalm.
79.6. Ier. 10.25.
and there, or by those within the Church the Lord is more easily entreated;
and is more difficultly provoked unto anger against them. Yea, in a true Church
we see many burning and shining lights, which animate, attract, and encourage
us to the practice of piety: and therefore it is no small prerogative to be
made a member of a true Church: neither should our care be small in learning,
and laboring so to live that we do not provoke the Lord to deprive us of
this great blessing, and blessed privilege, by taking away the Candle, or
removing the Candlestick out of his place, or letting out his Vineyard to
other Husbandmen, who will be more thankful, profitable, and obedient unto
him, then we have been. And thus much for the second answer to the first
Question.

Thirdly, Answer. 1
sometimes we trust to precedent mercies, and deliverances. some in this land
dow often say, The Lord has not dealt so with any Nation, as with ours, in
giving us pious, prudent, and religious Princes, who zealously, and
courageously maintain, and defend the true Faith, and in continuing his Gospel
among us, and peace, prosperity, and plenty, unto us so long a time; and in
preserving us from the Spanish Armado, or Bravado in 88. and that unparallelled
Powder Plot, and all the plots, counsels, and consultations of the Jesuits, and
all the Whoores brood, who inendtd mischief against our Estate. And therefore
we may be secure in this land, because the Lord (we know) will be unto us one
and the same to day, and to morrow, and for ever. I answer hereunto.

1. That this is most true, that the Lord has long dealt most graciously with
England, in all the particulars instanced upon. And,

2. That the mercy of the Lord is above all his works, and greater then all
our sins. And

3. That if we would live sincerely, as Ammi, the Lords people, he would never
then (so long as we so continued) pronounce against us Loammi, that we should
be no longer his people. If we were ready to embrace the Lords offers, or
careful to walk worthy of his love, he would never then denounce against us,
Lonuchama, that he would no more be merciful unto us. For the Lord is
immutable in himself, and these changes are in us; and if we do not fall
from truth unto error, from sanctity unto sin, from profession unto
profaneness, from religion to rebellion, from God unto Satan, the Lord will
never fail nor forsake us, but continue to be our God, and continue us to be
his people. But,

4. If we abuse his mercy, Romans 11.2^
and long-suffering, and prove like those evil. Husbandmen, or that wicked
servant, we must then expect, that mercy will give way to justice, and
judgment; and we (through the Lords just anger) shall become as miserable a
Nation, as ever we were happy by his free mercy and goodness: And therefore
let us adorn that profession which we have undertaken: Let us make religion
our Sparta, 1. Pet. 2.12
and labor to beautify it by righteousness, holiness, sobriety, and
temperance; that those without the Church may be wone unto her, by our holy
lives, and godly conversations coupled with fear: and then we may be
confidently and comfortably assured, that the Lord will be as a wall of brass
about us, and hedge us about with a guard of angels, and protect, defend, and
preserve us from all our enemies, and all who have evil will at this our Sion,
whether foreign, or domestical; and establish Religion and peace in our
Borders, and continue his Gospel in purity, and sincerity amongst us, even
until the second coming of Christ unto judgment. Amen.

Fourthly, Answer. 4.
some particular persons presume of their communicating of the Sacraments: some
will say, they were baptized, and have been at the Lords table; and therefore
they conclude; Tush, 1 Pet. 2.21.
no evil will come unto them. But we must know, that there is an outward
washing in Baptism (as Saint Peter says) as well as an inward; and many are
washed by water, who were never purged from all their fins by the blood of
Christ. And S. Paul tells us, that all the Israelites were baptized in the Cloud
and in the Sea, and were all made partakers of the same spiritual me ate, 1 Corinthians. 10. 5.8.
and drink; and yet many of them perished. The Evangelists tell us, that Judas
ate, with his Master, the Paschall Lamb, and received a sop from him, and yet
died in damnable desperation; and the Apostle says, that many communicate the
outward elements in the Eucharist to their own damnation. And therefore let
not us trust to the outword work, 1 Cor. 11.20.
or to the partaking of the outward elements only for these alone profit
nothing: but let us labor for the baptism of the spirit, and true
regeneration, and endeavor to eat Christ by a faith unfeigned, Luke 10.20.
and then we shall have greater cause of joy and rejoicing, than if we had
power to cast out devils, to cure the sick, to raise the dead, and to remove
mountains.

Secondly, Quest. 2.
it may further be demanded: why we in England may not presume of those many
and great privileges which we have above many, yea the most, if not all,
other Nations?

First, no outward thing will profit or advantage us at all, Answer 1.
as was showed before; romans 2.2.6.
and therefore we must not trust to any such thing. And

Secondly, Answer. 2.]
our Church and State has long continued without any desolation or alteration:
and therefore we have the more cause, not to be high minded, but to fear: For
Ominum rerum est vicissitudo, there is a revolution of times, and a vicissitude
of all things. But yet our long enjoyment of Peace and the Gospel, shall be
neither cause nor means of the depriving us of them, if we be but obedient to
the Gospel, thankful for the Gospel, and profitable and fruitful in every
good work under the Gospel. But

Thirdly, Answer 3.
Hinc illae lachrymae: whereas the longer we enjoyed the means, and light of
the Word, we should have been the better, and more zealous, holy and
fruitful: we have contrarily been worse; and more cold, wicked, and barren.
And although (with the Church of Ephesus) we have yet many good things in us,
yet like her, Revel. 2.2. ^ etc.
we have fallen from our first love, and the Lord has daily more and more
things against us. And therefore let us not presume, but (as she was
admonished) remember from whence we are fallen, and repent, and do our first
works, and shine, and burn as formerly, yea daily more and more even unto the
perfect day, lest the Lord come against us speedily (as he there threatens)
and remove our Candlestick out of his place, And

Fourthly, Answer 4.
we in this land must nor trust to any outward prerogatives, or former
covenants; because all external covenants, which the Lord makes with any
people, or Nation, Church or State, are but conditional (as was proved before)
and therefore except we perform the Articles of agreement, and conditions on
our part. viz: obedience, repentance, faith, thankfulness, and love, we
cannot expect the performance of the Lords promise.

Thirdly, Quest. 3.]
it may yet further be demanded, by what means this our Church, State, and
Country of England may be still confirmed, and established in prosperity and
peace, and preserved and saved from those direful distresses, and doleful
miseries, and calamities, which the Lord inflicts sometimes upon those parts of
the world, and place; which have been most dear unto him, and precious in his
sight?

Do we desire this? Answer.
I know all true English hearts do desire it: and therefore the way thereunto,
or means to obtain it, are these, viz,

1 Take heed that we do not provoke the Lord unto anger by our sins, and
then we may trust him for our safety. He has had a care of us a long time, and
he will still be careful of us, if we be but careful to please him, and
fearful to offend him. He has carried us in his bosom, and nourished us,
and extraordinarily increased us, who were but little in the times of
Wickliffe, Husse, Luther, and Tindall: and he will still continue to educate,
and instruct us, if we will but willingly be instructed by, and obedient unto
his sacred behests. Hitherto Satan has raged, and the Jesuits, and Iebusites
conspired against us; but our good God (for which ever blessed, and praised be
his holy Name) has hitherto laughed them to scorn, and infatuated the
devices, and confounded the plots intended against us. And if we do not
incense, and exasperate him by our sins, he will quickly confound our foes,
and not subject us to their rage. And

2. Let us in the state of our souls, Toto divisorbe Britannos.
or spiritual condition, resemble the situation of this Island of little
Britain. All our Historians, Chronologers, and universal Maps, tell us, that
England is (as it were) thrust out of the world, or separated from it, because
it stands at the very outside thereof. Let us Englishmen be thus; that is, let
us not be of the world, although we are in the world; but separated from the
world. Let not unlearne the vices, evil customs of other Countries; let not
us follow pride, or profaneness, or drunkenness, or gluttony, or
superstition, or covetousness, or swearing, or atheism, and the like, as some
other Nations do, (and as we have long done, and still do, too too much) but
let us follow (the Prophet Esaiah's counsel, Esa 52.11
and be admonished by his caveat, to depart and come out stom them, to learn
no unclean thing of them, nor in sin to partake take with them, lest we
also partake of their plagues; but to labor that we may be clean and pure,
and the Lords Peculiar people, because he has done great things for us in
this land. And

3 Let us labor to be a fruitful flock, and folk in every good work. For
as every tree in Paradise was fair and fruitful? so England would certainly
be another Paradise, if every plant and person therein were such. And therefore
if we desire to grow green, and to flourish, like the plants of Paradise, let
us all labor to abound in the works both of Religion, and righteousness; and
endeavor that we may be a chaste Church, and a pure, pious, and prudent
people, truly wise unto Salvation. Let all who are members of the Church,
labor to be like Christ, the head of the Church. Let all who are of the
Militant Church, labor to be like those of the triumphant Church. Let all the
members of our true visible particular Church of England, strive to resemble,
in purity, piety, sincerity, sanctity, equity, and zeal, the true members of
the internal, invisible, spiritual and Catho lique or Universal Church: and
then we shall be the wisest, best, happiest, Harding. Major. Boeth. Fabian.
Bale Engl. votar. sol. 27.
and most flourishing people under Heaven. After the Saxons had conquered our
Nation, it was called Eugland of Engist, which was their chief Captain, as
witnesses diverse Authors. But after wards Gregory the first, seeing some
English boys to be sold in the open market at Rome, asked of what religion
they were (beholding them to be fair skinned, beautifully faced, and flaxen
haired) And answer was made him, that they were of an I Will called England, and
they were called Angli: well, says he, they may be called Angli (English men)
quasi Angeli, of Angels, because they have Angelical faces. Oh my beloved
Countrymen, let us all labor that we may be here like Angels, in grace and
purity, and then we shall be like themin heaven, in glory and felicity. When
Sertorius was sentenced to be expulsed out of Rome, and banished, he solicited
Pompeius, and Metellus, to procure his revocation, saying. He had rather be an
obscure Citizen of Rome, than elsewhere an Emperor. And I for my part, shall
thus say of my own Nation, that I had rather be a private person, and
inferior Preacher here in England, (so long as we enjoy peace, and the
liberty of the Gospel) than a Patriarch elsewhere. Lipsius says, Vt
hominibus singulis, sic populis suae lauds, suae labes; as persons, so places,
have something in them to be praised, and commended, and something to be
dispraised and condemned. And this may be truly said of our Land; for as we
want not our faults, and failings, and those gross ones; so we have by the
great goodness, and undeserved love of God toward us, been like a City set
upon a hill, seen by others, famous amongst, and before many others, and for
our peace and prosperity, envied almost by all others.

To some men their Country is their shame; and some are the shame of their
Country. We need not be ashamed of our Nation (it being for the circuit of it,
I think, in all things second to none) or very few under the coape of Heaven,
and therefore take heed that we do not by our lewd lives and corrupt
conversation, become a shame unto our Nation Cleobulus illam Rempublicam maxim
dixit been compositam esse, ubi Cives magis infamiam, quam legem metuunt.]
Plutarch. in convivio. 7. Sapient.
. Oh let us never turn our glory into shame: our reputation into reproach; our
fame into infamy and disgrace; our sincerity into superstition, and our true
profession, and profession of truth, into Popery, or any other erroneous
religion: lest that we which have long been an admiration and rejoicing unto
our friends, and an emulation, and envy unto our encmies; become (through the
judgments of God effused upon us) a grief and cause of sorrow to those who
love us, and an exultation (for our misery) to those who envy us. An Italian
Traveller, reported that he had seen in England, Pulchru^ Rege^, a goodly
King; in France Pulohrum Regnum, a goodly Kingdom: In Spain, Pulchrum
Senatum, a goodly Counsel. Let us add a fourth, and make it good, namely,
Pulcbrum populum: let us be in the eyes of all who see us, and in the ears of
all who hear of-us, not only a goodly, but a godly people; and then we shall
be the beauty of the whole earth, and as the apple of the Lords eye, and as
the fignet upon his right hand. So be it.

The second Proposition being thus briefly finished, I proceed unto the third:
to wit,

Proposition. 3.
That all changes, chances, mutations, maladies, alterations, ruins, and
eversions; which falls upon any Church or State, Country, Kingdom, or
Commonwealth, come not by chance, but from God himself; the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, and Supreme Governor of all the world.

If we would see how that point arises from the Text, How the Proposition
springs from the text.
we must then observe these five things therein, namely.

1. What the Prophet David does? He prays. 2. For what? For preservation, and
deliverance out of distress. 3. For whom? For himself, and his people; or for
the Israelites. 4. To whom he prays? To the Lord, verse 1.
And lastly, why he prays unto him? Namely, because their misery, calamity,
and distress came from him. As the Poet says.

-- Nam qui mihi vulnera fecit,
Solus Achilleo tollere more potest.
Those who were wounded by Achilles, could be cured by none, but by him: so
the Prophet here knows that the Lord that cast them down, and it is he that
must raise them up; he has broken them, and he must bind them; he has
scattered them, and he must gather them; he has plagued them, and it is he
who must pity them; or else no mercy, deliverance, or relief can be showed
unto them. And therefore our Princely Prophet does thus petition the Lord.
Verse. 2.3.4.
Oh God thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been
displeased with us. Thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken it.
Thou have showed thy people bard things, thou host made us to drink the wine
of astonishment. And therefore seeing all our maladies and miseries come from
thee, and that for our evil of sin committed against thee, thou inflictest
this evil of punishment upon us. Save us oh God with thy right hand, and hear
me.

I must say of this point, as the Stagge says in the Emblem. Inopem me copia
fecit, plenty of proofs, will make me poor of proofs: For the Scripture,
experience, and all Histories, do so abundantly testify the truth thereof; and
all Christians so undoubtedly and readily assent, and subscribe thereunto; and
this very Psalm (verses 1.2.3.6.7.8.12.) so clearly confirms it, that I
should but light a Taper to the Sun at high noone, to spend time to prove it.
The point proved by, Scripture, and Examp.
If proofs should not readily accurre to the memory of any Reader, then let
him view, and confider these few for many. Psalm 74. the whole Psalm, and
75.7.8. Ierm. 27.5. Daniel 4.25. Acts 17.26. and withal mark well these
examples; to wit, of the four Monarchies, Daniel 2. 31. etc. And of the
cutting off, and casting out of the Canaanites, Hittites, Hivites, Moabites,
Jebusites, Perizites, and the rest, mentioned in Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua,
and Judges. And of the division of Israel, 1. King. 11. and desolation thereof,
1. King. 17, and of the captivity and destruction of Iudab 2. Chron. 36. And
these testimonies, and examples may sufficiently suffice for the proof of the
(...) of the point, that it is thus, That all changes and chances; mutations
and maladies which fall upon any Chnrch or State, come from God.

Now for the (...) thereof, the Poet says well,

Felix qui potuit rerune cognoseere causas; that is, He is a happy man who
does not only know the things which are done, but the causes why they are
done. But I will not now much enquire wherefore the Lord does thus change,
cross, and afflict, Churches, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths: For that we
showed amply in the prosecution of the former proposition, but I will now
principally show the signs and symptoms, and external, and moving causes of
the decay, ruins, and desolation of a Commonwealth.

First, Fahar. in Psalm 60. and 135. Nine causes of the decay of a
Commonwealth.
Fabritius shows, and proves that the causes of the translation, mutation, and
maladies of a Commonwealth, are these nine: namely, 1. The contempt of the
worship, word, and Ministers of God; and contrarily the love of lies, and lying
Prophets. And, 2. Idolatry, and superstition. And, 3. Tyranny, injustice, and
unjust taxes and exactions in Magistrates. And, 4. Pride in apparel. And, 5.
Covetousness in Superiors. And, 6. Sedition, and seditious practices, against
the ordinary Magistrate, ordained, and appointeed by God. And, 7. A general
supine carelessness, and carnal security in all, And, 8. An inundation of
iniquity; i.e. when all of all sorts are so wicked, that one winkes at another
faults. And, 9. The profanation of the name of God.


Secondly, Plautus says, Plantus in Persa Ten causes of the ruins of King.
domes.
that there are these ten causes of the ruin of a Republicke: to wit, 1.
Treachery. 2. Theft. 3. Covetou snesse. 4. Envy. 5. Ambition. 6. Backbiting
and slandring. 7. Perjurie. 8. Idleness. 9. Injuries, and wrongs. 10.
Notorious wickedness, or an impudent audaciousnesse in sinning.


Thirdly, Cyprian says, Ex Anton. part. 1. tit. 5. cap. 3. Sect. 8. Twelve
things Pernicious to a people and land.
that there are twelve abuses in a Commonwealth, whereby it is endangered, and
harmed: as namely, 1. A wise man without good works. And, 2. An old man
without Religion. And, 3. A young man without obedience. And, 4. A rich man
without liberality, and alms deeds. 5. A woman without shame, and chastity.
And, 6. A Master without wisdom. And, 7. A Christian which is contentious.
And, 8. A poor man which is proud. And, 9. A King which is wicked. And, 10. A
Priest which is negligent. And, 11. The common people without discipline. And,
12. A people without Law.


If the Reader would see all these enlarged, let him read Antoninus in the
place above cited.

These Master Warner in his Albi. ons Eugland ( Lib. 9. cap. 53. page 239.)
has lively expressed in these verses, viz.

A wise man living like a Droane, an old man not devout.
Youth disobedient, rich men that are charity without.
A shameless woman, vicious Lord, a poor man proudly stout.
Contentious Christians, Pastors that their function do neglect.
A wicked King, no Discipline, no Laws men to direct.
Are twelve the foulest faults that do all Commonwealths infect.
Fourthly, observe we, Two sots of signs, (...)
(that according to the Graecians) there are two sorts of signs; to wit,
probable, and infallible; or symptoms, and signs, or presag s, and causes of
a Commonwealths ruin. Of which particularly.

First, the probable presages, The presages. or proble signs of a Nationell
desolation, viz. 1. Pragmaticalnesse.
and symptoms of a Kingdoms fall, and destruction, are these six which
fellow: namely,

First, pragmaticalnesse, when men look unto, and meddle with others, and not
themselves. In a great house there are many several offices, and officers; now
if every man be careful in his own place, and look well unto his own
work, then the house and family will be well ordered; but if one meddle with
another, and control one another, and look more to each others employment,
and execution of their office, then to their own, then all goes out of order.
And thus is it in a Commonwealth: For when all sorts of men generally pry more
into others then into themselves; and consider the places, offices, and
employments of others more then their own: and judge, censure, and condemn
othere, but never look unto their own ways: then that State or Country, is
in imminent danger of desolation, and misery. And therefore if we defire the
preservation of our Church and Commonwealth; let every one sweep down his own
door, and meddle with his own matters, and look well to the careful
discharging of his own place, wherein God has set him: and then (by Gods
blessing) we shall still flourish and prosper. And,

Secondly, 2. Innovations.
Innovations in a Church or State, presage and occasion the ruin, and
downe-fall thereof. Demosthenes
Whence the Locrians enacted this Statute (as Demosthenes witnesses) That
every Citizen who was desirous to bring in any new Law, should come and declare
it publicly before the people, with a halter about his neck, to the end, that
if his new Law were not thought meet to be received, and very profitable for
the Common wealth, be might presently be strangled as a worthy reward for his
rashness. And by this means Innovations, and alterations in the State and
Commonwealth were kept out. Ascham.
As Master Ascham said, Vulgus and imperiti homines aegerrime a coresuetudine
divelli possunt; The common sort of people are hardly drawn from their old
customs, so wise men are hardly drawn to like or allow of new Laws; as
Augustus Caesar said to a flatterer, who blamed Cato Vticensis, Erasm. Rot.
lib. 4. apophex Suctonio.
for his obstinacy against Julius Caesar: Quisquis praesentem Reipublicae
statum mutari non vult, is and Civis, and vir bonus est. Whosoever opposes
himself against Innovations, and alterations, in a well governed State, is
both a good Citizen, and a good man. And this may be said also of him that
withstandeth the introducing of errors, sects, and heresies into any Orthodox
Church; Socrat. lib. 2. Tripart. hist. cap. 34.
because, as Sophronius said, when he heard one mention some errors, and
erroneous opinions in the Seleucian Synod; Si per singulos dies, propriamedere
fidem licuerit, veritatis integritas non diu manebit. If every man were
suffered to broach, and bring into the Church his own conceits, and opinions,
and to teach them as necessary truths unto others: the integrity of the truth
would not long last in that Church. Plutarch.
As old trees which have taken deep and large root, cannot be removed or
plucked up, and transplanted elsewhere, without apparent danger, and hazard of
the life thereof: so a Commonwealth, or State, will not without much
commotion, be removed from her old and ancient Laws, and form of Government;
Whence it was that Erasmus said. As change of meat, or drink, or dwelling,
disturbes the constitution of the body, and is an enemy to nature at first,
although a man remove, and change to as good or better. Ita praestat far
principem, aut Magistratus pristinos, quam novos asciscere, quod omnis rerum
novatio non careat perturbatione. So it is better to bear with old
Magistrates, and to obey the ancient government (when it is according, or not
contrary to the divine Law) then to call in new Governors; because, all
Innovation has perturbations and troubles attending upon it. Grimaldes.
The Lacedaemonians are highly praised by Historians, for having continued
seven hundred years without any alteration of their government. And so also
are the Venetians, who have constantly lived in one form of government, by the
space of a thousand years, and more. Indeed I know nothing is perfect here on
earth, but every where much is amiss; and therefore when any abuse is observed
either in Church or State, or any thing invented or found out, which may be
truly good and profitable for a Commonwealth, it may be redressed, or enacted
by some Law: this being but an addition to the Law, not an alteration of the
Law; a necessary injunction, not an unnecessary imposition; a help, not a hurt
unto the State: and a means that subjects may live in godliness and honesty,
and not be provoked to sedition or heresy, or any commotion and discord. And
therefore let us pray unto the Lord, who has the hearts of all men in his
hands, so to dispose, and rule all our Governors, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil; as also this high Court of Parliament, that all our holy, wholesome,
good and godly Laws may be executed, and others established for the redressing
of what is amiss; but that no such Innovations or alterations may be brought
either into our Church or State, as may offend weak consciences, or hinder the
progress of Religion, or the peace and prosperity of the Commonwealth. And,

Thirdly, 3. The fear of the righteous.
another presage of the ruin of a Kingdom, is the fear of the faithful
flock of Christ. When cormorants and gulles forsake the seas; and when worms
creep out of the earth; it portends a tempest, and storms. And when the
Rattes leave the ship, it presageth shipwreck: so when the righteous
children of God are afraid of Gods righteous judgments, and do labor all they
can to prevent them, or to arm themselves against them: it does prognosticate
some ensuing evil: for the Lord does nothing but he reveals it to his
servants. When the faithful were once fled out of Jerusalem into Pella,
Jerusalem was taken: and when Lot was once gone cut of Sodom, it, and the
neighbor Cities were burnt with fire and brimstone. And therefore if we
desire the preservation of our Church and Nation, let us fear, when the
faithful are afraid: and when they think of flying out of the Land, let us
think of flying unto the Lord: or when they arm themselves against his
judgments, let us labor generally by prayers, tears, humiliation, and
repentance, to avert and turn away his judgments. And

Fourthly, 4 The honor of the wicked.
as the fear of the righteous, so also the honor, promotion, and advancement
of the wicked, is a presage of a Regions ruin. For where wicked men rule and
govern, and only (or principally) such are raised to places of eminency and
dignity; there the Church or State must needs be governed amiss. Hector
Piut. in Cap. 38. Ezech.
Or as one says: As a man deprived of his eyes abides in darkness: so a
Commonwealth bereaved of just and wise Princes, and Magistrates, continues in
black pitchie horror. And therefore as a governor of a ship, does seek for
the best, and most skillful Mariners; Piutarch. in Moral.
and an architect for the skilfulest builders: so a Prince ought to purchase
unto himself those who are truly religious and very fit for government.
Wherefore if we would see our Church and Commonwealth flourish, let us
invocate, and become humble suitors unto our God, who has the hearts of Kings
in his hand, that he would make his sacred servant, and anointed, and our
gracious Sovereign, more and more like unto his Servant David, in this thing:
and that as King David's, so King Charles, his eyes may be upon the righteous of
the Land, and those who are precious in the sight of the Lord. And

Fifthly, 5 The hatred of the godly.
the hatred of the good, another symptom of the subversion, or desolation of a
Kingdom. A rude rusticke fellow with a paper in his hand, met Aristides,
Plutarch. a Bonus Caius tanturnmodo malus, quod Christianus, Text. in Apol.
and (not knowing him to be what he was) entreated him to write the name of
Aristides in his scroale: he marveiling at this, demanded, if ever Aristides
had injured him? No (quoth he) but I cannot endure the surname of Iustus: or, I
hate him because he is good. And thus many in the Primitive times were
persecuted, only because they were more holy, and pure than the common sort,
and would not accompany, nor communicate with them in their wickedness.

At such time as the Ephesi banished their Prince Hermodonus, Cicero.
they uttred these words. Let none of us excel another, but if any so do, let
him no longer here dwell, but inhabit elsewhere. Certainly, when the righteous
are generally hated, Qua tales, as they are righteous; and that a Land or
People, take away or make away the righteous, or hate them, as an offense unto
them: that Land is not far from a curse, and some grievous calamity. And
therefore if we desire the preservation of our Church, and State, let us pray,
and that powerfully unto the Lord, that the best may be most made of, and
esteemed by us; and that those who are dearest unto him may be dearest unto us,
because they are the props, and pillars of our Commonwealth.

Sixthly and lastly, 6 When people will not endure reproof.
it is an evil Omen, and presage, when people being generally exorbitantly
wicked, will not endure reproof at their hands, whose duty it is so to do,
Celliodorus the Philosopher was banished in the fury of the Marians, not for
the evils then found in him, but for the vices he reproved in them. Thus Ahab
cared not for Michaiah, 1 King. 21.
because he reproved him: 1 King. 13.
and Jeroboam commanded the Prophet to be attached, who had spoken against him,
and his Idolatry. Certainly, when a people generally are thus glewed to their
sins, and say audaciously with the thistle in the Scottish coin. Nemo me impune
lacescit, If any man meddle with me, he had as good hold off his hands; or
reprove me, he had as good bite off his tongue; it is an argument of a near
approaching mischiese. And therefore if we wish the welfare of our State, let
us all learn to receive the words of exhortation, and reprehension patiently;
yea let us pray, that the Watchmen of the Church may be permitted freely to
give warning, and to awaken the people when they see danger approach: that the
Trumpeters may be suffered to sound, and stretch out their voices, when the
enemy draws nigh: and that the Seers of Israel may speak as well as see: and
as boldly, and freely reprove sin, as unwillingly they see it. And thus
briefly I have run over the symptoms: or probable presages of a Republiques
ruin. Now

Secondly, The signs and sure to, Kens of some National evil.
the external causes, or means, or the infallible signs, of the desolation,
destruction and decay of a Commonwealth, or State are these.

First, 1 Prosperity, or adversity.
Prosperity, or adversity: wealth or want; abundance or scarcity; to wit, in
the excess. For as a Country, which is miserably poor, and in woeful want,
cannot long subsist; so on the contrary, abundance of wealth, and affluence in
all things, begets pride, security, luxury, and all manner of excess, and so
by little and little is brought to perdition. Amongst Sea-bordering Cities, and
for renown of Merchandise, Tire in former ages was most famous: for thither
resorted the Merchants of all Countries for traffic, both of Palestina,
Syria, Egypt, Persia, Assyria, Arabea, Indea, and others; by means whereof it
being grown exceeding wealthy, and being lifted up to the height of pride, and
plonged in the depth of pleasure, it was at length by the just judgment of
God, so sacked, and ruinated, that the very memory thereof at this day scarce
remains. Plutarch. in convivio. 7. Sapient.
And hence it was that Thales pronounced that Commonwealth to be the best,
Quoe cives neque proedivites, neo admodum pauperes contineret. Wherein the
Citizens were neither too rich, nor too poor. And therefore if we desire the
continuance of our Kingdom, and Commonwealth: let us pray with Solomon, that
the Lord would neither lay such poverty upon us, that we murmr against him,
Prove. 30.8.9.
or have recourse to any wicked courses or be not able to subsist: neither that
he would permit us in prosperity, and wealth, to forget or fall from him, or
to kick against him when we are full: but that he would be pleased to bless
us, and to cause us to flourish, and to knit us in all conditions close unto
him, both by obedience, confidence, dependence, thankfulness and love. And

Secondly, 2 An Anarchy
another sure sign of a Kingdoms or Peoples ruin, is an Anarchy, or to be
without rule, government, or governors. It has been much disputed by
Statesmen, what manner of government is the best? Whether a Monarchical, or
Oligarchicall, or Druarchicall, or Aristocraticall, or Timocraticall, or
Democraticall: but neither Statesman, nor wise men, nor any but mad men, ever
disputed, pleaded, or desired an Anarchicall State. Because every Reader
perhaps knows not the nature or distinction of these kinds of government,
Several sorts of governments in the World: as
I will therefore for the enforming of his knowledge briefly define them.

A Monarchy, A Monarchy.
is, where one King, Prince, or Emperor, rules soly, and alone. And thus we
and the most Nations are governed, and our government is Monarchical.

Oligarchy, An Oligarchy.
is when a sew Noble, or rich men, govern the Commonwealth, rejecting the
poor, or baser sort: and thus Sicilia was governed.

Druarchy, A Druarchy.
is when two rule in one dominion, or Empire, but in several parts, and thus
the latter Romans divided their Empire into two parts (it being so ample,
spacious, and large, that one could not oversee, rule or govern all) and the
one Emperor ruled the East, and the other the West.

Aristocracie, An Aristocracy.
is the rule and power of the best, and most virtuous men, approved for good
life and wisdom; and who aimed in all their thoughts, and endeavors at the
general profit: and thus were the Lacedaemonians long governed; and thus at
this day is Venice.

Timocracie, is the power of mean, A Timocracy.
or men of indifferent wealth, governing by some Laws taken from Oligarchy,
and Democracy, which are two extremes.

Democracy, Democracy.
is where Freemen being the greater number, the Lords of the State: and thus
was Athens governed.

Anarchy is where people have neither Head, Anarchy.
Ruler, nor Law: mention whereof is made, Judges 21, 25. There was as then no
King in Israel, but every one did that which seemed good in his own eyes. Now
of all States this is the worst: for how can a body live without a head, or a
family without a Master, or a people without any Law. And herefore it is true
which one said, Cornel. Tacit.
Proestat sub malo esse Principe, qua^ sub nullo. People had better have an ill
Prince than no Prince. Chrysostom. hemad popul. Antioch,
Yea Chrysostom says, Proestat habere. Tyrannum quam nullum, Subjects had
better have a Tyrant in a Land, than neither Ruler nor Law in a Land. Men had
better live where nothing is lawful, than where all things are Lawful; and
where they are burdened with many Laws, rather than there where there is no
law, or government at all, For as a ship cannot be without a pilot, nor an Army
without a Captain. So a City or a Country cannot be without a Prince, or
Ruler, lest the mighty should devour the meaner sort, and the strong the weak.
As a Captain is the eye of his army: so is a Prince the eye of the
Commonwealth. For which cause Demas an excellent Orator, when he saw Alexander
the great dead, he compared the Camp and Kingdom of Macedonia, to Cyclops:
which (as Aristotle says) had nere an eye. And therefore, that our
Commonwealth may stand, let us pray for the health, happiness, prosperity,
and peace, of our gracious Sovereign, and all our other pious and zealous
Governors both spiritual and temporal: and for the continuance of the
Religious government, which has been long established amongst us, both in
Church and Commonwealth. And

Thirdly, 3 Wars.
another infallible sign, or maine cause of the desolation of a Land, is
war, either foreign or domestical. Dulce bellum inexpertis. None delights
in war, but those who are ignorant what war is. For of all temporal evils
war is the worst, and of all wars, civil wars the most wretched, as
appears evidently from the nature, fruit, and effect thereof. Aristotle
writes, Arist. dehister anim. lib. 9.
that the Cybind and the Eagle do so vehemently contend, and strive, that
oftentimes clasping together in the air, they fall down unto the earth, and
are taken up alive of shepherds: so now and then is comes to pass in
foreign wars, that while two Princes, or Kingdoms, by bloody broils,
waste and weaken one another, a third invader comes, and subverts them both:
but in intestine wars this is most usual: for a Kingdom divided against it
self cannot stand. Dragons sucking the blood of Elephants, do kill them, and
they in like manner being drunken with their blood, are squeezed in pieces by
the fall of the Elephant, and so die: Plin. lib 8. cap. 12.
so ordinarily in civil (or rather uncivil) wars, both parts do destroy,
and are destroyed, both sides do endammage, and are endammaged, Civil wars
beget covetous desires, the ruin of reputation, force, violence, want of
reverence toward God, disobedience to Magistrates, corruption of manners,
change of Laws, contempt of justice, and base estimation of learning, and
knowledge. This in a word is the epitomie of all evils, and in this word War
all woes are wrapped up: for, war begets bloodshed, and murder, bloodshed
begets noisome smells, noisome smells and vapors corrupt the air, the air
being corrupted breeds the plague, pestilence, and sickness: where the sword
and plague are, husbandry, and trading, are hindered, and where trading and
husbandry are hindered, there follows famine, penury, and poverty. And
therefore I may conclude this branch either with the saying of the Poet, Nulla
salus bello, pacem te poscimus omnes. Because there is neither health, joy,
safety, nor profit in war, therefore the Lord in mercy bless us with the
blessing of peace. Or I may conclude this with the saying of Saint Augustine
concerning drunkenness; Long est a nobis, misereberis ne appropinquet nobis.
Confess. 10.31.
Long since was war removed out of our Land: Christ Jesus grant that it may
never return back again unto us. Or, I may conclude this head, with the
saying of Archidamus, who writ a letter unto the Aeolians intending to aid the
Argives in their war: and in the Letter were only traced these words.
Quietness is good. Or I may and will conclude this particular sign of the
ruin of a Realm (and apply my conclusion, to our unhappy and woeful present
civil dissension) with this Apophthegme, Amantium irae amoris redintigratio
est: The breach of friendship by dissension, strengthens the powers of love
in her new conjunction. And I pray that that jarre and breach, which is now
betwixt the Head, and a Member of the body, may so be conjoined in affection
and loyalty, that it may be more firm, stable, and cordial, mutually, than
ever it was.

Fourthly, and lastly, the maine cause of the destruction of a Nation is sin,
and spiritual rebellion. Now when I consider the nature and number, the
quantity, and quality of our sins in this Land, I cannot but acknowledge,
that if the Lord should enter into judgment with us, he might justly bring a
total subversion, and desolation upon us, for our many, great and clamorous
sins. And therefore this branch concerning us so nearly, and in so high a
nature, I will crave leave of my Reader, to enlarge my self therein a little
more than in any of the former.

And let me entreat every Christian who reads this, to observe with me, that
when I say, Sin is the cause of the subversion of a State, it may either be
understood of sin in general, or of particular sins.

First, 4 Sin.
this may be understood of sin in general, or of a general sinning; and
herein we must note, that a general impiety, or an universal iniquity, or an
epidemicall maturity and ripeness in sin is the cause, sign, and sure
Forerunner (without true and unfeigned repentance) of a general, and total
destruction. John 4.39.
And therefore it does stand us in hand to consider, how this belongs, and how
near it comes unto us in this Land; certainly, Rev. 14.16.
the Region is white unto harvest: and we have cause to fear, that the Lord
will command his destroying Angel to thrust in his Sicle, and to cut us down.

For let us look which way we will, or to whom we will, and we shall find sin in
full weight, and measure.

First, We have sinned against all the Command^
if we look unto the Law of God, and compare our selves with his commands, we
shall return but a woeful reckoning. For,

1. If we look upon the first Commandment, we find little or no love in us
toward God: but every one following his own affections, and loving his own
Helena: some making their craft their God, and some their gold their God, and
some their pleasure their God, and some their belly their God, and some their
drunkenness their God, And,

2. If we look upon the second Commandment, we shall see the Papists
laboring with tooth and nail to raze it out of the Decalogue; and
superstition creeping into the bosoms of many Protestants, who long with the
Israelites after the fleshpots of Egypt, Exodus 16.3. Ier 44.16. Act. 7.39.
and desire again to sacrifice to the Queen of Heaven, and to submit their
necks once more to the tyranny of Rome. And,

3. If we look to the third Commandment, Isa. 58.13.
we shall hear swearing in young and old, rich and poor, high and low. And,

4. If we look to the fourth Commandment, we shall see the Lords day
profaned, slighted, and despised by many, and truly sanctified only by a
few. And,

5. If we look to the fifth Commandment, we shall see the Magistrates
despised, those who are in dignity and authority blasphemed, and every man's
will serving for a Law, And,

6. If we look to the sixth Commandment, we shall see charity waxen cold,
yea (amongst the most) stark dead, and instead thereof arises injuries,
revenge, and hatred toward equals, and hard-heartednesse against the poor.
And,

7. If we look to the seventh Commandment, we shall see an Ocean of sins,
viz. in some, pride of apparel, in some gluttony, in many drunkenness, in as
many fornication and uncleanness, and wanton and lascivious words, and all
manner of filthiness. And,

8. If we look to the eighth Commandment, we shall see how it condemns some
of oppression, some of covetousness, some of usury, some of injustice, some of
thefts, some of fraud and deceit, and some of undermining, and overreaching of
others. And,

9. The ninth precept will convince infinire many of us of lying, equivocating,
and teaching our servants, and children to lie. And,

10. If we look unto the last precept of the Law, we shall find that we
all, yea the best of all, are most miserably faulty, for internal
concupiscence is every where, and few or none any where are content with their
condition, but every one thinks other to be happier then himself. Now,

Secondly, All degrees and orders of men have sinned.
if we look unto the orders of men, or unto their several degrees, ranks,
and qualities; we shall find that sin has every where deceived many. For,
1. If we look into the Court, we shall see many transported with flattery,
ambition, coverousnesse, pride, swearing, and diverse other sins. 2. If we
look into the City, we shall see many misled by worldliness, deceit in
weights and measures, swearing, drunkenness, hypocrisy, lying, and what not?
3. If we look into the Country, we shall see in the most, a kind of
Atheism, and contempt of Religion. 4. If we look upon old men, we shall see
them for the most part, to be more intent upon temporal things, then
spiritual; to regard gold more then grace, and earth more then heaven; and to
refuse to be taught, as though they were too old to learn Religion, though
not to learn new sins. 5. If we look upon young men, we shall find the
most to be men in sin, but very babes, yea blocks in Religion. 6. If we
look upon women (the weaker vessels) we shall find many of them to be strong
in brawling, scolding, cursing, adultery, drunkenness, and what not? except in
discretion and religion. 7. If we look upon little children, we shall find
them to be froward, averse, cross, and learning to ly, and swear, as soon as
they can speak. Now,


Thirdly, The degrees of sin.
if we look upon the degrees of sin, we have good cause to tremble. For, 1.
All sin, and that in many things, and many times. And, 2. To continue in
finne is the fault of the world: for how few every where are turned from their
sins by the preaching of the Gospel? Esa. 5 3.1.
3. To be hardened in sin, is both the stain, and bane of the world: for we
are now like deaf Adders, which will not hear; and we harden our hearts
against God, having neither any sense of sin, nor of his wrath. 4. How many
are there amongst us, who deride and contemn the reproves of the word, and
the Ministers of the word; yea, the Law of God it self, while they excuse,
plead for, and stand to maintain, and justify their sins.


Let us all in this Land confess our sins, and give glory to God: Let us
acknowledge that many sins are committed amongst us, and that often; and with a
high hand, and by some of all ranks, degrees, qualities, sexes, and ages: that
we may the more readily, and willingly turn generally unto the Lord, lest for
our general and universal sins; he inflict upon us some general, and
universal plagues. And thus I have done with the first particular, viz. sin
in general.

Secondly, when I say that sin is the cause of the subversion of a State, it
may be understood of particular sins: The particular sins which hasten a
Kingdoms ruin.
For according to diverse, there are diverse sins which hasten the downe-fall
of a Commonwealth: instance but in one or two.

First, 1. The oppression of Superiors. Bons Postoris est pecus tondere, non
deglubere
sometimes by the oppression of Superiors the Commonwealth is impoverished;
and therefore when Tiberius Caesar was solicited by the Governors of the
Provinces, to lay heavier tributes, and levy larger Subsidies from his people,
made (though a Painim) this Noble and notable answer. That a good Shepherd
ought to sheare his Sheep, and not to flea them: And thus also Queen
Elizabeth said to the President of Ireland. And,

Secondly, 2, Gifts, or Bribes. Exodus 23.8.
The Scripture says plainly, that gifts, and bribes overthrow a
Commonwealth, Prove. 29. 4. Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Esa. 1.23. and 5.23. Now
according to some) there are three sorts of rewards: viz- 1. In the
Commonwealth, namely, when gifts are given for the procuring of some public
offices, or places. And, 2. In the Church, which is called Simony, when
spiritual dignities are bought. And, 3. In private matters, for the corrapting
of judgment; and this is called Bribery. Now there are none of these but they
are in some regard hurtful to a Church and State: And therefore, if we desire
the good of ours, we should pray unto God to work in us a general repentance
for our general sins; and to seal unto us a general pardon of all our
transgressions: and to turn from us all those evils which we have deserved
for our many and great provocations: and so to sanctify, and direct all our
Superiors and Governors, that they may truly wish well unto us, and seek
our good, and set such over us, as may do the like; and place in place and
office, such as are good, and able to do good, both in Church and
Commonwealth, that justice may be distributed without partiality: And,


Thirdly, 3. Toomuch liberty.
too much license and liberty, and remiss lenity in Superiors, and
Governors, is another enemy unto a State. For it cannot choose but breed a
great mischiese in a Commonwealth, when justice sleeps, and the shameless
boldness of evil dooers is not curbed in with a birdle, but runs its own
swinge: and therefore a Consul of Rome could say, That is was an evil thing to
have a Prince, under whom liconce and liberty is given unto every man to do
what him lists. And therefore we should pray that all good Laws may be
executed, and that the Magistrate may not hold the sword of justice for naught.

Fourthly and lastly, 4. The contempt of the word.
the contempt of the word of God is another maine cause of the desolation of a
State. I will for the clear proof of this, beause it necrely concerns us,
allege and urge only one place of Scripture; namely, Esaias. 5.24 where we
have these words. As the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes
the chafe, so their root shall be rottenness, and their bleslome shall go
up as dust: because they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and
despised the word of the holy one of Israel. Three things are here worthy of
observation, for our present purpose, viz.

1. What is threatened. 2. Who are threatened. 3. Why they are threatened.
Observe.
1. That the Lord does not say, that his anger toward them for the contempt of
his word shall be like fire in a house, but like fire amongst stubble, and
straw. That is,

1. Their destruction shall be total, Prove. 30.16 Ier. 4.4.
there shall be nothing left, neither shall any be able to free them from the
Lords just wrath. If a house be one fire, it may be put out; yea, though it be
not, all is not burnt, for all materials in a house are not combustible: but
there is no quenching of stubble being once on fire, neither is any thing
thereof left unburnt: and such is the wrath of God against the centemners of
his word. And,

2 Their destruction shall be sudden, and come upon them like a whirle-winde.
If a house be on fire, it is a long time on burning, but stubble, and straw
being once kindled, are consumed in a moment, and (as it were) in the twinkling
of an eye. And thus the wrath of God will come suddenly, and violently, and
like an armed man, upon all the contemners and despisers of his word, without
repentance. And therefore let us kiss the Son, Esa 29.5, Psalm. 2.11.
and labor to be reconciled unto the Father, for if his wrath be kindled, yea
but a little, blessed are all they that are at peace with him. And thus we see
what is threatened, viz. total and sudden destruction. Now,

II. Observe here who they are who are threatened, viz. root and blossom; what
is meant by this Metaphore, is not generally agreed upon by Interpreters. For.

1 Some by root understand evil thoughts: and by branch evil works.

2 Some by root understand men, Hebr. 12.15 Hier. s.
and by branch the glory of his beauty, riches, honor, and the like. Malac.
4.1.
Hier. s.

3 Some by root and branch understand a total and final destruction. Esa
14.29 30. and 37.31.


4 Some by root understand themselves, and by branch their children. We may
thus profitably, and truly conjoyne all these together; that if we continue in
our hearts to contemn the Word, and in our lives to disobey it: God will then
in his fury destroy with a final, fearful, and total destruction, both our
bodies, estates, and children. And

III. Observe we, why they are thus fearfully threatened: viz. because they
contemn and despise the Word and Law of God. Now if we would know who they
are who contemn the Word; they are

1 Those who contemn the threatenings of the Word, being altogether fearelesse
of them; and say, Tush, let him come. And

2 Those who despise the primises of the Word, not believing them at all. And

3 Those who slight the admonitions of the Word, not obeying them at all. And

4 Those who lightly regard the authority of the Word, saying, I will do what
the Word forbids, in despite thereof. And

Those who do not much prize, and value the Word, are contemners of it. And

6 Those who despise reprehension, or are angry when they are reproed by the
Word, are also justly said to contemn it.

Now it will easily appear by the particulars, how nearly this belongs unto
us, in this Land. For how many have we amongst us, that notwithstanding all
the comminations, and threatenings of the Word, daily sounded in their ears,
run on to sin, as a horse unto the battle, with all wicked violence, and
impetuousnesse, being altogether fearlesse of the wrath, or judgments of God?
How many have we amongst us, that neither question the truth of the divine
promises of the Word, or at least will not be allured by them unto obedience?
How many have we that with the Cock, had rather have a barley corn, than a
precious orient jewel; and with the Ass, a bottle of hay, rather than Nactar,
and Ambrosia, and like the Israelites, prefer the flesh pots of Egypt, before
the riches of Canaan; and the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season,
Psalm. 16.11
before the pleasure which are at Gods right hand for ever and ever? and all
this through unbeleefe of the promises: How many amongst us are there, who
despise and disobey the admonitions, and precepts of the word; Ier. 44.16.
and although they be daily instructed and taught, yet will not learn? How
many have we that stubbornly and perversely say, with that stubborn and
perverse people, The word that thou speak unto us, in the Name of the Lord,
we will not do it, but we will do whatsoever proceeds out of our own
mouths? How many are there amongst us, who lightly regard, and basely esteem,
of the Gospel, and the glad tidings of peace and salvation: and are
indifferent, whether Popery or Protestanisme, whether Christianity or
Heathenisme, whether truth or error, get the upper hand in our land, if so be
it may but go well with them in outward things? How many have we, who will
not endure patiently the word of reprehension, but oftentimes prosecute and
persecute with virulent hatred and malice, the faithful Ministers of the word
of God, because from the Lord, and by the Commandment of the Lord, they
reprove their sins.

And therefore may we not justly fear that the Lord has a controversy with
us for these things? and that he will be avenged on such a Nation, as is this
of outs? May we not truly fear that the fire of Gods fury will fall upon us,
as a flame amongst the stubble, for our great and greevous contempt of the
Word? Certainly, when we look upon our selves and sins, we cannot but
confess, that it is of the Lords great and mere mercy, that we are not
already consumed. Wherefore let us provoke him no longer, lest he turn his
love into hatred, his smiles into frowns, his amity into enmity, and let his
little finger henceforth lie more heavy upon us than his whole loins have
done heretofore. If the Reader would see the fearful judgments which the Lord
has inflicted upon those places, or persons which have conte^ned his word, let
him read the places quoted in the Margent 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Prove. 1.29. 30. etc.
Esa 30.10. a 2. Jer. 11.7.8. and 25.3.8. and 43.2. Act. 19.9. 2 Pet. 2.5. Exodus
19.6. Hose 16.7. and 2 King. 17.13. etc.
If he desire to look home, then let him remember, and observe, a History or
two of our own: namely. The Lord stirred up Gildas a godly learned man, to
preach to the old Britons, and to exhor them to repentance and amendment of
life, and to forewarne them of plagues to come if they repented not: but what
availed it? For godly Gildas was laughed to scorn, and taken for a false
Prophet: Acts and Momuments. foL 3 2.
and our bold Britons, with whorish faces, and unrepentant hearts went forward
in their sins: but what followed? The Lord to punish this their contempt of
his Word and Ministers, sent in their enemies on every side, and destroying
them gave their Land to other Nations. Again after this, Almighty God seeing
Idolatry, Superstition, Hypocrisy, and wicked living used in this Land, raised
up that godly learned man John Wickliffe to preach unto our Fathers repentance,
and to exhort them to forsake their idolatry and superstition: but his
exhortations were not regarded, but contrarily both himself, and his servant
were despised, and himself and his books after his death burned. Now what
ensued hereupon: A most grievous and heavy vengeance: for they slew their
lawful King, and set up three other on a row, under whom all the Noble blood
was slain up, and half the Commons destroyed; and what by war in France,
and civil discord among themselves, the Cities and Towns were decayed, and
the land brought half to a wilderness. And therefore seeing the contempt of,
disobedience unto the word of God, is a maine cause of the destruction, and
desolation, both of Churches and States, let us take heed thereof, if we
desire that ours may long stand, and flourish.

The second part wherein is handled the fourth and fifth Propositions.
The third Proposition being thus succinctly handled, I go forward unto the
fourth, Proposition IV.
namely,

That it is the Lord, and he alone, who protects and preserves, who blesses
and prospers both Princes and people, countries and commonwealths, Churches
and States. Or, That all preservations, mercies, deliverances, and blessings,
which any people, Nation, Church, or language enjoyes, come from God, and from
him alone. Or, the constitution, How the point is derived from the Text.
confirmation, conservation, happy administration, protection, and prosperous
success of Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Churches, comes from God.

How naturally this point arises from the text, will easily appear, if we
consider in the text but these two things, to wit,

1. What our Kingly Prophet desires for himself and his people; namely,
protection, preservation, and deliverance from evil, and confirmation in
peace, etc.

2. Of whom he begs these things; viz. of the Lord. The proposition proved.
Save thou us O Lord with thy right hand.

The truth of the point will evidently appear by a particular or two. viz.

First, Kingdoms and dominions are disposed of by God, and he gives them to
whom he pleases, as is plain from these places, Dan. 2.21. and 4.17.25, 32.
Levit. 23.10. Ier. 27.6. Pro. 8.15, 16. Job. 12.18. And

Secondly, Kingdoms and Dominions are confirmed and established by God, and he
makes them to endure.

Thirdly, the Lord preserves a people from their enemies, as appears by Number.
14.9. Psalm. 127.1. and 147.12, 13., And

Fourthly, the Lord gives a people victory over their enemies, as is proved by
these places. 1 Samuel 14.6 and 2 Chronicles. 14.1. and 25.8. Psalm. 18.33. etc. and
46.9. and 118.15. Prove. 21.31. And

Fifthly, the happy administration of a Commonwealth comes from God; as is
clear by the examples of those, under whom Churches and Kingdoms have
flourished, because (as the Scripture says) God was with them. Read to this
purpose, Josh. 15. Iud. 6.12, 16. and 11.29. and 13.24., And therefore
Magistrates may here learn a threefold duty; namely,

First, to implore the blessing of the Lord, 3. things required in a Magistrate.
and to beseech him so to enable them to go in and out, wisely before his
people, that the Commonwealth may be peaceably prosperously, and religiously
governed, under, and by them,

This was the suit of David, unto the Lord. Psalm. 86.11.16. and of Solomon. 1.
King 3.7. and of Moses, Numb. 27.15, 16. And

Secondly, Magistrates may learn hence, not to trust unto themselves, in the
administration of a Commonwealth, but unto the Lord, from whom all sufficiency
thereunto comes, neither to arrogate or ascribe any thing unto themselves, or
to their wisdom, or prudence, or policy, or diligence, or watchfulness,
although they see the Commonwealth to prosper and flourish under them; but to
ascribe all Glory and Honor unto God, who both enables them to execute and
discharge their places, and also blesses their endeavors. And

3. Because the Lord has promised, both to bless Magistrates in themselves,
and to bless their endeavors, and to prosper their people under them, if they
will but walk in his ways sincerely, and obey his will, and rule and govern
according to his word; therefore if they desire the accomplishment of this
promise, they must fulfill this condition: but of this more amply by and by.

A Commonwealth is like a City, wherein are observable these four things, to
wit,

First, the foundation, or groundwork thereof, which supports the whole
Fabric, and this is Religion and Justice.

2. The gates thereof, which are the strength of the City, and those are the
Magistrates.

3. The Laws whereby the Magistrates govern. And

4. The Citizens, people, or subjects, which are ruled and governed by the
Magistrates, according to those Laws. Now something of all these, in that
which follows.

The Lord, we say, blesses, prospers, preserves, and causes to flourish
Churches and States: now the question is, how he does this? I answer, not by
miracles, but by means; and therefore if we desire the preservation, peace,
prosperity, and happiness of this our Church, and Commonwealth, then let us
use those means which God has appointed, and walk in those ways which lead
thereunto. Here observe that there are some things required both in Magistrates
and people, some things in Magistrates alone, and some in people alone, if we
desire that our Commonwealth may flourish, and be prosperous and blessed: now
of al these particularly, and in order.

First, the duty both of Superiors, and inferiors, both of Magistrates and
people, if they desire and wish the welfare of that State wherein they live, is
fivefold, namely,

First, both of them, or every member of the Land, must in general labor to
the utmost of his power, for the peace and prosperity of the Common wealth. For
as the temper of the world does consist of contrary elements, after a
wonderful harmony, so a Commonwealth does stand by the diverse endeavors of
men. And as a Set or Consort of Music is sweet, if every one observe his
time, notes, and cliffes, but ridiculous, if sung or played confusedly, without
any order or harmony; so if in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, every one look to
his own place, and do his own duty in his place, then that State will
flourish and prosper.

Therefore let every member of this our Commonwealth, look to his own
affairs, and do that which he ought to do, and we may then confidently
expect a blessing from God upon us. And

Secondly, 2. Every one must cease to do evil.
every member of this our body politic ought to be cut off, whatsoever is
evil, and to remove whatsoever is in any of them, or amongst them, which
endangers, or harms the Commonwealth. If there be any thing in any part of
the body which is banefull or hurtful to the whole body, we out it cut, or
off, because that we had rataer that some one part of the body should perish,
then that the whole should be destroyed. And thus in the body of a
Commonwealth, let us for the conservation of the whole, take away whatsoever
might hurt or hasten the ruin thereof, and let none, who bears the name of a
christian, take any such course (as too many do) that for the enriching of
themselves, care not though they ruin the Commonwealth. And

Thirdly, 3. Every one must love the Commonwealth better then himself.
Let every member love the Church and Commonwealth, better then himself: as
that ship-master is worthy of neglect and contempt, who had rather be in safety
himself, then have his ship safe: Cicero lib. 4. ad Herennium.
so that man is to be dispraised, that when the Commonwealth is in danger,
and jeopardy, regards his own private and particular safety, before the
preservation of the Commonwealth. Players come upon the Stage, Plutarch.
not principally to please their Spectators, but to enrich themselves: and
thus: many live in the Commonwealth: but it should not be thus; for every one
should seek the public profit, before his own private gain, if he would see
the Commonwealth flourish wherein he is: for as Guardians are appointed for
Orphans, for the good of the Orphan, not for the gain of the Guardian; so
every one who is set in any place of power or authority in a State, is placed
therefore the profit of those who are committed unto him, and not principally
for his own advantage: because this lesson and lecture is something hard and
harsh, I will therefore give my reader an instance or example or two, for his
imitation and encouragement herein. Aelianus tells us, that all the riches of
the World could not withdraw Epaminondas, from any the least duty of his
country. Plutarch tells us, that Paulus Aemilius, warring against Pyrrhus, King
of the Epyrots, when the Oracle pronounced, that the Romans should be victors,
if any one amongst them would throw himself into a gulf, Valerius Torquatus
voluntarily offered himself: and the like did Quintus Curtius in Rome, being
armed, and mounted on horseback. Justin tells us, that Codrus understanding by
the Oracle, that except he were slain, his contrymen, the Athenians,
should never have the victory over their enemies, went disguised into the
Battle, in the coat of a common soldier, and thrusting himself into the for
most front, was slain. Suetonius tells us, that Julius Caesar, and Cicero being
mortal enemies, Caesar, in the Senate house, said unto him, I cannot deny
this, oh Cicero, but that in those things which touch thy self, thou art
careless and remiss, but in matters that concern the Commonwealth, very
importunate, Certainly, if every one in our State were of these men's minds,
and did thus prefer the public good, before the private, we should quickly
have a flourishing Commonwealth. Reverend Beza tells us, that M. Calvin, in the
year 1556, when Perin had conspired against the State of Geneva, ran into the
midst of their naked swords, to appease the tumult; well knowing, Nemo
sibinatus, that men are not born for themselves, but for their Country, and
that, Pulchrum est pro patria mori: It is a commendable thing for a man to lay
down his life for the good of his Country: not only humane histories, but
also divine, give us examples to this purpose. I will only name two.

Nehemiah, Nehem. 5.14.
showing his love to the people of the Jews, and his care for them, has these
words, And from the time that the King gave me charge to be Governor in the
land of Judah, I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of the Governor.
That is, I received not that portion and diet, which the Governors, which were
before me, exacted: wherein he declares, that he rather sought the wealth of
the people, and their good, then his own commodity.

When King Ahashuerosh had given leave to the Jews, to put their adversaries
to death, the Text says, Heb. 9.10. The ten Sons of Haman, the adversary
of the Jews, slew they, but they laid not these hands upon the spoil.

Where we see, that they sought not their own gain, but only did execute
just judgment upon the Enemies of the Church. And therefore being compassed
about with such a cloud of witnesses, 1 Cor. 10.24. let us follow their
footsteps; and thus seek the welfare, and flourishing estate of our Church,
and Commonwealth, by preferring the good of that, before our own private
ends. And

And fourthly, let every member of this our politic and Ecclesiasticke body,
labor for unity, unanimity, and concord. For this is the chiefest ornament,
yea one of the surest supports, that either City, Province, Kingdom,
Commonwealth or Church can have. And therefore the Prophet David does so
highly extol concord and unity amongst brethren, Psa. 122.3.4.5. and 133.1.2.
of one region, and religion. And Salust shows the necessity of it, where he
says, Concordia parvae res crescunt; discordia maximae dilabuntur: Prosperity
attends concord and unity, but adversity and misery, dissension and discord; as
was demonstrated by that old man, who gave his sons a bundle of Arrows bound
close together to break, and when none of them could do it, he unbound them,
and then being loose, every one could break them. And thus (as it is observed
by our Historians and Chronologers) so long as we in this Land keep the unity
of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, and labor that there may be peace betwixt
us and our God, and unity and concord amongst our selves, we need fear neither
enemies nor evils. Now this concord which is desired, is in that which is good,
not in that which is evil: namely, unity and concord in true religion; and in
a lawful administration of justice and right; and in procuring and defending
public honesty; and in promoting the public good, and the like. And therefore
if we desire that our Church and State may flourish, let us all labor to be of
one mind, and on judgment; at least let us take heed of dissension, discord,
jarres, and all breaches, which may either destroy or disturb the peace and
welfare of that Church and Commonwealth wherein we live.

And fifthly, V. All must be converted by the Preaching of the word.
another thing required of the whole body politic, if we desire that our
Church and State should still stand, continue, and flourish, is to do, as
Niniveh did: namely, to repent, and turn unto God by the preaching of the
word. Our Savior says, Math. 11.24.
If the works which were done in Capernaum, had been done in Sodom, it would
have stood, and remained even until this day: where our Savior directly
teaches us, that the reason why a Kingdom flourishes and continues, is,
because the word of God, which is preached therein, is rightly used unto
repentance. Or, if a City, or Nation desire to continue and flourish, the only
way thereunto is, to hear, and obey the word of God Isa. 3.10, 11, and 65.2.
How a City, or Nation may be made truly happy.
. Here observe carefully these few short particulars: to wit,

I. It is not enough to hear the word, or to be present at the preaching
thereof: for a Dove, or a Daw; may do so much. Neither

II. Is it enough to suffer the word of exhortation, and reprehension patiently
Heb. 13.12.
, (although many will not do so much) for this they of Chorazin did, for any
thing we read to the contrary. Nor

III. Is it enough to reverence the preachers of the word (although many will
not do so much neither) for this Herod did Mar. 6.20.
. Nor

IV. Is it enough to show some certain humiliation, by reason of the
co^minations of the word (although not many do thus much) for this Ahab did 1
Kin. 21.
. But we must seriously repent, and turn unto the Lord, in new obedience, and
true sanctification, as the Jews did Acts. 2.37.
, when Peter preached unto them. Neither

V. Is it sufficient, that this be don of a few, but of many, when the
Commonwealth lies at the stake, and is either a winning or loosing, either a
making or marring. For although the Lord does often spare many for a fewes sake
Genesis 18.25. etc.
, yet he will remmeber those who repent not at the day of vengeance Exo. 32.34.
etc. Number. 14.21.
. and therefore if we desire that hereafter we may not fall into the fearful
hands of Gods destroying vengeance; and that now the Lord would so bless the
proceedings of this honorable Assembly met together in high Court of
Parliament, that our Church and State may long stand, remain, and flourish;
then not Vel duo vel nemo, one or two of us must repent, but many of us, that
so by our prayers we may prevail with the Lord. Neither

6. Is the endeavor of the inferior, or vulgar sort sufficient, at this time,
or upon so weighty an occasion, as the staying, and upholding of a
Commonwealth ready to fall; but the conduct of the Nobles, Peers, and Princes
of the Realm, are required also. And that both in true humiliation of heart,
and also in exemplary reverence and practice, (as the King of Niniveh, and the
Nobles did) they being the Wethers, and leaders of the flocks. Now noble
Captains never say, Ite, sed eamus, go ye and fight, but come, let us go.
And therefore when any public danger is doubted, or affliction feared, or any
general, common, and special blessing desired; then both Prince and people,
noble and ignoble, high and low, pastor and flock, should

1. Assemble to gether to the house of God, to hear his word, And

2. The hearers, i.e. all of them, must endure the Preacher to admonish, and
reprove them; neither contemning him nor his message, but reverencing both; the
one as the message, and the other as the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Yea,

3. All must humble themselves, and tremble at the threatenings of God. For all
the beasts of the Forest must quake if the Lion roar. And

4. Those who are called Gods (that is, Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Judges,
and Superiors, must labor by their command, humiliation, and godly practice,
to move and excite others to unfeigned repentance; as that pattern of Princes,
Jonas 3, 2.3, 4.
the King of Niniveh, did. For the Lord has promised to be gracious to that
Nation that thus seeks him, and sueth unto him; and therefore let us, from
the highest to the lowest, harken to the Lord, and walk in his ways, and he
will quickly subdue our enemies, and trune his hand against all our
adversaries, Psa. 81.13 14, 16.
and feed us with the finest of the wheat, and satisfy us with honey out of
the Rock; and make England (like the Land of Canaan) to flourish and flow with
milk and honey. And thus much for the conjoynt duty of Superiors and
inferiors, Magistrates and people. Now

Secondly, The duty of Superiors and Magistrates alone.
follows the duty of Superiors and Magistrates alone, and what is required on
their part, if they desire, that our Church and Commonwealth, may long
continue in prosperity, purity, and peace. Now here observe that the Magistrate
is twofold; There is a twofold Magistrate.
to wit, Supremus, et Subordinatus, supreme and subordinate.

First, the supreme Magistrate, is the King sacred Majesty; The duty of the
supreme Magistrate is twofold. viz. 1 To be holy.
now in him two things are required: namely,

1. To continue to lead his people by a holy example, Homer calls Kings
Diogenes, The generation of the Gods, and Diotrephes, Men nourished by the
Gods; and the Scripture says of them, Psalm. 86.
That they are Gods, that is, that they should be as men obedient unto God, and
as gods, exemplary unto men. As the ordinary Lodestone which draws Iron unto
it, is it self drawn by the Ethiopian Lodestone; so Kings, who draw their
people after them by their example, should be drawn themselves unto the Lord,
by his; seeing they represent him unto us. It was said long since,

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. That is, people frame their lives
according to the example of their Prince; and daily experience has proved the
truth of this saying. Historians tell us, that Alexander the great, and
Alphonsus King of Arragon, were both wry necked, the one by nature, and the
other by custom; And therefore all their followers did hang the head upon one
shoulder. Aurelius the Emperor loved Red Wine best; And therefore Torquatus
would palnt no other Grapes, Dionysius for a time loved Plato well, and then
all his followers turned Philosophers. Such as the color of Jacobs Rods were,
Hector Pint. Eze. 17.
such was the color of the cattle which were bred of the sheep conceiving in
the sight of the rods: so as the actions of the Prince are, such are wont to be
the cogitations, and conversation of the subjects. As other beasts level their
looks at the countenance of the Lions, and birds make wing as the Eagle flies:
so people will imitate their Princes. If Trajane be just, then all the people
will study justice. If Octavius delight in Poesy, then every one will strive
to be a Poet. If Cornelius fear God, then so will also all his household do.
And therefore unto the flourishing, and establishing of a Church or Sat, in
peace, purity, religion, and righteousness, it is very requisite and
necessary, that the Prince be zealous, and religious. And

2. It is further required in a Prince, 2 To take unto him Assistants.
to take unto him the assistance of others, that is, wise, religious, and grave
Counselors ordinarily; and Parliaments upon extraordinary, urgent, or
important occasions. For as a vine, although it be the noblest of all trees,
yet needs the supportation of reeds, props, and of other unfruitful trees;
so Princes and Potentates need the help of inferior persons. Yea as the hand
is not the weaker, because it is divided into fingers, but fuller of agility to
labor: so in a Kingdom, the businesses are better done, Plutarch.
which are imparted unto many. And therefore seeing Kingdoms and
Commonwealths are not weakened, or made worse, but contrarily bettered and made
more strong, by the help and assistance, of able Counselors, and religious
Parliaments; therefore these are requisite to be used by the Supreme
Magistrate, if he desire that the Church and State should flourish and prosper
under him. The duty of Subordinate Magistrates.
Now

Secondly, there is a Subordinate Magistrate; that is, those who are under the
Supreme and placed by him, in place of authority. Here now observe, that the
Subordinate Magistrate is either In fieri, or in facto; in potentia, or actu.
That is, some are to be chosen Magistrates hereafter, and some are Magistrates
already. Now a word or two of these particularly, and apart: namely, Who are to
be chosen to the Magistracy.


First, if we desire that our Commonwealth may prosper and flourish, then some
things are required in those who are to be admitted unto the Magistracy, and to
be looked unto by those, who admit them, and commit the government of the
Commonwealth unto them. As namely, 1 Such as are learned in humane Laws.


1. They ought to be wise, and understanding men, and learned in the Laws. As
the body is without members, so is the Commonwealth without Laws; and as a
distracted or doltish head, does small good unto the body, even so an ignorant
Magistrate does small good unto the State. And thereforefore it is requisite,
that those who are admitted unto the Magistracy, be men well acquainted with the
Laws of the Land wherein they are. There was a time appointed unto the
Vestals, 1. Wherein they should learn. 2. Wherein they should exercise that
they had learned. and 3. Wherein they should teach others; and thus also did
Diana's Priests at Ephesus: Plutarch.
So they are to do, who are to undertake the government of a Commonwealth.
For it becomes him who governs to be learned (the better to know what he
does) and wise (to find out how he ought to do it) and discreet, (to attend,
and take opportunity by the fore-top) and resolute in the action of justice,
without corruption of fear of any. The master of the Ship sets another at
the helm, to steer and direct her: but it is a shame for a Magistrate to
execute. his place, and administer justice by a Deputy, being altogether
unable himself to do it, by reason of his ignorance in the Laws and Statutes
of the Realm. Yea honesty and a good meaning are not enough in Magistrates
without ability; for although they mean well, yet often by doing amiss they
endanger and indamage both themselves and others. Gracchus, son of that
Gracchus that had been twice Consul, meaning well to his Country, but (for
want of knowledge) managing it undiscreetly, was slain in the Capitol by
Cornelius Scipio Nasica, Appian.
and his followers. And hence it was that Solomon so earnestly prayed unto God;
To give him wisdom, and knowledge, or the spirit of direction, for the right
administration of the Commonwealth. Or, by wisdom (as Tremellius thinks) he
means knowledge, to wit, of the laws of right and justice, and of the duties
which belong unto him to do, as he is a Magistrate. To teach us, that it
behooves a Magistrate to seek after the knoweldge of the Laws of that Nation
wherein he dwells. Hence Samuel writ the laws of their Land in a book: 1 Samuel
10.25.
and when the people crowned Ioash, 2 Chr. 23.11.
they put the book of the Testimony in his hand: and this book, every King
and Magistrate must have a copy of, which they must read diligently, that they
may discharge their functions according to law; because the Commonwealth is
not to be governed Ad placitum as Magistrates list, but according to the Laws
of the Land. And

2. As those who are admitted to places of power and authority, 2. They must be
learned in the divine Laws.
ought to be learned in the humane laws of the place where they are to
exercise their authority; so also they ought to be instructed in the Divine
Laws of God. Lev. 9.7.
Moses being the Lawgiver and supreme Magistrate and Judge of the people,
prescribed unto Aaron what sacrifices should be offered, both for himself and
the people, wherein he may be a pattern of Rulers; Deuteronomy. 17.
That they should not be strangers in matters of Religion. And hence the King
was commanded to study and to read continually the Law of God. And Constantine
said to the Bishops of his time, Vosintra Ecclesiam, Euscb. lib. 4. de vita
Constant.
ego extra Ecclesiam a Deo Episcopus constit^eus sum, You within the Church,
and I without the Church am of God appointed a Bishop. Eusebius. ib. 4. Eccles.
hist. cap. 3.
So also Theodoret, Rcrum coelestium desiderio teneri, and earam discendarum
studio duci, pium Imperatorum cum primis decet: It chiefly becomes a godly
Emperor, to be possessed with the desire of heavenly things, and led with the
study of them. But of this more by and by. And

3. 3. They must deliberatly under take the Magistracy.
Although a man be indiferently and competently furnished both with the
knowledge of humane and divine Laws, yet he must enter into the Magistracy
with great deliberation. For as he who goes leasurely and deliberatly into a
river, receive no harm, but he who violently and rashly plungeth himself, or
falls therein, is in danger of drowning; so those who suddenly and unadvisedly
come unto the Magistracy, often repent their rashness; but those who are
fairly and freely called thereunto and enter thereinto, with mature
deliberation, and discharge their places with-moderation and wisdom, shall
neither grieve others, nor have cause of grief in themselves: And therefore if
we wish well unto our State, it is our cutie both publicly and privately, to
pray unto the Lord, to give always such Magistrates unto us, as are wise,
understanding and learned men, both in humane and divine matters, and who
ambitiously seek not after preferment. And thus much for the three things,
which are required in those who are to be chosen or admitted unto the
Magistracy. Now

Secondly, The du. of those who are Magistratee, is twofold, Ad beneesse and Ad
esse simpliciter.
there are Magistrates in Facto, or Actu, who are already admitted unto the
Magistracy, and are actually Magistrates. Now if these desire that the Church
and State may thrive and prosper under their hands, then many things are
required of them, and in them. I will rank the several duties of Rulers and
Governors into two ranks; to wit, The things requite in Magistrates.
some things are requisite in them, Ad been esse, for the more profitable
discharging of their functions; The things requisite in a Magistrate.
and some things, Simpliciter ad esse, are simply necessary for every
Magistrate in his place. Now of these severally.

First, Ad been esse, if Magistrates desire that they may much profit, and
advance, and promote the good of that Church, and State wherein they are
placed, in authority and power; then these things are to be observed by them:

1. 1 Not to have too many places.
That they have not too many Irons in the fire, or too many offices, either in
Church or Commonwealth. As a governor of a Ship does some things with his
own hands, and somewhat by others: so in a Commonwealth one ought not to have
all offices engrossed in his hands, but one ought to have one, and another
another; for both things are done better, which are done by the advices, and
judgments of many; and also he who has but one place to discharge, must needs
execute it better, then if he had two: And therefore when and where there are
able man enough, it were good for the Commonwealth, if one had more but one
place of office to look unto, Indeed I know that many places are of that
nature, that an intelligent, industrious, and diligent man may discharge two;
and therefore I put this particular under the head, Been esse, and not Esse
simpliciter, because a man may be a good Magistrate and Governor, and yet
execute two places.

2. 2 To love and honor the good.
It would much promote and advance the glory, and good of a Commonwealth, if
Magistrates, and Rulers would prize, esteem, love, and encourage the godly,
and those who are worthy of respect and honor. As our Savior says, A Prophet
is not respected in his own Country; so Erasmus said, Men of desert are
ordinarily least esteemed of in their own Lands; and this is both a blemish,
Stob. 6. ser. 41. de Repu.
and a blot unto, and a bane of the Commonwealth. Solon was wont to say, That
that City would certainly flourish, In qua viros bonos honoribus affici,
contra autem, improbos poenis mos fuerit; where good men were honored, and the
wicked disgraced, and punished. Theophrastus being asked, Quidnam Rempublicam
conservaret? How a Commonwealth might flourish? answered, Praemium, et paena,
by encouraging, and rewarding the good, and by punishing the evil. Plutarch in
Lacon.
And thus Agesilaus says, the office of a Magistrate is, Erga rebellanies
audacia, erga subjectos benevolentia uti; according to that of Virgil, the duty
of a Magistrate is, Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos, to exalt the
obedient, and to humble the stubborn. For Virtus laudata creseit, extol,
exalt, dignify, and prize those who are good, and do well, and it will both
encourage them, and others, in well-doing. Now a Magistrate (I grant) may
execute the Laws and discharge his place, with some profit to the
Commonwealth, and yet not in affection and action thus look upon, and love
principally those who are religious, and holy; but certainly if he did so, he
would advance religion and righteousness in a State of much the more: and
therefore I place this particular also under the head Been esse, and not Esse
simpliciter.

3. If Rulers and Governors in their places desire to benefit that
Commonwealth wherein they live; 3 To govern with a gentle heart.
then let them hold the reign of government with a gentle hand. As wine does
first serve and obey the drinker, but by little and little mixing it self with
the blood in the veins, does overruled the drinker: so he that comes to the
government of a Commonwealth, by first applying himself in meekness and
gentleness to the disposition of the people, does afterward draw them to his
purpose, and in all willing subjection. And therefore Solomon's old, grave, and
experienced Counselors, thusadvise King Rehoboam, 1 King. 12.7.
If thou will be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and
answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for
ever: And the goodness of this counsel appeared by the event; for the
refusing to follow it, and giving a rough and ragged answer unto the people,
ten of the twelve Tribes revolted, and fell from him. Agesilaus could say, that
Magistrate governes best in a Commonwealth, that governs the subjects and
people under him, as father his children. I know that a good Magistrate may and
ought to be severe in punishing offenders, and reforming of vices: but I
conceive that he generally shall to most good in a Commonwealth, which,
although he be not remiss in his calling, or in the execution of his place,
yet does rule and govern those who are under him, with a gentle hand, a mild
and soft temper, and a sweet government. And therefore I place this particular
also under the head Been esse, not Esse absolute. And

4. 4 To be holy and religious.
If those who are in place of authority and government, desire to do good in
their places, to that Church and State wherein they live, then it is very
requisite, that they should be holy, upright, unblameable, and Pious. And
therefore that all Magistrates may be moved hereunto, let them consider a
particular or two, namely,

1. Mat. 5.14.
That they are like Cities set upon a hill; and consequently, their sins can
hardly be concealed, but will easily be made conspicuous unto the world. And
therefore if Magistrates regard their own reputation and credit, they must
labor to be religious, immaculate, and holy. And

2. Let them remember, that as of all sins, theirs are seen soonest, so of
all sins, theirs are the greatest; because they are not only hurtful to
themselves, but to others also; and that both in regard of their conversation,
and also of the administration of the Commonwealth. That is, if Magistrates be
wicked, they are both examples of wickedness unto others, and also (for the
most part) do obliquely govern the Commonwealth. Now by the evil examples
of superiors, many are infected and misled, as follows by and by; and by the
evil administration of the Commonwealth, the whole body politic is
endangered and harmed. ^ Pro. 28.15, 16 and 29, 2, 4. Pccle. 10.16.
Pharaoh that wicked Egyptian King, hurt his people by his life, in giving
them an example of his disobedience and obstinacy, and by his administration of
the Commonwealth, in uniustly oppressing the people of God. Solomon infected
his people by his life and manners, in marrying so many Idolatrous wives, and
infected them by his administration of the State, in introducing idolatry
amongst them; and so we might instance also in Rehoboam; and Ahab, and others,
but I pass them by; concluding this particular thus: if Magistrates would not
be the worst of men, nor the greatest of sinners, nor of that number for whom
the severest plagues and punishments are reserved; then it concerns them, and
that not a little, to labor to be pure, and unspotted in the eyes of God and
men, And

3. Let all Rulers and governors remember, that their lives being exemplary, a
godly conversation seen and perceived in them, will be an excellent means to
make a good, and godly Commonwealth. Pittacus being asked, which was a well,
and a right governed Commonwealth? answered, a cuius gubernaculis; mali
removentur: that which keeps wicked men from all rule and government: and
this answer was not given without just cause, the life of a Magistrate being
the rules square, frame and form of an honest life, according to the which,
subjects and inferiors frame their lives.

For although it was said of old, Vivitur legibus non exemplis, Men live by
laws, not by examples, yet now adays, people or subjects do rather take their
patterns and examples, from the lives of Princes and Magistrates, then from
their laws, as may appear by an instance or two. Fline. lib. 18. Cap. 27.


As the Herb Heliotropium, does always look toward the Sun, and when it
it is hid does gather in the flower: so many, yea the most, look unto
Superiors and Rulers, and address themselves to whatsoever they see them
inclined. Plato being broad-brested, all his Scholars wore pillowes under their
garments, that they might seem to be like him. Aristotle stammered in his
speech, and therefore his Scholars would stut and stammer, that they might be
like their Master. Because Ennius the Philosopher was so given to drunkenness,
that he was seldom sober: therefore his Pupils would go reeling and
staggering in the streets. And therefore seeing subjects look more to the
lives then laws of Superiors, if they desire that they may be well ordered
under them, they themselves must labor to be religious and holy, yea as they
exceed others in place and dignity, so should they also in zeal and piety:
according to the saying of Alphonsus. Panormit. lib. 6. de rebus gestis.
Alphonsi.
Those, Qui aliis praeessent, tanto privatis hominibus meliores esse oportere,
quanto honoribus and dignitate aneccellerent. The greater that a Magistrate is
in power above others, the more ought he in virtue to excel all others. The
King of Calecut is chief of his Religion, and for this cause goes before the
other Kings of India in dignity, and is called, Samory, that is to say, God on
earth. And indeed if all amongst us would labor to excel others as far in
zeal, virtue, purity, and Religion, as they excel them in power and dignity;
and that the higher any one is, either in Church or Commonwealth, he were the
more eminent and singular in godliness and grace: then people would honor
them as the Lords Vicegerents on earth, and as earthly Gods; and would strive
to tread in their steps; and be fearful of doing what is evil, lest they
should thereby incur wrath and punishment; and consequently the commonwealth
would quickly be much reformed.

The stalk I know is a different thing from the grain of corn, althoughit
support it, and bear it up; and a Magistrate may be profitable to the
Commonwealth, and yet be no saint in life: and therefore I put this particular
also under the head Been esse, not Esse absolute. But Omne tulit punctum: That
Magistrate who is a good Magistrate in regard of the Commonwealth, and a good
man, yea a burning and shining lamp in himself, shall have praise both with
God and man; and be profitable both to himself, and others. And therefore if
we wish the peace and prosperity of our Church and State, then let us
saithfully and fervently call upon our God, that he would be pleased to enable
all our Rulers and Governors, to execute profitably, and to discharge
religously, those places and offices wherein they are; and to sanctify them by
his only Spirit, and to make them holy, and lovers of goodness, and good men;
and mild, meek, and gentle, in their government, and rule. And thus much for
those duties which are required in Magistrates, Ad been esse,

2. The things necessary in Magistrates.
The duties required in Magistrates Ad esse absolute, simply, and absolutely;
or the more essential duties of Magistrates as Magistrates as Magistrates, are
these viz.

1. They keep their own Laws. Zonarut.
Magistrates and Governors ought to observe and keep their own Laws; or, to
walk according to the Law. The Kings of Persia showed themselves more subject
to Laws, then their Lord did. And the Kings of Lacedemonia did monthly swear
to guide themselves according to the Laws; and the Ephory took an oath in the
behalf of the people to see it executed. And Archemedes says, It is very
requisite, that Princes and Magistrates live according to that Law themselves,
which they would have others to regulate their lives by; this being a
principal means to make the people obedient thereunto, and the Commonwealth
to flourish, as appears by that saying of Agesilous, who being asked whence it
came to pass, that the Commonwealth of the Spartanes flourished, above her
other Nations, answered, quoniam plus caeteris in hoc sese exercent, ut pariter
and imperare, Plut. in Laton. apophtheg.
and parere sciant, Because they are more careful then others, to obey their
own Laws, which they injoyne unto others.

Some may here demand, Question.
if we the subjects be subject to the Law; and Kings and Magistates also
subject to the Law, then what is the difference between the Kings and
Magistrate subjection, and ours.

A famous Modern Divine answers hereunto thus, Answer. Weemes exercit. upon
com. 5. lib. 2 exercit. 12. p. 24.
that Kings and Magistrates are subject to the directive part of the law, but
not to the coactive part of it. The law is considered two manner of ways, viz.

1. As it is the rule of Justice, and the line, by which both Magistrates and
people should be governed and guided; according to that saying of the Emperor;
Legibus solutus legibus tamen vivit. Although he were loosed from the coactive
part of the Law, yet he was directed by, and lived according to the Law. And,

2. The law is considered as an instrument, which the Prince and Magistrates
use, for the ruling of the subject. Now if we consider the law in the first
sense, then the Prince and Magistrate is subject to it; but consider the law as
an instrument, which Rulers and Governors use in Ruling of the people, and in
this sense they are not subject thereunto.

A blind man is lead by his servant, Simile.
now so far as his servant leads him, he is not his servant, or his
inferior; but consider that servant as an instrument, serving his Master, and
then he is inferior unto him, and serves him, although he were never so
sharp sighted: and therefore if Rulers and Magistrates desire indeed that the
Commonwealth may be well ordered, and the people regulated according to the
laws of the land, and made obedient thereunto, then it is necessary, that they
themselves direct their lives by the law: for as the Apostle says, how can a
Magistrate say unto a subject, Thou shall not Thou shall not swear, when he
himself is a blasphemers; or, Thoushalt not steal, when himself is
sacrilegious? And

2. 2 They must execute the awes.
Magistates must observe and keep the Laws themselves, so if they desire that
the Sat may flourish and grow green under their government, then they must
also execute the Laws, administer justice, releeve and help the oppressed,
and punish the violaters of the Law.

As a Land cannot long last without Laws, so almost as good no Laws, as no
execution of the Laws; For it is in a manner all one, for Magistrates to make
no Laws, and to execute no Laws which are made. Plato said, that a
Commonwealth consisted of two things, viz. Reward and punishment. Now if Laws
be not executed, then both these parts, and consequently the whole falls to the
ground. That is, if neither good men, who live according to the Law, be
rewarded, nor evil men and transgressors of the Law punished, then how can the
Commonwealth long subsist. And therefore as Chyrurgions cut off a rotten
member from the body, least it should endanger the whole body: So Magistrates
should punish, and take away those who by their lewdness, wickedness, and
insolences, infect and polute the Commonwealth; the inflicting of of
punishment upon Malefactors, being a point and part of good zeal in a
Magistrate. Bonos punit, qui malis parcit, said Seneca. He punishes a good
man, who spares and punishes not an evil man. Yea it is dangerous for a
Magistrate not to correct, and (when the fault truly deserves it) to cut off
transgressors: For,

1. They make themselves guilty thereby of their sequent faults: as Will
Summers said unto the King, that the murderer had slain one man, and he two:
Because if the King had executed the Law upon him for the first murder, then
the other had not dyed by him. And

2. When wicked men sin, and are not punished, it animates and emboldens
others to do the like. And therefore as Caiaphas said, It is better that one
dye, then that all the people should perish; Ioh. 11.50.
So I say, it is better that one scabbed sheep should be slain, then suffer
it to infect the whole flock. And therefore it is very necessary, that
Magistrates should some times not only unsheath the sword, but also strike
with the sword: because as the Proverb is, too much pity spoils a City. And

3. It is the reputation of a City and Nation, to have the Laws executed
therein without remissness, and partiality: and contrarily it is a disgrace
and scandal unto a place, to have the sword of justice so fast locked in the
scabert, that it is never drawn out, nor the Laws at all executed, nor justice
administered. And therefore if Magistrates regard their own credit, or the
reputation of their Country, they must be careful to execute the Laws upon
Malefactors, and Law-breakers. And

4. Rulers and Governors are sworn to rule according to the Laws, and
carefully to execute the Laws; and not to do this, is a violation of their
oath. And therefore if they would not be forsworn, they must not hold the
sword for naught, neither be only scare-crowes, but execute the Laws, by
encouraging and rewarding the good, and by punishing the evil. And

5. It is dangerous for the Magistrates themselves not to administer justice,
in relieving of the injured and oppressed; as may appear in the person of
Philip of Macedon, who having subdued almost all Greece, and being in the top
of his glory, celebrating at one time the marriage of his son Alexander, and
of one of his daughters, with great Pomp and magnificence; as he was marching
withal his Train betwixt the two Bridegroomes (his own son, and his son
in Law) to see the sports and pastimes which were prepared for the solemnity of
the marriage; behold suddenly a young Macedonian Gentleman, called Pausanias,
ran at him, and slew him in the midst of the press, for not regarding to do
him justice, when he complained unto him, of an injury done by one of the
Peers of the Realm. And therefore if Magistrates would not make themselves
guilty of the peoples sins; if they would not aimate and embolden people to
sin; if they regard the credit of their Country, or their own oath, or
safety, then they must execute the Laws upon transgressors. Now

3. As Magistrates must execute the Laws, 3 They must be just in judgment.
so they must be just in judgment, administering the Law, equally and justly
without respect of persons. As there were two Pillars before Solomon's Temple,
viz. 1 Kin. 7.21. 2 Chr. 3.17.
Iachin, id est, God will establish, and Bohaz, id est, Strength, which two
Pillars were set up to behold the porch of the Temple. So there are two
Pillars, which uphold our Church and State, viz. Religion (of which by and by)
and Justice; true Religion upholding the Church, Psa. 122.3, 4, 5.
and Justice the Commonwealth: and therefore they may more fitly be learned.
The sword and buckler of the Commonwealth, then Fabius and Marcellus were. The
King (says King Solomon) By judgment and justice establishes the Land. Prove.
29.4. Ps. 72.1.
For which cause his Kingly father desires the Lord to give these unto the
King. And therefore Magistrates must administer just judgment without respect
of persons. Anacharsus said, that Laws did rightly resemble the Spiders web,
because they take hold of little Flies, and Gnats, which fall into them, but
the great ones will break and run through them at their will. But indeed
this is neither the fault of the Law, nor Lawgiver, but of the Magistrate, who
does administer it with partiality, and respect of persons, which should not
be: For as the Sun is not one to a poor man, and another to a rich, but common
alike to all: So a Prince and Magistrate ought not to respect the person but
the matter. Tatius the fellow King of Rome with Romulus, Plutarch.
for not doing justice in punishing certain of his friends and kinsfolks, and
had robbed and murdered certain Ambassadors which came to Rome, was so
watched by the kindred of the slain, that they slew him as he was sacrificing
to his gods, because the could not obtain justice at his hands. Malum
consilium consultori pessimum, as evil counsel is often worst unto him who
gives it, so is neglect of justice to him who should administer it. And
therefore all Magistrates who desire the safety of themselves, and the
preservation of the State, ought to judge with righteous judgment. And

4. 4 They must be magnanimous.
As Magistrates must be just and upright in the execution of the Laws, so must
they also be magnanimous, and courageous in the administration thereof. For it
behooveth a Prince or Ruler, to be of such zealous and godly courage, that he
always show himself to be as a strong wall for the defense of his people,
Religion and Laws. Yea, it is requisite for all those who have rule and
governance in a Commonweal under their Prince, to know the bounds of their
State, and the full effect of their duty; Lactantius.
that by a courageous and undaunted executing of justice, they may be feared,
and by showing mercy, they may be loved. Magistrates must be so magnanimous,
that they omit not the execution of the Laws for fear of any, and so
resolute, that nothing may hinder them from the administration of Justice. The
Naturalists observe, that although the great Owl be in shape like other
Owls, yet in bigness, and in sharp talents she ressembles the Eagle: but no
withstanding her bigness and talents, she wants courage, and is a very
cowardly bird. And such are evil and timorous Governors, who being armed with
authority, do not or dare not bend their force for the suppressing of evil,
and resisting of common enemies. Magistrates must not only have a good
inclination, but also a religious resolution in the executing of their places.
For otherwise

1. Importunity of friends and suitors will overcome them if they be mutable
and weak in resolution. And

2. Rewards, gifts and bribes will corrupt them, if they be covetous. And

3. Love, or hatred, or anger, will blind them if they be passionate and
partial Judges. And therefore it is necessary, that being armed with
authority, they should be also with magnanimity, courage, resolution and
constancy, and adorned with purity, equity, moderation, impartiality, and
circumspection, and free from all vice, avarice and impurity. And

5. 5. They must govern according to the word.
As Magistrates must be courageous and resolute, so they must rule and govern
according to the word and will of God. Here observe, that there are two sorts
of laws, namely permissive and preceptive. Now although humane laws often
permit those things whch are not warranted by the word of God, as Moses
permitted unlawful divorces, and our Land permits usury, for the avoiding of
some great inconveniency; yet they must never command any thing to be done,
whch is contrary to the word, and Law of the Lord. Caius a Roman Emperor,
sent Petronius into Syria, with commandment to bid battle unto the Jews,
Josephus.
if they would not receive his image into their Temple, which they refused,
with these words, They had rather die, then turn from the Laws of God. And as
all godly Christians should say thus, That they had rather die, then do any
thing contrary to the Law of God; so all good Magistrates should thus say, That
they had rather die, then command subjects to do any thing contrary, or not
according to the will of God, or not govern according to that rule, which is
the square and pattern of all pious and perfect government. And

6. 6. They must defend Religion. Talmud Cholin. 62.1.
As Magistrates must be careful to govern according to the Laws of God, so
they must careful protect and maintain Religion, and the true worship of God.
The Jews in their Talmud say, That the Grapes in Babell sent upon a time to
the Vine leaves in Judea, desiring them to come and overshadow them, otherwise
the heat would consume them, and they should never come to maturity. And thus
if Religion be not sheltred by those who are in place of government; or if they
cast not their sha^dow over it, it will soon decay; but where they favor and
protect it, it prospers. Licurgus reformed the State of the Lacedaemonians: Numa
Pompilius of the Romans: Solon of the Arhenians; and Deucalion of all the
Grecians, generally, by making them devout and affectionate toward the gods in
prayers, oaths, oracles, and prophecies, through the means of fear, and hope
of the divine nature, which they imprinted in them. And certainly, if all our
Christian Magistrates would make it their principal care to advance Religion,
and to compel men to worship and serve the Lord, both by their precepts and
presidents, both by threatenings and mild speeches, both by countenancing the
good and religious, and by disliking and disaffecting the irreligious and
profane; then certainly we should quickly have a flourishing Church and State.
Octavius prayed God that it might be said, That by him the Commonwealth of
Rome was preserved from all danger; and that at his death he might carry with
him that hope. That it should remain many ages in that Estate he left it.
Suetonius.
This should indeed be the care, and desire of every religious Ruler, and the
way and means thereunto is, to labor to advance Religion, and the pure
worship of God; for where true Religion is professed, and the Lord truly
worshipped, and the Gospel sincerely and powerfully preached, there we may be
sure that the Church and State shall be preserved, so long as it continues in
that course, and the Magistrates in that care of Religion. And therefore if all
our Governors (as they ought) do desire, that our Church, Commonwealth and
State, may by them or by their means, be preserved from all danger, and that
we may long flourish after their deaths, then let them while they live, labor
to protect, maintain and defend the truth, and true Religion of Christ, and
advance, propagate, and enlarge his Kingdom, and the preaching of the Gospel,
even from Dan to Beersheba. This was always David's care, as we may see in the
whole 1.17. Psalm, and 2 Samuel 6. and 1 Chronicles. 14.12. and 16.4. and 2 Samuel 7.2.
and 1 Chronicles. 22.14.

And hence Magistrates are called Gods Ministers, Romans 13.4. that their
principal care may be to advance his glory in the propagation of Religion, and
the promulgation of the Gospel, yea hence we are commanded to pray for them, 1 Timothy 2.2
that under them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty: yea hence the Lord has recorded, and humane histories, put upon the
file of fame, the names of many Magistrates and Rulers, who have been most
careful herein: as of David, and Ashah, 2 Chronicles. 14.21. and Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.7. and 19.8. and Ezechia, 2 Chronicles. 29.5. and 30.1. and Constantine
the great, and Valentinian, and Theodosius, and Gratian. And therefore if we
desire the peace, prosperity, and good of our Land and Church, we must daily
invocate the throne of mercy, and the Lords most sacred Majesty, to give
continually, and successively unto us, such Magistrates and Rulers, both in
Church and Commonwealth, as may observe in themselves the Laws which they
prescribe unto others; and may execute all holy and wholesome Laws which are
made justly, impartially, courageously, resolutely, without respect of persons;
and according to the rule and direction of the Law of God; and which may
protect religion, and preserve it in purity, and sincetie. And thus I have done
with the second maine brance, The duty of Subjects alone.
viz. The duty of Magistrates, if they wish truly the welfare of the Kingdom.
Now

3. Follows the duty of inscriours and subjects alone, and what is required
on their part, if they desire that our Church and Commonwealth may long
continue in prosperity, purity, and peace. Their duties are these. viz.

1. 1 They must fear the Magistrates.
They must fear the Laws, and stand in awe of the Magistrates; according that
of Plato, happy is that Commonwealth, where the people do fear the Law, as
a Tyrant. For as Magistrates (as was showed before) must nto be like
scarre-crowes; so no more must people think either Laws or Magistrates to be
such. Plata. in Convivic. 7. Sapient.
Bias was wont to say, Optimam else Rempublican, in qua legem omnes perinde ac
ipsum Dominum, et Regem metuunt. That Commonwealth must needs flourish and
prosper, where people are as afraid of their Laws, as Lords, and as fearful
to break the Laws, as to offend their King. Solon being asked, how a City
might continue in a happy and flourishing estate? answered, Si Cives quidem
Magistratui obediant, Magistratus autem legibus. If the Citizens obey their
Governors, and their Governors their Laws, provided that the Laws be good.
But of this by and by.

2. 2 They must honor the Magistrates.
Subjects must honor their superiors the Magistrates, who bear a weighty
burden for them. If we could, and would but consider the heavy tasks, troubles,
cares, and toylsome endeavors, of our ^nfull and careful Governors, we would
think them worthy of double, yea trible honor. A Kingdom is nothig else then
a care of another safety, according to that of Antiochus, who told his son
Demetrius, that their Kingdom was a noble slavery. August. de civit. 1.14.
Augustine says, Imperatores serviunt quibus videntur unperare. Emperors are
the servants of those whose Lords they seem to be; that is, in labor and care
for them, not in subjection unto them. Many, says Plutarch, in outward show,
seem glorious and happy, who by reason of a cursed wife at home, is full of
heaviness: So a Kingdom seems to bring all content with it, but it is well
known that Crowns have their cares, yea so many, so great, so weighty, that
(as a King of our own, once said) if a man knew how many cares and troubles
did attend it, he would not take it up, though he saw it lying on the ground.
And therefore they desire honor from and by us, in bearing these heavy and
hard burdens for us. Yea, as Lactantius says, Kings as they are men before
God, so are they gods before men: and therefore as the Lords Vicegerents and
Deputies, they are to be honored by men. And

3. 3 They must obey the Magistrates.
As people or Subjects must fear the Laws, and honor the Magistrates, so
they must also be subject and obedient unto them. Romans 13.
The Apostle commands every soul to be subject unto the higher powers: And the
reasons hereof are.

1. Because this subjecton unto Magistrates is the very preservation of
Kingdoms: as we might abundantly show out of Roman Histories. The Emperors of
Rome continued long in their government, so long as they kept the people in
subjection, yea so long their Commonwealth flourished; but after the people
began to cast off the yoke, an crown whom they pleased, they then continued
but a short tim^ their Empires (as we see by Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and
Julian, who slew one another: and by Pertinar who was slain by the soldiers)
and then their Empire began to decay. And therefore it is a great blessing of
God, when Subjects are obedient unto their Sovereigns, and Superiors in all
lawful things. For all things succeed well where there is obedience, and sweet
accord, but the pride of rebellon is as the sin of Witchcraft, and preceeds
ruin. Prover. 28.2.

Subjects I say, must be obedient and subject to Governors, because as a man
is a civil and sociable creature, so there is nothing more pleasing unto God,
then (...), or when the order ordained and appointed by him is observed by us;
namely, 1 Cor. 12.15.
when the hand does not oppose the head, nor the foot the hand, nor these the
belly; but every member does perform its own office. When the head hates not
the members, nor they the head; but reciprocally seek the good one of another,
then the body must needs be in good frame and temper. But if the head look
upon the body, as an enemy thereunto, and the body behold the head with the
like eye, all the Microcosme and body must then needs be out of frame, and
miserably distempered. And thus if Magistrates stand disaffected unto the
people, and look upon them with all evil eye, as strangers to their welfare:
and people on the other side conceit and disconceive of Magistaates, as those
who seek to work their woes, and weave their ruin; then nothing can be
expected indeed but ruin and destruction on both parts. But if the supreme and
subordinate Magistrate look upon the people as their body, without which they
cannot subsist; and the people look upon them as their head, without which
they could not be preserved in unity and order, or freed from miserable
confusion; and both mutually seek the honor, pleasure, profit, and welfare
(if without obsurdity I may so speak) our little Microscome, or body of
England, will be in a happy and blessed health. And

2. Subjects must be oedient, and subject to Superiors, and Governors,
because (as the Apostle says) They are from God; Romans 13.2.
that is, he has made them Magistrates, and imprinted his stamp upon them,
and given their power and authority unto them; according to our Saviors speech
to Pilate, Thou can have no power over me, except it be given thee from
above. Ioh. 19.11
And therefore (as Saint Paul says) He that despises the power of Magistrates,
Romans 13.4.
despises the ordinance of God. And

3. Subjects or people must be obedient and subject unto Superiors, because
(as the Apostle says) they are ordained by God ser our Cicero) are borne for
themselves; much less then Ki ngs, or Magistrates; for they are ordained for
the people sake, lest that we should be a flock without a Shepherd, which is a
point next the worst, as we see by Michajahes speech unto Ahab. And therefore
seeing they are the Lords Ministers and appointed by him in much mercy, 1 Kin.
22.17.
for our welfare and peace; let us obey them and be subject unto them, 1 Pet.
2.13
as unto the Ministers of God.

If any demand wherein our subjection unto Magistrates consists? Quest.
I answer, In these things, to wit;

1. Answer
In reverence conjoined with love; we must honor those whom the Lord has
honored, and neither despise, emulate, or slight them. We must love them
with our hearts and minds, and honor and reverence them both in our words and
works. Read to this purpose Exodus 20.12. Romans 13.7. and 1 Peter 2.17, 18.
Exodus 22.28. Eccles. 10.20. And

2. This obedience which we owe unto Magistrates consists in the undertaking
of just and lawful wars for the defense of our Country, or in assisting of
our Magistrates in their wars undertaken for the defense of us and our
Commonwealth, against either foraine or domestical foes. And

3. Mat. 22.23 Romans 13.6.
This our obedience and subjection unto Magistrates, consists in giving unto
Caesar those things which are his, and in paying unto Princes those duties,
tributes, and customs which belong, and are due unto them. And

4. It consists, in praying unto God for them, but of this amply in text, and
last proposition. And

5. It consists in obeying their commands, statutes, and laws. Here observe,
that commands and laws o Magistrates are threefold; to wit

1. Good simply, or directly according to the word and will of God: as when
Magistrates in their laws and statutes prohibit swearing, stealing, adultery
and the like, and command and enjoyne the careful observation of the Lords
day. Now in these precepts there is no question, but Magistrates ought to be
obeyed, because as the Lords Vicegerents, they impose nothing upon us, but the
Lords own yoke.

2. Some Magistrates command things simply evil; as to fall down before a
false God. Dan. 3. or not to fall down, and pray unto the true God. Dan. 6.
Now here there is no question neither, because we must rather obey God then
man; and therefore when man's mandats countermand the Lords, we must not then
or therein obey him.

3. Sometimes the Magistrate commands that which is adiaphorall, and
indifferent in it self, as namely, for some politic respects, the Magistrate
commands us to abstain from flesh on Fridayes, or in Lent, when we may without
any endangering of our health, or the encurring of any eminent inconvenience.
Now this obedience me thinks no Christian man should deny to any Christian
Magistrate.

4. 4. They must be at unity among themselves.
If people desire that this our Church and State may long stand, and lastingly
flourish, then as they must be subject, and obedient unto Magistrates, so they
must be at unity and peace among themselves. If one member should be at
variance, and hold war with another, how could the body subsist. Now in this
our Church and State, we are or should be members of one and the same body
(Romans 12.4, 5, etc. 1 Corinthians. 12.12, etc. Ephesians. 5.29.) and therefore we ought
to hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. We in this Land, all
profess to have one Father, and say we believe in one God and Father: And one
Mother; saying we believe the Church to be holy, wherein we are regenerated
and borne again: And we are fed with the same teates, and nourished with the
said food; for our meat is the body of Christ, which was given for us, and our
drink is the blood of Christ, which was shed for us; and we all hope for one
and the same inheritance; saying, we believe life everlasting. And therefore
it is fit that we should accord and agree among our selves, and like brethren
live together in unity, which is a good and a pleasant thing, and an excellent
means to preserve in peace and plenty this our Commonwealth.

5. And lastly, if subjects desire that this our Church and State may long
flourish in purity, piety, 4. They must be holy and religious.
and prosperity, then they must labor to be obedient, and holy. Zeno was wont
to say, Stob. Ser.
Decorandon esse Republieas non preciosis ornamentis, sed inhabitantium
virtutibus. Kingdoms and Commonwealths are not to be adorned with precious
jewels, or outward pomp, but with the piety and virtues of the inhabitants. It
is the Lord (as we proved before) that protects and preserves Kingdoms and
States: now we can no longer be assured that he will preserve us, then we are
careful to please him, and fearful to offend him, and diligent and
industrious in the working of his work, and walking in his ways. But having
spoken something of this in all the precedent Propositions, I will not here
enlarge it any further. To conclude, If we desire that we may still have a
pure and peaceable Church, and flourishing and prosperous Commonwealth, then
let us learn to fear the violating of our Laws, and stand in awe of them,
let us learn to honor our Magistrates, and to reverence them. Let us learn
to be subject to our Magistrates, and to obey them in all lawful things. Let
us labor for peace, unity, and concord amongst our selves. And let us labor
to purge our selves from all pollution, both of the flesh, and spirit, and
perfect holiness in the fear of God, and walk as become his peculiar people,
And then we may be sure of his special protection. Let us be thankful to our
good God, for all the blessings and mercies which in this Land we enjoy, both
in regard of Church and State; and let us express our thankefolnesseunto him,
id est, by acknowledging that it is he, and he alone, who has hitherto
preserved and blessed us, and that not for our merits, but for his own mercies
sake. And 2. By praising his most glorious Name, with our tongues, And 3. By
obeying him in out lives. And 4. By loving him in our hearts. And 5. By
depending wholly upon him for the time to come. And 6. By a diligent
circumspection and religious fear, lest we should provoke him unto anger, who
has so long and so lovingly preserved our Church and Commonwealth. And
because the protection and continuance of Kingdoms comes from him alone; ^et
us always have recourse with goldnesse of confidence unto him for these
bl^ings; remembering that he is, 1. Omnipotent, one who knows all our
necessities and wants. ( Job 28.24. Psalm. 139.6.12. Prove. 15.3. Ierem. 32.19.)
And 2. Omnipresent, one who is every where, and in all places at once (Psalm.
139.7, 8. Ierem. 23.^3.) And 3. Omnipotent, one who is able to do whatsoever
he will, both in heaven and earth: Psalm. 86.8 Deuteronomy. 3.24. Ierem. 32.27) And 4.
Constant and most true in all his promises. (Numb. 23.19, Josh. 21.4.5. and
23.14.) And 5. Good and merciful unto all his, or al those, who believe in him
and obey him; and is ready to defend and help them whenever in their
necessities they seek and sue unto him. In a word, If we refuse and rebel, we
shall be devoured; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Esaias 1.20. But if
we delight in the Laws and Ordinances of the Lord. He will cause us to ride
upon the high places of the earth, and feed us with the heritage of Jacob, and
bless us with the blessings of Joseph: (...) the Lord has spoken this also.
Esaias 58.14.

HAving, with what convenient brevity I could, dipatched the fourth
Proposition, I come briefly unto the last, which is this,

When any calamity or misery is either feared or felt; Proposition 5.
or, does either lie upon the backs, or hang over the heads of any Church or
State: or when any special blessing is wished or desired for either, or both
of them: that then it is the duty of all the pious and zealous members thereof,
both to desire and endeavor, both to labor and pray, for the obtaining of the
blessing wanted and desired.

How this point is derived from the Text, How the point arises from the text.
we may see without spectacles; For the people of Israel being in distress,
the Prophet seeks redress, and deliverance therefrom by prayer: They are
infected with war, and desire peace; therefore David seeks it by prayer, he
desires that Religion and prosperity may be established in their borders; and
therefore he prays for it; that being the ordinary means to avert evils, and
to obtain good things.

This point is of that boundless contents, that I must be constrained to do
as the dogs do at Nilus are accustomed to do; to wit, Take a lap, or snatch
of some of the principal particulars therein, and so away. An Orator must so
put on those passions which he would stir up in others, that the visage,
action, and gesture, might speak as well as the mouth: and therefore I wish I
were able to set before your eyes, such expressions as might move you to pious
and powerful prayers, and might beget in your hearts unfeigned sighs, and
sobs, and intervall supplications. The Proposition proved. What things are to
be prayed for, and against are either.


I proceed unto the proof of the point, which briefly is this, That prayer is
both a remedy against evils, and a means to procure good things unto us. I
might for the ample and clear proof hereof, give my Reader this Division, and
easily make it good viz. That things to be prayed for, or against are either

First, evil, which are threefold; to wit, Temporal, Spiritual, and
eternal. And prayer is profitable against all these evils. Temporal and
Spiritual evils are of two sorts; to wit, either feared or felt; and
answerably thereunto, we pray either to be preserved from them, or for the
prevention of them, when we fear them: Or, to be delivered from them, or, for
the removal of them, when they are felt by us, and lie upon us. Now prayer is
profitable for both these; viz. both for the prevention of evils, and
preservation out of evils. Or

Secondly, things to be prayed for, are good; which likewise are threefold,
namely, temporal, spiritual, and eternal. Now prayer is profitable for the
procuring of all these. Temporal, and spiritual blessings are either desired,
or enjoyed, and accordingly we pray, either for the enjoyment of them when we
want them; or for the continuance, or increase of them, or that they may be
blessed unto us, when we possess them. And prayer is profitable for both; viz.
both for the procuring of those good things which we want, and for a blessing
upon, and blessed continuance of those things which we have. Thus (I say,) I
might lay down this ground, and build much matter upon it; but because I here
study brevity, and every knowing Christian is fully persuaded of the truth of
all this, I will therefore touch upon a particular or two, and so proceed.

Art thou sick, Esa. 38.2. 1 Samuel 1.15. 1 Kin. 18.42. Psa. 141.8. Psa. 90.3.
and 50.15. Iam. 5.16. 2 Samuel 2. Jonah. 3.3, etc. Genesis 28.20. Matthew. 6.10. 2
Cor. 12.8. Math. 26.41. Math. 26.38.
and desire health? then pray as Hezebiah did. Art thou barren, and desire
a child? then pray as Annah. Do thou desire to be freed from dangers and
casualties? then pray as David did. Do thou desire to be delivered from some
evil or affliction which lies upon thee? then pray, as David did: and as the
Lord, and Saint James commands all to do in the like case. Art thou afraid of
the Lords anger, and desire to be reconciled unto him? then pray as David and
as the King of Niniveh did. Art thou in want, and desire sufficient food and
maintenance? then pray as Jacob did, and as our Savior commands. Art thou
tempted and assaulted by Satan? then pray, as St. Paul did, and as Christ
commanded his Apostles to do. Art thou dejected, sorrowful, Luke 17.5 Matthew.
8. Math. 7.7 Luke 18.1. Acts 6.4. and 1 Pet. 4.7. and 1.9.
and troubled in spirit? then pray as our Lord himself did. Do thou desire
the augmentation and increase of thy faith? then do as the Apostles and the
Centurion did? Pray, Oh Lord increase our faith; or, I believe, Lord help my
unbeleeve, Do thou desire any requisite blessing or grace whatsoever? then
pray; for that is the ordinary and ordained means to obtain it. Do thou
desire a blessing upon that Church and State wherein thou live? then pray as
the Prophet David here does. If thou were in a house of bondage, under
Pharoahes tyranny, in an iron prison, in a brazen tower, in a den of Lions, in
a fiery furnace: pray but from thence with the Prophet in my Text, Save me oh
Lord with thy right hand, and hear me, and he will either deliver thee (for
he is able) or so comfort thee, that a prison shall be as a Palace unto thee.
Art thou either afraid of, or infested and anoyed with enemies, either
domestical or foreign? then pray as Ezra, Joel, Moses, and Hezekiah did.
Exodus 17. Ezra. 8.23. 2 King. 19.15. Joel 2.17. The definion of prayer.


If any should inquire what prayer is, Damascene answers, that it is (...). The
ascent of the soul unto God, and a begging at his hands those things which we
stand in need of: Or prayer is a begging of God those things which we want, and
a thanking of him for those we have.

If any should desire to know, The division of prayer. Petition. Deprecation.
Imprecation. Intercession. Thankes-giving.
how many sorts of supplications, or kinds of prayer there are; let him take
notice, that there are principally these five: viz. (...), A begging at Gods
hands some good thing, (...) a deprecating, or praying against some evil
thing; (...) when a man prays for a curse or malediction upon some one or
other; (...) when a man intercedes for others; that is, that the Lord would be
pleased to withhold or remove some evil, or to give and continue some good,
unto some one or other; (...) is a giving of thanks unto God for the
withholding or removeall of some evil, either from our selves or others; or
for some good blessing imparted unto, or bestowed upon our selves or other.
What prayer the text speaks of
Now both the text, and point propounded speak of the first, second, and
fourth: for we pray both for the withholding of evils, and preservation from
evils, and deliverance out of evils, and the enjoyment and continuance of
spiritual, and temporal blessings and graces, both from, for, and unto our
selves, and the Church and State wherein we live.

Having thus defined, and divided prayer, let us now consider the twofold
foundation thereof, to wit.

First the examples of Gods love and mercy toward others, The foundation of
prayer is twofold.
for when we consider and observe, how ready the Lord heretofore has been to
hear and help those who sought and sued unto him in the time of their
distress and want, and withal remember, Psalm. 32.6.
that the Lord is no respecter of persons, nor mutable, but alike to all, and
always alike, then we are emboldned to pray unto him. Now what can we want or
desire, either spiritual or temporal, but we may find some examples in the
Scripture of some, who have been in our case, and by prayer unto God have
obtained what they wanted and desired: from which consideration we may
conclude, that if we do but lift up pure hands unto our God, as they did, then
he will hear and help us, as he did them. And

Secondly, Number. 23.19. Josh. 21.45. and 23.14. Psa. 33.4. and 89, 35. Mal. 3.6.
Heb. 6.17.
the other foundation of prayer, is the truth, fidelity and righteousness of
God: for when we consider how faithful and true the Lord is in all his
promises, and that not one of them shall fall to the ground unaccomplished; and
then ponder the promises which hehath made to hear his children, and weigh
well the blessings which he has promised unto them, both for soul and body,
both for this life, and the life to come; and then (if we be his) we are
encouraged with boldness of confidence to make our requests and wants known
unto him. To whom we must pray.


Having thus briefly seen the foundation of prayer, and the encouragements
thereunto; it is not now amiss to consider, To whom we must pray. Mat. 6.9.


And our Savior resolves this, bidding us pray unto Our Father: that is, unto
God, who is

1. The Father of light: and therefore we must come and pray unto him, with the
true sincerity of the heart; for if we call upon him with feigned lips, he will
find it out with his All-seeing eye. And

2. He is the Father of glory; and therefore we must come and pray unto him,
with fear and reverence. Psalm. 2.11. And

3. He is the Father of merey; and therefore we must come confidently unto him.
And

4. He is an Almighty Father, able to do what he lists; and therefore we must
first fly unto him, not thinking any thing impossible to be had from him by
prayer; as was worthily observed by Origin in these words. Si quicquam
impossible orati ni putamus, aut fideles non sumus, aut nescientes Scripturas:
scilicet, Qui petit accipiet. That is, he who thinks any thing unpossible unto
prayer, is either destitute of faith, or divine knowledge: for if we do but
know and believe this one promise, Whosoever asks, shall receive, we cannot
then think any thing impossible to be had at the Lords hands by prayer.

Now because it is questioned betwixt us, and the Church of Rome, Whether we
must pray only unto God or not? I will therefore give an argument or two to
confirm it, briefly, and so proceed. Argument. 1.


The first argument is taken from Psalm. 50 15. Call upon me, says the Lord,
and I will deliver thee. He that alone is aole to deliver us, to him alone must
we pray. But the Lord alone is able to deliver us; therefore unto him alone we
must pray. Argument. 2.


The second taken from Romans 10.14. How can we call upon him, in whom we have
not believed. He unto whom we must pray, must be of that nature, quality, and
condition, that we may as well trust in him, as pray unto him. But we are
forbidden to trust in any but God. Therefore we must pray only unto him.
Argument. 3.


The third is taken from Exodus 22.20. Cursed be he who shall offer burnt
offerings unto any but unto the Lord of Hosts. Sacrifice and burnt offerings in
the O. T. were proper unto the Lord alone. But prayer in the N. T. does supply
the place and room of Sacrifi^e in the Old. Therefore prayer is now as proper
unto the Lord as Sacrifice was then. The Minor is proved thus, The Prophet
Malachy says, 1.11. That incense must he offered up unto God: and Same Paul (1
Timoth 2.8) says, That the lifting up of pure hands is meant thereby. And
therefore it is the clear Doctrine of the sacred Scriptures, That prayer is to
be offered up only unto God.

Oh but (may some say) When must we pray unto God? I answer,

1. Before we begin any work at least of weight; and the more weighty and
important the work is, the more earnest must we be in our prayers before the
undertaking thereof. Because the particular occasions, affairs, and works,
which this might be applied unto, are in a manner infinite: I will therefore
omit the application thereof unto any particulars, and by some ground and
proofs only confirm the truth of the assertion in general: viz. That before
we do undertake any work, at least of weight or moment, we must beg a
blessing thereupon of God by prayer. Pray (says Socrates) in thy heart unto
God at the beginning of all thy works, that thou may bring them to a good
conclusion. The Lord gave Narseies victory, more through zealous prayers that
he used, then his force, and valor; for he never went to sea, nor began
battle, nor determined of war, nor mounted on horseback, but first he went
to the Temple, and served God. The lessons of Pythagoras, Plato, and their
disciples, Blondus.
began and ended with prayer. So the Brachmans among the Indians, and the Magi
among the Persians. never began any thing without praying unto God. And Ovid
begins his Metamorphofis, and Cleanthes his Iambicke verses, with prayer.
Pliny in an Oration which he made in the praise of Trajane, commended the
custom of the Ancients, in making invocations and prayers before the beginning
of their works; saying, that there can be no assured or wise beginning of any
enterprise, without the special aid and assistance of God. 1 Chro. 29.9.
And thus when our Princely Prophet was about to provide oblations for the
Temple, he first prays; 1 King.
as does also Solomon when he dedicated the Temple. And thus all our wages,
works, affairs, employments, and businesses, must be taken in hand, and begun
with prayer: for those actions which we dare not pray unto God to bless, or
present before him by prayer, we must not do. Genesis 24.12.
Abraham's servant before he go into the City, prays unto God to bless, and
prosper his voyage, in sending him a good Wife for Isaac. Ruth 2.4. 2 Chro.
20.6. etc. Psalm. 127.1, 2. 1 Timothy 4.5.
Thus Boaz for his Reapers; and Iehoshaphat for his people; before they dare
make war against their enemies. Without Gods blessing all our labors are in
vain; and by prayer unto him, our labors are sanctified. And therefore we
must begin every weighty work, at least, with prayer, if we desire a blessing
thereupon.

2. We pray in our necessities, or make our requests known unto God by prayer,
when we are sensible of either want or woe; either defect or cistresse. Indeed
I do not say, that we must then only pray unto God when poverty pricketh, or
necessity urges, or some imminent danger enforces us, and spurreth us forward
to pray: for every one will do thus: viz. Cry, and run unto God in their
affliction, misery, and danger; as we may see by the Mariners in whose ship
Jonah was, Jonah. 1.
who when they feared drowning, praid every man of them unto his own God. The
like examples we have many in humane Histories; I will name only this one,
viz. In Zara (or as some call it Iadera) a Town in Sclavonia, there is a
Church consecrated to Saint John di Malvatia, which was built by a company of
Sailors, who being in a tempest made a vow, that if they escaped ship-wracke,
they would consecrate a Church unto that Saint, and accordingly paid their
vows. Saint Peter, when he felt himself sinking, did then cry speedily unto
his Master to save him. Psalm. 107.
Yea the Psahnist tells us, that even wicked men will move the Lord by their
prayer, to have pity upon them, when they are grievously afflicted: and
therefore we must not only pray when we have need. What do I say? Must we not
only pray when we have need? I must unsay this again, and entreat my Reader
to pray no oftener unto God, then he has need to pray: neither to go unto God
any oftener, Ephesians. 6.18. and 1 These. 5.17.
then he has need of him. But how often is this? Always, and therefore we had
need (as we are commanded) Always to pray. For

1. We are always sinners, and we daily renew our transgressions against God;
and therefore there is a necessity of praying daily unto God for the pardon and
remssion of our daily sins; according to that of Saint Augustine. Aug. in
Enchirid.
Do quotidianis peccatis, sine quibus haeevita non ducitur, quotidiana oration
fidelium satisfacit. As we sin daily, so we must repent and beg remission
daily, for our daily sins. So another Father, Bern.
Sicui aeger ad medicum, sic debet esse peceator ad Creatorem suum; qui ergo
peceator est debet orare Deum, sieut ager Medicum. As the sick man seeks unto
the Physitizan for ease, so should the sinner seek unto God for peace: and as
the sick man daily renewes his suit unto hi Doctor, until his sickness be
removed; so should sinners until their sins be remitted. And therefore
seeing that we are always sinners, we had need be always suitors for the
pardon of our sins And

2. We are always weak, and defective in grace; according to that of the
Apostle. We do but know in part, and believe in part, 1 Cor. 13.10.
and obey in part, and love in part; and it is the Lord ouely who must supply,
and perfect us; and therefore we had need to pray unto him, for the supply of
our wants, prayer being the means which principally prevails with him. And
thus we see shen we must pray: We will now consider, For whom we must pray.


For whom we must pray; Namely,

1. For our selves; Semper tibi proximus esto, Love begins at home: 1 For our
selves.
and therefore, he is scarce soundly wise, Qui sibi non sapit, who is not wise
for himself? But he who forgets to pray for himself, does seldom (I fear)
pray for others. Wherefore let us make our own wants first known unto God,
and labor for the pardon of our sins, and our reconciliation with God; and
then we may hope, that our prayers shall be acceptable unto him for others.

2. We must pray for others. 2 For others.
Although we must pray for our selves (as we showed even now) yet we must not
pray only for ourselves (as we have now to prove) but also for others.
Chrysostom.
Pro se orare necessitas cogit, pro oeliis autem hortatur charitas. Necessity
conitra^es men to pray for themselves, but charity moves us to pray for others.
Cyprian.
Non d^s Pater meus, sed Noster; necda mihi, sed nobis. Our Savior did not
teach us to pray, Mat 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 4.16.
my Father, or give me; but Our Father, and give us. And there is great reason
that we should remember others in our prayers, as well as our selves; because we
are all conjoined in one; that is, either in body as we are Christians, or at
least in flesh as we are men. Now when I say we must pray for others, or for
all, it must be thus understood. viz. We must pray for the goldly in faith, for
the wicked in hope, and for our enemies in charity.

3. More especially we must pray for our dread Sovereign, 3 For the King.
King Charles. Pope Leo 10. honored our King Henry 8. with the Tittle of
Defender of the faith, because he defended the Popedom, and writ against
Luther. But our gracious Prince is more truly called Defender of the faith,
because he disclaimes the Pope, and maintains the doctrine of Luiher, so far
as it stands and accords with the infallible rule of divine truth. 1 Timothy 2 1,
2.
And therefore great cause is there, that we should pray for him, Psalm. 72. i.
etc. and 20.1. etc.
that he may long continue peaceably to govern us, and fincerely to profess,
support, and maintain the true Catholic, and Apostolic faith amongst us.
And

4. As we must pray for the Kings sacred Majesty, 4 For Magistrates.
so must we also for the Magistrates who are placed in government by him over
us: that we under them may lead a godly and peaceable life. Rulers and
Governors are the eyes of the Land, as we see by the Phrase used by David's
servants unto him; Thou shall no more go forth with us, least the light of
Israel be extinguished. Yea, according to saint Paul's precept ( pray for Kings)
Christians have always prayed for those under whom they lived, even though
they were heathens and unbeleevers. Tertullian sets down the matter and form
of the Christians prayer, Tertul. in Apol.
for the Roman Emperor. Manibus expansis, quia innocuis, capite nudo, quia
non erubescimus, precantes semper sumus pro omnib us Imperatoribus, vitam illis
proliam, imperixum fecurum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem,
populum probum, orbem quieium. That is, With hands spread abroad, because
innoceni, and bare head, because not blushing, we are always praying for all
Emperors, that God would grant unto them a long life, a happy reign, a safe
house, victorious Armies, a faithful Counsel, a loyal people, and a
peaceable world. And therefore having Apostilicke precepis, and Primitive
precedents, we should not neglect to pray for our King and Governors. But we
touched upon this before, in the former Proposition, and therefore I proceed.

5. And lastly, we must pray for our Minisers, 5 For Ministers.
and spiritual Governors. It was the ernest prayer of the Jews, that Aarons
rod might flourish, Talmud Babylon^
i.e. that the Priests, and the children of the Priests might prosper; for when
Aarons rod flourished, it was a token that the Priesthood should continue. And
therefore let us pray, Plin. lib. 3. Cap. 12.
that our two famous Universities may be like the Pom-citron tree, that as it
bears apples at all times, some falling off, some ripe, and some budding out;
so, as many notable lights decay, others may supply their places. Romans 15.30.
Saint Paul exhorts the Romans To strive with him by prayer unto God for
himself; implying (as Beza observeves) that the godly should pray as fervenly
for the spiritual, (...)
temporal, and eternal good of their Ministers, as he should for himself;
and that there should be a godly contention betwixt them (for so much the word
imports) who should excel other; viz. Whether the Minister excel the people
when he prays for himself, or they him, when they pray for him. And
contrarily, Ministers must be as fervent and hearty in their requests, for
their people, as for themselves. And therefore let us call upon God for our
Ministers, that he would make them able Ministers, and eyes to the blind, and
feet to the lame, and so sanctify them, with divine knowledge and grace, that
they may lead us in the truth, and true way of life both by their doctrine and
example. Having thus compendiously seen for whom we must pray, For what we
must pray. 1 First for temporal and spiritual things for ourselves.
the next things to be confidered is for what we must pray.

First, we must pray unto God for protection from evils, and deliverance out of
evils, and for all those blessings, graces, and mercies, which we stand in
need of either for souls or bodies. These I need not reckon up, because every
man's necessities, wants and defires will suggest these unto him.

Secondly, 2. For those things for our Church and Commonwealth, etc. 1. For
the prosperity of the Church and State.
from the Prophet David's example in my text, we ought to beg many things at
Gods hands, in the behalf of our Church and state wherein we live. Now because
they are many, I will be the briefer in some of them.

1. We ought to pray for the flour shingestate and prosperity of our Church
and Commonwealth; and that it may continue, yea increase in purity, piety,
peace, and plenty. The Romans were wont upon certain high days to pray for
increase of wealth to the people of Rome: which custom Scipio being Censor
changed, saying. That their wealth and prosperity was sufficient, and therefore
they ought only to pray unto God to preserve in such as it was. I will not say
altogether thus of our Common-welath, because many say, and more know, that we
are much decayed in regard of what we were, and the most Countries and shires
much impoverished. And therefore as we ought to call upon the Lord for the
continuance of our prosperity, wealth and, peace; so we may warrantably pray
for the increase thereof, Abraham praying for Sodomes prosperity and
preservation, was answered according to his request. That if there were but as
many godly men therein as he mentioned, it should not be destroyed. Upon which
promises, Calvin in Genesis 18.
Master Calvin observes, That if God do so patiently hear, and graciously
answer the prayer of one faithful Abraham for the wicked Sodomites; then how
much more mercifully, and willingly will he hear the prayers of his children,
for the good of his Church, and for a Nation wherein his name is called upon.
And therefore let not one of Abraham's sons, but all his faithful seed in
this Land, cry aloud unto the Lord, for the continuance, yea increase of our
wealth, prosperity, and plenty in outward things, and for our peace, purity,
and zeal, both in Church and Commonwealth. For we having not only ten, but
many true, many fifties of righteous men inour Land; and the Lords Name being
truly called upon by us, and his true worship maintained amongst us; we may
be certainly assured that if we join in faithful and fervent prayers unto
him, for this our Church and Land, we shall be heard.

2. Sin being the cause of the deprivation of good things, and the infliction
of evil; we must therefore with strong cries beseech the Lord of glory, to
pardon the many and great sins of our Land, and to turn away from us ah
those many and great evils, and plagues, which we have deserved for our wicked
deeds; Orig. tract. in Man.
and to give and continue those blessings unto us, which we stand in need of,
but have not at all deserved. And

3. We should pray for unity and concord. 3 We must pray for unity, and
coacord.
For as Music does not delight the hearers, except there be concord: so God
is not delighted with any Commonwealth or Church, except there be unity and
consent among them. When there was a confusion of languages, the building of
Babel was of necessity given over; so when dissension, discord, schisms, and
rents reign in a Church or State, then neither can Religion prosper or
flourish, nor can the Lord be pleasingly worshipped, or that Church or State (it
it so continue) be preserved from confusion and ruin. And therefore we had
need pray, that love, unity, concord, unanimity, and a sweet accord, may be
planted and rooted in us, and be so firm and fixed amongst us, that with one
heart, one mind, one soul, yea one end vour, we may seek the glory of God,
the peace of the Church, the advancement of Religion, and the prosperity, and
good of the Commonwealth. And

4. We must pray unto God for preservation from our foes, 4. For preservation
from our foes.
both domestical and foreign. Isoerates prayed god to save and keep him from
his friends, rather then his enemies: saying, That he could be aware of his
enmies, Psalm. 127.1.2. Psalm. 90.11
because he trusted them not, but be could not be so of his friends, because he
relied much upon them. I dare not say thus, because I know, Except the Lord
keep the bouje, and City, the watchman watches but in vain, and all humane
helps, and means are vain: but this I may safely say, That as we ought to
pray unto God to preserve us from relying and depending upon any feigned
friends, who do not cordially affect our Church or State, but in their hearts
wish and cry, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground: so we ought also
to pray unto him to protect and defend us from all our proffessed foes, who
wish and intend evil unto and against us And

5. 5 For the preaching of the word.
We should heartily and zealously pray for the continuance of the preaching of
the Gospel unto us, and that it may be encouraged, promoted, advanced, and
propagated more and more. We must rememoer that the preaching of the word is,

1. rofitable to teach us our natural condition, and the condition and
contamination of our nature, Preaching is profitable in many regards.
and the estate and condition wherein by nature we are. The word, let us see
our sins, and sinfulness; and move us both to acknowledge our iniquities,
and to grieve for them, and to repent us of them, and truly to turn from them,
Esa. 58.1. Iercm. 4.9. Ezech. 3.4. and 33.1. and 2. Timoth. 4.1. And

2. Ioh. 17.3. 1 Cor. 2.14 and 2 Cor. 6.6
The preaching of the word is profitable for the attaining unto the knowledge
of God. We are by nature ignorant of the knowledge of the true God, or at
least, of that true knowledge of the true God, which is life eternal. But by
the word and the preaching thereof; we are instructed in the knowledge of him.
2 Cor. 5.19.
And

3. Preaching is profitable for the publication and demonstration of our
reconciliation with God, by Christ, the Mediator of this our reconciliation. And

4. It is profitable for us in crosses and afflictions; for by the word we are
directed how to bear afflictions, how to be eased under them, and releated
from them, Psalm. 19.9. And

5. The preaching of the word, is profitable, for the instruction and teaching
us our duties, both toward God and men, whether supericurs, inferiors, or
equals. And

6. It is profitable for the bringing of us unto heaven, and the obtaining of
life eternal, Psalm. 1.2. and 1 Timoth. 4.16. And therefore I may safely, and
dare holdly conclude, That whosoever is no friend to preaching, is neither
friend to Church nor Commonwealth, and the less friend that a man is to
preaching, the less cordially stands he affected either to Church or
Commonwealth, and whosoever endeavors to put powne and silence preaching,
does endeavor (as much a in him lies) to put out the eyes of Church and
Commonwealth, and to make both, blind and miserable. The Papists say,
Ignorantia matter devotionis,
Ignorance s the mother of Religion, We say of Rebellion and we know, that it
is the powerful, and plentiful preaching of the Gospel which holds men in
obedience, both to God and Governors. And therefore let us pray fervently for
the long continuance and pure preaching thereof amongst us; and for grace to
practice what is preached, and then our Church and Commonwealth shall certainly
long flourish. And

6. 6. We must pray for peace. August.
We must in the behalf of our Church and Commonwealth pray for peace, it
being (as Augustine says) in a Stte, like harmony in Music. When Bees hum
most, or make most noise in their Hives, and seem most tumultuous, then they
are in best case: but it is not thus with a Church or Commonwealth, for they
are best when they are most quiet and peaceable. Plutarch.
Plutarch makes mention of a maid who had many suitors who fell to such
contention amongst themselves for her, tha^ they did tear her all in pieces
And thus. Nimium altercando admit^tur veritas, many disputations andiscentions
in a Church or State, does quickly tear it in pieces: and therefore it is
necessary to pray for the peace of both. That is, to wish and desire in our
selves, and to beseech of the Lord, that 1. Neither the devil nor any of his
instruments may hinder, either the progress of Religion, or the preaching of
the word. And 2. That we may by his power and providence, be saved and
preserved from all persecutors, enemies, and external foes. And 3. That
neither our Church nor Commonwealth may be corrupted with any superstition, or
by any sin; but that our Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Rulers, may so smite
with the sword of Discipline and Excommunication, and our Civil and Politic
Governors, may so use the sword of Justice; that sin, superstition, and
schism may be supplanted, and restrained, and virtue, Religion and truth
maintaintd and defended. And these things we should all beg earnestly of God.

Having thus clearly handled, Why we must pray for the Church, and
Commonwealth.
What we must pray for in the behalf of our Church and Commonwealth: it now
remains in order to show,

Why we must be thus careful to pray, and bus earnest in praying for our
Church and State. I answer hereunto

First, Answer 1.
because we cannot expect that either should prosper without prayer. Heaven
shall cease to be, when it shall cease to run: and men shall cease to
prosper, when they cease to pray. For how can we expect a blessing from God,
either upon our selves, or our Commonwealth, when we neglect to sue unto him
by prayer for it. And hence the jews say, Druf, in Genesis
Sine stationibus non subsisteret mundus; the world could not endure without
standing, idest, praying, for they usually stood when they prayed: and
(Gnammuda) standing, is one of the seven names which they give to prayer. And
therefore I may say to my brethren, as Nestor said to his children, Pray, for
ulesse God help us, we shall all perish. Homer.
The Lacedaemonians custom was, not to crave any thing of their Gods, but what
was of importance and great consequnce; saying, that all small matters were to
be obtained by man's industry. Now the prosperity, purity, and peace of our
Church and State is a matter of much moment, and therefore there is great
reason that we should all pray unto God for them. And.

Secondly, Answer 2.
we should pray for our Country, Church and State, because no temporal thing
should be dearer unto us then our Country. I say no temporal thing, because
the Lord, Religion, and the truth must be nearer and dearer unto us, then
either our Land, liberty, or lives; Homer tells us, that so dear was the love
of his Country to Ulysses, that he preferred his native soil lthaca, before
immortality. We must not so do, but only prefer it above temporal things.
Some define a Country thus, Definition of a Country.
It is the Region or Climate under which we are borne, and the common mother of
us all, which we ought to hold so dear, that in the defense, thereof, we
should not fear to hazard our dearest lives Plato says, There can be no
kindred nearer unto us, then our Country. There is nothing more to be desired,
then the good of our Country: nothing more to be affected then the love of our
Country: For although children, parents and friends are near to us, yet our
Country chalengeth a greater love. And therefore (as the heathen said) Happy
is that death which being due unto nature, Pulchrum est pro patria mori.
is besto wed upon our Country. And therefore seeing our Country should be
thus dear unto us, there is great reason, that we should pray for it, and our
Church and State established therein. And

Thirdly, Answer 3.
because the good of the Commonwealth and Church is ours, For if (as Stobaeus
says) The profit of the Country extends it self to every City of the same;
then the good of a Commonwealth and Church must in like manner be communicated
and extended to every inhabitant therein.

Tully telsus, Nemo sibinatus, None are borne for themselves only, but also or
their Country; and therefore if we should seek the good of that, before our
own gain; then much more should we desire and labor to procure that which
is good both for our selves and Country, as peace, prosperity, plenty, and
purity are. It argues self-love, for a man to love his Country, not for it
self, but for that good which he possesses in it: and therefore if we love
our selves, let us pray for the peace and good of our Church and State. For as
the life of all the members proceeds from the heart; so from the
Commonwealth proceeds the common good of every one, Geminianus lib. 6 de
homine. ca. 5.7.
and upon the safety thereof depends the safety of all. Wherefore every one
of us should labor, both by prayers and endeavors to promote the good of this
Country. The Senate of Rome saluted Augustus, Sever.
by the name of Pater Patriae, The Father of the Country: and the Romans
erected Images of all such as renowned or benefited their Country. And
therefore if we desire happiness and esteem amongst men, while we live, and
a good name, and report when we are dead; we should by all means advance the
good of the Church, and Commonwealth. And

Fourthly, Answer 4.
we should pray for our Country, because necessity requires it; it being now
taking physic, and always subject to enemies.

1. Saint James says, If any be sick, let him send for the faithful
Ministers to pray with him; and the prayers of the righteous, shall save the
sick. Here note, that something is there expressed, to wit, that Prayers must
be made for the sick) and some thing employed, viz. (that besides the prayers
of others, the party must not neglect the means of Physic) for Physic must
be used, and then the blessing of God desired upon it by prayer, whereby the
creatures are sanctified unto us. Thus should we now do, for our Church and
Common-weath being sick, and Parliaments, and Convocations being the proper
Physic, ordained for the healing, curing, recovering, redressing and
restoring thereof; and this Physic being now a working; we should all pray,
and that powerfully, that the Lord would so bless and assist them both, that
they may be instruments of much good, both to our Church and State. And

2. Certainly, Live. lib. 30.
we are never without some enemies or other; either homebred, or abroad,
either open or secret. Livy says truly, Nulla magna livitas quiescere diu
potest, si foris bostem non invenit, quaerit domi, No Nation can long be quiet
or at peace; for if it have no enemies abroad, it shall find some at home. Yea
the devil being an enemy unto truth, and all true profession, Religion and
worship, does ordinarily stir up most enemies, and employ most subtle, and
most crafty instruments against that Country or Kingdom, where the truth is
professed, defended, and maintained. And therefore seeing we are assured, that
we are not destitute, or altogether without enemies, although we could see
none: therefore there is great cause and need to pray for the protection,
preservation, and prosperity, both of our Church and State.

Fifthly and lastly, Answer 5.
we should labor by prayer for the good of our Commonwealth and Country,
because otherwise we are worse herein then infidels, as will appear by an
example or two. Aristotle being at Athens, was very careful for his Country,
the which when Alexander had overrunne and rased, Valor. Max
by letters he moved him to buid it up again. Plutarch.
Dion of Syracuse, was so loving unto his Country, that he never rested until
he had thoroughly freed it from the tyranny of Dionisius. Themistocles being
banished his Country, and in service with King Artaxerxes, poisoned himself
with the blood of a Bull, Theucidides.
in presence of all the Persians, lest he should be compelled to fight against
his Country. Livius.
Vetruria dissuaded her son Martius from the siedge of Rome, only by
reducing to his memory, the love he ought to have to his Country. Antiochus
(or as Plutarch in his Apophthegmes says Antigonus) had such a care of his
Country, and was so fearful of doing any detriment, or discommodity
thereunto, that he made this order, That if letters came from him, or his
Nobles, to the prejudice of the common good, his subjects should pocket them
up, as unwittingly written. Thus we see how the Heathen stood affected to
their Countries; and therefore if we would not seem to be, or rather, be
indeed worse then they, we should be earnest with God by prayer for the good
thereof. And thus we see the reasons why we ought to pray for our Chuch and
State. It follows in the next place seriously to consider; How weemust pray
How we must so pray for our Commonwealth, that our prayers may be heard of
God, and pleasing unto God, and granted by God, and consequently profitable,
both to our selves and our Country?

First, we must pray with humility, reverence, 1. With humility, and
reverence. Orans considerare debet, quid petit seipsum quem petit. Be rn.
and fear, remembering what we are who pray, (viz. dust and ashes, worms, and
no men) what is he to whom we pray? (viz. the King of Kings, and the Lord of
Lords,) and for what we pray, viz. for the felicity and prosperity of our
Church and State, which is a suite of that moment, that without it we and ours
cannot be truly happy. Psalm. 2.11
And therefore we should serve the Lord with fear, and come (or pray) before
him with trembling. Faith (says one) joined with prayer, makes it more
forcible, but humility coupled with it, makes it beneficial and effectual;
as we may see by the example of one reverend suitor, and humble petitioner,
Luke 18.11.
I mean the poor penitent Publicane, in whom we may observe these things,
viz. 1. He stood far off, there was his fear. 2. He durst not lift up his
eyes to heaven: there was his shame. 3. He smote his breast: there was his
sorrow. 4. He confesses himself a sinner, there was his humility. And thus we
see, fear, humility and reverence in him, when be prays. Now what was the
effect of this prayer? Bernard tells us. Publicanus, qui dum non auderet oculos
in coelum tollere, ipsum coelum ad se potuit inclinare, id est, Whilst this
Publicans dorst not lift up his eyes unto heaven, be inclines and pulls down
heaven unto him: For the text says, He went away justified, and was made
partaker of that mercy which he praid for. And therefore let us power forth
our prayers for our Commonwealth, with a religious reverence and fear, and
holy humility, in regard of the Lords beauty and our baseness, of his purity
and our impotency, of his power, and our poverty; and then we may be assured
that our prays shall be prevalent and effectual with God. And

Secondly, 2. With our whole man.
as we must pray humbly and reverently, so also with our whole man; that is, In
prayer we must lift up our hands with Moses, and our eyes with Stephen. We
must pray with our tongue as David did; Exodus 17. Act 7. Psalm. 8. Judge 5.
Exodus 14. Luke 1. Lam. 3.41 Gregor. in Job. 27.
and with our heart as Deborah did. Moses could pray when he held his peace,
and Zachary when he was dumb. And the Prophet exhorts us to lift up our
hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens: upon which words a Father gives
this note. Corda cum manibus levat, qui orationem suam operibus roborat; nam
quisquis orat, sed operari dissimulat, cor levat, sed manus non levat; quisquis
operatur and non orat, manus leavt and cor non levat, etc. He lifts up his
heart together with his hands, who both prays for what is good, and
practices what is good; but he who prays and practices not, lifts up his
heart, but not his hands; and he who practices that which is good, but
prays not, lifts up his hands but not his heart.

Thirdly, 3. With pure hearts.
if we desire that our prayers may be powerful and prevalent with God, and
profitable and effectual unto our selves, and those for whom we pray, then we
must be careful, first to purge and clease our hearts from sin. Prayer must
be accompanied with the mortification of dead works; because no Prayer can tie
the will of God unto us, except first of all we renounce and conquer our own
wills. August. de rectie. cathol-conver.
For as no medicine can cure a wound, if the iron remain within it: so no
prayer profits his soul, which has sin and iniquity residing therein. it
is found to be true by experience, that if the Apothecarie put into his perfume
the lest jot of brimstone; it poysoneth all the other perfumes. Even thus is it
with us; for our prayers are our incence, our hearts the perfumingpot, and the
free our zeal, to which if we add but one sin, we infect and make
unpleasing, our whole sacrifice. Gellius.
And hence when Dingenes saw wicked men to pray unto God for help, and
deliverance, he laughed them to scorn; because he knew that the prayers of
perverse and impenitent petitioners were not pleasing unto God. There is a
certain serpent which before she drinks vomits up her poison; whereby she
teaches us, to cast from us whatsoever is impure and unclean in us, before we
power forth our prayers unto God. Levit. 1.16.
The Priests under the Law, were commanded to throw away the crop or maw,
wherein the meat began to be digested; showing that he who offers up any
spiritual sacrifice unto God, should in like manner be purged from the filth
of sin, Psalm. 66.18.
if he desire that his suite may be heard: for the Prophet David says, If I
regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not bear me: and therefore Saint
Paul exhorts, 1 Timothy 2.8.
that men every where should lift up pure hands. And Origin thus notes upon
Exodus 16. Where it is said, that the Manna was turned into worm; Orig. ^hom^
in Exodus
Post susceptum verbum, si quis peecat, efficitur ei verbum vermis. If after a
man have received the word, he sin, the word is turned into worms. Indeed
the Lord may, (and does sometimes) give good temporal blessings unto those
whose hearts are not purged from sin, as we see in Ahab, 1 King. 1.29.
but not spiritual: and therefore if we desire, that both spiritual and
temporal blessings should be given and granted, both to our Church and
Commonwealth, then we must labor that our hearts may be cleansed from all
ungodly lusts; and affection of sin, and then our prayer shall be pleasing
unto God, and profitable unto us. For, August.
Oration si pura sit coelos penetrans, v^a non redibit, If prayer be pure, then
it will pierce the heavens, and not return invaine. And

Fourthly, 4. In faith
we must pray in faith; as is clear from these places, Jude 20. Matthew. 21.22.
and 9. 28. John 14.13. and 16.24. James 1.6. and 1 John 5.14. The doubt here to
be resolved is, What it is to pray in faith? Whereunto I answer.

1. To pray in faith, is to apprehend, and remember the promises of God,
contained in the word; those promises being the foundation of our faith. And

2. To pray in faith, is to adhibite, and give faith to the promises
apprehended and understood, believing that they shall be fulfilled in us. And

3. To pray in faith, is to pray in this confidence and assurance, that
(according to the promises) our prayers shall be heard, and our requests
granted. Or to pray for those things which by a certain faith we hope for.
Exodus 17.1 Kin. 18. Exodus 9.25.
And thus Moses prayed in faith for victory against Amalech, and Elias for
rain, Moses against thunder, in these words, I will spread mine hands unto the
Lords, and the thunder shall cease Where we see that he prays with
confidence, and is assured that God will hear his prayer. And thus ought we
to ask in faith. and pray with assurance, that God will hear us. Here observe
that there is a double kind of assurance to wit,

1. Extraordinary, which proceeds of some special revelation; as here Moses
building upon Gods particular promises made unto him, was assured that his
prayer should take effect. Now besides this there is,

2. Ordinary assurance, which is twofold; to wit,

1. When we pray for spiritual things, which concern life eternal; and here
the faithful have an absolute assurance to be heard. And

2. When we pray for temporal things, where our assurance is but
conditional, viz. that God will grant us such things so far forth as they
are expedient and profitable for us. And therefore let us pray in faith, when
we pray, that is, 1. Let us learn the promises of the word, and know what
promises are made unto us in the word, that our prayers may be built upon those
promises; for otherwise they are without a foundation. like the City built
upon the sand. 2. Let us confidently believe that all the promises of the word
are true; Mat. 7.20.
and that if we be the children of God, they shall be made good unto us, in
the Lords appointed time, and in his own sense and meaning. For this is true
faith, according to the Father, in these words, Bern.
Creed quod remittuntur peccata, sed adde-quod remittuntur tua, non est
presumptio, sed fides. We must not only believe that the promises are true,
but also apply them unto us, believing that they shall be accomplished in and
unto us; for this is not presumption, but faith. Then 3. In this confidence and
assurance, let us pray for those things which are necessary, either for our
selves or others; and we shall undoubtedly, either procure what we pray for,
or, (...) something which may stand us in as much steed, and be every way as
profitable for us. And.

Fifthly, 5. With zeal.
We must pray zealously and fervently, if we desire that our prayers, which
we offer up either for our selves, or our Commonwealth, may be heard and
granted. For methods sake, I will here point at three things, and that very
briefly; viz. 1. That we must or ought to pray fervently, and 2. How our zeal
and fervor must be regulated in our prayers, and 3. That zealous prayers are
very prevalent with God. Zeal is necessary, in prayer.


1. If we desire that our prayers which we send forth unto God, either in the
behalf of our selves or others, may be prevalent with him, according to our
desires, then we must pray zealously and fervently. Zealous prayer must
ascend, if we desire that grace may descend; because God is a Spirit, and
therefore in spirit and in truth of the inward man, must he be served and
sought unto. Now

2. How zeal must be qualified in prayer.
It is worth our observation, How our zeal in our prayers is to be regulated,
namely, According to the nature of the thing which we pray for. Here note, That
we either pray for temporal things, or spiritual.

First, sometimes we pray for things which concern our bodies, lives, and
estates; and for these we must pray modestly, moderately, with a willing
submission unto Gods will, and not with that ardour of affection, that we
desire spiritual things with all. And

Secondly, sometimes we pray for spiritual things, now these either concern
our selves, our God, or our brethren

1. Sometimes we pray for spiritual things which concern our selves; as, For
the remission and pardon of our sins, and the turning away of the judgments
which worthily deserve for our sins committed. And here we must pray
zealously, but in the positive degree of zeal. Sometimes we pray for the
quantity, measure, degree, and extent of graces: that is, that the Lord would
be pleased, to shed abroad his grace in our souls, and to establish our hearts
in grace, and to augment and increase his grace in us more and more. And here
we must pray more zealously, but yet only in the Comparative degree of zeal:
for as we must more zealously pray for grace, and the increase thereof, then
for the pardon of sin, and aversion of judgments; so there is something else
which we must more zealously desire, then grace.

2. Sometimes we pray for spiritual things which concern our God: that is,
when we pray for his glory, and the advancement thereof, and the sanctifying
of his Name. Now here we should pray most zealously of all in the superlative
degree of zeal: for the glory of God is to be preferred before any thing that
concerns us. And therefore if we should see the glory of our God trod in the
dust, or his Name dishonored, or his truth persecuted; we should then double,
and redouble our requests unto God, with the Prophet Elias, when he had waged
God at the stake against Baal the false God, Oh Lord hear me, 1 King. 18 37.
oh Lord hear me. We should say in such a case as Francis Spira said (an
Advocate of Cittadell, under the jurisdiction of Venice, in the borders of
italy,) in a conflict which he had within himself, whether he should confess
Christ or not; Cast away fear (says he) oh my soul, put on the shield of
faith, where is now thy wonted courage and constarcy, remember that the glory
of thy Christ lies now at the stake. Yea, when we pray for those things which
concern Gods glory, we should say as Hannibal said, who when Carthage was
besieged by Scipio, sought for peace, who never before that time refused war
protesting that he might with more safety have lost all his battles within the
Alps, then, one at the gates of Carthage; because in those battles he
adventured nothing but the superfluity of youthful blood, who sought their
destiny in the Field of Honor, under the Banner of Mars: but now the
Commonwealth lay at the stake; and they played their Altars, religions, lives,
wives, children, and estates, and all at one game; and therefore to loose once
now, were to be quite undone for ever.

3. Sometimes we pray for spiritual things (and I will here subjoyne
temporal) for others; as namely, for our Country; that is, when we pray for
the peace and purity of the Church, and the long continuance thereof in peace
and purity amongst us, and the advancement of religion, and prepogation of the
Gospel, and the powerful and painful preaching of the word. Or, when we pray
for the peace, preservation and prosperity of this our State, and Commonwealth
wherein we live. Now I conceive that we should more zealously, and fervently
beg these things for our Church and State, then any particular blessing or
grace for our selves; because by such a Commonwealth the Lord would be more
glorified, then he could be by any particular person. And thus we have seen,
that we must pray zealously, and how our zeal in our prayers must be
regulated. Now

3. Zealous prayers are very effectual.
Observe that fervent prayers are very effectual. Zeal in prayer is the wing
which carries it up unto God; and like Elias his Chaniot, transports us into
heaven. Zeal is like the Eagles wings, whereby we mount up unto God, and like
Jacobs Ladder, by which we ascend on high, to the most high. Zeal in prayer
does often ravish the petitioner into the third heavens, as Saint Paul was
thereby. As trees that have taken deep rooting, cannot be pulled up: so the
fervent prayers of the faithful cannot be driven back, untll they have
ascended into the presence of the highest. (...). Lord be merciful unto me is
but a short word, but it contains an Ocean of mercy, says Chrysostom.
Chrysostom. hom. 5. de incompr. not. Dei.


Although that there be no fire in the steel, yet if we smite it hard upon a
flint, fire issues out thereof: and so if our iron hearts be heaten upon that
rock Christ by fervent prayer, either the light or fire of zeal or
consolation, will issue thence. And therefore that our prayers may be fiery
and fervent, let us remember that infinite Majesty before whom and to whom we
pray: and the want of those things which we pray for: and let us fear lest the
Lord should justly repulse us, for our cold and careless calling upon him. And

6. 6. With persoverance.
If we desire that the prayers which we power forth may not return as an
abomination into our own bosoms, but be pleasing unto to God, and profitable
unto our selves, then we must pray perseverently, or continue in prayer; until
our requests be granted. The Oak falls not with one How, or at the first
stroke; but continual hewing, brings both Oaks and Cedais to the ground. We
do not always open the door at the first knock, but to him, who continues
knocking, we open at the last. One drop of water will not move a Marble, but
continual dropping thereupon will hollow it, at the last. Jacob wrestling with
the Angel, obtained a blessing; and so every good Christian who wrastles with
God by perseverant prayers shall be blessed at last, and made partaker of the
thing he prays for. Hier. s. Began. 18.30.
Abraham perseverantia sua magis magisque praevalet, nec Deus prius codere
desinit quam Abraham or are Abraham by his continuance, and perseverance in
prayer does more and more prevail with God for first he desirs that Sodom may
be spared if there be 50. righteous therein: then he abates five of that
number twice; and where he perceives that the Lord says, Amen, or So be it, to
all his requests, then he takes a greater leap, from five to ten, Lord, what
if there be but 30. or 20 or 10. Will thou then spare it? The Lord answers, I
will And it is worthy our observation and admiration, That the Lord gives not
over granting, until Abraham cease suing; So long as Abraham has a tongue
to pray, the Lord has an ear to hear, and a tongue to grant his requests;
but (as the text says,) When Abraham gives over praying, the Lord then goes
away. James the esse, the son of Joseph, who is called the brother of Christ,
and who was so like him, that in the betraying of him, for fear they should
mistake, Judas gave him a kiss; through continual praying, had his knees as
hard as a Camels hoof. When Tire was besieged by Alexander; one of the
Citizens dreamed, that their God (or Idol) Apollo would ruune away from them;
whereupon they bound him so fast with cords, that he could not stir. Thus if
our sins should suggest unto us, that the Lord would leave us, and lay us
open unto our enemies; the way to preserve and keep him amongst us, is
perseverant prayers. As he who would strike fire out of a flint, is not
contented to strike once but often, yea until the sparks kindle the tinder:
so he who desites any favor or merey from God, must not only once pray for
it, but continue and persevere in prayer, until his request be granted, and
he have prevayled with God. Let the Reader turn but to Luke 11. the first
verse, and so forward; and Luke 18. 1. and so forward, and observe what he
reads there, and then he will not question the power and efficacy of
perseverant prayers.

Thus we have seen that our prayers must be humble and reverent; and that
our whole man must pray; and that we must pray with hearts purged from sin,
and call upon God in faith, aed with fervor and perseverance; it now remains
to show the power and efficacy of such prayers. The power and officacy of
faithful prayers.


If any would know what power such prayers as these have with God, and how
available and effectual they are, let him observe that such prayers are
profitable, both in regard of our selves and of others.

First, humble, hearty, holy, It is profitable for our selves
faithful, zealous, and perseverant prayers, are profitable for our selves,
both in regard of our souls and bodies: but I will conjoyne these together.
Observe here these particulars. viz,

1. Prayer always procures a blessing from God unto us. August.
Oration justi clavis est coeli, ascendit precatio, and descendit Dei
misericordia. Prayer is the key of him: and therefore let but that ascend up
unto God, and then the blessings and mercies of God shall descend down upon
us. But of this I treated in the first proposition.

2. Faithful prayer does corroborate and strengthen us unto bolinesse, Edov.
Granat lib. de devot.
and the works of Religion. For as a Traveller after that he has rested
himself and eaten, begins to feel ease, and is so refreshed and
strengthened, that he can walk further: even so prayer, which is the
spiritual food of the soul, is the cause of new fortitude and strength, to
walk in the ways of the Lord. As Sampson was without his hair, so is a man
without prayer: but by prayer we become strong and vigorous, as Sampson was
when his hair was grown. And therefore if we desire to be filwith with all
spiritual and temporal blessings, then let us pray. And

3. Prayer is profitable against Satan. As a City which is not compassed and
fenced about with walls, Chrysostom. li. 2. de ^. at.
easily comes into the subjection of enemies, so the devil easily brings
that soul under his dominion, which is not fenced and guarded with prayer. On
the contrary. As the roaring of a Lion affrighteth the beasts of the forest: so
the prayers of the faithful drive away satan, according to the saying of the
Latin Father, August. ^. Math. 6.
Oration oraniti est subsidium, Deo sacrificium, daemonibus autem est flagellum.
Prayer is a sure and and safe Sanctuary unto him that prays: prayer is a
pleasing sacrifice unto God to whom we pray, and prayer is a prevalent weapon
against sa than, whom we pray against. And hence our Savior and his Apostles
so often teach us to pray against this evil one, and enemy of mankind. And
therefore if we desire to be preserved from satan, we must pray. And

4. Prayer is prevalent against God; or it appeaseth the wrath of God,
according to that saying. Flectitur tratus voce rogante Deus, although God be
angry with us, yet faithful prayers will pacify and appease him. And therefore
we are commanded to kiss the Son lest he grow angry, Psalm. 2.20.
and so we perish in his wrath; that is, we must labor to reconcile our
selves unto our God, by powerful and penitent prayers. And therefore we must
pray both for the pardon of our sins, and the aversion of Gods judgments. And

5. Prayer is prevalent against our enemies; and this is the principal weapon
that David fights withal against his. Let our enemies be foreign, or
domestical, spiritual, or temporal; such as desire the ruin of our Church,
or of our State, or whatsover they are; prayer is a powerful weapon against
them. Moses qui cum taceret clamabat, Ambrose.
cum otiofus staret praeliabatur; sed etiam de hostibus quos non contigerat,
triumphabat, etc. Moses cried when he held his peace; he fought against his
soes as he stood idle; he triumphed over them, although he never touched them;
to wit, by faithful and fervent prayer. Hence the same Father faith, Longius
vulnerat quam sagitta, prayer will wound an enemy farther off then an arrow,
and overtake those who are off from us. The Romans in their wars against
Hannibal, were driven to such want of weapons, that they were forced to go to
the Temples, and to take thence the weapons which were consecrated, and
fighting with those weapons against their enemies, they prevailed, and became
victorious. And thus the weapons wherewith we must principally preserve our
selves, must be divine and holy, such as Ezechias drove away Senacherib
withal, to wit, prayer: and such as the Christians in the primitive times
principally used, namely, Preces et lachrymae, prayers and and tears: for
these are both the safest and sharpest weapons we can use against any enemies.
If Samuel pray against the Philistims, the Lord will smite them with a great
slaughter. And if we pray against our enemies, we may expect both protection
from God for ourselves, and correction, and destruction upon our enemies. A
Lady of this Land persecuting Master Knockes, did say, she could not but
persecute him; and yet she feared his prayers, and the supplications of those
who prayed for him, more then she should fear an army of 20000 men. And indeed
all the enemies and persecutors of the faithful, have cause to fear: their
Weapons being mighty, and their Protector Almighty; although themselves be
infirm and weak; as is evident from Psalm. 27. from 7. verse, and so forward.

6. Number. 15.38.29.
Prayer is profitable for us, because it draws down God unto us; or because
thereby we mount up unto God. The Jews were commanded to wear frienges upon
their garments; for which cause they were called (Calcoth Tephilim) Garments
with wings; and hence Elisha was called Elisha cum alis, Elisha with wings.
because he wore the coat of remembrance, which had four fringes hanging down
at the four wings of it (Arbham eamphah) Four wings; and this garment was
called Talith, A winged coatc. Because he used still these wings, to put-him
in mind of prayer, which are the golden wings of the Dove, (say the Rabbis)
which carry us up to heaven. Prayer is the chain, whereby intending to draw
God unto us, we are drawn unto him: even as the rock draws the Mariners
unto it; when they pull with all their force (the Anchor being fastened
thereunto) as though they would hale it unto them. Or suppose there were a
chain reaching from earth to heaven, and fastened in heaven, he who would
climb up thither, thereby, must draw the chain, as though he would pull
heaven down unto him, when the truth is, it is he who is raised higher and
drawn nearer unto heaven. even thus we by prayer labor to draw down God unto
us, but are indeed thereby drawn unto God. And thus we see how, and wherein
prayer is profitable for our selves. Now

2. Faithful, fervent, Prayer is profitable for others
and pure prayers, are profitable also for others: or others are sometimes
benefited by the prayers of the faithful. I dare not here go so far as the
Papists go, who tell us that the prayers of Gods children, are effectual for
the dead; and give us proof thereof in Saint Dunsiane, who understanding that
the soul of King Edwine was to be carried into hell, never gave over praying
for him, until he had freed him from that danger, and transferred him into the
coast of penitent souls. I dare not (I say) say thus, but I dare boldly say,
that prayer is profitable for the living, and that in diverse regards; as for
example,

1. The faithful by their prayers, have procured rain for other. Justin
Martyr tells us, that when Antonius the Philosopher, had by the prayers of the
Christians, obtained a plentiful rain, for the releeving of the army over which
he was; he writ a letter unto the Senate of Rome, that the Christians had most
powerful and prevalent weapons, to wit, prayers unto God: and therefore he
perswads the Senate, to desist from the persecution of the Christians, (...)
etc. lest (says he) they fight against with these potent weapons. And thus we
see Elias procures rain for Ahab, by prayer unto God. And

2. The faithful by their prayers sometimes procure health unto the sick:
according to that of Saint James, the faithful prayers of the Saints, shall
save the sick. And I conceive that the Apostles in their mirrculous Cures,
used prayer. And

3. Bartholomew the Apostle, Marullus.
by his prayers, restored the distracted daughter of Polemius King of India, to
her former senses. And.

4 The faithful have benefited some by their prayers, by procuring thereby the
destruction of their enemies. Thus King Oswald a Christian by Prayer unto God,
obtained victory against Cadwallo, and Penda, the Britain Kings, who came
against him with a mighty host. And hereby he benefited both himself, and his
army. Aurelius Antonius the Emperor, in his expedition against the Germans,
had in his army a legion of Christians, who by their prayers unto God, obtained
rain for the refreshment of his army, when it had almost perished for lack of
water: and not only rain for the good of their friends, but also fearful
thunder and lightning upon the head of their enemies; whereupon, the Emperor
ever after called that band

The thundering band. And

Lastly, Genes 20.^.
the faithful by their prayers have preserved others from the wrath and
judgment of God. Abraham by his prayer preserves Abimelech. Moses by his
prayers often delivers Pharaoh from the judgments of God. And when the Plague
was begun among the Israelites, Numb. 16
by the prayer of Moses, and sacrifice of Aaron, it was staid. But above all
remarkable to this purpose, is Exodus 32.10. God threatents to destroy the
stubborn and superstitious Jews, but Moses prays for them: whereupon the
Lord says, Let me alone, that I may destroy this people. Dei potentiam servi
preces impediebant. The prayers of Gods Children (says Hierome) abate the edge
of his power. Ligatum habent sancti Dominum, ut non puniat, nisi eum
permiserint ipsi. The Saints (says Bernard sweetly) have the hands of God so
fast manacled, by their prayers, that he cannot power out those judgments upon
the wicked which they deserve, except they will give him leave, by ceasing to
pray for them. And therefore seeing our prayer is prevalent and powerful, both
for our selves and others; Philip. 4.6
Let us in every thing by prayer and supplication, make our request known unto
God, as Saint Paul commands us; and Pray for the peace of Sion, Psalm. 122.6.
and the prosperity of our Church, and the preservation of our Commonwealth;
all crying with one tongue, and one heart, either with the Prophet here in my
text, Psalm. 28.9.
Save us O Lord with thy right hand, and hear us; or with the sam Prophet
elsewhere, as it is put in English meter.

Thy people, and thy heritage,
Lord bless, guide, and preserve,
Increase them Lord, and rule their hearts,
That they may never swerve.
Amen.

(...).

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Thomas Wykes, R. P. Episc. Land. Sacellanus Domest.
November. 19. 1640.

