A Philosophical ESSAY Toward an Eviction of The Being and Attributes of God.
Immortality of the souls of men. Truth and Authority of Scripture.

TOGETHER With an Index of the Heads of every particular Part.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, and are to be sold by John Adams and
Edward Forest, 1652.

To the READER.
THE Author of this Book although he had never suffered it to be published, had
he not been assured that it is not (for the main) much liable to just
exception, and although he has no further care of the reception and
entertainment of it, then the consequence of it may deserve (whereof the Reader
and not himself must be the Judge.) And so he is not moved by the common
passions of such as use to make Epistles and Prefaces, to their Readers, yet
some thing although but for custom only he was willing to premise, and to
acquaint the Reader with thus much by way of Apology for himself.

That this was written diverse years since without any purpose of ever letting
it go abroad, that the chief end of it was to clear to himself who is a lover
of rational knowledge, an account of the grounds of his own belief, and to
that end to lay in order his scattered notions concerning that subject; and
this he intends as an Apology for the homeliness of the style.

That at the same time when it was written, it was also delivered in a private
course of religious exercise, and that will be the excuse for such repetitions
as might otherwise seem ill-favored in the several Sections of it.

That at the time of his composing it, he was destitute of the assistance of
his Books, which is one cause that it is not adorned with Testimonies and
citations out of Authors, but comes out naked, being supported only by the
order and plainness of reason that it trusts to.

That since the composing of this he knows that diverse Books of the same
Argument have been written by men far more knowing then himself, but that he
has not yet read any of them, nor knows whether he do agree with them or not,
which abstinence has been caused partly for that he is himself satisfied by
what is here delivered, and partly for that he had no leisure or mind to alter
this which he had done, though possibly it might be for the better.

That whereas he speaks of Epicures, Machiavelians, and the like, he makes use
of those names only in a popular way as they are names of Characters well
known amongst us, and that he intends not to traduce those Authors or cast any
contumely upon them.

Lastly, He must needs acknowledge, that before the edition of this he has
seen M. Hobs his Leviathan, and other Books of his, wherein that which is in
this Treatise intended as the main Foundation whereon the second Discourse (Of
the Souls Immortality) insists, is said to imply a contradiction, viz. That
there are any such things as Immateriall or Incorporeall substances. Upon which
occasion he thought good only to say, That he has a very great respect and a
very high esteem for that worthy Gentleman, but he must ingenuously acknowledge
that a great proportion of it is founded upon a belief and expectation
concerning him, a belief of much knowledge in him, and an expectation of those
Philosophical and Mathematical works, which he has undertaken; and not so
much upon what he has yet published to the world, and that he does not see
reason from thence to recede from any thing upon his Authority, although he
shall avouch his discourse to proceed Mathematically. That he is sure he has
much injured the Mathematics, and the very name of Demonstration, by bestowing
it upon some of his discourses, which are exceedingly short of that evidence
and truth which is required to make a discourse able to bear that reputation.

That in this case M. H. is only a negative witness, and his meaning in
denying incorporeall substances, can rationally import no more but this, that
he himself has not an apprehension of any such beings, and that his cogitation
(as to the simple objects of it) has never risen beyond imagination, or the
first apprehension of bodies performed in the brain; but to imagine that no man
has an apprehension of the Godhead, because he may not perhaps think of him
so much as to strip off the corporeal circumstances wherewith he does use to
fancy him; Or to conclude every man under the sentence of being non-sensicall,
whosoever have spoken or written of Incorporeall substances, he does conceive
to be things not to be made good by the Authority of M. Hobs.

That whereas very many men do profess an apprehension of such beings, and he
in the mean time professes this to be impossible, this Author is hard put to it
to excuse this from much incivility, and conceives the import of it to amount
to thus much, that he conceives himself in the highest and utmost bound of
humane apprehension, and that his reason is the measure of truth, and that what
he sees not is invisible, I conceive the case in this to be alike, as if
whilst two men are looking at Jupiter, one with his naked eyes, the other with
a Telescope; the former should avow that Jupiter had no attendants, and that it
were impossible he should have any: the reason why M. H. denies those beings
whilst other men apprehend them, is for that he looks at them with his Fancy,
they with their mind.

Many more things he had to say for himself, but he understands not fully the
use or benefit of Apologies.

The Contents.
PART. I.
SECT. I.
Preface.
SECT. II.
OF the design ad definition of Religion, the prejudices and pretenses against
the Christian, the sum of what is in controversy deduced to three Questions.
1. Of the Being of God. Attributes 2. Of the Immortality of the Souls of men.
3. Of the Authority of Scriptures.

SECT. III.
Of the being of God evicted by way of Demonstration from the Creatures. page
11.
SECT. IV.
Of the Attributes of God, those likewise evicted from the Creatures. page 17.
PART. II.
SECT. I.
A Proposal of the Argument for the Immortality of the Soul, and a
manifestation of the major proposition, that incorporeall substances are
immortal. pap. 33.
SECT. II.
A Proof of this Proposition, that the Souls of men are incorporeall
substances, by comparing the affections of bodies with those of souls. p. 38.
SECT. III.
A further proof of it by the general way of apprehension. p. 43
SECE. IV.
The same further demonstrated from the several acts of the Soul, from simple
apprehensions. p. 51.
SECT. V.
From Judgment and Discourse. p. 58.
SECT. VI.
An Application of the former Propositions to the inference of a Religion in
general, and a proposal of the third in order to the Christian p. 67.
PART. III.
Concerning the truth and Authority of our Scripture.

SECT. I.
Petitions and Cautions premised to the Question. p. 75.
SECT. II.
The Assertion resolved into two Propositions, the former undertaken, that
whosoever believes the Historical part of the Scripture must believe the
Doctrinall. p. 81.
SECT. III.
The kinds and degrees of the causes of Historical Faith in general. p. 89.
SECT. IV.
An Application of those general grounds to the History of the New Testament,
and a proof of this Assertion, That there is as great reason to believe the New
Testament, as to believe any other History in the World. p. 97.
SECT. V.
That there is much greater reason to believe the History of the New Testament,
then any other History. p. 206.
SECT. VI.
That the Old Testament is the Word of God. A Proposal of three several
assertions, whereby it is concluded. p. 119.
SECT. VII.
The first Assertion proved, That the Books of the Old Testament which we now
receive, are the same which the Jews do now receive. p. 124.
SECT. VIII.
That the Books, which the Jews do now receive, are the same which they have
received ever since the Consignation of their Canon. p. 128.
SECT. IX.
That in our Saviors time these Books were true, and consequently were the
Word of God. p. 135.
SECT. X.
That there is no reason to disbeleeve the Scriptures. Objections briefly
proposed and answered: first general Objections against the whole. p. 138.
SECT. XI.
Objections against particular parts, briefly proposed and answered. p. 149.
PART. I.
Preface. SECT. I.
ALthough I am not without apprehension, that the discourse which I design may
be prejudged unprofitable, as pretending to lay again that foundation which
has long since been laid in the minds of all that will be readers of it; yet
when I consider those scandals which the looseness of our times have offered
even to the religious, and the bold and horrid pride and presumption of
Atheists and Epicures, which by a profane and confident asserting the
uncertainty of all things (undervaluing the abilities of our Natures to raise
an opinion of their personal excellencies) have labored to introduce into the
world a general Athiesm, or at least a doubtful Skepticism in matters of
Religion: And when we consider the nature of our minds, which is upon any ill
suggestions apt still to receive some impression (those things being of like
operation with Calumny, which if it be confidently and boldly charged, will be
sure to leave some scarre behind it.) When we observe this use and inclination
in our selves which is in things where we have not a belief of what is spoken,
or do not give perfect credit to an accusation, yet to admit of a suspicion
that things may be as they are spoken; and although the strength of our
contrary belief do keep us from a full assenting to the thing in question, yet
if it happen that the things concern our selves, and we have happened to cross
our opinions, or our belief in our way of practice, such is the perverseness
of our hearts, that in such cases they will make use of the belief of others
(especially if they have the reputation of knowing men) to oppose against their
own belief, and interpose betwixt the lashes of their consciences and
themselves. I say the present condition of Religion, and the corrupted nature
of our hearts being such, I cannot think it useless, nay not unnecessary, to
raise a discourse of Religion even from the common Elements and Fundamentals,
and for a while, neglecting the more knowing party of men, to undertake, so far
as the argument will bear, to follow the way of demonstration, and lead on the
weakest from such things as they themselves cannot deny, to the acknowledgement
of the mysteries of our faith, and to the practice of the laws and injunctions
of our Religion.

SECT. II.
Of the design and definition of Religion, the prejudices and pretenses
against the Christian, the sum of what is in controversy deduced to three
Questions.

1. Of the Being of God. Attributes 2. Of the Immortality of the souls of men.
3. Of the Authority of Scriptures.
WE may begin with the consideration of the definition (and the design of our
selves in the matter) of Religion; however the practice of the world may
contradict it; I hope we may take this definition of Religion as one that is
agreeable to the apprehension which all of us have of it. Religion is a
resignation of our selves to God, with an expectation of reward; The design
indeed of Religion, however it ought to be merely obedience to the pleasure and
the will of God, and height of it is barely terminated in his glory, (so that
the highest act of it is Adoration) yet I say the design of men's Religion is
that it may be well unto themselves, and to bring them to an estate of
happiness. The very definition of Religion supposes a Godhead, according to
that of the Apostle, He that comes to God must believe that God is. The very
design of it supposes that both the party worshipping is capable of rewards,
and that God likewise does not neglect his services (in the following words of
the Apostle) that he is the rewarder of those that diligently seek him.

Again, the resignation of our selves supposes the resignation of our supreme
faculties, those are our understandings and our wills, viz. our wills to an
obedience to his will, to a performance of his injunctions, to a submission to
his providence; and a resignation likewise of our understandings to his truth.
Now it is agreeable to reason, as well as to the Apostle, that we cannot
practice the will of God, unless we know it, and that we cannot know it
unless it be discovered to us. So then in our profession of Religion, there
are these supposals. That there is a God; and That he is a rewarder of those
that seek him (and that supposes that they are capable of his way of
rewarding;) That the diligence of our seeking must be exercised in a way
conformable to his will; and That to this purpose we want not rules for this
conformity. These are I say the general suppositions of every Religion under
Heaven. You see that the being of Religion is in self-resignation, but the end
of that resignation it is reward (still retaining in mind that caution, that
mercenarily to labor for reward is not the supreme exaltation of Religious
acts, but that it is the ordinary degree of men's Religion, and an allowable and
commendable step, and a degree unto the other; it being the strong powerful
motive to Moses to neglect the momentany pleasures of Pharaohs Court, because
he had respect unto the recompense of reward:) I say it is the natural way of
reason in every act to look at some or other end, and to undertake no labor
without an eye upon reward. Now so it is, that some men who account themselves
the wisest, observing as they think the design and issue of Religion, and
comparing the labor and the wages, they with much wisdom as they think,
conclude that all the business of gain which comes by Religion is no way worth
the pain and labor. They see that all things come alike to all, there is but
one issue to the just, and to the unjust; nay, they think they see that the
success of things it is not equal to the religious and irreligious; but that
besides the pleasures and enjoyments which religious men do fondly deny
themselves, besides that melancholy life which they by their strictness and
preciseness bring upon themselves, they often anticipate and hinder the
thriving and success of their own designs by a dangerous and prejudicial
scrupulosity: whereas the other party besides the pleasure of their lives in
private, they carry matters of state, and either by force or fraud they
circumvent and overcome the narrow and feeble spirits of the others; and the
success of things they often observe to be answerable to this Hypothesis, ready
they are to say with those in Mal. 3. 14. Surely it is in vain to serve God,
and what profit is it to keep his Ordinances, to walk mournfully before the
Lord of Hosts, whereas we see the proud happy, and they that work wickedness
are set up, and they that tempt, God are even delivered? Upon such observations
upon the reward, they conclude clean contrary to the suppositions of Religion,
God is no rewarder of those that seek him; such as deny themselves the most for
him, they have no other reward but sadness of soul and debility of body, and
exility of fortune: surely if he were a God, he would not thus desert his
party, and give them over to the scorn and derision, and miseries of the world:
surely therefore there is no God, or surely he sees it not, or tush God cares
not for it, and so these men's Religion is vain: or else these men they have not
hit upon the true way of worship, the rules they go by they are uncertain, that
which they pretend to be the word of God, it is not so, but some bundle of
Impostures, devised by some body, and put upon these simple people to delude
them, they indeed flatter themselves with expectations when they are dead, but
those are but vain, for who knows that the spirit of a man goes upward, and
that the spirit of a beast goes downward? as a man dies, so dies a beast,
wherefore let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. These are the
substance of those allegations which by Atheists, Epicures, and Machivillians
are set in competition with Religion: these are those Engines by which the
devil has prevailed to the seduction of many, and to the entertainment of a
suspicion by men, otherwise prudent and sober-minded: the main foundations upon
which we differ they are these.

1. The Being and providence of God. 2. The Immortality of the soul. 3. The
Authority of the holy Scripture.
Before we come therefore to the particular mysteries of faith, it is necessary
that these be cleared before we come to settle in particular differences of
Religion, that we justify our selves against the petulances of those men that
would laugh and scoff us out of all Religion; crying to every party (as they
see the variable chances of the world to give occasion) where is now their God?
Indeed if there were not a God to worship, or if God did not see, and regard,
and reward our worship, or had we no rule to work by, we should have none
encouragement to Religion: Nay, upon all that happens to men in this life, we
cannot but allow, that, upon their supposition, they conclude not irrationally.
Concur we must with our Apostle, that If in this life only we had hope, we
were of all men most miserable; But we know assuredly that thou God see, and
that thou have given us thy holy Word to be a light to our feet, and a lanthorn
to our paths; and that though now we see but through a glass darkly, yet the
time is coming when we shall see thee face to face. The state of the
controversy then is this, which of the parties is in the wisest way; The
Atheist thinks that the Religious is a fool; the Religious, that he is a fool
that says in his heart there is no God: The Athiest that the souls of men are
mortal as the souls of beasts; the Religious, that the Atheist is a beast to
say so, etc. But such kinds of contests are vain, wherefore let us see where
the truth lies.

SECT. III.
Of the Being of God evicted by way of demonstration from the Creatures.

THe Question is, Whether or no there be a God?

And here first I must entreat that it may be remembered what that party is
which defends the negative, and what is the design that we are upon, that so
the following discourse be not thought useless or industriously set out of our
ordinary road. Our enemies are Atheists: and that which is to be convinced is
the Atheistical pronenesse of men; so that in the controverted questions it
will not be a sufficient way of answering, to say that the Scriptures and the
Spirit of God make it evident that there is a God; and again that the
Scriptures are evinced to be the Word of God by the Spirit of God bearing
witness with the heart of man. It is true, that the Scriptures clearly deliver
that there is a God, and as true it is that God by his grace does work the
heart of man to a believing of the Scriptures: these things they are really
true to those who already are believers, and each of them conduces to a
confirmation of each other: but to a man that doubts of the Godhead, and denies
the Scriptures, to use those arguments for satisfaction, were to minister a
scandal to him, and by circular way of reasoning and assuming gratis the
matter of the question (for they do no otherwise who only say, We must believe
the Scriptures to be the Word of God, because God says so, and a God we must
believe because the Scriptures say so) to make them think we have no more to
say but this, it is so because it is so: and so confirm them in their Atheism
and irreligion. It was a certain observation of Aristotle, that (...) in every
acquisition of knowledge, the understanding does proceed from premises which
were known, to the inference of a new conclusion, which was before unknown: and
so was that other Aphorism of his, that there is no disputation unless upon
principles, which are confessed on both sides, and such only are the common
principles of intelligence, and the plain discoveries of the senses there where
the mysteries of faith are questioned; it will not be sufficient therefore in
the present case, to allege that saying of the Apostle, Romans 1. 20. For the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so
that they are without excuse: but we must clear, and demonstrate the truth of
that allegation, by reasons taken from things visible: however, it may be
lawful for us to make use of the direction of this place, as a canon for our
enquiry, although not of the authority of it, as a sufficient argument to
enforce a belief from the gainsayer. I say therefore that an eternal power may
beevinced from the creation of the world, and that the creation of the world
may be demonstrated from the consideration of things visible, so that by Reason
as well as Faith (though not so readily) we may be brought to understand that
the world was made of things which disappear. I say, that the world was not
eternal but created, is demonstrable from things that are visible; our
argument shall be from generation: Whatsoever is begotten was begotten of some
other, for nothing can possibly beget, or make it self, otherwise it will
follow that the same thing is and is not both at one instant, seeing it is both
the producer and the thing to be produced: it is to be produced, and so it is
not yet, it is likewise a producer, and that supposes that it is in being: It
is therefore in being, and it is not in being, that is a manifest contradiction:
Wherefore nothing can generate, or make, or produce it self: Wherefore every
thing that is begotten, is begotten of some other, and then the other which
begat it either was it self in the same manner begotten, or it was not, if it
was not, we are already come to the first principle which was unbegotten, and
so have discovered a Godhead: If it was begotten, either we must follow up the
course of successive generation to some first production from a cause eternal,
or else we must necessarily say that the course of generations had no
beginning, and consequently that infinite successions are already past, which
is as much as to acknowledge that an infinite number of successions are past,
and if past, then they are at an end; so we have found an infinite which has
had an end, that is another contradiction. Again, if any shall affirm that the
course of generation had no beginning, but that the number of them has been
infinite, let us put a case and reason with him: we will imagine the
generations of Abraham for example, and of Joseph, the son of Jacob, the son
of Isaac, the son of Abraham. I demand therefore whether before the birth of
Abraham, there had past an infinite series of generations or not? if the series
was finite, the work of generation had beginning, which is the conclusion I
contend for, if the series past was infinite, then at the birth of Joseph it is
evident that more generations were past, so we have found a number greater then
that which was supposed to be infinite, and consequently that was not infinite,
so it was both infinite and not infinite, a manifest contradiction: but if we
say that Abraham's series was infinite, and that so was Joseph's also, then it
will follow that the number of Abraham's was equal to the number of Joseph's,
but Abraham's was but a part of Joseph's, wherefore the part is equal to the
whole. Else admit that Abraham's was finite, but when it came to Joseph, that
then the number was infinite, it follows then that a finite number added to a
finite shall make an infinite, which likewise is against the common light of
reason. We see therefore that supposing the eternity of the world, or the
infinity of generations does force the mind to contradictions, and
consequently the fiction is vain, and utterly impossible; and as we have argued
in the way of generation, so we may likewise in every thing where there is
motion or mutation, that is in all the parts of the visible world, the creation
therefore of the world from the visible things thereof, is manifest, which was
to be demonstrated, and from the creation of the world we may infer those
invisible Attributes of the Eternity and Power, and wisdom, and Providence of
God, that which rests yet to be demonstrated.

SECT. IV.
Of the Attributes of God, those likewise evicted from the Creatures.

THat which we are yet upon, it is a general introduction to Religion, and a
demonstration of the Necessity of it against Atheists and Epicures, and such as
are the despisers of it: that which we pretend is that their rejection of
Religion cannot proceed from any considerate solid reasoning of their
understanding, but from an evil disposition of their affections, which makes
them, we believe, rather wish, and so give out that their assertions are true,
then that themselves believe them to be so; particularly in that grand
principle and fundamental of a God, and of a Providence, from whence the rest
will freely and naturally follow: We have by plain and easy demonstration
evinced, that from the visible things of this world, the creation of it may be
evicted: and that the Apostle, although to such as were initiated in
Christianity, he did propose it upon the well attested authority of the Spirit
of God, by many mighty signs and wonders declared to be with him: although to
them he thought it needless any more then to refer them to the natural
principles of their understandings: yet that he was not wanting to the
infidels, but by designing to them so ready a topike or medium; from whence to
begin their argument has not deserved of the unbeleeving that slender
estimation which they have been pleased to afford him: there is no action or
mutation in any thing visible whatsoever, but it is performed by motion, nor
any motion followed home successively through it is causes, but will force the
mind of man to a first mover, which is it self unmoved, and though for some
reasons I did propose the argument in the name of generation, yet if in the
place of it you should have been pleased to substitute motion in general, or
bodily action (for either they are formally the same, or consequent at least to
one another) the variation of the terms of the argument would no way have
changed the substance of the conclusion: which I intimate to give notice of the
sufficiency of that argument, which in it self comprizes a multitude of others
more particular, lest any advantage might possibly be made against the want of
number in my argument. Well, having concluded the creation, and beginning of
the world, we see it follows that thence we conclude the eternal power and
Godhead, that is, the eternity and power of the Godhead: to which that we may
fully convince our Atheist, we will likewise add the wisdom, and providence,
and the immensity, and other attributes of God.

And first for Eternity, Eternity.
we have by undeniable consequence resolved all motions in the world into the
bosom of a first mover, and if we suppose him a first mover, this supposition
will evidently conclude, that he is eternal, that is that he is without
beginning of essence, or without any term or limit of duration; for if it had
any beginning of essence or duration, that beginning of being presupposes a
priority of not being (that is, that actual being is not of the essence of it)
and so that we may without any contradiction, suppose it not to be yet in
being, that is we may bring our understanding without error to the apprehension
of it as being yet in the state of power only, or potentiall being, so as
things are in their causes: so then let us conceit it in this state, and
compare this state with the other when it has a being, and it evident that
this passage or transition from want of being to a being cannot be without a
motion, nor motion without an actual mover: but that which moves a thing from
not being to a state of being is necessarily a precedent mover to that which
from it receives its being: so then that which we supposed to be the first
original mover, it will have a mover which shall of necessity have gone before
it, and consequently it will be both a first and not a first mover, that is a
plain and evident contradiction. Instead of multiplying Arguments without
necessity, we will only return by the footsteps of our analysis, and so from
the being of a first mover conclude the Eternity: If it be a first mover, then
it had no former mover, and if so, then it never was produced from not being
unto being; and if so, then it never had any beginning of its being, then it is
Eternal: therefore whatsoever is the first mover it must of necessity likewise
be Eternal. But from the common affections of things visible we did before
demonstrate an original and first mover, wherefore the visible things of this
world they likewise do evict the Eternity of the Godhead.

Having demonstrated the Eternity of God, the rest of his Attributes, such as
we are able to comprehend in this life, they all of them will follow, his
Necessity, Independency, Infinity, Unity, Omnipotency, Omniscience.

And first for his Necessity: Necessity.
whereby I mean his Necessity of being, not his Necessity of operation, so as
it is opposed to freedom of will and power to act, or to forbear. I say then,
that the Godhead is a necessary being, that is, that it is impossible it should
fail, and implies a contradiction, that it should not be, that is it which
Divines mean, when they say it is eternal, a part post, as well as a part
ante: for if it be not a necessary being, that is, if necessity of being be not
included in the essence of the Godhead, then it is not impossible that it
should lose his being, that is, it is possible that it should lose his being,
that is, it is in the power of something to cause it to lose his being: but
nothing can pass from being to not being without a change or motion, so then
the motion of it is in the power of some other, and consequently this is not
the first original of motion, but that other; but we supposed this to be the
original of motion, and consequently, It is not possible it should be deprived
of its being, that is, it is a necessary being in respect of others, and as
impossible it is that it should lose its being of it self. Indeed it is a
manifest contradiction, that any thing should have a power over its own
essence, and needs no further conviction or opposition, seeing the active power
of any thing is founded in the essence of it, and consequently cannot exceed
the essence or bring it not to be: However the necessity of the existence of
God will be evinced from the Simplicity Simplicity
and uncompounded property of his nature, and that from his Eternity; for
imagine him to be compounded, then it must be of some principles of
Composition, and if so, then those principles must be presupposed to his being,
and precede him in a priority of nature: so then there will be somewhat in
nature before that which was before evinced, and now supposed to be eternal:
and if he be a simple essence and eternal, he must be purely actual and
nothing potentiall, for if in his essence be any thing potentiall, that is, if
it be in any possibility, that possibility relates to some superior and former
cause: Whereas we have all this while been reasoning about the first cause and
supreme: Simple he is therefore and pure, and a simple act out of the bounds of
possibility, and of suffering, and so again we have concluded his necessity of
being.

Now as we have demonstrated his Necessity, so likewise we may thence collect
his Independency. Independency.
We are indeed in a great deal of blindness in the contemplation of the
Godhead, and most humbly crave leave of God to be admitted to enquire and
speak after the manner of men: God does not exact that we should exceed the
measure of our understandings in our contemplation of him, or that we should
deliver him as he is in himself, or otherwise then he is pleased to reveal
himself to our weak and feeble understandings, and so we hope his Majesty will
not be offended at us, if after the manner of men we labor to deduce one
attribute out of another, if withal we take this caution, that upon our
dependency of inference, and the precedence and following in our discourse, we
do not conclude that succession or dependency of attributes in God, and
imagine that to be in the object which is only in the Organ. I could not but
take this advantage for this caution now, that from his Eternity, Simplicity,
and Necessity I am concluding his Independency; this, to our understanding and
discourse may well enough (as concerning us) depend upon those other, that is,
the supposition of those will force the mind to an acknowledgement of this,
but to imagine that order to be in God, were to imagine a contradiction, by
putting a dependency upon the attribute of Independency: If he be a simple act
and pure, it is impossible he should at all depend upon another for his being:
for suppose his being to depend upon another, then that other must necessarily
be presupposed, and he the cause likewise of his being; for if it depend upon
another for his being, his being cannot be without that other, and so it is
presupposed, and therefore it is before this in order, and as in order so in
causality, for we speak of a real and essential dependency, not of a Logical
or notionall; wherefore this other, and not the Godhead will be a cause and a
former cause; and consequently the Godhead, unless it be independent, will
neither be the first cause, nor eternal; contrary to that which was before
demonstrated.

Again the Simplicity and the Impassibility of God will necessarily evict him
to be incorporeall, Incorporeality.
seeing that every body is compounded and passible, nay we may go so far as
to say that corporeity is passibility, for corporeity is quantity, and in the
last abstracted notion consists in three dimensions, but quantity is nothing
else but divisibility, that is, an aptitude to suffer division, that is
passibility; whatsoever therefore is impassible, that likewise is incorporeall
which was to be demonstrated.

And if it be incorporeall, then likewise it is unbounded and unlimited by
place, for whether place be taken for the surface of some ambient body, or for
a space, the very essence of a place consists in relation to a body enclosed;
but that which is no body cannot admit of an enclosure, therefore that which is
incorporeall is free from the limits and terms of place, so then it is evident
that the first cause is free from the limits and restraints of place, before we
proved that it was free from any limits of duration, but in the freedom from
time and place consists the notion of immensity, Immensity.
and so the immensity of God is now demonstrated (or, which is all one, his
Infinity.)

But if the Godhead be infinite, then likewise it is but one, and so we may
demonstrate the Unity Unity.
of the essence of the Godhead. Now that there cannot be two infinite essences
we will demonstrate. But first for the help of our imagination, and to render
that serviceable to our understandings, we will imagine two bodies infinite,
then thus, either the one of those bodies is in all the space wherein the other
body is or it is not: if they be both together in the self same space, then
that which is the longitude of the one is the longitude of the other, and their
latitude is the same, and so likewise their profundity the same, I say not only
equal: for as from filling equallity of spaces we must infer equality of
dimensions, so from identity of space we must conclude them to have the same
dimensions, but the last and most abstracted notion of a body is mathematically
resolved into those dimensions, wherefore those which fill the self same space
are the self same body, and so two bodies they will be but one body, which is a
manifest contradiction: but if we shall say that where one of these infinite
bodies is, the other is not, then there will be some space where one of these
bodies is excluded, and consequently it will be limited and finite, which yet
we supposed to be infinite; so then, it will be infinite and not infinite,
which is a manifest contradiction: We have demonstrated therefore that there
cannot be two infinite bodies, the truth is we ought to demonstrate that there
cannot be two infinite essences, but the notion of being and essence is so
abstracted and high, that it would strein our understanding to keep it so long
intent upon its abstracted object, as were required to go through a
demonstration where infinite simple being should be the subject, and unity the
affection to be demonstrated, but if we shall proceed but to other degrees, as
for example, of power, or wisdom, or the like, the demonstration will run as
clear to the mind, as in the case of bodies it did to the fancy: for either
those infinite powers are the same, or not the same; if they by the same, then
it is but one power which was vainly imagined to be two: but if the powers be
not the same, then one power is where the other power is not (not meaning in
ubi of place, but of case) and consequently a case where one of the powers is
not, and consequently the power is limited, which yet is supposed to be
infinite, there can be therefore but one infinite power, nor any more then one
infinite essence, and so we have demonstrated the Unity of the Godhead.

It remains that we demonstrate the Omnipotence of God, and his Omniscience:
Omnipotence.
and first for his Omnipotence, That God was a God of power it was demonstrated
then when we found him to be the first cause, and original mover and the
creator of the world, again we demonstrated that he is simple, and free from
all manner of Composition, purely actual, and consequently does not consist of
subject and accidents: his power therefore is no accident to his being, but his
power is his being, and his being having been demonstrated to be immense and
infinite, his power likewise must be illimited, and infinite, and conseqently
he is Omnipotent.

The same argument will prove him likewise to be Omniscient, Omniscience.
for as he is the first cause of every thing created; so likewise of all the
created knowledge, and consequently all knowledge is derived from him,
wherefore it is primitively in him, and then it follows that his knowledge and
his essence is the same as well as his power, and his being; therefore as that
is infinite, so is this likewise: and so we have evicted his Omnisciency, that
is an infinite knowledge, which includes in it the knowledge of all
particulars, for if any particular in the world were excluded it were not
infinite, but limited; so then the thoughts of the heart are open to the the
view of his Omniscience: And thus according to that Canon of direction, which
we took from the Apostle, we have proceeded, and that strictly and warily,
according to the laws of demonstration, and from the visible things of this
world, enforcing our selves first to an acknowledgement of the creation of the
world we have thence; taking in only the common principles and common notions
((...)) of intelligence, proceeded higher, to a demonstration of the eternal
power and Godhead: that is, of those Attributes of the Godhead, which by the
irreligious and Atheists have been pretended not to be; and actually manifested
that the invisible things of God may be discovered by those things which do
appear.

PART. II.
SECT. I.
A Proposal of the Argument for the Immortality of the soul, and a
manifestation of the major proposition, that incorporeall substances are
immortal.

THe second thing which we pretended to demonstrate as a general groundwork
whereon to build a necessity of Religion in the general, it is the Immortality
of the souls of men; for if in this life only we have hope, then in the
judgment of the Apostle, we are indeed of all men most miserable. Now the
truth is that we have no absolute necessity of much endeavor to clear the
Immortality of the soul, after so clear and demonstrative a discovery of the
essence and the attributes of the Godhead, seeing that a bare reflection either
upon the general way of reasoning, whereby we came to those conclusions, or
upon those simple objects of the mind, which were the subjects of every
particular enquiry, must necessarily prompt us with undeniable arguments, of
the spiritual and incorporeall nature of our mind, from whence will
necessarily follow the natural incorruptibility of it, that which is all that
we pretend to when we say, that it is immortal: (for it is not our meaning,
that in the notion of Immortality is included a necessity of being, such as
relating to the power of God should put it out of a capacity of Annihilation.)

Yet considering the darkness of our minds, and that inability toward a
strict and vigorous reflection, which even in those who are most practiced in
the contemplation of themselves, and in the scruting of the ways of their own
internal operations is overfrequent; and considering how little reason there
is to expect it of those who by their way of living are more deeply engaged
among things no way exceeding the affections and circumstances of bodies, and
bodily motions, and perhaps may think themselves unconce^ned to be busy in the
knowledge of themselves: It will be requisite that we insist more particularly
upon it; that so the matter may be cleared even to the most vulgar
apprehensions, supposing only that they can but obtain so much of themselves as
w^rily to attend to that which is to be delivered.

Now the substance of all that I shall speak toward the demonstration of the
souls Immortality shall be summarily comprised in this one Syllogism.

Whatsoever substance is incorporeall it is immortal. But the souls of men are
incorporeall substances, Ergo,

The former of these Propositions is indeed in it self undemonstrable, as being
a principle evident to a considering mind, and so not resolvible into any
former principles, so that all that can be done to a further clearing of it
will only be to examine and follow home the terms, to their first original
notions, which they are assigned to represent. Indeed the word mortality, as it
is usually apprehended, has always reference to a compounded substance, or to
a body which has in it self some principle and cause of motion, and signifies
no more but a capacity of the material and passive part, to be deprived of
that inward active principle of its motions, as is evident by those things
which we use to say may die, or are dead, as men, and beasts, and plants: but
when the question is only of that active principle, it cannot so justly be put
in the terms of mortality, as of corruptibility, or a natural tendency to a
corruption: so then that which we are to strive for is the true and accurate
notion of corruption, and when we have driven it to the highest, we shall find
that corruption is nothing else but a dissolution of things joined together,
and that this dissolution is nothing but a separation, and that separation is
nothing but division, and that division is an immediate and a formal act of
quantity, and quantity is nothing else but a mode of corporeity, so as you see
that corruptibility does even in the notion of it include corporeity:
whatsoever therefore is incorporeall it is incorruptible, which was to be
demonstrated.

SECT. II.
A Proof of this Proposition, that the souls of men are incorporeall
substances, by comparing the affections of bodies with those of souls.

BUt the souls of men are incorporeall substances.

That they are substances is evident, seeing that they are subjects of certain
properties and affections, which is the very formal notion of a substance. It
remains only therefore that we demonstrate them to be incorporeall.

Now for the clearing of this it is requisite that we consider wherein consists
the being of a body, and wherein consists the being of an humane soul: nor can
we use any possible means to come to an apprehension of their being, but by
considering those primary passions and properties whereby they make discovery
of themselves: the first and primary affection of a body is that extension of
parts whereof it is compounded, and a capacity of division, upon which as upon
the fundamental mode the particular dimensions (that is the figures) and the
local motions do depend, the figure being nothing but a particular and
determined extension of the matter, toward such and such parts, and local
motion being nothing but division, so that whatsoever may possibly be performed
by any body, it must have its original groundwork in divisibility, and its
actual being in division toward which the situation and figure and determined
quantity of parts must make the disposition.

Again for the being of our souls if we reflect upon our selves we shall find
that all our knowledge of them resolves into this, that we are beings conscious
to our selves of several kinds of cogitations, that by our outward senses we
apprehend bodily things present, that by our Imagination we apprehend things
absent, that we often recover into our apprehensions things past and gone, that
upon our perception of things we find our selves variously affected, sometimes
with pleasure or pain for things present, sometimes with hope or despair of
things absent, and the like: Nay, we are conscious to our selves of objects,
which could not by any bodily impressions be wrought in our fancies or our
brain; and of superior passions answerable to those objects. In one word, we
find that our souls are a kind of essences which are conscious (or having a
sense) of things.

Now then we are to compare together these two properties of a body and a soul,
and so conclude either an agreement or a disagreement in the natures of those
subjects. And here upon the very first view of a considering mind it will
appear that divisibility is not apprehension, or judgment, or desire, or
discourse, that to cut a body into several parts, or put it into several
shapes, or bring it to several motions, or mix it after several ways, will
not serve to bring it to apprehend or desire; it is not the hammering and
filing, and fitting of the wheels of a watch; which can make it apprehend the
end for which it serves, or comprehend the motion of the sun which it is made
to measure, nor is it material whether we take an example in things natural
or artificial, or upon what principles of mixture we proceed, the conclusion
will be still the same; for sense and perception, and apprehension, and desire,
etc. they are as great strangers to the obscure notions of heat and cold, and
moisture, and drought, and of those elements to which they are assigned, to
fire, and air, and earth, and water, as they are to quantity, and situation,
and figure, and motion, and the like, there is no man certainly that can
clearly apprehend, that combining any proportion of fire, and air, and water,
and earth, should make the lump of it to know or comprehend what is done to it
or by it: we see not then any the least inducement in our notion of bodies
simple or mixed, or howsoever varied to bring us to an apprehension of
cogitation.

Nor yet will our reflection upon our cogitation bring us to any apprehension
of corporeity or divisibility: the truth is our sense and apprehension of
bodies cannot infallibly assure us that there are any bodies in the world; but
we must be forced to an higher principle, whereon to ground that assurance, so
far is cogitation, and apprehension, and the like, from involving in its
being any corporeity; nay, we see manifestly, that upon the division of the
body the soul remains entire, and undevided: it is not the loss of an hand, or
foot, or eye, that can maim the understanding or the will, or cut off the
affections: so that we have not any the least inducement under the notion of
cogitation to involve division, or under the subject of cogitation to include
the subject of division or divisibility, to come then to a conclusion: it does
evidently appear that corporeity consists in divisibility, and that the essence
of the soul consists in being a conscious essence, or a cogitative being, to be
cogitative is far different from being divisible or extended: Wherefore the
essence of the soul is far different from the essence of a body: Wherefore the
souls of men they are incorporeall essences, (...)

SECT. III.
A further proof of it by the general way of apprehension.

NOw although the truth and certainty of propositions depends not upon the
multitude of arguments whereby they are concluded, and so we have already
sufficiently discharged our undertaking; yet something shall be further added
toward the discovery of the spirituality of the soul, to show that it does
far exceed the sphere of corporeity, and is not confined by the streightning
boundary of sense: this will appear from all the kinds of apprehension of the
souls; that is, from 1. Way of apprehending. 2. Simple apprehension. 3.
Judgment. 4. Discourse.



And first of all from the very way of our apprehensions in the general, from
our apprehensions even of sensible objects, for however we are apt to imagine
that those may be performed by bodies, upon an exact scrutiny we shall find it
otherwise: That this may appear we shall do well to observe and take off an
error, which even from our childehood we have taken in: it is a common belief
of ours, that sense is performed in the outward organs, touching, for example
in the hand, seeing in the eye, and so of the rest: (In them, I say, and not
only by them) and then we put our selves to no further trouble, for to know how
sense is made, then only to think that something hot touches the hand, and so
the hand feels heat, that the image of some body appears in the eye, and so the
eye sees the body; briefly, that sense is performed either by an immediate
contact, as in touching and tasting, or by a resemblance, which by the object
is wrought in the organ, and that in the matter of sensible perception there is
no exceeding the power of these two bodies, the object, and the organ; nor any
superior operation to that which may be performed by the application of
several bodies: but to take off this imposture of the senses, I shall need to
do no more, but to demonstrate that all our sense is immediately performed in
the brain, and not in the limbs or organs: We will instance only in the senses
of feeling and sight.

And first that our feeling is performed in the brain by the mediation of the
nerves it is made manifest by our observation of such diseases as take away the
sense of feeling, how that the seat of those diseases, it is not in the limbs
but in the head, Palseys, Epilepsies, Apoplexes, and the rest: the seat of them
is in those parts of the brain from whence do spring those nerves by which our
operations are performed, and the way or remedy for restitution of our feeling,
it is to take away those obstructions from the brain, whereupon the effect does
follow; now all this were needless, if sense were performed immediately in the
limbs themselves: Indeed it may possibly be imagined, that in those cases we
are therefore deprived of sense, because our motion is intercepted, that there
is some activity toward sense depending upon the motion of the limbs: although
there be no visible strength in this objection, yet there are sufficient
instances to take it off, seeing there either are or lately were examples
living of such as had no sense at all of feeling, and yet performed their
local motions perfectly. Moreover many unquestionable experiments have been
made of such as have affirmed that they have felt in such a finger, and such a
toe, and after their hands or their legs have been cut off. Many other
instances and arguments may be brought to prove, that the sense of feeling is
not performed in the outward limbs.

And secondly, for the sense of seeing, that that likewse is not performed in
the eye, it is as evident, the cause why it would seem to be so, is because it
is very evident that the images of things do indeed pass thither, and are
conveyed after diverse refractions and reflections through the coats and
humors of the eye, to the bottom of that tunicle which is called retiformis.
Hence it is obvious to conclude that vision is therefore performed within the
eye. But if this were so, beside that no reason could be given why with both
our eyes and two images of it, we see but one thing: it would necessarily
follow that we could not see any quantity bigger then our eye in its natural
situation, for if Images were seen in the eye, they would be seen as they are
in the eye, but in the bottom of the eye the images of things are inverted, and
consequently the things themselves would seem to be inverted, men would seem to
us with their heads below and their feet above, that which is on the right hand
would seem to be on the left.

Now that the Images are there inverted, besides the demonstrative reasons that
so it must be, we may at any time make experiments to attest to those
demonstrations. It is impossible but that the visuall beams of larger objects
must intersect each other in the eye, and by that cutting one the other, the
situation of the parts must be inverted, and thus much has ever been
apprehended, and confessed by all those that have understood the laws of
radiation, but some conceiving that by an inverted species an object could not
be seen upright, have with mighty industry devised most ingenious errors
concerning ways of refraction, whereby the coats and humors of the eye should
come to reerect the image before it comes to the nerve, whereby vision is
performed, but time and experience have evicted all those witty speculations to
have been nothing but snbtile and fine impostures of the fancies of their
authors, aerie reasons of a vain and ungrounded supposition: for it is evident
to him that will take the pains to take off all the muscles and tunicles, which
serve for the feeding and motion of the eye, and clear that part only where the
visuall nerve is fastened, then darkening a room, and only leaving an hole
sufficient to receive this eye, and will stand behind it, and look through it;
to such an one it will be evident, that the images of things without are
inverted in the bottom of the eye, at the place where is the passage of the
visuall nerve, and consequently as feeling was not performed in the hand, so
neither is seeing in the eye, but both of them in the brain. But before things
are conveyed to the brain all the corporal similitude will quite be marred,
the image of a man cannot be carried whole, through the optive nerve into the
hollow of the brain, nor the figure, or other quality of that we touch be
carried quite along the nerves, from the fingers ends unto the head, and
original of the nerves: but all that can be imagined to be done in the brain,
it is some motion and alteration made either by a vellification of the nerves,
or by a vaporous and spirituous substance, passing through them which retains
no signature or natural sculpture of those things which are apprehended by
them; all that is done by the bodies, the object and the subject it is utterly
of another kind: there is no natural similitude betwixt a motion in the
forepart of the head, and betwixt an horse which it represents, our
apprehensions of things they are far beyond those means by which they are
occasioned, and consequently the subjects of these apprehensions do far exceed
the subjects of those poor and gross productions, that is, the nature of souls
is far other and better then that of bodies, which was to be demonstrated.

SECT. IV.
The same further demonstrated from the several acts of the Soul, from simple
Apprehensions.

HAving demonstrated the souls of men to be incorporeall substances, from the
comparison of their properties with the affections of bodies, and therein
finding no agreement or correspondency, and moreover from the general way of
our operations, which could not possibly proceed from variety, or subtilest
applications of bodily substances. It remains that at this time we consider the
several kinds of the cogitations of men, and from the Simple apprehension,
Judgment, Discourse,

conclude the immortality thereof.

First of all from simple apprehension, which is the first operation of the
understanding of man both in nature and time, and is the taking in of simple
objects into the mind, and so furnishing it with materials for judgment and
discourse; we shall find then the souls incorporeity if we shall but reflect
upon such simple Ideas in it self which represent things in themselves
incorporeall, for a corporeal thing can neither be the Idea of an incorporeall
being, neither can an incorporeall, immateriall be subjected in a material or
corporeal: we found before that the application of bodies could not perform
that which we call the sense of bodies, much less then can that produce in us
Ideas incorporeall, yet such and very many such we find to be within our souls.

We find in our selves Ideas of spiritual substances, as of God and Angels
and of their simple and incorporeall properties and attributes, it is but
returning back and recalling into our remembrances those demonstrations of the
several Attributes of the Godhead, to which we did arise, even from the
visible things of this world, and they will satisfy us in this particular: our
endeavor there was to demonstrate the truth of them in themselves, here to
consider the way and manner of their objective existence in our apprehensions,
and the truth of demonstration which satisfies the souls of men: it is that
clear agreement betwixt the understanding and the object, that is, that things
be in the understanding as they are in themselves. We clearly then demonstrated
God to be an immateriall substance, wherefore we gained an apprehension of a
substance immateriall and incorporeall, and of immateriall properties, and
consequently the notions of the Godhead, and his attributes were in our
understandings incorporeally, and so they are incorporeall.

It cannot here be denied but that in our ordinary and transient thoughts and
discourses, we are very apt together with spiritual beings to draw into our
fancies the images of things corporeal; for example, when we speak of God we
are very apt to have in our fancies the visible heavens, and a representation
of something sitting or acting in them: when we think or speak of Angels we are
apt to call to our remembrances the shapes of beautiful winged, aerie bodies,
and so when we meditate upon Eternity, we are apt to reflect upon the image of
time, of the revolution of the Sun and Stars, which are the usual measures
of it, at leastwise of a successive duration of things, and there are diverse
of us which terminate our thoughts in these images, and never obtain a flight
beyond them, nor ever come to observe in our souls the difference betwixt
imagination and intellectual apprehension; but yet notwithstanding when we
have the patience to stay upon the consideration of these objects, and warily
attend to that inward light which we bear about us, we presently reject these
images from the essence of God, and Angels, and Eternity, and by discourse we
strip off these material and gross representations, and find that the causes
why upon such occasions as these they come into our minds, is, because we
commonly hear of them together, and because of those symbolicall expressions of
these beings which have delivered to us the knowledge of these. God Almighty
calls himself the ancient of days, and it is not our custom to imagine any
thing but clothed with circumstances, in some place, and the place that is
usually mentioned with God, it is the heavens, and those heavens which are the
object of our senses and imagination, it is the place of the Sun, and Moon,
and Stars; and so we are apt to form to our selves an image of God, or at
least through incogitancy to let slip into our thoughts a fancy of some
reverend image sitting above the Firmament.

Thus likewise the descriptions of the Angels, they are usually made to us in
Scriptures by such representations: we see nothing fairer then our own kind,
and so we conceive of them in the fairest shapes we can imagine, (and
contrariwise of the devils in the most ugly) assigning to them wings, because
under such forms the notion of of them is veiled to us.

And yet at the same time we know, and can perhaps demonstrate evidently, that
if God were a body, he could not be a God, that is, that the properties of a
bodily substance can no way agree with that notion of the Godhead, which is
immoveably fastened in the very essence of our souls.

We know habitually that the nature and essense of the Angels that stood, it is
the same with those that fell away; however we have fair and pleasant
imaginations usually when we speak of those of light; and foul, and ugly, when
we think of those that are in chains of utter darkness: however the name of
Michael and his Archangels recall into our minds the images of the fairest of
the children of men, and that of Beelzebub the Image of a Dragon.

So likewise the common measure of the duration of things, wherewith we usually
converse, they are hours and days, and months, and years, and these are made
by the revolution of the sun, and of the stars, and those are attended with
several positions of them in respect of themselves, and us with light and
darkness, cold and heat, Winter and Summer, and those other vicissitudes, and
speaking of Eternity we presently think of a long continuance, and so call into
our imagination a long continued series of these revolutions and vicissitudes;
whereas yet we know that where there is a vicissitude there is a priority, and
where there is a priority there must be a beginning, and where there was a
beginning that was not eternal: it is plain that if in eternity there were such
parts as days and years, there must be as many millions of years, as minutes,
and so that a minute were equal really to a thousand years, and so it follows
clearly that Eternity even in our notion is an infinite and undivided
unsuccessive duration.

These examples are sufficient to show the difference betwixt the intellectual
apprehension of things, and the imagination which accompanies our superficial
thoughts, our slight and cursory taking them to our minds and to illustrate
that, however in our fancies we may have corporeal representations, attending
upon these spiritual beings, yet the Idea's whereby the understanding
apprehends those simple essences, are incorporeall, and consequently the
understanding part of man is incorporeall.

SECT. V.
From Judgment and Discourse.

ANd now whatsoever of perfection may be evinced to be in the souls of men,
from the simple apprehensions of single objects, may much more strongly be
concluded from those more perfect operations, exercised in comparing several
things together, and working out the truths, striking forth the light from
those collisions. A judgment takes in two several simple terms, and upon them
passes the sentence of their agreement or disagreement.

A discourse takes into consideration two of the judgments already past and
decided by the soul, and from those two draws forth a third, and so brings into
act those truths which folded in their causes lie in the secret places of the
soul concealed from it self.

Now as the souls of men are conscious to themselves of certain essences within
themselves, which neither in their being nor in their operation upon the soul
are any way mixed with ought that is corporeal; and so from thence the
incorporeity of the soul was immediately concluded, so here in these second and
third operations of the soul, we have this further advantage, that however the
simple objects which are the terms in the matters of judgment may be bodies,
yet the acts of judging and discerning and reasoning, they are no bodily acts,
nor come within the compass of bodily motions to be performed, and that even
in those things which are most obvious to the outward senses or the inward, the
understanding part is yet carried away far beyond the bounds and territories
of the senses, and raises it self into the contemplation of causes of the
things it either sees or hears, or otherwise perceives and frames to it self
consequences and corrolaries, such as are not sensible but are only
discoverable by a diviner light, by this diviner faculty it is that seizing
upon any thing whatsoever, and fixing it self steddily upon the contemplation
of it, it passes from the most contemptible of creatures up to the
incomprehensible creator, it climbs up by degrees, and passing through the
continued chain of causes till it comes to that link which is fastened to the
chair of God, it rests not in things below, but soars up steddily to immensity
and eternity. It is by this faculty, that upon sight of the causes of things,
it does foresee the effects and consequences: and seeing the effects it makes
to it self a conclusion of what must be the causes, and by frequent exercise in
these contemplations attains to a kind of mastery over the works of nature,
and produces things strange and wonderful in operation, it applies the active
powers unto the passive (as the Schoolmen speak) and so imitates God and nature
in great and mavelous conclusions.

He observes the properties of a despicable stone, and is carried so far in
the contemplation of the consequences of those properties that he dares
adventure himself upon the huge unruly ocean, under the conduct and direction
of it, and he finds experience to answer to his contemplation, he gets the
mastery of that unruly boisterous element: he rides securely upon the back of
the dark waters: he makes a needle touched with a stone to supply the place of
the stars of heaven: when the eyes of heaven are veiled from him amidst the
dark waters and thick clouds of the skey; he examines all the chambers of the
sun, and imitates him in compassing the world, he goes out from the East, and
returns again from the West; returns, and that laden with the treasures of the
world, with the blessings which Moses did assign to Joseph, Deu. 33.13. the
precious things of heaven for the dew, and for the deep, that coucheth beneath,
the precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and the precious things put forth
by the Moon, the chief things of the ancient mountains, and the precious things
of the lasting hills, the precious things of the earth, etc. he settles a
correspondency betwixt the utmost distants of the world, and opens a traffic
betwixt nations opposite in place, in manners and affections, such as had lien
concealed from the knowledge of one another, even almost from the time of the
Ark that floted upon the waters, but what do I speak of these things? he
displays the banner of Christ in the regions of death and hell; he sheds forth
the glorious light of the Gospel to the people that sat in darkness and in
the shadow of death: what sensible analogy or correspondency is there betwixt
the situation or motion of a stone, and the salvation of mankind, and yet by
various consequences he discovers how by the means of that, this likewise may
be effected; he discovers it, and puts it in a successful and happy execution.

What is there more contemptible then a stone? hardly any thing that is a
substance, and yet it is much less contemptible then a shadow, he observes a
shadow, and that carries him aloft to a contemplation, and a discovery of that
most glorious creature which comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber,
and rejoices as a Giant to run his course: From the shadow he rises to the
Sun in the Firmament, and to a perfect understanding of his course in the
Ecliptique, and then brings back again his understanding to the shadow, he
makes thereby an instrument that shall design to the eye the daily circuits of
its motion: his eye that gave occasion to his mind to discover them in
contemplation, and now his mind is impregnated with the light of knowledge,
and returns with usury to the senses that occasional advantage which they
afforded it, and gives them the pleasure of the viewing of its practice it
gives the eye and hand directions for drawing of lines, which by the regular
application of a stick, or wire, stone, or any other body shall discover not
only the divisions of the day, the hours that are past, or else to come, but
even all the mysteries of the Suns motion: how it measures out the night, and
in what quantity it dispences out the day: how near are his approaches at noon,
and how far distant he is from us at midnight; by what degrees he draws
toward us, and how by eqnall measures he retreats; how he rises from his
greatest southern declination to the North, and from thence returns again to
his chambers in the South, having touched the boundaries that he cannot, he
must not pass; and how in this his continual progress he dispenses the
several seasons of the year, what time he enters into every sign, when he
begins to rejoice the hearts of any of the nations by his presence, and what
time he leaves them in the darkness: these are but some few and less
considerable of those wonders which are performed by that which has no being.

To insist upon it how the reason and wit of man has found out several Arts
and Sciences, from principles most contemptible, how it arises to most
admirable speculations, and upon poor beginnings to what issues it brings; how
it can give the height or distance to which it never can approach, how by the
application of a piece of wood or other matter to the eye, it can assign the
distances and places and motions, and appearances of the stars of heaven, and
foretell the positions and combinations of the Planets, the Ecclipses of the
Sun and Moon to the generations to come: how it corrects the judgments of
the senses, and demonstrates that to be far greater then the world, which the
eye presents no bigger then a bushel, nay, no bigger then the rowell of a
spur: to insist upon such things as these, were to be prodigal and
superarrogate in proving the incorporeall nature of the souls of men, and yet
all these are nothing to those more ordinary things which it performs when it
assigns and prescribes to it self laws of mutual signification by things
which have no similitude, when it designs notions to sounds, and sounds to
letters, and upon hearing the voice Soul, or seeing the word Man, we call into
our minds the things which I have spoken of him, things which cannot be
performed by the collision of atoms, the motions or dispositions of parts or
quantities, but must be the issues of spiritual essences: such therefore are
the souls of men, and so they are immortal.

SECT. VI.
An Application of the former Propositions to the inference of a Religion in
general, and a proposal of the third in order to the Christian.

THe third thing which I propounded to speak of by way of preparation to the
entertainment of the principles of our Religion, it was the authority of the
holy Scriptures, that which we have already demonstrated was of a more general
design, this comes to be more particular, that was against Atheism and
irreligion, this against superstition, and the false religions of the world,
the will-worships of the Heathen and the Jews, and of a party of those that do
profess the name of Christ. Out of what has already been delivered, a
necessity of Religion in the general will result, for it is the first
consequence of reason from the consideration of the attributes of God, and the
condition and properties of the souls of men, for having by necessary force of
argument drawn up the vast number of mankind to one original cause, even to
God as their Creator, we cannot choose if we will insist upon that
consideration but fall upon a necessity of Religion. For if God have created
man he must have done it for some end and purpose, seeing he is an intelligent
agent, and such agents as work with understanding, they always work upon
design, and propound some good to themselves in all their actions, for they
cannot be supposed to work but upon desire, and the object of desire is only
goodness; if now we employ all our wit and our invention to discover what good
can accrue to the Godhead by the Creation of man, we can find none that is
imaginable in the way of profit or of gain: that which the Psalmist has laid
down is a conclusion following from the light of reason as well as from the
special revelations of the holy Scripture that our goodness extends not to
God, and it was a question, which might with good congruity fall from Eliphaz
the Temanite, Job 22. 1. Can a man be profitable to God, as he that is wise may
be profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
righteous? or is it any gain to him that thou make thy way perfect? And the
matter of gain being excluded from the end of God in our creation, if we run
over all the objects of pleasure which come within the spheres of the souls of
men, we shall find no pretense of reason for any thing of ours to please the
Almighty, and so to be assigned as an intelligible cause of our creation, but
the delight which the Godhead might take in the communication of his goodness,
in the explication or unfolding of those glories which lay enwrapped within it
self, in having something (if I may so speak) without and besides it self,
which might be apprehensive of the excellencies of it, might be subject and
conformed, and might perform toward it the acts of glorification and praise.

So then the glorifying of God is all the end that can be found out why God
should ever have created us: and the next thought to this conclusion of our
reason must be of the ways and means whereby he may be glorified by us: and
there again when we shall have run over all the ways imaginable, we can fasten
upon none other then the admiration of his excellency, the adoration of his
Majesty, the obedience to his will. And these are the acts and performances of
Religion, so that the consideration of the Godhead and his Attributes, do
naturally cast us upon a necessity of Religion.

Now as the consideration of the Godhead does naturally enforce a Necessity of
Religion, so does likewise the consideration of the Immortality of the souls of
men: for if we shall but consider, that our souls shall never fail of their
existence, but continue in being to all Eternity, we can hardly avoid the
thoughts of the shortness of our duration in this world, or the comparison of
the time of our duration here, with that other continuance which does abide for
us hereafter: and if we will have the patience in our thoughts to insist upon
the proportion of a few years unto an unlimited, and unmeasurable Eternity, we
shall unavoidably fall upon this judgment, that our condition here is no way
comparable to that which shall be: that momentany pleasure bears no proportion
to eternal happiness or eternal misery: that these light afflictions which
are but for a moment, are not to be compared either to the joys or miseries
which are to be expected, and consequently that our care for this life ought
not, nor cannot in common prudence equal our care for eternity. So then
whatsoever befalls us here we shall conclude it requisite to provide that we be
not miserable hereafter, and consequently that we make our selves a friend of
him that has the issues of death in his power, and moderates and dispenses the
rewards of Eternity: but there is no way to have him propitious to us, but by
obedience, no reason to expect that he should satisfy our longing, or fulfill
our will to all Eternity, unless we fulfill his will for our time of trial in
this life, and that is by the exercise of Religion only attainable. So that the
consideration of the Souls Immortality will likewise enforce us to a necessity
of Religion.

Thus far the common principles of natural reason will force us, even the
first and most common principles of intelligence, such as are grounds of clear,
evident, and perfect demonstration; so that it must be the Fool alone, as the
Psalmist speaks, which can be an Atheist, so that they are without excuse
whoever glorify him not as God: thus far those poor remains of sight which
yet is left to the corrupted offspring of our degenerate Parent will serve to
lead us, to the general necessity of Religion: but here indeed it Jeaves us
destitute of the certain ways of pleasing God: and consequently destitute of
clear and solid grounds of hope of attaining to eternal happiness. And here
it is that the Scoffers and irreligious men take occasion to reason themselves
and others to destruction: seeing that nature has here deserted us, and left
us no infallible Rules of particular ways of devotion, they contend that there
are none such, and consequently that our Religion is vain and uncertain,
uncertain in the issue because uncertain in the grounds and principles. And
here now against them we pretend that wherein our natural light has failed
us, the mercy of God has been pleased to supply us, that God has not left us
without a certain rule and Canon of Religion, not without a light shining to us
in this dark place, particularly that he has given to us his holy Word to be a
Light to our feet, and a Lanthorn to our paths, and that the books of the holy
Scriptures are that Word of God.

PART. III.
Concerning the truth and Authority of our Scripture.

SECT. I.
Petitions and Cautions premised to the question.

YOu will do me the favor to consider that our present controversy is
against those that deny the Authority of the holy Scriptures, so that we cannot
have the advantage of those Arguments which in every other controversy of
Religion are the most valid: I mean Arguments drawn from the Authority of the
Scriptures themselves, which is the best, if not the only authentike rule of
decision of such differences as do arise; such as do indeed arise in the
Church of God, who all do agree in a profession of that faith which is
delivered in these holy Books, this I say they agree upon in these general
terms, however with wonderful heat and distance they vary in their judgments
whether or no some particulars be of the recommendation of the Scripture. It is
then the common principle of Christians, and the ultimate rule for the
judgment of those that are within: but as for them that are without the Church
they ae likewise out of the jurisdiction of this Canon, or Judge, and to give
over their incredulity (or rather infidelity) as some of our Divines have done
with this ill-interpreted axiom for rejection, that they deny our principles,
and so are not worthy to be disputed with, or to refer them only to the (...)
of the Scriptures, and to the spirit working with the reading and hearing of
them, it might be to prove a scandal to them without; and to such as are weak
and wavering within, it were tacitly to imply, that we have no way to gain the
question, unless our of courtesy the adversary be pleased to yield it to us,
to resolve the motives of our Catholic Faith into private impulses and
particular dictates of the Spirit (arguments of very great credit and
reputation due to our selves as particular favorites of the holy Spirit, but
such as being deserted by the tenor and regiment of our lives, render us
dishonorable to that holy Spirit whereto we pretend, whilst in the
apprehension of men we do at least obliquely entitle it to such actions as are
inconsistent with it, professing we hold our faith by private revelation, and
consequently have our understandings taken up by the holy Ghost at such time as
our wills are guilty of enormous sins.) A fancy that is the mother of diverse
prodigies lately broken into the Church, as that either God sees no sin in
believers, that Murder, Adultery, Incest, Sacrilege, (any thing) may be
committed, and that these are no sins in believers, arguing thus, that they
which have the holy Spirit are free from sin, such as do believe the Gospel
they have the holy Spirit, because there is no other motive sufficient besides
a private illumination, so then they cannot be guilty of sin, but yet they
may, and do commit such things as those we mentioned; wherefore those are no
sins. Thus does Satan transform himself into an Angel of light, and act his
Tragedies in the likeness of the holy Spirit: Nay we say, and do believe that
the Devils also believe and tremble, that the Kingdom of Heaven is like a Net
which drew to shore fishes of all sorts, some to be put into vessels, and
others to be thrown away. We say and do acknowledge to the glory of God, that
the internal light of the holy Scriptures is sufficient to make the man of God
perfect to salvation, and that in some it is the means of generating faith in
men, but that the most of those believers who have the happiness to be trained
up from their infancy in any part of the Christian Church; by observing the
esteem which in their Church is had of those holy Books, they do betimes upon
the reputation of their Church receive them with a kind of veneration, that
upon this motive they receive the faith; and that others do upon other
inducements entertain it, and once for all we say, that besides the secret and
free illuminations of the holy Spirit, these want not Arguments to enforce the
reason of unbvassed men to entertain the Scripture as the Word of God, and that
all such as without the engagement of perverse affections shall admit those
Arguments in their apprehensions must necessarily be of that belief.

Before I betake my self to the proof of this assertion, I must premise that by
the books of the holy Scripture, I mean such books of the old and new Testament
as in the Church of England have been accounted Canonical, and that I intend
not here to take up the controversy which is betwixt the Church of Rome, and
us concerning the books which are Apocryphal, the drift of my discourse being
against those who believe too little, and not those who believe too much.

Secondly, I must premise that we are not here to expect the necessity of
demonstrations, but must content our selves with such arguments as the nature
of our subject will admit: there can be no true and perfect demonstration,
unless the property to be demonstrated do naturally flow from the subject of
the demonstration. In matters then depending upon the free election of causes
there cannot possibly be any perfect demonstration, and such is the giving of a
rule of life in respect of God, so that there cannot be a perfect demonstration
of it. So then we must content our selves with arguments falling short of the
necessity of demonstration, but such as no man shall be able to deny, without
denying some such principles as all men do acknowledge to be true.

SECT. II.
The Assertion resolved into two Propositions, the former undertaken, that
whosoever believes the Historical part of the Scripture must believe the
Doctrinall.

1. TO believe that these Books of Scripture are the Word of God, there are
very great and important reasons. 2. To disbeleeve it there are no reasons, or
not any sufficient reasons.
And first of all, to prove that those books of Scriptures are the Word of
God, it is sufficient if we prove the truth of them, because themselves pretend
to be of divine inspiration. All Scripture is of divine inspiration, the tenor
of the Old Testament runs generally so, The Lord spoke unto Moses or other of
the Prophets, such as were the Penmen of the holy Scripture, indeed the
general pretense of those that wrote both Testaments, is, that holy men did
speak and write, as they were inspired by the holy Ghost, so then, if this
pretense of it be true, it must be true, that it proceeded from the holy Ghost,
and consequently to prove the truth of it will conclude that it is the Word of
God.

Now as concerning the truch of those writings we have 1. The same Arguments or
as great as for the truth of any writings in the world. Nay 2. We have
Arguments (moral Arguments) to evince the truth of them, such as no other
writings can pretend to. That we may shorten that we have to perform, you may
consider that the things delivered to us in the holy Scriptures are either
matters of History or Doctrine, and that these are frequently interwoven in the
Scripture, so as when Saint Matthew does in an historical narration bring in
our Savior preaching in the Mount, and delivering there a summary of his
Doctrine, so that it will appear that if the historical part of the Scripture
be undoubtedly true there cannot rationally be any doubt made of those
doctrinall rules and precepts which there are delivered. As for the doctrine of
any party whatsoever concerning God there is not imaginable any argument so
ready to evince the truth of it as God himself, freely attesting to the
deliverers of it by mighty signs and wonders, by great and undeniable
miracles, such as are instances of the immediate hand of God; such as by
skillfull and knowing men are acknowledged to be no way performable by the
praestigatory act of Magicians, or by the power of evil spirits. Such were the
miracles which are delivered to us by Moses all along the course of Gods
bringing the children of Israel out of Egypt to his own land; and afterward
wrought by the Prophets. And such were the works of our blessed Savior all
along the course of his Ministry before his passion, and such and more
admirable was his resurrection and ascension. Whosoever does believe, that
there was such a man as Moses, that this man Moses did profess himself to have
received from God a Law, which was to be delivered to a people, he may hitherto
very well doubt, whether or no he was not deceived, in imagining that he had
received such a law. But if withal he shall be assured or steadfastly believe,
that this man Moses, to make good his pretenses to Gods revelations, could
obtain so much of God as, to the eyes and senses of millions of gainsayers and
opposers of what he did deliver, to show great and palpable miracles: whosoever
does believe that he did turn a rod into a serpent, and that back again into a
rod; that by stretching forth that rod upon the River Nilus he turned their
waters into blood, and slew their fish: how afterward he brought frogs upon
all the land of Egypt, even into their Kings chambers; how he brought flies,
and caterpillars, and lice, and thunder, and lightning, and mighty hailstones;
how he brought botches and murrain amongst men and cattle; how he brought upon
all the land of Egypt a darkness that might be felt, and slew their
firstborn; afterward how he divided the Red Sea for the people to pass
through it, and when he had served the turn of his party, how the floods
returned and overwhelmed his enemies; he that shall believe that after this he
brought water out of the rock, sweetened the waters of Marah, brought Quails
into the wilderness, procured Manna to fall about their tents all the week,
and none upon the Sabbath; how the fire from Heaven consumed Nadab and Abihu,
only for adventuring to offer strange fire, otherwise then he had prescribed
them; that the earth opened and swallowed up Korah, and covered the
Congregation of Abiram; that at the time of the promulgation of his Laws, God
himself appeared visibly, that the glory of his presence overshadowed the
Mount, how there were thunder and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the Mount,
Exo. 19. how Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended
upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and
the whole mountain shaked exceedingly. Whosoever believes these works to have
been done by the same party that professed a revelation from God, cannot avoid
the belief of his profession, unles he can believe that God by so great
miracles would attest to Blasphemy and Sacrilegious impostures, a thing which
is palpably mad to be believed, and is against the light of common sense and
reason.

So likewise whosoever does believe that in the days of Augustus Caesar there
was such a man as Jesus of Nazareth, commonly called Christ, and that this man
did profess himself the son of God, and pretended to deliver to all the
world a way of Religion, a Covenant of life eternal, an abrogation of the
ceremonies of the former law, and those other things which he professed, there
is no necessity that he should believe that either he was the Son of God, or
that his doctrine was infallible. But if together with these professions he
shall take into belief those things which Jesus did, though for his own sake
he see no reason to believe him, yet at least he will believe for the works
sake, if he shall believe that God himself did attest to these professions, he
will likewise believe those professions of his to have been true, and Gods
attestation he will believe, if he shall believe that a little before his birth
a company of Angels appeared to Shepherds and told them of it; that presently
after it a star appeared to wise men in the East, and conducted them to the
place of his Nativity: that in his life time he did such works as never man
did: how he turned water into wine, commanded the winds and the sea: how he
cured all manner of diseases with his Word, how he gave sight to such as were
born blinde^ which was never known since the world began, how he cured most
obstinate diseases of long continuance merely by the touching of his garment:
how he cast out devils from such as were possessed: how he raised up the dead
to life, and every way demonstrated the power and presence of the Godhead, how
at the time of his crucifixion the frame of Nature seemed to be dissolved; how
the vail of the Temple rent, and the graves opened, and many bodies of the
dead, which slept, arose, and came into the holy city, and appeared to many;
how there was darkness over all the earth, the Sun eclipsed at the time of
the Jewish passover, when the Moon was at the full; and lastly how after three
days he arose again, appeared several times to his Apostles, gave them power
to perform the miracles which he had done, and visibly ascended up into heaven:
Whosoever does believe these matters of fact, must of necessity believe the
doctrines which he believed; unless he will accuse God of bearing false
witness, or own some such other detestable and odious incongruity.

You see then, how the matters of fact being cleared, and the historical
narrations being asserted to be true, the doctrinall parts will follow of their
own accord: and that if we can clear such things to have been performed by
Moses, and Jesus of Nazareth, and that such doctrines were delivered by them;
it follows that those doctrines are true, and are the Word of God.

SECT. III.
The kinds and degrees of the causes of Historical Faith in general.

IT remains therefore, that we make it appear that the sacred Histories are
true, and that no man, pretending to reason, can justly refuse to admit that
principle into his belief; there being 1. The same reason to believe those
Histories, that there are to believe any Histories. 2. More reason to believe
them then any other.




First then, Whosoever does deliberate with himself, about that question,
whether or no he should give credit to any History propounded, can possibly
find no other considerations to sway his judgment, then such, as either are
taken from the thing it self that is delivered, or from the persons which have
delivered the relation, and from such qualifications of them as upon the
grounds of reason he can discover, if the matter it self do involve a clear
and evident contradiction to some natural principles, it is not the
asseveration of all the men of the world that can work a belief in the
understanding: it not being in the power of man to entertain a belief contrary
to his knowledge, although it may produce in him a doubting, whether or no he
have not suffered any fallacy to be imposed upon him, and so be wrought to
run over the matter again unto himself, and follow it with strict and wary
attention backwards and forwards in reference to his principles.

But if the thing it self be not incredible, however difficult or strange it
be, that which then he does consider is, the qualities of the relators, and the
manner of the relation, and there is not any improbability proceeding from the
difficulty or the rarity of the accidents, which may not be outweighed by the
known disposition and properties of the Relators.

Those things which men do consider in the Relators of things in order to
yielding of their belief, they relate either to the of the Relators,
Understanding or Will and concern either their Sufficiency, or Integrity.



Men usually consider whether or no the things be such as may be certainly and
evidently known, and whether these parties had sufficient means to come to the
certain knowledge of them, and whether they contain themselves in their
relations within the bounds of things liable to certain knowledge: thus then
those things which may be certainly known they are the outward events of
things, whereas the secret causes may lie concealed, the former are such as are
the objects of common sense, and come within the cognizance of all: the later
are such as are indiscoverable by any man, they being oftentimes made up of a
complexion of actions and dispositions of multitudes of men; or things
perfectly to be known, only of him that sees all things in speculo
aeternitatis.

If the History (or Relation) contain it self within the bounds of evidence
and certainty, the next thing to be considered is, whether or no the party that
is Author of the Relation had sufficient means of knowledge; whether himself
were an eye or eare-witnesse of the things which he relates; or whether the
things were so publicly acted and known, that he might certainly, and
particularly inform himself, without any danger of deceit.

If the party be of known ability, both in himself, and in reference to the
things, the next question will be of his Integrity, and whether there be
sufficient reason to believe, that he would not voluntarily deliver a falsehood,
in stead of truth, and because it is not reason to believe that men will lie,
unless they either be known to be corrupt or some end be visible of gain to
them from their lying. Men use to consider these things likewise before they
settle upon belief.

These are the grounds and considerations, and inward discourses whereupon men
do proceed to the receiving of historical belief, even of any relations
whatsoever: and accordingly as all of these conditions be clear or obscure,
doubtful or certain, such is the strength of his belief; if all of them
concur there remains no reason at all of doubting: if some of them fail,
there will follow a debility, answerable in the belief; seeing that the belief
of the conclusion can never exceed the force and evidence of the premises.

That there is or lately has been such a City as Rome, or Jerusalem, or
Paris, there are none of us that doubt, although we have not seen them; because
they are things very easily known, as being the objects of the eyes, because
the reporters have been there to see them, and because no end or reason can be
imagined why or how men should combine to abuse those that have not traveled.

That there have been formerly such Cities as Corinth, and Philippi, and
Lacedemon, etc. we make even as little doubt as of the former, because the
things in their nature are evidently to be known, and they have all of them
been mentioned in the Books of Polybius or Plutarch, or a multitude of
Historians that knew them.

That the History of Caesar's war against the Gauls is true, though written
by himself, it is believed, because of his abilities to know, and because it
makes not things appear to be strained in his behalf, because it might have
been contradicted if it had been otherwise, and because he is delivered to us
in the complexion of Histories as a man of honor that would not write a lie.

That the Histories of Salust are true, it is believed because he wrote of
things done within the compass of his time whereof he might well inform
himself, he was a man of knowledge and could not gain by any thing that he has
delivered if it were untrue.

That all of these Histories were written by those that bear the name of them,
there is hardly any man that doubts, because there is no improbability in
reason: they have been constantly so received in the world, and mentioned
successively in Authors following one another from their several generations
down to ours.

We see the various degrees of qualifications (some of them) upon which we
build an historical belief, that this belief comes short of the clearness of
our assent to a Mathematical demonstration is evident, because there is an
absolute impossibility that things should be otherwise, there being a
contradiction involved in the very terms, and in adjecto: but here is no
impossibility but only an exceeding difficulty which makes up (not indeed a
Mathematical but) a moral impossibility; it is possible that all men may
combine together to say that they have seen such things as they have not seen,
because every man is a liar: but how they should come to do it, or to what end
is so invisible and inconceivable, that the matter, taken in the gross, is
altogether incredible. It is absolutely possibly that all those writings which
we receive as delivered down from ancient times, may have been of late devised
by some men to abuse the world, rnd put upon other names: but to what end, any
men should ttke the pains, and how they should fit them with circumstances, and
make them all depend upon each other, in a constant succession, agreeing in the
mention of persons, places, and actions, is a thing so difficult, as that it
would argue madness to believe, and conclude him to want the use of reason,
that should reject the light of all antiquity.

SECT. IV.
An Application of those general grounds to the History of the New Testament,
and a proof of this Assertion, 'That there is as great reason to believe the
New Testament as to believe any other History in the world.

SUch madness then, and no less it were to reject the Histories of the holy
Scriptures; no less madness? nay, it is much greater, and that not only
because they are of more concernment to us then the acts of men of former
times, but even because of the advantages of the delivery of those Histories.
We will begin with those of the New Testament.

And here first, The Books of the New Testament were written by those whose
Names they bear; that the four Gospels were written by the four Evangelists,
and that the Acts of the Apostles were written by Saint Luke, etc.

Now that these Books were written by these men, it is impossible affirmatively
to demonstrate; all that can be said is, that there is as great evidence of it
as of any other writing in the world; that by whatsoever argument it can be
made appear that any Books have been written by those who are reputed for their
Authors in antiquity, (that the works of Homer, or Plato, or Aristotle, or
Tully are theirs) by the same it may be made evident, that these have proceeded
from our Authors.

Have they been successively delivered? so have these: have they been
continually mentioned under those names? so have these: have they been
acknowledged by all parties? so have these: those that in the primitive times
did oppose the doctrine of Christ, yet did it not under the pretense that their
Books were spurious, neither Jews nor Pagans had the impudence to make that
objection. Julian the Apostate does freely acknowledge ( Cyrill. 10. Grot. 3.
ver.) that the Books which by the Christians were received under the names of
Peter, Paul, Matthew, Mark, Luke; they were the writings of those Authors.

It is true, that there are some Book received of the Canon of the New
Testament, whose Authors are unknown; as the Epistle to the Hebrews, and some
others: but concerning them I hope to speak in answering those objections
which are made against the Scripture. In the mean time we may justly assume it
for granted, that those whereof no question has been made in ancient times
they are the writings of those to whom they are ascribed.

And now this being supposed, which cannot with any pretense of reason be
denied, it follows clearly that the things they have related are to be
believed: for first, the things which they have delivered they were matters
easily to be known; in respect of the things themselves, they were matters of
fact and speeches performed by our Savior or by themselves: Secondly, the acts
were acted publicly in the face of the world; and the speeches which they
deliver as spoken by others, they were for the most part spoken publicly,
either in the Synagogue, or in the Temple, or to the multitude somewhere
gathered together, on a mountain, by the seaside, in public places: so as
they might have easily been contradicted if they should have delivered a
falsehood: Thirdly, the parties which have delivered them had all the
opportunities in the world to know the truth of things; they were things done
either by themselves, or within their own sight, or hearing for the greatest
part; or at least wise in the times and places where the reporters lived.

Matthew and John the two Evangelists which wrote the History of Christ, they
were two of his Disciples: two that were intimately acquainted with his
actions, and his words, more familiar with him then the rest; the one was the
disciple that Jesus loved, and used to lean in his bosom, as they lay at meat;
the other was usually taken with him when most of the rest were left behind;
and hence it follows that they themselves were present at almost all the acts,
and speeches which they have delivered.

Mark and Luke the other two Evangelists, they lived in the same territories,
at the same time, where and when our blessed Savior bestowed his conversation;
and moreover Saint Mark was (as it is very probable) first a Disciple of Saint
Paul, who was miraculously chosen to deliver the doctrine of Christ: Afterward
he was undoubtedly a disciple and companion of Saint Peter, who was an Apostle
of our Savior, did live familiarly together with him, was present at almost
all things which Mark has written: and besides whatever is delivered by Saint
Mark is to be found in the writings of the Apostles. Luke was an individual
companion of Paul, and so he might learn of him such things as he delivered;
besides that he says, that he spoke with those that were eyewitnesses of the
things which he delivered, he was borne near hand, he traveled through
Palestina, might converse with those very men, upon whom Jesus had wrought his
miracles, such as had seen the life of Jesus, his death and resurrection.

The Acts of the Apostles were likewise written by Saint Luke; and that Book
contains some things done by the rest of the Apostles; but the most of it is
concerning the actions of Paul after his miraculous conversion: the former it
was easy for him to know, either from the Apostles themselves or others: of
the latter he could not be ignorant, because he was continually with Paul in
all his labors and his journeys, even from the time of his conversion to his
imprisonment at Rome.

As for the matters of fact which are delivered in the Epistles of Paul, and
Peter, and James, and John, and Jude, they are such, as either were done by
themselves, and so they could not possibly be ignorant of them, or by others
with whom they held a correspondence, or by our Savior whose Apostles they
were, all but Paul; or else they are things done by others, publicly and
notoriously known.

Lastly, As for the Epistle to the Hebrews and the Revelations, though the
authors of them be not certainly known in the Church, yet thus much is plain,
that the Author to the Hebrews says, that the Gospel of Jesus was preached at
first by Christ, and confirmed unto him (Us) by them that heard him, 2. v. 3.
and so that he could not be ignorant of that; nor yet was it possible that the
Author of the Revelations should be ignorant, whether or no he had those
visions which he has delivered.

Now these are all the Books of the New Testament, and it appears, that the
Authors of them had as much opportunity to know the things which they
delivered as is possible to be had: wherefore the business is clear in respect
of their Sufficiency of knowledge; and all the Question which remains, it must
be in regard of their Integrity.

Whosoever challenges or questions the Integrity of an Historian, and upon
that cause refuses to receive his Testimony, it is requisite that he produce
the reasons of his suspicion, that he charge the Authors of corruption, and
prove the charge which he has objected; or that he discover and manifest the
ends, which he might propound to himself, as the reward of his imposture; that
he show the gain that might accrue, or the loss, or peril, or ignominy that
he might avoid; and manifest that his accusation has not proceeded from
malice, but from judgment, from some grounds of reason, and not from
perverseness, or spite, or any inhumanity. Here then it is that we challenge
men or Devils to produce the crimes, to detect and prove the villainies of these
Writers; nay, to assign the ends which they might have in relating falsehood,
the gain, the pleasure, the glory, the safety, or whatsoever it is that
prevails upon the appetites and lusts of men: and let their infidelity and
jealousy out-doe the malice of the grand Apostate. Indeed I think scorn to
stand upon this argument, it was the contemplation of these things chiefly that
gained from me that second assertion. That there is greater reason to believe
the Scripture then any other writings in the world: the first Proposition being
already demonstrated That we have as great.

SECT. V.
That there is much greater reason to believe the History of the New Testament,
then any other History.

HAving already demonstrated, that considering the qualifications of the
persons who have recorded unto us the New Testament of our Savior; there is as
great reason to give credence to their Histories as to any other ancient
Histories in the world, by reason of their means of knowledge, and
opportunities for discovery of the truth of those matters of fact, which they
have delivered. It follows now that we make good that, which in the second
place we propounded concerning them, which was, That we have greater reason to
believe them then to believe any Historians whatsoever, and this now will be
manifested to us by these Arguments following, 1. Greater obligation. 2. Their
sufferings. 3. Their Miracles. 4. Their predictions.


First then, They were more powerfully obliged to the delivery of the truth
then others, not that others were not obliged likewise to deliver nothing but
the truth: there is in the conscience of every soul settled a principle
dictating unto him, that he ought not not to recede from the truth in his
relation; but yet this principle is, in the most of men, very much overclouded
and overborn; as is manifest, not only by the fabulous relations of ancient
Histories, even after the institution of the Olympiads; but by that inclination
which we find, almost in all men, to make their relations handsome; in order
whereunto even the gravest of them, Josephus, Livy, and the rest of those orders
of Historians, have often changed the form of Circumstances, and varied from
the truth, to make a coherence of things according to their fancy, such as
might please their own imaginations.

The truth is, that which held in the Heathen, so far as they were held within
the boundaries of truth, it can be conceived to be no other then a certain
magnanimity, and a moral generosity that was actuated and quickened in them by
the conceit of a reputation, thereby gained amongst the people, of their own
generation, their hopes of perpetuating their own fame, together with the acts
which they recorded, and consecrating them to eternity and immortality; I do
not say, that this was all the motive which they had, but that upon the
consideration of them, in the whole complexion of their circumstances, I cannot
find out any more powerful motive, nor any stronger obligation.

But, besides all that these men had to move them, the writers of the New
Testament had likewise other motives, as far beyond these, as the heaven is
beyond the earth, either in dignity, or situation: A most severe injunction of
their Master, such as they themselves have delivered, such as they could not,
neither durst neglect: their writings abound in precepts of truth and of
veracity, and that prescribed under far other conditions, and settled upon a far
surer foundation, upon the foundation of truth it self, the original and the
Ideall truth of the world; and propounded to them under far other penalties:
they knew full well and taught to others, that of every idle word, which men
shall speak, an account must be given at the day of judgment: how dreadful an
account then must they have expected, if they should have delivered falsehood in
the place of truth, if they should have told a lie for God, or lies of God, or
delivered impostures in the name of God? nay verily, the necessity which lay
upon them, compared to others, does as far exceed it; as the fear of a little
disreputation is exceeded by the horror of eternal torments: and now their
practice was also answerable to their obligation, and what they delivered, in
their speeches and writings, was fully exampled in their lives. We have before
intimated that whosoever will charge an author with a lie, he must either
detect the lewdness and corruption of their lives, or at least wise manifest
what they might gain by their report; the former could never be by their sworn
enemies detected, nay Julian the great Apostate could charge them with nothing
but simplicity: now then, all the gain that can be, is reducible to the
Avoidance of evil, and Obtaining of good.



The Goods that are to be obtained are either of Body. Estate. Liberty.
Reputation.



First then, What outward evil did they thereby escape, that so they may be
judged to have lied out of fear? consider the state of the world at that time,
and tell us, whether or no there was danger in speaking, and writing those
things, or in the forbearance? Did the Roman Emperors, or the Governors of
Judea, or the Jews, or the Presidents of the adjacent Provinces, or the
multitude threaten them to make them speak, or to be silent? Did they by that
means put themselves into a condition of ease and pleasure, and soft luxury?
Did they treasure up gold and silver, and raise themselves a fortune by it? Had
they a greater freedom inward or outward, did it let them into larger
principles, or procure them a greater scope to gratify their inordinate
desires? Was it the way to advance them to honor and reputation, either with
the Governors, or with the people? nay, instead of bodily ease and pleasure it
objected them to pains active, and passive,

they were forced to undertake labors, and travels, and watchings, and the
inconveniences of great and painful industry: they were daily opposed to
hunger and thirst, and cold and nakedness; nay, to torments and to death:
instead of gaining an estate, they were enforced to forsake all that they had
to live an ambulatory kind of life, without any certain being, depending as it
were on the Ravens, to provide them their meat from one day to another. Instead
of that same freedom and liberty which men affect, they entered into a
straighter and more narrow way then the way of the world, they were forced to
deny themselves, even such things as they knew were lawful, and they were
abridged even of the common enjoyments of mankind, not suffered to converse
with freedom, or to breath with safety: they no sooner came to a city, but
there they were persecuted and forced to fly unto another. That which Saint
Paul spoke of himself as he was making his last voyage up to Jerusalem, might
have been the common Motto of them all, Now I go bound in the Spirit up to
Jerusalem, not knowing what things shall befall me, only the holy Ghost that
testifies in every city that bonds and afflictions abide me there.

As for the matter of honor and reputation, that was all in the hands of their
enemies, the Jews, and the Greeks: they preached Christ crucified, to the Jews
a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness; and all the credit which they
obtained at their hands was, to be accounted a company of silly men,
contentious for a thing of nothing, a question about names, about one Jesus
which was dead, whom they affirmed to be alive: this was the opinion of the
Gentiles; and by the Jews they were looked upon as revolters, and so not fit to
live: as for this sect we know that it is every where spoken against; and they
were hereby rendered the scorn and derision of the world, the offscouring of the
people: what shall I more say? they were deprived of all the enjoyments of the
world, and cast into all the miseries, or in the words of the Author to the
Hebrews, They wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented; and all for the delivery of the things contained in those
books: and if we will sadly consider it we can assign no cause of this their
choice, but the force of truth prevailing on them, and the urging of their
conscience, by the continual instigation of them by that spirit which acted
them, making their hearts hot, and kindling a fire within them, a fire in their
bosom, which they could not suppress. We cannot but speak the things which
we have seen and heard: they suffered for their profession that, never men did;
and so we have greater reason to believe them then any other men.

And we have still greater arguments then these, because that God himself gave
testimony to their words and writings; and that both in their own times, and
the times which did succeed them: in their own times by miracles; in the
succeeding generations by accomplishing their predictions.

The Apostles then, in confirmation of their doctrine, were endowed with a
miraeulous power from on high, and manifested to all the world, that they had
received in great abundance their portions of the spirit, from him that had the
spirit not by measure: they preached, and as they preached, they confirmed
their doctrine by mighty signs and wonders, and evident manifestations of the
holy Ghost; so evident, that when they had delivered the relation of them to a
gainsaying, a crooked and perverse generation, assigning the times and places,
and other circumstances, their spightfull enemies could never detect them of
the least imposture; but were forced, though their teeth gnashed while they
spoke, to confess, that indeed great miracles were done by them; that this was
evident and they were not able to deny it; nay, such was the evidence of the
miracles performed by them, that some of them have been recorded in the annals
of heathen Authors ( Phlegon,) that they were appealed unto by the primitive
Christians (in the times next succeeding the Apostles) in all their Apologies
for the Christian faith, in their Apologies made to the Heathen Emperors, they
are appealed unto as things commonly known by the world, yielded without
contradiction, which could not with any forehead be denied; they were, I say,
appealed unto, and that to the greatest enemies of the Christians, and that by
way of challenge to the trial, and that without any reply as to the falsehood
of them, and without any recrimination; nay, which is yet much more, there were
not only by these men themselves, but even at their sepulchers when they were
dead, great miracles performed, for diverse centuries of years, and that so
certainly, that it was confessed by the sorest enemies of the Church, such I
mean, as were of the School of Pythagoras, that by Magic Arts strove to
out-doe the performances of Christ, particularly by that mad Dog Porphyrius,
and others. Unless then, men will deny God the honor due unto him, and make
him by his presence, and testimony authorize imposture, there can be no scruple
made of the truth of these men's writings, but they must be believed before the
writings of any others in the world, unless they likewise could have done such
acts as these have done, unless they could have cast out devils by their
words, have given the holy Ghost by the imposition of their hands, unless they
could have healed all manner of diseases, the blind, the lame, the deaf, the
dumb, etc. by words, touch, shadow; or could have spoke all sorts of
Languages, or rather at one speaking could have brought to pass, that men of
every language should perfectly have understood their speech, as if it had been
their own: Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia,
and Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, Egypt, and
the parts of Lybia, about Cyrene, strangers of Rome, Jews, and Proselytes,
Cretes and Arabians, they all heard them speak in their own tongues.

Nor did it please the Lord of the spirits of all flesh, here to stint the
dispensations of his holy spirit to them, he gave them not only the power of
miracles, but the spirit of prophecy, he unfolded to them the everlasting
rolls, and admitted them into his decrees, and would not hide from them the
things, which he meant to bring to pass, in the generations to come: he urged
them by his holy Spirit, and they foretold the fates of the world, they
foretold it, and God brought it to pass: I cannot stand to reckon up all their
prophecies which they delivered, and shortly after they were fulfilled, of the
spreading of that leaven, of the growth of that grain of mustardseed, of the
mighty and wonderful propagation of the faith, and the perpetual enduring of
it, of the rejection of it by the Jews, and the receiving of it by the
Gentiles, of the hatred of the Jews, and the torments which were to be
undergone by the glorious Martyrs, of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
calamities of that faithless Nation: all these make it evident that God was
with them; that there is infinitely more reason to believe the writers of the
New Testament then any other writers.

That none can disbeleeve them, without forfeiting his reason, by asserting
that God would give testimony to imposture.

SECT. VI.
That the Old Testament is the Word of God. A Proposal of three several
assertions, whereby it is concluded.

HAving demonstrated that the Books of the New Testament are all of them to be
received under the authority and credit of the word of God, that the
dogmaticall parts are to be received upon the credit of the Histories, and the
Histories upon the common principles of reason, and consequently that no man
professing to be guided by reason and judgment can refuse them. It remains,
that we demonstrate the same of the Old Testament, and that we take off those
colors, and answer those Sophisms, which by some men are urged against the
Scripture, and so conclude this argument.

Before I proceed to the former of these, I must call to your remembrance that
which, in the beginning, I did premise, that under the title of the Books of
the Old Testament, I did comprehend those, and those only, which in the Church
of England have been admitted, under the name of the Books of the Canonical
Scripture: and that I had no purpose at all to meddle with the controversies,
which are betwixt us and the Roman Church, about the books which are
Apocryphal: the reason, why the Church has entertained them only, into the
Canon, is, because they only were of the Canon of the Jews belief, before the
coming of our Savior, they only being written in the Hebrew tongue, and
consigned by Esdras at the return of the Jews from the Babilonish captivity, as
is generally believed amongst the Jewish Rabbines, whilst the Prophets Haggai,
Zachary, and Malachy were yet alive.

Now although the way to demonstrate the truth of them, considering the
question apart, and by ic self, be the same with the way, whereby we did
demonstrate the truth of the New Testament, by asserting the Authors of them
to have been those men to whom they were evermore ascribed; and from the
qualities of the things delivered (in matter of History) and the characters of
those persons, who have delivered the several parts of it, to demonstrate,
that no reason can be imagined, why such men, as those are and must be supposed
to be, should deliver such impostures as those must be, supposing them to be
impostures; that no end or motive can be discovered, which they should propound
to themselves for their reward, but on the contrary that many reasons are
visible, why they should have held their peace, if they durst have concealed
those things from the world; the reasons from safety, gain, glory, and the
like, as might either jointly or severally be demonstrated, of even all the
books of the Law, and of the Prophets, which make up the greatest part ( Moses
together with the Law having delivered likewise the shame of himself, and
Miriam, and Aaron. The Prophets having been all or most of them hardly used:
which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted?) Although, I say, this
had been the natural way to demonstrate the matter in question, taken singly
and apart by it self; yet partly to avoid the similitude of matter, which
renders unpleasant even the most profitable discourses, and partly to make a
present dispatch of this Argument, I shall content my self to have put you thus
in mind, that all those general arguments, for the truth and credit of those
writers, are common to these as well as to the others; and that there needs no
variation of them, being to be applied to the question now in hand, any other
then the interchanging of their several names, their personal relations, and
qualities, and other accidents: In a word, that the kinds of the Arguments are
the same, and the force of reason alike in both, allowing only the difference
of gradual and individual circumstances.

This being premised, the sum of what I shall further say is briefly this,
That 1. In the time of our Savior, and the Apostles, these Books were true.
2. That since that time they have not been changed.

From which two Propositions it will follow, that still they are so; and
consequently that the Books of the Old Testament, as well as of the New, are
the Word of God.

As touching these propositions, the truth of them will be inferred by this
ratiocination. 1. The Books, which we now receive, are the same which the Jews
do now receive. 2. The Books, which the Jews now receive, are the same which
they did formerly receive, even up to the consignation of their Canon. 3. The
Books, which then they did receive, were true.


SECT. VII.
The first Assertion proved, That the Books of the Old Testament which we now
receive are the same which the Jews do now receive.

THat those Canonical Books which we receive are the self same with those
which the Jews at the present do receive, is a case so plain, that it needs no
manner of proof, but only this, that it is obvious to every man to compare our
English or Latin Bibles with the Hebrew Bibles, which are used amongst the
Jews at present, and daily put forth by the present Rabbines, residing in the
several parts and dominions of the world; upon such a comparison it will be
found, that we do own the self same Books which they do, without any difference
in the number or inscriptions, chapters, or verses of those Books: such as do
doubt of this, they must take the pains to try, and to resolve themselves by
their own experience, or else if they are not able, or not willing to take the
pains to make themselves their own resolvers, they must of necessity believe
the multitude of those, that have already tried it, and finding it to be
generally granted, and allowed of all men, and all parties, however differing
otherwise amongst themselves, they must upon that account, either believe the
Proposition, or else devise some way how, and for what end it should be brought
to pass, that the learned men of all Nations, and Religions, Jews, Christians,
Papists, Protestants, Turks, Pagans, etc. should agree together to impose upon
that part of people, that cannot or will not fit themselves, to resolve a
question, so easy and of such concernment.

Now, that all these sorts of men do thus agree, must likewise be believed,
until some one instance can be produced to the contrary: the truth is, the
thing being a matter liable to the trial of common sense, and obvious to all
the world, there is no more controversy made of it, among the learned, then of
a principle in Mathematics.

It is true indeed, that as concerning the interpretation of those books, there
is, and almost, ever was a great deal of controversy amongst the learned, (but
none as to the number and to the parts of those that are delivered amongst the
Jews) and it is likewise true, that the belief, of far the greatest number of
Christians, does in its kind depend upon the questionable fidelity of
translators, and that fidelity of theirs, if it be to be tried, that must be
done by means which are not exempt from question: all therefore which can be
said in this matter is that unless we can attain to skill sufficient for our
own satisfaction in this question, we take into thought the qualifications of
Translators, in respect of skill and of fidelity; and impartially that we
consider all those rational heads and grounds, whereon men use to settle their
belief, amongst which no greater evidence can be expected then there is in
cases where all agree; and such is the main body of ours, and other
translations likewise: this that I have spoken of translations is indeed a
digression from the proposition I should demonstrate, seeing when we speak of
the sacred authority of the holy Scriptures we mean it not of translations, as
they are such, but primarily of the originals, and of translations, only so far
as they are consonant to those originals. And thus much is indeed sufficient
both for the assertion, and explication of that proposition, that the books
which we receive, they are the same which the Jews receive.

SECT. VIII.
That the Books, which the Jews do now receive, are the same which they have
received ever since the Consignation of their Canon.

BUt secondly, the Books which the Jews do now receive, they are the same
which they did formerly receive, upwards to the time of our Savior, and his
Apostles; nay, beyond them to the very time of the consignation, or sealing up
the Canon of their belief, that is, their Books were never changed nor
corrupted.

It is not here my purpose to assert, that never any letter or word has been
changed, or formerly read otherwise then now it is in the Jewish Bibles, (I am
not so far unacquainted with their Keri and Chetib, or with the notes of the
Massoreth) but that there has not been made any variation so considerable, as
to shake the authority of the present coppies. Of these various readings I hope
to speak in the answering objections. In the interim, I am to demonstrate, that
they have not received any considerable depravation.

And now this being a negative Proposition, common reason does presently offer
it to every ones judgment, that it cannot be positively proved, the very
nature of such propositions, contradicting that manner of proof: the arguments
then, which are producible, are some of them taken, from the causes why they
could not (morally) be corrupted; the other from signs that de facto they have
not been so.

The first argument then is taken from the multitude of copies, which it was
impossible to combine together to corrupt upon design, or that they should
accidentally agree together in the same casual corruptions.

It is certainly apparent out of the Histories of the Jews, that after their
first and second captivities, they did store themselves with multitudes of
copies of the sacred books, and that both publicly and privately; that which,
before they were dispersed, either was not so necessary to them, or else was
not so apprehended by them: so long as the first Temple was yet unrazed, we
read but of very few (if any) Synagogues of the Jews in other Nations, out of
the bounds and terrirores of Judea: but after by their long and woeful
captivity, when their confidence in the protection of their Law and their
Temple had, by their sad experience and woeful suffering, worn it self out of
their minds, their Temple being utterly demolished, the best of them began to
think that it was possible that even the Law might fail: ( Habbakuk) and they
now bethought themselves, of making use of the rational means of the
preservation of it; in the minds of men, and seeing there could not be any
readier way thought upon then the erecting of Synagogues, and writing many
copies, these were the courses which they took, (they had had experience of the
inconvenience of having one only copy, in the loss of that copy, which being
found again by Hilkiah the Priest, made King Josiah to rend his clothes, at the
hearing of those things written in the Law) and accordingly we find, before
the coming of our Savior, many Synagogues erected in foreign places, and the
books of the Law, and the Prophets in every Synagogue, read every Sabbath day;
now every dispersion increased the number of Synagogues and Books. And besides
the first captivity of the Tribes carried into Media by the Assyrians, we shall
find them, even after they had license from Cyrus to return, continuing still
abroad, and upon many new occasions again dispersed: those that read over
sacred Histories and profane, shall find them seated in most of the Eastern
Countries adjacent Judea, or not far distant from thence: the Macedonians
invited them to Alexandria, the cruelties of Antiochus, the civil wars of
the Asmonaei, the armies of Pompey, and Lossius, drove many of them from their
habitations: the cities of Cyrene, of Asia, Macedonia, and Lycaonia, the
Islands of Cyprus and Crete, and diverse others, even Rome it self, they were
all of them furnished with Temples and Synagogues of the Jews: now so it is
that the Books of all these did agree together amongst themselves, which they
could not have done if any, and not all of them should have been corrupted; and
that all of them should either casually or by design be corrupted (besides that
no end can appear to encourage such a design) the thing it self makes it
impossible.

Besides, had any such thing been, they must, to make a correspondence, have
corrupted likewise the Septuagint translation, which for almost three hundred
years before our Savior was extant in Egypt; that I speak nothing of the
Chaldee Paraphrase extant before the time of our blessed Savior: so then, as
far as the nature of a moral subject will admit, we have showed, as from the
causes, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament could not be corrupted.

Now as from the signs we have likewise powerful arguments, that to our
Saviors time, they were uncorrupted, because our Savior never discovers any
corruption of the Text, which certainly he would not have spared, at such times
as he taxes the Scribes and Pharisees of making the Law of God of none effect,
by their traditions.

Now, that the Hebrew Canon has not been corrupted since our Saviors time, we
have this sign likewise, that never any of the ancient Fathers have, in their
greatest heat of zeal against the Jews accused them of such corruption, though
Justin Martyr complain of wronging the Septuagints Translation; and certainly
if they should have corrupted them upon design, either before or since, it
would have been in all those places which conclude against them, for Christ,
(the true Messiah, that stumbling stone, upon which they stumbled and fell:)
but those do remain unaltered.

The truth is, to them were committed the Oracles of God, and they have, by the
visible ordination of the providence of God, discovered so much care and
diligence that way, as is not to be found to have been bestowed upon any other
writings under heaven: witness the Critical notes of their Massoreth, which
gives an account of the numbers of of letters in every Book almost, and almost,
if not altogether, of every various lection. I conclude then that they have
never been corrupted.

SECT. IX.
That in our Saviors time these books were true, and consequently were the
Word of God.

BUt we, in our Saviors time they were true, and the Word of God, as appears
by our Saviors testimony, and the testimony of the Apostles, who still refer
to them as being of divine inspiration, as being the truth and Word of God,
their using the testimony, almost of every particular Book, as anthenticall,
their disputations founded upon their Authority. Particulars in this kind are
so many, and so plain, that without any more speaking I will conclude, that we
are to receive the Old Testament upon the credit of the New; and the New
Testament (as I have formerly demonstrated) upon greater reason far then any
other writings in the world; and consequently that we must receive the Books of
the Old Testament upon the same Authority.

We have already discovered some of those many reasons, whereupon we are to
receive the Books of the Old Testament and the New, under the credit and
authority of the Word of God. Besides those whereupon I have insisted there are
many more; some of them taken from the quality of the writers, some from the
manner of the writings, the former showing that those men, from whom they
proceeded, were not fit persons to devise such things, they being many if not
most of them, simple and unlearned men; the latter manifesting that such things
are not, of their nature, obvious to be devised, because they transcend the wit
and invention of man; the Majesty and simplicity of the style, the concord and
harmony, the end and scope, the power and efficacy, the antiquity; besides the
Testimony of the Spirit in the hearts of men.

But the evidence of truth no way depending upon the multitude of arguments or
reasons, and all of these being insisted on in some or other of those Authors
which are obvious, I shall at this time finish what remains, of that which at
the first I propounded, which was to show, That as there are many and important
reasons, moving wise men to receive them, so there neither are nor can be any
sufficient arguments on the contrary, to make men to refuse them.

SECT. X.
That there is no reason to disbeleeve the Scriptures. Objections briefly
proposed and answered: first general Objections against the whole.

It Is true indeed, that many both of old and later times, have refused either
all or several parts of the holy Canon, and it is not to be hoped or expected,
that they should ever be generally received by all the world: there must be
heresies, and amongst the rest there always have been, and sure there ever
will be Antiscripturians: the greatest part of the world have ever lived
according to sense and appetite; and to prove that de facto it is denied, is
not to manifest that there is reason why it is so; yet seeing there are of
those disputing and theoreticall heretics, as well as practical, to conceal
or dissemble the arguments, which are alleged against the truth, it would be
to betray the cause that we have undertaken, and give occasion for some
Jealousy, that their Objections are unanswerable.

To come then to an issue, some have rejected All, by reason of
Impossibilities. Repugnances. Mutations. Parts, accusing them as Sine nomine,
Authoris. Dubitati, Ab intrinseco, matter

Those who refuse the whole Scriptures, they are some of them Atheists, others
profess themselves Christians, and yet do deny the authority of the written
word, pretending to private and secret illuminations, as the last rule of their
actions: the design of my discourse being against the former, I shall only
intimate the frenzy of the later. They pretend, that that, which we call the
written word, is not the Word of God, because 1. The Word of God is God
himself. 2. Christ is the Word of God. 3. The Letter kills. 4. The Word of God
is spirit and life.


These are the arguments which, by some Enthusiasts, are used against the
written Letter. And for answer to them, we may only observe, how, by arguing
against the authority of the Scriptures, these men do tacitly assert it; for
taking their arguments out of it, and proceeding no further, either by reason
or revelation, to the discovery of their antecedents, but barely resting in the
recital of those words which are there written, they do resolve all the power
and force of their argument into the authority of those very writings which
they would impugn, and consequently they do at once deny and grant, the
authority of the Scripture; which is to deserve the Epithete, which is given
them, of fanaticall Enthusiasts.

That the Word of God is God himself (taking the Word of God for the immanent
act of the divine understanding) is indeed a truth attainable by other
principles, by those I mean from whence the absolute simplicity of the divine
nature is attainable. But that Christ is the eternal word of the Father, and
that there is such a spirit and life, as the argument does imply, and that
there is a divine and mystical meaning of that letter of the word, they either
owe their faith unto that word, or else they have not done very charitably in
concealing those ways whereby they come to know it, and very improvidently in
giving occasion for us to believe, that their pretenses of illumination are but
pretenses.

Now for that other party, who do reject the Scriptures (the whole bulk of
them) their Arguments are these, I. Because they deliver things impossible, and
consequently incredible, and so they are not to be believed. 2. Because they
deliver things repugnant, and contradictory to one another. 3. Because the
Books of the Old Testament are doubtful, by reason of the differences of the
Text and Margent. And the Books of the New Testament are likewise uncertain, by
reason of the various readings of several copies.


1. Those things which the Atheistical party use to object, against the
authority of the Scripture as impossible and incredible, they are the miracles
performed by Moses and the Prophets, by Christ and his Apostles, but if we
shall attentively consider them, we shall find, that they do include in them
no contradiction, nor any absolute impossibility of the performance; the utmost
that can be justly concluded from them, is, that they transcend the ordinary
course of the dispensation of that providence, which orders the world, and
administers the laws of the government thereof. But, upon the hearing or
reading of extraordinary events, presently, (though they have been sufficiently
attested) to disbeleeve them, upon conceit of reason to the contrary, discovers
palpably the want of the exercise of that reason, whereto they so much pretend:
for a man to deny, such matters of fact as he is not able to comprehend the
reason of, must either suppose the party, to know the causes of all appearances
in nature, or conclude him guilty of childish, and ridiculous incredulity. We
have before demonstrated the Omniscience, and the Omnipotence of the Divinity;
and that being, as has been actually proved, clearly and evidently
demonstrable, for the contemptible wit, and reasoning of man to prescribe
limits, and bounds to that power and knowledge, is no less, then to own the
acknowledgement of a contradiction, by professing that, to be limited and
finite, which the natural principles of our understandings, will force us to
acknowledge of necessity to be immense and infinite.

It cannot be thought a thing impossible, that God should either raise the
dead, or command the Sun to stand still in Gibea, by him that considers, what
it is to be the original of life, or to have created the Universe with the
word of his eternal power, the things which are impossible with men, they are
possible with God: and consequently we having before concluded the vanity and
madness of Atheism, shall need to say no more, to evince the frivolous
weakness of this Argument, from the impossibilities.

2. As for those repugnances and contradictions, which some men vainly please
themselves, imagining they have found them in the Scripture, if they be well
examined, they will be proved to be but so many instances of the weakness, or
inadvertancy of the Objectors those which have been made against the Old
Testament, have long ago been found by Rabbi Moses ben Maimoni not to have
taken in all those conditions, which have been by Philosophers discovered to be
required to make up a perfect contradiction, that is, that contrary assertions
be made of the same thing at the same time, according to the same part, or
motion, or apprehension: and the same has been lately performed by Manasseh
ben Israel, in his conciliator for the Old Testament. It has likewise, for the
New; been long since performed by many of the Fathers, and of late by diverse
of all professions, Papists, Protestants and their several subdivisions. The
matters of Doctrine are easily reconciled by distinguishing the notions of
several terms, so for example, as faith is said by Paul to justify, and works
by Jame., by distinguishing of Justification; and the matters of History are
reconciled by attending to times, and places, persons, and forms of speech.
Thus are the differences cleared, which are about the Genealogies of our
Savior, delivered by Saint Matthew and Saint Luke. The truth is, there could
never any considerable difference, either in matter of doctrine or history, be
urged against the Scriptures; yet if some slight and inconsiderable
circumstances should seem to us so to differ that we could not reconcile them,
it ought rather to confirm our belief, then any way to shake it; seeing it is
the custom of those who design to impose upon men's belief, so to contrive all
circumstances as they may be sure to have no difference discovered.

Such is, in truth, the agreement and harmony of all these authors, so distant
in time, in place, in institution, as is not to be found in any other authors
in the world, though of the same sect, either in Philosophy, Law, Physic, or
any other faculty; nor yet in any one man with himself; as might be manifested,
if either this time or place required it. And so instead of an objection to
shake us, we have found an argument to confirm us.

3. The third Argument or objection against the whole Books of Scripture is
taken from the Keri and Chetib of the Old Testament; and from the various
readings of the New; from those they conclude them to be doubtful, from these
corrupted.

Now the former of these is answered by the Jewish RR Isaac Jacob of old, Elias
Levita of later times, who do deny the consequence of that Argument, and make
it manifest that those were added for signification of some mystery, and not
because the Text was doubtful: and for proof of their assertion they prove,
that the Books of Haggai, Zachary, Malachy, Daniel and Ezra, had those
marginall notes added to them by their authors, who all were members of the
Synagoga magna, and made the consignation of the Jewish Canon: these could not
be doubtful of the sense of their own writings; and consequently from those
marginall notes, the doubtfulnesse of the Old Testament can no way justly be
concluded.

As touching the various readings of some places of the New Testament, we
cannot deny but that through the failings of some Scribes, there are found in
the most ancient copies of those books some differences of letters, or some few
syllables, or words; but this we deny, that those are sufficient, from whence
to conclude the books not to be credited; for upon the same reason it will be
concluded that no Book in the world is to be credited, unless they can be
manifested to be exempted from the slips and failings of transcribers. Nay, the
consideration of those various readings, are very strong arguments that the
substance of the writings are incorrupted, and that they were never changed
upon design, seeing the differences that are do no way infer any difference,
either in the Doctrine or History of the Testament: it was of the favor and
mercy of God to preserve to his Church those various readings, that by
comparing them together, and likewise with the rest of the holy Scriptures,
both the true sense and the true reading of them might at once be manifested.

SECT. XI.
Objections against particular parts, briefly proposed and answered.

NOw Objections, against particular books of either Testament, will be found
likewise inconsiderable: it is true that many of them have been either doubted
of or rejected by some men, but those who have pertinaciously refused them,
have done it rather out of the interest of their passions and corrupt
affections, then out of judgment. Briefly,

Ecclestastes has been rejected by some as Written by Solomon in his dotage,
Placing felicity in senses.



But the first of these can no way be proved; nay, the contrary appears by the
whole tenor of it well considered; and the latter is evidently confuted by the
conclusion, Fear Cod, etc. for God shall bring, etc.

The Canticles have been taken for a Love-song, compiled in a complement to
Pharaohs daughter; but it had been but a slender complement to tell her, that
her eyes were like fish-pools, and her nose like the tower of Lebanon that
looks toward Damascus.

The Prophecy of Daniel has been charged by Porphyrius, to have been a History
written after the things were done, written in the time of Antiochus, and
imposed upon the world under the credit of the name of Daniel: but, beside the
testimony of our Savior, it appears out of History, that that Prophecy was
showed to Alexander the great, in his advance toward Jerusalem, 150. years
before Antiochus.

New Testament.
Hebrews was rejected by the Latin; Church because the Author was unknown,
and because of some passages especially seeming to favor the Novatian herefie.
I answer.

1. It is not the name of an author which gives credit to his Writings, but
that character of his person which is drawn from his abilities and integrity.
Now these were never doubted of in that Author.

2. Those passages are very well to be understood otherwise, then in favor of
the Novatians.

3. It was ever received in the Greek Church, and recited amongst the
Canonical Books by the Councels of Nice, Laodicea, and Carthage.

4. If we are to believe, the Western Church had grounds to doubt of the credit
of it, at such time as it did not admit it, we may as well believe, that that
Church had reasons which satisfied them of the authority of it, at such time as
they did receive it.

The Epistles of Saint James, 2d of St Peter, the second and third of St John,
Jude, Revelations, have all of them been doubted of, for some time; by some
parties whether or no they were indeed written by those authors, under whose
names they are now received: but though they were some time doubted by some,
they were always received by others; and those Churches which did refuse them,
so long as they were unsatisfied, are to be supposed to have been satisfied
when they did receive them; and so we ought to give as great, if not greater
cedit to them, then to such others as had not been questioned; inasmuch as that
which has been deliberated, and debated, and then decided, is to be credited,
as well as that which silently has passed on unquestioned.

And now I have with brevity (as I suppose) congruous to such an Essay as I
intended, made evident the last assertion which I undertook, That to
disbeleeve, either the whole body of Scripture, or any part of it, there is no
reason; or not any sufficient reason.

(...)

