THE MIRACLES Performed by MONEY; A POEM.

By the Author of the Humors of a Coffee-house.

It Is Virtue, Wit, and Worth, and all,
That Men Divine, and Sacred call:
For what is Worth in any thing,
But so much Money as it will bring?
Hudibras part 2d. Canto 1st. LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by the
Booksellers of London and Westminster: 1692.

EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO Sir Martin Monyless.
SInce my very good Friend, but now under the Hatches,
And as poor as a Seller of Brooms and Card-matches,
Thou have left off thy Quibbles, thy Songs, and thy Catches.
Prithee leave off thy Sober dull Plodding and thinking,
And into thy Pockets get Ready and Chink in,
And then I Will allow thee a Time for good Drinking.
For till then be thy Parts never so Modish and Florid,
Till with Darby's and Smelts thou thy Purse have well stored,
There Is a Fool in thy Face, and an Ass in thy Forehead.
What a Pox do I care for a Monyless Fellow?
If he speaks never so Witty he seems but to Bellow,
If he wants the true Blessings of White and of Yellow.
Till thou Money have got, thy Brisk Humor will falter,
Till thou have it never spare neither Temple nor Altar,
But a Word by the by, Have a care of the Halter.
But let happen What will, get some Money how er'e,
Cog, Flatter, Dissemble, Lie, Swear, and Forswear,
And attempt any Action a brave Fellow dare.
Be a Pimp, or a Pander, a Sharper, or Bully,
A Decoy, a Trappan, or a Counterfeit Cully,
And never give ore till thou'st done the trick fully.
Swear old Men are young, and Queen Blowze is a Beauty,
Undo pretty Virgins, tempts Wives from their Duty,
And be true to all Interests you think will be true to ye.
Out-rail a Bilk't Coachman, Out-banter a Wit,
Out-lye a News-writer, out-promise a Cit,
Strive thy self to outdo if the Thing thou can hit.
More Women deceive than did Wickham of late,
Religion or Bawdy or any thing Prate,
And put on all Shapes so thou get but the Plate.
Prithee never want Money what ever may lack thee,
For when thou have Money no Friends will forsake thee,
But if thour't without it the Devil may take thee.
Thy Friend (if thou will be thine own)
Tom of Ten Thousand.

WHat mighty Magic does the World betwitch,
That all Mankind thus Covet to be Rich?
Daily plough up the raging stormy Main,
From East to West, and all in chase of Gain;
Climb highest Hills, through sandy Deserts go,
Over partcht Plains, and Mountains clad in Snow;
The various Heats and Colds of Climates scorn,
Of both the Tropicks, Cancer, Capricorn;
Deprive their Nights of Rest, their Days of Pleasure,
Grow Hoary-headed in pursuit of Treasure;
Swear and Forswear, Equivocate and Lie,
Stick at no Oaths nor blackest Perjury;
Sons kill their Fathers, Brother fight with Brother,
And all Mankind prove Wolves to one another;
Friends sheath their Swords in Bosoms of their Friends,
When with kind Love their Interest contends;
With wild confusion all the World spread over,
Occasioned by the search of Shining Oar:
The Secret would some Spirit but unfold,
From whence proceeds this mighty thirst of Gold?
Cease Foolish Muse, thy Admiration cease,
Or to know nothing of the World confess;
For it is a certain Maxim plain and clear,
Want of a Blessing makes a Blessing dear:
What Monied Man wrackt with Gout, would not,
With a young healthful Beggar change his Lot?
With wholesome Scraps a vigorous health maintain,
Rather than lie on Velvet Couch in pain?
If Love of Money be the Root of Evil,
The want of it is certainly the Devil:
A Truth which ever was and ever will
Be known to all the Brethren of the Quill:
Their Purses like Sprink-tides are sometimes swelled,
And to the Brims with smiling Angels filled:
But Tides of Ebb do soon their Pockets drain,
And then they are at low Water mark again.
Since then it is not by the Gods allowed,
Poets should always find so great a good,
We Will rail at what is not within our Power,
As did the Fox, who swore the Grapes were sour;
Recount the various Wonders hourly done,
By Moneys strange effective Force alone,
And the surprising Miracles unfold,
Done by the Virtue of Almighty Gold.
Room for my Lord there -- be uncovered Slave,
Bear back ye Vermin, cries a saucy Knave,
Walking before a Spark whose vast Estate
Did's Title first, and then Respect create:
Whose Grandfather perhaps was one so civil,
For Gold to go directly to the Devil,
That his dear Honey suckle Babe might be
A Knight, or else a Man of Quality:
See how he struts -- observe the humble grin,
Which by his Flatterers is returned again;
Mark how they bow with most fantastic cringes,
As if their Bodies moved by Springs and Hinges.
A supple Slave then whispers in his Ear,
My Lord, Gad judge me, if you don't appear,
The most accomplished Person in the World,
Your Shape so clean, your Wigg so neatly Curled;
Nay you are the only Man at Court, which ere
Knew how to Dress -- By Gad my Lord you wear
Your Clothes with such becoming Negligence,
As if you only put them on by Chance;
The Ladies all have laid their Hearts at stake,
And sigh and languish only for your sake.
At this my Lord affords a gracious Smile,
Listening to's fulsom Flattery all the while.
By this time to attend his Levee, comes
A needy Poet, twirling of his Thumbs,
And looking simply humbly craves, my Lord,
The mighty Honor would be pleased t'afford,
As to become a Patron to his Play,
That is, in other words, be pleased to pay
For fulsom Praise, cramp't in a florid Story,
In the Epistle called Ded'catory:
By a small nod my Lord assents he will,
Which does the scribbling Wretch will pleasure fill:
Homeward he goes by studious Arts to raise,
For gilded Quality some tinsel Praise.
Nay too too often do Men of Wit and Parts,
Well read in Men, in Languages and Arts,
Expose, for want of necessary Pence,
To monied Blockheads, their Immortal Sense;
Who by that Means acquire a lasting Fame,
And to Posterity transmit a Name;
Which in Oblivions Records else had stood,
With Names of Millions dead before the Flood.
Mong Wonders to which Money makes pretense,
It Is strange it should supply the want of Sense!
Yet is an Idiot by Fortune blessed,
With a full Pocket, or a well crammed Chest;
And by the means of his so large Increase,
Made Knight o'th Shire, or Justice of the Peace:
At Quarter Sessions when he sits in State,
Among his Brethren, to Assess and Rate,
Tho nere so dull and flat, yet what he says,
Is of Bystanders sure to gain the Praise;
It Is much if when their Commendations Swell,
They say not -- Spoken like an Oracle.
Or if in mixed Converse, where Business, News,
Or other Talk does Company amuse,
The Man should chancc to Interfere and Prate,
(For nothing noted but his great Estate)
If by the Hour he Nonsense should discourse,
(Than which there cannot be a greater Curse
In Conversation) yet they listen all,
And greedily snatch up the Words which fall
From's Mouth, as if they were in modern Sense,
The choicest Pearls and Flowers of Eloquence.
But if on him the Itch of Scribbling seize,
And's labring Thoughts can never be at ease,
Till he in Print has to the World put forth,
A Piece (as he esteems) of mighty Worth,
Be the Subject what it will of any kind,
It will not fail a vast Applause to find;
For there was never a Scribbling Monied Fop,
But found some greater Fool to cry him up;
If not much Prais d, it will at least be said,
The Author wrote for Pleasure, not for Bread.
Is Verse the Subject? Though each Stanza chimes,
With as much Spirit as do Belmen's Rhimes;
Though ten times duller every Line appears,
Than Crowns late Daeneids, or John Bunyans Verse:
Yet his flat Nonsense will the World prefer,
Before the Lines of Cowley, Rochester,
Waller or Denham, or the late admired
Oldham, who wrote as with a Muse inspired.
If Politics his empty Pages swell,
He understands much more than Matchivel;
And does from newer Principles derive ye
The grounds of Rule than Hobbs in Book de Cive:
Nay, he how far the very bounds can show,
Prerogative and Privilege may go;
And he has often, though t'has been in's Power,
Declined the Place of Privy Councellor.
Does History amuse his idle Hours?
He does with more Solidity discourse
Of that grave Subject, than can ere be read,
In Works of Baker, Speed or Hollinshed.
If to mixed Subjects he his Pen applies,
What ere he writes is sure to find success;
His Flatterers will every thing admire,
Each Line, each Sentence, sets their Souls on fire;
All is Divine, there is not a Word amiss,
With joy they shake, and weep with tenderness:
By this his Vanity so high is flown,
He thinks no Works so shining as his own:
If you in number of his Friends he takes,
Of's Works to you he then a Present makes;
For which, as it is the Fashion now a days,
You must be sure the new Composure praise,
And tell him, that the sottish World had lain
In Ignorance, had not his Learned Pen
The Foggs their Reason clouded, soon dispelled,
And with rich thoughts their empty judgments filled:
Tho after all it is these Scriblers fate,
(For little else but noisy Praise they get)
To have their very Works so much esteemed,
By Flatterers, to be at last condemned,
To wrap up Spice, Tobacco, Soap and Plumbs,
Under Pyes put, or wipe the Readers B -- s;
And thus each lofty Line, each mighty Thought,
Is to its final Execution brought.
If one by Fortune plac d in low Degree,
Reduced to Want and needy Poverty,
Living in Country Village all alone,
His Name to Parish-Register scarce known,
Should by some strange and unexpected Fate,
Become the Heir to Money or Estate,
And is, his part the better to maintain,
Ambitious to be thought a Gentleman;
Though by the ancient Stock from whence he came,
He was a Beggar both by Sire and Dam;
Yet Learned Heralds can for Money show,
From some rich Family he first did grow:
Tho, for some time it may have been obscure,
His Ancestors came in with the Conqueror.
If store of Or and Argent he has got,
He shall not fail to have 'em in his Coat;
Though Dormant Couchant long his Name did rest,
He shall have Lion Rampant for his Crest;
And if heel pay but briskly for the thing,
From John of Gaunt his Pedigree they will bring
Thus store of Money and a vast Estate,
Can of a Clown a Gentleman create.
But now another Scene appears in view,
A Scene which known Experience says is true:
Suppose then Reader, that my Friend and I,
Even in the days of Childish Infancy
Such Freedoms take, we afterward improve,
To highest Offices of Friendly Love;
One Soul our different Bodies seems to move,
Alike we hate, alike approve, and love:
All lawful Pleasures we alike partake,
And each is free to Dye for to others sake;
No Task thought difficult, nor Danger great,
May firmer Unions of our Souls create;
And what crowns all, we both have Money store,
He vastly Rich, I far from being-Poor.
But if by Fortune's strange capricious Spite,
On my Estate some sweeping Mischief light,
Some raging Fire my blooming Hopes prevent,
Or Loss by Sea, or other Accident
Strips me of all those Riches once I had,
My Diet mean, my self more meanly clad,
Pensive and Thoughtful all day long I walk,
And to my self in broken Murmurs talk,
Having no Comfort but this Thought alone,
Tho Fortune's fled, yet Friendship is not gone;
Unwilling yet of Friends to ask Relief,
For there is a kind of Modesty in Grief,
As yet within the compass of my Breast,
My Wants, my Troubles, and Afflictions rest;
Yet if at last my cruel Creditors,
Join all their Forces, and unite their Powers
To crush me, and by Sergeants rude Arrest,
I Am safely locked in Ludgate's stony Chest;
But yet in Prison give my Thoughts some scope,
And entertain my self with starving Hope,
That my rich Friend, since now I stand in need,
Will prove a real, cordial Friend indeed;
I write; no Answer comes: I write ag'en,
Till I to Stumps have almost worn my Pen;
No Friend appears, my dying Hopes to cherish,
There I may Lie and Rot, and Starve and Perish;
At last, when I Have more Messengers employed,
Then patient Job with their sad Tales anoy'd,
He sends -- (for should himself in Person come,
He Would be Infected in a Prison-room)
And lets me know, that he is very sorry
From Walls of Stone, to hear my dismal Story,
But had poor luckless I two days before
Sent the sad News, he could with mighty store
Have eased my wants, and tho his heart was willing,
He could not now equip me with a Shilling;
For on the Morning of that very Day
I sent, he would paid all is ready Cash away:
Or else -- when he the Message has read over,
Pretends he never heard my Name before:
Lord how I wonder who this Man should be,
That sends this sad complaining Note to me?
I knew indeed a Wealthy Man o'th Name,
But cannot guess the Person whence this came:
Though he and I a thousand times have tried
Pleasures, when sailing with a Monied Tide,
But now my Person's utterly forgot,
And I in Gaol condemned alive to rot:
Strange Logic! Can the Walls of Prison frame,
And prove the same Man is not now the same?
But if by some most unexpected fate,
By some Friend's Death I Am left a good Es^tate,
And from Confinement sally once again,
Of my Acquaintance, what a mighty Train,
Who either shunned or knew me not before,
Come cringing now, and wait upon my Door!
In Antichamber wait till I shall rise,
And with their Wishes my good Fortune bless,
While each one strives to do what ere he can,
For me the fortunate, the happy Man;
With folding Arms my Body they entwine,
Their Fortunes, Services, their Souls are mine,
With winged haste at my Commands they run,
All court the Rising, none the Setting Sun.
If Gold in Friendship can such Wonders show,
In Love, what strange amazing Things 'twil do?
Not Wit nor Virtue half so much can move,
As powerful Gold in Arts of making Love:
A thousand Accidents tempt Flesh and Blood,
But powerful Guinea cannot be withstood,
For it is a Truth which Mankind will confess,
That ready Money speaks all Languages.
Am I than AEsop more deformed in Shape,
A prating, chatt'ring, laughing, amorous Ape,
And justly can pretend no other Sense,
But noisy Nonsense and Impertinence;
If I with Guineas have my Pockets Lind,
What signifies the Shape of Corpse or Mind?
The Ladies will Adore any Person more,
Than that of Handsome F -- g, heretofore.
I am their Dearest Dear, their Fubbs their Honey
Their Angels nay their very Heaven for Money:
I am more welcome to their Longing Arms,
Than is a Man possessed with Thousand Charms,
Of Person, Birth, Wit, Valor, tho I want
Each Quality, I am their Darling Saint.
For Money, Husbands will their Wives Decoy,
And teach 'em to Commit the Guilty Joy;
Ride out of Town, that the Gallant may come
To taste forbidden Pleasures in his Room.
And if he unawares should chance to be
Spectator of their Amorous Privacy,
Is Deaf and Blind, and cannot hear nor see;
Nay some Obliging Cuckolds will do more,
Bring the Spark home and after hold the Door,
Think Horns no Shame, if Money by them come,
And Boast and Glory in their Cuckoldom.
Mothers for this their Daughters will betray
To Man of Quality, if he but pay.
With Charming Guineas in the Balance laid,
What a poor Trifle is a Maidenhead?
It Is found and lost, it is lost and found again,
As is the Cully found amongst monied Men:
To those will pay for such forbidden Crimes,
It shall be sold 'bove thirty several times,
And the cracked Girl more timorous appear,
Than Lucrece was when Tarquin Ravished her.
Too well this Infamous deceit is known:
To the Lewd Bawds of this Luxurious Town,
When a Raw Country Girl away they lead,
And turn the Penny by her Maidenhead.
How many Jilts, Cracks, Prostitutes and Whores
Their Sexes scandal, Natures common Shores,
Are there in Town (sad Wretches as they are)
Who once were very virtuous, young and Fair?
And who had virtuous been this very Hour,
Had it not been for Gold's Almighty Power.
Gold first their Blindfold Reason led astray,
(For who its Mighty Power can disobey?
Gold to forbidden Paths First brought them in,
And Gold alone informd 'em how to Sin.
The Greatest Blessing which the God's have sent,
T'inrich Mankind withal, is True Content,
Which humble Poor as well as Rich enjoy;
Life's only Cordial, Life's true Solid Joy,
Yet this rare Jewel is too often Sold,
And every Day Exchanged for Shining Gold.
Can it be thought an old Gray withered Sot,
Who has in's Grave one Foot already got,
With Palsies, Aches, Rheumes, and Gout oppressed,
No Pith in's Back, nor Vigor in his Breast,
Can be a welcome Present to the Arms
Of a Young Creature blessed with Thousand Charms?
Yet this we see is almost Daily done,
And fair young Phillis, by old Damon won;
Whilst other Shepherds Witty Gay and Young,
Who by her side have tuned their Pipes and Sung,
Wanting the Blessing of a large Estate,
Which Settlement and Jointure may Create,
Are slighted -- whilst the Youthful Charming Bride,
Lies by an old Man's unperforming Side.
The Price of Beauty what Man does not know?
Alas the Value ont is fallen so low,
Each petty Chapman now with Purse in Hand,
Has it at Minutes Warning to Command.
Women like Books and Pictures now a Days,
Are put to Sale, and who the Price can raise,
Not he whose Merits decently can Crave 'em,
No, no, the Lucky He bids most shall have 'em:
Youth, Wit and Valor will not now prevail:
But yet Almighty Money cannot fail.
With what Impatience have I often seen,
A Youthful Bride, who never saw Eighteen,
Running with nimble haste to opening Door,
To meet her Good old Man of Sixty four,
Clap her Warm, Soft, Plump Rosy Cheek to his,
And nestle through his Beard to get a Kiss?
Play with her Hand upon his Grisly Chin,
And softly say, my Dear where have you been?
Well, you are unkind, a Naughty Man I vow,
I thought you would been at home two Hours ago,
Dinner's quite spoiled -- But yet for you my Dear,
I have reserved some Lobsters and Caveir
I almost Longd to see you -- He mean while,
For these Endearments cannot afford a Smile,
But in his Clownish way says -- you have your Will,
But Pleasure must give Place to Business still:
Gripewell and I have got this very Morning,
A thousand Pounds -- a Sum not worth the Scorning,
And tho the Times are Cloudy like the Weather,
At honest Ned's took one half pint together.
Come come -- and there perhaps he leads her in,
A Sight would almost tempt a Man to Sin,
And from him, since he values not the Pleasure,
To snatch the Lovely Young and Tempting Treasure.
For Money thus will Virgins throw their Charms
Within the Circle of an Old Man's Arms;
Though Frost to Fruits, and Mildew to the Corn,
To Armor Rust, or Fits to Child new Born,
Cannot more Fatal and Destructive prove,
Than Age to Beauty, Impotence to Love:
Her youthful Heat new Blood in him inspires,
While he by's Coldness Damps her warmer Fires,
His aged Limbs do Gout or Palsy Rack;
She must by Sympathy his Ills partake,
Becoming in short time (a thing most Common)
A Sickly Pining Drooping old young Woman.
Shift we the Scene now to a close Alcove,
And see a youthful Spark pretending Love,
(For sure no Man can be so void of Sense
To think it is any thing but mere pretense)
To an old withered Beldam of threescore,
Of swelling Bags blessed with a Numerous store:
What Mighty Wonders cannot Money do?
Tho She Deformed as Mother Shipton show,
He Gripes her Palsied Hand, and vows and swears
No Beauty at the Court with her compares,
So soft her Skin, her Eyes such Luster hold,
Nature designed she never should grow old,
While she with Smiles, (which are indeed Grimace)
Adding more Wrinkles to her Wainscoat Face,
Half opening of her Mouth to her new Lover,
Fearing she should the want of Teeth discover,
Cries, truly Sir, I wonder you should spy,
One Charm in me to please your curious Eye:
I Am old, it is true, but yet there was a time,
Tho it is long since, when I was in my Prime:
This Face had Charms -- Ah Madam! pray forbear,
Say not it had, they are still too plainly there,
Says he, and pushing on his amorous Rage,
Tells her, that Wine and Beauty gain by Age.
She overcome, poor Thing, by his soft Words,
At last to take him for her Spouse affords:
To Church they go, on which the World may say
(That truly now December Weds with May;
While he receives a Pension during Life,
To Do the Drudg'ry of an old Rich Wife.
Twere Endless, should I but attempt to Run,
Over all the Miracles by Money done.
What Mighty Magic is there in a Fee,
To turn the very Scales of Equity?
Wrong shall be Right, and Right again be Wrong,
If but with Gold you touch the Lawyers Tongue,
And the Coifd Sergeant, when at Bar he pleads,
Shall speak or true or false, as Guinea leads;
And Votes of Scarlet Judges bought and sold,
If purchased by the Mighty Power of Gold.
The Roman Church her self is not ashamed,
To say the Poor, and only they are Damned;
The Rich shall stay short time in Purgatory,
But no poor Wretch directly went to Glory:
No, he must fry in Purgatory Kitchen,
Till Money can his Soul from thence be fetching.
No College Doctor in his Gilded Coach,
The Cottages of Poor will ere approach.
Phisicians come not where there are no Fees,
None cure or plead in Forma pauperis.
Money what Wonders can it not effect?
Who ever faild that had it, of Respect?
It Will make the Blind Man see, the Lame Man walk,
Make Deaf Men hear, and Dumb Men loudly talk;
It Will make an old Man have a youthful Skin,
And Beldams, old as Aldgate, not Sixteen;
Make Cowards Valiant, and make Blockheads Wise,
And from low Dunghills make the ignoble Rise;
Get Pardons for, and Licenses to Sin,
Tempt Virgins, and unwary Youth draw in;
Depress the Good and Virtuous with Disgrace,
And set up Vice to Lord it in their place:
But ah! what Pen its Miracles can tell,
Which Heaven purchases and saves from Hell?
FINIS.

