A JOURNEY TO SCOTLAND, GIVING A CHARACTER OF THAT Country, the People and
their Manners.

By an English Gentleman.

WITH A LETTER From an OFFICER there, AND A POEM On the same SUBJECT.

LONDON: Printed in the Year M DC XCIX.

A CHARACTER OF SCOTLAND.
IF all our European Travelers direct their Course to Italy, upon the account
of its Antiquity, why should Scotland be neglected, whose wrinkled surface
derives its Original from the Chaos? The first Inhabitants were some Straglers
of the fallen Angels, who rested themselves on the Confines, till their Captain
Lucifer provided places for them in his own Country. This is the Conjecture of
Learned Critics, who trace things to their Originals; and this Opinion was
grounded on the Devil's Brats, yet resident amongst them, (whose foresight in
the events of good and evil, exceeds the Oracles at Delphos) the supposed Issue
of those Pristine Inhabitants.

Names of Countries were not then in fashion, those came not in till Adam's
days, and History (being then in her Infancy) makes no mention of the changes
of that Renowned Country, in that Interval betwixt him and Moses, when their
Chronicle commences, she was then Baptized (and most think with the Sign of the
Cross) by the Venerable Name of Scotland, from Scota, the Daughter of Pharaoh
King of Egypt. Hence came the Rise and Name of these present Inhabitants, as
their Chronicle insorms us, and is not to be doubted of, from diverse
considerable Circumstances; the Plagues of Egypt being entailed upon them, that
of Lice (being a Judgment unrepealed) is an ample Testimony, these loving
Animals accompanied them from Egypt, and remain with them to this day, never
forsaking them (but as Rats leave a House) till they tumble into their Graves.
The Plague of Biles and Blains is hereditary to them, as a distinguishing Mark
from the rest of the World, which (like the Devil's cloven Hoof) warns all Men
to beware of them. The Judgment of Hail and Snow is naturalized and made free
Denison here, and continues with them from the Sun's first ingress into Aries,
till he has passed the 30th. degree of Aquary.

The Plagues of Darkness was said to be thick Darkness, to be felt, which most
undoubtedly these People have a share in, as the word (...) (Darkness) implies;
the Darkness being appliable to their gross and blockish understandings (as I
had it from a Scholar of their own Nation.) Upon these Grounds this Original is
undeniably allowed them, and the Country it self (in Pyramids) resembles
Egypt, but far exceeds them both in bulk and number; theirs are but the
Products of Men's Labors, but these are Nature's own handiwork; and if Atlas
would ease a Shoulder, here he may be fitted with a Supporter.

Italy is compared to a Leg, Scotland to a Louse, whose Legs and engrailed
Edges represent the Promontories and Buttings out into the Sea, with more Nooks
and Angles than the most conceited of my Lord Mayor's Custards; nor does the
Comparison determine here: A Louse preys upon its own Fosterer and Preserver,
and is productive of those Minute-Animals called Nitts; so Scotland, whose
Proboscis joins too close to England, has sucked away the Nutriment from
Northumberland, as the Country it self is too true a Testimony, and from its
opposite A --, has calved those Nitty Islands, called the Orcades, and the
Shetland, (quasi Shite-land) Islands.

The Arms of the Kingdom was anciently a Red-Lyon Rampant, in a Field of Gold,
but Ann. Dom. 787. they had the Augmentation of the double Tressure, for
assisting the French King; but His Majesty's Arms in Scotland is a more
Hysteron Proteron, the Pride of the People being such, as to place the Scots
Arms in the dexter Quarter of the Escutcheon, and make the Unicorn the dexter
Supporter, with the Thistle at his Heel, with a suitable Motto, Nemo me impune
lacessit, true enough; whoever deals with them shall be sure to smart for it:
The Thistle was wisely placed there, partly to show the Fertility of the
Country, Nature alone producing Plenty of these gay Flowers, and partly as an
Emblem of the People, the top whereof having some color of a Flower, but the
bulk and substance of it, is only sharp and poisonous Pricks.

Woods they have none, that suits not with the Frugality of the People, who are
so far from propagating any, that they destroy those they had upon this
politic State Maxim, that Corn will not grow on the Land pestered with its
Roots, and their Branches harbor Birds, Animals above their humble
Conversation, that exceeds not that of hornless Quadrupedes; marry, perhaps,
some of their Houses lurk under the shelter of a plump of Trees (the Birds not
daring so high a presumption) like Hugh Peter's Puss in her Majesty, or an Owl
in an Ivy-bush. Some Firr-Woods there are in the High-lands, but so
inaccessible, that they serve for no other use than Dens for those ravenous
Wolves with two Hands, that prey upon their Neighborhood, and shelter
themselves under this Covert; to whom the sight of a Stranger is as surprising
as that of a Cockatrice. The Valleys for the most part are covered with Beer,
or Bigg, and the Hills with Snow; and as in the Northern Countries the Bears
and Foxes change their Coats into the Livery of the Soil, so here the Moor-Fowl
(called Termagants) turn white, to suit the Sample, though the Inhabitants
still stand to their Egyptian Hue.

They are freed from the charge and encumbrance of Enclosures, the whole being
but one large Waste, surrounded with the Sea: Indeed in many places, you may
see half a Root of Land divided with an Earthen Bank, into many differing
Apartments, according to the quality of Beasts that are to posses^ them.

The whole Country will make up a Park, Forest, or Chase, as you will please to
call it; but if you desire an Account of particular Parks, they are
innumerable, every small House having a few Sodds thrown into a little Bank
about it, and this for the State of the business (forsooth) must be called a
Park, though not a Pole of Land in it.

If the Air was not pure and well refined by its agitation, it would be so
infected with the Stinks of their Towns, and the Streams of their nasty
Inhabitants, that it would be pestilential and destructive; indeed, it is too
thin for their gross Senses, that must be fed with suitable Viands, their Meat
not affecting their distempered Pallats, without it have a damnable hogoe, nor
Music their Ears without loud and harsh Discord, and their Nostrils (like a
Jew's) chiefly delight in the perceptible effluviums of an old Sir R --.

Fowl are as scarce here as Birds of Paradise, the Charity of the Inhabitants
denying harbor to such Celestial Animals, though Gulls and Cormorants abound,
there being a greater sympathy betwixt them. There is one sort of ravenous Fowl
amongst them that has one web foot, one foot suited for Land, and another for
Water; but whether or no this Fowl (being particular to this Country) be not
the lively Picture of the Inhabitants, I shall leave to wiser Conjectures.

Their Rivers, or rather Arms of the Sea are short, few places in Scotland
being above a day's Journey from the Sea, but they are broad, deep and
dangerous pestered, with multitudes of Porposses or Sharks (some of them
perhaps amphibious too, that live more on Land than Water) which destroy their
Salmon, the great Commodity of this Country, which being too good for the
Inhabitants, are barreled up, and converted into Merchandise, etc. The Banks
and Borders, of these Rivers (especially near their Towns) are adorned with
hardy Amazons, though inverted, their Valor being (chiefly) from the waste
downwards, which parts they readily expose to all the dangers of a naked
rencounter. The exercise of their Arms, I should say Feet, is much about
Linen; Sheets are sufferers, a fit receiver is provided (not unlike a shallow
Pulpit to mind them of their Idol Sermons) wherein foul Linen is laid to
suffer Persecution, so they turn up all, and tuck them about their wastes, and
bounce into a Buck-tub, then go their Stock, and belabour poor Lint till there
be not a dry thread on it. Hence came the Invention of Fulling-Mills, the Women
taught the Men, and they put in practice.

The Country is full of Lakes and Loughs, and they well stockt with Islands,
so that a Map thereof, looks like a Pillory-Coat, bespattered all over with
Dirt and rotten Eggs, some pieces of the Shells floating here and there,
representing the Islands.

Their Cattle are only representatives of what are in other Countries, these
being so Epitomized, that it is hard to know what Class they relate to. Their
Horses are hardy, and not without Gall (as some say other Horses are) using
both Tooth and Nail to mischief you; that they may not use more state than
their Masters, they go barefoot, which preserves them from the Gout; and if
Hudibras's Horse had been of this Race, he had not needed a Corn-cutter: Their
Furniture or Harness is all of the same matter, all Wood from Head to Tail,
Bridle, Saddle, Girths, Stirrups and Crupper, all Wood; nothing but a Withy
will bind a Witch, and if these be called Witches, I shall not oppose it, since
by their untoward Tricks, one would guess the Devil to be in them; their
Bridles have not Bits, but a kind of Musrol of two pieces of Wood; their
Crupper is a Stick of a Yard's length, put cross their Docks, both ends thereof
being tied with woven Wood to the Saddle. Their Bed and Board too, is all of
the same dry Straw, and when they have it up, whip on Harness, and away. Their
Neat are hornless, the Owners claiming sole Propriety in those Ornaments, nor
should I deny them their Necklace too, for methinks that hoisted Wood would
mightily become them. Their Sheep too have the same preferment, they are
coupled together near their Master's Palace. Some Animals they have by the name
of Hogs, but more like Porcupines, bristled all over, and these are likewise
fastened to the Freehold by the former Artifice; all their Quadrupedes (Dogs
only excepted, in which sort they much abound) are honored with Wooden
Bracelets about their Necks, Legs, or Arms, etc.

Their Cities are poor and populous, especially Edenborough, their Metropolis,
which so well suits with the Inhabitants, that one Character will serve them
both, viz. High and Dirty. The Houses mount seven or eight Stories high, with
many Families on one Floor, one Room being sufficient for all Occasions,
Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and Shit -- The most mannerly step, but to the
Door, and Nest upon the Stairs. I have been in an Island where it was difficult
to tread without breaking an Egg; but to move here, and not murder a T -- is
next to an impossibility; the whole Pavement is Pilgrim-salve, most excellent
to liquor Shoes withal, and soft and easy for the barefoot Perambulators.
The Town is like a double Comb (an Engine not commonly known amongst them) one
great Street, and each side stockt with narrow Allies, which I mistook for
Common shores; but the more one stirs in a T -- the more it will stink. The
other Cities and Towns are Copies from this Original, and therefore need no
Commentators to explain them; they have seven Colleges (or rather Schools) in
four Universities; the Regents wear what colored Clothes or Gowns they please,
and commonly no Gowns at all, so that it is hard to distinguish a Scholar from
an ordinary Man, since their Learning shines not out of their Noses; the
younger Students wear Scarlet Gowns only in Term time; their Residence is
commonly in the Town, only at School hours they convene in the College to
consult their Oracle Buchanan; their chief Studies are for Pulpit preferment,
to prate out four or five Glasses with as much ease as drink them; and this
they attain to in their stripling years, commencing Masters of Arts (that is
meant only Masters of this Art) before one would judge them fit for the
College; for as soon as they can walk as far as the School (which they will do
very young, for like Lapwings they run with Shells on their Heads) they are
sent thither, where they find no Benches to sit on (only one for the Master)
but have a little Heath and Fadder strewed for them to lie upon, where they
litter together, and chew the Cud on their Fathers Horn books, and in good time
are preferred to the Bible; from this petty School, away with them to the
Grammar School, viz. the College, where in three or four years time they attain
to (their ne plus ultra) the degree of A. M. that is, they can extempore, coin
Graces and Prayers for all Occasions; if you crack a Nut, there is a Grace for
that, drink a Dish of Coffee, Ale or Wine, or what else, he presently furnishes
you with a Grace for the nonce; so if you pare your Nails, go to Stool, or any
other action of like importance, he can as easily suit you with a Prayer, as
draw on a Glove; and the wonder of all is, that, this Prayer shall be so
admirably framed, that it may indifferently quadrate with any occasion, an
excellency no where so common as in this Country. Thus you see the young Man
has commenced and got strength enough to walk to the Kirk and enter the Chair,
where we shall find him anon, after we have viewed the outsides of their
Kirks, some of which have been of Ancient Foundations, and well and regularly
built, but Order and Uniformity is in perfect Antipathy to the humor of this
Nation, these goodly Structures being either wholly destroyed (as at St.
Andrews and Elgin, whore by the remaining Ruins you may see what it was in
perfection) or very much defaced; they make use of no Quires, those are either
quite pulled down, or converted into another Kirk, for it is common here to
have three, four, or five Kirks under one Roof, which being preserved entire,
would have made one good Church, but they could not then have had Preaching
enough in it: Out of one Pulpit now they have thirty Sermons per Week, all
under one Roof, plenty of spiritual Provision, which gusts much better with a
mixture of the Flesh; as you may guess by their Stools of Repentance in every
Kirk, well furnished with Whoremongers and Adulterers of both Sexes. In Venice,
the shadows only of Curtezans are exposed to public view only in Effigic, but
here the Whore in Person has a high place provided her in the view of the whole
Congregation for the benefit of Strangers, who (some think) need not this
direction, but may truck for all Commodities, with the first they meet with.
They use no Service Book, not Whore of Babylon's Smock (as they term a
Surplice) nor decency, nor order in their divine, or rather contumelious
Service. Would a King think himself honored by Subjects, that petitioned him
with Bonnet valed, but cockt his Cap the while his request was granting, while
precious Mr. Presbyter, grimaces, prays or houls, the Monster Rabble vails; but
as soon as Text is taken, Blew-bonnet takes place again, and this Pulpit-prater
is esteemed more than God's Ambassador, having the Holy Spirit at his beck to
prompt him every word he speaks, yet not three sentences of sense together,
such Blasphemy as I blush to mention.

Their Christnings (as all other things) are without Form, only Water poured on
the Infant, and such words used as Sir John's Mephistophilus supplies him with,
and so the Child commences Christian, as good (or better) than the best of
them. Some think Marriage an unnecessary thing amongst them, it being more
generous and usual amongst them to take one another's words; however, it is thus
performed, the young Couple being attended with Tag-rag and Bob-tail, gang to
Kirk, where Mr. Scruple (like a good Casuist) controverts the point in hand to
them, and schools Mr. Bridegroom in his Lesson, then directs his Discourse to
Mrs. Bride, who being the weaker Vessel, ought to have the more pains taken
with her; he chalks out the way she is to walk in, in all its particulars, and
joins their hands, and then let them fall to on God's Name: Home they go with
loud ravishing Bag-pipes, and dance about the Green, till they part by Couples
to repetition, and so put the Rules in practice, and perhaps Sir Roger follows
Mrs. Bride to her Apartment, to satisfy her doubts, where he uses such pungent
and pressing Arguments, as she never forgets as long as she lives.

When any one dies, the Bell-man goes about ringing their Passing Bell, and
acquaints the People therewith, in form following, Beloved Brouthrin, and
Susters, I let yau to wot that their is an fauthful Broothir lawtli departed awt
of this prisant varld, and thy plesuir of Aulmoughti Good (and then he vails
his Bonnet) his Naum is Volli Voodcock, third Son to Jimmoy Voodcock, a
Cordinger; he ligs aut thy sext door vethin thy Nord Gawt, close on thy Nawthwr
Rawnd, and I wod yaw gang to hus burying on Thrusdau before two a Clock, etc.
The time appointed for his Burying being come, the Bell-man calls the Company
together, and he is carried to the Burying-place, and thrown into the Grave (as
Dog-Lyon was) and there is an end of Wolli. Few People are here buried in their
Kirks (except of their Nobility) but in the Kirk Garths, or in a burying place
on purpose, called the Hoof, at the further end of the Town (like our Quakers)
enclosed within a Wall, so that it serves not only as a Burying place, but an
Exchange to meet in; perhaps in one part of it their Courts of Judicature are
kept; in another are Butts to shoot at for Recreation. All agree that a Woman's
Tongue is the last Member she moves, but the Latin Proverb, mulieri ne credas,
etc. seems to prove it after death: I am sure the pride of this People never
leaves them, but follows them to their long homes (I was about to have said, to
the Devil) for the meanest Man must have a Grave stone full fraught with his
own Praises (though he was the vilest Miscreant upon Earth) and miserable
memento mori's, both in English and Latin, nay, Greek too, if they can find a
Greek word for Cordinger, the Calling he was of, and all this in such miserable
Scotch Orthography, that it is hard to distinguish one Language from another.

The Castles of defense in this Country are almost impregnable, only to be
taken by Treachery or long Siege, their Water failing them soonest; they are
built upon high, and almost inaccessible Rocks, only one forced passage up to
them, so that a few Men may easily defend them. Indeed, all the Gentlemen's
Houses are strong Castles, they being so Treacherous one to another, that they
are forced to defend themselves in strong holds; they are commonly built upon
some single Rock in the Sea, or some high Precipice near the mid-land, with
many Towers and strong Iron Grates before their Windows (the lower part
whereof, is only a wooden Shutter, and the upper part Glass) so that they look
more like Prisons than Houses of Reception; some few Houses there are of late
erection, that are built in a better form, with good Walks and Gardens about
them, but their Fruit rarely comes to any perfection. The Houses of the
Commonalty are very mean, Mud-wall and Thatch the best; but the poorer sort
live in such miserable Hutts as never Eye beheld, it is no difficulty to piss
over them; Men, Women and Children pigg altogether in a poor Mouse hole of Mud,
Heath, and such like matter; in some parts where Turf is pentiful, they build
up little Cabbins thereof, with arched Roots of Turf, without a stick of Timber
in it; when the House is dry enough to burn, it serves them for Fuel, and they
remove to another. The Habit of the People is very different, according to the
Qualities, or the Places they live in, as Low-land or High-land Men. The
Low-land Gentry go well enough habited, but the poorer sort go (almost) naked,
only an old Cloak, or a part of their Bed-cloaths thrown over them. The
Highlanders wear slashed Doublets, commonly without Breeches, only a Plad tied
about their Wastes, etc. thrown over one Shoulder, with short Stockings to the
Gartering place, their Knees, and part of their Thighs being naked; others have
Breeches and Stockings all of a piece, of Plad-Ware, close to their Thighs; in
one side of their Girdle sticks a Durk or Skean, about a Foot or half a Yard
long, very sharp, and the back of it filed into diverse notches, whereie they
put Poison; on the other side a brace (at least) of brass Pistols; nor is this
Honor sufficient, if they can purchase more, they must have a long swinging
Sword.

The Women are commonly two handed Tools, strong-posted Timber, they dislike
Englishmen, because they have no Legs, or (like themselves) Posts to walk on;
the meaner go barefoot and bare-head, with two black Elflocks on either side
their Faces; some of them have scarce any Clothes at all, save part of their
Bed clothes pinned about their Shoulders, and their Children have nothing else
on them but a little Blanket; those Women that can purchase Plads, need not
bestow much upon other Clothes, these Coversluts being sufficient. Those of the
best sort that are very well habited in their modish Silks, yet must wear a
Plad over all for the Credit of their Country.

The People are Proud, Arrogant, Vainglorious Boasters, Bloody, Barbarous, and
Inhumane Butchers. Couzenage and Theft is in perfection amongst them, and they
are perfect English haters, they show their Pride in exalting themselves and
depressing their Neighbors. When the Palace at Edinburgh is finished, they
expect his Majesty will leave his rotten House at White Hall, and live
splendidly amongst his nown Contrymen the Scots; for they say that
Englishmen are very much beholden to them that we have their King amongst us.
The Nobility and Gentry Lord it over their poor Tenants, and use them worse
than Gally Slaves; they are all bound to serve them, Men, Women, and Children;
the first Fruits is always the Landlord's due, he is the Man that must first
board all the young married Women within his Lairdship, and their Sons are all
his Slaves, so that any mean Lord will have six, or ten, or more followers,
besides those of his own Name, that are inferior to him, must all attend him
(as he himself must do his Superior, of the same Name, and all of them attend
the Chief) if he receives a Stranger, all this Train must be at his beck, armed
as aforesaid; if you drink with them in a Tavern, you must have all this
Rubbish with you; and if you offend the Lord, his Durk shall soon be sheathed
in your Belly, and after his, every one of his Followers, or they shall suffer
themselves that refuse it, that so they may be all alike guilty of the Murder:
Every Lord (of note) has a Gibbet near his House, and has Power to condemn
and hang any of his Vassals; so they dare not oppose him in any thing, but must
submit to his Commands, let them be never so unjust and tyrannical. There are
too many Testimonies of their Cruelty amongst themselves in their own
Chronicles, Forty of their Kings have been barbaroufly Murdered by them, and
half as many more have either made away themselves for fear of their torturing
of them, or have died miserably in straight Imprisonment. What strange
Butcheries have been committed in their Feuds, some of which are in agitation
at this day, viz. Argile with the Macclans, and Mac Donnels about Mula Islands,
which has cost already much Blood, and is likely will cost much more before it
be decided; their Spirits are so mean, that they rarely Rob, but take away Life
first, lying in Ambuscade, they send a brace of Bullets on Embassy through the
Traveller's Body; and to make sure work, they sheath their Durks in his
liveless Trunk; perhaps, to take off their fire Edges, as new Knives are stuck
in a Bag pudding. If an Highlander be injured, those of his own Name must
defend him, and will certainly have satisfaction from the Offenders: A late
instance whereof was at Inverness, (a considerable Town) where one of the
Macdonnels was slain, but shortly, the chief of the Name came down against the
Town with 1500 Men of his own Name, and threatened to fire the Town, but the
Inhabitants compounded with them for 2000 l.

Their Cruelty descends to their Beasts, it being a Custom in some places to
feast upon a living Cow they tie in the middle of them, near a great Fire, and
then cut Collops of this poor living Beast, and broil them on the Fire, till
they have mangled her all to pieces; nay, sometimes they will only cut off as
much as will satisfy their present Appetites, and let her go till their greedy
Stomachs calls for a new supply; such horrid Cruelty as can scarce be
paralleled in the whole World! Their Theft is so well known, that it needs no
proving, they are forced to keep Watch over all they have, to secure it; their
Cattle are watched day and night, or otherwise they would be overgrown by
morning. In the High-lands they do it publicly before the face of the Sun, if
one Man has two Cows, and another wants, he shall soon supply himself from his
Neighbor, who can find no Remedy for it. The Gentry keep an Armory in their
own Houses, furnished with several sorts of Fire Arms, Pikes and Halberts, with
which they Arm their Followers, to secure themselves from the Rapine of their
Neighborhood. The Lowland Language may be well enough understood by an
Englishman, but the Highlanders have a peculiar Lingua to themselves, which
they call Erst, unknown to most of the Lowland Men, except only in those places
that border on them, where they can speak both: Yet these People are so
currish, that if a Stranger enquire the way in English, they will certainly
answer in Erst, and find no other Language than what is forced from them with a
Cudgel. If Cornelius Agrippa had traveled Scotland, sure Cookery had not been
found in his Vanity of Sciences, such is their singular Skill in this Art, that
they may defy the World to rival them; King James's Treat for the Devil, that
is, a Poll of Ling, a Joll of Sturgeon, and a Pigg, with a Pipe of Tobacco for
digestion, had been very complete, if the ordering thereof had been assigned to
a Cuke of this Country, who can suit every Dish with its proper Hogo, and
bring Corruption to your Table, only to mind Men of Mortality: Their Meat is
Carrion when it is killed, but after it has been a Fortnight perfuming with the
aromatic Air, strained through the calmy Trunks of Flesh-flies, then it passes
the trial of Fire under the Care of one of those exquisite Artists, and is
dish'd up in a Sea of sweet Scotch Butter, and so covered and served hot up to
the Table: O how happy is he that is placed next to it, with a privilege to
uncover it, and receive the hot steams of this dainty Dish, almost sufficient
to cure all Distempers. It will be needless to instance in particulars so plain
and evident to all that have traveled through the Country, that they may
certainly bear away the Bell from all their Neighboring Nations, or indeed
from the whole World. Their Nobility and Gentry have Tables plentifully enough
furnished, but few or none of them have their Meat better ordered: To put one's
Head into their Kitchen doors, is little less than destructive; to enter Hell
alive, where the black Fairies are busied in mangling dead Carcases, and the
Fire and Brimstone, or rather stew and stink, is ready to suffocate you, and
yet (which is strange) these things are agreeable to the humors of the People.
The poorer sort live on Haddock, Whiting, and sour Milk, which is cried up and
down the Streets (Whea buys sawer Milk) and upon the stinking Fragments that
are left at their Lairds Table. Prodigious Stomachs, that like the Gulon, can
feed on their own Excrements, and strain their Meat through their Stomachs, to
have the pleasure of devouring it again!

Their Drink is Ale made of Beer-Malt, and Tunned up in a small Vessel, called
a Cogue; after it has stood a few hours, they drink it out of the Cogue, Yest
and all; the better sort, Brew it in larger quantities, and drink it in wooden
Queighs, but it is sorry stuff, yet excellent for preparing Birdlime; but Wine
is the great Drink with the Gentry, which they pour in like Fishes, as if it
were their natural Element; the Glasses they drink out of, are considerably
large, and they always fill them to the brim, and away with it; some of them
have arrived at the perfection to tope Brandy at the same rate: sure these are
a Bowl above Bacchus, and of right, ought to have a nobler Throne than a
Hogshead.

Music they have, but not the Harmony of the Spheres, but loud terrene Noises,
like the bellowing of Beasts; the loud Bag pipe is their chief Delight,
stringed Instruments are too soft to penetrate the Organs of their Ears that
are only pleased with sounds of substance.

The Highways in Scotland are tolerably good, which is the greatest Comfort a
Traveller meets with amongst them; they have not Inns, but Change Houses (as
they call them) poor small Cottages, where you must be content to take what you
find, perhaps Eggs with Chucks in them, and some Lang Cale; at the better sort
of them, a Dish of chopp'd Chickens, which they esteem a dainty Dish, and will
take it unkindly if yon do not eat very heartily of it, though for the most
part you may make a Meal with the sight of the Fare, and be satisfied with the
steam only, like the Inhabitants of the World in the Moon; your Horses must be
sent to a Stablers (for the Change Houses have no Lodging for them) where they
may feed voluptuously on Straw only, for Grass is not to be had, and Hay is so
much a stranger to them, that they are scarce familiar with the Name of it.

The Scotch Gentry commonly travel from one Friend's House to another, so
seldom make use of a Change House; their way is to hire a Horse and a Man for
two Pcnce a Mile; they ride on the Horse thirty or forty Miles a day, and the
Man who is his Guide, foots it beside him, and carries his Luggage to boot. The
best sort keep only a Horse or two for themselves and their best Friend, all
the rest of the Train foot it beside them. The Commonalty are so used to
worship and adore their Lairds, that when they see a Stranger in any tolerable
Equipage, they honor him with the Title of Lord at least, An't please you my
Lord such a one, or an't please you my Lord Dr. at every ba^e word forsooth.

The Nobility show themselves very great before Strangers, they are conducted
into the House by a many of his Servants, where the Lord with his Troop of
Shadows receives them with the grand Paw, then enter into some Discourse of
their Country, till you are presented with a great Queigh of Syrup of Beer,
after that a Glass of White Wind, then a Rummer of Claret, and sometimes after
that a Glass of Sherry Sack, and then begin the round with Ale again, and ply
you briskly, for it is their way of showing you are Welcome by making you Drunk;
if you have longer time to stay, you stick close to Claret, till Bacchus wins
the Field, and leaves the conquered Victims grovelling on the place where they
received their overthrow; at your departure you must drink a Dongha Doras, in
English a Stirrup Cup, and have the satisfaction to have my Lord's Bag-pipe
(with his loud Pipes, with his Lordship's Coat Armor on a Flag) strut about
you, and enchant you with a Loath to depart.

Their Money is commonly Dollars, or Mark pieces, coined at Edenbrough, but
their way of Reckoning is surprising to a Stranger; to receive a Bill of a
Hundred Pound in one of their Change-Houses, when one would not suppose they
had any of the value of a Hundred Pence; they call a Penny a Shilling, and every
Twenty Shillings, viz. Twenty Pence, a Pound; so the proportion of their Pound
to ours, is Twelve to One. Strangers are sure to be grossly imposed upon in all
their Change Houses, and there is no redress for it: If an Englishman should
complain to their Magistrates, they would all take a part against him, and make
sure to squeeze him.

The Conclusion of the Abridgment of the Scotch Chronicle, is the rare and
wonderful things of that Country; as in Orkney, their Ews bring forth two
Lambs apiece; that in the Northermost of Shetland Islands, about the Summer
Solstice, there is no Night; that in the Park of Cumbernaule, are white Kine
and Oxen; that at Slanes there is a putrefying Water in a Cove; that at
Aberdeen is a Vitriolin Well, that they say is excellent to dissolve the Stone,
and expel Sand from the Reins and Bladder, and good for the Colic, being drunk
in July, etc. These prodigious Wonders in one Country are admirable, but these
are not half of them. Loughness never freezes; in Lough Lommond are Fishes
without Fins: And 2dly. The Waters thereof rage in great Waves without Wind in
calm Weather: And 3dly. and lastly, Therein is a floating Island: In Kyle is a
deaf Rock twelve Foot every way, yet a Gun discharged on one side of it, shall
not be heard to the other. In another place is a Rockingstone of a reasonable
bigness, that if a Man push it with his finger, it will move very lightly, but
if he address his whole Force, it avails nothing; with many more marvels of
like nature, which I would rather believe than go thither to disprove. To
conclude the whole bulk and selvege of this Country, is all Wonder too great
for me to unriddle, there I shall leave it as I found it, with its agreeable
Inhabitants in

A Land where one may pray with cursed intent:
Oh! May they never suffer Banishment.
FINIS.
A Description of Scotland, in a LETTER from an Officer in the Army, to his
Friend in London.
SIR,
YOU may be sure it goes hard with a Soldier, when he is brought to his
Prayers, and that is my Case and all with me, and would defire my Friends to
join with me in them, that God would put it into His Majesty's Heart to call us
out of this Kingdom, and to send us to any other part of the World; for we
cannot lose by the Change, for here is neither Meat for Man nor Horse; here is
great store of Fowl, indeed, as foul Houses, foul Sheets, foul Linen, foul
Dishes, Pots, Trenchers, Napkins, etc. They have good store of Fish too, and
good for those that can eat it raw; but if it comes once into their hands, it
is worse than if it was three days old. For their Butter and Cheese, I will not
meddle withal at this time, nor no Man else at any time that loves his Life.
The Country, I confess, is good for those that possess it, and too bad for
others to be at the Charge to Conquer it. The Air might be wholesome but for the
stinking People that inhabit it; the Ground might be fruitful, had they Wit to
manure it. They have good store of Deer, but they are so far from the Place
where I have been, that I had rather believe than go to disprove it; all the
Deer I met withal, was dear Lodgings, dear Horse-Meat, dear Tobacco and English
Beer. Fruit, for their Grandsire Adam's sake they never planted any, and for
other Trees, had Christ been betrayed in this Country (as doubtless he should,
had he come as a Stranger) Judas had sooner found the Grace of Repentance, than
a Tree to hang himself on. They have many Hills, wherein they say is much
Treasure, but they show you none of it, Nature has only discovered to them
some Mines of Coal, to show to what end he created them. There is little Grass
to be seen but in their Pottage; and Hay is Heathen Greek to them, neither Man
nor Beast knows what it means. As to their Religion, it is such a Hodge-podge,
there is no describing it. Their Sabbath Exercise is a Preaching in the
Forenoon, and a Persecuting in the Afternoon; they go to Church in the Forenoon
to hear the Law, and to the Craggs and Mountains in the Afternoon to Louze
themselves. They hold their Noses, if you talk of Bear-baiting, and stop their
Ears, if you speak of a Play. Fornication they hold but a pastime, wherein
Man's Ability is approved, and a Woman's Fertility discovered; at Adultery they
shake their Heads. Theft they rail at, and think it impossible to lose the way
to Heaven, if they can but leave Rome behind them. The Ointment they use, is
Brimstone and Butter for the Scabs. To conclude; The Men of old did not more
wonder that the great Messiah should be born in so poor a Town as Bethlehem,
than the World may wonder at, that England should have a Race of Kings from
such a cursed Country as Scotland.

Yours.

THE Rebel SCOT.
HOW! Providence! and yet a Scottish Crew!
Then Madam Nature wears black Patches too,
What shall our Nation be in bondage thus
Unto a Land that truckles under us?
Ring the Bells backward; I am all on fire,
Not all the Buckets in a Country-Quire
Shall quench my rage. A Poet should be feared
When angry, like a Comet's flaming Beard.
And where is the Stoic can his wrath appease
To see his Country sick of Pym's disease;
By Scotch Invasion to be made a Prey
To such Pig-Widgin Myrmidons as they?
But that there is Charm in Verse, I would not quote
The Name of Scot without an Antidote;
Unless my head were red, that I might brew
Invention there that might be Poison too.
Were I a drowzy Judge, whose dismal Note
Disgorgeth Halters, as a Jugler's Throat
Does Ribbands; Could I in Sir Empericks tone
Speak Pills in phrase and quack destruction,
Or roar like Marshal that Geneva Bull,
Hell and Damnation a Pulpit full:
Yet to express a Scot, to play that prize,
Not all those Mouth Granados can suffice.
Before a Scot can properly be cursed,
I must like Hocus, swallow Daggers first.
Come, keen Iambicks, with your Badgers feet,
And Badger-like bite till your Teeth do meet:
Help ye tart Satyrists to imp my rage
With all the Scorpions that should whip this Age.
Scots are like Witches; do but whet your Pen;
Scratch till the blood come, they will not hurt you then.
Now as the Martyrs were enforced to take
The shapes of Beasts, like Hypocrites at Stake
I Will bait my Scot so, yet not cheat your eyes;
A Scot, within a Beast, is no Disguise.
No more let Ireland brag, her harmless Nation
Fosters no Venom since that Scot's Plantation:
Nor can our feigned Antiquity obtain;
Since they came in, England has Wolves again.
The Scot that kept the Tower might have shown
Within the Grate of his own Breast alone,
The Leopard and the Panther, and engrossed
What all those wild Collegiats had cost.
The honest High-shoes in their termly Fees,
First to the Salvage Lawyer, next to these.
Nature her self does Scotchmen Beasts confess,
Making their Country such a Wilderness;
A Land that brings in question and suspense
God's Omnipresence, but that Charles came thence;
But that Montross and Crawford's Royal Band
Atton'd their Sin, and Christened half their Land.
Nor is it all the Nation has these Spots,
There is a Church as well as Kirk of Scots.
As in a Picture where the squinting paint
Shows Fiend on this side, and on that side Saint.
He that saw Hell in's melancholy Dream,
And in the Twy-light of his Fancy's Theme
Scared from his Sins, repented in a fright,
Had he viewed Scotland had turned Proselite.
A Land where one may pray with cursed intent,
Oh may they never suffer Banishment!
Had Cain been Scot, God would have changed his Doom,
Not forced him wander but confined him home;
Like Jews they spread, and as Infection fly,
As if the Devil had Ubiquity.
Hence it is they live at Rovers and defy
This, or that place, Rags of Geography.
They Are Citizens of the World, they are all in all,
Scotland's a Nation Epidemical.
And yet they ramble not to learn the Mode,
How to be dressed, or how to lisp abroad;
To return knowing in the Spanish Shrug,
Or which of the Dutch States a double Jug
Resembles most in Belly, or in Beard,
(The Card by which the Mariners are steered)
No, the Scots Errant fight, and fight to eat,
Their Ostrich Stomachs make their Swords their Meat.
Nature with Scots as Tooth drawers has dealt,
Who use to string their Teeth upon their Belt.
Yet wonder not at this their happy choice,
The Serpent's fatal still to Paradise.
Sure England has the Hemorrhoids, and these
On the North postern of the Patient seize,
Like Leeches; thus they Physically thirst
After our Blood, but in the Cure shall burst.
Let them not think to make us run of the score
To purchase Villenage, as once before
When an Act past to stroke them on the Head:
Call them good Subjects, buy them Ginger-bread.
Not Gold, nor Acts of Grace, it is Steel must tame
The stubborn Scot, a Prince that would reclaim
Rebels by yielding, does like him, or worse,
Who saddled his own back to shame his Horse.
Was it for this you left your leaner Soil,
Thus to lard Israel with Egypt's Spoil.
They are the Gospel's Lifeguard; but for them
(The Garrison of New Jerusalem)
What would the Brethren do? The Cause! The Cause!
Sack-Possets, and the Fundamental Laws?
Lord! what a godly thing is want of Shirts!
How a Scotch-Stomach, and no Meat converts!
They wanted Food and Raiment; so they took
Religion for their Seamstress, and their Cook.
Unmask them well, their Honors and Estate,
As well as Conscience, are sophisticate.
Shrive but their Title and their Moneys poize,
A Lord and twenty pence pronounced with noise,
When construed but for a plain Yeoman go,
And a good sober two pence, and well so.
Hence then you proud Impostors, get you gone,
You Picts in Gentry and Devotion.
You Scandal to the Stock of Verse, a Race
Able to bring the Gibbet in disgrace.
Hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
The Ostracism, and shamed it out of use.
The Indian that' Heaven did forswear,
Because he heard some Spaniards were there;
Had he but known what Scots in Hell had been,
He would Erasmus-like have hung between.
My Muse has done. A Voyder for the nonce,
I wrong the Devil should I pick their Bones;
That Dish is his; for when the Scots decease
Hell like their Nation, feeds on Bernacles.
A Scot when from the Gallow tree got loose
Drops into Styx, and turns a Soland Goose.
FINIS.

