The Christians Uictory over Death.

A SERMON AT THE Funeral of the Most Honorable GEORGE Duke of ALBEMARLE, etc.
In the Collegiate Church of S. Peter WESTMINSTER, On the XXXth of April,
M.DC.LXX.

BY SETH Lord Bishop of SARUM

Preached and Published by his Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for James Collinsat the Kings-headin Westminster Hall,M.DC.LXX.

The Christians Uictory over Death.
I.COR.XV.57. But thanks be to God, who gives us the Victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.
WHosoever he was who first said of Wisdom (or Philosophy) that it is
Contemplatio Mortis, has recommended a considerable document to the World.

Not that the continual Poring and meditating upon Death (precisely and nakedly
considered) is a matter so much becoming a Philosopher. But because the true
Theory of the consequents of Death, is not only the most excellent, but also
the most concerning part of humane Knowledge.

It is that Theory, which influences the Actions of all living men; which
steers their courses, and gives rules and measures to them in all their
concernments.

As, for instance.

The true determination of the Question betwixt the Christian Theory and others
(especially that of Epicurus) concerning the state after Death (the Mortality
or Immortality of the Soul, the Account and Judgment after Death, the
Resurrection of the Body, and the Rewards of Eternity:) will decide the
Questions of (...) and, (...), Good or Evil, Prudent or Imprudent, Brave or
Contemptible in the Lives or Actions of Men.

If Death have Dominion over the Whole man, and if it be an Extinction of the
Soul as well as a Corruption and Dissolution of the Body; If there be no
Rewards or Punishments to follow, and could we be sure of all this; Then to
deny our present Affections and appetites, or to put our selves upon hazardous
and difficult designs, upon the Contemplation of something to betide us after
death, is very Imprudent, Foolish, and Ignoble.

If on the other side, the end of this mortal life be the beginning of another
state, a state of happiness or misery, to be dispensed according to the
Christian Theory; Then to prefer things light and Temporal, before those which
are weighty and eternal, is Beastly, sottish, and Contemptible. It is the
business of our most Learned Apostle, here in this Chapter, under the
Comprehensive Title of the Question concerning the Resurrection, to compare and
to examine the Christian and Epicurean Theories, in reference to the State of
the vita functi.

The Corinthian (Epicurean) Philosophy had begun like a Cancer, to eat out the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, and here he labors earnestly to retrive it.

He proves the truth of the Christian Doctrine, and (because veritas est una)
in so doing he shows the falsehood of the Epicurean Hypothesis.

From the Resurrection of Christ he infers the truth of the General Doctrine of
the Resurrection; and for the truth of Christ's Resurrection, he appeals to more
than 500 Witnesses.

He shows the many Absurdities of Epicurizing under a Profession of
Christianity; and answers that fond Objection about the manner of the
Resurrection, and the body that shall arise.

He weighs the Physical and Theorical opinions, and the practical Corollaries
of them.

The Natural Philosophy of one Opinion is, That We shall die to morrow (toti
moriemur.) Of the other, That we must all live for ever.

Of these Opinions, One tends to corrupt good manners; the other to rectify
and ennoble them: One inclines and leads men to the Work of the Beast in Man;
the other, to the Work of the Lord.

The Logic of One is this, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die;
The Inference of the other is this, Let us be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know, that our Labor is not
in vain in the Lord.

The Epicurean Imposture, by the assistance of a violent Lust, an ungovernable
rage, Actuated and Heightened by provocation, or inflamed by the spirit of Wine;
may furnish out a Hector to a Duel; and prompt him on to die as a fool dies.
But the foundation of Great and Heroical Performances, the just and rational,
the Considerate and Sedate, the constant, perpetual, and uniform contempt of
Death in all the shapes thereof, is only derived from the Christian Principle.
This inspires passive valor into the hearts of men, and furnishes invincible
Martyrs for the Stake; This excites Active Courage, and Equippes and furnishes
Heroical Soldiers and Generals for the Field.

To this the World is indebted for the Glorious Example of this day; and to
this we are indebted for this Triumphal (...) of the Text; O Death! Where is
thy sting? O Grave! Where is thy Victory? The sting of Death is sin, the
strength of sin is the Law: But thanks be to God, that gives us the Victory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The words of my Text resolve into two General parts.

1. A Proposition or Christian Principle, God through Christ gives us the
victory over death.

2. An inference to Christian practice.

1. In reference to God, Thanks be to God. 2. In reference to our selves, Let
us be steadfast, unmovable.

As for the Inference, I shall only be permitted to Conclude with it, and am
forced to be very contracted in my Observations.

The Proposition may be considered two ways.

1. Objective and in Thesi, and so it lays down the general Case of Believers,
as it stands ((...)) in the truth of nature, and so it gives us this universal
Theorem or Observation, viz.

Every true Christian is through our Lord Christ victorious over Death. Or, God
through Christ gives to every Christian the victory over Death.

2. Subjective and in Hypothesi, as it bears a part in St. Paul's Triumphant
(...), and then it affords us this more restrained and particular Observation,
viz.

Through Christ it is given to some Believers, even here in this Life, to
attain to a settled contempt of Death, enabling them to triumph over it.

Of these two Observations very briefly.

I. Christ has procured to every true Christian or Believer the Victory over
Death. Now the Assertion of the truth of this Proposition, the Explication and
particular tractation of the Causes, and the Deduction, and enforcement of the
Consequences of it in reference to God and Man, is so Apparently the entire
Argument of the Gospel, that it is needless, among Christians, to insist on the
proof of the Observation: Briefly; the Gospel has delivered to us both the
(...) and the (...) of it.

First, For the (...).

If either (according to the Doctrine of Epicurus) we suppose Death to dissolve
the Soul, as well as to corrupt the Body of a man;

Or if the Soul of a man shall survive, and Death shall immediately enter it
into a state of infelicity to be filled up, and eternized by a miserable
Resurrection under the stinging of a worm that dies not, and the tormenting
rage of a Fire that never shall be quenched. In either of these Cases (in the
Figurative Language of the Scripture, which speaks of Death as of a Person) it
may be properly asfirmed, That Death is too hard for such a man, that it gets
the victory, and holds the Dominion over him. But if on the other side, the
state of a man be advanced and bettered by his Dissolution; So that upon good
Consideration, it be desirable to him to be Dissolved. If when Death shall have
done its utmost, the Essential part of man, The Man that is in Man, shall be
surviving, surviving in joy unspeakable; to be completed in a Glorious
Resurrection, to be continued and increased to all Eternity. Then he who does
not perish by the hand of Death, nor is thrown by it into a state of
infelicity, but passes through death into endless Life; this man is properly
victorious over Death.

Now this is the Effect and Summary of the Gospel, to this every part of it,
one way or other, does relate, it every where assures us, that this is the
condition of every true believer, Joh. 3. 16.
Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, i. e. shall not cease to be,
(much less do worse) but have everlasting Life; viz. he has the victory over
Death.

Secondly, Again for the (...). The whole series of this affair is per omnia
Causarum genera, from the first occasion of the difference, to the last
performance of the Victory, abundantly delivered in the Gospel.

This tells us, Romans 5. 12.
that by the Law sin entered into, the World, and death by sin, (i. e. death
temporal and death eternal.) So that the sting of death is sin (or the
Consequent of sin) and the strength of sin is the Law. Ibid.
It tells us, that death reigned over all; in as much as all men had sinned.
That by the Law no flesh could be justified, Rom.3.20.
though it was (in its nature) holy, just, and good; Yet it was become the
ministry of condemnation.

That to take away the strength of sin (which is the Law) God sent his Son made
under the Law, Gal.4.4,5.
to redeem them that were under the Law; that to disarm death by taking away
the sting thereof, I Cor. 5. 2
He who knew no sin was made sin; Rev. 6. 14.
That sin might not reign in us, and death might no more have the Dominion over
us; That we might not Rom.6.14.
be under the Law, but under Grace, Col.2.14.
He humbled himself to Death, even the Death of the Cross. Phil.2.8
There, He, (his own self) bare our sins in his own body; Pet.2.24.
There he abolished in his flesh the Law of Commandments, slaying the enmity
thereof; Ephesians. 2.15.16.
There, He blotted out the Col.2.14.
handwriting, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross.

Heb.2.14.
There he died, that by his death he might destroy him, that had the power of
death, even the Devil.

Col.2.15.
There he spoiled Principalities and Powers, (...)^ ostentavit eos, triumphing
over them in it.

Thus Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, obtained the Victory over death and
hell, obtained it for himself, and for all his faithful Soldiers and
followers; Thus all of them have certitudinem objecti, Every true believer is
victorious over death in truth, and in rei veritate.

But every one has not in this life certitudinem subjecti; This is not a
general Interest, to which men are entitled by Christianity, but a special
Grace and privilege, dispensed according to the peculiar prerogative of Gods
Will and Pleasure.

Though Christianity, and a just power of Contemning Death may be reciprocal,
yet Christianity and the actual exercise of the contempt of Death, do not by
necessity evince one another. There are Children of light which walk in
darkness, working out their Salvation with perpetual fears and tremblings.

There are (on the other side) some, that having no Charity, are yet so far
transported as to give their Bodies to be burned. There is a way that seems
right unto a man, but the end thereof are the paths of death. So that the
second Observation is limited, and particular: viz

II. Through Christ it is given to some Believers to attain in this life, to a
settled contempt of death, and enabling them to triumph over it: This was the
Case of St. Paul in the Text, and the Case of many others, He gives us the
victory, says St. Paul.

To clear this Observation, I ought to show how Christians come to obtain this
privilege, (...) (by and through Christ.)

To perform this fully, it would be requisite to lay before you the Doctrines
of the Merits of Christ, and of the Grace of God, and of the Application of
them by Believers. But being restrained by the occasion, I shall only endeavor
to show, that Christ (and He indeed alone) has given his followers such a
System of principles, as is apt and able to bring them to a Rational contempt
of Death. Now this he has done,

1. By the Theory which he has left the World concerning the State of the Vita
functi (or Deceased.)

2. By the assurance which he has given the World of the truth of that Theory.

No other Theory (supposing it to be true) is in its nature able and apt to
bring men to this heroic state. No other dissenting Theory is or can be true.
Annihilation and misery Nature abhors, and the only ground of a rational
Contempt of death, is a just expectation to advance and better a man's estate by
dying.

This expectation arises only from a good Conscience; To reduce a man to a good
habit of Conscience, nothing is powerful enough beside the powers of the World
to come, a right understanding, and a deep Consideration of the Pe^sonal
Rewards and Punishments of the World to come.

Now the true Theory concerning Personal Rewards and ^unishments, was first of
all clearly delivered to the World by our Lord Jesus Christ: For,

1. He it is that has cleared the personal capacity of the rewards of the
World to come.

2. He it is who has delivered plainly and clearly the Administration of the
Rewards themselves.

3. Christ has cleared the Capacity of personal rewards; and this he has done
by his Doctrine concerning 1. The Immortality of the Soul, and 2. Of the
Resurrection of the body.

First, For the Immortality of the Soul.

Although the simple Apprehension of spiritual Beings; The judging things
contrary to the representation of sense (as in the distance and magnitude of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars;) The forming universal Pr^positions; The Reasoning
and Reflecting power of men; The struggling betwixt the Sensual and Intellectual
part of man.

The Lashes of Conscience, in Wicked men, always forecasting g^ievous things.

Although, these and many other indications of Nature do evince, that there is
in living men something incorporeal and immortal.

And although beside and above these Indica^ions, there are many passage in the
Law and the ^rophets, from whence the immortality of the S^ul may be Concluded,
(in Consequence whereof, both before and during the t^me of Christ, All the
Sects of the Jews, except the Sadduces; And (I think) All the Philosophers,
except Epicurus, did declare for the Doctrine of an Immortality.)

Yet it is truly said of Christ, that he did (...); that he cleared or brought
to light the Doctrine of Immortality.

The Opinions which ruled the World before him (both of the Philosophers and of
the Rabbis) were not only false but pernicious; They still made Death the King
of Terrors, and were so far from Establishing^ that they overthrew the Capacity
of Personal Rewards and Punishments after Death.

These are the Consequences of all those Hypotheses which either destroy the
substance of the Soul with Epicurus; Or the individual permanency of the Soul
with the Platonists, the Peripateticks and the Stoics. Or which assert the
Metempsychosis of Souls, passing from Men to Beasts, or Men, with the
Pythagoreans and many of the Jews. And these were the Imaginations which had
possessed the World before the Ministry of Christ.

If the Soul were a Crasis or Harmony, a Modus or Motion of the Body, it would
then be dissolved in Death, it would cease to be or sleep in the lifeless.
Atoms whereof the Body was composed.

But He has taught us, that men may Kill the Body, and not be able to hurt the
Soul; from whence it follows, that the Soul is a distinct and permanent
subsistence.

If the Immortal part in man were a Delibation of the Godhead; or Intellectus
agens, or the Soul of the World, and upon Death were back again refunded into
them; the Individual nature would be destroyed; But He has taught us, that
this is still preserved, that the Souls of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are
distinctly preserved in the hand of God.

If Souls did transmigrate from men to beasts, or from one man to another, who
could be rewarded? Pythagoras, or Euphorbus? he has instructed us, that the
Soul does not shift and flit from one body into another, but in their
departure, when they go hence, they pass into Everlasting Habitations.

Lastly, He has informed the World, that not only the souls of the Righteous,
but of the Wicked also, are Immortal. That as the soul of Lazarus, so also the
soul of Dives, was permanent and existent after Death.

Thus Christ has cleared the Doctrine of Immortality, and (in respect of the
soul) the capacity of personal Rewards.

2. Moreover, to fill up and c^mpleat the capacity of the whole person, and so
render it entire, He has delivered to the World the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Body; namely, that the time is coming when Death shall be
finally swallowed up in Victory.

That He himself shall then descend from Heaven with a shout; 1These.4.
with the voice of the Archangel, with the Trump of God, and the Dead shall
rise.

That the dead in Christ shall rise first.

That what is sown in Corruption, shall be raised in Incorruption.

That all men shall rise with their own bodies, Act.24.^
both Just and Unjust; that the hour is coming^ that all that are in the Grave
shall hear his voice and come forth. Joh. 5. 2^


That the Sea shall give up the Dead which are in it; ^p^c.20.14
And Death and (...) shall deliver up the dead which are in them.

That those that have done good, ^^. 5. 29.
shall go into the Resurrection of Life; and those that have done evil, shall
go into the Resurrection of Condemnation.

Thus has our Lord Christ cleared the Principle and foundation of a Generous
Contempt of death, by bringing to Light the Capacity of Personal Rewards in the
World to come.

But, 2. He has clearly delivered the whole method and Administration of
Rewards themselves, Inchoate and particular in our decease. 2. Universal,
Consummate in the great Day of Retribution, at the time of the general
Resurrection.

In the Gospel we are taught, that immediately upon our Dissolution, the Souls
of the Righteous enter into a state of happiness, and the souls of the wicked
into a state of Infelicity.

For the former, to be dissolved is to be with Christ; for the latter, to die
is to become miserable.

Say to the Righteous, (...).10.
it shall be well with him (...), they die in the Lord, they rest from their
Labors, their works follow them.

Say to the Wicked, it shall be ill with him; the Other is comforted, but he
shall be to^mented; Lazarus died, and immediately was carried by Angels into
Abraham's Bosom; The rich man died and was buried, and presently we find him in
Hell, in Torments.

But the great and final distribution of Rewards, the Circumstances and entire
Economy of the General Judgment, as it is delivered only, so it is delivered
punctually, and exactly, in and by the Gospel.

This tells us,

That God has appointed a Day, wherein he will Judge the World. Ap^c.10.
That Christ is ordained of God, to be Judge both of Quick and Dead.

That he shall come in the Clouds, Apoc.1.7.
and every Eye shall see him. That the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken, Mat.24.
and then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and they shall see
him coming in the Clouds with power and great glory.

That he shall send his Angels, Ibid.31.
with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together the Elect from
the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other.

That he shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory. Mat. 25. 3.


That all Nations shall be gathered before him; We must all appear before his
Judgment Seat, to answer for the things done in the body, whether they be good
or evil.

That he shall separate the one from the other, Ibid. 32,
as the Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goat,

That the Books shall be opened, ^poc.20.12.
and the dead shall be Judged out of those things which are written in the
Books.

That every secret thing shall be brought to light, Cor. 4. 5.
the secret Counsels of the Heart, the hidden Works of Darkness, shall be
revealed, and he shall Render to every one according to his Deeds.

That this sentence shall be pronounced, upon the blessed, Come ye blessed of
my Father, etc.

And this upon the cursed, Go ye cursed, etc.

Finally, that upon the sentence given, the righteous shall enter into joy
unspeakable and full of Glory; And the Wicked shall pass into a state of
everlasting torment, where shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

These are those Powers of the World to come, whereof the Apostle speaks. As
there are movimenta mechanica (mechanical powers) whereby the motion of bodies
is excited and regulated; So Rewards and Punishments are movimenta spiritualia,
those spiritual powers, which excite and regulate the motions of the Soul; and
that which gives to these their utmost force and moment, is this Consideration,
That they are to be Eternal.

This Consideration is able effectually to affright men from base and ignoble
Actions, and to inspire them with noble and heroical designs, to raise them
above all worldly things, and bring them to a Rational contempt of Death; And
this is that Theory which Christ has delivered concerning the state of the
Vita functi.

But Secondly, Christ has not only delivered, but he has also assured the
world of the truth of this Theory.

He confirmed the truth of his Doctrine, the Divinity of his precepts, the
certainty of the Rewards, and punishments of the world to come, the infallible
performance of his promises, and his threatenings.

Not by giving the world a set and series of imaginary principles of vain
Philosophy, and Science falsely so called, engendring strifes and everlasting
disputations.

Not by bare Assertions, and confident Repetitions only, as did the Epicureans
of old; And as is the manner of some in our days, who have taken up their
principles amongst our selves

Not by Fantastical obscure Ratiocinations, concerning Numbers, Vehicles,
(...), or the like; But by evidences plain and convincing, by proofs sensible
and experimental, partcularly accommodate to the eviction of the truth of the
matter in question, and to the conviction of all mankind; By raising Lazarus
and others from the dead, he at once gave an experiment of the immortality of
the Soul, and of the Resurrection of the body, of the capacity of eternal
Rewards and Punishments.

Of all his Doctrines he gave infallible, sensible, undeniable proof, by the
purity of his Precepts; The Sanctity of his Life; The Testimony and witness of
his Death.

By fulfilling all the Prophesies concerning him; By his Predictions and his
Miracles; By a thousand several instances of supernatural Wisdom and Power; By
his glorious Resurrection, his Visible Ascension; By sending down the Holy
Ghost on the Apostles; By enabling his Disciples and his Followers to work
Signs and Wonders (in one word) by innumerable Arguments.

Thus the Captain of our Salvation, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, has
cleared the Foundation and Principle of Heroic Actions, in exhibiting to the
World, the Grounds and Causes of a just and rational contempt of Death.

ANd now, blessed be his Holy Name, who by his Grace, applying those Principles
to the hearts of the Professors of Christianity, is pleased in all Ages to
raise up Christian Heroes for a Testimony to the energy of his eternal Gospel.
And in particular, Blessed be his Name, who in our Time, and in our Nation,
has been pleased to raise up that Great and most Honorable Person, the
Illustrious GEORGE Duke of ALBEMARLE, that Great and most eminent and uniform
despiser of Death; That Glorious Performer of Heroic Actions. Concerning whom I
am obliged (though very briefly and scantly) to speak His Country the source of
many Gallant men.

His Extraction from a generous, ancient, eminent Family; His early Addiction
to Arms, the School wherein he was trained; the degrees by which he ascended,
His youthful essays, His virile Performances both at Sea and Land; in Foreign
Countries, in England, Ireland, Scotland, (All memorable, and such as will be
great in Story) shall not detain you.

The little which I intend to speak, shall take its Epoch from that time, when
God was pleased to raise him up to be our Deliverer, to call him forth and show
him openly upon the Theater of the World; making him a spectacle to Angels and
to men.

Since this time, if we shall well consider him, in every Circumstance, I
conceive I may, without flattery or partiality pronounce;

1. That a greater Action has not been performed, than that of the
Restoration.

2. That a greater Person than He, concerning whom we are speaking, has not
b^^n: produced in many Generations; And these are the two things which I shall
propose to your Observation.

To enter into the places of Rhetoric, and to expatiate in a formal
Panegyric, were to violate your patience, and offend the manes of him, to whom
we perform this parentation.

He was a man Great of Performance, little of Speech, no lover of wast words,
or fine composed Orations, but a great Affecter of what was short and plain,
easy and inaffected.

In compliance with this Character of him, I shall briefly and plainly entreat
you to consider, That for a man to exert an Heroical performance, two things
are requisite.

1. There must be the exercise of Virtue, (Prudence, Fortitude, Justice,
Temperance, and their subordinate virtues) in an eminent manner: And 2. There
must be (...), something divine and extraordinary.

An eminent opportunity, an Object Arduous and Honorable; And a Success that
may have in it an evidence of something supernatural.

Consider how all these Circumstances were combined and constellate in that
mavelous work of the Restoration.

2. Moreover, seeing that Honor est in honor ante, and lies in the Apprehension
of Spectators, who always have one eye on the prosperity, as well as an
anoth^^ (...) the merit of a person; And who do not give a final Judgment, ante
obitum supremaque funera. Therefore to estimate the greatness of this Person, I
shall entreat you to consider, 2. The perseverance of his virtue, 3. The
Felicity wherewith it was attended.

1. For the Glory of the Restoration.

The greatest advantage of Honor (with God and Man) which can befall a
Military Person, is not to slay his thousands, or his millions, but to be made
a Repairer of the Breaches of his Country, and a Restorer of paths to dwell in:
For this there must be Opportunity (if there be no breaches, there can be no
repairer,) For this, God gave him Opportunity.

How great, alas! were the Breaches, how gaping, how desperate were the Wounds
of these sinful, miserable Nations? Hell had broke loose upon us, and Confusion
had obtained and held a Dominion of 20 years.

The Flower of our Nobility, Gentry, etc. cut off by the Sword of the
Rebellious; How were the mighty fallen! I may not stand to make a gradation of
our miseries, -- Quanquam animus meminisse horret -- Yet I must repeat it, the
King and the Priest (the best of Kings, a most excellent Prelate) fell under
the Swords, rather under the Axes of an impious Rebellion. The Sun was turned
into Darkness, the Moon into blood, the Stars thrown from their Orbs. Our
Religion abolished, our Foundations overturned, our Laws abrogated. The
Government of Church and State dissolved, the Governors Banished, imprisoned,
murdered.

Instead of Religion; Atheism, and Infidelity, Fanatic Rage and wild
Enthusiasm: Instead of Liberty and property, the voice of Sequestrations and
Plunders, Decimations, Transportation, Imprisonment, were heard in the Land.

Our Kings and our Princes were among the Gentiles, ^^m.2.9.
the Law was no more, the Prophets received no Vision from the Lord.

How often did his Majesty attempt a Restitution! How often was he
disappointed! He came to his Own, but his Own received him not: they said, This
is the Heir, Come let us Kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours.

God permitted them to fill up the measure of their Iniquities, to baffle every
attempt for a Restitution. He suffered them to ride over our heads, Tinkers,
and Cobblers, and Draymen, etc. to become Lords over his Inheritance.

And now behold a Wonder of Providence and Mercy, Behold, we said our bones are
dry, our hope is gone, we are clean cut off.

When presently and unexpectedly, the Glory of the Lord appeared for our
deliverance.

Re, summa stante tegula, (...).

As it was with Gideon, Iephtah, Samson, and other Heroes of old, the Spirit of
the Lord came upon this Great Captain.

It prompted him to an heroical Design, it filled him with Prudence, Fortitude,
Justice, Temper, and Sobriety, to an heroical degree. Immediately he was not
disobedient to the Heavenly motion, but he forthwith proceeded to the
performance of Actions able to justify the belief of a Divine Assistance.

By a deep Prudence, and an impregnable Taciturnity, he confounded the wisdom
of the Wise, and he put to shame the pretended Spirit of the fanatical
Enthusiasts.

He hampered the Crafty in their own Snare, in the Net which they laid for
others privily, was their foot taken.

Such was his Courage, that though an Host of men were prepared against him,
yet he did not fear. Audite posteri! if my voice would reach it, I would speak
to the Generations which are to come.

By his Courage and his Prudence, Himself (at first alone in the Design)
without any Confidents or Correspondents, being then in an unsure conquered
Country; friendless, moniless, unarmed, and unprovided. Taking to him the help
of a few cold Streamers, in the Compass of a few weeks, without the expense of
one drop of blood, He scattered the invincible Armies and Armadoes of the
Rebellious, which had so long subjugated these Nations, and made themselves
terrible to their Neighbors.

He reduced into Obedience all the Cities, Towns, Castles, Forts, Armies,
Navies, Magazines, of England, Scotland, Ireland, and our Foreign Plantations.

He broke the Heart of Rebellion, tore up the roots of Anarchical Tyranny, and
of Fanatical Usurpation.

By Temperance, Vigilance, and strenuous Activity, God blessing his endeavors,
he brought all things into his power. And when he had them there, when these
Nations trembled under ambiguous Expectations, and the wondering world were
gazing and conjecturing which way the moment of his prodigious fortune would
incline him; He chose the way of Conscience and Religion. The fatuous glaring
Luster of a prosperous Usurpation could not seduce him. But embracing the
well-weighed dictates of a sober, solid, Christian understanding, he sacrificed
all his acquisitions to Honor and Justice, plainly Heroical and Divine.

He restored to every Man his own; to the King he restored the Throne of his
Royal Predecessors; to the Nobles their Honors and ancient Privileges,
(tribute to whom tribute, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor belonged.)
To the whole Nation he restored their Religion, their Laws, their Liberties,
their Properties, (And to some of the Regicides he repaid their due.)

Thus was God pleased by the ministry of his hand (at a time and in a manner
unexpected, by a surprise of grace and bounty) to turn our Captivity as the
Rivers in the South, to fill our mouths with laughter, and our tongues with joy.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and (by their
Gratitude and Obedience) declare the wonders of this Heroical transaction,
Surely here was (...), This was the Lords doing, and it will be mavelous in
all succeeding Generations; He it was that sent Redemption to his people by the
hand of this Great Leader, as of old he did to Israel by the hand of Moses.
Concerning this whole Transaction I shall only say, it cannot be paralleled out
of the Rolls and Records of the Generations which are past, and it will be
remembered and admired in the Generations which are to come. This was the State
of that Glorious Action.

2. In the next place, toward an estimate of his person, be pleased briefly to
reflect upon his Demeanor afterward; consider how all his following Actions
were answerable to this grand leading performance, and were in their kind Great
and Heroical.

Did ever any person (after so great an Action) exceed him in the temper and
sobriety of his mind, or in the Dutifulness, usefulness, the strenuous labor,
the Constancy and final perseverance of all his following performances? After
that (by the mercies of God) the public affairs were composed, and by the
Bounty of his Gracious and Grateful Sovereign, His own private Affairs were
settled.

Did He use any Insolences? Offer at any Extravagancies? Attempt any
Exorbitancies? Side with any Factions? Make any Intrigues? Cherish any
Resentments? Nay, but entirely and absolutely, ( without any the least
reserve,) He devoted himself to the service of his King and Country, and to the
support and preservation of those Great Interests of Church and State, which
God by his Ministry had Restored.

Riches and Honor did not corrupt and soften him to Ease and Luxury; They did
not abate, but animate and inflame his Courage and his Industry.

He did not say, Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years,
eat, drink, and be merry.

He did not say, Let others labor, and let others fight, Let me enjoy my self
a little before I go hence, etc. But on the other side, If ever any living man
did studiously decline employments, because they were easy; and offer himself
to others, because of their Difficulties; embracing with a greedy magnanimity
the very labor and Danger of them, certainly He was that person. To omit the
industrious execution of his other Offices, wherein no man could exceed him,
the vigilant and laborious performance of his place of General, which obliged
him to a Constant, perpetual care of all his Majesty's Forces, and to a
vigilant eye over all the Nation (and the like.) When God was pleased to send
upon the Cities of London and Westminster that tremendous Plague, and every one
by an eager flight withdrew themselves from the danger, how earnestly did he
petition that he might stay at Westminster! There he staid, and by the
exceeding hazard and indefatigable labors of his person, and by a pious,
timely, prudent erogation of his Charity, he was a succor and support to a
languishing Nation, a dying people.

When the War grew to an excess of fierceness, how promptly and desirously did
he profer himself to the Engagement! I need not stand upon this Argument, Non
ignota loquor. This was his disposition, this was his practice, such was his
Constant behavior to the last. No man ever exceeded him in the perseverance of
his merit.

3. To complete the estimate of his person, It remains that we speak a word of
his Felicity.

1. The experience that he had of it in this Life.

2. The Hope of his Enjoyment of it in the other.

1. As for his temporal felicities (received at the hand of God) they may be
reduced to three orders, 1. Personal. 2. Domestical or Oeconomical. 3. Popular,
or Political.

1. That great things might be done by him, God was pleased to bestow upon him
great Endowments; Many and great Deliverances, Great and Glorious successes.

Notwithstanding the undervalue of some who think themselves the Wits, Non est
magnus cui non Fuit ille magnus.

God had bestowed upon him, A large understanding, A deep judgment, A capacious
and a Retentive memory, An admirable faculty of dispatch of business, A strong
compacted Body, A solid mind, not apt to be elevated or depressed, An
invincible Courage, A sedate and uniform contempt of Death. Each of these hard
to be equalled, all together never to be exceeded.

To reserve him for honorable and great performances, he bestowed upon him a
thousand eminent, and great deliverances; I believe there is hardly any man
living, who had been more often or more dangerously engaged, yet (I have often
heard him say that) he was never considerably hurt, or wounded, God covered his
head in the day of Battle, and in time of danger he whelmed him under the
hollow of his hand.

St. Paul gives the Corinthians a Catalogue of the Perils from which God had
delivered him. He filled up and vastly exceeded the Catalogue of St. Paul. From
perils of Robbers, ^Cor.11.
from perils from his own Countrymen, from perils among Strangers, from perils
in the City, from perils in the Field, from perils in the Sea, from perils
among false Brethren, from perils by the plague, from perils by war, from
perils of Assassination -- from perils innumerable, the Lord delivered him.

To set upon him his own stamp and signature of Honor, God blessed his
Counsels, and gave a wonderful success to his endeavors. No age can equal that
success of the Restoration; He never felt into any Great Disaster in his
profession (which is the common fate of great Commanders) And even where the
issue of the whole matter has not been very prosperous, God has ordered his
part so, that he has come off with immortal Honor and Reputation. Such was
his personal felicity.

Moreover, God blessed him in his oeconomical Relations, He was certainly the
best Husband in the world, and he received the requital of faithfulness and
love, they twain were loving in their Lives, and in their Deaths they were not
divided.

He was the best Father in the world, and God was pleased to bless him with a
Son of eminent abilities, of body and mind, fitted for the support of his
Honor, and the continuance of his Name and Family.

He lived to see him entered into the service of his Country, (as Hanno entered
Hannibal, against the Romans, so) he entered him in the Loyal Antifanatical
House of Commons. He lived to see him disposed of in a very Honorable
marriage, seasoned by himself in the principles of Virtue, and Religion, Honor
and deep Loyalty, Disposed to follow him in the ways of Honor which himself
had traced, and in Gods due time to become a support and ornament of his
Country.

Lastly, God blessed his endeavors with honor and acceptance of men, of all
that are good and honest in the Land, from the King that fitteth upon the
Throne, to the meanest Beggar in the street.

The Soldiers looked upon him as their Father, and were ready and ambitious to
live and die with him. The body of the people loved and honored him, nay (God
forgive them) they believed and trusted in him. They thought he could do all
things, (...).11.21.
(as Martha said unto Christ, Lord if thou-hadst been here, our Brother Lazarus
had not dyed) how often has it been said by common people, If the General had
been here, the City had not been burned?

He was the Favorite of the Parliament, the Dearling of both Houses, they
confided in him, they loved and revered him. And his Love was Reciprocal. His
Heart was upon them for their Religion and Loyalty, he mourned for their
divisions; exceedingly labored the uniting of both Houses, and the Continuance
of this Parliament.

But incomparably beyond all his other worldly felicities, was the constant,
uninterrupted, Ardent Affection of His Sovereign Lord and Master. He conferred
upon him Riches, and Honors. He Cherished him in His Royal Bosom. He pursued
him with perpetual Ardors without Intermission or abatement. No shadow of
Suspicion, no Cloud of Jealousy, no Qualm of Satiety arose, from the first
Moment of his Services, to the last moment of his Life.

Nay, his Love to him is stronger then Death, His Affection follows him after
death, in a paternal tenderness toward his Son. In the glorious Parentation of
this Day; What can a pious Prince do more then to deliver his remains to be
deposited in the Sepulture of the Kings of England, and his Renown to be
preserved in the memorials of all Posterity?

These are some few Instances of the favor God showed to this Great Person in
this World. It is true, that all worldly felicities in this life are not to be
valued without the hopes of his felicity in Heaven; I shall speak therefore one
word of that, and so Conclude.

2. Here indeed we are in loco lubrico, concerned to be reserved and Wary; What
shall we say? or what shall we not say?

We know the hard Censures of Fanatical, factious, disappointed, envious
persons; But I know likewise, that we have not so learned Christ.

In all that I have spoken, or shall speak concerning him, I would not be
understood to pretend, that he was exempt from humane failings, and
Infirmities, Quisque suos patimur manes; But his virtues were great and
eminent, his merits known to all the world. Surely he had no failings
comparable to the envy and ingratitude of his detractors. Moreover we have a
gracious God, a merciful Redeemer, an High Priest sensible of our Infirmities;
And we have reason to believe that his Infirmities were washed away by the
blood of Jesus.

What we have seen and heard, we may be admitted to speak, and I have had the
honor to be (in some measure) a Witness of his Conversation.

For the last 7 years (at least) of his Life, I had the honor and happiness of
a free Conversation with him. Toward his latter days (especially since his
bodily Infirmity began to prevail upon him) My addresses were more frequent
then before.

When I had opportunity, I waited on him in the Country; When I perceived the
approaches of Death, I attended him carefully and often.

I was with him in his Agonies, I assisted in his last Christian Offices; I
heard his last words, and his dying Groan. Uti Imperatorem decuit, I saw him
dye erect in his Chair. And lastly, I had the honor to close his Eyes.

This I speak, not to boast of the particular honor which he was pleased to do
me (his Conversation was universally such, toward all mankind, humble, easy,
and familiar; I am persuaded that hardly any did ever exceed him in this part
of the greatness of his mind, he was (...), the self same person in every
position, never depressed, never elated by his fortune) but I mention these
particulars only ad faciendam fidem.

In reference to the Duties of the second Table, His performances were so
eminent in all relations, that the mention of them is needless.

Tell me, all ye that would detract from his honor, was he not an Incomparable
Subject, Husband, Father, Friend, Citizen, Commander?

I shall only speak a word in reference to the first Table.

His Religion did not indeed consist in talking, canting, boasting, (of
privileges or atteinments) censuring, or disobedience. But it was solid, real,
and substantial; And it had these marks.

Through all the Varieties of his life, he adhered constantly to the true
reformed Protestant Profession, and was a Lover of the Doctrine, Discipline and
Government of the Church of England.

He was a great detester of Sacrilege; he has often told me with Joy and
Resolution, that he never had or would have in the Compass of his Estate, any
part that had ever been devoted to pious Uses.

He was constant in attendance on Religious Duties (Prayers, Sermons, etc.) and
would not depart hence without the Viaticum Christianorum, the Communion of the
Body and Blood of his Redeemer, which he received with all the Testimonies of
Penitence, Devotion, and Comfort.

He discovered always an awful reverence toward the Majesty of God, and an
abhorrence toward the Profanation of his Name.

As for the truth of the Graces of a Christian Spirit, the surest time to judge
of them is the time of trial; the time of the greatest trial, is the time of
Sickness and the approaches of death; And in reference to these, I am persuaded
that,

If self-denial and resignation to the Will of God; If patience and meekness,
and a deep humiliation under the mighty hand of God.

If a promptness to die and a desire to be dissolved.

If a Conscience satisfied and rejoicing, in the discharge of duty toward God
and Man.

If Faith in Christ and a comfortable hope of Salvation.

If freedom from terrors and scruples, to which even good men are liable.

If all these ( sealed with a clear and perfect understanding to the last
moment, and with a gentle, placid and decorous Exit) are any grounds whereby to
judge of a Christians estate in reference to the World to come, then the World
has reason to be persuaded of the happy Condition of this Great person.

As he was not an ordinary person: So his trial was not the ordinary trial of
men, it was not in outward matters, but in his body; his plague was the plague
of the heart, without a metaphor: I saw his heart opened, and upon sight of
what was there, it was generally concluded, that there was the Seat of the
Distemper whereof he died.

His visitation was tedious and long, in 12 months space he very seldom slept,
or took any rest within his bed, but suffered all that while an internal
painful strangulation.

He bore all this with an Heroic patience and meekness without murmuring, or
complaining; As a lamb that is dumb, so opened he not his mouth.

He would not indeed hasten his release, but he rejoiced when he saw it coming;
about three days before his death he foretold the time of it plain enough, with
joy and Satisfaction; Two days before it, he told me, That no man in England
(that was his word) was more willing or more desirous to die then himself. That
he had discharged his Conscience to God, His King, His Country. That he hoped
he had left his Son settled in a good Condition, and that God had a blessing for
him; And he hoped that he (himself) had made his Salvation sure.

The evening before his Death he said several times, that that day had been
better than any of his former, and that the next day he should be better then
he had been in all his Life.

From whence we all concluded, that the next day would be the day of his
departure, which happened accordingly; for about nine of the Clock in the next
morning (soon after he had been recommended to God in the Prayers and Offices
of the Church) he fell into a short agony of the duration of about two or three
minutes, he gave one inward Groan, and a little subsiding in his Chair, he
gently and placidly yielded up the Ghost.

This was the Exit of this Illustrious person; when his heart and strength
failed, God was the strength of this heart, and we have reason to hope and to
believe, that he is his portion for ever.

That his eminent contempt of death (so remarkable to all the world) was drawn
from the Christian Principles. So that he Sang within himself St. Paul's
Epinikion, O Death etc; Wherefore I conclude with St. Paul's Inference,

Let us give thanks to God who gives us the Victory, Let us give thanks to God
who has given us the great Example of this day. Let us run with patience the
race that is set before us, looking up to Jesus the author and finisher of our
Faith, Let us be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord, forasmuch as we know that our Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

