Vindiciae Academiarum CONTAINING, Some brief Animadversions upon MR WEBSTERS
Book, STYLED, The Examination of Academies.

Together with an Appendix concerning what M. Hobbs, and M. Dell have published
on this Argument.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University, for Thomas
Robinson. 1654.

SIR,
THERE came lately to my hands since I came to this place a Discourse styled
the Examination of Accademies, (which I herewith send you) It pretends to the
reforming of Public Schools, and the promoting of all kind of science. I must
confess my self at first sight, very much pleased with the undertakeing, as
being suitable to my own frequent wishes, and what I conceived might with some
reason be hoped for in this inquisitive age. And therefore I came to the
reading of it, with great expectations of finding somewhat answerable to the
nobleness of the attempt.

But I quickly discovered, that I was like to be much disappointed in that
hope, and that besides a Torrent of affected insignificant tautologies with
some peevish unworthy reflections, and the repetitions of some old and trite
cavills, together with several bundles of gross mistaks there was little else
to be expected from this Author.

Two grand incapacityes for such a work, he quickly discovers himself guilty
of, that are not to be pardoned or excused in such an undertaker.

1. His ignorance of the present state of our Universityes which he pretends to
reform.

2. His Ignorance in the common grounds of those Arts and Sciences which he
undertakes to advance and promote. In both which respects he must needs fall
under that censure of folly and shame, Prove. 18.13.
which Solomon does ascribe unto those that will venture to judge of a matter
before they understand it.

1. For the present state of the Universityes. He supposes and takes it for
granted, that they are so tied up to the Dictates of Aristotle, that whatsoever
is taught either against or besides him by way of refutation or supply, they do
by no means admit of, so much as to any consideration or debate, but are wholly
ignorant of it.

Which is so notoriously false, that I should very much wonder with what
confidence he could suppose it, if I did not find Mr Hobbs likewise guilty of
the same mistake. Whereas those that understa^d these places, do know that
there is not to be wished a more general liberty in point of judgment or
debate, then what is here allowed. So that there is scarce any Hypothesis,
which has been formerly or lately entertained by Judicious men, and seems to
have in it any clearenesse or consistency, but has here its strenuous
Assertours, as the Atomicall and Magneticall in Philosophy, the Copernican in
Astronomy etc.

And though we do very much honor Aristotle for his profound judgment and
universal learning, yet are we so far from being tied up to his opinions,
that persons of all conditions amongst us take liberty to descent fom him, and
to declare against him, according as any contrary evidence does engage them,
being ready to follow the Banner of truth by whomsoever it shall be lifted up.

Witness the public Lectures of our Professors, the Positions or Questions
maintained in the public Exercise of the University for Degrees, and in the
private Exercises of Colleges, besides the Instructions and readings of many
Tutors, wherein the principal things which this Author does accuse us to be
ignorant of, and enemies unto, are taught and owned, and I can assure him they
are so well learnt, that for all his contempt of the Universityes, we have here
many young boys (who have not yet attained to that very proud and vainglorious
title of Bachelours of Art, (as he is pleased to phrase it) that are able to
reform this Reformer, in those things, wherein he thinks us all so ignorant,
and himself so great a Master.

2. And for his ignorance in the common grounds of those things which he
undertakes to advance and promote, his whole Discourse does not so clearly
prove any thing else, (not that which he intends by it,) as it does prove this.

Let any serious man but consider the two first Chapters of it, wherein he
endeavors to prove, Universities are not in any kind useful to fit men for
the Ministry, but opposite thereunto, page 3. And that those Systems of
Theology, which are therein taught are not only useless but hurtful, page 10.

One might reasonably expect that upon flinging out his Gauntlet for the
defense of such positions as these, this Author should muster up his forces,
and appear at least with some seeming strength and reason. And yet he does
nothing less.

His Arguments to this purpose being generally so trivial, coincident,
inconsequent, that we should look upon it as a sign of very great negligence
or ignorance in many of our young Boys, if they should debate matters in so
impertinent and loose a manner. And I must observe by the way, how this Author
does herein give sufficient warning what we are to expect from him in the
Reforming of Logic, of the use of which he himself understands so little,
that will teach a man how to define and distinguish, to understand Consequences
and Method, and by this means to speak clearly, strongly and plainly: To
which he is altogether a stranger. Nor is it to be much wondered at, if he
appear an enemy to Syllogismes, (as he afterward professes) considering how
wildly his own arguments would look, if they were to be put into that dress.

He supposes in both these Chapters, that the Universities do undertake to
teach spiritual knowledge, and to furnish men with such gifts, as do only
proceed from the Spirit of God. And this is the chief foundation that he does
erect his following heap of Arguments upon, then which nothing can be more
groundless or false. There being no man, (that ever I heard of) who has
believed or asserted any such thing. And I cannot think it any great
presumption to believe that I understand the tenets of the Uniuersity in this
point as well as he. I am sure it has been the common opinion amongst them,
that there are three kind of gifts materially requisite to complete a man unto
the Ministerial function.

1. Something to be infused by the Spirit of God, which must illuminate him to
understand the mysteries of the Gospel, and affect his heart with an
experimental savor, and acquaintance with those sacred truths wherein he is
to instruct others.

2. Some natural abilityes in respect of solidity of judgment, strength of
memory, warmenes of affection, readiness and volubility of speech, by which he
may be rendered much more serviceable in that work, then those that want these
abilities.

3. Something to be acquired by our own industry and the teaching others;
Namely, a distinct and methodicall comprehention of the several subjects to be
treated of, together with the means or advantages that help to facilitate the
work of instructing others.

In which respect it may be of singular use for a man to be acquainted with the
several Scriptures and Reasons, that are more immediately pertinent to any
particular head in Theology, as concerning God, his Attributes, Works: The
fallen estate of man, the means of his restitution etc. The duties of the Law
and Gospel together with many particular cases of Conscience which are
incident to the various states and businesses of life.

Concerning all which things, sure it can be no hinderance to a man (as this
Author supposes) to have all the most material notions upon any subject, put
together, cleared up and stated by the concurrent labors of many wise and good
men, after much consideration and experience about them. And this is that
Theology, which the Universities do pretend to teach, and though it does not
exceed the sphere of those common gifts which mere natural men are capeable
of, yet is it of such singular use to enable a man to speak distinctly unto
several points, to confirm truth, to clear up difficultyes, answer doubts
and consequently to help in the work of informing others. That I am not able
to imagine any reason, why an eminent ability in this kind might not be
sufficient to make a man capable of a civil degree, as well as skill in any
other faculty.

I am sure the preparatory studies required to the profession of Physic or
Civil Law, are not more then for this Theology, nor is it less copious for
its extent, or of less importance and usefulness for its end, then either of
the other Faculties.

Now unless this Author will say, that he who has grace, and is without these
gifts, is better able to Teach, then he that has both grace and these gifts
too, he has no reason to complain of the uselesnesse and danger of
Academicall education, in reference to the work of the Ministry.

Whereas he does object that these common gifts are a Temptation to pride,
confidence, boasting: That is merely accidental: So is health too, and
liberty, and all other natural or acquired abilities, and he may upon as good
grounds, hope to persuade men to love sickness and slavery, as to prefer
Ignorance before that Knowledge of this kind that is to be learnt in the
Universities; the best things that are (even Grace it self) may be
accidentally hurtful by the abuse of them, but that is no argument against
their proper usefulness.

Coloss. 2.8.
As for his objecting that place of the Apostle, where he bids to beware of
Philosophy: If that prohibition be to be understood absolutely, and without
limitation, why does he here pretend so much to the knowledge of it himself,
and to the Advancement of it in others? The same answer that he will make for
his own vindication, will serve for his Objection. But besides if he consider
the place better, he will find the words to be, Beware least any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain deceit. Where it is the abuse and not the use that
is prohibited.

I cannot pass over this subject without taking notice of the near affinity
betwixt his third and fourth Argument against school Theology, page 14, 15.
In one he quarrels with it because it is drawn into a strict Logical Method.
And in the next, because it is a confused Chaos. Are they not judiciously put
together? And is not the man very quarrellsome? That out of zeal to contradict
his Adversaries, takes no care of contradicting himself.

What a loose and wild kind of vapouring is that Cap. 3. about Cryptography,
and the universal Character wherein he supposes the Universities to be wholly
ignorant, none of them having so much as touched at these things. page 24.

But above all, the man does give me the freest prospect of his depth and
brain, in that canting Discourse about the language of nature, wherein he does
assent unto the highly illuminated fraternity of the Rosycrucians In his large
encomiums upon Jacob Behem, in that reverence which he professes to judicial
Astrology, which may sufficiently convince what a kind of credulous fanatic
Reformer he is like to prove.

How wretchedly does he abuse some ingenious opinions by his ignorant managing
of them, particularly the copernican Hypothesis; In the defense of which he
urges such pitiful arguments as are enough to fright a serious man from the
belief of it, and to breed a prejudice against it in such as are that way
inclined.

It is enough to nauseate and make a man sick to peruse his crude and jejune
Animadversions upon Logic, Mathematics, Physickes, Metaphysickes, etc. with
the expedients or remedies which he proposes, wherein he has abused some good
Authors, by his ill managing the notions that they have suggested to him.

I must needs confess that at the first sight of this Book, I had a very great
desire to know what the person was who had put himself forward to so noble an
attempt, as reforming all Schools, and advancing all Arts. But for that he
does in his Epistle at the beginning refer wholly to his Book, whereby he
says he will discover himself as Hercules does by his foot and the Lion by his
pawe. But if I were to judge of him by the impressions which he therein makes
of his foot or pawe, I should not by that guess him to be either a Hercules
or a Lion, but some more weak and less generous Animal.

I have heard from very good hands that he is suspected to be a Friar, his
conversation being much with men of that way, And the true design of this
Book being very suitable to one of that profession, Besides that his
superficial and confused knowledge of things is much about that elevation.

I should have been apt to have conjectured him to be some obscure person,
whose peevish malecontented humor had brought him into the gang of the vulgar
Levellers: Amongst whom his ability to talk of some things out of the common
road, has raised him to the reputation of being (...), some extraordinary
person; and by that means has blown him up to such a selfeconfidence, as to
think himself fit to reform the Universityes.

And thus Sir have I given you my sudden thoughts upon the cursory reading of
this Examen. And though the Book will appear unto all Judicious men but
slight and contemptible, yet because it may light into the hands of some weaker
persons, who may be apt to take accusations for convictions: It would not be
amiss if for their sakes some body would vouchfafe more particularly to
examine this Examiner, and to disabuse such as may be seduced by him. It is
part of that Scholastic imprudence, which men of our profession are subject
unto, to sit down and satisfy our selves in our own knowledge of the
weakness of such Adversaries, without taking any pains to satisfy others,
who are not so well able to judge.

I shoud think that Mr Alex: Rosse might in some respects be very fit to enter
the lists with this Champion. But I know not how far he may at present be
engaged in the Confutation of some better Book. I am very sure Sir there are
many of your acquaintance, who if their leisure and patience would permit, are
able to play with this Hercules, and I should think it a good recreation for
some of their spare hours. And the hopes that you may be isntrumental for
this is, the chief occasion that provoked me to trouble you with so large an
account of my present thoughts upon this subject.

It may seem somewhat odd and strange to consider what several kinds of
Adversaries have of late appeared against the Universityes. Mr Hobbs, Mr Dell,
Mr Webster.

The first of them being a person of good ability and solid parts, but
otherwise highly magisteriall, and one that will be very angry with all that do
not presently submit to his dictates, And for advancing the reputation of his
own skill, cares not what unworthy reflections he casts on others. It were not
amiss, if he were made acquainted, that for all his slighting of the
Universityes, there are here many men, who have been very well versed in those
notions and Principles which he would be counted the inventer of, and that
before his works were published. And though he for his part may think it below
him to acknowledge himself beholding to Mr Warners Manuscripts, yet those
amongst us who have seen and perused them must for many things give him the
honor of precedence before Mr Hobbs.

The other (as far as his character may be picked out of his writings) is an
angry fanatic man, who wanting himself such Academicall Learning as would
become his relation, would needs persuade others against it, like the Ape in
the Fable. But there is reason to hope that he may be shortly called to an
account, and laid openby a person of eminent worth, whom he has weakly
provoked.

The last is this worthy Author, who by a smattering and superficial knowledge
has raised himself a repute amongst his ignorant followers. In the strength
of which he comes forth to teach the Universities. I should have used him with
much more tenderness and respect, if it had not been very evident to me that
it was not so much an ingenuous affection to the advancement of learning, as a
froward and malicious prejudice against the Universities, that put him on to
this work.

But by this time I have tired you as well as my self, let me crave your
pardon for this tediousness, and that you would continue to esteem me for

SIR Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant N. S.

SIR,
IF I should gain no other fruit beside the pleasure of my giving testimony to
the service and respect I bear you, it were a reward exceedingly beyond the
labor of the task which you (by recommending) have imposed upon me. The
advancement of Learning and the consideration of designs tending that way, are
things exceedingly suitable to mydesires, these things have been the argument
of much discourse, which I have had the happiness to have with you. I must
needs say that I should not more desire (next to the matters of the highest
concernement) to meet with a Book of any other argument, then such an one as
should propose expedients for the perfecting and promoting of all kinds of
Science. And that is the undertaking of the Book you are pleased to send me,
(in the Title Page of it) so that the pleasure you are pleased to give me in
offering me under the notion of satisfying your desires that which is so
suitable to my own, takes off all consideration of labor in turning the times
of my diversion to scribbling, and yet leaves me the hopes of your Acceptance,
as if I had taken pains, or done something in your service.

I can easily conceive, that upon the ground which I have laid (of my delight
in writings tending to the advancement of Learning.) I may raise a suspicion
that out of compleasance to you I would diminish the service which herein I
offer you. Seeing the disappointment of our earnest expectations in things we
seriously desire, does use to be unpleasant to us, and such a disappointment
you have sufficiently fore warned me of in your Epistle. But I must profess I
am far from any such reach in Complement. Designs that way, do always
please me however managed, provided it be not in the way of a dull and nauseous
mediocrity. You may perhaps Sir, impute this to some peculiary in my
disposition. Yet I have observed in other men, that they have expressed as
great a pleasure at the combat of Clinias and Dametas, as of Amphialus and
Musidorus, and when Punteus was in town, I saw the soberest of the spectatours
as much affected at the imitations of the Zany, as at the Active, and (in their
kind) admirable performances of the chief Actor.

There is an excellency in that which is uncouth, as well as in what is
handsome; and it is enough for me if any thing be excellent in its kind, and
such I found (upon my slight perusal) to be the Book you sent me, which to my
Lord Bacons Advancement, and those which some others have designed, bears such
proportion as I have intimated.

It remains therefore that I humbly thank you for so far considering my
Genius, which always inclining me to Idleness, you have found out a way to
employ my vacancyes with a just satisfaction, such as does arise rather from
being slightly busied then not at all, rather from Trifling then perfect
Idleness.

In compliance therefore with your desire, I mean to run over this reverend
Author, not staying upon his expressions, or making a toil of a pleasure but
briefly touching upon the things he mentions, taking no care either of my
passions or expressions, any farther then to retain them within the compass
of civility.

Those things which you have taken the pains to confute, I shall not so much
as once recite, the remainder I shall carelessly and slightly (that is, in my
apprehension most becomingly) speak to.

It Is true, you have given us a perfect character of him in your Epistle; but
because some may conjecture that he knows himself, better then you know him
(though in truth you are much a better judge of him then he is of himself:) I
suppose it may not be unusefull to gather together that Character which he has
given of himself, that doing him no wrong, and forming a just Idea of him in
the beginning of my Discourse, the Reader may be prepared for a due reception
of that which follows.

We may understand him by his style ( oration indicat virum) and by his
passions, wherein its hard for a man to dissemble.

HE enters in fear and proceeds in jelousies. Epistle.
His first fear is (of affrighting the tender Scholars) least he should be
looked on as some Goth or Vandall, Hunne or Scythian coming like a torrent
from the Boreall mountains of cold stupidity etc. But for that his comfort is,
that others cannot more Experimentally and Apodictically anatomize his
Idiocracy then himself, wherein besides the (...) of his elloquence, there is
likewise a (...) of sense not fathomable by common understandings; as how
others should at all experimentally, or he himself should Apodictically
anatomize his Idiocracy.

His next is a doubtful pang, least he should be charged with over much
confidence, and the proposal of fame for his Guerdon but here again his
bosom is his Sa^ctuary, I find him valiant (your petifull men are always so)
the sanctuary of his breast and a sentence of the Accedence are his retreat; and
this is his comfort a man is a man though he have but an hose on his head, and
homo is a common name for all men. It Is to be hoped his Examen may be
favorable to the Gramar, who is thus beholding to the Accedence; Yet some men
think he could not want an high degree of confidence that should expect fame
from compiling such a work as this.

His next encounter is against the suspicion of Avarice, as if he would ruin
Universities to share in the spoil. But this he does sufficiently confute by
an Argument of such a weighty consequence, as I hope no man will be so uncivil
as to deny. For he is no Deane nor Master President, nor Provost, Fellow, nor
Pensioner, and least any man should suspect him to be of another order which he
has omitted viz. a Scholar; he gives assurance to the contrary by that new
ellegance which he has added to an old verse, Qui cadit in terram non habet
unde cadat.
Which he has reformed it into nonsense: Indeed although we hope that none
could suspect him of any such interst; Yet all those Parties ought to thank him
for his care in giving the world this satisfaction.

By this time he supposes the drousy world awakened by the sound of his
thundering style (and by the Proclamation of his heroical designs) to enquire
into the Origin and Education of him that dares censure (and defy all the
Universityes in the universe Though he might chose to answer; he will not be
Cinicall but say, That Hercules is eastly known by his foot, and the Lion by
his paw, his Treatise shall show that he is a free borne Englishman (of the
house of the Websters) and that's enough for modest inquirers.

And now one would think this Herculean Lion should be no more afraid, but
again behold he trembles, least some should think his Treatise to be like
Plato's Republic: Sr Thomas Mores Vtopia, or the Ld. Bacons new Atlantis. But
if they should do so, they were surely much to blame, and 'twere an
unpardonable error, I should be very glad to rid him from this fear, but I
consider it is the destiny of such Heroes, borne for reformers of the world, to
be men of working fancies, subject to ma^y fears and trances. His predecessor
in the Military way (the famous Hero of the Mancha mistook a windmill for an
enchanted Castle, and this man (man did I say, this Hero) lies under the same
delusion, relieve him I cannot, lament him I must, O Webster Webster quae te
dementia cepit.


He has a petty scruple yet remaining, least he may possibly be charged with
an infirmity of pilfering or nimming: But he can say, with Macrobius, Omne
meum, Nihil meum, the Treatise is of his own invention (he found it in Helmont,
Verulam, Gassendus, and some others) he has indeed taken some hints to the
mountenance of three quarters of the Treatise, but he took them from strong
men, fighting with the steely instruments of Demonstration etc. and no man can
accuse him of singularity, whilst Noble Heroes bear him Company.

Thus have you Sir, a character of this Noble Reformer, given us liberally by
himself, he would not calumniate the Academies, (but censure the corruptions
of the present Generation) he professes he has not done all he could, so that
if he fail, we must blame his weakness not his Will; where by the way,
observe the consequence of his reformed Logic, he could have done more if he
would, and yet we must blame his weakness not his will.

Hitherto you have had his Apologies, he will now put us to ours, for Explicit
Epistola, Incipit Examen Academiarum.

CAP. I. Of the general ends of erecting public Schools.
HE acknowledges, that no Nation has been so ferall as not to honor
Literature, for the Indians had their Brachmans etc. and these had their
public Schools.

The man we see thinks it brutishness not to honor Learning, and the way for
Learning to flourish, to be by instituting Academies. How infinitely are we
beholden to him for this testimony.

Yet they had not so far as he can gather (and that's as far as some milder
Author will furnish him, for its hard to name from whence he had his Catalogue
of Brachmans, Magi, and Druides, there are so many who taken with the bombast
of their names love to recite them) any public salaryes: But their merit was
their maintenance etc. Here first it will be worth the while to observe his
course of reasoning, how it differs from ours in the Universities.

1. He cannot gather they had public Salaries. 2. Therefore they had no
Salaries at all (for Their merit was their maintenance.) 3. Yet their
excellence in arts procured them Advancement.
I see the reason why he is offended at our Logic; But (to answer seriously)
if he have any meaning in this touch, it must be of bad signification to the
Revenues of the Universities.

But it would be sad, if things should be modelled by this man's reading, or
Universities were to subsist upon his collections.

It Is true, we never read of AEsculapius, what fees he took, nor of the price of
Homers Ballads, yet we know that Homer had a mouth, else how could he sing? And
by the Immortality of his Works we know that his drink was not water.

-- nec vivere carmina possunt
Quae scribuntur aquae potoribus.
This man's predecessor in the way of Knight Errantry, had like to have run
into a grievous mistake, because he had never read in any Author, that they
used to carry money; and if M. Webster compose himself to the model of what he
reads concerning those ancient Worthies, I confess I should fear to keep him
company; for not reading of any shirts or shoes that they made use of, I know
not how sweet and cleanly I might find him.

Well Sir, that which follows is very sad, and you having answered the
Theological part, I intend to skip it over.

The ends of erecting Academies, have been in his account, the same in general
to all people, though they have differed in particulars.

Viz. Politic, in reference to the Commonwealth Military. Civil.
Religious, serving to Idolatry amongst the Heathen. The Ministry amongst
Christians.



The Politic use he approves of, to the great happiness of the Universities,
rejoice therefore O ye Academies, for ye may remain notwithstanding the
strenuous endeavor of the Scythians, the Goths, the Vandalls, and the Huns.
Dicite, Io Paean.

But the Religious use of them he disapproves, and here it is that you have
sufficiently contunded him, and saved us the labor of a Reply, I shall not
therefore need to speak a word to his Theological Arguments, the judicious
Reader will excuse this Chasme, being so happily prevented by your Learned
Strictures, I shall touch upon that which you took no notice of.

It fell within the compass of his wit, being so vast and comprehensive to
discern, that languages may be judged useful to Theology, see therefore how
he will elevate their reputation.

It is not (he says) concluded which are the Original Copies: and tongues
teach but the Grammatical sense. It is indeed disputed which Copies are
Authentical, betwixt men of his Religion, and those of ours, but the want of
Grammar, has made a Protestant of a Friar, for by translating the word
Authentical, into the word Original, he has (by mere chance) renounced the
Tridentine Council, tacitly acknowledging the vulgar Latin not to be
Authentical.

But his Logic is as fortunate as his Grammar, he argues Tongues to be
unnecessary to Theology (for I am loath to offend his tender ears or head)
because they teach but the Grammatical sense, and a literal understanding:
Sir, you may perhaps demand a reason of the consequence, thinking the knowledge
of the Grammatical sense, to be necessary to the attaining of the Spiritual
meaning, but I shall desire to be heard as to the Antecedent, and to be his
remembrancer, that Tongues, nay Letters, have taught a way of Mystical
Theology, as mystical as need to be, and not unworthy to be compared to his
which follows; it is pity he had not heard of the mysteries of the Gnostics,
nor the Ziruph Gematry and Notariacon of the Cabalists, that one might have
gained his favor to the Greek, the other to the Hebrew Tongue, to the
advancement of Marcus and Colarbasus, and the sparing of Behemen and De
Fluctibus.

But the knowledge of Tongues is built upon no surer a foundation then
traditionall Faith. Alas! who knows there ever was such a language as Greek
or Hebrew or Latin, or that the words do signify as we are told. Mr Webster is
a deep thinking man, and will not be put off without a demonstration or
revelation (you charge him wrongfully with Popery he hates traditions) and will
not I warrant you upon tradition believe that caput signifyes a head, or that
this word head, can represent that noble part of his styled in the verses
before his Book his bonny sconce, where so much wit and Learning is inskulled,
in this point surely he may say, Preface*
if he be not guilty of too much dubi^ation, with Pyrrho, he is not over
confident with Aristotle.

But there are errors in all translations, therefore toungs are unnecessary,
how necessary to renounce their reason, is it for those who deal with them of
the Mystery. Some would have thought because there were errors therefore the
study of Languages are necessary; that were indeed the Logical consequence,
but the other is the Mystical.

His last Argument of making men proud of their skill you have answered, and
this for the first Chapter as to what you thought worthy of your notice, the
Second concerning Schoole-Theology, has felt likewise the weight of your hand:
I pass on therefore to the Third, being earnest to taste of his Humanity.

CAP. III. Of the Division of that which the Schools call Humane Learning, and
first of Tongues or Languages.
THAT which he Proposes in the Third Chapter is to speak 1. Of the division of
humane Learning, made by The Schools. Himself.
2. Of Languages, where he proposes, 1. Their uselessenesse. 2. A Dispute about
the way of Attainement, Whether that by Grammar be the best. 3. Errors of
Grammar. 4. Advancements, by Hieroglyphics. Symbolismes. Steganography.
Universal Character. Language of Nature.




The first part of his undertaking, I shall not stand much upon, because the
good man has hinted at some others worthy of more consideration, the good man
(for I fear I offend when I call him Master Webster, because of page 11.) is
offended that knowledge should be divided into Speculative and Practical:
Natural Philosophy has for its object, Corpus Natural mobile, and the end is
not Speculation, and so its practical. Mathematics has taught men to build
houses, etc. therefore that is Practical, and the Schools would have them
Speculative. A sad thing, and worthy the Animadversion of this great Reformer.

Now if the Schools should answer, that the end of these Sciences may be
practiced, and yet they may be speculative, I know not what he would reply. I
am much given to observe the course of his ratiocination, which always ends in
Mystery. See then how he proceeds for Natural Philosophy: This cannot be
Speculative, for the end of it is more sublime then to rest in Speculation.
Well, what is the end? to behold the eternal power and Godhead, that is,
speculation: but farther, to be drawn to worship him, that's indeed practice;
But lastly, to worship him, that we may come to the vision of him, that is
Speculation; the end therefore of it may be Speculation, and so the Schools
escape a whipping.

For what he says concerning the Mathematics, as you know Sr it cannot choose
but move me, they have bin so^etime accounted my Mistress, and Jealousy must
work when I find another courting her, and that so passionately that he falls
into an Ecstasy: ( O sublime, transcendent, Page 19.
beautiful, and most Noble Mistress (quoth he) who would not be enamoured on
thy Seraphick pulchritude etc.) But making my approach to him, I find him at
his distance, praying (like some moping Friar to the Lady of Lauretto, or like)
the Nephew of the Queen of Faery, and uttering a speech to her, made by John
Dee in his Preface, enough to satisfy me, that she is yet pure and untouched
by him, and has not entertained him into any familiarity.

Seriously Sir, had he read the Book as well as the Preface, nay had he
understood but the two first Propositions, he would have perceived, how
Theorems do serve in order to Problemes, and practice may be the end of
contemplation, and so again the Schools might have escaped him.

Well! but see him divide now the Arts and Sciences, behold him coming to it
with his cleaver, or rather with his Herculean beetle endeavoring to split
them in three pieces.

1. The first are those that though they seem to confer some knowledge, yet
they do it in order to a farther end, and so are isntrumental.

And this part, according to this Author, ought to comprehend all Arts and
Sciences, and so the block of Sciences, has escaped the wedge, though it has
felt the Beetle-head.

2. Those which confer knowledge of themselves, and are not isntrumental to
others, as Natural Philosophy, etc.

Here the Beetle rebounds, and gives himself a blow, for can the science of
Natural things, whose subject is Corpus Natural mobile, p. 18. choose but be
subordinate and isntrumental to the discovery of God, and the preservation of
health? p. 18.19.

3. The third sort are those, which though they confer some knowledge, and
have some peculiar uses, so they seem necessary as ornamentall.

We see the blow the Beetle gave him, has wholly bereft him of his sense, a
sad example upon a man, that not contented with the old, would set himself to
make amongst us new divisions.

Well may he loose his senses, but he will never loose his mettle, he no sooner
awakes out of his trance, but biting his tongue by chance, upon that occasion
he falls upon the thought of Tongues and Languages. Wherefore woe be to them.

1. The Knowledge of tongues bears a great noise in the world (and is it not
strange that tongues should keep such a noise?) and yet there is not much
profit by them.

The profit that is by tongues is only 1. To understand one another. 2. To make
foreign negotiations and to traffic
and therefore it is not worth the while to learn them.

The Argument is somewhat mystical, I shall endeavor a little to unfold the
mystery; All good things relate only to the body or mind, and the lives of men
are divided into these four kinds (...). (...). (...). (...)


Riches or pleasure carry the greatest sway, and those are carried on in the
world by Negotiations and Traffic, these administer to every Nation whatever
is the peculiar advantage of any one, and furnishes them all with Gold and
Silver, etc. which men have agreed to make the common measure of riches, and
with all things conducing to health and pleasure. Now there is no traffic
without the use of Languages, therefore there is not much profit in them. Well
these are commonly counted good things, but our Zeletique or Sceptick may be in
that a Stoic, these are commoda not bona, things that are good and profitable
are the goods of the mind, and those are attained by making use of the
Discourse and writings of men of all Ages and Nations, and that is not to be
done without skill in Languages, So that again there is but little profit by
them.

It Is true no sort of men can well be without the^, as they cannot be without
the Sun, (his heat to nourish, his light to guide them) therefore the use of
them is little, this is his Logic, but I am apt to forget my self as often as I
shall fall into his Mysteries.

2. But if Languages were worth the while to learn, yet the way of teaching
them (by Grammar etc.) is not the best. Either the way must be by Grammar, or
by Exercise in Colloquy, if the latter it must be gained by co^versation either
at home or abroad.


First for the Learned languages, Latin, Greek, Hebrew and the rest of that
rank, whether shall a man travel to converse with such as will speak to him
in those tongues: as for other tongues, as French, Italian, Spanish etc. his
advice will be to travel into those Nations. But if any man make it his
business to comprehend them all, he must either hire men of all sorts to be
with him as Conversers, or must apply himself to all, (traveling till he meet
with them) so that the result will be that instead of some days in his study,
a man spends many years in travel or conversation, and all for saving the
expense of time and charges.

The way of Conversation, makes men ready and confident, but that alone will
never make them accurate, an instance whereof we have, in that none that have
no skill in Grammar, can ever amongst us (though they speak excellently)
attain the true writing of our English Tongue, and though many have come to be
knowing men, as to the substance, and vastly read, yet I never knew an accurate
man, fit to write or speak in any learned Language, who neglected the Grammar
of it.

This I thought proper enough for an Academicall man to take notice of: as for
his exceptions to the Grammar, as being void of Evidentiall perspicuity, and
not coapted to the tender capacities of young years etc. I leave them to the
Schools of the lower form to answer. The man supposes that Universities, like
to the Scholae Illustres of the Jesuits, teach the Latin Grammar, and to go
through even the lowest elements of learning: but you know Sir, that it is
neither usual nor lawful to teach the Latin Grammar in the Universities.
Stat. Cant.
If this man have ever seen any Universities, they have been the Romish
Schools and Academies, to whose elevation, the Learning which he discovers,
and the reformation he proposes, are (to use his excellent phrase) coapted.

But in truth I am extremely ravished at the defects he finds in Grammar, and
his proposalls for its advancement, how sweetly and congruously has he drawn
in to the relief and advancement of Grammar and Language, those things which
mortal men intended to set in opposition to them. It is reported of Friar
Bacon, that time was when by the strength of Alchymy he made a Brazen head to
speak Time is etc. but how far has our Friar exceeded him, who taking of
Hieroglyphics, Emblemes, Symbols, and Cryptography, and according to his
capacity, has extracted out of silence, an advance of Eloquence, and from dumb
signs a Grammar. Sir, I do not deny that the consideration of these things
may very well accompany the consideration of Grammar, and the defects in these
kinds may be spoken of very methodically, together with the defects of Grammar,
they being all conversant (though in ways as absolutely different as the ear
is from the ey) about signification, and generally referring to it: but to make
them all one, or parts of each other, amounts to no less then a great want of
consideration.

It is a thing to be acknowledged by all considering men, that knowledge is
conveyed by signification of our notions to one another, that signs may be
made (by institution of men) in any way which does admit of a sufficient
variety, and that knowledge may be communicated, as well by the eye as by the
ear, but to say that by introducing that way, either Grammar or Languages
should be advanced, it were as mystical as to affirm, that the day light is
advanced by the coming of the night, or that he would kill a man for his
preservation.

To discourse concerning Hieroglyphicall (or Emblematicall) and
Cryptographicall Learning, is as needless, to men that know any thing, as
useless to M Webster, who out of the abundance of his ingenuity, confesses the
Cryptographicall Books of Porta, Agrippa, Trit^hemius, etc. to be written to
his wonder and amazement; what was the design of them, and to whether Pallas
they refer, he troubles not himself to know, it is enough for him, that
Orthography and Cryptography have the same end, and he has heard that the
first is a part of Grammar: and why may not Emblems be a part of Grammar, as
well as Etymology, they begin both with a letter, the word sounds as well, and
Emblematicall is a neater word, and suits perhaps better with his mouth then
Etymologicall. Besides.

Hierogliphicks and Cryptography, were invented for concealment of things, and
used either in mysteries of Religion which were infanda, or in the exigences af
War, or in occa^ions of the deepest secresy, (such as those of Love, which is
not to be owned, or of the great Elix^r, and the like) and Grammar is one of
those Arts and Language one of those helps, which serve for explication of our
minds and notions: How incongruous then is it, that the Art of Concealment,
should not be made a part of the Art of Illustration; surely it would make much
to the advancement of Children while they are learning the Elements of Grammar,
to be put upon the speculation of the Mensa Isiacae, the Canopi, and Obeliskes,
the Thesaurus Hieroglyphicus, or Grosschedel's Magical Calendar; This would
certainly effect, even in Children, what Porta and Agrippa have done to M.
Webster, bring them to Wonder and Amazement.

But he has extremely disobliged whosoever have been Authors of the
Symbolicall way, either in Mathematics, Philosophy, or Oratory, to bring them
under the ferula, and make those who have exempted themselves from the
encombrances of words to be brought post liminio, into the Grammar School, it
was little thought by Vieta, M. Oughtred, or Herrigon, that their designation
of quantities by Species, or of the several ways of managing them by Symbols
(whereby we are enabled to behold, as it were, with our eyes, that long
continued series of mixed and intricate Ratiocination, which would confound the
strongest fancy to sustain it, and are with ease let in to the Abstruseft, and
most perplexed depths, wherein the contemplation of quantity is concerned)
should ever have met so slight a considerer of them, as should bring them under
Grammar. It is very well known to the youth of the University, that the
avoiding of confusion or perturbatio^ of the fancy made by words, or preventing
the los of sight of the general reason of things, by the disguise of
particular numbers, having passed through several forms of operation, was the
end and motive of inventing Mathematical Symbols, so that it was a design
perfectly intended against Language and its servant Grammar, and that carried
on so far, as to oppose the use of numbers themselves, which by the Learned,
are styled Lingua Mathematicorum, with whom (...) and numero inexplicabile are
equipollent: But Mr W. makes me wild to follow him in his mysteries.

The use of Symbols is not confined to the Mathematics only; but has been
applied to the nature of things, by the Pythagorean Philosophers, and diverse
of the Cabalists, and to the Art of Speaking, by diverse both Jews and others:
and this Symbolicall art is that Ars Combinatoria, from which Picus Mirandula
and others, make such large undertakings. The Pythagoreans did make Symbols of
numbers, designing (ex Arbitrio) the parts of nature (as the supreme mind, the
first matter etc.) by them, an instance whereof is Platos, Timeus; the
Combinatorian Jews ( viz. the Author of Iezirah and others) and from them I.
Picus: Schalichius Lully, and others, have made Symbols of the Letters of the
Alphabet, so that (...) signifies with them God: (...) the Angelical Nature
etc. The use of this way with all Symbolicall writers old or new, ( Numeralls,
Literalls, Algebraicalls (for there want not such as have designed things by
the notes of Cossic powers) is to discourse (that is to compare subjects and
subjects, subjects and Predicates, and to deduce conclusions) freely without
the trouble of words, upon which while the mind of man is intended, it neither
sees the consequence so clearly, nor can so swiftly make comparison as when it
is acquitted of those obstacles, an instance whereof every man has in casting
an account by Sarracenicall Ziphers, which is much more certain and speedy,
then if the numbers were designed either in words at length, or in the letters
of any Alphabet; if ever there be a speedy way made to the attainement of
Knowledge, it must be by making a shorter, and clearer cut to the
understanding (by the way of signification) then that which is travailed now by
words; which advancement of Learning and Knowledge, will bring (not an advance,
as this man innocently supposes, but) an elevation and uselessenesse upon
Language and Grammar.

For this effect is that which is pretended to by the Universal Character,
about which he smatters so deliciously viz. To take away from every Nation the
necessity of Learning any other beside their mother tongue (which no Nation is
taught by the rules of Grammar) by designing all things and notions by certain
common signs which may be intelligible by all alike though diversely
expressible (as our numerall notes, the notes of the 12 Signs etc.) You see
Sir how methodicall the man is by bringing this under Grammar, however I shall
take this hint to speak a little freely concerning this Argument.

Sir when I first fell from that verbose way of tradition of the Mathematics,
used by the Ancients, and of late by almost all (such as Clavius and the like)
who have written huge Volumes of particular subjects; into the Symbolicall way,
invented by Vieta, advanced by Harriot, perfected by Mr Oughtred, and Des
Carts: I was presently extremely taken with it, finding by this means, that
not only the substance of those vast Volumes might be brought into the compass
of a sheet or two, but that the things thus reduced were more comprehensible
and mannageable; the labor of the brain much taken off, and a way laid open
(by the various comparisons and applications of quantities) for invention and
demonstration of infinite propositions with more ease then before we could
understand those which others had invented for us. And I was put upon an
eranest desire, that the same course might be taken in other things (the
affections of quantity, the object of universal Mathematics, seeming to be an
Argument too slender to engrosse this benefit.) My first proposal was to find
whether other things might not as well be designed by Symbols, and herein I was
presently resolved that Symboles might be found for every thing and notion, (I
having found the variety of many millons of signs in a square of a quarter of
an Inch.) So that an Universal Character might easily be made wherein all
Nations might communicate together, just as they do in numbers and in species.
And to effect this, is indeed the design of such as hitherto have done any
thing concerning an Universal Character. And the thing thus proposed is
feasible, but the number of several Characters will be almost infinite (at
left as great as the number of primitive words in the most copious tongues and
the learning of them either impossible or very difficult. Of this kind I have
seen several Essays, one in Print, another in Manuscript showed to K. Charles
(containing the first Book of Homers Iliads done into Characters,) but in truth
such as would never be received, or if they should, would give us no other
benefit, besides a communication without language (which is that which is
spoken of the China Characters.)

So that the tradition of Learning, or faciliation of it would be but little
advanced by this means. But it did pesently occur to me, that by the help
of Logic and Mathematiticks this might soon receive a mighty advantage, for
all Discourses being resolved in sentences, those into words, words signifying
either simple notions or being resolvible into simple notions, it is manifest,
that if all the sorts of simple notions be found out, and have Symboles
assigned to them, those will be extremely few in respect of the other, (which
are indeed Characters of words, such as Tullius Tiro's) the reason of their
composition easily known, and the most compounded ones at once will be
comprehended, and yet will represent to the very eye all the elements of their
composition, and so deliver the natures of things: and exact discources may be
made demonstratively without any other pains then is used in the operations of
specious Analytics.

And to such a character as this, there is but one thing more desirable, which
is to make it effable, because it is a dull thing to discourse by pointing and
indication: and as to this there is thus much obvious, that if the first and
most simple things and notions are so few as is the number of consonants, and
the modall variations so few as may be expressed by Vowels and Diphthongs, this
also may be done with great ease and clearenesse, otherwise not without
admitting Homonymies and Synonimies into that language. And here also, a
success has been found much beyond expectation, viz. that the characters
before described may be utterable, and the names be made up of the definitions
of things, or a complexion of all those notions, whereof a Complexe is
compounded, every simple notion being expressed by one syllable, and the most
complexe notion, consisting of as many syllables, as it does of simple
elementall notions. This design if perfected, would be of very great
concernement to the advancement of Learning, and I know one in this University,
who has attempted some thing this way, and undertaks as far as the tradition
of real Learning, by which I understand the Mathematics, and Natural
Philosophy, and the grounds of Physic.

However M. Webster will be brought by this, to acknowledge that these things
are considered in the Universities, and that they only are not dry, whilst he
and his friends are madid.

Such a Language as this (where every word were a definition and contained the
nature of the thing) might not unjustly be termed a natural Language, and
would afford that which the Cabalists and Rosycrucians have vainly sought for
in the Hebrew, And in the names of things assigned by Adam, which M. Webster,
passing the bounds of sense and reason, would bring under the Laws and
regulation of Donatus, although as he concludes most Grammatically, C. ult. it
be not Acquisitive but Dative.

Sir, familiarity with M. Webster makes me bold with him, and that has
encouraged me, to deny that ever there was any such Language of Nature, and to
offer him this Demonstration.

The Paradisicall Protoplast, being Characteristically bound to the Ideal
Matrix of Magical contrition, by the Symphoniacall inspeaking of Aleph
tenebrosum, and limited by Shem hamphorash to the centrall Idees, in-blowne by
the ten numerations of Belimah, which are ten and not nine, ten and not
eleaven; and consequently being altogether absorpt in decyphering the
signatures of Ensoph, beyond the sagacity of either a Peritrochiall, or an
Isoperimetrall expansion. The lynges of the faetiferous elocution, being
disposed only to introversion, was destitute at that time of all Peristalticall
effluxion, which silenced the Otacousticall tone of of the outflying word, and
suppressed it in singultient irructations. But where the forms are thus
enveloped in a reluctance to Pamphoniacall Symbols, and the Phantasmaticall
effluviums checked by the tergiversation of the Epiglottis, from its due
subserviency to that concord and harmony which ought to have been betwixt
lapsed man and his fellow strings, each diatesseron being failed of its
diapente necessary to make up a Diapason no perfect tone could follow. And
consequently this Language of nature must needs be impossible.

I am apt to suspect that this demonstration may to some seem somewhat
obscure, but I am very sure that if Mr Webster does understand what he has
transcribed upon this subject it must have to him (to use his own phrase) an
evidentiall perspicuity.

Thus having demonstrated what I undertook, I make an end of this Chapter, and
proceed to comment upon your text, concerning that which follows.

CAP. IV. Of Logic.
HOw great a favourer of Sciences Mr Webster is, will appear in this, that in
every chapter his Discourse (If I may be bold to call it so without a
Catachresis) equally runs against the Schools, and the arts themselves. I am
persuaded he used to be sorely beaten in the Schools with stripes, and that
has raised up in him, this fatal indignation, woe worth the hand that gathred
the twigs, that made the rod, that whipped the -- for what if he were incapable
of Arts? Ex quovis ligno non fit etc. and what though from a child he were
given to Pilfering, and to Plagiarisme, we know that every thing would live,
and if he now can make a Book from whence he hopes that he shall volitare --
vivus per ora virum, and yet take of that Book, whole sheets together from
other Authors, mentioning them only now and then in the margent, as if he
quoted a line or two of them, if I say by this trade he can live, yes and rant
amongst the Levellers, and be suffered to spend much paper, let them say what
they please, the man is to be regarded both as a wit, and a great paines-taker.

That which follows and is considerable in this whole Book, except his
raptures when he falls in contemplation of Magic, Astrology, or Behmens works
is entirely taken from others, but they are strong men, there is his valor, and
they are none of his acquaintance, there is his ingenuity this Chapter begins
page 32. and reaches to the 40. page of these, his 33. page is taken from
Gassendas his Exercitations page 162. his 34th from L. Bacon page 33 (in 160)
his 36th from Gassend. Exerc. page 100, 101, 102. his 37. and 38. out of
Helmont. page 42, 43, 44. the rest of the Chapter out of Verulam and Agrippa,
and thus I could give an account of all the rest were it not to be Jejune and
troublesome.

But to come to our Examen his scope being to speak against the Logic taught
in our Universities, his Discourse runs upon these heads. 1. Logic is a mere
verbal contest. 2. It is ill applied for the finding forth of verity,
Induction being laid aside and Syllogism taken up. 3. It teaches no certane
rules of Abstracting notions. Fitting words to notion.
4. It is made a part of Physics, intricated with thorny questions etc. 5.
Aristotle's Logic is defective etc. as follows in Gassend. locis ut supra. 6.
There are errors in the parts, viz. 1. In Definition. 2. In Division. 3. In
Argumentation by Syllogism. 1. Their conclusion not necessarily compels
assent. 2. Syllogizing does not teach that which we are ignorant of before. 3.
Syllogisticall conclusions beget but bare opination.

7. Lullyes Art (an Alphabeticall way for Syllogizing) better then the other,
deserving wondrous great praise, yet leaves the mind vast and unsatisfied. So
great is the difference betwixt putation and true knowledge.
If the man had intended to speak to our Capacityes, he should have first
examined what Logic is usually taught in Universities and disputed against it;
now he has roved at all and some interchangeably, accordingly as the fortune
of his Collectors has enabled him, speaking first against the Boys, for
hissing, then against Syllogism, then against Definition, then against
Aristotle, then against Definition etc. And after that against Aristotle and
Syllogizing: you see Sir the generosity of this man he will not make use of
Logic against it self, and you will think me ridiculous in answering to his
Allegation (the University being wholly inconcerned,) but i will be exceeding
brief.

1. A Systeme of rules directing us to the knowledge of the truth begets no
intestine war no humming, hissing, nor obfuscation.

2. The use of Induction is taught in the University as well as the use of
Syllogism; Logic is universally subservient to the enquiry of all truths;
Induction is ridiculously applied to Mathematical truths, and Syllogism is to
be applied to Physics; it was a misfortune to the world, that my Lord Bacon
was not skilled in Mathematics, which made him jealous of their Assistance in
natural Enquiries; when the operations of nature shall be followed up to their
Staticall (and Mechanical) causes, the use of Induction will cease, and
Sylogisme succeed in the place of it, in the interim we are to desire that men
have patience not to lay aside Induction before they have reason.

3. Logic does teach certain rules of Abstracting notions viz by examining
the Agreements and disagreements (which they call the Genus and Difference) of
things, and if our notions of things have been rashly abstracted, the fault
has been either in the obscurity of nature, or in the dullness or impatience
of Philosophers and not in the Logic of the Academies. The notions of things
being rightly abstracted they are rightly assigned to words by Definition.

4. The questions concerning the entity of Logical notions, and other
Physical and Metaphysicall things, are not (to my Knowledge) mingled with the
tradition of Logic, (otherwise then to afford examples to the Rules of it) so
that this complaint may concern others, but not our Universities.

5. Aristotle's Organon is not read to the youth of this University, (how justly
I contend not) neither was it ever understood, or ever will be by M. Webster,
then why should we fall out about it?

6. 1. It is a prodigious Ignorance in Helmont (from whom M. Webster without
regard to common honesty, has taken what ensues) to think there are no other,
or scarce any differences known, beside Rational and Irrational: This is
frequently met withal in the vulgar Systems of Logic as an example, and he
thought no more was known: without regard to all demonstrative Mathematical
knowledge: but he could not speak of things he understood not; why then should
the blind lead the blind?

2. Something he would have spoken against Division, but he had it not about
him; so we can only thank him for his good intentions in that particular.

3. His Exceptions against Syllogizing (I mean his new supply out of Helmont
are these.)

1. Their Conclusions do not necessarily compel Assent. viz. M. Webster is
one who can grant the premises in a true Syllogism, and yet deny the
conclusion. I Answer this is by a special gift.

2 His Second exception, I say, that the eduction of a third Proposition, or
truth from two that were known before, is a teaching of what we knew not,
otherwise no man living need to study for any Demonstrative Knowledge: it is
possible M. Webster may know that totum est majus sua part, and the other
Axioms in Euclid, yet I dare say, he understands not, that in a Rectangled
Triangle, the square of the Hypothenuse, is equal to the conjoined squares of
the other sides, much less any of the Propositions concerning the Regular
Bodies, or Conic Sections.

3. And whereas he says, that Syllogisticall conclusions beget but bare
opination; we ought to pardon him, Helmont told him so, and he knew not that
there was such a thing as Syllogismus Demonstrativus, and what would you have
of a Cat? etc.

7. But though he have despised these ways, he will give an excellent account
of the Art of Lully, and indeed his description argues him a man of profound
search into the things he deals with: it is he says, An Alphabeticall way for
Syllogizing: a description sunk many fathoms beyond the profundity of truth or
sense, and if there be any sense assigneable to this description, it will
amount to such a Definition of Geometry as this, It is an Art of Knowing
something by the help of Letters, Syllables, Words, and Figures: a matter of
grievous skill and judgment to discover Sir I need not own my conversation in
that Art of Lully: yet I meet with few that have considered much more of it
then my self, and this I undertake to be accountable for to M. Webster, that
neither that, nor Logic are unusefull* yet that Logic conduces more to the
invention, and search, and strict examination of Truth, and that other more to
the invention of Arguments for discourse: the one more appropriate to Logical,
(as it is called) the other to Rhetorical, or Poetical invention; the one is a
very good way for beginners, the other extremely useful to men that have
already attained to the knowledge of things, to fetch the notions of things
with ease and celerity in their view; and fit men for secure and ready
speaking. I have now done with his Chapter of Logic and come to that
concerning Mathematics.

CAP. V. Of the Mathematical Sciences.
THE Mathematics are extremely beholding to him for his Favors (but sure
without any special desert from him) He has heard of their perspicuity,
veritude, and certitude, and complains they are so slightly handled, without
any solid practice, or true Demonstrations.

You know Sr, how much this makes toward a bribeing of me; My clamor is
against the neglect of Mathematics in our method of study, and you would think
I cannot choose but receive a co^placency from his concurrence; lyet such is the
perversenes of my nature, that I have not upon any occasion, felt my spleen so
high, streining upon a downright indignation, as when I find him and Mr Dell
praising the Mathematics: for why? what have the Mathematics deserved? that
these men should render them contemptible by their commendations: You know Sir,
it was heretofore accounted an instance of Mathematical skill, to give the
dimensions of Hercules from the measure of his foot, what if I should adventure
to give you the measure of this Mathematical Hercules, or Herculean
Mathematian. Sir i will begin to rant the society with these men having brought me
to it, and I will give you the (Mathematical) measure of two of them together
Mr Webster and Mr Dell.

The measure of their pous (for they tread both in the same steps and are
Mathematitians both of a cise) I take merely from their buzzing Discourse
about Mathematics, and lay this for my Assertion as the result and sum that
may be collected from what they have said in that argument (where I put with
the jejuner discourse all the Rhetoric Poetry. All all the raptures, extasyes
and exclamations, and bring them into this aequation) and that if A be a
symboll of a known measure of skill to be expressed in the number 666. the
skill of them both put together will be equal to Aq -- AqCCC, (the mischief
is they do not understand me) and thence it follows as a corollary, that
neither of them ever understood one demonstration or aequation, and for
assurance of what I say, I undertake, that if either or both of them jointly or
severally be able to resolve a common adfected aequation, or give the
Geometrical effection of it (that which many Boys in the University are able
to do) I will procure them one of our Mathematick Professors places.

But he says The Schools have done little or nothing to advance learning, or
promote Science, it is true that my L. Nepair, Mr Briggs, and Mr Oughtred,
(private Spirits) have done something etc.

Will he be always so mysterious? Was not Mr Oughtred Fellow of K. College
in Cambridge, and Mr Briggs first Fellow of St John's, afterward Professor of
Geometry at Gresham College, and did he not lastly live and dye Professor of
Geometry at Oxford, did not most or all of those he mentions afterward,
Profess and read the Mathematics in several Schools and Academies, and is
not Gassendus (from whom he takes whole sheets together of this Rapsody)
Professor of Astronomy at Paris.

What then does this man mean, to say the Schools (as he terms them) have
not advanced these sciences; dos he expect that the College buildings, or Sr
Thomas Bodlyes frame should do it? Indeed they will do it as soon as he. But I
forget my self, the sum of his complaints is this.

1. That Arithmetic and Geometry are neglected, the Schools contenting
themselves with verbal disputes of magnitude, etc. 2. That Optics have
received no advance. 3. That the Theory of Music is neglected. 4. That the
Astronomy Schools teach according to the Ptolemaick System, which they
maintain with Rigor. And against this his spirit runs out in very many
Arguments. 5. They are ignorant of the other parts, as Geography, Hydrography,
Chorography, etc. 6. They do not profess the divine Art or Science of
Astrology. 7. Somewhat he would say of Staticks, Architecture, Pneumatithmy,
etc. Commemorated by Dr John Dee.
Concerning these, I shall speak as briefly as is possible.

1 Arithmetic and Geometry are sincerely and profoundly taught, Analyticall
Algebra, the Solution and Application of Aequations, containing the whole
mystery of both those sciences, being faithfully expounded in the Schools by
the professor of Geometry, and in many several Colleges by particular Tutors,
and were he an Idoneous Auditor, I undertake he should receive full
satisfaction here in that particular, however I will be bound he shall be
wrought upon (as he expresses it elsewhere) even to wonder and amazement.

2. His next complaint is, that the Optics are neglected, (I cannot say what
they are generally, but this I know, that there have been lately given by some
persons here instances of more solid knowledge of all sorts of radiation or
vision, then ever were here, or indeed elsewhere before, and that such things
are ordinary now amongst us (done by some amongst our selves) as heretofore
were counted Magical.

3. The Theory of Music is not neglected, indeed the Music meeting, by the
Statutes of this University, appointed to be once a week, has not of late
been observed, our Instruments having been lately out of tune, and our harpes
hanged up, but if such men as he should please to come among us, and put us to
an examen, without doubt we should then have a fit of Mirth etc.

4. But of all things the Astronomy Schools he is most offended at, as
maintaining with Rigor the Ptolemaick System: And against this he disputes
with Arguments able to turn a Copernican into a Ptolemaick: the thing, as to
our University, you know to be most false; I believe there is not one man here,
who is so far Astronomicall, as to be able to calculate an Eclipse, who has
not received the Copernican System, (as it was left by him, or as improved by
Kepler, Bullialdus, our own Professor, and others of the Ellipticall way)
either as an opinion, or at leastwise, as the most intelligible, and most
convenient Hypothesis. For my self, you know well my principles of Philosophy
and Astronomy, and how little this whole Pamphlet concerns me, yet in defense
of Ptolemy this may be said with justice, that there is no Astronomicall Book
in the World, which may not be better spared then his (...): Sir H. Savile
(then whom in his time, Europe had not a better judge of things of that
nature,) says of it, nihil illi par aut aequale: and I heard this lately
discoursed and demonstrated, by one (having relation to him) who himself is
yet a Copernican of the Ellipticall family; had this man ever seen the
Almagest, or Ptolomies Hypo^yposis, he would have known, that Ptolomy never
meddled with solid Orbs, he only salved the Phenomena, which were left him by
Excentricks and Epicycles, and meddled notwith the Physical part at all: and
indeed there is no Mathematick Book in the world more learned or useful in its
kind, then Ptolemies Almagist, but it is above the capacity of M. Websters cise
to understand either his solution of Triangles, his investigation of Apogees
and Excentricities, his Demonstration of the Inequalities of the Planets, his
concluding of them from the Phenomena of nature, and his exhibition of them by
his hypothesis.

The Method here observed in our Schools is, first to exhibit the Phenomena,
and show the way of their observation, then to give an account of the various
Hypotheses, how those Phenomena have been salved, or may be (where the
Aequipollency or defects of the several Hyppotheses are shown.) And lastly to
show how the Geometrical Hypotheses are resolvible into tables, serving for
calculation of Ephemerides, which are of quotidian use, and if Mr Webster have
any thing to amend in this method, and will afford it our Professor, I will
undertake he will be thankful for it.

The puerility of his Arguments your self have noted, they are sacred I will
not name them.

5. It is not fair to say we are ignorant of Cosmography, unless he had tried
us, indeed, if we be so, I know some must answer for it, Sir Henry Savile has
laid it upon one of his Professors to Read publicly after the body of
Astronomy, these Arts he mentions, and if he be ignorant of them, let M.
Webster inform against him, and take his Profession, win it and wear it.
You will give me leave Sir, to publish in our vindication, what your self and
I know to be true. These Arts he mentions, are not only understood, and taught
here, but have lately received real and considerable advances (I mean since
the Universities came into those hands wherein now it is) particularly
Arithmetic, and Geometry, in the promotion of the Doctrine of Indivisibilia,
and the discovery of the natural rise and mannagement of Conic Sections and
other solid places. Optics and Perspective, by various inventions and
applications on Gnomonicks and picture Astronomy in polishing, and indeed
perfecting the Ellipticall hypothesis, and rendering it Geometrical; and surely
if we may still enjoy the encouragement of the Higher Powers, we may hope in a
little time, to give a good account of our selves, as to these particulars.

6. But the mischief is, we are not given to Astrology, a sad thing, that men
will not forsake the study of Arts and Languages, and give themselves up to
this high and Noble Art or Science, he knows not what to call it: Nay call it
that ridiculous cheat, made up of nonsense and contradictions, founded only
upon the dishonesty of Impostors, and the frivolous curiosity of silly people,
so as none but one initiated in the Academy of Bethlem, would require of us,
that we should be Philosophers and Mathematicians, and yet not to have
outgrowne this gullery. I speak not to him (for he understands as much of
Astrology as of other things) but to those he so highly adores (for one of whom
viz. Mr Ashmole, I have a very good respect) I make this proffer, that if they
can assert either upon the grounds of reason, or constant experiment, any one
rule of Judicial Astrology, nay if they can maintain, that the very
foundations of them, are not frivolously and ridiculously laid and retained, I
shall join with Mr. W. in desiring that the Thundering Pulpit men, may submit
to the Blundering Hell-pitmen, and that Divinity (he will let me use that word
rather then loose a Conunrim) may give way to Divination. The pretense of
Astrology is to divine by the Syzyges of the Planets. The Planets are
considered, as they respect either (1) the 12 houses, or (2) the signs of the
Zodiac, or (3) one another, or (4) according to their site and native powers.

Against them I assert, that their Houses have no foundation, for whereas there
are three ways of assigning them, either by dividing the Ecliptic, the first
vertical or the Aequinoctiall into 12 equal parts, they have forsaken the two
former, and called the last the rational way (as condemning the two former of
irrationality) yet this rational way serves but for some parts of the sphere,
and those that live under a right or parallel sphere (if any do) must be
deprived of the benefit of Astrology, because in a right sphere they are
confounded, and in a parallel there are no houses.

2. In relation to the signs of the Zodiac, the Planets are conceived to have
their Exaltations or Diminutions, and here they discover a most profound
stupidity: about the time when this folly took place, the Apogees and Perigees
of the several Planets being by Astronomers determined to be in certain
places of the Zodiac: this exaltation or depression, in respect of distance,
they Coxcomically have understood in respect to their virtue, and though their
Apogees be changed, they still retain in those very places their Exaltations.

3. Their number of Aspects is Arbitrary, and there may as well be made 600 as
6. and granting there were any reason or ground for their good or bad
signification, they must signify to one another, not to us.

4. Lastly, the virtues of the Planets themselves, that they are hot and cold,
male and female etc. is ridiculously founded; who ever felt the heat of Mars,
or cold of Saturn? The whole Theory is formed with respect to the
Peripateticall System, the conceit of the four Elements, and if they should be
granted, conduce nothing to the fortune-telling which they profess.

I have but touched these things, yet so as I have struck at the root of their
whole imposture, and if they can satisfy in these things, I will be their
Proselite.

7 Seeing Mr Webster had nothing to say of Staticks, Architecture, Pnemaththmy,
etc. I only shall say that all or most, have received some improvement in this
place, as we shall make appear when he makes his visitation.

CAP. VI. Of Scholastic Philosophy.
THis Chapter of his consists of two parts, an affirmative and a Negative; the
first concerns the way of Philosophy, which he says is professed in the
Schools viz. The Aristotelicall way: in the other he would exhibit the
Desiderata, those things whereof the Universities are ignorant.

He disputes against the Aristotelicall Philolophy in more then twenty whole
pages of this Chapter, but his dispute is interrupted by the Desiderata: for
from page 53. to 67. inclusive, he is Ant-Aristoticall; thence to the 78. p.
come in his other exceptions, and from the 78. page to 83. ( viz. to the end of
the Chapter) he has another bang at Aristotle.

You know Sir, how little either I my self, or our Universities, are concerned
to interesse our selves in this quarrel, considering the liberty that is here
allowed and taken, this Discourse may perhaps concern Collegium Conimbricense
or some foreign Universities, and let them Answer it.

Yet I must confess I wondered at this chap. both at the learning, the
Inequality, and the method of it; I presently found some things in it to exceed
the Genius of our Reformer, and some things well becoming him both in respect
of his Learning, Method, and Ingenuity.

Concerning his Desiderata I shall speak briefly by themselves, after I have
given an account first of his Antaristotelicall matter, then of his Method.

I have formerly intimated how good he is at taking hints, I forgot to give
notice in the last Chapter of that faculty of his; Now I will not see him
wronged, my Proposition is, That there is not one Argument against Aristotle,
which he has not taken entirely out of Gassendis Exercitations adversus
Aristoteleos, beside a little out of Helmont, to spare words I have annexed
this Table.

Webster. Page Gassend. Page Here come in the Desiderata, Afterward 53 53, 54,
55 54 56 55 58, 59, 60 56 60 Webster. Gassend. 57 62, 63 Page Page 58 64 78 141
59 78 79 146, 167 60 79 80 167 61 81, 83 81 170, 171, 172 62 84 82 186 63 90,
92 83 189, 195 64 93 Webster. Helm. 65 46 66 and deinceps. 67

You may think Sir I love the man, otherwise I should not take this pains with
him; this concerns his Learning, that which discovers his ingenuity is, that
in the transcription of all these 18 whole Pages out of Gassendus, he never
quotes him* only for a line or two by the by, page 66* he names him.

Q. But you will wonder why this chasme should be betwixt page 67. and p. 78.
and why he could not have given Aristotle his lurry altogether?

Ans. I answer because his Translator failed him, who should have brought it to
him altogether.

Mr Webster being above, or without all skill in Languages, and destitute of
revelation, was forced to get another to translate (he only attempting at one
small parcel page 64. Accedebat ad haec ingenium viri (Aristotelis) tectum and
callidum etc. which he construes, there happened to these things the close wit
of the man etc. though his translator stays, yet (sensible in how great need
the world stood of his labor) he goes on, and when his Translator brings in
his remnant, he claps it into the rest crying first come first served, and
that is the just account and reason of this Method.

The sum of his complaints is this.

1. Natural Magic is abominated, and prosecuted with fire and sword, and not
only so, but the name of it execrable etc. 2. The sublime science of
Pyrotechny, or Chemistry neglected. 3. Medicine 1. Turned to flattery etc. 2.
Ill bottomed upon false Philosophy. 3. The Galenicall way not advanced. 4.
Discoveries in Anotomy 1. Vselesse (as Circulation) 2. Defective, as to the
discovery of the Signatures of the invisible Archeus. 5. Surgery defective
in curing the Lupus, Cancer, etc.
Again, that the Schools are ignorant of 1. Celestial Signatures, and
Subcelestiall Physiognomy, viz. Meteorologicall, Mineralogicall, Botanicall,
Anthropologicall. 2. The three great Hypostaticall soule-ravishing Principles,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. 3. Magneticall Philosophy. 4. Atomicall Learning.


To all these I shall make a very brief reply.

Ans. 1. It is surely a wonderful thing, that natural Magic should not only
be prosecuted with fire and sword, but that it should be execrable also. Yet
notwithstanding this lamentable persecution, I dare adventure my life, That M.
W. may pass safely with this Examen, carrying it either in his pocket, or in
his hand, or in his mouth through both the Universities of this Nation, the
several Colleges of Eaton, Winchester etc. the College of Physicians at
London, and all the rest, (provided he have a care how he passes by the College
at Bethlem) without any danger of Bell, Book, or Candle, Fire, Sword or
Execration. As for those Authors who have treated of that Argument such as
Agrippa, Porta, Wecker, and the rest, you know Sir how often they have deluded us
how very slender a proportion of truth is contained in their volumes, that they
are not respected here because of the name Magic, much less for any conjuring
they teach, but for the cheat and imposture which they put upon us, eluding
credulous men with the pretense of specificall virtues, and occult celestial
Signatures and taking them off from observation and experiment (the only way to
the knowledge of nature) The discoveries of the Symphonies of nature, and the
rules of applying agent and material causes to produce effects, is the true
natural Magic, and the general humane ends of all Pylosophycall enquiries;
but M. Webster knew not this, it is plain therefore he is no Witch, and is
therefore free from persecution.

2. Chemistry you know is not neglected here (there being a conjunction of both
the Purses and endeavors of several persons toward discoveries of that kind,
such as may serve either to the discovery of light or profit, either to
Natural Philosophy or Physic. But Mr Webster expects we should tell him, that
we have found the Elixar, (surely we are wiser then to say so) yet we can
recommend him to one of his faith, who has been threescore years in the
pursuance of it, and two years since believed he was very near it.

3. By what Chymicall operation Physic should be turned into flattery, in
truth I cannot fancy. The practice of Physic has been bottomed upon
experience and observation.

4. And that is the reason, that the discoveries of the Circulation of the
blood, of the venae lacteae, both Mesentericall and Thoracicall, of the vas
breve, and several new ductus, vasa lymphatica etc. have not made an
alteration in the practice of Physic, answerable to the advantage they have
given to the Theory; and the security and confirmation they have brought to the
former ways of practice.

As for his Postulatum of discovering the signatures of the Invisible Archeus
by Anatomy, it is one of his Rosycrucian Rodomantados; would he have us by
diffection surprise the Anima mundi, and show him the impressions of a thing
invisible? Yet the Schematismes of nature in matters of sensible bulk, have
been observed amongst us, and collections made of them in our inquiries, and
when the microscope shall be brought to the highest (whether it is apace
arriving) we shall be able either to give the seminall figures of things, which
regulates them in their production and growth, or evince them to lie in
quantities insensible, and so to be in truth invisible.

5. If neither Physic nor Surgery should be defective, he ought to believe,
that man should be Immortal, or at least, be as long lived as the Rosycrucians
tell him. Yet Surgery as well as Physic, has even in our time been extremely
advanced, this place has given late instances of both; (particularly in
recovering the Wench after she had been hanged at least half an hour, and
others which I could mention) And the College of Physicians at London is the
glory of this Nation, and indeed of Europe, for their Learning and felicity, in
the cures of desperate Ulcers and diseases, even of the Cancer, and those he
(ignorantly) mentions, which have been diverse times performed, by D. Harvey
and others.

As to the Ignorance he charges upon us, I Answer.

1. It is the destiny of proud and ignorant men, such as having nothing of
science, have yet the unjust desire to be reputed Rabbis, and the Impudence to
attempt to be Reformers, that being diverted from the real and solid ways of
knowledge, they dwindle after the windy impostures of Magic and Astrology* of
signatures and physiognomy, and the like, and if we follow them not madding in
these pursuits, we pray that we may be excused.

2. I have formerly given some intimation of our Chymicall society, so that I
hope it will be charitably concluded, that we are not ignorant of those
hypostaticall principles: yet how they should come to ravish the soul of M.
Webster, I cannot tell, unless it should be in contemplation of the benefits
he has received from them, viz. of Salt at Dinner, of Sulphur in the Mange,
and of Mercury in Salivation.

3. Magneticall Philosophy is not neglected here, your self Sir, are conscious
of some Instruments that are prepared for those experiments (as Loadstones
rough and polished, armed and naked, a Terrella and diverse others) and how it
is a real design amongst us, wanting only some assistance for execution, to
erect a Magneticall, Mechanical, and Optic School, furnished with the best
Instruments, and Adapted for the most useful experiments in all those
faculties.

4. How happy are you and I Sir, and our ingenious acquaintance, (whose studies
are toward Physic or Philosophy) in this place, who are all employed to salve
Mechanically, and statically the Phenomena of nature, and have in some parts
advanced the Philosophy of those he mentions? How will it comfort us that we
do, and have done in many things, what he would have us? Qui monet ut facias,
quod jam facis ipse etc.


But least we should be lifted up, behold him in the next Chapter thundering
against the remainder of Arts and Sciences.

CAP. VII. Of Metaphysics, Ethics, Politics, Oeconomicks, Poesy and Oratory.
YOu see Sir, how thick they come together, and yet the Chap. consists but of
three leaves, and part of them is taken up with the repetition of that learned
Proverb, Hercules is known by his foot, and the Lion by his pawe. Do not you
think Sir, that this man looks like Hercules? He thinks so, and he knows how
he looks; even like Hercules Furens, and thence is the inequallity of his
Ravings. You had him in the former Chap. in his combat with strong men to take
from them their steely arms of demonstration; But no Mortal wight, no Hero is
able to persist to perpetuity: we see here the great Alcides or Goliath
fainting, not able to weild his Weavers beam, or Fustilogge, letting it fall
at all adventures, himself forlorn of friends, his strength and reason fled
away.

But though the storm be past therere may be danger from these after drops,
Alcides may stu^ble, and oppress the Sciences with his fall and a man may be
wounded with the convulsive graspe of a dying Lion. Let us observe, therefore
and either decline or repel these last attempts against the Learning of the
Academies.

Against Metaphysics his exceptions are these.

1. It brings no better instrument for the discovery of truth, then the
operation of the Intellect.

Why! has Mr W. any better instrument then this? Is it sense, or is it
revelation? What is his instrument or tool, that he preferres before the
Intellect of man? The man is mad why do I trouble him?

2. It contains no certain principles, the principle of men's Cogitans, is
more certain, and undeniable then that of the Schools, Impossible est idem
simul esse and non esse.

It seems he is in a case to swallow Contradictions, and can assert that a
thing can simul esse and non esse (I warrant this man does believe
transubstantiation) how is his throat widened since he was so straight as not
to admit the inference of a conclusion in a true Syllogism? but then was then,
and now is now, omnium rerum est vicissitudo. Yet Des Carts will give him
little thanks for acknowledging his Principle, Cogito ergo sum, if a thing may
simul esse and non esse.

3. The sum of the remainder is this, (though by a special gift he has
multiplied it into three arguments) That Metaphysics is of no Profit but to
obscure the truth, has produced none but weak frivolous opinions concerning
God etc. and the poisonous Cocatrice eggs of Altercation.

I answer Sir that I have no inclination to grapple with the wind, or deal
with wild universalityes, I am of opinion, that there is much to be considered
of, and amended in the Metaphysics; but that upon this occasion, he has only
discovered an art he has which might have saved him the labor of all
particulars, by saying at once both to the Schools and Sciences that they are
evil and not good, yea even wicked frivolous and abominable.

His next touch is at Ethics, and his Exceptions are

1. Against Aristotle, who was a Heathen, and did not acknowledge God.

And you say Sir, Mr Webster is a Friar, yet Aristotle acknowledged a First
Mover and if that be not God what is it.

2. He placed the summum bonum in the exercise of virtue, but the summum bonum
is not attaineable in this life.

But he was disputing what was the summum bonum in this Life, and if virtue be
the way to Life Eternal, it is certainly that summum bonum.

3. They have taught nothing practicable.

We are sorry that Mr Webster finds Justice, Prudence, Temperance, Modesty etc.
unpracticable, but so it seems it is with him, and yet he will be our Reformer.

4. Aristotle takes the pre-eminence of that which is deduced from the
Principles of Christianity, and is unjustly preferred before Socrates, Plato,
Zeno, Seneca, Epictetus, who contain more precious Treasure.

But where is it O thou roaring Lion, (seeking whom thou may devour) or
rather thou Essex-Lyon, that Aristotle is preferred before Christ? Is it at
Oxford or at Cambridge? Are not the Christian Ethics of Daneus, Scultetus,
Amesius, Aquinas, others, beside all those Authors you have mentioned, read and
study,d and preferred before him in the Universities? What shall be done unto
thee O thou leasing toungue?

Politics.
His exception against the Politics read in the Universities is very faint and
thin being only this, That Plato, Bodin, Machavell, are as good as Aristotle
( though he have many things of singular use, which is the first good word he
has given him) and that our Country man, M. Hobbs, is more profound, and yet
we read Aristotle in the Universities.

Rhetoric.
And the same is his Exception against Rhetoric. We read Aristotle, and spend
too much time upon ornamentall Oratory and Poetry, which are gifts of nature.

Ans. Had this man found any one that had written whole Books against these
Arts of Aristotle, so as Gassendus, Helmont, etc. against his Logic and
Natural Philosophy, and a Translator ready to assist him, these Arts and
Sciences had not thus escaped him, now he can only clatter at Aristotle, and
clamor against the Schools for reading him. Plato, Bodin, Macchiavel, are as
good as Aristotle: well, and Aristotle as good as them; what then? But Mr Hobbs
is more profound etc. It Is true our Theologues say he is bottomed in the great
Abyss. Again, Aristotle in his Rhetoric must give way to Plato; I will not
repeat what I have said, and you Sir before me, concerning the Liberty and
variety amongst us, But I affirm, that supposing those Moral Authors which
even now he mentioned, Zeno, Seneca, Epictetus, or these Politic writers or
Rhetoritians, did contain things better in their kind then Aristotle, yet they
are not so fit to be read in Universities by way of Institution, as he. They
have written diffusedly stilo oratorio, or use by way of Dialogues, but have
not given a brief Methodicall body of the things they handle. The business of
such as have the institution of youth, is to give them, first a brief and
general comprehension of the kinds and natures of those things, about which
their studyes, and endeavors are to be employed, and so to excite and stir
them up to a deeper and more thorough consideration of them, to set them into a
way of study and knowledge, but no man is made perfect in any kind by the mere
endeavors of a Tutor, but for that they must have recourse to their industry,
their ingenuity, and their inclination. Now the chief reason as I conceive,
why Aristotle has been universally received as Magister Legitimus in Schools
has been; The universallity of his Enquiries; the brevity and Method of them;
fitting them for Institutions, and not the truth or infallibillity of his
Works: Ignorance or want of consideration of that end, mixed with pride and
Arrogance and an Ambition to be a reformer, has produced this glorious work
of Mr Webster.

He has now done with the Learning of the Universityes, indeed he had done
with it long ago, and will have a fling at their Customs and Method.

CAP. VIII. Of their Customs and Method.
WHat Erasmus said concerning the Popes Crown, and Monks bellyes, is more fit
for a Friar to speak, then for us who live upon College Commons. To come
therefore briefly to his Exceptions.

1. His first is, That all our several Colleges are tied to one Method,
carried on in one way, bound to the same Authors.

The charge is utterly untrue, yet were it so, it were no inconvenience
(unless he could demonstrate an error in our Institutions) that those who are
to engage in the same Scholastic exercises, should be trained up in the same
Authors and Method.

2. But our Exercises are slothfully performed, our Public Acts being kept but
four times in the year, that is in the Terms, which, if one should tell them
in plain terms, are but usually idle terms.

Would not some man as knowing as himself imagine our Terms to last some four
days or thereabouts? But you know Sir, they take up the greatest part of all
the year, and that in the vacations our Scholars are not exempt from
exercise, either in the College-Halls, or in their Tutors Chambers.

As for his quibling about terms, (it being the only wit that he has offered
at) I will upon no terms spoil his Conundrum, yet I must confess some
grudging I have, that he should set up in two trades at once, Quibling and
Reforming.

3. The custom is Injurious which ties men to a set time of years and Acts,
before they can receive their laureation.

Of all men living I know no reason why such as he should complain of this:
alas! why should such men be left behind their over nimble fellows? Me thinks
he should be comforted, in being suffered to Leird it in a crowd of better
company. But seriously Sir, I use to admire in this the prudence of our
Ancestors; to stay a while for a degree (which yet this man would not have us
so proud and arrogant as to confer) it is no prejudice to men's worth or
Learning; those Colleges have not been least renowned where the local
statutes oblige them to stay the longest; we are not destitute of other
equivalent encouragements, in case of an egregious proficiency: and if upon
such pretenses, time and exercises should be dispensed with, the overweening of
men, and the partiallities of friends, would prove very prejudicial to the
true and sincere interest of worth and Learning.

4. His next scandal is, At the Humming and Hissing of Boys, rather like
Geese then Bees etc.

Indeed Sir, the Boys are to be chidden, yet I must needs tell M. Webster,
that all are not Bees that buzze, and it appears their hissing has been his
great vexation; but that he was never troubled with their humming.

5. He complains, That their Disputations are about Notions and paper-Idols.

Was there ever, or can there be a Disputation about any thing else but
Notions? Would he have them bring forth Bread and Cheese and Dispute de
gustibus? Or would he have the Consecrated Host brought in, and paper-Idols
converted into Wafer-Idols of more savor?

6. And in earnest, it is a heavy thing, that they make use still of the Latin
Tongue in all their exercises.

Indeed Sir, this is a sad and grievous complaint, and has not fallen from him
without reason. His reason I discovered in his Chapter about Philosophy: let
others admire his wit, I am for his judgment: you say Sir, he is a Friar
(whether black or gray, of the Family of the Creepers, or the Skippers it
matters not) now Sir, if he could reform out of the Universities, our studied
Arts and Languages, so far as to banish from us the use of even the Latin
Tongue, and put us into a course of studying Magical signatures, Astrology,
and Jacob Behmen; his modesty might admit of demanding a Canonization, and this
great Mathematician, might justly conclude his account to his holiness, with
an (...).

P. 8, 9, His next three complaints I shall make bold to put together, as
containing our adhering to Antiquity, our being sweyed by plurality of voice,
and our adhering to Aristotle.

O Aristotle, are you there! I wondered where he was all this while, when M.
Webster was in distress for want of him: but he is a Peripatetick, and will
never leave these courses, till M. Webster turn him out from among the
Academies; however for us, let M. W. answer for our affectation of novelty and
singularity, and we shall well enough evade the charges of these Paragraphs.

10. His last complaint is, that we do not read the Mathematics.

Indeed we do not so much and early as is fitting, yet this I must needs say,
that we read Ptolemy, Apollonius, and Euclide, etc. and he has read nothing
but John Dees English Preface: make room now for his Expedients.

CAP. IX. Of some Expedients or Remedies in Theology, Grammar, Logic, and
Mathematics.
DID not I heretofore intimate, that I found M. Webster to be a pitiful man,
and now Sir you see it plainly proved by this Chapter, and those which follow,
Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque feret.
he that has hurt the Universities will heal them. You know it is the custom
of those generous souls, who for the health and safety of the generality of
men, do use to ascend the bank or public stage, to give poison to some that
are about them, to wound or scald them, not that they delight in torturing the
creature, (that were cruelty) but by the smart of some few, to convince the
unbelieving multitude of the celestial energy of their Balsames; they only
wound, that they may cure the wounded. And now for Application in short, that is
the design of this noble Gentleman: yet least any man should think the
remedies worse then the diseases, I am resolved here to join with him, and
with steely arguments, to confound his gainsayers.

For Theology.
1. His first remedy is, that men should lay aside the suffering of themselves,
to be styled by the Blasphemous title of Divines, and that the people should
call them Theologues, as they do in Scotland.

I am for Theologue, Divine is a thin stingy word to it, this fills the mouth
better, and is fitter to astonish, comes nearer too to a Magical noise, (and
Magic is almost Divine p. 68.) I would have the people call them Theologues,
and this is my reason; his reasons are mystical, because the other is
blasphemous: yet nothing more frequent amongst the Ancients then (...): and
those who have sought Epithites for Plato, Aristotle, and Ptolemy, called the
first of them (...), the second (...), and the last (...), I am persuaded
without any intention to Blaspheme. In the last place, I must pray you not to
mistake him, as a favourer of the Scottish interest, for it is well known he is
a Leveller, and by consequence an adversary to the High-lands.

2. His next remedy is, that the Scriptures be wholly laid aside in Scholastic
exercises.

The truth is Sir, he has spoken so excellently in his remedies, that all the
service I can do him, is only to unfold his meaning. I say then that his
meaning is not, that the Scripture should be laid aside in moral exercises,
(for he would have them deduced from the principles of Christianity p. 87.) nor
yet in Physical exercises, (for he would have some Physical Learning
introduced into the Schools, which is grounded upon Scripture Principles p.
105.) but his meaning is only, that the Scriptures should be laid aside in
Theological exercises, and who does not see what a remedy to Theology that
would prove?

3. That the discoveries of God by reason, may be a part of Natural Philosophy.

For why? the subject of Natural Philosophy is Corpus Natural Mobile.

Concerning Languages.
1.2. His first and second Remedies for Languages are, that we should advance
our own, and have a compendious way for teaching foreign Languages.

Who ever thou art that deniest these to be special (or rather indeed
general) remedies in this malady, I say unto thee, thou Lie, and art
stiffnecked: moreover I say, that they are excellent remedies, as being part of
the universal medicine.

3, 4. That in teaching Languages, Comenius way in his Ianua Linguarum.
Grammar, M. Brinsleys way in his Grammar School.
may be followed.

Comenius I know, and that his way is useful, Mr Brinsley I have not the
happiness to know, any otherwise then by M. Websters commendation, being one
of his favorites I should be glad to serve him: I conceive by M. W. his design
is, that Children should be well instructed in the Accedence before they learn
their Grammar.

5. In his fifth remedy he discovers a maine secret, that Irregulars should be
learned without rule, and that the Irregulars being learned, the rule also of
the Regular Nounes and Verbes would be facile and brief, as being but one rule
for all.

Indeed the Children ought to cry gratias, for if for one play-day, and that a
broken one, they use to do it, how many play-daies has he procured them?
besides the present sport he makes them.

After all this he fears it may be imagined, that he should proffer at
advancing Symbolicall and Cryptographicall Learning, the universal Character,
and Language of Nature.

I testify they do him wrong that thus imagine, and never understood well what
formerly he delivered in that Argument: I had him presently in the wind, (such
was my felicity) and durst then have sworn (if need had been) that it was even
just as now I find it: that concerning Cryptography, Symbols, the Universal
Character, he knew nothing; and that his discourse of the Language of Nature,
did signify only this, that wanting the use of other languages, even of the
Latin, he had obtained a gift as useful, viz. a Canting Language.

Next in order follows Logic.
1. His first remedy is, that we find out what reason is in its intrinseck
nature and operation. And examine wherein man's reason exceeds the reason of
other Animants; and here he says it will be found, there is no specificall but
a gradual difference.

M. Webster having discovered that betwixt his reason, and his horses, there is
only a graduall difference, has given much light in the present enquiry; only
he has concealed from us, which of them has the advantage of degrees, and
whether those Degrees are divided by minutes, seconds, and thirds, and whether
in the sexagesimall or decimall way. When he shall have helped us in these
scruples, I pray Sir, let us make the best we can of this remedy.

2. That the principles of Syllogism be cleared and demonstrated.

Because it is very hard for him to understand, that Quae eidem sunt aequalia,
vel inaequalia; sunt inter se aequalia vel inaequalia. Or Quae convenient in
uno tertio vel non convenient; inter se convenient etiam vel non convenient,
his reason differing but gradually from the reason of other Animants.

3. That some prevalent way be found out, for discovering and rectifying the
fallacies of the senses, for Abstracting adequate notions, and giving apposite
denominations to them.

Now Sir, what say you to M. Webster? Had he had the luck to have added the
Quadrature of the Circle, with its Appendices in Geometry, and the Philosophers
Stone in Chymystry, what could more judiciously and comprehensively have been
required?

4. That induction may be improved, and to that end Experiments frugiferous and
luciferous may be made.

The thing that is here proposed I do exceedingly like, and seeing it is an
Amphibious argument, belonging to Physic and Logic both, I will not be so
unreasonable as to quarrel with him about his Method or disposition.

The Mathematics.
The Mathematics should come to be spoken of, but they being what they are,
(able to shift for themselves) and he being able to make a (scambling) shift
without them, and it being terrible hard for one utterly unacquainted with them
to speak any tolerable sense in this Argument, he being wisely-wary, wishing
well to the Mathematics and Mathematicians, (l mean the Copernican
Astronomers) having spoken against Ptolemy, having had a twitch at Aristotle,
and having no more to say, concludes the Chapter.

CAP. X. Of some helps in Natural Philosophy.
HOw can it chose but be well helped up, when he shall set his hands to it who
is so great a Naturall-Phylosopher? In this Chapter he first discusses that
great Question, what shall become of Aristotle? And then proceeds to his
Remedies.

The first in truth is decided (in my opinion) not without some judgment, how
ever it comes to pass.

There are many things in him good (in truth very many excellent things, all
his Historical parts of nature are excellent, and so is his Rhetoric, and all
his other works) only his Physics is to be eliminated, it being founded upon
either false, or not intelligible Principles, referring all things to that
System, and model of the World, which time and observation have manifested to
be untrue: the Astronomy depending thereon (upon that System of four elements,
and a Quintessentiall solid Heaven) falls necessarily upon the removal of his
Physics, or rather the Physical part of that Astronomy.

You see Sir, how loath I am to vary from M. W. my opinion concerning Aristotle
being even coincident with his: yet I think Aristotle's Books, the best of any
Philosophic writings, and that when these things are laid aside, that which
remains deserves for him the honor that ought to be given to one of the
greatest wits, and most useful that ever the World enjoyed.

Farther, I must inform M. Webster, that the thing he does desire, is already
performed in our Academies, there being no man, any thing deeply seen in
Natural Philosophy, who goes about to salve things upon the principles, of
matter, form, and privation, or the first and second qualities. So that I
fear his molimina against Aristotle, will by some wits, be accounted
disingenious, and his reflections upon our Universities, unworthy and
impertinent.

But to come to his Remedies.
1. His first is, that my L. Bacons way may be embraced. That Axioms be
evidently proved by observations, and no other be admitted. etc.

I am wholly of his judgment, yet I have an itching desire to know what Lilly,
and Booker, Behmen, and all the families of Magicians, Soothsayers, Canters,
and Rosycrucians, have done to vex him, since he was writing of Mathematics,
and Scholastic Philosophy, that having cherished them then, and put them in
hopes of his blessing, he should now of a sudden cast them off, betaking
himself to their deadly enemy.

2. The second Remedy is, That some Physical Learning may be brought into the
Schools, that is grounded upon sensible, Rational, Experimental, and
Scripture Principles, and such an Author is Dr Fludd; then which for all the
particulars, the World never had a more perfect piece

How little trust there is in villainous man! he that even now was for the way
of strict and accurate induction, is fallen into the mystical way of the
Cabala, and numbers formal: there are not two ways in the whole World more
opposite, then those of the L. Verulam and D. Fludd, the one founded upon
experiment, the other upon mystical Ideal reasons; even now he was for him,
now he is for this, and all this in the twinkling of an eye, O the celerity of
the change and motion of the Wind.

3. His third remedy is, That the Philosophy of Plato and Democritus, of
Epicurus and Philolaus, of Hermes and Dr Gilbert, be brought into Examination
and practice.

He means that these be examined by those that can understand them (himself
being unprovided in that kind,) that we choose the good, and refuse the evil.
You will say, if De Fluctibus be so perfect, what need we go any farther? I
warrant you Sir, he knows both why and wherefore, though I can see no reason
for it.

4. That youth may put their hands to labor, and their fingers to the
Furnaces: that the Mysteries discovered by Pyrotechny; and the wonders brought
to light by Chemistry may be familiar to them.

All that I can do here is to explain his meaning, least the remedy should
loose its operation [It is not his meaning, that the youth should put their
fingers into the Furnaces, for that would make them dread the fire, nor yet
unto the Furnaces, for that would smut them, but to, that is, toward the
Furnace.] He has likewise taken care that we should not confound in this
Paragraph Chemistry and Pyrotechny, the wonders of that, and the Mysteries of
this. Chemistry is well known, Pyrotechny is the Method of fireworkes, the
Mystery of making Squibs and Crackers.

5. The last remedy is, That Galenicall Physic may not be the prison that all
men must be enchained in.

See Sir how one may live and learn! I ever thought that Galenicall Physic
had served to make men loose, and not to be a prison to them. I can but thank
Mr Webster for this discovery, Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris.

Metaphysics.
His remedy for Metaphysics is to read Des Carts. Yet had he read him till he
had understood him, the world had been deprived of this Herculean labor.

Ethics.
Ethics is better taught by President. Which made him show his manners in
dealing with the Universities.

Rhetoric and Poetry.
Rhetoric and Poetry are gifts, and he has naught to do with them, for why?
Kings and Emperors cannot make an Orator or Poet, Much less can he make
either of them. A sows ear will never make a silken Sail.

CAP. XI. Some Expedients concerning their Custom and Method.
WHosoever shall consider the Errors charged upon the Universities in his
eight Chapter, and the Expedients here proposed, if he do not acknowledge the
Remedies here applied to be the very genuine and natural ones hinted by the
Indication of the Diseases: I say he labors in his Judgment, and is a
Dis-Idoneous Auditor of Mr Webster.

For If the Disease be, that the body of the University is bound, (bound to one
Method) can there be a surer remedy, then to use a solutive Medicine, to give
them a purge and set them loose? If it labor of Idleness or a consumption of
time, can any remedy be more natural, then that time should not hence forth be
trifled away? These are his Recipes, carried on thus to the last, against which
the tongue of envy, cannot say but they are proper to their Maladyes.

Yet I must speak to them in several.

1. That there be a liberty in the way and Method of Study.

I have formerly hinted to him, that our Universities are pretty well furnished
with this medicine, so that he shall do well to vent it upon those foreign
ones from whence he is come.

2. That time be not misspent in the Universities.

Some captious ones have asked, why then he would not take care, to keep his
Works from coming hither to be read? to whom I answer, that he never did
intend they should come hither, he meant them to a party in the City, and takes
no pleasure I dare say, that I should spend this time about him; well this is
not the only thing wherein it is my happiness to agree with M. Webster.

3. That there be not a set time for degrees, but that merit, not years should
take place, and be rewarded.

How fitting this is, I have endeavored to show p. 40.

4. That in their Exercises, it be tried what they can do, that (nature having
given them two hands) they may learn to work etc.

The reasons of this may be many, I shall name only two. First, because he has
been used to weed the Garden, and to other labor in his Covent: then why
should not we? Secondly, because if his reformation shall take place, we must
be put shortly to work for our livings, therefore it is good before hand, for
each man to be provided of a Trade.

5. That Exercises may be in English.

His reason is, least we forget the English Tongue, which would be very sad if
it should fall out: Mine is, that M. Webster and others of his measure, be not
deprived of the benefit of them.

6. That neither Antiquity nor Novelty take place of Verity, nor the Authority
of Aristotle, or any other, should enchaine us.

What? again at Aristotle! nay verily now he is to blame: This remedy had been
a pure one, if he could have let Aristotle alone: the fetching him in here, I
fear, may give occasion to some, to think he does it out of spite.

7. Lastly, the order he prescribes is this, that they be taught, 1.
Mathematics. 2. Tongues. 3. Physics. 4. Logic. 5. Metaphysics. etc.

Not that all men should be bound to the same Method, (as is above expressed)
beside M. Webster studied all these together, which has made him so equally
skilled in all, that there is not any thing to choose betwixt his skill in every
one of them, no man being able to speak, whether he be a greater
Mathematician, a Linguist, or a Philosopher.

And now Sir, you judge that I have faithfully performed what I undertook, at
the opening of his Remedies: I having stuck to him as close as needed to be,
and to speak truth, as close as his sent would suffer me.

Sir, I have ran through this Pamphlet, and I think I have in some measure,
made good the character you gave me of him in your Epistle; you know Sir, I am
not of those who hate to be reformed; it has been my earnest desire, that men
of Parts and Experience would meet together, and consult about the Advancement
of study, by the most convenient method, That would produce something worthy of
our age of light; the raw and crude attempts of such men as these, are slight
and very Ridiculous, no ways considerable, unless it shall be in their
excitations of us, to reform such Errors as we find, to assert and vindicate
the honor of these places. A thing which would speedily and plentifully be
performed, if our design of Printing Books, and setting up a foreign
correspondency were once accomplished. There is one thing which this sort of
Pamphleteers insist on, which as it is pursued by my L. Verulam, so it carries
weight with it, but is very impertinently applied, either as an exception
against us, or as a general rule to be imposed upon us in our Academicall
institution. It is, that instead of verbal Exercises, we should set upon
experiments and observations, that we should lay aside our Disputations,
Declamations, and Public Lectures, and betake our selves, to Agriculture,
Mechanics, Chemistry, and the like.

It cannot be denied but this is the way, and the only way to perfect Natural
Philosophy and Medicine: so that whosoever intend to profess the one or the
other, are to take that course, and I have not neglected occasionally to tell
the World, that this way is pursued amongst us. But our Academies are of a more
general and comprehensive institution, and as there is a provision here made,
that whosoever will be excellent in any kind, in any Art, Science, or Language,
may here receive assistance, and be led by the hand, till he come to be
excellent; so is there a provision likewise, that men be not forced into
particular ways, but may receive an institution, variously answerable to their
genius and design.

Of those very great numbers of youth, which come to our Universities, how few
are there, whose design is to be absolute in Natural Philosophy? Which of the
Nobility or Gentry, desire when they send their Sons hither, that they should
be set to Chemistry, or Agriculture, or Mechanics? Their removal is from
hence commonly in two or three years, to the Innes of Court, and the desire of
their friends is not, that they be engaged in those experimental things, but
that their reason, and fancy, and carriage, be improved by lighter Institutions
and Exercises, that they may become Rational and Graceful speakers, and be of
an acceptable behavior in their Countries.

I am persuaded, that of all those, who come hither for Institution, there is
not one of many hundreds, who if they may have their option, will give
themselves to be accomplished Natural Philosophers, (such as will, ought
certainly to follow this course) the pains is great, the reward but slender,
unless we reckon in the pleasure of contemplation; that indeed is great and
high, but therefore to draw all men that way, by reason of the pleasure, were
to present a Feast all of Custard or Tart, and not to consult the variety of
Tastes, and tempers of our Guests: But I have been too much and long extravagant
and idle: if out of all this you shall be pleased to raise a Contemplation of
your power over me, and shall from thence receive a complacence, it is the
only aim and interest of, SIR,

Your Most etc. H. D.

An Appendix Concerning what Mr Hobbs and Mr Dell have written touching the
Universities.
SIR, when I consider how I have spent that little time, which I have hitherto
bestowed upon Mr Websters Examen, and into what a temper of mind I have fallen
upon that occasion, the satisfaction I receive from what I have done, is so
small, that were I not held on by the power you have over me, in truth I would
excuse my self from any farther trouble. Now it seems I must go on, and
being tired with idle play, I must address my self for a much more
considerable encounter. You know Sir, and have observed in your Letter to me,
how vast a difference there is, betwixt the Learning and Reputation of Mr
Hobbs, and these two Gentlemen, and how scornefully he will take it to be
ranked with a Friar and an Enthusiast: The Answer to this, if he complain,
will be, we found him inter Grues, and could not without prejudice let him
escape: However I shall deal with him as respectfully as I can, giving him
leave to hear himself speak at large, (a thing he is infinitely taken with)
and making such replies, as Truth and Reason shall suggest in our
concernements. I intend only to consider what he has spoken of the
Universities in his Leviathan, or rather what I have therein observed to that
purpose, laying together such passages as may make him to be understood.

That men may be able fully to comprehend the meaning of this Author, we must
carefully by way of preparation, search for his 1. End and Design. 2.
Judgment, concerning the means of attaining it. 3. Expectation as to success
in his Design, and the consequences of it.


1. It appears that the end he proposes to himself (in his Leviathan) is,
that the World should be regulated exactly, by that model which he there
exhibits, and that his reason should be the governing Reason of Mankind.

This is (I conceive) so evident, that he will not deny it, and so frequently
insinuated, that it is needless to be particular. The close of his second part,
and 31 Chapter, is with an intimation of a desire, that by the exercise of
entire Sovereignty, his truth of speculation may be converted into the utility
of practice.

2. The means he proposes to accomplish this end, is the public Teaching of
his Leviathan: which he would have protected by the exercise of entire
Sovereignty. ibid.

Now this public teaching may be either in the Pulpits. Universities.


The Divines and others who make show of Learning, derive their knowledge from
the Universities, and from the Schools of Law, or from the Books which by men
eminent in those Schools and Universities have been published. It is therefore
manifest, that the instruction of the People, depends wholly upon the right
teaching of Youth in the Universities. p. 179, 180.

So that the way he proposes to accomplish his great design, is, the Public
reading of his Leviathan in the Universities, (especially of England) and in
order to this, he has declared himself concerning his Book, the
Universities, and himself. 1. Concerning his Book in the review. p. 395.
"That it may be profitably Printed, and more profitably taught in the
Universities. 2, and 3 Concerning the other two. p. 180. In answer to these two
Questions.

1. Are not the Universities of England learned enough already (to teach the
People their duty? 2. Is it you (Mr Hobbs) will undertake to teach the
Universities?
Where the answer to the first, is, That the Universities have not been able to
plant the true Doctrine (which is his.)

And to the other, that any man which sees what he is doing, may easily
perceive what he thinks.

His immediate desire and judgment is therefore, that his Leviathan be by
entire soveragnity imposed upon the Universities, there to be read, and
publicly taught.

3. It will now concern us to consider his expectation and hope, concerning
the accomplishment of this (sober and modest) design. Upon the prevailing or
failing of which hope in his mind, the destiny of the Universities (as to his
endeavors) shall depend. If he have hope that he shall be publicly taught in
the Universities, it will be convenient for him only to endeavor this piece of
Reformation, and to assert their usefulness being so ordered. If there be
little hopes of obtaining this public Authority for this great Leviathan; To
what end then serve the Universities? Shall other things be taught there
publicly, and this be looked upon as the writing of a private Author? It will
then concern him to fall down right upon them, on every occasion to endeavor
to blast them, and to proclaim them useless to the world.

And here indeed we find him fluctuating betwixt despair and hope, p. 193.
sometimes, At the point of believing this his labor as useless as the
Commonwealth of Plato. At other times recovering hopes, that one time or other
this writing of his may fall into the hands of a Sovereign, who by the
Exercise of entire Sovereignty, in protecting the public teaching of it, will
convert this truth of Speculation into the Vtility of practice.

How happy Sir had it been, if his hopes might have reigned perpetually in his
mind, that so the Universities might have obtained a Patron of this great man,
but he is well in years, and Jelousy and Spleen have prevailed over him, and
in conclusion, he deals with us accordingly; indeed Sir, somewhat Puerilely,
in insulting over us without cause, Tetrically striking at us without any
occasion, Unreasonably, in charging us with some things we are not guilty of,
and condemning us for other, without convincing us of any fault. This is that
we shall demonstrate in our just defense, There are two passages by the by, and
one entire Chapter which will concern us to consider.

His first passage is in the 1. Chapter p. 4. Where having determined Sense to
be nothing else but a perception of a motion made upon the Organ, He adds, But
the Philosophy Schools through all the Universities of Christendom grounded
upon certain texts of Aristotle, teach another Doctrine (viz. that sense is
made by a Species etc.)

1. As for the thing here charged upon all the Schools of Christendom, you
know it Sir to be untrue.

The other Theory of explaining sense upon the grounds of motion, was almost
generally received here before his Book came forth. Being sufficiently taught
by Des Carts, Gassendus, S. K. Digby, and others, before he had Published any
thing in that kind.

2. That which he so much glories in, is not his own invention, but is
contained for substance (as I am certainly informed by one who has seen it)
in Mr Warners Papers, which Mr Hobbs had long since in his hands, and is
delivered in the very beginning of that tract of vision, which treats de
penicillo optico.

3. If Mr Hobbs had invented this, who has not (so far as I can learn)
added any thing considerable to the inventions of other men: It might have been
needless, upon so slight an occasion, to insult over all the Schools of
Christendom; but his mind was intent upon his design, and at this time his
hope had possession there; He says not (therefore) that, as disapproving (yet)
the use of Universities, but to let men see what would be amended in them. page
4.

But that which follows after is indeed of worse consequence, and is (to
speak the best and mildest of it) an evidence of a fuming spleen, and an
instance of despondency in his design.

A touch he is thought to give us in his Kingdom of Darkness, where he makes
a comparison of the Papacy with the Kingdom of Fayries. The words are ( p.
386.) In what shop or operatory the Fayries make their Enchantments, the old
Wives have not determined; but the Operatories of the Clergy, are well enough
known to be the Universities, that received their Discipline, from Authority
Pontificiall.

In truth Sir, I hardly know how to behave myself upon this occasion. First, I
know not whether he intended this to concern our Universities or not; if not,
he might have done us the Justice, to have separated our case from that of
Popish Universities; if he did intend to cast a contumely upon us, I am yet at
a loss how to answer him. This whole discourse is freakish and unbecoming the
Archipoliticall gravity of a Master of the world, our Universities have bin
Modelled by commission from the Civil Power. Seeing the old Women have found
no operatory for the Fairyes; it was a needless Solicitude in this Reverend
old man, to seek one for the Clergy. Well Sir, seeing he will have his
frollick, I am resolved to answer this passage with a Crotchet of a Friend of
mine, whose observation, is that however the Fayries are said to be harmless
in their dancings, he is sure the Hobbe-goblins are spightfull and mischeivous
in their Friskings.

But hitherto we have been but girded at; his maine forces he has gathered
into the Chapter preceding this, viz. the.46. whose title is of Darkness from
vain Philosophy, etc. but its design is against Universities. And this
Chapter contains, 1. A discourse concerning, the beginning and progress of
Philosophy. 2. Concerning the original, and Progress of Schools. 3. The
unprofitablenesse of Schools. 4. Of Universities, and a general charge
against them. 5. Their particular errors.


The two first parts of this Chapter, seem not to be of any special
concernement to us, and I shall have that regard to him, and to my self, not
to oppose him without necessity: were it requisite so to do, it were easy to
manifest, that his sentence concerning the beginnings and progress of
knowledge, is neither suitable to Reason nor History: the supposition laid as a
lemma to that sentence is, that hearding of men like beasts together, their
feeding upon Akornes, and drinking water, their wanting for some time the use
of speech, etc. things neither suitable to those Authentic Histories which
ought to have authority amongst us, nor yet to the conclusions of Reason,
running back from the present state of the world, to the temper and state of
earlier times. But to drive this home were to unravell the whole body of his
Politics, and to dissolve this goodly work, which is not to be done
occasionally in such an Appendix; the time may be, when after Mr Hobbs shall
have published his other Philosophical Works, from whence the rise of this
Great one is fetched, some friend or other of ours may set apart some time, to
weigh and examine all his Labors, and then to render him what shall be due to
the Truth and Demonstration of his Assertions.

You know how much may be said for that Origin and derivation of knowledge,
which the Books of Moses deliver to us; And for the Origin of Schools, which
is the second part of this discourse: as we cannot deny them to have been the
productions of Peace and leisure, so I conceive it is an excessive instance of
Spleen and Melancholy, prejudicial even to the whole course of Life and
Profession of M. H. to call the Discourses and Contemplations of the Ancient
Philosophers, by the name of Talk and Idleness, and to compare the Exercises
of Plato, Aristotle, Zeno, and the Ancient Worthies, (without some of whose
endeavors, there had scarce at this time been either opportunity of knowing
much, nor had the World perhaps set so high a price on knowledge,) to the
prating and loitering usually exercised in Paul's Church, and More-fields* The
world had then another esteem of those Exercises, who publicly upon this
occasion erected Schools for Lectures, and Disputations, almost in every
Commonwealth. And it is in the strength of the reputation of Philosophy gained
that way, that M. Hobbs finds a regard amongst men, desirous of knowledge, and
not for the eminence of what he has published, in any kind exceeding the
productions of those men whom he despises. Thus much in general concerning the
two first parts of this Chapter. The Third is, the Inutility of the Ancient
Schools.

The distaste he has conceived against our Universities, has not suffered him
to contain his Rage within any bounds. What has been the utility of those
(Ancient) Schools? What Science is there at this day acquired by their
Readings and Disputings. p. 369.

The meaning is, there never was any profit by Public Schools. This concerns
us, and we will examine it particularly.

The substance of his reasoning is this, (ib.) Natural Philosophy cannot be
had, without having first attained great knowledge in Geometry

That we have of Geometry (which is the Mother of all natural Science) we are
not indebted for it to the Schools.

Plato forbad entrance to all that were not in some measure Geometricians, etc.

Sir, here it is that I cannot but complain of misguided Rage in M. Hobbs;
against this passage I assert, that not only Geometry was taught in the
Ancient Schools, but that to those Schools, we owe the Geometry which we have.

Much we owe to the School of Athens, and even to Plato's School (the
Academy) much more to that famous School of Alexandria. Plato was He, who when
the Oracle required the duplication of the Cubicall Altar, expounded it of the
recommendation of the study of Geometry to them, showed them that the
particular solution of the Problem, must be by the invention of two mean
proportionalls betwixt two lines given, propounded the Problem to his Scholars,
who wrote several things concerning it.

Proclus does often refer the invention of Propositions in Euclides
Collection, to the School of Pythagoras. Theudius Magnes, Cyzicinus the
Athenian, and others, are delivered to us by Proclus, in the Second Book of
Commentaries upon the first Element of Euclide, in Academia simul vacasse
quaestionibus Geometricis enucleandis.

But the School of Alexandria, has been so renouned for delivering of the
Mathematics, that in truth I cannot but wonder at the assertion of M Hobbs.

It was begun by Euclide there, not long after the building of that City, in
the time of Ptolemaeus Lagi.

It was continued by the Disciples of Euclide, who left many behind him as
Pappus acknowledges in his Collections.

To it we owe all the great Mathematicians, which ever were amongst the
Ancients, such as Eratosthenes (who set up the Instruments at Alexandria, by
which men made the observations of Hipparchus, and Ptolemy the foundation of
all Astronomy) Archimedes, Apollonius (the great Geometrician) Ptolemy, Theon,
Diophantus, and very many others.

Nay, Sir H. Savile has asserted, that from the time of Euclide to the
Saracenicall times, there never was a great Mathematician, who was not borne at
Alexandria, or had not studied some years there.

I would gladly know, what is there in Geometry, or all Mathematics, which we
are not indebted for to some of these, I speak not of Propositions, but of the
way and method of mastering all kinds of Problemes. The Analyticks was their
Art, the Exegeticall part has indeed been found out by Vieta, and the
Geometrical effection of solid and lineary Problemes, by the immortal wit of
Des Carts, but had it not been for those, we never had enjoyed the benefit of
these.

I have heard that M. Hobbs has given out, that he has found the solution of
some Problemes, amounting to no less then the Quadrature of the Circle, when
we shall be made happy with the sight of those his labors, I shall fall in
with those that speak loudest in his praise, in the mean time I cannot
dissemble my fear, that his Geometrical design (as to those high pieces) may
prove answerable to a late Opticall design of his, of casting Conicall glasses
in a mould, then which there could not be any thing attempted, less becoming
such a man, as he does apprehend himself to be.

Briefly as to the case in hand, either M. Hobbs did know of these Schools,
or not; if he knew not of them, I dare undertake him not to be so great a
Geometrician as he pretends to be, and that he is defective at his chief
weapon.

If he did know of them, where is his ingenuity in asserting the inutility of
Schools? and that we are not beholden to them for our Geometry?

It is not in vain Sir, that I have charged these things upon his spleen,
which yet will more appear by that which follows. page 370.

4. That which he there asserts concerning Universities is, that whereas an
University is an Incorporation of many public Schools in one Town.

1. The Principal Schools were ordained for The Roman Religion. The Roman
Law. The Art of Medicine.


To this it is easily answered, that however the Ordination of them has
formerly been, the two Universities have since the casting off the Papal Yoke,
been regulated by the Civil power, and been conformed to it, so that the
Discourse of the Romish Religion or Law, with reflection upon us, is
disingenious, and nothing to this purpose.

2. For the study of Philosophy, it has no otherwise place, then as a Handmaid
to the Romish Religion.

This is in truth so Barbarous an Assertion, as nothing beside the Reverence to
his Gray Hairs, restraines me from speaking bluntly of him: what friends to
the Romish Religion our Universities have brought forth, that party have felt.
And it is said that Mr Hobbs is no otherwise an enemy to it, save only, as it
has the name of a Religion.

3. And since the Authority of Aristotle is only current there, that study is
not properly Philosophy but Aristotelity.

How far the Authority of Aristotle is current amongst us, Sir both you and I
have spoken.

What his design is concerning the public reading of his Leviathan Himself
has told us.

From whence it is manifest, that the only thing which pains him is the desire
that Aristotelity may be changed into Hobbeity, and instead of the Stagyrite,
the world may adore the great Malmesburian Philosopher.

4. For Geometry till of very late times it had no place at all. And if any man
by the ingenuity of his nature had atteined to any degree of perfection in it,
he was commonly thought a Magician, and his Art Diabolical.

Geometry has now so much place in the Universities, that when Mr Hobbs shall
have published his Philosophical and Geometrical Pieces, I assure my self, I
am able to find a great number in the University, who will understand as much
or more of them then he desires they should, indeed too much to keep up in them
that Admiration of him which only will content him.

And if in our times these studies have been advanced, we might have expected
from a temperate man, rather the commendation for our Advance, then an
exprobration with the ignorance of our Ancestors.

The truth is Sir, about that time when Mr Hobbs was conversant in
Magdalen-Hall, the constitution and way of the University might (likely) be
enclining to his Character of it, but now his Discourse seems like that of the
seven sleepers, who after many years awaking, in vain addressed themselves
to act according to the state of things when they lay down.

I shall speak no more to this fourth head. And to the fifth, containing an
enumeration of particular errors: They all or most are resolved into that
Aristotelity he Charges us with, and require no Answer, save that we enjoy a
liberty of Philosophizing, and that if he should do us the honor to come
amongst us, I am persuaded he would hardly find any other fault with us, except
that great unpardonable one, that the public reading of his Leviathan, is not
by a Sanction of the Magistrate imposed upon us.

5. The particular errors which he would charge us with, are near twenty in
number, amongst which there is not one, either in Philosophy, Politics, or
Divinity, which he has proved, or can prove, both to be an Error, and to be
maintained by our Universities. I shall give a brief account of them all.

1. His first Error charged upon us, is the Doctrine of Abstracted Essences,
and Immateriall Substances.

Concerning which, as I cannot but acknowledge his Ratiocination to be good, as
to the former part, viz. of Vniversalls, and formal Entities: so I am willing
to make good upon a just occasion, that Being is a superior notion to Body,
that Immateriall substance, or separated Substances, is no contradiction, and
that the Truths of Philosophy, are better salved upon that ground, then upon
his imagination.

2. His next quarrel is at Nunc stans, the common definition of Eternity: This
I affirm to be more intelligible then a successive Eternity, or a progress in
infinitum, which is the contrary position.

Of all that which follows, I do not know one thing which is held by any of
us.

3. As That one Body may be in many places, many in one.

4. That Gravity is the cause of heaviness.

5. That Quantity is put into Body already made.

6. That the Soul of man is Poured into the body, meaning it literally and
grossly.

7. That the power of willing is the (total) cause of Actual willing.

8. That Fortune or Ignorance, is an occult cause of things, although we may
not profess to know the causes of all things.

These are the Errors in Natural Philosophy charged on us, and yet not one of
those positions generally maintained by us.

Moral Errors are these.
1. That one makes things Incongruent, another the Incongruity. 2. That private
appetite is the rule of public good. 3. Lawful Marriage is unchastity. 4.
That all Government but Popular is Tyranny. 5. That not Men but Law Governes.
6. That humane Laws ought to extend to the inquisition of men's Thoughts and
Consciences, notwithstanding the conformity of their Speeches and Actions. 7.
That private men may interpret the Law, and restrain where the Sovereign has
left a liberty
Concerning all which Positions, I am persuaded he cannot instance in one
University man, who has published such an opinion, as he would put upon the
whole Universities: it is true, that in the first of these, when the question
is, Whether there be Free will in man, or God be the Author of sin, men fall
frequently into very great difficulties: but either Mr Hobbes ought to have
cleared one part of these two; or not to have charged upon us, either the
obscurity of Truth, or the imbecility of humane Nature.

As for the rest of them, he may better assert, that there are Universities in
the Moon, and that they maintain all those Positions, then impose them upon
us. There it will be hard to prove the contrary, We now challenge him to make
proof of what he has delivered, and Promise to give him satisfaction.

There remains three other Charges, viz.
1. The Insignificant Language of the Schoolmen (the Commenters upon Peter
Lombard.) 2. Errors from Tradition (as the Histories of Apparitions and Ghosts,
etc.) 3. The suppression of Reason and true Philosophy.
But these with the other charges, are so extravagant, and so much forced to
appear against us, that had he not been in great necessity, and much
constrained to it by his passion, I am persuaded, he never would have produced
them, as Arguments of our disgrace. What is the language of Peter Lombard, or
the Writers upon the Sentences, to the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge?
When were we troubled or frighted with Ghosts or Apparitions? Whose Reason or
Philosophy have we suppressed? Or is it such a Crime to Assert the Attributes of
God, and the Natural Immortality of the Souls of Men, that it shall exempt
our Adversaries from the Common Laws, Honesty, and Ingenuity, and excuse the
most gross and palpable Calumniations of us? Nay, the delation of us to the
Civil Magistrate, and the Endeavors for our Extirpation? But he has done
what becomes a man of his judgment and Principles, let us be answerable to
ours, not returning railing for railing, or scorn for scorn, but making an
end of this contention, let us release the Reader from farther trouble.

Concerning Mr DELL.
IT remains now, that I should take into consideration what Mr Dell has
written in our concernements, but that which he has done, is so little either
in Magnitude or Virtue, that I can hardly persuade my self to make a business
of it.

The cause of Learning, its necessity and usefullnesse to the Ministers of the
Gospel, though it be of general importance to all men, whose interest it is,
that the Blind be not leaders of the Blind, yet seeing the defense of it is
taken up, by one so able and ready to maintain the Truth, (Mr Sydrach Sympson)
I look upon it as foreign to our present engagement, and shall therefore
wholly decline it.

Our view is only of a Postscript to his Book, called the Trial of Spirits,
where he delivers his judgment concerning the Reformation of Universities. The
piece is short, it contains many things wherein we agree with him, and some
few wherein we differ.

1. He would not have Children have nothing to do, but to do nothing. Very
witty, No more would we. 2. He thinks it meet, the Magistrate take great care
for the education of youth. We also think it meet. 3. That Schools be erected
in greater Towns and Villages, that none but Godly men, and sober and Grave
Women have charge of of them. Very good. 4. That they first teach them to read
their Native Tongue, [very necessary] and presently to read the Scriptures.
Very convenient. 5. That in Great Towns they teach them Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, and the Latin and Greek especially from Christian Authors. (not from
Heathen Poets etc.) This also is very Honest. 6. It may be convenient, that
there may be some Universities or Colleges, for the teaching Liberal Arts, as
Logic of good use in Humane things, though in Divinity gladius Diaboli, and
Mathematics, which as they carry no wickedness in them, so are they (...)
useful. This sentence, though as it concerns the use of Logic in Divinity,
it be of an occult and not investigable sense, yet as it concerns the
Mathematics, it carries in it neither nonsense nor dishonesty, and is besides
very allowable.
Thus far then we are agreed, in that which follows, Reason will that we
should differ from him.

1. He complains that our Universities should only be at Cambridge and Oxford,
and here he 1. Charges them of Encroachment against the Law of Love, for
Monopolizing humane Learning. 2. He charges them to have been places of great
Licentiousness and profaneness. 3. He asserts it to be more suitable to a
Commonwealth, (if we become so indeed, and not in word only) and more
advantageous to the People to have Universities in every Great Town.


To answer first to his criminal charges.

1. If Mr Dell be a graduate in the the University, he has sworn to defend
the privileges of it, to do it all the Honor and right he can, If so how does
he encroach upon the Law of nature, Sacred amongst all not given over to
Barbarism* Unless he can prove the matter of that Oath to be unlawful which
is yet retained in every Corporatio^) I do not know any thing which can here
excuse him from unrighteousness. If he himself be no Graduate, he does indeed
discover no more, but a disingenuous envy and (considering his relations) an
unworthy ingratitude.

2. But particularly, first, that which he calls the Monopolizing of Learning
by those two places, it is not to be charged upon them (neither is it f^rther
chargeable then upon any corporation of men whatsoever) but it reflects upon
the Sovereign Magistracy of our Nation by whose ordination, the privileges
and statutes of both the Universityes have been always regulated.

2. His second charge is general, unproved, and no ways concerns us* I am
sure that this University cannot now be Justly taxed with any such
Licentiousness or profaneness: indeed the care and prudence and success of
our Immediate Governors, as to the Advancement of Religion and Learning is such
as Mr Dell may envy but he will never equal it, I should be very loath to
injure him, yet common fame has brought his name hither with a Character upon
it of one whose studied design is (by letting fall all Discipline) to let in
License with all its usual train, both into Cays College, and that other
University: an I that the consequence of what he has done hitherto has been
such as tends manifestly rather to the ruin then Reformation of that place.

3. His third assertion contains in the Parenthesis an unworthy reflection upon
those who have the manage of the supreme power, and is in it self such as he
cannot prove; were his design put in execution, it would tend undoubtedly to
the disadvantage of Learning; there is nothing in the world more conducing to
the enlarging of the minds of men and the completing of their Knowledge, then
the co^versation with men eminent in all the several parts of Learning, and
the honest emulation of those that do excel. This is to be had only where
there are great numbers of Students and Professors, and the cause of the
advance in Learning increases always with the variety and eminency of men's
wits and learning who converse together. To spare more words in a Theoreticall
discourse of this nature, we may compare together the Learning of the
Universities, and Religious Houses of foreigne parts, where it is evident, the
difference in Learning is vast; those are dispursed according to great towns,
and remain pitifully ignorant, these are one or two in a Nation, flourishing
with the profession of all ingenious Learning.

Now that which he alleadges as a convenience in his way, That People may
maintain their Children at home while they learn in the Schools, has not
been observed to tend to an advance in learning but to the contrary.

We have not Generally observed that Towns-mens Children prove the greatest
Scholars and those who would have their Children excellently learned rather
choose to send them abroad to School, or to travel, then keep them at home.
Having briefly examined this proposal, I shall need only to mention his
second; which is,

2. That youth may be so trained up that they may spend some part of the day in
Learning, and another part in some lawful Calling (suppose of Weaving or
making Shoes) or one day in study, and another in business.

How much he has in him either of Learning or Judgment, he has manifested by
this proposal; I am much assured, there is not a Learned man in all the world
who has not found by experience, that skill in any Faculty (so as to exceed
the smatterings of such trifies as Mr Dell) is not to be attained, without a
timely beginning, a constancy and assiduity in study, especially while they are
young; Had not Mr Dell abstained from reading of the Poets (rather because they
are too hard for him, then for any wickedness which is in them) he had long
since been persuaded of this truth, Multa tulit fecitque puer, sudavit and
alsit.
Vdum and molle lutum es, nunc, nunc properandus, and acri
Fingendus sine fine rota --


It is very probable that Mr Dell may have given as much of his time to some
other trade, as he has done to Learning or study: Indeed his Learning and
Judgment shows it, (notwithstanding which he may be (for ought I know) an
excellent Artificer, his wit perhaps lying that way) but if this course shall
be set up, as the only Authorized way of Institution, we may by this means
have ignorance enough to think highly of our selves, but we shall become the
scorn of all the Gallant Men in the Nations about us, and Mr Dell shall not
need to torment himself about Tithes, and maintenance of Ministers, the
Romans will come and take away their Place and Nation.

Sir, I have now done what I intended, (as slightly as I could run over what
you recommended,) and am ambitious only to continue in the acceptance wherein I
stand with you,

As being your most Humble and Affectionate Servant H. D.

FINIS.

