Female Policy DETECTED. Or, The Arts of a Designing Woman LAID OPEN. In Maxims
proper to be observed by all, Especially the Youth of this Nation, to Arm
themselves against the Subtilties and devices of Intreiguing Women.

Divided into Six Chapters.
I. Of their Allurements. II. Of their Inconstancy. III. Of their Love. IV. Of
their Revenge. V. Of their Pride. VI. Of their Ingratitude.
To which is add^d, Two POEMS, one in Commendation of Virtue, the other in
Dispraise of Vice.

Dedicated to the Apprentices of LONDON.

London, Printed for Benj. Harris, at the Lower end of Bartholomew (...), near
the Royal Exchange, 1695.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE Apprentices of LONDON.
WE may observe the Happiness or Unhappiness that waits upon this Life, are
most commonly owing to the Vigilent and Industrious, or the careless and
ungoverned Actions of our Youth; and as the former lays a probable Foundation,
upon which (by a continued Care) we may build our succeeding Fortunes to a
comfortable height, so the latter robs us of that Substance upon which we ought
(for our Security) to place the Pedestal of our future Prosperity: And as there
is nothing tends more to the Destruction of Youth, or renders them more
incapable of considering their own Welfare, than the Conversation of
Intrieguing Women: I thought, Young Men, I could not do you a greater Service
in this Age, where to tempt cunningly, and deceive slily, are the Study of the
Female Sex, than present you with a small Pocket-piece, which shall serve as
Armor to defend you from the Darts thrown from Wanton and Designing Women,
whose evil Communication corrupts good Manners, and will make you (if deluded
by them) Disobedient to the Laws of GOD, undutiful Children to your Parents,
unjust Servants to your Masters, ill Husbands (when you Marry) to your Wives,
ba^ Fathers to your Children, Enemies to your Country, and Slaves to others,
as well as to your own Vices. There is nothing more evident, than that several
Young Men in this City of London have been drawn aside, to their Ruin, by the
attractive Sorcery of these bewitching Load-stones, which having been observed
of late by the Right Honorable the Mayors, and other the Justices of London,
that they have been so commendably Industrious in suppressing this Vice, within
the Bounds of their Jurisdiction, that it is a hard matter for a Night-walking
Strumpet to strole through the City unpunished. The Magistrates have done their
Parts, and nothing is required further, (for the more effectual Promotion of
the City's Glory) but your Care to avoid the Lust and Subtilty of those private
Madams, whose gay Apparel, and false Pretense to Modesty, gives them Covert in
reputable Families, where they heard with the Virtuous, declaim against the
Vices of the Age, and seem to wonder at that Wickedness in others, which
themselves do practice daily, to maintain their Pride.

I have therefore Taught you how to know these Vultures in Peacocks Plumes, and
how to avoid them, and how to converse with them without Prejudice in the
following Treatise, which I dedicate to your View, and commend to your
Practice, as you are the Flower of our Nation, and Glory of the Metropolis; to
whom

I Subscribe my self Your most Humble Servant, E. W.

THE PREFACE.
THE Study of Designing Women in all Ages having been to Improve, and set off
Nature with such Artificial Charms, alluring Dresses, and resistless Glances,
that most of our Youth, before they have shifted of the tender years of their
Infancy, are subdued by their Pollitick Inducements, to their Ruinous Embraces,
which are frequently succeeded by irrecoverable Injuries, either to Estate or
Person, if not Both, except withdrawn Timely, (by Prudence) from this
Epidemical Folly.

I have therefore thought it necessary, to present the Age (in this following
Treatise) with a fair Prospect of the Dangers that wait on the Conversation of
Intreiguing Women: With a Scheme of their Allurements, Subtle Stratagems and
Devices, by which they often Trepan Unwary Youth, into a State of Misery.

I have not only (in brief Sentences) laid open the studied Policies, and
cunning Delusions of the Female Sex, but have given such Maxims of Prudence,
that shall Arm you against their Subtilties, and teach you to act Counter to
all their Designs, though laid and carried on with the greatest Cunning and
Industry.

As Virtue is better understood by Expeperience than Precept, so the knowledge
of Vice is better gained by Precept than Experience; and as all things are
distinguished by their Contraries, so it is necessary to be acquainted with the
latter, to compare it as a Foyl, to set off the true Luster and Beauty of the
former.

In the Performance of my Task, I have been as Compendious as possible; so that
I hope I shall neither offend the Judgment, or Trespass much upon the Patience
of the Reader, but rather furnish him with such Rules and Maxims, (against
Designing Women) that shall be delightful to Read, easy to Remember, and very
proper to Practice.

There are few Persons, who have been reduced from a Plentiful Fortune, into a
State of Necessity, but the World may observe, Women have always had the
greatest share in their Ruin; Therefore, to be fortified against Female Policy,
is a matter of no small Moment; and he that is without these Prudentials, is
not a day secure of either his Estate or Person, from the Gripes of a Female
Vulture, but is liable to be Tricked into such Labyrinths of Misfortune, where
you will find no Clue to return by to his former Liberty.

All that I entreat of the Youthful Reader, is, to peruse it without Prejudice,
and make it useful to himself, and I will engage, he may at Eighteen or Twenty
Years of Age, evade the Designs, resist the Temptations, and withstand the
Sorcery of those Crafty Witches, better than most Men (without it) shall be
able to do at Forty.

I do not intend any affront to the Chaste or Virtuous, nor would I have them
offended at my Undertaking, for may Design is rather to raise them to such an
Esteem, that n^ne should have Title to Love or Admiration, but such Women,
whose affection to Virtue, and resolutions against Vice, shall oblige them to
be Faithful. And if the Reader will observe the Rules I have laid down, he
shall know how to Judge, and how to Choose; To Instruct him in which, is the
end of the following Treatise.

FEMALE POLICY Detected etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the Allurements of Women.
OF all Vices, an unlawful Fredom with the Female Sex is the most predominant,
and, of all Sins, has the most powerful Temptations and Allurements to betray
and draw Men into this Folly. The Inducements of the Fair Sex are so
prevailing, a Propensity in Nature so forcible, it is hard to stand unmoved,
when tempted forward by the Charms of a subtle Woman, and drove by the frail
Desires of an unbounded Lust.

But as there is not Passion too strong to be conquered, or Temptation too
great to be resisted; so if you will observe the Maxims I shall give you in
this little Treatise, you will be armed against Beauty; make Love your Subject,
and all the Subtilties of the Fair Sex shall truckle, and become Instruments of
your Direction, instead of your Ruin.

Be careful how you conceive too good an Opinion of a Woman at first Sight, for
you see not the Woman truly, but her Ornaments. Paint, Patches, and fine
Dresses, are to hide Defects; for Beauty, like Truth, is always best when
Plainest.

Many in rich Ornaments look inviting, whose Beauty, when they undress, flies
away with their Apparel, and leaves you (as Juno did Ixion) nothing but a
cloudy Mistress to embrace.

If you like a Woman, and would discover if she be in Nature, what perhaps she
may seem by Art, surprise her in a Morning undrest, and it is Ten to One, but
you will find your Goddess has shifted off her Divinity, and the Angel you so
much admired turned into a Magmallion.

Be always Jealous of a Maid, who extols her own Virtue; a Wife, who exclaims
against her Husband in his Absence; and a Widow, that courts your Company; for
when a Woman praises her Virtues, it is as a Shopkeeper does a Commodity, with
a desire to be rid of it; and she that will lay open the Failings of her
Husband to another, will, to the same Man, lay open her self whenever he shall
require it of her; and when a Widow seems fond of your Conversation, be sure
it is through design; and if you are not careful, she will bury you alive.

Be not tempted to pick up any Woman in the Street; but if you should, be sure
you have one Eye before you, and another behind you; for wheresoever Lust
leads, Danger follows.

Covet not the Presents of a fond Woman, for they are Baits left to ensnare
you, and while you think you are a gainer by her Gifts, you are loosing your
Self.

Whoever is trepanned by a Woman's Smiles, is as a Fly hampered in a Cobweb,
who waits the Leisure of the Spider when he shall be devoured.

He that serves the Lust of a Woman, makes himself her Monkey; for she admires
him no longer than while he is playing with his Tail.

Be careful how you live upon a Whore, as how you keep one; for by the former
you will get nothing, and by the latter loose every thing you have got.

Mistrust a Woman that seems Rich by her own Discourse; for she that talks much
of her Fortune, has generally but little.

Think not every Woman Rich that wears gay Apparel; for many forfeit their
Virtue, to maintain their Pride.

Build not too great a Faith upon the sight of a few Guineas, or a Gold Watch,
these may be but shooing Horns, to draw you on to your Ruin.

Believe no Man's Affirmation of a Woman's Fortune, unless you know him; for
Designs are never carried on without Abettors.

Be sure of her Portion, though you take her Virtue upon Credit; but he that
takes both upon Trust, may find, when too late, he has neither to trust to.

Endeavor not to continue a Woman's Love by Gifts, for every Present you make
her may be the Purchase of a Rival: besides, they love Gifts, and if you use
them to it, they will Love you no longer than you are giving.

Believe not hte trivial Favors of a Woman a demonstration of her Love; for
they pride to be Beloved, though it be by those they Scorn.

Raise not an Opinion of your self upon the Flatteries of a Woman, nor think
her Praises any sign of Love, but of her Cunning; for Designing Women, like
great Politicians, flatter them most they design to Ruin.

(...) no Woman charm you with the Music of a smo^^h Tongue; for many can talk
well, that act ill.

Believe no Woman the more Virtuous for resisting the first Attempt; for, like
besieged Towns, they will withstand several Efforts, and, at last, Surrender
upon Capitulartion.

Some Women (like strong Holds) are to be taken but one way, which if you
cannot readily discover, be content, she her self will find ways to direct you,
if she likes you.

When a lewd Woman serves your Necessity, it is with a certain expectancy you
should serve her Lust: her Kindnesses are measured by your Capacity, and a
continuance of her Favors dwell upon the Repetition of your Performances; she
will stretch her Purse-strings to support you in Extravagancy, if you strain as
hard to supply her unbounded Leachery; but be sure she will be your Servant no
longer than you will remain her Drudge.

Who is Stallion to a Whore, is a Slave to Iniquity, and a Champion to another
Vices, a Coward in a Good Cause, and a Curse to himself.

Let no Woman tempt you by her Wit to Love her; for she who has Wit enough to
tempt you, has enough to deceive you.

Suffer not your self to be Ensnared by a Woman over free in her Gestures, or
Conversation; for whosoever is much active in Behavior, behaves her self like
a Lover of much action; and whoever is free in much Company, will be much freer
when but Two together.

Think not the Amorous Glances of a Woman toward you, gives you Title to her
Affection; for they can look one way, when their Hearts are another.

Expect no good Quality in a Woman more than what she shows; for it is a Maxim
in their Politics, to put the best side outward.

If you Love a Woman, be careful how you show it; for your Nibbling at the
Bait, may too early discover a willingness to be Caught.

Wast not your Strength in the Enjoyments of Beauty, neither your Time or Money
in Corrupting Virtue; but Marry a Chaste Wife, of a Good Family, with a Moderate
Fortune, and you need not question being Happy.

CHAP. II.
Of the Inconstancy of Women.
WHosoever resigns her Virtue, to gratify another Lust, will not scruple the
same freedom with another, to Pleasure her own; for few Women Love so well, as
to Love a Gallant better than themselves.

She who will lose her Reputation to Oblige you, will Hazard your Love to
Gratify her self; and she that will do both, can never be Constant.

Put no Confidence in a Woman that has lost her Honor; for she who is without
Reputation, has nothing to engage her to be Faithful.

Constancy is maintained by Virtue, and she who has lost her Virtue, has
nothing left to oblige her to be Constant.

She that preferrs Pleasure before Virtue, will be Constant to her Lust, but
not to you.

Nothing engages a Man's Affection so much to a Woman, as a belief of her
Constancy; but it is better to believe her otherways, for then she can never
Deceive you.

Women are sensible that Constancy is more prized than Beauty; but it is a
Maxim among their Sex, to Deceive us most in what we most Value.

Nothing is more Ridiculous than to keep a Miss; for the that you keep, will
keep another if she can; there being the same Ambition in her to be Mistress of
another, as there is in you to be Master of her: and he that thinks a Woman
Constant, because he keeps her, proves a Knave to himself, and a Fool to his
Madam.

Put no Faith in a Woman that is Wife to another; for she who is not Constant
to her Husband, will never be so to you.

A Woman who has a Husband, and will admit of a Gallant, let him look upon her
as Faithful as Monsieur Raggou's Mistress, who was Constant to the whole Troop.

A Married Woman, if Lewd, is Subtle by Experience; for she who has her
Husband to Deceive every Day, can Deceive a Gallant at Leisure.

A Durable Love is the Supporter of Constancy; but that Love can never be
Lasting which stands on a False Bottom.

Be Constant to no Woman but a Wife, if you be, you Deceive your self; expect
no Constancy in a Whore, for she will deceive you.

Credit no Woman's Words who has lost her Virtue, but believe the contrary, for
she talks Counter.

If you have Contracted any Friendship with a Woman, let all she can do for you
be no more than you deserve; but if she prove Constant, let it be more than you
expect.

Think not a Woman is most Faithful to him she is most Fond off; for to him the
Deceives most, she seems always most Obliging.

Believe not all to be Virgins that talk much of their Virginity; for all would
seem Maids that have been made otherwise.

To one, a Woman may be Constant; but if she divides her Affections between
two, she can be Constant to neither.

If you are Familiar with another Wife, believe her not, when she says she
knows none but her Husband and you; for she will Swear to her Husband, she
knows none but himself.

Credit nothing a Woman says, as to her Constancy or Virtue; for she will
judify her Innocence before him, with whom she has been Guilty.

Love no Woman in the Absence of her Husband; you only stop a Gap for another,
who will return you no thanks for your Labor; and remember, his Approach, will
be your Distance.

If you Love a Woman, Conceal it, Oblige her with common Courtesies, but show
no Passion; for by your Prudence you may Master her, to whom a discovery of
your Love will make you become a Servant.

Measure a Woman's Love by her Jealousy; for she Loves him best of whom she is
most Jealous, and of whom she is most Jealous, to him she is most Constant.

Be Jealous of a Woman that will not be Jealous of you; for she that will not be
Jealous, Loves you not; and she that Loves you not, will never be Constant to
you.

Answer all the expectations of a Woman you would keep Constant; for one single
neglect hazards the loss of her Affections.

Keep a Watchful Eye over the Woman which you Love, seem not to be over
Credulous of her Virtue, if you do, she will make trials of your Faith.

She who Kisses her Husband in Public, has generally her Eyes upon him she
would Kiss in Private; and she that will Kiss both in Public and Private,
values not where she Kisses.

Be Constant to your Wife, that she may be Constant to you; for Gratitude may
constrain a Woman to preserve those Bonds which Revenge may make her violate.

Choose for your Wife a Prudent Woman; for Prudence preserves Virtue, Virtue
Love, and Love Constancy.

Inconstancy in a Wife makes Wedlock a Bramble, which bears Abundance of Thorns.

Inconstancy in a Husband makes Inconstancy in a Wife; and an inconstant Wife
makes a Husband a constant Cuckold.

Trust no Man with your Wife Abroad, nor court your Friend to bear her Company
at Home in your Absence; for Opportunity and Importunity may conquer the most
Heroic Virtue.

Carry no Man to your Mistress if you prize her; for if she loves you, she will
be civil to your Friend for your Sake.

It Is the Policy of a Designing Woman to oblige the Friend of him that loves
her, to acquaint her self, by that means, with his Affairs, that she may manage
him the better.

Most Women are of cold Constitutions, and under the Dominion of the Moon; and,
remember, it is an approved Maxim, That all Sublunary things are subject to
Mutation.

Constancy is a great Virtue, and its opposite is a dangerous Vice; whoever
neglects the former, to practice the latter, is neither to be Beloved or
Trusted.

It Is Good to be Wise, it is Wisdom to be Just, and Just to be Constant.

CHAP. III.
Of the Love of Women.
THE Love of a Woman is easy to be gained, but difficult to be preserved; you
may with more facility subdue Virtue, and bring a Chaste Woman to your Embraces,
than engage her to be Constant, after she has resigned her Honor. It Is a
received Opinion among their whole Sex, That the Passion of Love ceases in a
Man after Enjoyment, and the Esteem he had before of her Person is much
lessened by her Condescension to his Desires, which Conception occasions her to
withdraw her Affections from you, (unless every Hour you confirm her in a
different Faith by fresh Assurances) coveting to be Beloved by some Body who
has a good Opinion of her Virtues; for there is nothing more certain, that
Women who have been deceived themselves, take a secret Delight in Deceiving
others; therefore, you that are the Deceivers, be careful you are not Deceived.

The Love of a Virgin is innocent and lasting, as her Virtue. The Love of a
Just Wife friendly and delightful. The Love of a Widow politic and deceitful.
The Love of a Lewd Woman lustful and revengeful.

If you are the Favorite of a Lady, and depend upon her Courtesies, you must
be industrious to oblige her, and as watchful to preserve her from the Efforts
of Rivals, or you will soon find your Mistress like a Pot-Gun, the last Pellet
she receives will drive out the former.

Simpathize not with a Woman who loves you Passionately; for as she finds your
Love increases, she will cool her own with the Assurance of yours.

If you have gained a Woman's Love, and would preserve it, be sure be constant
in your Visits, or you will find most Women have so bad Memories, that a Weeks
Absence will make them quite forget you.

The Love of a Woman has its Seasons, like the Year, its Spring, Summer,
Autumn and Winter. It begins with a warm desire, and is nourished to a grearer
heat, by the kind Influence of the Object, till the Harvest of her Joys are
full ripe; but when the Fruits of her Affections are reaped and gathered, you
will soon perceive some sharp Breezes, as Signs of an approaching Winter.

The Love of a Chaste Woman will be continued toward you as long as you behave
your self well; but the Love of a Woman who has lost her Virtue, is but during
Pleasure.

Love a Woman with Moderation that loves you to an excess; her Passion will
naturally reduce it self to the same Equality, for no Extremes are lasting, and
then you have the Advantage, for the Continuance of a little Love shows a
constant Temper, and looks friendly and obliging, when a Passion cooled to the
same Indifferency will look slighting and neglective; besides, he that loves a
Woman too much, is apt to love himself too little.

Depend not on the Love of a lewd Woman, it is a Reed will soon deceive you, her
Love is entangled with her Lust; to continue the one, is to be a Slave to the
other; and rather than be that, I would share the Punishment of Cesaphus.

Secure not your Love to a Woman by Oaths or Protestations; for she will then
think you have bound your self to continue that Respect which would be
otherwise her Care and Study to merit and preserve.

Let not the Protestations of a Woman's Love to you be a President for you to
follow, though you Love her, for she does it purely to tempt you to give in the
same Security, that she may have the more to upbraid you with whenever you
shall prove false.

If you are Beloved by a Person you cannot Marry, whom you are willing to
secure to your own Embraces, draw what you can from her by Insinuations; the
more you get, the faster you bind her; she will not part with that easily, she
has purchased dearly; and the more you cost her, the more she will prize you.

The Love of a Virgin is much to be pitied; the Love of a Wife highly to be
valued; but the Love of a Vicious Woman deserves neither; for she will Love any
that will serve her Lust.

Give no Encouragement to the Love of another Wife; for it is Lustful in the
beginning, Treacherous all along, and Dangerous in the end.

Love is a Distemper will wade through the greatest Difficulties to obtain a
Cure; he that is the Phisician may exact what Fees he pleases; therefore, do
you be careful how you become the Patient.

Seraphick Love, is the Bliss of Angels; mutual Love, the Comfort of Mankind;
natural Love, the Chain of the World; but Lustful Love, the Mother of
Misfortune.

To Love a Wife, is our Duty; to Love a Friend, our Interest; but to Love a
Curtizan, is a dangerous Venture.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Malice and Revenge of Women.
OF all Passions, that of Revenge is the most opposite to Reason and good
Humor; it will so far blind and deceive the Judgment, that Persons under this
Madness value not what Injuries they do themselves, in rashly attempting some
trifling Prejudice to an Adversary. This Passion in Women springs frequently
from the envenomed Seeds of Corrupted Love, (as the best Wines once turned
become the sharpest Vinegar) and is so predominant in this Sex, that they value
nothing they do to accomplish those ends in which the Sweetness of their
Revenge is centered; and as they love to extremes, every little neglect they
construe a great Slight, and through their Weakness, mistake Accident often for
Design, and fling themselves, by their own Whimsies and Conceits, into an evil
Opinion of Persons which they Love. Thus, oftentimes, they let their own
Jealousies pass for Realities, and sour their Affections into a sharp Revenge,
without a just Occasion, turning Furies to those they Loved, through a fanciful
Ingratitude, which I conceive to be the chief Reason why Women are much more
Subject to this Passion than Men; therefore, covet no Woman's Love, but whom
you will be diligent to Oblige; for a small neglect is taken by them as a great
Ingratitude.

Deal with a Revengeful Woman, as with a Hand-Granado, which you cast from you
as soon as the Fuse is lighted, lest it burst, to the Prejudice of him that
fired it.

Have no Familiarity with her you have highly disobliged, least ( Bee-like she
stings you with her Tail.

She who once Loved you, and is turned your Enemy, look upon her always to be
so; be not deluded by her Flatteries, to give it into her Power to hurt you;
for Women, though they seem to forget a Wrong they have been forced to suffer,
yet you will find they have good Memories when they have Power to revenge it.

Trespass not on the Affections of a Woman who Loves you to Excess; for Women,
(like Ale) if over Sweet, will turn sour the sooner.

Take not always a Woman's Frowns as Slights, nor her Smiles as a sure Argument
of her Love; for every time the Sun is clouded, it does not predict soul
Weather, and when it shines out a Storm may be near at hand: Women can
dissemble their Passions, and change their Looks, as a Scorpion can its Color.

A Woman's Love turned into Revenge, is like Wine turned to Vinegar, which can
never be reduced to its primitive Goodness, but will always remain Sour till
its dead.

Nothing is so Revengeful as an injured Woman; for which Reason, the Poets have
ordered the Furies to be put up in the Feminine Gender.

The Love of a Virtuous Woman is a great Blessing; but if once lost by
Ingratitude, you will find she will turn her Love that could not last, into a
Revenge that will.

Shun a Woman that is your Enemy; for every time she sees you it puts her upon
fresh Mischiefs.

If you have dealt Ingratefully by a Woman, converse with none that respect
her, lest at some time or other it should happen to your Prejudice.

The Passion of an Envious Woman is virulent, and Flattery the only Antidote to
expel the Poison: To dissemble, shows more Prudence than to aggravate; by the
one, you may pacify the Fury of fermented Spirits, when the other will beget
in your Enemy fresh Resolutions of further Mischiefs.

Be Merciful to those you can overpower; but Flatter such Enemies you cannot
Conquer; for Revenge (though sweet to those who seek it) is always bitter to
the Sufferers.

Some Women are so politickly Penitent after a Revenge completed, they will
palliate the Injury with succeeding Pity; but think the Sorrow of such a Person
as great as hers, who (weeping) follows a dead Husband to the Grave, whom she
has wished out of the World a Thousand Times whilst he was Living.

Changes in inconstant Tempers are never to be minded; she who does you a
wilful Injury, and seems Sorry for it, it is your Prudence to believe she only
grieves, that the Mischief she has done you is no greater.

Trust an Enemy who has once hurt you, upon a Reconciliation, no further than
you would the Fawning of a Mastiff Dog who has attempted to worry you.

Most Women are Politic in their Love, but much more Subtle in their Revenge;
therefore, be careful how you affront them or deceive them to deserve it:
besides, it is Ignoble to offend the Pevish, or to hurt the Weak.

Make not her that Loves you, by Ingratitude, your Enemy; nor let not the
Ingratitude of whom you Love excite you to be hers; for Revenge (like a
Crab-Tree) produces a sweet Blossom, but a sour Fruit.

CHAP. V.
Of the Pride of Women.
STateliness in a Woman may become her as she walks; but Pride in Conversation
is hateful and ridiculous, and exposes the Persons affected with it to the
Censures of the Company in such awker'd Gestures, and uncouth Behaviors, such
peremptory Sentences, and impertinent Loquacities, that offends both the Eyes
and Ears of all that have either Modesty or Prudence. Nothing shows the want of
Judgment more than Female Pride, which is (doubtless) nourished by the vain
Conceits of their own Perfections, and begets such a Self-Love, grounded upon
Self-Opinion, that they look upon their whole Sex beside with Envy and
Contempt, and like Narcissas, daily dote on the Reflection of their own
imaginary Excellencies. Cast not your Eyes too often upon such Women, for they
are chargable Mistresses, implacable Wives, and ill Mothers to your Children.

A Proud Woman, like an imprudent Prince, always Love him best by whom she is
most slatter'd.

If you Aim at the Favors of a Lofty Dame, you must highly extol her Person
and her Parts, and conceed with her Opinion in all things, though never so
opposite to Reason; for Flattery and Humility must be the Supporters of your
Interest.

Let Pride in a fine Woman anticipate your Admiration; for never admire her who
admires her self too much; conceive her as a large Looking-Glass cracked, by
which single defect is rendered of small Value, by reason it can never be mended.

Pride in a Witty Woman, is like a Whet-stone to a Scyth, it only serves to
sharpen her Reflections, and makes her a more dangerous Weapon for a Man to
meddle with.

A Proud Woman, like a stately Horse, must be rid with a Curb, and managed with
a straight Rein, or she will soon be the Bane of her Rider.

If you Marry a Haughty Woman, you ought to have a good Estate; for you will
find, a Proud Wife, in a low Station, will be an uncomfortable Companion, and
the first in Adversity that shall lend a h^lping Hand to your Ruin.

Pride in a Friend is dangerous, in a Mistress chargable, but in a Wife an
implacable Torment.

Many Women have forfeited their Virtue, to gratify their Lust, but more to
maintain their Pride; and Lust, though it will make a Woman a Whore, yet it is
Pride that makes her Mercenary.

Many Women have Virtue enough to resist the bare Attempts of Familiarity; but
few that can stand against the powerful Charms of Gold, fine Dresses, Coach and
Horses, and Attendance. It is Grandeur influences Pride, and leads Ambition by
the Nose through the worst of Vices; for there are many who are honestly Poor
by constraint, who would willingly commit any Evil to be Rich.

That Virtue is never Safe which is under the Guardian-ship of Pride; the
latter will be maintained, though the former is sacrifie'd to support it.

He that has a Proud Woman to his Wife is like an Oak begirt with Ivy, he
Suffers himself to be Embraced by that which will bring him to his Ruin.

When Ambition leads the Van, the whole Body of Vice follows; and wherever you
see Pride in the Front, be sure Lust Marches in the Rear.

Pride in a Beautiful Woman is like a Flaw in a Diamond, it lessens the Value,
Spoils the Luster, and Remains Incurable.

He that Marries a Proud Wife is as unhappy as a Prince who has a Rebellious
Nation to Govern, as the latter must grant every Petition of the People to
secure Peace in his Kingdom, so must the former every request of his Wife to
preserve the same in his Family.

Of all Imperfections in a Woman, Pride is the most Intolerable, for that is
hardest to be excused, which is never to be mended.

Pride in a Wife, makes a Husband appear little; it oft-times compels him to
Submit, where he has right to Govern.

He that has a Prudent Wife, has a Guardian Angel by his Side, but he that
has a Proud Wife, has the Devil at his Elbow.

A Proud Woman is an Imperious Wife, an Undutiful Daughter, an Implacable
Mistress, a Harsh Mother, and a Saucy Servant.

Pride is the Parent of Iniquity, the Innovator of Vice, the Seed of Rebellion,
and the Rise of Faction. Pride lost Mankind their Paradise, the World its
Peace, and made a Devil of an Angel.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Ingratitude of Women.
LET no Man deceive himself with the Expectancy of Gratitude in a Mercenary
Woman; for she, who for Suks and Satins, or a splendid Maintenance, will submit
to your Pleasure, and swear Constancy to her Keeper, shall be first that
forsakes you in a declining Condition; and though she has built a Provision
for her self out of the Ruins of your Fortune, yet she shall be the last Person
that shall lend you the least Assistance when your Occasions shall most require
it; Therefore, look upon whatsoever you give such a Woman to he buried, as in a
deep Sea, from whence no Returns can be expected.

If you love a Woman, be not deluded by her trifling Presents to make chargable
Returns, for that is the Aim of her Policy. Let not a Point Cravat, because it is
her own Working, give her Title to a Settlement out of your Estate, lest while
your Mistress extols your Gratitude, the World laughs at your Folly.

Giving Presents to a Woman to secure her Love, is as Vain as the Endeavoring
to fill a Ceive with Water; for you may continue Giving the one, and Pouring
into the other, till the last Trump sounds, e're you find the one the Faster,
or the other the Fuller.

The Gratitude of a Mercinary Woman lies only in her Tail, with it she
dissolves all Obligations, and will still be a Gainer even when the Debt's Paid.

Whoever blames a Woman for her Ingratitude, is equally culpable for Trusting
her with the Power to prove so; for Love with Moderation, keeps a close Heart
and a wary Hand, and her Ingratitude can never hurt you.

Debauch no Virgin to maintain her after, lest you are served as a Gentleman,
who having wasted his Fortune in the extravagant Support of a Young Gentlewoman
whom he had first desil'd, sent his Man to her upon a particular Exigence, to
desire her to lend him Ten Guinea's; to which she answered, Pray present my
Service to your Master, and tell him when he has made me amends for the Virtue
he has forced from me, I shall be glad to Oblige him; but I wonder he should
think I would lend Money to him who has robbed me already of that which admits
of no Restitution, but for ever continues him my Debtor. Therefore, corrupt no
Virgin, or the Surrender of her Virtue to your ^mbraces, will remain upon you
as a perpertual Obligation, and serve her at all times to excuse the highest
Ingratitude, or the greatest Injury she shall act against you: besides, the
World shall condemn you under all the Mischiefs you shall suffer by her means,
crying, you were first her Ruin, and all the Evils she can do you is no more
than you deserve.

Love is the Legature that binds a Woman to Gratitude; she that Loves you, will
gratefully accept, and generously return the lest Favor that shall signalize
the Affection of the Giver; but a Designing Woman esteems the Donor by his
Presents, and not the Presents by the Donor.

She that has a Design upon you, will first oblige you with some engaging
Courtesy to become her Debtor; but be careful of those Women who are generous
in the Beginning, lest you pay, with your Ruin, for their Kindness in the End.

Ingratitude is said to be worse than the Sin of Witchcraft, and he that
trusts a Woman he has once found Ungrateful, is worse than bewitched.

Court not a Reconciliation with a Woman who has once deciv'd you, lest she
triumphs over your Submission, and makes von become an Ass to bear the Luggage
of her Infirmities.

To a Woman you Love, behave your self boldly, and with freedom, though justly
and respectful, for a Manly Carriage will awe her to be grateful, when a
cringing fondness may occasion her to presume on your good nature.

In Commendation of Virtue.
Virtue, thou Ornament of Humane Life,
That Crowns the Virgin, and Adorns the Wife,
From thy Blessed Treasure of Contentments flow
All the true Blessings we enjoy below.
Those Sweet Delights, which in thy Bosom dwell,
Rise up in Springs, and into Rivers swell,
Which know no Ebb, or Storm, but free from Noise,
Flow Calmly in a constant Tide of Joys:
Thou bring'st Contentment to the Meanest Birth,
And gives us Taste of Heaven here on Earth:
From whence, through Crystal Innocence, we see
A pleasing Prospect of Eternity;
Where Angels, to receive the Virtuous, wait,
And bid them Welcome to a Happier State.
When Vice has dressed her Wanton Daughters Head,
With Tresses loose, in Airy Modes Displaid.
Complexion heightened, and improved by Paint,
And all the Arts that Pride could e're invent:
Yet Virtue in plain Coif, adorned no way
By Nature, looks so Innocently Gay:
She in her Home spun Garbshines brighter far than they.
As Precious Gems, of which the India's boast,
The plainer set, the greater Luster cast.
Virtue, like Beauty, wants no Studied Smile,
But of it self shines bright without a Foil.
Could the Corrupted World but truly taste
The Sweet Delights which Vicious Actions Blast,
Their Lewd Excesses they would repeat no more,
Their Counterfeit Enjoyments soon give over
To Gaze at Virtues Beams, and the Chaste Dame Adore.
It Is she emboldens us to fear no Fate,
And gives Contentment to the meanest State.
Closely Embraced, she Blesses each Degree
With a Calm Mind, from Perturbations free,
And, by Content, Improves Felicity.
Would all Mankind her pleasing footsteps tread,
Which do to Truth, and all Perfections lead,
Sexes would join, as Angels do above,
Not to Fulfill their Lust, but Seal their Love.
In Dispraise of Vice.
WIth what reproachful Blushes do the Wise,
Those Follies, which the Age embrace, despise,
With Wonder and Contempt they Gaze to see
Virtue thus Sacrificed to Leachery,
By the Sly Snares of Female Policy.
What strange Temptations draw the World aside,
To Embrace Vice, and Virtues Charms deride:
As Thieves and Ruffians, who abhor the Light,
Shun the Bright Day, and seek the Gloomy Night,
Tell me, mistaken Souls, what Baits allure
From Virtues Paths, so pleasing and so sure,
Where no deep Sloughs, or dangerous Bogs are found,
But sundry Prospects of Delight all round;
Who'd quit so happy, so secure a Road,
To Wade along in Filthiness and Mud.
Where Paths so rugged are, Friend Jossels Friend,
Each for Precedence in Vice contend,
But Sorrow is (alas) their Journeys end.
So is the unweary Traveller betrayed,
When by an Ignis Fatnus misled
Among Brakes and Pools, from whence the treacherous Guide
Flies undiscerned, and does his Tapor hide,
Leaving the Wandering Wretch quite void of Light,
Exposed to all the Accidents of Night.
Thus fare the Unhappy Mortals, who receed
From Virtues Paths, the tracts of Vice to tread,
Where Fears and Cares each Wanton step succeed.
Look at the Monster Vice with Steady Eye,
Who thus devours the Worlds Tranquillity,
You may discern the Beast in every part,
By Nature Black, though Whitened over by Art;
As Strumpets, when Distempered and Unclean,
Paint Fair their outsides when most Foul within,
Vice, thou Black Parent of Revenge and Strife,
Thou Shame of Humane Race, and Sting of Life,
By thy Rank Bowels every ill is fed,
From thee all Rapes and Villainies proceed;
Ambition, Envy, Lust Adultery,
Murder, Rebellion, every Infamy,
Have all their Birth and Nourishment from thee.
Shun the Dark Fiend, and its alluring Toys,
Reject its Trifles and Embrace true Joys;
Which if you will find, choose Virtue for your Guide,
Woo the kind Dame, and keep her by your side,
Kiss her Soft Lips, and Wed her for your Bride.
FINIS.

