AN ENCOVRAGEMENT TO WAR OR, BELLVM PARLIAMENTALE*

SHOWING The unlawfulness of the late Bellum Episcopale.

As also the Justness of this present Expedition for the defense of the
Kingdom.

With the Illegal, Rebellious, Traiterous, Barbarous, and bloody proceedings
and Intentions of the Cavaliers.

Lately published at the request of a Friend, by John W^^d Trooper under the
E^^ of (...)ford,

Bellum Parliamentale

Bellum Episcopale

Th(...) winds and as the (...) carri^^ away. Job (...)

Quadra Senatus.

Nitimur in Votitum sed quo rapit impetus aureo
Pellimur haud valleat niti fugimusque retrorsum.


TO HIS WORTHY AND MVCH ESTEEMED GOOD Friends, Mr. John Millington, Mr. Peter
Goodwin, and Mr. Samuel Clark.
Sirs,
THough I be already much obliged unto you, for former kindness, and am like
to remain so engaged: My Lot being so like a blank, in respect of outward
abilities, that I am unable for the present, to return you a only a verbal
satisfaction. Yet I beseech you to let me run so much further in your debt, as
to be pleased to show my Infant Muse, that favor, as to read over these few of
her childish expressions, (she being yet in the lowest form) and to speak
mildly of them; that so she may with the more celerity, march to the head of
this Ages Hellicon. Which when she shall once attain, (assisted by your favor)
she shall never care for the hardest sensure, that any of Zoylus Faction can
pass upon her: but shall be grateful to you, and remain,

Yours, J.W.


AN ENCOVRAGEMENT TO WAR.
WHat odds is twixt this Breach? and that late plot,
Laid by the Prelates against the harmless Scot,
What difference I say? is it not the same
In its Effect? save't has another name?
That done by Popish Prelates: but this bears
The name of Popish Lawless, Cavaliers.
That only against the Scot, but this is made
The English, Scottish, Irish, Liberties t'invade
At once: and strike the Parliamentall power
Of the three Kingdoms dead, (even in an hour)
That power whereby the freedom of these Lands
In their perfection, strength, and union stands.
And which once lost, we all must presently
Turn to that old Egyptian slavery.
What could the Prelates then aspire unto,
That Cavaliers, now'l not attempt to do?
Was not the Quarrel then, and now all one?
The aims of both, against true Religion.
Did not the Prelates then (as these do now)
Persuade the King, the Scots would overthrow
His just Prerogative: because they would
Not by their Romish power be contrould.
Because they would not (as the Scripture says)
Make them as Lords, and Rulers, of their Faith?
And did they not in our dread Sovereigns name,
As Rebels, all the Covenanters proclaim?
Cause their heroic Spirits would not yield
The Episcopal Liturgy the field.
And (though free born) cause they would not consent
To slavery: far worse then Banishment.
And in a word, because they would not be
Enthrald to that hard yoke of Popery.
And do not these French prosolites endeavor.
To make divisions that may last for ever
Twixt King and Subject? Mis-interpreting
All Messages that pass betwixt the King
And his great Council: Making such construction
Of grave advice, as needs must bring destruction.
And though they understand the sense of Laws,
Yet cause themselves have broke them; and because
Th'intend to live as outlaws: and as men
That never mean to live by Law again.
Therefore they wrest them from their proper sense,
Stamp them with false interpretations: whence
(The King being once postest therewith) proceeds
Such fears and threats of civil hostile deeds.
Hence it is so many fruitless words are spent
In vain betwixt the King and Parliament.
Hence it is the king declares the Law to have
Another sense then Parliament conceive:
Hence it is so many slight and so contemn
The Parliament: and speak so base of them
And their proceedings: hence the misery
Of England does most necessarily
Its pedigree derive: and till Misprisions
Disunions, Alienations, and Divisions
Twixt king and Parliament united be:
And right constructions made yea till we see
These spirits of division, severed from
His Majesty: and quite casheerd and gone.
England will not be England, but will be,
And so remain, Babel perpetually.
But when these base Malignant spirits are
(Through Gods free mercy, and the tender care
Of our good Parliament) scattered, dispersed,
As those were that for Scottish blood did thirst.
When the head of that same Serpents brood is broke,
And their deceitful Projects want a cloak,
To carry their hid poison in, and when
The Prelates lordlinesse is laid again
As low as when it first began to spring
Twards that Exorbitancy that it was in,
Till these few Months last past, yea when the Land
Shall freely, stoutly, valiantly stand
In every part from Beersheba to Dan,
United in their Members, as one Man.
For Christ, and for the Gospel, and for all
Just Rights and Privileges both great and small,
For our dread Sovereigns just Prerogative:
Neither to add thereto, or to deprive
Him of a hair that is due to him: (the one
Is to detract from him that wears the Crown:
The other wrongs the Subject) and likewise
For privilege of Parley: The Liberties
And Rights of Subjects. And to stand unto
Each promise made in our late solemn Vow;
(Which he tha^ does refuse, O let him be
For evermore Anathema (for me)
Then shall our British Island that has been
The Receptacle, yea the common Inn
Where all Idolatry, and Superstition,
Profaneness, Armenisme, and Sedition.
Atheism, Oppression, Blood, and Cruelty,
Extortion, Persecution, Briberie,
Excess, Oaths, Blasphemy, and every sin,
With great applause has been persisted in.
Be as the Holy Land: like Israel
The people shall be blessed, that therein dwell.
This City shall be like Jerusalem,
Each town, like Sion fair; And as for them
That dwell in Country Villages, they shall
Them Christ's beloved, Redeemed people call.
Then shall Rome's pride abate, then shall the three
Distempered Kingdoms be at unity.
Then shall we praise our God, and serve our King
Unanimously: without murmuring.
When these Sanballets and Tobiahs, shall
(Enforced thereto) let us build up the wall
Of our own peace and safety, and shall say
That a more just and honorable way
Then settling the Militia cannot be
Thought on, to advance Britains prosperity,
And their destruction, which already they
Know to be true, and therefore plots they lay
To cross it: but I trust shall never be
Of such considerable ability,
To perfect their Intentions; for where ere
Hushais good counsel is received, even there
Achitophels rejected is, and then
We know the common end of such wise men.
But since it is our present misery
By such lewd sons of violence to be
Opposed and maligned, yea since it is
To question Parliamentall privileges:
Their chief endeavor, yea and to disdain
And scorn that power that in them does remain:
And scoff at their proceedings, as they were
Objects too base for them to flout and gere.
And since there is left for us no other way,
Our God, our King, our liberties to enjoy:
But all hopes else are fled, and they alone
Next under God, (or surely we have none)
Are left to be a means to bring this (late
Apostate) Land to a reformed estate.
O then let every one that knows the prize
And worth of such a Parliament, be wise,
And not discert them; But let every one
Call former Racks and Impositions
Into their memory: O let them call
Those Popish Rites and Innovations all,
That burdned many a conscience to their mind,
And seriously search if they cannot find
Their spirits greatly eased; and then consider
So many unjust Courts cast down together,
(The vastness of whose arbitrary power
Did many a loyal Subjects state devour,
And spoil them of their Liberties) which we
Without a Parliaments authority
Had nere attained: and call to mind the cause
Why they were called: wast not because the Laws
Were trampled on? When all things out of order
Were rudely cast on every several border
Throughout the Kingdom: and when civil war
Did threat our former (slighted) peace to mar.
Had they not been, our freedoms, lives, estates
Had been a prey to Popish Runagates.
And think upon the call that brought them hither,
To sit so long a time in parle together.
When all the Kingdom was distracted so,
God moved the Lords, they to the King did go,
In humble manner him petitioning,
That heed convoke a Parliament, to bring
An end to these distempers, and possessed
Him, with the justice of this their Request.
And furthermore advisde his Majesty,
That that alone would work an unity.
Or else confusion would straight way step in,
And all to ruin and destruction bring.
The King approved and granted their Petition,
Called for a Parley with all expedition;
To settle peace betwixt the Lands divided,
And to have things controverted and decided
Twixt King and Subject; that exactions might
Be eased, that long against all Law and right,
Have been imposde; and that Religion
So long exposde unto derision,
Might have just vindication against all those
That have been known to be her godless foes.
We see the cause then why the Parliament
Was called together, and for what intent:
Their call st^n^s good in point o^ Law we see,
From God, and Man, King, Peers and Commonaltie.
So's their continuance too, the King has sealed
Their sitting: which is not to be repealed:
Till Church and State have past and overcome
These Agu^s, Fevers, and Consumptions;
That make them sick to death: When these are cured,
The Court may be adjourned: yet they assured,
They have discharged their duties, and the Land
Shall evermore to them obliged stand
For their good service: and all thought to be
Too mean to answer their Fidelity.
Let these considerations work upon
The Affections and desires of every one,
That do desire to lead a Christian life,
And to live free from civil wars and strife.
Or that desire that wholesome Law should be
The Rule whereby to judge indifferently.
As they their God, Laws, King, selves, Liberties,
Wives children, Country, and their substance prize;
Or any thing that unto them is dear,
In The City, or in the Field, or any where:
O let them stand courageously for those
That have stood so for them against their Foes.
Have not our Worthies for us sacrifizde
Lives, Honors, States (and what so highly prizde)
For our enlargement? What conspiracies,
Devises, plots, and Hell-hatch policies,
By Jesuits and Papists have been laid,
(And all to have their good proceedings staid)
Against their lives what threats have been belched out
Against them by that superstitious Rout.
What scandalous aspersions have been cast,
And what gross sensures vulgarly have past,
Their candide Reputations to bespot
With some pretended ignomimous blot:
As if they traitorously should undermine
Our government Politic and Divine:
And set an Arbitrary Course of power,
To wrong the King in's right, and to devoute
The Subjects state, and overthrow the right
Of King and Subject by their (lawless) might.
How have our Anti-sabbatists, and those
Arminian sottes (true Reformations foes)
In our corrupted Springs of Litterature,
And at our Innes of Court, and (I am sure)
In many other places, (though of late
They Are grown more wary) in their common prate,
Spoke ill of Reformation, and all such
Ith Parliament, that stand for it so much.
Yea, how have they by every Rusticke Swain,
And Ignoramus, (that can scarce speak plain
And tolerable English;) been defamde
Miscallde, abusde, and barbarously nick-namde:
If any shall presume to say, I lie,
I Will bring the world this truth to testify;
For scarce is there that City, Town, or place,
Where some have not endeavored their disgrace:
Nor is it unknownet'th' Houses, for themselves
Hear of the rude behavior of these Elves,
By Information, and perhaps the times
May come when such may answer for their crimes.
But yet, have they been daunted? or dismayde?
At what these envious Spirits did or said?
Have they given ore the work they had in hand,
Can any say, that slavishly they stand,
In fear of any? No: whose there? will say;
He that dares rouse a Lion from his Prey?
And force wild Beasts, to fly from den to den,
And fright them, that they dare not turn again:
Fears any Colors? Who can say of them,
That worthily have playde the parts of men,
Of noble Spirits: but that they should be,
Spoke of with honor, thought of reverently.
They have not flincht a step out of the way,
Although these Curres have held them at a bay;
But (as the spiritfull Horse no notice takes
Of the shrill noise that every Mongrill makes)
Have in their pious course persisted still,
Promoting good, not fearing any ill.
So let them still proceed, till they have run
The race of Reformation, that's begun;
So let the Spirit of grace and wisdom be,
Redoubled on their heads in each degree;
So let their courage be increased, and so
Let them Romes power (in England) overthrow;
So let their legal Orders be obeyde,
And all their black-mouthd enemies destroyed:
So let the Lord of Hoasts himself as he
In all things has been with them formerly;
So finish what is begun; and though their foes
Be twenty times in number, more then those
That came against King Asa; let the same
Dismal destruction then overcame
Those Egyptian Nigers, seize upon
These bloody minded Villains every one.
And if no other way, to public peace
Be found, but civil war; or we must cease
To be a priviledgd people; and must yield
Base Tyrannizing Cavileers the field,
Without resistance; and like conquered slaves,
Crouch to their yoke (outlawes and Banckrupt knave:)
Whose mercies are but Heathenish cruelties,
And their best acts murders and robberies.
O then Great Britain (every where) be ready,
To oppose such deeds so tyrannous and heady,
Assemble all your strength with joint consent,
To fight for God, the King, and Parliament.
It Is time ye Western Counties (that have been
So backward, and remiss) now to begin
To stand upon your guard, (now ye are made
The seat of war) O let it not be said,
Amongst those Rebels, that your slacknesse lost
The Victory, and so much blood has cost.
As may be shed in such a civil war:
Meet them 'ith face, and drive them back as far
As they can fly for Sea; and when they can
Shun you no farther, cast them every man
Into the Ocean: Or if she disdain
Such base degenerate Spirits to entertain;
As Britain has spude out: O then to show
How unworthily they got the overthrow;
And how unworthy they themselves have made,
As not to get room to have their corpse laid
In British ground: Let them on Gibbets hang
Till th'aiery Fowls consume them every one.
And as for those that by the Sword shall fall,
Let none of them obtain a Grave at all;
Let dogs and ravenous Wolves (if such were here)
And Vermin with their Intralls make them cheer,
Until their paunches burst, that so the guilt
Of all the causeless blood that has been spile,
May be took off, and may no longer stand,
Upon the general score of all the Land.
The Almighty will destroy them certainly
Before us, if we be not backwardly
And fearful to oppose them, God has quite
Forsaken them; yet he for us will fight,
If we will fight for him: These are the times
When God will visit Rome for all the crimes
She has committed, since the Brothers twain,
Strove which the Regal Power should obtain.
Now must must they pay for all the Christian blood,
That for almost two thousand years they shed;
Now must they pay for all their blasphemies,
Their oaths, their curses, and Idolatries:
This is the time that all the Popish powers,
Must be exilde this English Coast of ours;
This is the time wherein the Lord has said,
Babell is fallen, ^uinde, and destroyde:
This is the time wherein that Whore of Rome,
Must to perpetual desolation come:
And God has made us instruments, whereby
To bring to pass that ancient Prophecy.
Therefore may we return glory and praise,
And honor to his Name, that in these days;
These hard and Iron days has honored us
To be his people, fight his Battles thus:
Who when all power, authority, and hope
Of any good, was frustrate, void, and broke;
Revivde our drooping Spitus, and translated
The Ruledome of the State, from such as hated
Justice and Right* to such as are ambitious
To honor good men, and correct the vicious,
And has infusde a Spirit of life and power,
Into these livelesse catcasles of our*
And has stird up the body of our Nation,
To speak for, stand for, fight for Reformation,
Against a crew of Rebel Cavileers,
Composde of Popish and Arminian heiress
Whose Maxims, are the blood of Kings to shede,
And then affirme't a meritorious deed.
Whose purer Language is in pieces small,
To tear Christ's body, blood, heart, nails and all;
With horrid Oaths, and fearful Imprecations,
Provoking God to hasten their damnations*
Whose best expressions are to breath out threats;
Whose perjurde practice is to break all threats;
T'abolish Laws, and bring poor people under
Their slavish yoke, (or the Popes dreadfull^ blnders)
Our Ancestors, did long desire to see
These times, and yet could not permitted be;
Yet did rejoice to think that bloody Rome,
Should once to final desolation come.
What they esteemed therefore of such weight,
(Though in reversion) lets not rudely slight,
That see it now approaching, it is no small
Nor common mercy to see Babells fall.
Such fair occasion comes not every day,
To right our selves; lets do it whilst we may:
For now both heaven and earth together joins,
To purge the base corruptions of these times.
Occasions bald behind, time once past over,
Not all the Indian gold can ere recover.
Then you the Thousands of our Judah, go
Sheath all your Swords ith bowels of your foe;
Be cloathd with Valor, let your resolution
Be bent to bring all Traitors to confusion;
Let not fair words entice you, but let fly
As thick as hail, against such an enemy:
Break through their guilty ranckes, and overthrow
That Commonwealth of Rebels at a blow.
That that vast treasure they so long a time
Have whorded up, to use in this design:
And all the Arms they have so slily got,
And kept so close as if they had them not:
Their Horses, Pistolls, Swords, and Carabines,
Their Muskets, Pikes, Callivers. Magazines
Of Powder, Shot, and Bullets; and what ere
From France, or Spain, or from the Hollander,
Has been transported hither, to help out
To ruin us at such a civil bout.
We as our due may seize on for a prey,
When they be slain (or run for fear away;
That the surviving part may once again,
Their Freedoms, Laws, and Liberties obtain.
That when this corrupt generation shall,
Be cut by heavens bright Sword of Justice all:
The next ensuing age, may quite forget,
And scorn those rites that we admire at yet;
And may set up the true Discipline and Order,
Of Jesus Christ in every British border.
Now you whose forward Spirits Countrymen,
Affect the Justness of our cause, yet when
You hear that odious name of Cavalier
Opposing you; that mazes you with fear;
That traytrous, bloody, branded name, casts down
Your drooping Spirits equal to the ground;
So that for fear of such an Impious crew,
Y' had rather (shave) like part from all your dues,
And privilege, then seek how to obtain
Your Freedoms, Laws, and Liberties again.
Y' had rather loose all that you do possess,
Then take up lawful Arms to seek redress.
How plainly do such Cowards show to be,
Given up to base pusillanimitie:
Scorn then to be afraid of such a name,
Which unto them is but a brand of shame,
And not of honor: Can a worthless name
Crown them with glory, or our deeds with shame
Think you? Shall arrogated Titles make
You such a just and pious cause forsake?
Can painted shows, true substances exceed?
Can livelesse Statues do a manly deed?
Or does the Spirit of Valor rest on them,
Because base swearing domineering men?
Y' are all deceived, the valiant man is, that
Has fewest sins to be affrighted at;
T'rue Soldiers, will n'ere use violence,
Nor fight but to secure their conscience;
Thy are no profane swearers, nor will curse
Or ban, when things are bad, to make them worse:
Nor will they cry, God damn them, or them sink,
Nor over-charge themselves with too much drink.
Nor will they civil war seek to prefer,
In hopes that they may all prove Conquerers;
But do abhor all Motions that may lead
To the execution of so base a deed.
But being once debarde their proper right:
And finding that their liberties, by might
Are torn in pieces, and their freedoms made
A life of bondage, though they have assavde
All ways for their enlargement; do prepare
Unwillingly to tight themselves by war,
Against their injurious enemies: which shows
Our preparation against mad-capt foes,
Is upright, just, and legal: cause we stand
To hold up the foundation of the Land
From Sudden ruin: and to fortify
Our Laws against the rage of tyranny.
Our preparation for a civil war,
Is to keep the body from a mortal skar,
By taking off some pieces of proud flesh,
Which will in time her miseries increase;
And cause her death if let a while alone,
But help her health if once cut off and gone.
Our Parliament this legal war begins,
To cut off some superfluous useless limbs;
Whose preter natural vigor being infusde
Through every part, has every part abusde
With monstrous principles, such as were nere
Affoote (I think) in any place but here.
And drawn the Subjects of our English Nation,
T'admit a change, t'admit an alteration
Of Government, as well divine as civil,
(A violent Floodgate to let in all evil.)
This likewise does demonstrate unto you,
The desperate madness of our envious foe;
Who like distracted Bedlams run about,
Their own and others ruin to seek out.
These damned Cavaliers, and all what ere
They be that help them out of love or fear
It shows the base unworthiness of those,
That to their Country prove such mortal fo^s;
O what Malignant Spirits them possess,
That they envy their Countries happiness!
What Empire, Kingdom age, or generation,
Since Babells rise, or since (...) worlds foundation,
Can show the like, that ever England should
Nurse up a sort of men, that if they could
Would cut poor Englands throat: was it ever known
That any people did envy their own
Prosperity? Sure no: yet England has
Foster such hideous Monsters, that would bath
Their swords in friends, kindred, and neighbors blood,
Till down the fields there run a crimson flood.
What judgments this great Britain? that thy walls
And streets are filled with such rude Canibals,
That throw out all thy Courts, Errinnis fell,
That cruel, fierce and hellish Fiend does dwell?
Thy sins are sure unparrallell'd, which makes
Thy judgments pearlesse, for their odious sakes:
Fire, pestilence, and war, and many more
Inferior judgments, waste thy kingdom sore.
What Is to be done? to quit us of this grief,
Since we have been so long without relief.
Thou must return from thine Apostacies,
Thy superstitions and Idolatries:
And down before thy Maker in the name
Of his dear Son (that on him took the blame
Of all thy sins) thy Savior, thou must fall,
Desiring him to free thee from them all,
And show thee mercy: and especially
Invoke him now again, thine enemy,
Beseech him to vouchsafe his helping hand,
This one time more to this distressed Land,
And let him know, if he will be pleased, to give
Thee victory, he shall much praise receive.
And add to this thy martial strength and force
Of Muskets, Pikes, Swords, Pistols, men and horse,
And all munition else, what ere it be
That may annoy thy vaunting enemy:
And he that has preserved thee hithertoo,
Both teach thee and direct thee what to do.
But specially, O Glouster-shire, improve
My counsel; it is a pledge of native love,
Go muster up your Volunteers, whose number
May strike your damned Foe with dread and wonder.
^uksbury.
And thou my native * Town especially,
Whom I respect, that have been backwardly
In this defensive service stir thee now,
Make it appear that thou have paid thy vow.
Where are the scores of Horse, thou have set forth,
To answer thy external shows and worth?
Where are thy voluntary youths, that dare
Defend their Country in this civil war?
Some two or three are gone indeed, but they
Were feign (courageously) to steal away
Unknown, lest if they should themselves disclose,
Thy male-affected would account them foes,
And them discourage; yea, since our adieu,
They have malign'd us with reports untrue.
But I forgive them: and do thee advise,
As for thy private good thou would be wise,
(If public good thou sleightst) that thoudst but make
Inferior Towns thy president, and take
Them for a pattern: here, as little Towns
As are the least that coast upon thy bounds,
Have set forth fifty Horse: Young men and mayds
Of all sorts, as they are able, lend their aids,
Some six pence, twelve pence some, as they are willing
And storde, some five, some ten, some twenty shilling;
Or more, or less, as God has blessed them
With means, and hearts to part from it again,
Up therefore quickly, be not like the drone
That eats up others sweetness, but gets none,
If nothing but dead trading might persuade
To this, that might in common sense be made
A motive to stir up the drownest heart,
From somewhat toward this great design to part:
For be assurde that till the Kingdom (...)
Reducde to perfect peace and unity,
And freed from civil war, your trading shall
Continually decay, not mend at all.
And this me thinks should stir up every place
To do the like, because it is the case
Of all the Kingdom; For my part, had I
A thousand lives, and for each life, lying by
A thousand pound (which are above my sphere,
I Would hazard all to free the State from fear.
But some there be will say, do what I can,
These ravenous Vulters will not wrong a man
Alas, say they, here is great mistrusts and fears,
Where needs not any of the Cavaliers,
Alas good men, they do no hurt, they strive
For nothing but the Kings Prerogative:
They be religious men, and they will go
To Church as well as other people do:
And speak as well as most men in the Town,
Where ere they live, few men can put them down.
And shall we fight against them (God forbid)
Shall we do what good Subjects never did?
Make war against the King: We Will rather do
The servilst work he shall command us to,
Is it not better give the King his way,
In settling the Commission of Array,
And to be peaceful: Then to have the Land
In a perpetual combustion stand?
Alas poor silly gu^les, that neither see
Nor understand the approaching misery,
That such as they have brought upon us all,
If by the Sword of civil war we fall:
These men given up to slavish fear, have brought
Themselves and us and all the Land to naught.
Did these but apprehend at ^^far dear rates
Our Ancestors, our freedoms and Estates
For us have purchasde? What a world of pains
They undertook, that we might reap the gains:
What sums they paid; With what great industry,
Th'obtainde our Suffrages, and Liberty:
Sure then they would not be so easily won
To part from them (as many have begun)
Who Edom-like have for a mess of broth
Sold birthright, freedom, substance, faith and troth.
Did such but know experimentally
The value of the freedom they enjoy;
Had they but noble spirits; they would scorn
To live in slavery, that were free born.
But rather choose to die a noble death,
Then to live here ignobly underneath
The feet of Tyranny: For when our Laws
Are changed: and when our liberty withdraws,
Straight every upstart scoundrill will out-brave's,
And English States shall live like Turkish slaves.
As for the carriage of the Cavaliers,
Their tyrranny and wickedness appears
So gross, and palpable, that it will be
But needless labor, and time lost for me
Their rude and barbarous actions to repeat;
Their robberies and murders are so great
In Yorkshire, Lestershire, at Coventry:
Northamptonshire, Bath, Portsmouth, Banbury,
And superstitious Oxford, that was glad
At their first entrance; but are since grown sad,
To see their rude behavior, and what preys
They make of all things that fall in their ways.
And now it is scarce unknown to any Nation,
That Papists have a general dispensation
From their unholy Father; and they may
Now go to Church, and hear Don Bletro say
His Enigmattick Legend and may hear
A temporizing Sermon without fear,
So they advance his work: and do their bests
Through Europe to set up his Papal hests.
Which now are falling down, and those that be
Church Papists, as men term them certainly
Are out most dangerous enemies; and do
Oppose, malign and undermine us too.
If any Ignoramus yet there be,
That will not his own privileges see,
Nor will retain them: But will side with those
That are both Gods, the Kings, and Countries foes,
And will of such proceedings brag and vaunt,
Let them I say remain still ignorant.
Let the Concomitants of such a war
Attend them; and let them wax worse by far,
Till God has finished his good work, upon
This Land, and brought them to confusion.
Now little book fly on the wings of fame,
As far beyond the place from whence I came
As it is thither: that both North and South,
And all the winds may have thee in their mouth,
And take thy counsel: that from Cornwell and
From the utmost limits of Northumberland,
And Durham: yea from Dover in the East,
To the utmost bounds of Chester in the West,
Thou may have audience: that our Heroes may
Muster their Forces against that fatal day.
Grave Essex the chief Leader of us all,
And Bedford our Lieutenant General,
Not all the Roman States can make us fear,
Nor the great Turk himself if he were here.
Our Cause is just, therefore though thousands die,
We are confident to get the victory.
It is credibly affirmed that the Cavaliers do usually drink this wicked and
blasphemous health, viz.

1. A Health to his Majesty by whom we live, move, and have our being.

2 A Health to the Confusion of Pym, his (...) and his Gospel.

FINIS.

