Sot's Paradise: OR, The HUMORS of a Derby-Ale-House: WITH A SATYR UPON THE
ALE.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER
REader what ever the Author truly meant
I know not, but he told me his intent
Was not to Lampoon, or Reflect on any;
But through Necessity he writ, like many,
In Pinch-Gut Times, to get the Ready Penny.
Suppose (said I) you have angered some Bravado,
I hate the standing of a Bastinado?
Poh, poh, said he, such Dangers never heed,
I Would such a Cockscomb Ridicule indeed,
Each Sentence should have Gaul and Venom in it,
Which you, to recompense your Drubs, shall print:
Mortals have often, to their destruction, found,
Poets, like Gods, can at a distance Wound.
I thank you Sir (said I) such Verse, I doubt,
S'But a poor Plaster for a battered Snout.
He pressed the Copy forward, I seemed shie,
Till by these words he brought me to comply.
The Characters are random writ, God knows,
Slightly dispatched; designed, like Salesmens Clothes,
For no one in particular, but where
They best by chance shall fit, for them to wear.
Nay then, said I, if any Sot can find
His Picture here, and not as his designed,
And Angry be, I Will hire the Author then,
To whet his Wits, and Write as Keen again:
Since I can justly say (to save my Bacon)
I no Offense intend, I pray let none be taken.
Sot's Paradise: OR, The HUMORS of a Derby-Ale-House,
WHEN anxious Thoughts my troubled Brains possessed,
And the wild Hag rid straddling over my Breast,
Loaded with Sorrow, I pursued my rest.
My Pockets far too empty were for Wine.
That Noble Juice! That Cordial of the Vine!
By Humane Race so justly held Divine.
To ease my Cares I stumbl'd into R -- 's,
Sots Paradise, so Famed of latter days;
For Derby-Ale, it bears away the Bays.
Through Entry dark I the Tippling Mansion sought,
Whose close Dimensions raised a Jealous thought
I Would been Trappan'd and in a Mouse-Trap caught.
Like Weesel through a Cranny thus I crept;
And as he Screams, so I a Murmuring kept;
Now Paused and Swore, then Gropt, and forward step't.
Through stumbling craggy Ways the Godly steal
To Heaven, whence I concluded, without fail,
This narrow Path must lead to Heavenly Ale.
But in this Pot-gun Passage did I meet
A bulky Sot, who forced me to Retreat;
And shot me, like a Pellat, to the Street.
I gained the Bar by several Essays,
Where mourning Widow sat with doleful Face;
And on each Hand a Room, but never a Place.
I turned to the Left, and did amongst them squeese,
There heard some Belch, some Fart, and others Sneeze;
Buzzing and Humming like a Hive of Bees.
This Room I did for Ease and Cleanness choose,
The Chapel called, from having Seats like Pews,
Where grizled Sots sit nodding over the News.
With painful jostling I a Place possessed,
Sat down, then Belched and Farted like the rest,
Thump'd with my Fist, and cried I broke a Jest.
In comes a Female Tapstress, Pale and Wan,
Sod'n with the fumes of what she would Drank and Drawn,
Looks worse than the green Girl who wants a Man.
Sir do you please, I pray, to have your Ale
Drawn New, or with a little dash of Stale?
I gave her answer, and she soon turned Tail.
One sage old Bard next Chimney Nook was got,
Fixed as a Statue, motionless he sat,
His Eyes regarding neither Who nor What.
This speechless Image most I did admire,
No Derby could this Mortal Lump Inspire,
Who like Old Puss, sat Purring over the Fire.
One whim he had was often put in play,
By Name salute this Monumental Clay,
He Huffs and Puffs, starts up and runs away.
Then in thrusts one, strives hard to get a Place;
Witty in Words, and Satyr in his Face,
Thus boldly speaks in Derby-Ales disgrace.
Pox on it, said he, I Yesterday stepped in,
And drank Nine Tankards to divert my Spleen,
It failed, and now I Am come to drink Nineteen.
At Squire 's I heard a Beaux so Damn and Sink it,
Four Tankards numbed his Wits, you would not think it;
He swore we all are Clod-skul'd Sots who drink it.
This much disgruntl'd all the swilling Herd,
Who grin'd, and at him enviously star'd,
In answer not a Mortal waged his Beard.
One Gapes, a second Nods, a third he Winks,
A fourth he Smoaks, a fifth blows Pipe and Drinks,
Not One in Ten that either Talks or Thinks,
Thus seldom Speak unless it is to complain
Of Phthisick, Stone, the Gout, or some old Pain
That grieves them sorely, when the Moon's in the Wane.
Here worn-out Sinners at their Ails repine,
(The Herd thus sympathetically join)
All Grunting over their Hogwash-Ale like Swine.
Up rises now and then, a brawny Sot,
Before the Fire he turns his Arse about,
Hauks up his Phlegm, then Spitting staggers out.
With me this smoaky Clime did not agree,
These Sots too Grave were, that is too Dull, for me;
No Talk is worse than much Loquacity.
Willing to take a General Survey,
T* observe the Difference in Mortal Clay,
I stole from thence, to the next Room made way.
This called the Bear-Garden, where at a Table
I heard, amongst a wild Promiscuous Rabble,
More Tongues confused then ere were known at Babel.
A Beau repeating to his friend a Novel,
Two Lawyers in Dispute began to Cavel,
A fifth, with Chalk, was scoring out an Oval.
And, being as cunning as a Hocus Pocus,
Had laid a Wager with a John a Nokus,
He Would with a Thread and Pins find out the Focus.
A Scholar, next, of Batchelor's Degree,
Standing four Years at University,
Rose up and flung a Witticism at me.
I liked the Sport, and did retort the same;
I hit him Home according to my Aim;
But could not get his Hair Brained fury tame.
So Learned he seemed, so Witty in Discourse,
He Would hold me all the Money in his Purse,
Though I seemed Man, he would prove me but a Horse.
I gravely said it did his Skill surpass,
And, in return, I instanced him a Case
Wherein a Scholar proved himself an Ass.
He smelt a Rat, and found he was mistaken,
Shut up his Brains, true knowledge had forsaken,
And dwindl'd into News to save his Bacon.
A little Captain, though of great Renown,
Cocked up his Hat, swore Zoons; and then sat down,
Out-chatter'd all the Magpies in the Town.
He talked of Heroes, Hectors, and Bravadoes,
Of Gashes, Slashes, Cuts, and Carbonadoes,
Of Cannons, Mortars, Bombs and Hand Grenades.
The Valiant Pigmy, eagre to declare
His Broils in Taverns, not Exploits in War,
Teas'd me with Nonsense more than I could bear.
The Di'lect he retained he learned at Nurse,
And that his Words might be of greater force,
He tagg'd each Sentence with an Oath or Curse.
A Dapper Blade was Squeezed among the rest,
Who would have made each Word he spoke a Jest;
Aimed at much Wit, but little he possessed.
Like Ill Rung Bells he did Confusedly Nock
His Ill Tuned Words to hammer out a Joak,
Whose Tongue outrun the Larum of a Clock.
This Mortal proved a Midnight Magistrate,
Who ask's us, Why so drunk, and why so late?
Little in Person, though in Office Great.
He Huckles much, though what by that he means,
Let Oldish, Shirley, or such Learned Brains,
TO inform the World, employ their Skilful Pens.
Next sat a Drone, whose Wits had but a Dull-Edge,
His Gravity and nice Grammatick Knowledge,
Spoke him some Senior Cock's comb of a College.
He Learned Reasons offered unto some,
Why Gerounds end in di, in do, or dum,
They grave attention gave, and sat hum Drum.
Next him a Spark bedaw'd with Golden Twine,
So very Grave, and eke so very Fine,
I took him for some Statesman on Design.
Some humble Lord, so generously free,
Seeking Applause and Popularity,
Came here to Court the good Mobility.
I turned about, and viewed him for a space,
No Sword he would on, and in his Mein no Grace,
Dullness instead of Grandeur in his Face.
My Judgment erred, I quickly found its failure,
No Honor in his Speech, in's Looks no Valor,
A Lord, thought I! Wounds, this must be a Tailor.
When e're he spoke, it matter was of fact,
So Emphatical his Words, and so compact,
No Strowling Player could be more exact.
Against him Teague, an Irish Barber sat,
Who has a Thousand Whimsies in his Pate,
Makes Wigs, tunes Bagpipes, does the Lord knows what.
By chance, said I, What is it a Clock I Pray?
After some time he would studied what to say,
He Answered, By my Shoul it is Shaturday.
Each loving each, as truly as a Brother,
In all things act alike, Speak, Drink and Smother,
Delight, as Monkeys, to Buffoon each other.
Like the Twin-Stars, these two United are
It Is no great matter whether both appear,
If you see one, in him the other's there.
The Ale at last to these weak Noddles stole,
Supplied the want of Brains in every Skull,
And made them Merry, though it made me Dull.
The Tailor begged of his Reverse a Tune,
Teague for his Bagpipes sent, and fixed his Drone,
Then Played Dundee's Farwell, and Sung O hone.
This pleased the Mob, and made them hoop and hollow,
As when the Brindled Dog, against the Fallow,
Pins down the Bull, and makes him Roar and Bellow.
I Teas'd and Tired with this Bear-Garden Play,
In doleful dumps did for Ten Tankards Pay,
And Sick not Drunk I homewards steered my way.
A SATYR UPON Derby-Ale.
BASE and Ignoble Phlegm, dull DERBY-ALE,
Thou can over none but Brainless Sots prevail;
Chokes them if New, and Sour art if Stale.
Thou drown'st no Care, or do thou Elevate;
Instead of quenching Drouth, do Drouth create,
Makes us dull Sots at an expensive rate.
Old English Ale, which Upstart Fops disdain
Brewed by our Grandsires, Cheered the Heart of Man,
Quenched Drouth with pleasure, and prolonged their Span.
But thou! Poor Slime, thou art not Ale, for why?
Thou neither Cheares the Heart, or Brisks the Eye;
The more we Drink the more we still are Dry.
Rare Fat'ning Swill, to Belly up Lean Guest,
It feeds a Man in fix Months to a Beast,
And gives him bulk for a Church-Ward'n at least.
Puffed up with thee, Dispirited, Debased,
We into Gray's-Inn reel (O Pump be praised)
There Quench that Drouth thy Treacly Dregs have raised.
One hearty Draught prepares for Pipe of Funk,
Three Tankards whets my Appetite for Punk,
Four makes me Sick; but Ten wont make me Drunk.
Over Nipperkins of thee six Hours I sit,
Till spent my Total, and benumbed my Wit,
Thus nothing have, and just for nothing fit.
Our Wits, or Thoughts, thou never can advance
Above the affairs of Poland, or of France,
Wounds! You Are a Booby to a Cup of Nantes.
You Are fit for those who are from Troubles free,
Thou Cur'st no Spleen thou art unfit for me,
I'd's live almost drink Adam's Ale as thee.
Thou make us Fat in little time, it is true,
The same will Swins-Flesh and Potatoes do;
They covet Flesh, not Brains, that follow you.
Thou Noble Ale! Mere Caudle, and unfit
For Men of Care to drink or Men of Wit,
Poor English Coffee for a ploding Cit.
Guzzle for Carmen, Foggy and unfine,
For nothing fit but to Exhaust our Coin,
Water to Brandy, and small-Beer to Wine.
Forgive my drowsy Muse where ever she nods,
She Is not Inspired or Tutored by the Gods,
She Rhimes over Ale, others over Wine, that is odds.
What if you say she is Dull, it is no great matter,
Cross Muddy Ale's a heavy Theme for Satyr,
Tom Brown be judge, or honest Ben Bridgewater.
FINIS.

