A STEP TO Stir-Bitch-Fair: WITH REMARKS UPON THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON Printed and Sold by I. How, in the Ram-Head Inn-Yard, in
Fanchurch-street, 1700.

Books Printed and Sold by J. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn-Yard in
Fenchurch-Street; and by M. Fabian, at Mercers-Chappel.
1. SOt's Paradise: Or the Humors of a Derby-Ale-House: With a Satyr upon the
Ale. Price Six Pence. 2. A Trip to Iamaica: With a True Character of the People
and Island. Price Six Pence. 3. Ecclesia and Factio. A Dialogue between
Bow-Steeple-Dragon, and the Exchange-Grashoper. Price Six pence. 4. The Poet's
Ramble after Riches. With Reflections upon a Country Corporation. Also the
Author's Lamentation in the time of Adversity. Price Six pence. 5. A Trip to
New England. With a Character of the Country and People, both English and
Indians. Price Six pence. 6. Modern Religion, and Ancient Loyalty: A Dialogue.
Price Six Pence. 7. The World Bewitched. A Dialogue between two Astrologers and
the Author. With Infallible Predictions of what will happen from the Vices and
Villainies Practiced in Court, City, and Country. Price Six pence. 8. A Walk to
Islington: With a Description of New Tunbridge-Wells, and Sadler's
Musick-House. Price Six pence. 9. The Humors of a Coffee-House: A Comedy.
Price Six Pence. 10. A Frolic to Horn-Fair. With a Walk from Cuckold's-Point
through Deptford and Greenwich. Price Six pence. 11. The Dancing-School. With the
Adventures of the Easter-Holy-Days. Price Six pence. 12. The First Volume of
the LONDON-SPY: In Twelve Parts. 13. The Second Volume of the LONDON-SPY: In
Six Parts. Price Six Pence each; or they may be had both Volumes Bound
together; and also Bound with the rest of the Authors Writings. 14. The
Metamorphos'd Beau, etc. Price Six pence. 15. The English Nun: Or, a Comical
Description of a Nunnery. With the Lives and Intrigues of the Priests and Nuns.
Price Six Pence. 16. Laugh and be Fat: Or, an Antidote against Melancholy.
Containing great variety of Comical Intrigues in Town and Country. To which is
added Nine Delightful Tales. Price One Shilling. 17. A Step to the Bath: With a
Character of the Place. Price Six Pence. 18. Labor in Vain: Or, what Signifies
Little or Nothing, viz. I. The Poor Man's Petition at Court. II. Expectation of
Benefit from a Covetous Man in his Lifetime. III. The Marriage of an Old Man
to a Young Woman. IV. Endeavors to Regulate Men's Manners by Preaching or
Writing. V. Being a Iacobite. VI. Confining an Insolvent Debtor. VII. Promise
of Secrecy in a Conspiracy. VIII. An Enquiry after a Place. 19. The Reformer.
Exposing the Vices of the Age: In several Characters. viz. 1. The Vicious
Courtier. 2. The Debauched Parson. 3. The Factious Hypocrite. 4. The Precise
Quaker. 5. The Covetous Miser. 6. The Prodigal Son. 7. The City Letcher. 8. The
Insatiate Wife. 9. The Amorous Maid. 10. The Beau Apprentice. 11. The City Mob.
12. The Country Squire. 20. The Rambling Rakes: Or, London Libertines. Price
Six Pence. 21. The Insinuating Bawd: And Repenting Harlot. Price Sixpence.
A STEP TO STIR-BITCH-FAIR.
HAVING heard much of the Fame of Stir-Bitch-Fair, where Vice, Merchandise, and
Diversion, draw the Cambridge-Youth, London-Traders, Lyn-Whores, and abundance
of Ubiquitarian-Strolers, into a promiscuous Assembly, all contributing
something to either the Pleasure or Profit of one another; some coming to spend
Money, others to get it: The Promotion of their Interest, or the pleasing of
their Senses being the two chief Ends, I suppose, which collect such Numbers of
Mankind together from their sundry scattered Habitations: I resolved, since the
Season of the year proved Dry and Pleasant, to make a short visit to Cambridge,
and withal to take a complete survey of this its Neighboring and Renowned
Fair, of which I had often heard many remarkable and pleasant Stories. In
pursuance of this my Design, I gave earnest for a Place in the Stage-Coach, and
the next Morning having Lined my Pockets, and bundled up a sufficient Quantity
of Linen to refresh me for the Fortnight, I took a Hackney Wheel-about for
Expeditions sake to the Green-Dragon within Bishopsgate, where our Traveling
Convenience stood ready to receive me: But by that time I got thither, the
Country Tub-driver began to be impatient, all the Company but my self being
already come, and had taken up their Stations in the Dirty, Lumbering, Wooden
Hovel, being more in shape like a Tobacco-Hogshead than a Coach, Bellying out
in the Boudge like the Stern of a Dutch Fly-Boat; and was built more for
Burden, and the Horses Ease, than to commode Travelers. The rest of the
Company being most of 'em pretty Burly, had made a Shift to leave me a Nook in
the Back part of the Coach, not much wider than a Chair for a jointed Baby; I
nessled, and I squeezed and drew in my sides like a fat Man going through a
narrow Style, till with much ado I had wedged in my Buttocks between the side
of the Coach and the Hip of a bouncing Blowsabella, who sat next me. Thus
laboring as hard as ever did furious Lover to riggle himself in between the
knees of a coy Mistress.

When I had thus by Storm and a great deal of Fatigue, taken my Place, which
notwithstanding the troublesome coming at it, I had before paid for, I sat with
Patience upon Force, crowded up like a great Plumb in the Corner of a
Minc'd-Pye. But before many Minutes were spent, our brawny Storm-beaten
Carrion-Flogger, whose empty Noddle was armed against the Weather, with a
Leather-Cap as thick as a Church-Bucket, drew up his Flounder-mouth like a Hens
Fundament; and with a cherrup or two, and an Enlivening Slash, away scower'd
the half Dozen of thin Gutted Titts, with a Crowd of Sinners at their Arses, as
if the Devil drove 'em: Our Booted Caravan, almost as big as the Belly of the
Trojan-Horse, being bound down so strictly to it is good Behavior, that it had
no more sway when we came over a Kennel, than St. Sepulchers Steeple has when
the College Youths are ringing in it: Whilst we at every swog, neaded our
Elbows in one another sides, till I had the ill Fortune to so raise an old
Gentleman's Spleen, that he Grind and Snarld like a Towzer at a Bone when a
strange Dog is near him, being ready to bite my Nose off, having given his
Corns a jostle I suppose, that put him under an uneasiness beyond the Patience
of his Years, which seemed to be attended with a Peevish Temper and many
Infirmities. In a little time we got often the Stones, and had done Cursing of
the Pavier; and then began to swim as easily along the Road as a Graves-end
Barge in Fair Weather, though wedged as close in one by another as a Barrel of
Red-Herrings, or Wheat-Ears in a Tunbridge-Pye.

I now took the Liberty to examine into my Company, consisting of five Women, a
sucking Child, the old Gentleman, and my self. Two of our Ladies I discovered
by their Talk were Sempstresses, the third a Perfumers Widow, the fourth a
Fatherless Parsons Daughter, and the fifth I imagined, was carrying down an
Unwelcome Fairing, the Child, to some unfortunate Cantabridgian, who when he
was last in London, answered the end of his Creation a little unadvisedly, and
left his Image behind 'im. The Old Gentleman, I understood by his Talk, having
a Son at St. John's College, whose unruly Appetites were a little too powerful
for the Weak Discretion of his Junior Years to keep under a regular Subjection,
was going down in order (by his Paternal Authothority) to restrain him, if it
were possible, from the Vices and Debaucheries incident to the Fair.

I began to consider with my self the inequality of the Number of the Female
Sex, was likely to make it a Chargeable Journey to the old Man and I, unless I
could handsomely project some Passible means to slip my Neck out of the Chollar,
which I did in a great Measure after the following Method. When a little
accidental Mirth and Frothy Prittle-Prattle had begun our Acquaintance, and
begot a little Familiarity amongst one another, I began to tell 'em a Story,
wherein I introduced it as a Custom in English Traveling, that the Majority
of either Sex used to treat the lesser Number of the other; but however, being
unwilling to put so heavy a Task upon such a Number of so pretty Ladies, tho
scarce one was handsome enough to be a Concubine to a Black-amoor, I thought it
was very Reasonable for the Old Gentleman and I to take one apiece of 'em under
our Protection; and that those whom Fortune should exclude from Enjoying the
Benefit should have no reason to be Angry, they should draw Cuts among
themselves, to determine who should be Entit'led to the Advantage, which the
wanton Titts very merrily consented to; but the old Testy Curmudgion having
little Generosity in his Looks, and less in his Heart, seemed to be very much
out of Humor I had made so expensive a Proposal, and very peevishly expressed
the following Words, viz. Marry let them Treat 'em that most wanted a return of
their Favors, as for his part he was grown Old and past it: Why, sure Father,
said I, if you were never so Old, you might wish a good thing well. But I Will
engage, said I, you are able to do Business still, if you would but give your
mind to it. Not I, replied the surly Cuff, shaking his Head, but whispering in
my Ear, says he, I Would give five Hundred Pounds I could. However at last we
droll'd the old Love-Penny into a Compliance, and the Women drew Lots; which,
for a Shift, the willing Creatures made of Whale-Bone they plucked out of their
Stomachers. Upon the decision of the matter, the homeliest Pugnancy amongst 'em
fell to my Lot, and Fortune favored the Old Fumbler with the Youngest and
Handsom'st, which infused such a Juvenal Spirit into my Grandsire, that he grew
as Frothy, and as Brisk, as a Bottle of small-Beer at Mid-summer; Snapping his
Middle-Finger and Thumb at every word, as loud as a pair of Castinets,
entertaining his Mistress with a Song in excuse of his Age, part of which I
remember to recite, viz.

SONG.
Though I am an Old Man, I have Wealth and Riches;
And besides Money, I Have something in my Breeches:
And dare to hold a Young Man, a Guinea to a Shilling,
I can please a Young Wench, if she be but willing.
By this time our diminutive Fellow Traveller, the swadled Infant; began by his
shrill Squales, more frightful to a Petticoat-Sinner, than a Sow-Gelders Horn
to a gelt Mungril, to show very terrible Signs of a Lamentable uneasiness;
upon which, the indulging Mother, tender of her hopeful Progeny (after she had
tried Hush, my dear Creature, Lull-a-by, and the Bubby, but without Effect)
guessed rightly the disaster that attended the poor Innocent, and began like a
careful Nurse, to examine whether any Signs of good Luck had dropped from the
Child's Bumfiddle; and upon strict enquiry found the Baby had broke his twatling
strings, to the great offense of the Nostrils of the whole Company, insomuch
that I, for want of being accustomed to the Infirmities of Children, was more
than ordinary Squeamish, and to aviod the Sight of the gilded double clout, as
well as the Scent of those Odoriferous Effluvia's that arose from the Sower
Grounds of the leaky Runlet; I popp'd out my Head out of one of the Coach
Windows, for the Benefit of the Air, and rid for a Mile, as if I had sat
Barrel'd up in a Gold-finders Caravan; with my Head out of the Bung-hole; so
that between the two extremes of Age and Infancy, we past away the Time till we
came to Ware; where we put in at the Sign of the English Champion, who redeemed
the Maid from the Jaws of the Dragon, to give Nature the refreshment of a
Dinner, and to ease our tired Limbs from that Numbness incident to those
cripling Postures, the Number of our Company forced us to sit in; in this Inn
stands the great Bed of Ware, talked of as much among the Citizens, who seldom
Travel beyond the bounds of the home Circuit; as the Gigantick greatness of the
Herodian Colossus, or the Magnitude of the Trojan Horse, are amongst the Sober
Enquirers into lost Antiquities. The Extravagant largeness of this Bed is very
much wondered at, by all that see it, being wide enough to lodge a Troop of
Soldiers, with the assistance of a Trundle-Bed; in the same Room hangs a great
pair of Horns, upon which (insisting upon an old Custom) they Swear all new
Comers; the form of the Oath being something Comical, and withal very Ancient,
I have presented it to the Reader, hoping if it be not valuable for its Wit, it
may be for it is Antiquity.

Take Care thou do thy self no wrong,
Drink no small Beer when thou have Strong;
And further do thy self this Right,
Eat no Brown Bread if thou have White;
And if the Mistress thou can Bed,
Besure thou do not kiss the Maid.
Show not thy Wife thy utmost Strength,
Nor let her know thy Purses Length;
Never be Bonnd for any Friend,
But rather far thy Money Lend;
For thou will find it is better he
Should break or be undone, than thee;
Trust no Man that is Proud and Poor,
Unless thou will forgive the Score;
For he will neither Pay nor own,
The Kindness thou to him have shown;
Be just and grateful to thy Friend,
'Twill make thee happy in the end;
But if thy self and thine thoud'st save,
Take Care thou deal'st not with a Knave:
Trust not thy Wife, though near so good,
With no Man but thy Self abroad.
For if thou do, ever she returns,
Thy Forehead may be decked with Horns:
What I have said do thou retain,
So Kiss the Horns, and say, Amen.
After this very Useful and Cautionary Oath had been administed ot several of
our Company, and among the rest my self; our Twelve-pence a piece was exacted,
for the Benefit of the rest of our Fellow-Travellers, who had been accustomed
to the Road; which Fine we were forced to submit to, or undergo the Ridicule of
the whole House, for the Ill-natured breach of an Old Custom. This Ceremony
being ended, and the usual dues Collected, and brought in, in such sundry sorts
of Liquor as might please every Bodies Pallat, spurred on by our Appetites, we
began to enquire what sorts of Provisions they either had in the House, or
intended for our Dinners? To which the Master answered, The only thing that the
Town was famed for, was Eels; in the ordering of which they had so complete a
Knowledge, they would undertake to dress 'em as many several ways as ever a
French Cook did a Feast of Frogs, or a Dutch Skipper a Dish of Pickled
Herrings. And it happening so Fortunately, that every one of our Company being
great Lovers of this Fish; we readily united in one Opinion, and ordered that
our Dinner might be all Eeles, desiring the Cook might serve us up with as
great variety of this Slippery Food, as her utmost Skill in the useful Art of
Cookery would give her Leave; without further directing her to any
particularities, but left her wholly to her own Freedom and Discretion in the
Business; which indeed she managed so well to her Masters Interest, and to the
Companies Satisfaction, that I believe never was a a parcel of Mud-worms served
up to the Table of an Epicure, and rendered more pleasing to the Pallat, with
such variety of Sawces, or made fit for the Stomach by such sundry Stratagems,
as were used in the industrious Coquination of these our slimy Eatables;
Besides, the ordinary ways of Boiling, Frying, Baking, Stewing, Roasting, and
Toasting; we had 'em Coddl'd, Parboiled, Sows'd Dows'd, and the Devil and all.

When we had Plentifully Feasted on our Fish, like so many Cormorants, and
wound up our Dinner as decency requires, with a short Thankigiving, we called
for a Bill to inform us what we had to pay; accordingly one was brought,
wherein more particulars were inserted, than ever were found in a Tailors
Debt-Book, or a Boatswain's Catalogue of Materials, for the new rigging of a
Vessel; which sum'd up, came as exactly to half a Crown, a Head, and
Twelve-pence for the Cook, as if the Master himself, had been well Skilled in
Arithmetical Proportion, and knew well upon Expedition how to prevent Fractions
in a reckoninig; though we told 'em we thought our selves a little unreasonably
dealt with; yet they so very much insisted on the extraordinary Trouble we had
put 'em to; that they Talkatively prevented any manner of Abatements, only the
Master very Politickly presented us with a Dram a piece of right French Brandy,
to wash away the grumbling in our Gizards, that we might not report to his
Prejudice the hardness of our Usage.

We all now had recourse again to our Country Vehicle, where we restated our
selves in our former Misery; and underwent the Penance of being crammed as
close as Potted Pdigeons, till we came to Puckeridge; where the Coachman only
called, to wash the Dust out of his Mouth, and supply his Salival Ducts with a
little Moisture, which might well become Drowthy, with his talking to his
Horses, upon whom he vented as much Spleen, Passion, and Flagellation, as ever
did peevish Pedagogue upon a dozen of Block-heads, who had neither Wit nor
Memory. All that was remarkable here, was an Ax which they showed us, kept as
sharp and as bright, as if it were whetted as often as their Knives, or scowerd
as often as their Handirons; this antiquated Weapon, as they tell you, had the
Honor of cutting off some great Man's Head, but who, or upon what Account, they
are at a great Loss to inform you.

From thence we jog'd on, till we came to our Evenings Stage, a Town called
Barley; where we put into an Inn, distinguished by the Name of Old Pharaoh,
which Title it acquired from a Stout Elevating Malt-Liquor under the same Name,
for which it has long been famous. This Inn is kept not only by a Female, but
according to her own report, and the Belief of her Neighbors, a Maid too; and
of such a Herculean Proportion, that had she been in the same Jeopardy with the
Virgin of Old, she would have been able to have made her Party good with the
Dragon; and if the English Champion had lent his assistance to the weakest
side, which I am sure must have been the Monster, I am certain she would have
proved strong enough to have beat St. George into the Bargain. Here our
Entertainment was very good, though not so cheap as to be attended with no Fault;
here we heartily enjoyed the true English Pleasure of Substantial Eating, and
supplied that Emptiness, the slippery Eels had left in our Stomachs, with
well-fed Mutton, and fat Fowls, which we washed down with old Pharaoh, till we
made our selves as merry as Bumpkins at a Harvest home, till the Women like
true Gossips over their Liquor, began to let their Tongues run as fast as the
quickest Division of Tollets Ground, quarrelling about the uneasiness of one
another places in the Coach, as if their Bumfiddles had been gaul'd by the
hardness of their Seats; whilst indeed I heartily wished their Tongues in the
same Condition. Our bouncing Maiden-Landlady to show a peculiar respect to us
the Company of the Coach, which I suppose, she esteemed as generally her most
profitable Guests, obliged us with her Company, not only to Supper, at which
according to old custom, she composed her Dutch-built Stern into a sedential
Posture at the Upper end of the Table, but also honored us after with a great
deal of her Blunt Conversation, which was very pleasant, and consequently
acceptable; entertaining us with a great many merry Stories, one of which I
thought more particularly diverting, and being managed by her self, and
Transacted in her own House, I think it worth the Reciting.

About the middle of this last Summer, a couple of jolly Country Parsons were
coming up to Town, mounted upon Roan and Sorrel, with their Wives behind 'em,
and chanced in the close of the Evening to put into old Pharaoh, and Inn there
for the Night; the House happening to be full of Travelers, insomuch that the
best Rooms were before taken up, had but one Chamber to spare, wherein there
were two Beds, which the Parsons rather than to go further and fare worse,
consented to accept of; Ordering a couple of Fowls to be laid down to the Fire,
it being difficult for a Priest to rest quietly that Night he goes to Bed
without Roastmeat for his Supper, says our Maiden Landlady; they all being hot
with riding, and half choked with the Dust upon the road, called plentifully
for old Pharaoh, which their Wives seemed highly to approve on, complaining
greatly they had met with but indifferent Liquor thro'-out all their Journey,
till they had happily arrived at Barley, upon which, says she, one of the
Parsons Punn'd upon the Name of the Town, after the following manner:

Good Barley makes good Malt,
Good Malt makes this good Liquor;
Which has no other Fault,
Unless it is so strong,
'Twill Fuddle ever long,
Both me and my Brother Vicar.
Thus they diverted themselves, till their Supper was ready, to which they sat
down with as cheerful looks, and keen appetites, as if it were a Parish Feast,
and what ever they had Eat and Drank, should have been on free-cost; when they
had about half done, they remembered to invite their Hostess to participate, who
having a huge Spirit, as I found by her telling the Story, in proportion to the
Bulkiness of her Body, was so highly disgusted, that after a slighting manner,
she refused their unmannerly kindness, resolving, as I suppose, to be even with
'em in the Reckoning. When Supper was over, and the two Parsons had cast up
Cross or Pile who should return thanks for the good Creature; the two good
Wives after they had drank a Grace-cup, were desirous to go to Bed; the Parsons
at this time having a greater kindness for the Liquor, than for their Helpmates
Company, had a mind to sit up a little longer, and considering Tobacco to be a
good Emblem of the World's vanity and instability, were resolved to Moralize
over one peremptory Pipe, and a comfortable Cup or two of Coroborating Old
Pharaoh: Upon which their Ladies being equally tired with the Fatigue of their
Journey, retired to their Chamber without their Husbands, with a Female
Chamberlain to attend 'em, who put them in their several Beds, set the
Recepticles of the Night in order, wished them good Rest, and bid them farewell
till the next Morning. Our Maiden Landlady about half an hour after, having an
indispensable occasion for something in the same Room, went up Stairs, opened
the Chamber Door, intending to excuse her self to the Levites Bedfellows, but
found 'em both refreshing their weary Limbs with Natures kindest Medicament, a
sound Sleep, which immediately put a Project into her Head, to draw the two
Priests into an ignorant Breach of the Ninth Commandment, and make 'em the
reciprocal Authors of one another Cuckoldom, without knowing any thing of the
matter, till 'twas too late for prevention; in order to effect this Design, she
changes the places of their Garments, putting the Clothes of the one Parsons
Wife, to the Bedside of the other, and shutting the Door after her, came down
Stairs, growing very Merry and Jocund with her Canonical Guests, which
occasioned 'em to inflame their Bodies with a Pot or two extraordinary. When
thus their own Wills had measured out to their Appetites a sufficient Quantity,
they were lighted up to Bed, and coming into the Chamber, fearing to wake their
Wives were very hush, ordering the Chamberlain to go down Stairs, for they
needed not his Assistance; the Curtains being Drawn, and the Parsons having an
Eye on their Wives Clothes, chose their Beds by the Apparel that lay by 'em,
examining no further for a better Information, but to Bed they went. The
Landlady Lodging herself that Night in the next Room, which nothing but a Thin
Wainscote parted, on Purpose to satisfy her self how her Project took, and
what Event it would produce in the Morning. No sooner had the Priests laid
aside the Robes of Divinity, and were Cumbent in their Feathers, but the Power
of Old Pharaoh, and the warmth of their Wives together, began to operate on
both Parties, and something was done, says my Landlady, which, though I Am a Maid,
I cannot choose but guess at: All things going smoothly on till Break of Day
without discovery, about five a Clock in the Morning one of the Parsons opening
the Curtains to guess at the time of Day, happens to espy his Neighbors Wife
instead of his own, and hearing his Brother Priest (who had not been Married
above a Month) very busy in the next Bed. Hold, hold, Neighbor, says he, have
a care what you do; pray G -- d send we are not mistaken; I doubt you have my
Goods there, however it came about, for I Am sure I have that by me that is none
of my own. The other who had much the younger and Prettier Wife: Tears open the
Curtains, and finds it too true to make a Jest on, Leaps out of Bed, which the
other did also, and so changed into their proper Places. The Parsons enquiring
amongst themselves what could be the meaning of this strange mistakes, could
account it to nothing but an agreement of their Wives to change Bed-fellows;
which the Women being Innocent denied, with all satisfactory: Protetestations;
so that what to make on it they could not Imagine, but dressed themselves and went
down Stairs, having no way left but to make the best of a bad Market. When they
came into the Kitchen, my Landlady bid 'em good Morrow, hoped they rested well
all Night, and asked if they would be pleased to have a Cup of the old Liquor and a
Toast for their Mornings Draught, No, no, says one of the Heavenly Guides very
angerly, Pharaoh was a good King, but your Pharaoh is wicked Liquor, it had
like to have raised a dispute between my Friend and I this Morning, about
pulling one another Boots on. Indeed Husband, says the oldest and the wisest
of he Wives, I vow it was a very pleasant mistake, howsoever it happened.

Hush, (says the Parson) Wife remember this,
Words are not well, in things that ^are amiss.
Meeting with nothing further that was remarkable at Old Pharoah's, when we had
refreshed our Bodies with a Nights repose; in the Morning, after we had lined
our Carcasses with a good Breakfast, to keep the Fogs from oftending our
Stomachs, we set forward on our Journey, and proceeded without any thing
remarkable, till we came to Saffron-Walden, so called from the great Quanties
of that most excellent Flower that grows there so valued by Physicians for it is
admirable Virtues in abundance of Distempers, being held to be one of the
greatest Cordials the whole Universe produces, it is said the Yellow Jaundise
is never incident to the Inhabitants of this Place, against which lazy
Distemper, this true English Medicine is so infallibly Efficacious, that let a
Person but Ride through the Town who is under this disorder, and the Effluvias
that arise from their Saffron-Gardens, shall fill the Air with such a
Salubrious Quality, that the Odoriferous Breath you suck into your Nostrils,
shall prove an effectual Cure, for not only the aforementioned, but many other
Distempers; as for my own part, I found my self so enlivened with the Fumes,
which I snush'd up as we passed through, that a stale Maid after the Loss of her
Virginity, or a cleared Culprit, who has just knocked off his Shackles, could
not be more Frollicksome and Gay, than I found my self; which I may justly
ascribe to the great Influence of this Golden-colour'd Product, which is of a
Nature so good, that Physicians themselves allow it can scarce be used amiss.

From thence we jogged on about a Mile, at which distance from Saffron Walden,
stood a famous Pile of Stone Building, called Audley-End, of which I had often
heard, but never till this time had amazed my Eyes with such a stupendous
Structure, which seemed to me to be a great City, with the License of a
Traveller, almost as big as London within the Walls, if you take Gardens and
all, and for ought I know, I shall not enlarge so much as to need your Pardon
for it.

This Magnificent Edifice was first raised by an Ancestor of the Earl of
Suffolk, and sold afterward to King Charles; the Magnitude of this House is
reported to be such, that it is a Days Work for a running Footman to open and
shut the Windows that appertain thereto; and that there is one Gallery in it,
of such a vast length, that if you beat a Drum at one end, it shall not be loud
enough to fright away a Mouse at the other; nor are we able to distinguish at
the same distance a Hog from a Dog, without a spying Glass. It Is a House fit
only for a Prince, and to be maintained and upheld at a National Charge, for
it is almost large enough to Beggar the Country it stands in, to keep it in
repair. It is situated in a valley at the Bottom of a Hill, and has Water
enough comes down in the Winter to drown it, if Care by Drains and Aquaducts,
were not taken to prevent it, It Is a useless Vanity, sprung up from abundance
of Riches, raised more for wonder than for use; and serves rather as a Monument
of the Donor's Pride and Greatness, than his Wisdom and Liberality; for to
spend one half of an Estate in a Building, that would ruin the remainder to
keep it in Repair, either shows that a Man knows not well what he does, or that
he has more Money than he knows well what to do with; or else that he was
mindful to do a vain thing with his Treasure, the better to show the World the
Vanity of Riches.

From thence we scower'd along an Asses Gallop, now and then plagued with a
terrifying Lesson from our little Humane Bagpipes, meeting with nothing
remarkable till we came within four Mile of Cambridge, at which distance the
top of Kings College Chapel was discernable, appearing in a Figure resembling
a Cradle, and by Travelers is so called; which happened to draw into my
Noddle, the following scrap of Poetry.

Old Cambridge brings forth Men of Learning and Parts,
Dame Natures dark Laws to unriddle;
And Since she is the Midwife of Science and Arts,
It Is fit she be known by a Cradle.
When from thence we had traveled about three Mile further, we came to a small
Village called Trumpington, a Mile on this side Cambridge. This Town is not a
little famous for two great Conveniences it affords the young Scholars of the
University, for here the fresh Men first learn to be good Companions, and
afterward when in Orders, practice to be good Preachers; for here they
commonly Drink their first merry cup with their Friends after their initiation,
and generally deliver their first Sermon when Qualified by the Bishop for the
Ministerial Function; as we passed through Trumpington, where the Scholars at
their leisure hours, are some or other of 'em usually refreshing themselves; we
saw several Black Gowns pop in and out of the little Country-hovels, like so
many Black Rabbits in a Warren, bolting out of their Coney-Burroughs; I have
some reason to be jealous, the Name of this Place was Originally given it for
no good, but rather from some wild Scholars, who being Libidiously given, had
usual recourse thither, and kissed the Wenches till they Farted again, from
whence, as some Sages conjecture, in process of time, it gained the Name
Trumping-Town.

Where Women, doubtless, are possessed,
Of Faculties discerning;
Since they (kind Souls) so often are Blessed,
With Men of Parts and Learning.
One Pulpit's Common to the Gown,
For Teachers to be seen in;
But they have Numbers in the Town,
Where Preachers often have been in.
All standing stiffly to their Text,
Till cleared the Point most fairly;
Whilst those they 'nstruct are never vexed,
But when they have done too Early.
The next place we arrived at, was our Journeys-end, Cambridge; where Black and
Purple Gowns were stroling about Town, like Parsons in a Country Metropolis,
during the Bishops visitation; Some looking with as meagre Countenances, as if
in search of the Philosophers-Stone, they had studied themselves into an
Hypocondriack Melancholy; other's seeming so profoundly thoughtful, as if in
pursuance of Agrippa's Notions they were studying how to raise Sparagrass from
Rams-Horns, or to produce a Homunculus as Gardeners do Pumpkins, by burying the
Semen in a Dunghill; some looking as Plump and as Jolly as a painted Bacchus
bestriding a Canary Butt; smiling as he past by, at his own Soliloquies, as if
he was muttering over to himself some Bacchanalian Ode, he had conceived in
Praise of good Clarret; others seeming as Sottishly Sorrowful as if they were
Maudlin Fuddl'd, and lamenting the Misfortune of poor Anacreon, who Choked
himself with a Grape-Stone; some strutting along about Eighteen years of Age,
in new Gown and Cassock, as if they had received Orders about two hours before,
and were the next Morning to have Institution and Induction, to become the
hopeful Guide of a whole Parish; and here and there one appearring so Rakishly
Thoughtless, as if Nature, by his empty Looks, had designed him to grind
Mustard, or pick Mushrooms for some Noble-Mans Kitchen; though his Parents, in
Opposition to his destiny, resolved to make him a Scholar. As for the Town it
self, it was so abominably dirty, that Old-street in the middle of a Winters
Thaw, or Bartholomew-Fair after a Shower of Rain, could not have more occasion
for a Scavenger, than the miry Street of this famous Corporation; and most of
them so very narrow, that should two Wheel-barrows meet in the largest of their
Thorough-fares, they are enough to make a stop for half an hour before they can
well clear themselves of one another, to make room for Passengers.

After the Coach had set me down, and I had taken a fair Leave of my
Fellow-Travellers, I walked about to take a more complete survey both of the
Town and University. The Buildings in many parts of the Town were so little and
so low, that they looked more like Hutts for Pigmies, than Houses for Men; and
their very Shopkeepers seemed to me to be so well-siz'd to their Habitations,
that they appeared like so many Monkeys in their Diminutive Shops mimicking the
Trade of London. Amongst the rest of the Pomps and Vanities of this Wicked
Corporation, there is one very famous Inn, distinguished by the Sign of the
Devils Lap-dog in Petty-Cury, here I went to refresh my self with a Glass or
two of Canary; where I found an Old grizly Curmudgion, Corniferously Wedded to
a Plump, Young, Brisk, Black, Beautiful, good Landlady, who I afterward heard
had so great a kindness for the Uniniversity, that she had rather see two or
three Gown-men come into her House, than a Cuckoldly Crew of Aldermen in all
their Pontificalibusses; and indeed I had reason to believe there was no love
lost, for the Scholars crept in as fast and as slily, for either a Kiss, a kind
Look, or a Cup of Comfort, as Hogs into an Orchard after a High-wind, or Flys
into Pigsauce, for the sake of the Sugar; I liked my pretty Hostess so
wonderfully well, and was so greatly Delighted with the pleasant Conversation I
met with in the House, that I determined with my self to make this my place of
residence during my continuance in the Town, so bespeaking a Bed, I afterward
took a Walk in order to view the University, of which I shall proceed to give
you a sober and Concise Description.

The Colleges stand without side the Town, which in plain Terms is a
Corporation of Ignorance, hemmed round with Arts and Sciences, a Nest of Fools,
that dwell on the Superfluities of the Learned, an ungrateful Soil where the
Seeds of Generosity are daily scattered, but produce nothing in return but the
Wicked Weeds of Unthankfulness and Ingratitude. Of Learned Societies there are
in all Sixteen, twelve Colleges, and four Halls; the most Magnificent of
which, being that of Trinity, whose spacious Quadrangle, and commodious Library
remain without comparison, the Scholars of this Foundation are distinctly
Habited, in Purple Gowns; the rest of the Universitie wearing Black, agree in
one and the same Mode. The next piece of Building more particularly Remarkable,
is Kings-Colledge Chapel, Founded by Henry the Sixth, and is greatly famed by
all Men of Judgment, for it is admirable Architecture, much after the manner of
Henry the Seventh's Chapel at Westminster, if not finer and larger. The rest
of the Colleges, except St. John's (which has been Beautified and Enlarged of
late years) wear the Faces of great Antiquity, and though they are not so fine as
those which have had the Advantage of a Modern improvement, yet the rust of
their Aged Walls, and Obsoleteness of their Structure, procure Veneration from
all Spectators, and seemed to me more noble in their Ancient Uniformity, than
others disagreeable enlarged with additional Novelties. In short, the Colleges
are so Splendid, the Government so Regular, the Orders so Strict, the
Ceremonies so Decorous, and the Preferments so Honorable, that in all Europe
it is not excelled by any University except Oxford.

Having thus feasted my Eyes with a general view of the Colleges, I retired to
my Inn, where I reposed my self after a good Supper, till the next Morning,
which proving fine and Pleasant, I took a Walk to Stir-Bitch-Fair, though for the
expense of 3 d. I might have been accommodated with the Convenience of a London
Hackney, who at this Season bring Passengers from London and ply there for the
Fortnight, carrying Tag, Rag, and Bobtail, for the aforesaid price, provided
they have as many as will fill their Coach; but for Eighteen-pence a Scholar
and his Mistress may have a running Bawdy House to themselves, draw up their
Tin Sashes, pink'd like the Bottom of a Cullender, and hug one another as
private as they please, obscured from the wandering Eyes of all observing
Passengers.

I had not walked above half a Mile from Cambridge toward the Fair, but I came
to a renowned Village which by all reports very deservedly has gained the
Ignominious Epithet of Bawdy-Barnwel, so called from the Numerous
Brothel-Houses it contains for the Health, Ease, and Pleasure of the Learned
Vicinity, and has had so ancient a Reputation for Sacrificing it is Female
Offspring through many Ages, to the Use and Service of the Neighboring
Societies, that there has not been a Maidenhead known in the Town at Sixteen
years of Age, since the time of King Henry the first, in whose Reign Cambridge
was new Modeled into an University. Besides the Women of this place have such a
Love for the Scholars, and hatred for the Townsmen, that a Batchelour of Arts,
shall have more favor for a Distick of English Verses, in praise of Simple
Fornication, than the best Tradesmen through out the Corporation shall find for
an Ounce of Sterlin.

From thence I marched forward till I came to the Fair, where I beheld such a
Number of Wooden Edifices, and such a Multitude of Gentry, Scholars, Tradesmen,
Whores, Hawkers, Pedlars, and Pick-pockets, that it seemed to me like an
Abstract of all sorts of Mankind, drawn into a lesser Body, to show the World
in Epitomy: At first I came to the Proctors-Booth, wherein he keeps an
Arbitrary Court to Punish, as the Learned Divan shall think fit, all
Misdemeanors touching the Scholars, from whence there can be no Appeal; and
near to this is held another Wooden Court of Justice on the Behalf of the
Corporation, where his Worshipful Bulkiness the Mayor, sits to determine all
such Matters as concern his Authority, assisted with the cornuted Elders of the
Town, who are ready to lend a Horn upon occasion, to help the Head of their
Superior in all cases of difficulty. A little beyond these, lay vast
Quantities of Hops, brought in from the adjacent Countries; which made me at
first conceive the Cantabrigians to be indefatigable Topers of Malt Liquor, if
the Town could consume a the in Tithe Twelvemonth of what I beheld in Bags,
which upon second consideration I imagined might be as well bought up by our
London Merchants, and therefore ought to beg Cambridg's Pardon for thinking it
guilty of such excessive Inebriety

From thence I turned to the left, by the River side, where my Nostrils were
Saluted with such a Saline Savoury Whiff, as if I had been walking in a dry
Fish-mongers shop in Thames Street; at last I came into a Dutch Market of red
and pickled Herrings, Salt-fish, Oysters, Pitch, Tar, Soap, etc. Next these a
parcel of Wooden Trumpery, ranged in as much order, as a Cup-board of Plate,
where Bacchanalian Students may furnish themselves with Punch-Bowles, agreeable
to their own Bibacity, Sot's supply themselves with Cans, sizable to their own
Humors, and Beggars accommodate themselves with Spoons and Porridge-Dishes of
any Dimension, suitable to their own Appetites. Adjoining to this place, stand
about a Dozen of Sutlers boozing-Kens, distinguished by the Name of the
Lyn-Booths; the good People that keep 'em being Inhabitants of that Town, and
have so fair a Reputation for the foul practice of Venery, that their sinful
Hovels have always maintained the Character of being notorious Bawdy-Houses;
the Scholars, to encourage the old Trade of Basket-making, have great resort to
these Up-tail Accademi^s, where they are often presented with a Lyn Fairing,
which brings 'em to thin Jaws, and a Month or two's spare diet, as a penance
for a minutes Titilation; giving many of 'em reason to say with a Scholar under
the same Affliction, who being at Chapel whispered to his Chamber-fellow,
Chum, Chum, though I have the Word of God in my Mouth, to tell thee the Truth
on it, I have a Lyn Devil in my Breeches.

From these Booths I went strait up a Hill, and came into a very handsome
street called Garlick-Row, where the slit-deal Tenements were occupy'd by
Sempstresses, Perfumers, Milleners, Toy-men, and Cabinet-makers; and is chiefly
frequented by Powdered* Beau's, Bushy Wig'd Blockeads, Country Belfa's, and
Beautiful Bury Ladies; the latter of which being as commendable for their good
Nature, as remarkable for their Prettiness, are attended with such Crowds of
Dutchified Fops, with their Hats under their Arms, and their Hands in their
Pockets, Bowing and Cringing with such Flexible Submission to each Proud
Enchantress, as if their Backs were made of Whalebone; which brought into my
Mind the following Distich of my Lord Rochesters, in which if I alter one Word,
for decency's sake, I hope the Reader will excuse it.

So a Proud Minx does lead about,
Of Humble Curs the Amorous Rout.
This Place terminates in a Place called originally Cooks-Row, but now more
properly Cuckolds-Row, from the great Number of Booksellers that are now crept
into Possession of their Greasinesses Division; this Learned part of the Fair
is the Scholars chief Rendezvous, where some that have Money come to buy
Books, whilst oaths who want it, take 'em slily up, upon Condition to pay if
they are caught, and think it a Pious piece of Generosity, to give St. Austin
or St. Gregory Protection in a Gown Sleeve till they can better provide for
'em. Here the most famous Auctioneer of all Great as well as Little Britain,
sells Books by the Hammer, and gives the Scholars as merry an Entertainment, as
a Mountebank and his Andrew. Here Is an Old Author for you, Gentlemen, you may
Judge his Antiquity by the Fashion of his Leather-Iacket; herein, is contained,
for the Benefit of you Scholars, the Knowledge of every thing; written by that
famous Author, who through his Prosound Wisdom, very luckily discovered that he
knew nothing? For your Encouragement, Gentlemen, I Will put him up at two
Shillings, advance 3 Pence; Two Shillings once: What no Body bid? The Bidder
advances 3 d. Two and 3d. once: Gentlemen, Fie for shame, why sure Men of your
Parts and Learning, will never suffer the Works of so famous an Author to be
thus undervallued: If you will believe me, Gentlemen, he is worth more to a
Powder-Monkey to make Cartridges of, than what is bid: Two and three pence
twice? What no Body amongst you Gentlemen of the Black Robe, that has so much
respect for the Wisdom of our Ancestors, as to advance the other 3d? Well Sir, I
find you must have him at two and three pence, Knock, and now you have bought
him: Sir I must tell you, you will find Learning enough within him, to puzzle
both Universities: And thus much I promise you further Sir, when you have read
him seven years, if you don't like him, bring him to me again, in Little
Britain, and I Will help you to a Man shall give you a Shilling for him, to
cover Band-Boxes. At this sort of rate he banters the young Studients; and
whatever they purchased, gave 'em a Jest into the Bargain.

From thence I passed into a great Street called Cheapside, where on one side
were a considerable number of wholesale Tradesmen, as Linnen-drapers, Silk-men,
Iron-mongers, Leather-sellers, Tobacconists, etc. who swelled in their Shops,
and looked as big above the rest of the Petty-Dealers as the bluff well-fed
Senior-Fellows of a College do above the lean thin-gutted poor Sizers. On the
opposite side are Suttlers Booths, much frequented by the London Citizens, who
are easily to be known by their thin Calves-Leather Boots, and the Bloodiness
of their Spurs, whose Rowels have been often buried in the sides of their
Hackneys. Their pretense is, coming down to meet their Customers; though its
plain by their Loitering, they have little else to do but to Drink, Smoke, and
Whore, and to help support the Fair in its Ancient Custom of Debauchery;
couzening themselves of their Time, their Families of their Money, and their
dear Wives of their Company. Their Whips they wear under their Arms, as a Beau
does his Hat; and tie up the ends of their Bob-Wigs in Black Bags, with a
ridiculous hope of being thought Gentlemen.

Behind these Booths is a place called the Duddery, encompassed round with
Salesmen and People that fell Norwich-Stuffs, and in the Middle, abundance of
Packs of that Deceitful Commodity Yorkshire-Cloth: The Sales-men Ply at their
Booth-doores as they do in Long-lane; and Lug and Tug the poor Country Folks
into their Mercinary Wardrobes as if they had power to Arrest 'em; who are
surely Cheated if they Buy, and almost Worried if they don't. In the Center of
this Place stands an old weather-beaten Pulpit, where on Sunday a Sermon is
delivered, for the Edification of the Strowling Sinners, who give open
Attention, as in a Field-Conventicle. Here is also great quantities of Wool,
put up in Bags, which they call Pockets, weighing at least a Tun Weight: An
Irish Gentleman coming by, and staring very hard upon 'em. By my Shoul, says
he, they are the largest Feather-Beds dat ever I did she; I wonder how they do
to turn 'em when they make 'em.

On the other side the River there is a little Town, called Chesterton, in which
there is the Sign of the Black Bull, where the Country Chapmen generally Lodge
that come to the Fair, for the sake of rare strong humming Ale, for which it is
famous; over which they get Drunk, Quarrel, and make Bargains, till the Fox
brings 'em to Sleep, and Sleep, by the next Morning, to a Sober Repentance.

The chief Entertainment of the Fair, is Stubble-Geese and Apple-Sauce, Fat Pig
and Fly-Sauce, Bad Sack and Good Walnuts; the last of which the Citizens send
as Fairings to their Wives, to Divert 'em behind the Counter, in their Husbands
Absence.

At Night, when their Booths are shut up, which is only by Skewering two
Haircloths together, then all that are Freshmen are sought by their
Acquaintance, in order to be Christened: The manner of which is thus, Two or
three contrive to decoy him, or her into a Sutlers Booth, under pretense of
some body being there to speak with them about Business; and then privately
send for an old Fellow dignified with the Title of Lord Tap* from his going
Armed all-over with Spiggots and Fossets, like a Porcupine with his Quills, or
looking rather like a Fowl wrapped up in a Pound of Sausages; who when he comes,
rings his Bell over the Head of the Party, repeating these Words with an
Audible Voice:

Over thy Head I ring this Bell,
Because thou art an Infidel;
And I have found thee out by the Smell:
With a Hoxius Doxius call upon him,
That no Vengeance may Light on him.
Then the Party Christ'ned chooses two out of the Company to be his Godfathers,
who generally give him some very Bawdy Name; then they swear him upon the
Horns, as at Highgate, make him give Tap Six pence, and spend four or five
Shillings to treat the Company, and then for ever after he is free of
Stir-Bitch-Fair; Of which having given my self the Satisfaction of a General
Survey, I went back to Cambridge, took a Place in the Stage Coach, and returned
to London.

FINIS.

