AN APOLOGY FOR THE Mysteries of the GOSPEL. BEING A SERMON PREACHED At
WHITE HALL, Feb. 16. 1672/3;.

BY SETH Lord Bishop of SARUM.

PRINTED By his Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by E.T. and R. H. for James Collins at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street, 1674.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE Mysteries of the GOSPEL. ROMANS I. 16. For I am not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ: For it is the power of God to Salvation, to every one
that believes.
THE former part of this Text (being delivered in terms unusual) has afforded
matter of Disputation to Interpreters.

The Question is, Whether it be to be taken for a (...); or to be understood
simply, and plainly, according to the usual import and meaning of such
expressions.

That St. Paul, so long after his Miraculous Conversion, (a little before his
Appeal to Caesar) drawing near to the finishing of his Course.

That St. Paul, after he had planted the Gospel, from Jerusalem round about
unto Illyricum, Romans 15. 19.
after the composing of all those excellent Epistles written before his bonds,
whereof this Epistle to the Romans was the last.

That St. Paul (I say) after all this, should descend to so poor an Expression
as might insinuate, that there was something in the Gospel, whereof it was
possible, that some of the Romans might imagine that he ought to be ashamed.

(That in the judgment of St. Paul the Gospel should administer occasion for
the Anticipation and Amolition of so contemptible a Prejudice,)

It seems to many very improbable, and therefore they say that the words are a
(...), and that the Apostle in saying that he was not ashamed of the Gospel,
intended to signify that he exulted and gloried in it.

Indeed, we find our Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 11.
not only in his other Epistles (and in his Apologies) but in this Epistle to
the Romans, 1 Cor. 4. 4. 3. 7. 10. 8.
often magnifying his Office, and glorying in the Ministry of the Gospel which
he had received; he styles it the light of the glorious Gospel, a Ministration
exceeding glorious, and professes that if he should boast of his Authority, he
should not be ashamed.

Yet (with submission to better Judgments) I humbly conceive that he is not so
to be understood in this place.

Though the Epistle was directed to those at Rome, which were already
Christians; yet this passage was put in with reference to others, to whom the
Epistle was to be communicated (persons not yet converted to Christianity. Ver.
8. hujus.
) To them who were already called to be Saints, whose Faith was spoken of
throughout the World; to talk of not being ashamed of the Gospel, had been a
(...) very incongruous.

But (on the other side) for him who (by his original Commission) was
constituted the Apostle of all the Gentiles, Act. 22. 21.
made a debtor to them all (as he says; Ver. 14.
) to the Wise as well as unwise, to the Greeks and Romans as well as the
Barbarians.

That he, who in pursuance of this Commission, had already planted the Gospel
amongst the more Barbarous Nations, from Antioch in Syria as far as Lystra and
Derbe, Acts 14.
Cities of Lycaonia; and among the Greeks, in all the chief Cities of Macedonia
and Achaia (from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum) so that nothing now
remained but to Preach at Rome (as he speaks Emphatically) at Rome also.

That he, 1 Cor. 2. 1.
whose Preaching was not in a way of Humane wisdom or excellency of speech (in
the way either of Rhetorical Harangue or Philosophical argumentation) intending
to preach at Rome (the Seat of the Empire of the World) the Resort of the
Noble, the Mighty, and the Wise, of all those who in the Phrase of our time,
are styled the Beaux esprits, the Wits and Braveries of the World.

Briefly, that St. Paul, who knew the Prejudices which these men had against
the Gospel, and with what Contempt and Scorn they generally looked upon it (as
a Dispensation whereof a man ought to be ashamed.)

That St. Paul, who (as it appears by all his Epistles and Orations) well
understood (the (...)) the Congruity and decency of speaking or of writing;
intending, before he should conclude, (after he should have evinced the
Excellency of the Gospel) to take strength and confidence, Romans 15. 17.
and glory in his Ministration; Being yet in his Prooemium only, whose Office
is ((...)) by a modest and smooth insinuation, to make way for his Discourse
which was to follow;

I say, that in this place of his Epistle, he should take notice of the
Prejudices which lay against the Gospel, and plainly and clearly (without a
(...)) Anticipate and Obviate the imagination that he ought to be ashamed of
it; This, I humbly conceive to be most agreeable to the design and Character of
St. Paul, and that according to this interpretation we ought here to consider,
I. A supposal in the Romans, intimating the prejudices against ^^e Gospel. And
therein, 1. A thing imagined; that Paul would not adventure to Preach the
Gospel at Rome. 2. The reason of the imagination, an Opinion that he would be
ashamed.
II. A removal or Amolition of that supposal, intimating the Iniquity of those
Prejudices: viz.

A Removal of 1. The thing that was imagined, I am ready to preach the Gospel,
even at Rome. 2. And of the imaginary reason of the supposition, For I am not
ashamed of the Gospel.


III. The Grounds and Reasons of this Amolition.

And these are drawn from two heads and adjuncts of the Gospel: 1. Necessarily
implied and presupposed, and that is Veritatis evidentia, (if the Gospel were
not the truth of God it could not be the power of God.) 2. Explicitly and
expressly proposed, and that is Virtutis excellentia, it is the Power of God to
Salvation (and that (...)) to every one that believes. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to Salvation to every one that
believes.





So that I am to speak of these two general Heads: I. Of the Prejudices against
the Gospel. II. Of the Iniquity and unreasonableness of those Prejudices.


From whence it will follow that we ought to Preach the Gospel, and not to be
ashamed.

Concerning which things I shall not endeavor at a Rhetorical Harangue, but
crave leave that I may be admitted to speak in a plain and humble Analytical
and Didactical way of discourse.

I. Then, I am to speak of those Prejudices against the Gospel, from whence it
is (by some persons) imagined, that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be
ashamed of it.

And herein I shall 1. Show that there always have been, and always will be
such Prejudices against the Gospel. 2. Enquire what it is in the Systeme of the
Gospel, which is the special object of these Prejudices. 3. Then make a brief
reflection upon the nature and symptoms of the Prejudices. 4. And upon the
Characters of the persons most obnoxious to them.


1. First, That there always have been, and always will be, Prejudices
against the Gospel (and an imagination in some persons, that Ministers and
Christians ought to be ashamed of it) is so deplorably manifest, that I need
not insist upon either the proof or declaration of it.

That it is, and has been always so, it is not only the unhappy complaint of
the present Age, but has been of every Age and Generation since the first
Promulgation of the Gospel; And that it will be so, we have an infallible
assurance from Christ and his Apostles; That the latter days shall be times of
Infidelity and departure from the Faith, that there will be Scoffers at the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 3. 1. 2 Pet. 3.3. Jude 18.
and cruel Mockers, we have the assurance of the Apostles St. Paul, St. Peter,
and St. Jude.

That when the Son of man shall come to judge the World, Luke 18.8.
he shall hardly find Faith on the Earth, we have the Prediction of our Lord
Christ himself.

Briefly and summarily, our Lord Christ in several places of the Gospel,
declares and supposes that many will be offended at him, Mat 23.3. Mar. 8.38.
that they will be ashamed of him, and of his words, both of his Person, and of
his Gospel.

Our Apostle declares that he himself is not ashamed, 2 Timothy 1. 8,12,16.
exhorts Timothy not to be ashamed, commends Epaphroditus that he was not
ashamed; 1 Pet. 4. 16.
St. Peter exhorts those that suffered for the Gospel not to be ashamed. If
there had not been an imagination in the world that they ought to have been
ashamed, to what end were all these Declarations, Commendations, Exhortations
concerning being not ashamed?

2. I pass therefore to the second thing propounded, to enquire what is the
special Object of these Prejudices, or what are those things contained in the
Gospel, whereof (in an especial manner) it is imagined that we ought to be
ashamed.

Though the whole System of the Gospel lies under Prejudices, yet not all parts
of it alike, some more than other, and some by reason of the other.

The whole Gospel is generally dividable into 1. Historical Narrations. 2.
Moral Institutions and Motives. 3. Dogmatical Mysteries.


These are delivered sometimes distinctly and severally, and sometimes they are
combined and mixed together.

That there was such a person as Christ, that he was born of, Mary, that Joseph
was his reputed Father; The manner of his Life and of his Death, his Actions,
and his Teachings, are matters merely Historical.

That this reputed Son of Joseph was indeed the Son of God, conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of a Virgin, and the like, have in them a Combination of the
Mystery together with the History of the Gospel.

[I stand not to show, how the Morality is sometimes simply delivered, and
sometimes in Combination with the Mysterious parts of the Gospel]

1. Now concerning those parts of the Gospel which are merely and simply
Historical, and Moral, I suppose they cannot be here intended; Because that to
such persons, as the Romans were, (men pretending to Reason and Philosophy)
they afford no color for an imagination that a Minister or Christian ought to
be ashamed.

Supposing the truth of what is there delivered (whereof In Sermon. against
Antiscripturists.
I have spoken heretofore) what was there in the Birth, or Life, or Death; the
Conversation, or Actions, (ordinary, or extraordinary) of Christ, or his
Apostles, whereof in the opinion of a Philosopher, a Christian ought to be
ashamed?

Was it the meanness of Christ's Nativity? That he was the reputed Son of
Joseph, who was of a mean and despicable Occupation.

Was it that he lived an Ambulatory kind of life? teaching and disputing
concerning good and evil, happiness and unhappiness, in the Synagogues and in
the Temple, and the Streets and Markets, and in the Wilderness (every where)
Preaching the Doctrine of the Kingdom.

Or lastly, Was it because of the occasion and manner of his Death? because he
was Condemned, and Executed by his Contrymen, upon an accusation of
corrupting the People, and making an Innovation in Religion, upon pretense of
holding intercourse with God?

Every one of these circumstances had been coincident in Socrates long before
the time of the writing of this Epistle to the Romans.

He was the Son of Sophroniscus, as poor a man as Joseph (a Carver of Images in
Stone) his Mother was a Midwife.

His Conversation was Ambulatory, discoursing and reasoning at all times, and
in all places, (in Academia, in Lycaeo, in Foro, in places of walking, and of
public Exercise; (when he ate, or drank, or played) in the Camp, the Market,
or the Prison) with all the men he met withal concerning Virtue and Vice, and
the summum bonum; concerning Wisdom and Folly. Vide Xenoph. in Soc. Apologia.
And he had been condemned and executed by the Athenians, upon the very same
pretenses which were objected against our Savior.

Yet all these disadvantages had not hindered Socrates (at that time, after
about 500 years) from the Admiration, and almost Adoration of all men
pretending to Philosophy and Wisdom, not only amongst all the rest of the
Gentile World, but even amongst the Romans also.

And therefore the mere Historical part of the Gospel could minister no color
of suspicion why a Minister or a Christian should be ashamed of it.

2. Moreover, the same may be said of those parts of the Gospel which are
merely Practical, and Moral, (The Precepts concerning Piety and Justice, and
Temperance in all the several branches of them, and the motives to them.)

The Morality of the Gospel infinitely excells the Institutions of any of the
Heathen Philosophers, all that they could object against it, was its too great
purity and holiness, that it puts a violence, and stretch upon Humane Nature,
causing men to strain after degrees of purity and sanctity unpracticable and
unattainable. It excells all the Precepts and Institutes of the Jews, Christ
made a (...) even of the Moral Law of Moses, and tells us, that the
Righteousness of Christians must exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees; Mat. 5. 20.
and the Apostle (comparing the entire Systems of the Mosaical and Christian
Oeconomies in reference to Christian Duties and the motives to them, Heb. 8. 6.
) justly pronounces, that the Christian has received a better Covenant,
founded upon better Promises.

3. It remains therefore, that the peculiar and special Object of those
Prejudicate imaginations (whereby it is concluded, that Ministers and
Christians ought to be ashamed) are the Articles of mere Belief, Dogmatical
Mysteries of the Gospel.

At the expense of your time and patience (in a long discourse) to tell you
what are the Mysteries of the Gospel, were to suppose that (in compliance with
the barbarity of later times) you had neglected to be instructed in your
Catechism, and had need that one should teach you what are the first Elements
of Christianity. My design engages me no further than only to name them, and
that also very briefly.

In the two first Chapters to the Corinthians, we find our Apostle handling
this Argument largely and ex professo.

And there he reduces the whole mystery to two words, namely, the Cross of
Christ, he tells them that he was sent to Preach and not to Baptize, that this
was that which Christ sent him to Preach; and that he determined to know
nothing else among them, but Jesus Christ and him Crucified, and in Chap. 1. v.
23. he declares this to have been the occasion of the Scandal, taken both by
Jews and Gentiles; I Preach Christ Crucified to the Jews a stumbling block, etc.

The Scandal taken, was against the Mysteries of the Gospel, and the Nature,
and Mediatorian Office; the Character and Personal Concernment of Christ, and
work of Redemption by his blood spilt upon the Cross, are the two great and
comprehensive heads to which the whole Mystery of the Gospel is easily,
naturally, and immediately reducible.

The Justification, Sanctification, entire Economy of the salvation of man,
depends immediately upon the work of Redemption by the blood of Christ.

The value and efficacy of his blood, resolves into the Excellency of his
Person, and of his Nature; That he was the Son of God the Father, Conceived by
the Holy Ghost, which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one.

So that in the last resolution, the conjunction of the Divine and Humane
Natures in the Unity of the Person of Christ, and the Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of the Nature of the Godhead, is the (...) of the Gospel.

And this is also the (...), that great thing whereof it is imagined that a
Christian or a Preacher ought to be ashamed.

Which will be yet more evident if we shall make a brief reflection upon the
Nature and Symptoms of the Prejudices against the Gospel, and the Character of
the persons more especially obnoxious to these Prejudices.

3. Beside the consideration of Interest, (real or imaginary) and the
disappointment of men's desires and expectations, (an ordinary, eminent and
predominant ingredient in the prejudices of all men) there are two things which
(in men pretending to prudence and virtue, or to reason and understanding) are
apt to create a distaste against any way of Institution, or any Doctrine
wherein they are supposed or presumed to be.

1. (...), an apprehension of Turpitude or dishonesty, either intrinsecally
contained in that which is propounded, or consequentially involved with it.

2. (...) or (...), an apprehension of some Absurdity or unreasonableness in it.

1. Of the former sort, are Principles of Atheism, Irreligion, Immorality, the
Doctrines of Diagoras, who denied the being of God; of Carneades, concerning
good and evil; of Diogenes, concerning Incest, etc. (which have an Intrinsic
and immediate turpitude;) The Doctrine of Epicurus concerning the Mortality of
the Soul, a consequential Principle of all Impiety, Injustice, and Debauchery,
if that be the case, 1 Cor. 15. 32.
Let us eat and drink, etc.

These are injurious to the Interest of Mankind, and they put an indignity
upon the practical reason and principles of men, and are apt to be distastefull
and offensive, instances whereof there are very many among the Heathens, (as
among others that of the Athenians, who banished Protagoras, and caused his
Books to be burnt in the open Marketplace, because he wrote doubtfully
concerning the being of a God) But as for these, it has not been in the power
of malice to fasten them upon the Gospel, or in the compass of mistake to
suppose them in it; so that it has been clearly exempted from this Prejudice.

2. The other thing that creates an aversion against any Doctrine is (...) or
(...) (an Apprehension of absurdity or unreasonableness in the things
propounded) wherein the Wit and Theoretick Reason or Understanding of men takes
it self (no matter whether it be justly or unjustly) to be affronted, and this
is as distastefull as the former.

An Instance whereof we have in the sixth of St. John, where when Christ told
those that followed him of eating his flesh and drinking his blood (speaking in
a figure not obvious to their vulgar understanding) they cried out (...), (that
was a hard saying) and taking themselves to be abused they finally forsook him.

I say, that the apprehension of Moral turpitude, or Logical absurdity are
equally distasteful, But in their more peculiar Subjects, and Symptoms, and
Aptitude to mistake and Prejudice, they differ.

The former aversion has its peculiar seat and residence in Virtuous and
Prudent men, (the (...) and (...)) and discovers it self in Zeal and
Indignation, as against things dangerous and pernicious; the later is subjected
in persons, who are (or take themselves to be) men of Wit and Learning (the
(...), and the (...),) the Symptoms of it are scorn and contempt, as of things
absurd and nonsensical, foolish and irrational.

And in matters of this nature men are more inclinable to fall into mistake and
Prejudice than in the former.

The Notions of Truth and Falsehood lie more abstruse than those of Good and
Evil, and men are more apt to be deceived in their wit, than in their honesty.

No Truths are so liable to mistake and prejudice as the professedly
Mysterious, and without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness. The
ground of this Prejudice is an Impotency to distinguish betwixt (...) and (...)
and (...), betwixt Truth and Clearness, Obscurity and Absurdity, Being
inconceivable and incredible, Being incomprehensible, and Being unaccountable.

4. This Impotency is an Infirmity to which the Brisk and the sudden, the
forward and impatient, the talkative and disputatious, (all such as scorn the
dullness of consideration, and think themselves above the drudgery of thinking)
that is to say the Wits and Beaux esprits are of all men living the most
obnoxious.

And from hence it is, that by persons of this Character to be despised, has
always been the fortune of the Gospel.

The condition of the Gospel amongst our selves, I shall not in this place, at
this time labor to declare, I come not hither to accuse my Nation; But that it
was thus in the Apostles time we have sufficient assurance.

He tells us that the most eminent despisers (the Contemptores legitimi) of the
Gospel, were the (...), and the (...), and the (...). The Tropical Rhetorician,
and the Flanting Orator, the Jibing Satyrist, and Scurrilous Comedian, the
Sophistical Philosopher, and Everlasting Disputant, the Conceited Scribe, and
Pharisaical Opiniator. 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Where (says the Apostle) is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the
disputer of this World?

The entertainment which the Gospel found at the hands of such as these was
generally that of scorn and contempt.

Speaking in the person of men of this Character (whether Jews or Gentiles) our
Apostle in the compass of two 1 and 2 of 1 Ep. to Cor.
Chapters does nine times call the Mysteries of the Gospel foolishness, and
foolish things, things weak, ignoble, and despised, and things which are not.

The sum of the whole Mystery of the Gospel is contained in two words, (Christ
Crucified) I preach (says he) Christ crucified, Chap. 1.23.
to the Jews a scandal, to the Greeks foolishness; the opinion they had of it
was that it was an absurd and a foolish dispensation, a dispensation whereof a
Christian, a Preacher ought to be ashamed.

Thus much of the first general part of my Discourse concerning the Prejudices
against the Gospel.

II. I come now to the second part,

To show the Iniquity and unreasonableness of these Prejudices.

And here I shall endeavor to evince two things.

1. That there is reason for the Contemners of the Gospel to be ashamed of
their Prejudices. 2. That there is no reason for Christians or Ministers to be
ashamed of the Gospel.
1. First, There is reason for the Contemners of the Gospel to be ashamed.

Because their Contempt of it does not proceed from any Generous or Noble
Principle or qualification, it comes not from height of Spirit or Wit, from
depth of Reason or Judgment, from largeness of Learning or Knowledge.

But from the want of all these qualifications, and is finally resolved into an
ungentile, and (if I may be permitted to speak plainly) a kind of Rustical
Ignorance and want of Ingenuity.

In Acts 17. 11. St. Paul comparing the Thessalonian Jews with the Beraeans,
says that the Beraeans were more Noble ((...),) because they did not
precipitously, and temerariously reject the Gospel, as the others did, but were
diligent in searching of the Scriptures daily, and in a strict enquiry
concerning the Grounds and Motives to Belief alleged by the Apostles (whether
they were of that weight which was pretended) whether they were so or no.

In matters of so great moment as the Gospel does pretend to be (in reference
to this world, and that which is to come) to despise, or to reject the
Proposals, without a just consideration of them, and without an impartial and
ingenuous examination (and full understanding) of the Grounds and Reasons, upon
which they are propounded, savours not of Prudence or Wisdom, Wit, or Learning,
Ingenie or Ingenuity; in one word, it savours neither of a Gentleman, nor a
Scholar.

Now that this is the Case in the Contempt of the Gospel, I think it will
appear if we shall attentively consider, 1. What was the Judgment of Christ
(who was the Author of the Gospel) concerning this matter. 2. The signal
Instances of the contempt and neglect of the Gospel mentioned in the Scriptures
3. If we shall make a rational enquiry into the Principles and Postulata, into
which the contempt of the Gospel is finally resolved.


1. First, this will receive evidence from the Judgment of Christ himself,
concerning the resolution of the rejection and contempt of the Gospel.

I suppose none will be so Jewish as to object, the bringing of Christ to be a
Witness in his own behalf, seeing his case is not the case of an ordinary
witness, but resolves it self (as afterward will be briefly showed) into
attestation of the greatest credit.

I say then, that Christ himself (who knew what was in man, and needed not that
any man should teach him) has resolved the contempt and rejection of the
Gospel into want of understanding, and of due and ingenuous consideration, into
Ignorance, and want of Candor and Ingenuity.

In the Parable of the Sower we find this Argument largely and profoundly
handled by our Savior, Mat. 13.3. Mar. 4. 3. Luke 8.5.
the Parable is three times delivered in the Gospel, and is very well known, so
that I need not stand upon the declaration or repetition of it. The (...)
concerning the bad, (that is the highway, the stony, the thorny) and the good,
(that is, the fruitful) ground, I shall not mention; He that shall harmonize
the triple Narration, and Analyze the (...) of this Parable, shall find, that
our Savior therein propounds and intimates the causes immediate and mediate;
Mediate, nearer and remoter, of the reception and rejection of the Gospel,
whereof (as to the point in hand) the sum is this:

That the irregular endeavor after the attainment of temporal good things, and
the avoidance of temporal Evils, The lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life, the Cares of the World and Deceitfulness of Riches, the
lust of other things, Pride and conceitedness of Wisdom, and other Carnal
Interests, are the cause of the want of an attentive, and patient, an ingenuous
and impartial consideration; And that the want of such a consideration, is the
cause of the want of a through Understanding; and that the want of a through
Understanding, this is the cause of the Contempt, or Rejection, or neglect of
the Gospel.

In the Gospel of Luke 8. 15. (...).
St. Luke he resolves the causes of the Reception of the Gospel into honesty
and goodness of heart (sincerity, and ingenuity) into a patient and constant
attention to (hearing and keeping of) the word.

In the Gospel of St. Matthew he resolves the whole matter into this one point
of a perfect and through Understanding. Mat. 13. 23.
The good ground, says he, is he that (...).
hears the Word and brings forth fruit with understanding.

A fair and honest, a candid and ingenuous attention and Consideration, and a
full Understanding, are the causes of the Reception; Therefore an Attention
hypocritical and unsincere, An ignoble ignorance, perverseness, and want of
candor and ingenuity, are the causes of the contempt of the Gofpel in the
judgment of our Savior.

2. The same also will further appear if we might be permitted to examine the
several Instances of contempt and neglect of the Gospel, and so go through the
various degrees of the Symptoms of Infidelity mentioned in the Gospel. I shall
only touch them very briefly, and the heads of them are such as these: 1. The
egregious hesitation or slowness in believing. 2. The refusal or rejection of
the Gospel. 3. The Offense or Scandal at it. 4. The quarrelling and disputation
against it, and opposition to it. 5. The downright scorn and contempt of it.
6. And lastly, the Persecution for it.


I say, if we might stay upon this Argument, it would appear, that as the
Remoter causes of every Case, are easily reducible, to the lusts and interests
mentioned by our Savior, so the more immediate Causes, whether in Jews or
Gentiles, will be found to resolve into want of Ingenuity and Understanding.

1. The Apostles were slow in believing before the Resurrection and Mission of
the Spirit. Christ tells them, that then they were Fools, and slow of heart
(inconsiderate and inadvertent, stupid and Disingenuous.)

2. The most eminent Rejecters of the Gospel were the Scribes and Pharisees: if
we shall enquire after the Virtue or Modesty, Candor or Ingenuity of these
men, we will find them the most barbarous and covetous, proud and
supercilious, insincere and hypocritical in the world, (how often does our
Savior charge them with all these things?) And if we enquire after their
Knowledge and Understanding, we shall find them to have been mere
Braggadocio's and pretenders; Christ often calls them blind Pharisees, and
blind guides; he tells them that they were blind leaders of the blind: Mat.
23. 16, 26.
that seeing they did see and not perceive, hearing they did hear and did not
understand.

3. In the sixth of John we find a mighty Scandal taken at the Gospel among
the Auditors of Christ, they murmured, they strove amongst themselves, they
finally revolted, upon a word, because they judged it to be, (...) a hard
saying; They judged it so, because they did not understand it; they did not
understand it, because they had not the Modesty and Meekness, Patience and
Ingenuity to enquire the meaning of it, or to attend to that Explication which
our Savior made of that expression. Ver. 6.3.


4. In the 22 of St. Matthew, and the parallel places, we find the Pharisees,
the Scribes, the Lawyers, the Herodians, coursing our Savior, charging him
with questions about paying Tribute unto Caesar, the Resurrection, the Great
Commandment, etc. If now ye will judge of the Ingenuity of these men, consider
there how thick and threefold, how furiously and how rudely, they fall upon
him, how stupidly they persist, every one judgeing that he was too hard for all
the rest, (and answered them well,) but every one adhering to his own
Conclusion; Consider how before they set upon him, they took counsel to
entangle him, and sent spies to entrap (or trepan) him; And for their
Understanding, consider how ignorant they were, not knowing the Scriptures, nor
the power of God.

Neither was it thus among the Jews only, but among the Gentiles also; nor only
in these, but in the two remaining degrees of the downright scorn, and the
contempt of the Gospel, and Persecution for it.

5. In the 26. of the Acts we find the opinion that Festus had concerning the
Gospel, (with what contempt and scorn he speaks of it, how roundly he
pronounces that Paul was mad.) If you should judge of his Ingenuity in
pronouncing, by his skilfulness in understanding of the Gospel; Consider how
profound an account of Paul's case, and of the Gospel he renders to Agrippa;
Act. 25.19.
how that it was a (trifling) question concerning the Jewish Superstition, and
concerning one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.

Ver. 32.
In the 17 of the Acts we find the Athenians (...), making a mock at Paul, and
scorning his Gospel as a most ridiculous thing; If you will know their manners
and ingenuity, you may observe, that they condemned him for a Babbler before
they heard him speak, Ver. 18.
and if you will measure the depth of their Understanding of that which they
despised, you may observe, that as they imagined Jesus to be a strange God; so
they understood Ibid.
Anastasis (the Resurrection) to be a Goddess. He seems (say they) to be a
setter forth of strange Gods, because he Preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection.

6. The utmost degree of Contempt of the Gospel, is Persecution for it; and the
highest imaginable instance of this, was the betraying and murdering of Christ
himself; Concerning the Ingenuity or disingenuity of the contrivance,
management, and execution of this prodigious Action, it were no less than
madness to undertake to speak proportionally; And that this also proceeded not
only from wickedness and want of Ingenuity, but from Ignorance and want of
Understanding, we have an irrefragable assurance. Christ himself says, that
they knew not what they did; Luke 23. 34. 1 Cor. 2.8.
and our Apostle, that if they had understood themselves, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory.

So that by all these instances, and many others or like nature, it does
appear, that (agreeably to the Sentence and Judgment of our Savior) the
contempt of the Gospel is finally resolved into a Shameful Ignorance, and want
of Ingenuity; which will yet be more evident from Reason.

3. I come therefore in the third place to a consideration of the (1) Principle
into which the contempt of the Gospel is resolved, and of (2) The Postulata
upon which it is grounded. And from the Absurdity of one, and the
Unreasonableness of the other, to make it appear, that there is reason for the
Contemners of the Gospel to be ashamed.


1. From the consideration of their Principle: After what has been spoken in
the former part of this Discourse, and what is attested by experience, I take
it for granted, 1. That the special Object of the Contempt of the Gospel is the
Mystical part of it. 2. That the immediate reason of the contempt of these
Mysteries is an Imagination, or Opinion of the falsehood of them. 3. That this
Opinion of the falsehood of them, is derived from the Obscurity and Difficulty
of them.


Because they are inexplicable, incomprehensible, unintelligible, they conclude
them to be false and incredible, merely Fantastical and Chimerical
Imaginations, and so to be despised.

So that the Principle into which these Scorners do resolve themselves, is
this; That whatsoever is Inexplicable, Incomprehensible, Unintelligible is (by
Philosophers at least and Wise men) to be accounted incredible, fantastical,
fictitious, and so to be despised.

If this be not the Ratiocination, and this the Principle of those Virtuosi, of
whom we are speaking, I desire to be better informed. But if it be, I would
entreat them to stand a little, and consider whither they are going, and
whither this Principle and reasoning will lead them.

Will it not lead them to cast off not only Christianity, but even all natural
Religion, and force them (with the wise man in the Psalmist) to say in their
hearts that there is no God? Because the Nature, and Essence, and Attributes of
God are inexplicable, incomprehensible, and unintelligible; He dwells in a
light which no mortal eye can approach unto, such knowledge is too wonderful
and excellent for us, and we cannot attain unto it.

But this I fear they do not account an inconvenience, but rather that this is
that they would be at.

Again therefore, I entreat them to consider;

Will not this Principle lead them to deny the most obvious things in nature?
Will it not take away the very grounds of all that wisdom, to which they do
pretend, (the force even of Experiment and Demonstration?)

Nay, Will it not finally bring upon themselves, that horrible inconvenience,
that they are not to be offended if it shall be doubted or affirmed that they
are not such Wits as they pretend?

The most obvious things in Universal Nature, are Continued Quantity, and Local
Motion: These are either infinitely divisible, or they are not. Will they deny
this Disjunction, (and say, that they neither are so, nor not so?) Or will they
make choice of either Member? Will they clear the difficulties that are in it?
Or answer the Objections that may be made against it?

I presume they may have heard of that famous Argument of Zeno ( AEliates)
called Achilles, How whilst that mighty Disputant (by the impossibilities and
absurdities on either side) was demonstrating that Local Motion was a thing
impossible, one of his Auditors rose up and silently and sliely walked about
the School, and so confuted him.

The most pervious, most clear, and comprehensible of all humane Sciences are
the pure and unmixed Mathematics, yet even in Geometry and Arithmetic how
many things are forceably concluded to be true, which are inexplicable,
unimaginable, incomprehensible? I shall instance in a very few; So few as not
to need an Apology to the unlearned in those Sciences: So trivial, as not to
admit of an Explication to the Learned.

That the least imaginable space should be equal to another (upon the same Base
of the same Altitude) whose sides are protracted in infinitum, or a Finite
greater than an Infinite. The equality of all Circular Angles of Contact. The
everlasting approximation and impossible concourse of Asymptots. The affections
of surd and irrational Quantities, etc. are undeniably demonstrated to be true,
yet all these (and many more) are inexplicable, incomprehensible,
unintelligible.

They say they cannot explicate or imagine, (they cannot conceive or
comprehend) the Mystery of the Trinity, and Unity of the Godhead, and therefore
they despise it as a mere fictitious imagination.

Do they therefore clearly understand, and fully comprehend, and can they
express and explicate the Affections of Unity and Trinity in Numbers? That
there should be a Quantity in Nature (one and not another) which with its
infinite q.c.qq. etc.
ascending powers and q.c. qq. etc.
descending roots are all of them equal, or rather one and the same among
themselves? Can they explicate, or imagine, or comprehend any one of the
infinite potential roots of the Number Three? q.c. etc.


They say, they cannot understand how Christ should be conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and born of a Virgin, and therefore they deride it.

Can they therefore understand how they themselves have been conceived, and
born, and nourished up? And are they able to explain how, and by what progress
from a little water spilt upon a too luxurious ground there should spring forth
such a Race of Titans, such a Gigantick brood of fighters against Heaven, of
Scoffers at Religion?

Briefly, they say they cannot comprehend how God and Man should be one Christ,
and therefore they contemn the Gospel, and the Believers of it.

Can they therefore understand how the reasonable Soul and Flesh should be one
man?

Either they themselves consist of two natures (the one Corporeal, the other
Spiritual and Incorporeal) or they do not. If they have nothing in them
Incorporeal, can they understand and explain how senseless Atoms, how stupid
Matter, and Local Motion should work themselves up to Sense and Cogitation,
Reflection and Discourse, to Wit and Gallantry? (so as to make Jests and
Ballads upon the Gospels.)

If they consist not only of a Body, but of a Soul (a spiritual Soul) also; Can
they explain by what (...), these two natures have been brought together; by
what bands and ligaments they are united, and how the Communication betwixt
them is performed? In one word, Can they explicate the Phenomena of Sense,
Imagination, Memory, Reason, Wit and Bravery?

If they are able to perform these things, let the world be made happy by their
labors, and let them receive the Paeans, and Acclamations, the Crowns and
Garlands denied to all that were before them. But if they must be forced to
confess that all these things are inexplicable, unimaginable, unintelligible,
and incomprehensible, and will yet continue to despise the Mysteries of the
Gospel only for that reason, because they are inexplicable, unintelligible,
incomprehensible, let them not be offended at a poor despised Minister of the
Gospel; if he shall declare and testify to all the World, that these are not
the Wits, or Beaux Esprits, or Forts Esprits; that they are Flesh and not
Spirit, mere ordinary mortal Wights as others are; that all their boasting is
but empty noise, and all they have to show is a mere Deceptio visus; that they
may be Masters of some devices that are pretty, skillful in the Arts and
Mysteries of Circulation and disguise, but they are not such dreadful
Archimago's, such mighty Conjurers as they pretend. Let them therefore abandon
their unreasonable Principle, and be ashamed.

2. But secondly, as is the Principle upon which they contemn, such are their
Postulata, (the (...), or (...), as the Philosophers and Mathematicians call
them,) that is to say, the terms or demands upon which they pretend that they
would cease to despise the Gospel, and for want of which they do contemn it.

These Postulata are reducible to two Heads: 1. Philosophical Demonstration.
Or, 2. The sight of Miracles, Signs and Wonders (at their demand.)


This is the pretense of the Wits of these Times: if the truth of the Mysteries
of the Gospel might be proved to them by Demonstration, or if they might see a
Sign they would believe; This was the pretense at the time of the writing of my
Text; ((...)) The Jews required a Sign, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
the Greeks ( i. e. the Gentiles) sought after Wisdom ((...), i. e. (...),) and
because they were disappointed of these, the mystery (of Christ Crucified) was
to the Jews a Scandal, to the Greeks foolishness. For brevity let us name these
two: 1. The Grecanick or Philosophical Postulatum. 2. The Judaick or Semiotical
Postulatum.


Now that the former of these proceeds from Ignorance, and want of Learning and
Understanding; the later from Pride and Arrogance joined with a blockish
Stupidity; That the former is disingenious, the later disingenuous, that both
of them are irrational and absurd is evident.

1. And first for the Grecanical Postulatum;

In the case of any Doctrine or question, to refuse a proof that is Cogent, and
sufficient, (the only proof whereof a thing is capable) and to hanker or seek
after a Proof impossible, or improper, (such as implies a Contradiction, or
such as the nature of the question will not bear;) This (I say) proceeds from
Ignorance, from want of Learning and Understanding, and this is the case of the
Grecanick or Philosophical Postulatum.

To give a rational or Philosophical Demonstration of the truth of the Gospel,
there are but three ways imaginable in Nature: By Arguments, either, 1. A
Priori, from the common Principles of Intelligence. Or, 2. A Posteriori, from
experiment and sensible observations.


And this latter way of arguing must be drawn either, 1. From instances of
things Novel and Anomalous in Nature, things purposely designed for such
Arguments: Or else, 2. It must be taken from the common and ordinary, the
standing and perpetnal Phenomena of Nature.


A Demonstration a posteriori by particular Instances of the Divine Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, purposely designed for that end, was the proof offered by
Christ and his Apostles; This they rejected; To prove particular Mysteries,
Mysteries hidden from Ages, (and so declared and professed to be by the
Promulgers) by general and perpetual Phenomena of Nature, is in nature
impossible to perform, and senceless to require: To prove any thing concerning
the Essence and Nature of God per causas, by Arguments a Priori supposes causes
precedent to the Essence of God himself, and implies a Contradiction; So then,
the Grecanick or Philosophical Postulatum proceeds from Ignorance and want of
Learning, and is at best disingenuous, and Theoretically absurd.

2. Again secondly, (concerning the Judaical or Semeiotical Postulatum) After
numerous, or rather innumerable Attestations by Signs and Wonders notoriously
known (and by themselves acknowledged) or sufficiently and authentically
proved, or delivered down by uncontrollable and irreproveable Tradition, yet
still to demand and require more Signs, Signs of their own election,
accompanied with circumstances of their own prescription; Is not this to tempt
and limit the Almighty? To make themselves Arbiters of the Emanations of his
Power and Wisdom? To suppose that those ought to be subservient to their wanton
curiosity; Is it not to expect that God himself should Lacquey after them, to
make him a doer of Tricks at their senceless and impudent demand? Is not this
an Asinine and an impious stupidity? A composition of the highest degrees of
Intellectual and Moral Absurdity which is imaginable?

Now (therefore) that this was, and is, (and to the end of the world must ever
now be) the case of the Jewish or Semeiotical Postulatum, is also plain and
evident.

In Confirmation of the Gospel, Christ and his Apostles wrought far more (and
more considerable) Signs and Wonders, than before (or since) that time were
ever wrought since the Creation of the world, yet all this will not content
them: Notwithstanding all this, (...), (they require a sign) the meaning
whereof is better interpreted by their Practice and behavior to our Savior
than by the Dictionary; And of this their behavior I shall only produce two or
three instances.

In the sixth of John we find that Christ fed 5000 men with five Loaves and
two Fishes, and when they had seen the Miracle, they were so taken with it,
that they Ver. 14. (...). Ver. 15.
said that he was that Prophet which should come, and they would have taken him
by force and made him a King.

But the very next day, these very men, that had seen, and felt, and tasted of,
the Miracle (because he told them that they followed him for the Loaves) take a
miff at him, they pirk up themselves, and come boldly and malepertly to him,
Ver. 30.
saying, (...);
What Sign show thou, that we may see and believe? What do thou work? As
if the former Miracle had not been now a Sign.

When Christ hung upon the Cross, Mat. 27. 40,41,42.
the Noble and the Mighty, the Grave and Wise amongst them, (the chief Priests,
and the Scribes, and the Elders) came, and offered him a bargain, if he would
then (just then) come down from the Cross, they would believe; but our Lord
Christ had just then something else to do.

In the eighth of Mark the Pharisees came forth, Ver. 11. vide Mat. 16. 1, 4.
12.38, 39. Luke 11. 16,29,30.
and began to question him ((...), to cavil, and dispute with him) (...), (
requiring a sign) seeking of him a sign from Heaven tempting him; They would
have (and that presently upon the spot) a sign, not (...), but (...), or that
which is properly (...); Vide Joh. 4. 48.
not from Wind, or Sea, or Earth, but from Heaven; not that they intended to
be his Disciples, but for a trial of his skill and ability; was not this a
Gallant and a Wise, a Noble and a Worthy Postulatum? Could it choose but move
him to a compliance?

This moved him indeed, to comply so far with his own defign, as to promise
them a sign; the sign of the Prophet Jonas (that irrefragable (...) of his
Gospel) which should render them inexcusable; But though he was meek and lowly
of heart, the soft and gentle Lamb of God, so that he snffered himself to be
accused, condemned, buffeted, and spit upon, and yet held his peace (as a Lamb
that is dumb so opened he not his mouth) Yet the nobleness and ingenuity of
this Postulatum kindled a fire within him, so that he spoke with his tongue.
This moved him to scorn and indignation, so that in effect he called them
bastards for for their labor, telling them that they were (no sons of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, but) a wicked and adulterous Generation; Mat. 12. 38, 39.
and that no sign should be given them but the sign of the Prophet Jonas.

I suppose I shall need to say no more concerning the absurdity and
unreasonableness of the Jewish or Semeiotical Postulatum. And

I have now done with the former part of my undertaking, which was to endeavor
to make it appear,

That the Comtemners of the Gospel have reason to be ashamed of their
Prejudices.

2. I come now to the second, which is the last part of what I have propounded,
viz. to show,

That there is no reason for Christians or for Preachers to be ashamed of the
Gospel;

And that upon two Considerations: 1. Propter veritatis Evidentiam. 2. Propter
virtutis Excellentiam.


The former of which is implied (if it were not the truth of God, it could not
be the Power of God.)

The later is expressed, For it is the Power of God to salvation to every one
that believes.

The evidence of the Truth is so great that whosoever duly considers it will
certainly believe the Gospel.

The Virtue and Excellency of the Gospel is so great, that whosoever truly
believes the Gospel shall infallibly be saved.

1. First, I am to speak of the Evidence of the truth of the Gospel. But
because it is here only implied, and because I have Sermon. against Antiscript.
formerly employed my poor endeavors upon that Argument, I shall only briefly
touch upon it.

The Mysteries of the Gospel, though they are inexplicable and inconceivable,
yet are they not incredible, though incomprehensible, yet they are not
unaccountable; Nor was the Author and Finisher of the Christian Faith so severe
upon the understanding of his followers, as to exact a Belief without a
sufficient proof and Demonstration of the truth of that which he delivered.

Though he would not offer at the Grecanick way (which he knew to be impossible
to grant, to be absurd and unreasonable to require) yet he would afford it that
Demonstration whereof it was capable (a Demonstration properly so called,
accommodate to the Understanding of all Mankind, Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and
Barbarians, Noble and Ignoble, Learned and Unlearned) (...).

He that refused to gratify the impudent Scribes and Pharisees in their way,
would not leave the truth of the Gospel undemonstrated in his own.

And of the truth of all the Mysteries which he delivered, this is the Analemma
Catholicon, the Common, the Universal, the Comprehensive demonstration.

He that made himself the Son of God (as the Jews express it) That said he was
one with God ( I and the Father are one) that he was in the Father, Joh. 10.
30. 14.11.
and the Father in him; That declared the Mission and Emanation of the Spirit
from the Father and the Son, and that always spoke of him as a person distinct;
And that these three are one. 1 John 5.7.


In a word; He that was the Author of these and all other Mysteries whereof we
have been speaking, did not put the issue of believing upon his (...), but upon
an undeniable and unrefuseable Criterion.

Joh. 10.38.
If I do not the works of my Father believe me not; but if I do, though ye
believe not me, believe the works, ((...)) that ye may know (by Demonstration)
as well as believe, that I am in the Father, and he in me.

He did not only bear witness to himself, (although he died in testimony of his
Doctrine) He had not only the glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly
fellowship of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs for his Witnesses; But he
called Heaven and Earth to witness, He subpena'd whatever was in Heaven, and
Earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep places, to bear testimony to him.

There were three that bore witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, those three which he affirmed to be one. The Angels ministered unto him;
The Devils trembled and fled before him; Plants and Animals, the Wind and Sea
obeyed him; The Stars in their courses, or rather out of their courses
militated for him. To give testimony to Consummatum est, at the time of his
Death, the Sun was eclipsed, the Moon being at the Full. To indicate the place
of his Nativity, at the time of his Birth a new Star was made on purpose.
Health and Sickness, Life and Death, and Hades, gave in their testimonies by
their obedience to his word. Yet once more, he shook the Heavens, and sent down
the Holy Spirit upon his followers: he shook the Earth also, he tore the Rocks
and opened the Graves, and at his powerful voice the bodies of the Saints
arose: And lest it should be said, He raised others but himself he could not
raise; As he finished the Great Mystery of Christianity by his Death, so also
he proved the truth of it by his Resurrection; As he died for our Sins, Romans 4.
24.
so he rose again for our Justification, for our Justification is in the Belief
of that, and all other, the Mysteries of Christianity.

These and many more, are heads of Arguments, which whoever duly considers and
understands, will certainly believe the Gospel propter veritatis Evidentiam.

2. It remains only to show, that whosoever does truly believe the Gospel,
shall infallibly be saved Propter Bonitatis, or Virtutis Excellentiam; Because
it is the Power of God to salvation to every one that believes.

In speaking of which Argument, I need not go about to prove, that the Power of
the Gospel is the Power of God, (in which respect it is called the Act. 11. 21.
Hand or Isa. 53.1.
Arm of the Lord, Romans 10. 16. Ephesians. 6.17.
the Sword of the Spirit, Tit. 2.11.
the Grace of God, bringing Salvation, and the like.)

Neither shall I stand upon a Comparison of the Gospel, with the Grecanical or
Judaical Institutions, (a man may believe all that ever was written by
Philosophers, and yet doubt whether there is, (or can be) such a thing as
Salvation, yea or no. A man may believe, whatever is explicitly and expressly
delivered in the Law of Moses, and yet not be saved) But my intention is
(barely and nakedly) this, By a short Reflection upon the Way and Method of the
Actions of Mankind, and the Discoveries and Contents of the Gospel (well known
to those that hear me) to manifest the truth of this Proposition, That, every
man that believes the Gospel ( i. e. that truly and actually (...). Luke 8.
15. (...). Romans 1. 28.
abides in that belief) shall infallibly be saved.

Because whosoever frames his Actions according to the Rules and Principles
(the Precepts and Prescriptions of the Gospel,) shall infallibly be saved.

And because, it is of the nature of man, to frame his Actions according to his
Actual and persevering Judgment and Belief.

The Nature and Essence of man consists in his Understanding; and for a man not
to follow the steadfast and constant, the actual and final dictate of his
Understanding, is impossible in Nature, and indeed implies a Contradiction.

He that believes, that there is neither God nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell,
Salvation nor Damnation; And that he has not an Immortal Soul ( i. e.) a Soul
to save; such a man (If at least he has attained to those great
accomplishments of Rudeness and Incivility) will make it his business to fill
up his measure of Debaucheries, and Impieties; will think it Brave (perhaps)
and Witty, to Blaspheme God, and scoff at Religion; will make it a matter of
Gallantry and noble Courage and Resolution, to challenge God to damn him, or
bid the Devil take him Body and Soul; will spend his time in Revelling and
Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness; Expecting and hoping to die like a
beast, he will be sure to live like one; And in conclusion will find himself
disappointed of this glorious hope (this goodly, noble, manly expectation) and
that his Miscreancy and the error of his Judgment has betrayed him into
eternal misery.

Whilst (on the other side) he that believes the Declarations, and Promises,
and Threatenings, of the Gospel, will have his fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

He that firmly and steadfastly believes, that the Soul which Actuates his body
is an Immortal Being (a subsistence which shall and must endure to all
eternity;)

That after Death he must appear before the Tribunal of God and Christ, 2 Cor.
5. 10.
to answer for the things done in the body;

That from thence he shall be transmitted to a state either of Eternal
Happiness, or Eternal Misery; either to be entertained (in the Vision of God,
in the fellowship of Saints and Angels) with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory:
Or secluded from the sight of God, and treated with the Devil and his Angels,
with torment unconceivable, unexpressible, and that to all Eternity.

This man, if he might gain all the Profits, and Honors and Pleasures, if he
might decline all the afflictions of this world, will not lose his own Soul:
Frustra blanditiae venitis ad hunc, frustra nequitiae venitis ad hunc.
Considering that light and momentany things bear no proportion to the exceeding
weight and moment of those which are Eternal, he will forthwith endeavor to
lay hold upon Eternal Life, and make haste to escape the Wrath to come; And to
that end he will devour all difficulties, and neglect no means or opportunities.

He that believes, that the only way to Happiness is the way to Holiness; Heb.
12. 14.
That without holiness no man shall see God; 1 Cor. 6. 9.
That no unclean thing shall enter there, That the Impious, the Unjust, the
Intemperate, the Lascivious (continuing so) shall never enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.

This man will endeavor to purify himself, to mortify all his carnal lusts
and affections, to cleanse himself from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and
to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

Again, he that believes and considers the Corruption and Impotence of his
natural Condition, and the design of Christ's coming into the world, what he
has already done, and what he is still in doing for him;

How that himself (and every man) is by nature a child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
that Sin reigns in his mortal body, Romans 7. 24.
that he lies under a bondage from which he cannot redeem, a Guilt from which
he cannot acquit himself;

Romans 3. 20.
That no flesh is justified in the sight of God.

Whosoever, I say, does believe this concerning himself; and (on the other
side) concerning Christ, that to this end was he born, and for this cause came
he into the world, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
that he might save sinners; Joh. 3. 17.
That the world through him might be saved;

That to this end (and this end only) he descended from Heaven; This was the
end of his Conversation upon Earth, his Life and Doctrine his Preaching and
Example; This was the end of his Crucifixion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Session at the Right hand of God; That by the sufferings of his Life, and the
inestimable value of his Blood, the world might be Justified and Redeemed from
the Guilt of their sins, rescued from the miseries of the world to come.

And that by the operation of his Doctrine, and Example, and the power of his
Intercession, the world might be sanctified, Delivered from the Dominion of
sin, purified and prepared to be admitted to the Vision of the most holy God,
Fruition of the Life to come.

I say, that the man that firmly, and steadfastly, and actually believes these
things, will not (nay, indeed that he cannot) neglect so great Salvation; That
he will not trample upon the blood of the everlasting Covenant, or despise the
Spirit of Grace, or crucify afresh the Lord of Glory, and put him to an open
shame. But that for his continual cleansing, from his past transgressions, he
will daily resort to the fountain which Christ has opened for sin and for
uncleanness, offering and presenting his head and his heart (his mind and his
affections) to the blood of sprinkling; And that for the obtaining of
preventing, and following Grace, to preserve him from lapsing for the time to
come, He will throw himself daily at the feet of that High Priest, which is
sensible of his Infirmities, and which sits at Gods Right hand, making
Intercession for him, and with sighs and unutterable groans he will implore the
Assistance of that Spirit which helps our infirmities:

And that continuing, and persevering in this Course, (by the Grace of God
which never fails them that seek him) he will certainly conform himself to
the Commands of Christ, and compose himself to his Example, till at length he
be transformed to his Image; He will add to his Faith Virtue, and to Virtue
Knowledge -- and so onwards, He will go on from strength to strength until he
appear before God in Glory.

I say, that such a man, Tit. 2.12.
by denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and living Soberly, and Righteously,
and Godly in this present world, will work out his Salvation with fear and
trembling, and in the end of his days will certainly and infallibly attain to
the end of his hopes, namely, the Salvation of his Soul. So that the Gospel is
indeed the Grace of God which brings Salvation to all men: It is the power of
God to Salvation to every one that believes.

TO come therefore to a Conclusion: Judge now in your selves Brethren, and
judge Righteous Judgment; Is this a Gospel which is to be despised? A
Dispensation whereof a Minister or a Christian ought to be ashamed? Are the
Mysteries of this Gospel to be derided and drolled upon? To be travestied or
turned into Burlesque or Macaronique? Is this to be a Brave and a Gallant
person? A Spark and a Wit? Or is it indeed to have never a spark of Wit or
Gallantry?

Men, Brethren, and Fathers; If the time, and your patience, and my strength
would bear it, I would take unto me boldness, and freely speak unto you
concerning the Gospel of our Savior; I would Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort.

I would severally and distinctly address my self to every sort, and every
Degree of those that hear me, Ecclesiastical and Civil, Young and Old, Wise and
Unwise, Noble and Ignoble.

I would speak unto you young men of the Clergy, that you would not be offended
at the Mysteries of the Gospel, or think it a matter of Wit or of Learning,
either to despise or to go about to mend them.

That you will neither be Drolled nor Disputed, Cajoled, nor faced out of your
Religion, or suffer the Mauvais hont (the evil shame) to be put upon you.

That you will not believe that it has been only dull formality, a want of the
smartness of your Wit, or depth of your Learning, which has retained your
Fathers and Predecessors, in the belief and the Profession of the plain, and
simple Articles of the Catholic Faith. Be not deceived Brethren; Vixerunt
fortes ante Agamemnona --.

Be not seduced by those who pretending to remove the Scandal of the Cross of
Christ (which thing St. Paul counted an absurdity in Christianity) would rob
you of a most divine and excellent Religion, Gal. 5. 11.
and substitute in its place a rotten and depraved Philosophy; Those I mean who
never have been able with all their Wit, Reason, and Learning, to explicate or
comprehend the Mysteries or Mechanies of a Mite, or of a Flea, of a Plant or
Stone, or any one of the innumerable things which are before them, and yet they
take upon them to control the plain literal, designed and reiterated
Declarations of Christ and his Apostles concerning the Mysteries of the
Godhead. Those who Grammaticizing pedantically, and Criticizing spuriously,
upon a few Greek Particles or words, would cozen the World of the benefit of
the blood of Christ, and Christ himself of his Divinity; and put him off with a
fantastical and Poetical Apotheosis.

I would speak unto you Fathers, because ye have known the Father and the Son,
ye understand the effect and consequence of the Mysteries of the Gospel to the
Salvation of men, that ye will continue to strive earnestly to retain that
faith (which is thought by some to be upon the wing, that Faith) which was once
delivered to the Saints.

I would speak unto you ((...)) Wise men or Philosophers; Paul speaking to the
men at Athens, Act. 17. 28.
puts them in mind of a saying of a Poet of their own; I would call to your
Remembrance a Saying of a Philosopher of our own, (a Philosopher of great
renown) which is to this effect: That a profound consideration of the reason,
and comprehension of the circumstances of things (a deep dose of Philosophy)
will make a man Religious; And that the contempt of Religion is an infallible
argument of one that is a smatterer only, and half-witted.

I would speak unto ye Nobles, that ye would be Noble as the Beraeans were;
That ye will search, examine, and consider, whether the case of the Gospel be
such as has been represented, yea or no: And then I am sure ye will continue
zealously and vigorously to support the Gospel.

I would take heart and courage, and improve in an humble confidence, so far as
to prefer a Petition to King, Lords, and Commons (the Noble, the Mighty, and
the Wise) that (at this time especially) they will be careful of Religion, and
tender of the Interests of the Gospel.

I would humbly endeavor to bring to remembrance, who it is by whom Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Justice; And what it is to be Defender of the truly
Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

I would endeavor to Demonstrate that neither Forts nor Castles, Armies nor
Navies, Arms nor Ammunition, Money nor Men, (to say nothing of Allies or
Confederates, or the Staff of Egypt) are so powerful a support of the Crowns
of Princes as the Gospel; Nay, not as a few lines of this one Epistle of our
High nosed Galilean (as the Scoffers have been wont to call him) duly imbibed
into the Souls and Consciences of men, namely, that saying at the beginning of
Chap. 13. Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, Romans 13. 1, 2, etc.
for there is no power but of God, the Powers that be, are Ordained of God --
And they that Resist shall receive to themselves Damnation; the belief of this
would be sure to compose the minds of all Dissenters so as to keep peace and
obedience at home.

And the belief of that which follows would defend us from our enemies abroad;
this would raise Taxes and Contributions, Subsidies and Royal Aids, procure all
things necessary for the maintenance of Just Wars abroad; For for this cause
also pay ye tribute, Ver. 6, 7.
because they are Christ's Ministers, etc. So powerful and useful is the
Gospel, where it is believed, to maintain all the parts and Interests, and to
command all the succors and necessary supplies of Government, to bring fear to
whom fear, honor to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute belongs.

Wherefore I would not fear humbly to make an Application in the words of King
David: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, Psalm. 2. 12.
be learned ye that are Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice unto him with reverence; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and so ye
perish from the right way.

But I can only be permitted to make one common and promiscuous Application, to
high and low, rich and poor, one with another, namely, To charge upon your
memory (and pray that it may rest upon my own) one saying of Christ himself,
that dreadful saying in Mark 8. If any one shall be ashamed of me, Mar. 8.38.
or of my words in this adulterous and sinful Generation: Of him shall the Son
of man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with his holy
Angels. And without any Apology for my boldness or indiscretions, to conclude
in the words of the Text: For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: For it
is the Power of God to Salvation to every one that believes.

FINIS.
Rules and Directions for Prayer and Meditation: Written by the late Right
Reverend Father in God Bryan Duppa Lord Bishop of Winton. Sold by James Collins
at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street.


