Ecclesia and Factio. A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Bow-Steeple Dragon, AND THE Exchange
Grasshopper.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, School.

ECCLESIA and FACTIO.
A DIALOGUE, etc.
Dragon. TELL me Proud Insect, since thou can not Fly,
By what assistance thou art Hopp'd so high:
The busy swarms of Gnats and Wasps around,
With Hum, and Buz, thy Revelations sound,
And cry in thee (alone) their happiness is found.
Me they Despise, and thee they Praise aloud,
Admire thee, and Adore thee as a God:
Misled by false Enthusiastic Light,
They Have raised thee now to a Destructive hight,
Who restless strive'st, by thy accustomed ways,
To stain those Glories, which thou never could raise;
And like your Dam (the Babylonian Beast)
Cry down those Truths (by which Mankind are Blessed)
Which Reason, well as Faith, makes manifest.

Grasshopper. Thy Scaly Body, and Aspiring Wings,
Thy furious Tallons, and thy frightful Stings,
Makes thee seem Monstrous to our milder Flock,
Who Dreaded once, but now Disdains thy Yoke:
You Would bind our Souls, b'Omnipotence made free,
And Rob us of that Heaven-born Liberty,
To which we have a Right, as clea^ as thee.
My Sons thou would unreasonably confine
To Worship God, within no Walls but thine,
As if the Prayers, from other Temples sent,
Of sighing Souls, who faithfully Repent,
Were Scorned, and by repulsion backward driven,
Vanished in Air, and reached no Ear of Heaven.
Where is its Goodness? What avails its Grace,
If our sincere Repentance wants access,
Through Heavens respect to either Time, or Place?
Those measures but our own Projections be,
Vnminded of the Great Eternity,
Whose Love Divine moves round the Sinful Ball,
To Bless each wretch, who on his Mercies call,
Without regard to Place, no matter where,
If the Heart's Contrit, and the Mind Sincere.
Our Humble Guide the great Example yields,
Who Prayed and Preached in Gardens, Mounts, and Fields:
Temples but Sacred from their use became,
Our Piety makes any House the same:
Where ever we in the Almighty's Name repair,
Omnipotence has promised to be there.
Besides --
Our Prayers (by which all-pitty'ng Heaven we move,
To grant us His inestimable Love,
When with true Zeal our Pious Souls are warmed)
Makes the Place Holy, wheresoe'er performed.

Dragon. Thou know I Am founded on a fateless Rock,
Freed from the danger of an Envious shock,
Scripture's my Bass, Immovable I stand,
Guarded by Lawful Power, on every hand.
Established by a National Consent,
Preach Faith, and Charity, do ills prevent;
And for the Truths I Teach, am made Predominant.
Steadfast and Pure, from Innovations free,
Preserved entire from Mutabillity;
Safe from your Pride, and Envy, Armed with Law,
To humble stiff Precisians, who withdraw
From my Communion, Conscious to agree
With Heads uncovered, or a bended Knee,
And think a Bow a rank Idolitry.
Religion, like a Prince, though never so Pure,
By Power to Punish, must be made secure,
Or else your Saints, to Reformation given,
Would quickly cut Ten Thousand Paths to Heaven.
Could I from Factious Insolence be free,
And live unstained, without an Enemy,
(But that, till thou art crushed, can never be)
Then Church, and State might happily Unite,
To Mankinds Safety, and to Heavens Delight:
But you, by Pride, are swelled to such a Rage,
(Fed by the Vice of a Corrupted Age)
That now you strike, with Envy, at my Power,
And aim'st above my Sacred Head to tower:
But all in vain --
For that Blessed Edifice can never drop,
Which, when assailed, good Heaven is still the Prop.
You urge a Barn, or Stable, where you Meet,
A Field, a Coffee-House, Dancing-School, or Street,
Are fit for Heavenly Worship, and for Prayer
Sacred, as unpoluted Temples are.
Rare Arrogance indeed, so vilely prone,
To justify Irreverence to a Godhead done.
A Room where Men their common Lusts pursue,
Drink, Swear, Lie, Cheat, all Worldly-business do,
In Christian Reason, is a hopeful Place
To beg God's Presence, or expect His Grace;
Whilst His own House, for Holy use ordained,
To Him Erected, by our Sins unstained,
Shall be Despised, and Unregarded stand,
A useless Fabric, in an Impious Land:
Yet do thou grumble in oppressive tones,
And rail at me for Persecutions.
If you, through studdi'd Prejudice, retire
From what the Laws of God, and Man require,
A Legal Force may justly then be used;
Such Factious Serpents may in time be bruised:
My Pow'r's from God, and in His Word declard,
To those who to my Laws bear no regard,
Heavens Punishments are Just, as to the Good Reward.
The Scriptures whatsoever I Teach contain,
What Is Easy I Recite, what is Hard Explain:
Virtue commend to Practice, Sin reprove,
Excite to Faith, Hope, Charity, and Love:
Obedience, Loyalty, Repentance, Prayer,
The use of what we Spend, or what we Spare.
Truth I advance, and what is False suppress,
You can no more than these, I do no less.
Then tell me what strange Feavour in the Head,
At first those Superstitious Frenzys bred?
From whence you raise that causeless discontent,
Which makes you from my Temples thus Dissent?

Grasshopper. Superfluous Rites there are, which you maintain,
And hold as Decencies, which I think Vain.
Look back upon your boasted Pedigree,
One part derived of Romes Idolatry,
From whose fantastic Customs you have drawn,
Spuare Caps, low Bows, your Surpliss, and your Lawn.
Proud Lazy Prelates, with Pluralities,
Who speak but by their hair-brained Deputies,
Whose Junior Years no Truths obscure can reach;
And seldom are so Wise, as those they Teach.
Your Mass-like Service, with your noisie Toots,
Of hum drum Organs, Fiddle Faddles and Flutes,
Your high-flown Doctrins to advance a State,
And Please it, till Unlawfully made Great,
Then turn your Holy Flat'ries to its Fate.
These I dislike, from these (in chief) Dissent,
As quite repugnant to the Lords intent.
These are the sumptious Trappings of the Whoar,
The Marks and Patches which she always wore.
These are her studdi'd, and prevailing Charms,
Which, but the looser part of Fancy warms,
And draws unwary Youth to her Adult'rous Arms.

Dragon. External Order first informs our Sense,
And raises in us a due Reverence,
Either toward Place, or Person, where we see
Concurrent parts, in Noble Form, agree,
And tend to a peculiar Harmony.
Or why did the Creator shape the World
From a dark Mass, together rudely hurled?
But that, in every part, Mankind should see,
The strokes of an Allpow'rful Deity.
From whence the light of Faith does first arise,
And makes our Reason subject to our Eyes,
For every wondrous work of Heaven we see,
Gives fresh Assurance of Eternity;
And by its Graseful Order strikes an Awe,
Humbles our Souls, and does Obedience draw,
By Natural means, to Heaven, and Natures Law:
Therefore, such decent Rites do I dispense,
As best shall Humble, and Affect the Sense;
And in my Sons beget a Graceful Reverence.
How Insolent it looks? How Evil bred,
T'approach God's Presence with a Covered Head?
Yet to a Great-man Couch, with Hat in Hand,
And Bare, before the Wealthy Idol, stand.
Or at Devotion so neglectful be,
As quite abandon all Humility;
And rather than to Bended-knees submit,
In disrespectful Postures, Lolling sit.
Next, with Church Government you disagree,
And causlesly condemn our Hierarchy:
Rail at my Bishops, angry at their State,
And Envy them, whose Merit made them Great;
The Learned, and Pious Characters they wear,
Has raised them to the Dignities they bear.
Unstained their Lives, they are as Guardians chose,
To save the Church from Error, and from Foes:
Without whose Conduct, and Authority,
Religions Pristine state can never be
Kept from Erroneous Innovations free,
But stand exposed to every abuse,
That each Fanatic whimsie shall produce.
Then sure such Men, who by a Painful Life,
(Through Grace) to Knowledge more sublimed arive;
And, with the piercing Eyes of Reason, see
Through all the Mist'ries of Divinity,
Justly deserve a Spiritual advance,
Above an unlearned, or a half-learn'd Dunce;
Whose rolling Eyes, feigned Looks, and yawning Jaws,
Can nothing utter, but with Hums, and Haughs;
Inspired with Ignorance, then roars aloud
Audacious Nonsense, to a Brainless Crowd:
It Is these, who from their Cradle are misled,
And backward taught, to Factious Pulpits bred,
Who, with impetuous vi'lence, headlong run,
Pursuing Ills, their Rebel Si'res begun.
Thus in their Fathers faults they persevere,
And, by Instinct of Nature, envious Dunces are:
These, through their barren Ignorance, exclaim
Against all Order, and the Church defame.
Pelting with Factious, and Calumnious Lies,
That Sacred Power, to which they cannot rise:
Spurning at all Ecclesiastic Pomp,
True Zealous Sons of the detested Rump,
Waiting the lucky Minute to be turned up Trump.

Grasshopper. These bald aspersions, from afar you fetch,
Serve, but as Bullets, to enlarge the Breach.
Why so Disturbed, so Scornful, and so High?
You're but a Weathercock as well as I.
Boast of fixed Fundamentals, yet I find,
For Interest, you can Turn with every Wind.
Where Is Right Divine, your Passive, and your Non,
The Bubble's once blown up, now, Poh, they are gone.
Where is your Loyalty, so subt'ly shown,
Sometimes to the Prince, and sometimes to the Throne,
Sometimes to both, sometimes to never a one:
Thus is it Logically placed behind
So many Schoolboys Querks, it is hard to find.
When the great Change (by Heavens permition) tried
Your Churches Doctrine, and her Clergies Pride,
Some Conscientious Fools, it is true, tur^'d out,
But all the Wiser Sheepheards faced about;
And, like good Men, could blacken and upbraid
That sinking Power, for which before they Prayed.

Dragon. Scandal (as you are wont) I know you choose,
As the best Weapon, of Offense, to use,
Whether, on search, it True, or False be found,
No matter which, if you can make it wound.
But know my Armour's tempered against Fate;
And much to hard, for you to penetrate:
The Iron Walls, my treasured Truths defend,
Reverb'rate all the poisonous balls you send.
You charge me with the want of Loyalty,
That am the chief support of Monarchy:
By my High Priest the Holy Oyl's applied,
By me Kings Reign, are Crowned, and Sanctified;
I am on Earth their Safety, and to Heaven their Guide.
By me the Factious Falsehoods are suppressed,
Scattered by restless Rebels, to molest
The happy quiet of a Peaceful Reign,
Which Traitors Envy, and blind Fools Disdain.
Duty to Kings, I to the Public teach,
To Loyalty Excite, Persuade, Beseech,
That all things to the Throne be easy made,
And him thereon be Rev'renc'd, and Obeyed.
What are all these, but Marks of Loyalty,
Religious Graces, manifest in me,
Virtues, I find, too bright for thy dull Eyes to see.
But pray your Reasons to the World impart,
Why now you from your old Opinion start.
In happy days, when Charles the Scepter swai'd,
When base Designs, by you know who, were laid,
Then all your Awkward, Canting Brood professed
'Twas Damnable, the Bread of Life to Taste,
Within my Sacred Temple-Walls, but now,
What then you held so Dangerous, you Allow.
If Once 'twas an Offense so great, we know
(As you maintained, full Twenty Years ago)
It Is Now the same, and Ever will be so.
Why do the Grandees of your Leering Tribe,
(Who from rank Dugs their Prejudice imbibe)
So curb their Malice, as Conform of late,
And with my Flocks they Envy, Congregate.
Often on a Sabaths Morning have I seen
Rich Awful Zealots, of a bulkey Mein,
Cheat Heaven, and dissemble with the State,
To be by Flattery, and Deceit made Great;
Visit my Temples, seem devout as Saints;
And for their Interest, turn base Sicophants:
Thus with my Worship, through design, agree,
And only Mimmick, what they hate to be,
To climb, unfairly, to Authority.
Then, by their own Corrupted Whimsies led,
Where the rape meet, and common Ills are bred;
There hear the Church, from whence they came, Lampoon'd,
And True Religion, by an Ape Buffoon'd;
Who over his Cushion, full of Yawn, and Hum,
Stands Gaping like the Bear that beats the Drum.
Thus is the Afternoon at Meeting spent,
The Morning in the Church, at Sacrament:
Rare Pious Christians, full of Faith, and Grace,
To thus with Heaven, dissemble for a Place;
And pawn their Souls to purchase Sword or Mase.
If I am Right, and from Mistakes most free,
Why do they not Conform entire to me?
If your dark System, they believe most True,
Why not alone Communicate with you?
Those who for Interest, carry fair with both,
Are Just to neither, by their Faith or Troth:
But plunged between two Crimes, to Greatness bent,
Err with the Wrong, and from the Right Dissent.

Grasshopper. If you make Laws to eclips my purer light,
And rob my Sons, of what is their native Right,
The fault's not theirs, it is you incur the blame,
The Cunning's on their side, on yours the Shame.
Why not by Birth, and Christian Knowledge free
To Riches, Honor, and Authority?
Why must these Worldly Comforts rest in you;
Or your Sons count all Power and Place their due?
Why may not mine as well assist the State,
And in as great attempts, prove fortunate?
If you such Laws procure, such Power possess,
As prove a hind'rance to our happiness,
How can you justly blame us, to evade,
And leap over all the stumbling blocks you have laid?
If you such bars to our Preferments make,
As Oaths, and Sacraments, for your own Interest sake,
It is no crime in us, the same to Break or Take.
If you attempt, through Pride, to keep us low,
And we, through Cunning, your designs o'erthrow,
Call it not Cozening Heaven, but Out-witting you.

Dragon. No Laws can such loose Principles restrain,
No force can bind you, but a Golden Chain.
Interest I find, is the prevailing tie,
Makes you Approve, Conform, Dissent, Deny,
Oppose the Right, or the Wrong Justisie.
Interest, from me first made you Separate,
And become Rival to the Church, and State.
Interest disposed you to Intestine Jars,
Improved to Bloody, and Domestic Wars;
Wherein being flattered with unjust success,
Trampled on Merit, spit in Virtues Face,
Riffled the Throne, and stained the Judgment Seat,
With Crimes too black, and dreadful to repeat;
As if to you, Omnipotence had given,
A Sanguine, not a Milky-way to Heaven.
Still are your Thoughts by wild Ambition tossed,
Aiming to gain that Power, you justly lost:
At all Ellections, busy are your Brood,
Heaving and shoving against the Public Good.
On all Promotions, Zealously intent,
Sqneese, Bawl, and Jostle, till their Breaths are spent;
Kick, Cuff, and Scandal (heedless of the Laws)
Tongues, Feet, and Arms, all working for the Caufe;
To raise some Meager Darling of their own,
Faction in whose penurious looks is shown:
Rich by mere Chance, or Fraud, not Great by merit grown.
Who can Lie, Cant, Dissemble, or Forswear,
Declaim against, or hear the Common Prayer;
Through all Opinions Halt, to Lamely reach the Chair.
Who can his Conscience, to his Interest mould,
Run with the Court, or with the City hold.
And without shame, can true Reflections face,
Or bear all scandal, with a comely Grace.
And will his Power beyond just bounds extend,
To injure Foes, or to advance a Friend;
Or any thing will do; to serve a Factious End.
These are the worthy Dolts, your Sons advance,
By their false Poles, and double Diligence.
These are the Men of merit, they provide,
To Row, and Toe, against the Wind and Tide;
Who in Tempestious Discords, they create,
Sail quite repugnant to the Church and State:
Yet to such outward Godliness seem bent,
To Church they will come, though in their Hearts Dissent:
But for no Faith, will either Hang, or Starve,
Both God and Mammon, for advancement serve;
Thus seasonably comply, or in fit times can swerve.
If such unsteddy Rovers bear Command,
Whilst Men of Worth, shall unregarded stand,
By Law, and Nature, Qualified for Trust,
To something Fixed, and known in all things Just.
I^ Men like these, shall be by Fraud put by,
And yield their Rights to the Pedantick Fry;
England must soon from all her Greatness fall,
And mourn her Ancient Glories Funeral.
Which Heaven prevent --
And (that she may once more her Grandeur boast)
Retrieve her Virtues, now so nearly lost;
And from all Factious Quarrels, and Despights,
Preserve the King, Church, Nation, and our Rights:
That in One Faith, we may United be,
And accord sweetly, in just Harmony.

FINIS.

