Against Resistance of Lawful Powers: A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE HALL, November.
Vth. 1661.

By SETH WARD, D. D. Chaplain to His Majesty.

Published by His MAJESTY'S Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for John Martin, James Allestry, and Tho:
Dicas, at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXI.

TO THE Most High and Mighty PRINCE, CHARLES the II. By the Grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please Your Majesty,
IF, when the present Service was with great Favor laid upon me by that most
Reverend Person, to whom I not only ow Canonical Obedience, but a free
disposal of my Concernments, I did not without fear address my self to the
Undertaking; and if now I make my humble approach into Your Presence with
Diffidence, and Trembling, and without those Tokens of Joy, which would be
agreeable to the Honor I have received in being by Your Majesty encouraged to
make this Offering: Your Majesty (being as an Angel of God) will graciously be
pleased to discern, that no Aversness from the service of Your Majesty, and the
Church, Nor apprehension of Difficulty in what I was to undertake, Nor fear of
the Adversaries of the Truth, have created these Passions in me; but that they
are wholly derived from other Causes. For, next to the greatend of all my
hopes, I shall not so earnestly snatch at any thing, as the opportunities of
serving God in that station he has ordered for me in the Church of Christ, in
which service I apprehend the acts of Loyalty, and Duty to Your Sacred Majesty,
and of teaching men so, to be most eminently involved.

As for the easiness of this performance, I am persuaded in my Conscience, that
to him, who has embraced Christianity in the true and genuine Spirit of it^
and to those, who without vile Affections, and Carnal Interests, shall apply
themselves to know the Mind of God (delivered in the Scriptures) no one thing
is more clear, and evident, or pressed more urgently by the Holy Spirit, then
is the Doctrine, which I have delivered. If there be such things, as damnable
Heresies, the denial of Christ himself (the Lord that bought us, blessed for
ever) is not more truly an Heresy, or a damnable Heresy, then that Doctrine
which does encourage Subjects to despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities.
We are not to ma^vail, if we have seen, that, after this grand Heresy had
broken its way thorough the Consciences of men, the sholes of others passed
clear without control,^ and that those Doctrines, and Practices, which, in the
purest Times, were abhorred as most heretical, and profane were made the marks
of the greatest God^iness, and instances of the highest seize in
Religion. But on the other side, it is considerable, that in the late days of
darkness, and of gloominess, God did not leave this Truth without witness: but,
amidst all the Blasphemies, wherewith Your Glorious Father (now with God) was,
in the day of His Calamity, blasphemed, even Rabshakeh J. G. Anti-Caval.
was driven to acknowledge, that the Doctrine of Resistance was a Mystery
concealed from the Prophets, the Apostles, and Primitive Christians, and
reserved to be revealed in our Times; upon whom the ends of the World are come.
And that our teaching Soldiers (who taught the Nation with Briers, and Thorns,
as Gideon did the men of Succoth) not able to resist the Spirit speaking in the
Apostles, were wont to resort to this foolish Refuge, that the Doctrine of
Obedience was a 2 Pet. i. 12.
present Truth (an (...) not to continue) abusing the Saying of St. Peter, as
they did other Scriptures, to their own Destruction.

As for the Adversaries of the Truths, which I have delivered (either on the
one hand, or the other) how great soever they may appear in their own Eyes, or
in the Eyes of their Admirers, I humbly conceive it may be no Transgression of
the Lines of Modesty, if I shall freely profess, that they are not terrible in
mine: no man has more reason, then my self, to be laid low on the
consideration of days, and years, withdrawn from that Study, whereunto I had
been consecrated: yet (after what has been spoken) me thinks in this Cause I
should not fear. My fear has been, that in a Cause of so great consequence, so
clear, so nobly handled by the greatest Worthies of the Church of England, I
should not find any thing to be tolerably spoken, before the greatest, and
most revered Judgment under Heaven. And I now tremble to think that such
Failings, as in the current of Pronuntiation might disappear, being now brought
to view, the Present, which I tender, may instead of an Offering be an Offense.
My fear has been, and still is, lest the Truth of that Gospel, wherein I
stand, should any way suffer prejudice by the Weaknesses, and Disadvantages,
wherewith it has been delivered: but we have a gracious God, and Your Majesty
is gracious. I am not ignorant how much the true Cause of God in the World
(which is truly stated to lie against the Carnal, and Spiritual wickedness of
men) is entrusted in the hands of Princes. I know likewise, and am assured,
that if men be taught, or brought to believe, that the utmost hazard of the
greatest Transgressions is only the loss of a few days, or years of life,
(such as they find it) it will be impossible for humane Laws to give check to
the unruly Lusts of men, or for Society to consist. Knowing this, and knowing
likewise the Scandals laid upon Religion, I have proposed, in all humble
sincerity, to lay before Your Majesty the true state of these matters; to
separate the precious from the vile (the sincere spirit of Religion from the
adulterate pretenses of it) and (if it should please the Author of Religion,
and Government, so far to bless my poor endeavors) by unaffected, and
unstrained Arguments, to do right to the Doctrine of our Church, and render our
Religion lovely in Your Eyes, to represent to Your Majesty how much You have
been favored of God, who has so far wedded Your Concernments, and interwoven
his Interests with Yours; and of how great Concernment it is to Your Majesty,
to endeavor the settlement of the true Religion, and to exert that Power,
wherewith You are entrusted, to the eradication of Atheism, and Profaneness,
and to the pulling down of the strong Holds of Satan. That this Resolution is
deeply fixed in Your Bosom, God has put into the Heart of Your Majesty to
declare: may the same God be pleased to perform this great and true Work of
Reformation by Your Hand; may Wickedness be rooted out, and all things, that
are generous, and praise worthy, flourish in Your time; may Your Majesty live
many, happy, and glorious days upon Earth, and be afterward crowned with
Glory, and Immortality,

So prays Your Majesty's most humbly devoted Chaplain, SETH WARD.

ROMANS XIII. 2. And they, that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.
AMongst all the Stratagemes of the Devil, tending to the undermining of
Religion, and the subversion of the Souls of men, though there cannot be any
more unreasonable, yet there was never any more unhappily successful, then the
creating, and fomenting an Opinion in the world, that Religion is an enemy to
Government, and the bringing Sincerity, and Zeal in Religion into jealousy,
and disgrace with the Civil Powers.

It was by this Jealousy, blown into the heads of the Highpriests, and the
Sanhedrim amongst the Jews, and of Herod, and Pontius Pilate, that Christ
himself (the Captain of our Salvation, the Author, and Finisher of our Faith)
was accused, condemned, and executed on a Tree. By this the Apostles were haled
before the Governors of Provinces, forced from one City to fly unto another:
for this they endured bonds, and imprisonment, and sundry kinds of death. It
was through this Fancy, that the Christians, for three hundred years together,
endured the rage of Heathen Emperors; being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented. Our Lord Christ was traduced as an enemy to Caesar, a man refractory
to the Roman Laws, and a Nonconformist to the Religion, and Laws of his
Country. The Apostles were charged as disturbers of the public peace, with
turning the world upside down. The Primitive Christians were accounted Enemies
to the Commonwealth, adverse, and malevolent to the Empire: and the Christian
Religion it self was bruited, and surmised to have something in it offensive,
and dangerous to the Civil Government; as appears not only by the Edicts of
Heathen Emperors, but also by the Apologies of Clemens Alexandrinus in his
fourth Book, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Athenagoras, etc.

Neither was it thus only of Old, before the Roman Empire was become
Christian; but even since the time of Constantine, down to our Fathers days,
nay to our own, we shall find the Devil still managing the same pretense,
carrying on the same Antichristian Mystery of Iniquity, which began to work
in the time of our Lord Christ, and his Apostles.

Those, that profess to know the Arcanum Imperii, and publicly proclaim
themselves to the world to be qualified for Molders of Commonwealths, and
Dictatours to Princes, are the Writers of Politics; Machiavel abroad, and
others nearer home: some of these, pretending Discoveries of things unknown to
all our Fathers, if they be strictly analyzed, will be found to resolve their
whole Mystery into this one pretense; that Religion, in the height, and
exaltation of it, is prejudicial to Policy; and that, to be a thorow-paced, a
sincere and zealous Christian, is to be dangerous to the State.

As the remedy for which evil, they have thought fit, and necessary, to
enervate the Principles of all Religion so far as to remove the Doctrine of
Cood and Evil, the Immortality of the Soul, the Rewards and Punishments of the
world to come; that so Religion may appear wholly to derive from Policy.

How destructive these Doctrines are, not only to the Souls of men, in
reference to the world to come; but to the Interests of this life (the regular,
and secure acquisition, and enjoyment whereof, are entirely derived from the
great, and everlasting Ordinance of Government) I am not now called to speak.
But surely it cannot be unnecessary to endeavor to state this Question, to
search into the grounds of this pretense, to examine thoroughly from whence all
this clamor, these fears, and jealousies; whence all this mighty scandal has
arisen.

The Gospel of our Savior is not like the Alcoran, which hates the light, and
abhorrs a strict examination of the Principles, whereon it stands. When the
Jews contended with our Savior, and opposed his Doctrine, he defired to bring
the matter in question to a rational decision, John x. The Question there was,
Whether he were the Son of God. And he propounds them this fair (...) Verse 37.
If I do the works of my Father, believe me: if I do not, believe me not.

And I verily, as a Minister of Christ (though the meanest of ten thousand) am
bold in the power, and through the evidence of the Truth of the Gospel to say,
Let the Adversaries of Religion search, and look; let them employ their Wit,
their Industry, their Logic, if any thing can be found in the Principles of
Christianity, prejudicial to the power of just, and lawful Magistrates; Nay
moreover, if it be possible for Men, or Angels, to state the rights of Civil
Government upon clearer, and firmer Principles, to secure them by more
powerful Obligations, to urge them upon men by more efficacious Motives of
Rewards, and Punishments, then those are, which the very Foundations of
Christianity do expressly propound: then let the Gospel, and the Ministers of
it, endure all that contempt, and obloquie, which these men desire to cast upon
them.

As for the Foundations of our Religion; there are those, that tell us, that
Christianity is founded upon Cephas (which is indeed by interpretation a Stone)
but the Apostle tells us ( Ephesians. ii. 20.) that we are built upon the Foundation
of the Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone: wherefore by these the present Question is to be decided.

If any men, at any time, taking upon them the Sacred name of Christians, have
swerved from the rule of their Profession, and (acting contrary to the Spirit
of Christ) have made that Holy Name to be blasphemed; it is reason, that they
be esteemed the utter Enemies of Christianity, and that they themselves should
bear their Condemnation: but to charge their Exorbitancies upon that
Profession, which they have profaned, and injured, is such an injustice, as
cannot consist with Moral Honesty, or Philosophical Ingenuity.

So then, hic Rhodus, hic saltus. As Saint Paul (1 Cor. xv. 14, 17, 20.)
concerning the Resurrection of Christ, If Christ be not risen, our Preaching is
vain, and your Faith is vain; -- but now is Christ risen: so I; If, within the
compass of those Foundations, which I have mentioned, be found any color, or
shadow of license for any person whatsoever, upon any pretense whatsoever, to
entrench upon the power of lawful Magistrates; if any Warrant at all for open
Rebellion, or privy Conspiracies; for Murdering, or deposing of Princes, or
absolving Subjects from their Allegiance: then let Kings cease to be our
nursing-Fathers, and Queens to be our nursing-Mothers; let David look to his
own house; let the light of our Eyes, the breath of our Nostrils, the Restorer
of Religion, the Defender of our Faith look rather first to defend himself. It
will then be reasonable to expect, that the Kings of the earth should stand up,
and Psalm. ii.
the Rulers take Council together against the Lord, and against his Christ,
that they should break their bonds in sunder, and cast their cards from them:
then our Preaching is vain, and your Faith is vain.

But now, indeed, the Case is otherwise, and that evidently. What the Laws of
men could never do with all their Temporal Rewards, and Punishments, in that
they are weak; that Christianity, in the true Spirit of it, performs, to the
utmost height, that is conceivable.

The Foundation of Government, and Obedience, is deeply, and firmly rooted in
the Foundation of our Religion. And, if the Scripture cannot be broken, if it
be true, that Heaven, and Earth shall pass away, before one jot of it shall
pass away: it is as true, that the Ordinances of the Sun, and Moon shall fail,
before this Ordinance shall be dissolved. For if by the Principles of our
Religion we are obliged to believe concerning the Books of the Old Testament,
that they have been delivered by holy men of God, who spoke, as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. i. 21. then the Holy Ghost has said, By me Kings
reign, etc. Prove. viii. 15. If Christ be the Son of God; the Son of God has
said, Render to Caesar the things, which are Caesar's, Mat. xxii. 21. If the
Holy Spirit did overshadow Peter, and the rest of the Apostles; then Peter,
overshadowed, and filled with the Spirit, commands us in the Name of God to
submit our selves to every Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. ii. 13. If Saint Paul were
called to be an Apostle by the miraculous appearance of our Lord Christ after
his Ascension, and was by him immediately instructed in the pure, and genuine
spirit of Christianity; then Saint Paul's Theory concerning Government is an
authentic Christian Theory, whereby the Doctrines, and practices of Christians
are to be judged^ and that Theory is delivered in the seven first Verses of
this Chapter; Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, etc. And they,
that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.

I call it a Christian Theory of Government; because it is a brief, and
comprehensive Scheme, whereby all Questions concerning Obedience, and
Government, may, according to Christian Principles, be resolved.

The whole Discourse of the Apostle consists of two general parts;

First, A strict Injunction.

Secondly, Effectual Motives.

First, The Injunction in the first words, Let every Soul be subject to the
higher Powers, etc.

Secondly, The Motives in the words following, which are taken from

I. The Original, and Institution of Government; it is ordained of God: hence
follows

II. The Sinfulness of Resistance; They resist the Ordinance of God. And

III. The Danger of it; They shall receive Damnation. Which is again enforced by

IV. The End of Government in respect of Evil men. The End of Government in
respect of Good men. Out of all which follows

V. The Necessity of Subjection; Wherefore ye must needs be subject. And

VI. The Nature of that Necessity: it is not of Prudence, but of Conscience.

After all which the Apostle (like a legitimate Demonstratour, resumes his
Proposition, and concludes it with an (...) Verse 7. Render therefore to all
their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor.

The words, which I have chosen, contain in them the Danger of Resistance to
the Civil Powers. They relate both to the Antecedent, and Subsequent parts of
the Apostle's Discourse, and are as efficacious toward the pressing of the
Injunction of Obedience, as it is possible for words to express, or men to
conceive.

The strongest, and most operative Arguments upon men (at least wise -- (...))
are Arguments of Terror. The most terrible thing within the compass of humane
apprehension, is Damnation: which imports, besides the judgments of this life,
the eternal privation of the enjoyment of God, utter Darkness, and everlasting
Burnings.

Those, that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation

Those, Expl
that resist] (...) Resistance is a Relative Act, and it implies some Person,
or Thing, to be resisted. What then is the Correlate of (...)?

That is delivered in the first Verse, Those, that resist (...), the
Authorities set over them, Civil Authorities having jus Gladii, the Authorities
Supreme, or Subordinate, justly obtaining over them. It is not (...), or (...),
which is here used, (which signify corporal strength, and power) but (...),
which the Scripture distinguishes from both the other. From (...), Luke iv.
36. and ix. 1. 1. Cor. xv. 24. Ephesians. i. 21. from (...), Jude 25. It answers
the Hebrew word (...), which the Septuagint translates by all the names of
Legal Authority; (...) It is taken for the Persons of Governors, as well as
for their Power: so Ephesians. iii. 10. That to Principalities, and Powers ((...))
might be known, etc. and (...), against Powers, and the Rulers of this world;
^phes. vii. 2. So that we may not separate their Personal, and their Politic
capacity.

It remains, that we enquire the meaning of (...), and (...), what it is to
resist in the Language of the Gospel. Now,

1. That to oppo^e by force is to resist, it is so plain, that I need not speak
to it. We meet both the words in that sense, James iv. 6, 7. (...), God
resists the proud; and (...), Res^st the Devil.

2. But the word signifies Opposition by subtility, as well as by force. The
Opposition of Elymas the Sorcerer to S^int Paul is expressed by this word, Act.
xii. 8. (...) and the opposition of Iannes, and Iambres to Moses, (...), 2 Timothy
iv. 15.

3. And lastly, it signifies Opposition by Words, as well as by Deeds. So
(...), to gainsay, and to resist, are the same, Luke xxi. 15. and (...) is to
contradict, Acts vi. 10.

The words then do clearly, and plainly comprehend all manner of resistance, or
opposition.

This hitherto concerns the Proposition taken materially: if we reflect upon
the form of it, there will be two things to be considered.

First, That the Proposition is indefinite, and equipollent to an Universal;
They, that resist, that is, (...), every Soul (as in the first Verse) that
resists, without any exception of persons.

Secondly, That the act of Resistance is set down likewise absolutely without
any restraint, in respect of any Pretenses, or Causes whatsoever. So that the
sense of the words resolved, and expounded by the Scriptures, is this; Every
Soul, which upon any Pretense whatsoever, in any manner whatsoever, shall resist
the lawful Authority, that is over him, shall receive to himself damnation,
that is, he puts himself thereby into a state of Damnation.

This I conceive to be the meaning of the Holy Ghost in the words of my Text. I
must acknowledge, that two things have been questioned in this Proposition by
the men of this unhappy, viperous, and adulterous generation.

I. The first is, Whether (...) ought to be interpreted so severely, as to
signify eternal damnation.

II. Whether that, which is said concerning all Persons, and Pretenses, can be
made good upon the Principles of Christianity.

I. As to the former of these, I shall only say, that the Argument brought
against this interpretation does, in truth, exceedingly confirm it.

The Allegation is, Object.
that (...) is used in Scripture for Temporal Judgment. The place produced is,
1 Cor. xi. 29. He, that eats, and drinks unworthily, eats, and drinks
(...) damnation to himself: where the Apostle seems to explain (...) by the
following words, Verse 30. For this cause many are weak, and sickly, and many
sleep; viz. by Temporal Judgments.

And indeed this is true; Sol.
but these things likewise ought to be observed.

1. First, that the same Penalty is denounced in the Gospel to those, who
resist Authority, and to those, that are guilty of the body of Christ, 1 Cor.
xi. 27. and Heb. x. 29
trample upon the blood of the everlasting Covenant.

2. That neither Ananias, and Sapphira, nor yet the Corinthians, were by their
temporal Judgments exempted from eternal.

3. And lastly, that seeing the great difference betwixt the Legal and
Euangelical dispensation did consist in this, that the express Promises, and
Threatenings, under the Law, were temporal; and under the Gospel eternal: if God
shall, under the Gospel, besides eternal punishments due to every Sin, add
moreover to some particular sins the threatenings of temporal Judgments, let
these men consider what advantage they have gotten, and what can more be
devised to contribute to the aggravations of such a sin. I shall say no more to
the first Question, nor to that part of the Text, which concerns the damnation
of Resisters precisely considered: but shall apply my self to the resolution of
the second.

II. It is impossible in half an hour, to speak concerning all those pretenses
for res^stance of Magistrates; which, being raised by Satan, and made use of by
the children of disobedience, are falsely charged upon Religion. I shall single
out some of the chief of them, and examine them by the Law, and the Testimony,
by the Old, and New Testament; adding to them, as occasion requires, the
judgment, and practice of the Primitive Christians; and afterward make a brief
Application.

Those, which have given the greatest scandal, as having troubled the Christian
world, and almost turned it upside down, are reducible to the two Heads of
^eligion, and Civil Affairs.

First, Those, which refer to Religion, are such scandalous Tenets as these;

I. That Erroneous ( suppose Heretical, or Idolatrous) Powers may be resisted;
especially, if they endeavor to force men to their own Religion.

II. That Christian Magistrates have no power in matters of Religion: viz. None

1. In religious Causes.

2. Over religious Persons By Orders. Over religious Persons By personal Gifts.

Secondly, Those, which refer to matters Civil, are reducible to such as these;

I. Harsh Administration.

II. Pretenses of Competition of power: and the like.

Now I shall not be afraid, or backward, to acknowledge; that, if any one of
these Tenets be agreeable to the Principles of Christianity, or to the practice
of the Primitive, and purest Christians,who are to be presumed to have known
the mind of Christ, and his Apostles: then we are to admit, that there is
reason in what is alleged to create a Iealousy upon Religion.

For 1. If Erroneous, Heretical, or Idolatrous Magistrates may be resisted,
(because they are so, or because they join oppr^ssion of Godly men unto their
Error in Religion, how can any Kingdom stand? These are matters, wherein every
man makes himself a Judge; and it is not material, whether he judge righteous,
or unrighteous judgment; the matter once stated in Thesi, that in such Cases
men may resist, the Hypothesis is easily made, and men let loose to act
according to their proper Apprehensions, or the Pretenses of those, who have
power with them.

What shall be done, when, at the same time, a Prince shall be judged, by one
part of his Subjects, Heretical, and profane, for departing from Superstition,
and vindicating his power from unjust Vjurpations over it: while another part
shall judge him to be Superstitious, and will never believe him to abhor Idols,
so long as he will not commit Sacrilege? What shall be done, while some
conclude him to be irreligious, because he will not worship Images; others
Idolatrous, because he kneels at the Communion? and both esteem him an
Oppressor; because he restrains their Zeal, and hinders them from that excess
of Riot, which they pant after, to the devouring of one another?

Supposing this Tenet to be true; it is indeed evident, no Government can be.
But now what Color can there be, to charge this Tenet upon Christianity? Does
the Old, or New Testament give any occasion to this Doctrine? Is it
countenanced 1.. by Moses? or 2. by the Prophets? or 3. by our Savior? or 4.
by the Apostles? 5. That Cloud of Witnesses (the Noble Army of Martyrs) did
they give Testimony to this Assertion, or to the contrary? I may not insist: a
word to each of these.

1. Moses was so far from the Doctrine of Resistance; that, notwithstanding the
hardness of Pharaoh's heart, the cruelty of the Bondage, the weakness of the
Egyptians by Plagues, the numbers of Israel, six hundred thousand, and three
thousand five hundred and fifty fighting men above twenty years old; besides
the Tribe of Levi: yet he would not lead them into the promised Land without
Pharaoh's positive, and express consent to their Departure.

2. As for the Prophets; in the third Chapter of Daniel we find three of God's
Children put to the trial (the fiery trial) of this Doctrine, by
Nebuchadnezzar, an Idolater, and a Tyrant, acting highly under both those
Capacities together. They were cast into the fiery Furnace, because they would
not worship the golden Image, which he had set up. And in the sixth we find
Daniel thrown into the Lion's den, only for praying to the God of Israel. Let
us consider their Behavior, did they resist, or mutiny, or labor to alienate,
or discontent or (by denouncing threats, or terrors) to discourage Subjects
from Obedience? How had they been instructed by their Prophets? Jeremy (2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 13.) had taught them, that Zedekiah had turned from the Lord God
of Israel, in rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God:
and that they ought to seek the peace of the City, whether they were carried
Captives, and to pray unto the Lord for it; Jer. xxix. 7. And therefore the
three Children in the third of Daniel only refer themselves to God for
deliverance: and Daniel, in the midst of the Lion's den. prays heartily for
Darius, O King, live for ever! Dan. vi. 21.

3. In the next place, let us consider the Case of Christ, and his Apostles,
and see whether any such Tenet may be collected from their Doctrine, or
Practice; their Speeches, or their Actions. As for what concerns our Lord
Christ, I have had the Honor formerly in this place more at large to vindicate
him from such aspersions. He paid Tribute at the expense of a Miracle, Mat.
xvii. 27. He submitted himself to all the Powers, that were over him; to the
Sanhedrim, and their Delegates, to Herod, to Pontius Pilate: he submitted
himself to death by an unjust Sentence, even to the bitter, and accursed death
upon the Cross; Philip. ii. 8. This was his Practice: as for his Doctrine; He
taught men to render to Caesar the things, that were Caesar's; Mat. xxii. 21.
He acknowledged Pilate's power to be from above; John xix. 11. He rebuked Peter
for smiting with the sword: and told him, that those, that take the sword,
shall perish by the sword; Mat. xxvi. 52. He taught his Disciples to pray for
them, which should persecute them; Mat. v. 44. And the utmost permission, which
he gave them, was, when they were persecuted in one city, to fly unto another;
Matthew. x. 23.

4. As for the Apostles: They taught men to obey them, that have the rule over
them; Hebr. xiii 17. to submit themselves to every Ordinance of man; 1 Pet. ii.
13. to do all things without murmuring, or disputing; Philip. ii. 14. to pray
for Kings, and all, that are in Authority; 1 Timothy ii. 2. Saint Peter has told
us, that such, as despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, are (in an
especial manner) reserved to ^udgment; 1 Pet. ii. 9, 10. and Saint Paul, in my
Text, that they shall receive Damnation.

This Doctrine they Sealed with their blood. Saint Peter (according to
Ecclesiastical Tradition) was crucified, and Saint Paul beheaded, James the son
of Zebedeus slain with the sword, etc.

Now, as for the Powers, to which all these Instructions, and Behaviors did
refer, they were for Idolatry, and Tyranny, and Persecution, Humani generis
portenta.

If it be objected, Obj.
that, All these submitted, because they were not able to resist: Sol.
the Answer, upon Christian Principles, might be; that He, which restrained the
Flames, and stopped the mouths of ^ions, could have given his servants power to
resist; that Christ could have prayed his Father, who would have Matthew. xxvi.
53.
given him more then twelve Legions of Angels for his relief; that the
Apostles, who wrought mighty signs, and wonders, could have rescued
themselves: had it not rather pleased the great Ordainer of Powers, by their
submission, to ratify, and establish the Doctrine of Obedience.

5. But the belief, and practice of the Primitive Christians will satisfy this
Objection even to common Sense, and Reason.

The Instances in this kind are infinite, where Christians, abounding in
numbers, being in Arms, and abundantly able to make resistance, have chosen,
with the expense of their lives, to yield obedience to Idolaters, persecuting
them for their Religion. I shall name but two Examples.

Tertullian Apolog.. 37.
tells the Emperor, that his Cities, Islands, Castles, Councils, Armies,
Regiments, and Companies; the Palace, the Senate, the Courts of Judicature were
filled with Christians: and yet they submitted to persecution.

And we read, that the Thebaean Legion consisted of six thousand, six hundred,
sixty and six persons, every man Christian, when they submitted to the
Decimation of Maximinian for Religion.

I shall say no more to the first Pretense.

II. Now the second is like unto it, alike prejudicial to Government; alike
false, and scandalous to Religion.

An House, or Mat. xii. 25.
Kingdom divided cannot stand: and 1 Cor. xiv. 33.
God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace; and that especially in
Religion. If none have this power to order matters of Religion, there must be
Confusion: if any other beside the Supreme Magistrate, there will be Division.
The inevitable Inconveniences of the exemption of religious Things, and
religious Persons, from the power of the Magistrate, are abundantly set forth
by such, as would improve them to the disadvantage of Religion. And, indeed, to
go about to deny, or to diminish the dismal Consequences of such Pretenses,
were to endeavor to put out the eyes of all the men of Reason, and Experience
in the world.

My present Duty is to enquire, what relation these Pretenses have to the
Principles of Christianity; and that

First, As to religious Causes.

Secondly, As to Ecclesiastical Persons.

Thirdly, As to holy, or gifted Brethren; as they style themselves.

Now, in order to a resolution in these Enquiries, I shall (as a Lemma) humbly
propose one Observation.

It is this, That, whereas there are two things, whereon all Political
administration does depend: 1. Concerning the Rights, and Bounds, and
Regulation of Sovereign Powers; 2. Concerning the Duties, and Obedience of
Subjects: we find both Christ, and the Apostles, frequently laboring to
settle in the Consciences of men that part, which concerns Obedience; but no
where restraining, or limiting, or particularly regulating, the Office of
Sovereign Powers; but leaving them to those general Rules, which concern the
Account, and Duty of all men in their several stations, and to the terms,
whereupon the Providence of God was wont to settle the Princes, and Governors
of the World^ Let the rights of Caesar be what they will (in reference to
Tribute, or other matters) Christ will not determine them: This he will; those
things, which belong to Caesar (according to Ius Gentium) must be rendered to
him. He does not examine Pilate's power, in Case of Blasphemy, or Treason; but
acknowledges it, and submits. He falls not upon sifting, or examining the power
of the Sanhedrim; either their original power, or the power left them by the
Romans: They sit in Moses Chair, etc. Whatsoever therefore they bid you do, do
it; Matthew. xxiii. 2, 3.

And so likewise the Apostles, they seem to be unconcerned (as it were) in the
governing part of Civil Policy. No word is found in all their Writings,
enquiring into the Rights of the Roman Emperors (who were sovereign) or
limiting the Exercise of their Power. Only thus much they take for certain,
such, as they were, they were ordained of God. And they spend all their labor
in founding deeply, and firmly establishing that other part, which concerns
Obedience.

From this Observation it will follow, That whatever Things, or Persons were
not before the times of Christ, and his Apostles, exempt from the power of the
Magistrate, are not by the Foundations, and Principles of Christianity
exempted. ( Non eripit mortalia, qui regna dat coelestia.) And it will only
remain for us to enquire, what was the manner of the Nations of the World, and
of God's peculiar people, in reference to these Particulars, before, and at the
Times of Christ, and his Apostles. To which if we shall add the practice of the
best, and most ancient Christian Emperors, I know not what more can be desired
to clear the present Argument.

I suppose it needless to put in a Caution, that while we speak of the
Magistrate's power to order matters of Religion; we do not entitle him to the
Priest's Office (the Spiritual Fu^ction) or the Execution of it, in preaching
the Word, administering the Sacraments, exercising the power of Ordination, or
of the Keys, etc. Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put it into
our Sovereign's heart to be tender of the rights of the Church, as of the Apple
of his Ey.

This is a Calumny insisted on generally by almost all our Adversaries, but it
is too rude, and gross, to be spoken to in this place. Rather let us see
whether the Sovereigns among all people, Heathen, Jews, Christians, have not
claimed, and exercised power in all Causes, over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Civil.

1. For Causes. The New Testament sometimes divides Romans i. 14.
the Gentiles into Greeks, and Barbarians; sometimes into wise, and unwise:
according to which division the Romans are, I suppose, reckoned under the
Greeks, from whence they were mostly extracted, and with whom they contended in
Civility. Briefly, 1. the Greeks, 2. the Romans, 3. the Barbarous Nations did
always exercise such a power.

(1.) Aristotle, Polit. lib. 7. cap. 8.
the greatest among the Greeks, tells us, that the first, and principal Thing
in a Commonwealth is (...). And, accordingly, if we consult the Fragments,
which are left us, of the Laws of the most ancient Grecian Commonwealths, we
shall find nothing so frequent, as the Ordinances concerning their Religion.

(2.) Amongst the Romans, Cicero (the wisest) says, that Religion is the
Foundation of Humane Society; as in truth it is. To say nothing of the
Ordinances of Numa, the Ius Pontificium, etc. the Titles of the Twelve Tables
are many of them concerning Religion.

(3.) As for the Barbarous Nations, I shall not multiply Testimonies, nor go
beyond the line of Scripture. In the third of Daniel we find an Edict of the
King of Babylon enjoining all People, Languages, and Tongues to commit
Idolatry; Verse 4, 5. And, by and by, another Edict, that no man should speak
amiss of the God of Shadrach, Mesech, and A^ednego; Verse 29. In the sixth we
find Darius (the Persian) by the advice of his Council signing a Decree,
against petitioning (for thirty days) any God besides himself; Verse 9. and
shortly another, that all men should tremble, and fear before the God of
Daniel; Verse 26. In the third of Jonah, the King of Nineveh, and his Nobles
proclaim a public Fast. In the first of Ezra, Cyrus puts forth an Edict to
build the Temple at Jerusalem. In the fourth, Artaxerxes reverseth it. In the
sixth, Darius re-inforceth it.

I suppose it is now evident, that Greeks, and Barbarians did exercise this
power.

To think to elevate the force of these Instances, because all these were
Ephesians. ii. 12.
Strangers from God, and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, is to mistake
the purpose for which they are alleged.

However, it was not thus among the Kings of the Nations only, but among the
holiest, and wisest of the Governors, and Kings of Israel, and Iudaea; who for
abolishing false Worship, and ordaining the true, are often highly commended by
the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures. The time would fail me to speak distinctly,
and particularly, of the Ordinances concerning Religion, which were made by
Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Manasses also, and
Josiah: concerning whom the Scripture gives these Characters. Moses was the
D^ut. xxxiii. 1.
man of God. Joshua Io^h. xxiv. 29
the servant of the Lord. David 1 Samuel xiii. 14.
a man after God's own heart. There was 2 Chronicles. ix 22.
none like unto Solomon. Asa 1 Kings xv. 14.
his heart was perfect with the Lord. 2 Chronicles. xvii. 3.
The Lord was with Jehoshaphat. Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. xxix. 2.
did that, which was right in the sight of the Lord. Manasseh 2 Chronicles. xxxiii.
13.
was heard of God. Josiah did that, which was right; and his 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 26.
Goodness was recorded.

Now the Acts of every one of these concerning the Worship of God, and matters
of Religion are recorded, and applauded in the Scriptures. For these all
ordered, and regulated Services, and Sacraments, and Covenants with God; they
erected Altars, and Tabernacles, and Temples, and dedicated them to the Lord;
they destroyed Idolatry, reformed abuses in God's Worship, settled both the
standing Worship of God, and occasional Thanks-givings, and Humiliations: to
omit other matters.

The whole Aaronical Ministry, which consisted in Ceremonies, and Sacrifices,
Typical, and Carnal Ordinances, was not ordered by the hand of Aaron, but of
Moses, who was Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 5.
King in Iesurun.

The Tabernacle, and Temple-service (which, beside the Mosaical Institutions,
consisted of Spiritual abiding Ordinances) was instituted by David: who, being
the sweet Singer of Israel, and acquainted more then ever any man (for ought
appears) with the ways, and helps of lifting up the Heart to spiritual
intercourse with God, to that end appointed the use of Music in the Church;
and (without fear of stinting the Spirit) he prescribed Set-forms of Praise,
and Prayers for the use of the Temple; and ordered the Service for every day. A
Psalm, consisting partly of the one hundred and fifth, ninety sixth, and one
hundred and eighteenth, he first delivered to Asaph, and his Brethren, at the
reduction of the Ark from the house of Obed-Edom; 1 Chronicles. xvi. 7. And diverse
other Psalms were composed by him for the Service of the Church.

And what he had ordained, Solomon put in practice. In the fifth Chapter of the
second Book of Chronicles, we find the pattern of the Service of this Time,
and Place, Verse 1^
the Sons of Asaph, Heman, and Ieduthun, arrayed in white Linen, with musical
Instruments, praising the Lord, saying, Verse 13.
For he is good, etc. viz. reciting the one hundred and eighteenth Psalm: and,
in token of God's acceptance, Verse 14.
a Cloud filled the house.

The one hundred thirty and sixth Psalm likewise was wont to be sung in
Thanksgivings. So we find also 2 Chronicles. xxix. 25.
Hezekiah, and 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 15.
Josiah, praising the Lord in the words of David, and Asaph.

Thus stood the matter under the Law; the ordering of matters of Religion was
not exempted from the Supreme Power. Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. xxix 34.
varied from Moses Lev. i. 6, 7.
his Law, and was blameless. Neither was it otherwise in the best, and purest
Times under the Gospel.

It had been but a slender invitation to the Emperors to become Christian; if,
by submitting to Christianity, they must lose so considerable a part of the
Sovereign Power enjoyed by all their Predecessors, and be thereby exposed
inevitably to Seditions, and Rebellions, upon every Frantic eruption of
religious Melancholy. The Primitive Emperors understood themselves otherwise,
and so did the Christians under them. I may not stand to recite the Annals of
the Church.

If Constantine had not interposed for the composing of the Arrian Heresy,
what had become either of Government, or Religion?

The drawing up of Canons for the regulation of Religion was by our LORD
committed to the Apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons: but, that these Canons should be enforced as Laws by
temporal Penalties, it was by the sanction of Civil Powers.

In the second Ecumenical Council, the Fathers, assembled at Constantinople,
beseech Theodosius the Elder to ratify the Decrees of that Synod.

Thus we find Justinian Novel. Constit. 131.
establishing the Homo-Canonicon, or Code of the Universal Church, consisting
of the Canons of the four first General, and five ancient Provincial Councils;
and commanding them, (...), to be kept as Laws. Briefly, to determine this
Question, we need only to view the Titles of the sixteenth Book of the Code of
Theodosius, the thirteen first Titles in the Code of Justinian, Photius's
Nomo-Canon, and the like.

The Pretense of exemption of Ecclesiastical Causes, so as has been intimated,
as it is inconsistent with Government; so it is also with the Principles of
Christianity.

2. Thus much having been spoken concerning the regulation of Matters of
Religion, it will be needless to enlarge concerning the second Pretense of the
exemption of Ecclesiastical Persons.

This Tenet is equally dangerous with the former, and equally contrary to the
Principles of Christianity. It were to be wished, that all men professing
themselves Ministers were thoroughly convinced of the Doctrine of Obedience:
otherwise, as they grow popular, they become dangerous. Sacerdotum quidam eo
sunt ingenio, ut, ni pareant, territent. And Saint Chrysostom commenting upon
Every Soul, etc. says, (...) Both the Apostle, the Evangelist, and the
Prophet. Our Savior was both Priest, and Prophet; and the Apostles were
Ecclesiastical persons: yet did not think themselves exempted. Such persons
were not exempted, either before, or after the Times of our Savior; neither in
1. a Single, or 2. Joint capacity. Mat. xix S.
From the beginning it was not so.

1. As to Single persons under the Law, we find and Instance of the Exercise
of the Sovereign power over an High Priest offending, in Abiathar, whom Solomon
1 Kings ii. 27.
thrust out, and placed Ibid. 35.
Zados in his room.

2. As to the calling of Assemblies; before the Gospel Times, it did belong to
the Supreme Magistrate. We find Moses, not Aaron; Joshua, not Eleazar; David,
not Abiathar; Solomon, not Zadoc; summoning the Priests, and Levites, to meet
together. And

In the Primitive Times of the Christian Emperors, we do not meet with
Councils, or Synods called by the Bishop of Rome, nor with Ministers, casting
themselves into Classical, and Synodical Meetings; nor with Assemblies of
Divines, called against, or without the Prince's consent.

The indiction of Times, and Places, the convocation of Persons, the
Presidency, the order of Debates, the dismission of the Assemblies, the
roboration of Canons (as to making them Laws of the Empire) in the General, and
Provincial Councils, were all the work of the Supreme Magistrate. And

As for matters of Appeal, we find Paul appealing to Caesar: Athanasius (from
the Synod at Tire) to Constantine; to whom three Appeals were likewise made in
the Cause of Caecilianus, and Donatus: and many more instances of this, and the
like nature.

3. I should now dismiss this Head concerning Religion, did there not remain
one Pretense more, and that so wild, and monstrous, that it looks as if it
were the last effort of the enemy of mankind (ultimus Diaboli conatus) for it
strikes at the Heart both of Government, and of Religion. It is this, that
Saints, and gifted Persons, (as they call themselves) are exempt from humane
Laws: and in effect resolves into this, that to reprobate others, and assume to
themselves the Title of the Godly Party, to talk of Reformation, and the power
of Godliness, of advancing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, etc. is to justify
Sacrilege, and Treason, and horrid Rebellion, and to qualify them for the
Kings, and Priests, and Prophets of the world.

How far this Satanical madness has prevailed, to the confusion of all things
Civil, and Sacred; to the scandal of Religion; the planting, and watering of
Atheism, and Infidelity; I tremble to call to our remembrance.

If my present business were to refute the men, that have given this offense,
how easy were it to examine their Gifts, and their Saintship, and how hard to
find them. But as the Woman of Samaria said to our Savior, Ioh iv. 12.
Art thou greater then our Father Jacob? are they greater Saints, or better
gifted, then Peter, and Paul, and the rest of the Apostles? He, that said, Romans
xiii. 1.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, had been 2 Cor. xii. 2, 3.
raped up (whether in the body, or out, he could not tell) to the third
heavens: has any of them been carried higher?

Christ the natural Son of God, Heb. i. 3.
the Brightness of his Glory, the Express Image of his Person, said, Matt.
xxii. 21.
Render to Caesar the things, that are Caesar's: are they greater then Christ
also?

But my present purpose being chiefly to remove these scandals from Religion;
come, and let us reason together, What could Christ, and his Apostles have done
more to prevent this scandal, then they have done? Their Doctrine, and practice
has been already shown; and the Danger, and Heinousness of the Sin of
Resistance (in all the kinds, and degrees of it) discovered; neither can any
thing more be imagined, which might be desired to anticipate, and obviate this
pretense, unless it be, that these things should have been particularly
foretold, and the Persons (at least their Party, and Sect) described; that the
world might be forewarned of them.

Will it then satisfy the enemies of our Religion, concerning the Truth, and
Infallibility of the Scriptures, and the abhorrency of the Christian Principle
from this damnable Tenet; if it shall briefly appear, that these things have
been punctually foretold by Christ, and his Apostles?

Christ Matthew. vii. 15.
has given warning of grievous Wolves in Sheep's clothing.

More particularly Saint Paul has told us, that 2 Timothy iii. 1.
in the last days perilous times should come; that there should be Ibid. Verse
4. 5.
heady, high-minded Traitors, having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof.

Saint Peter, that there should be 2 Pet. ii. 1.
false Teachers, which should privily bring in damnable heresies, Ibid. Verse
10.
presumptuous, self-willed, not afraid to speak evil of Dignities.

Now, if all this be not sufficient, Saint Jude has taken up this Prophecy of
Saint Peter, and given us two clear Characters of these Persons, whereby they
might be known. He tells us, 1. That they shall be Separatists from the Church,
and 2. false-pretenders to the Spirit. Jude 19.
These are they, which separate themselves, being sensual, having not the
spirit.

I shall say no more to the Pretenses relating to that Head which concerns the
matter of Religion.

2ly. Neither shall I enlarge upon that other Head referring to matters Civil,
where I instanced in two Pretenses taken from,

I. Harsh Administration in the Magistrate.

II. Competition as to power in Subjects.

I. Neither the Time, nor the Design, which I have propounded, nor (indeed) my
Profession, nor Abilities do allow me to enter into the depths of the
Politics, or to discourse of the limitations of Sovereign Powers. Thus much is
obvious to every man,

That there is no Cruelty so great as laxness of Government, nor any Tyrany in
the World like the rage of Subjects let loose; and that the little Finger of
Licentiousness is harder then the Loins of the severest Laws, and strictest
Government.

I shall briefly show, that the Scripture, foreseeing the easiness (by reason
of the Self-love, and partiality of men) of this Pretense, and the danger of
it, has directly opposed it self against it.

I shall not mention particular Commands: let us have recourse to the main
Foundations; the Body, and Substance of Christianity, the MISHPAT HAMELEK (the
Ius Regium) the Fundamental Law of the Kings of Israel.

1. Christianity obliges us to believe not only, that Christ is God, and that
the Gospel is from God: but that all the Circumstances of the Ministry of
Christ, and his Apostles were ordered by his Providence. Why then were the
Times of Tiberius, and Caligula, and Claudius, and Nero (out of the Series of
the Time spun out from the Creation) chosen, and selected for the promulgation
of the Doctrine of Obedience. If harsh Administration of Power will exempt men
from Obedience; at that Time, when Claudius, or Nero was Roman Emperor, why
should the Holy Ghost move Saint Paul to write to the Romans, They, that
resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation? So much briefly for the Gospel.

2 As for the Ius Regium in the eighth of the the first Book of Samuel we find
the Israelites desiring a King: and God (though rejected by this motion)
commands Samuel Verse 9.
to hearken to their voice. Yet, that they might know what they did, and not be
surprised (believing they might cast off again their King at pleasure) he
charges him to protest solemnly, and show them (...). Our Translation renders
it, The manner of the King. The Septuagint, and all ancient Eastern, and
Western Translations render it by words signifying the Law, or the Right of the
King, JUS REGIUM.

This ( says Samuel Verse 11, 12. etc.
shall be (...) He shall take your Sons, and Daughters, your Vine-yards, your
Fields, and your Flocks, etc. He tells them of harsh Administrations.

Was it the meaning of the Holy Ghost, that ( de Iure) Princes ought to do, or
that it was lawful for them to do after the manner there described?

In the seventeenth Chapter Verse 14.
of Deuteronomy we find the Duty of the Kings of Israel described in a way
directly contrary to this; they were Verse 19
to fear the Lord, and not to turn aside to the right hand, or to the left from
his Commandments. Psalm. ii. 10, 11.
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed, ye Judges of the Earth:
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

Was it a Prediction of what would be their condition, what would be the manner
of their Kings?

Not that neither! We do not read of any of the Kings of Judah, or Israel, that
proceeded to the height there expressed. Even Ahab, who 1 Kings xxi. 25.
sold himself to work wickedness, did not take Naboth's Vineyard by force; he
would not seize on it, till Iezebel had brought about the pretense of a Legal
Forfeiture.

What then is the meaning of (...)? Surely it imports thus much, that, if all
this hard usage should come upon them, they might cry unto the Lord; (Verse 18)
but that it would not dissolve Ius Regium (the right of Sovereignty) or enable
them to resist their Kings, or rebel against them.

II. There remains yet one Pretense to speak to, it concerns Competition of
Power, either on

1. Pretenses of Succession into the Magistrate's place in case of failour of
Duty, or upon supposals of forfeiture of Power.

2. Pretenses of the last resolution of Power into the people, the diffused
multitude, or the people's Representative, and the like.

Concerning which kind of Pretenses I must repeat what has been said of the
other. If they be admitted, they are destructive to Magistracy. If they be
encouraged by Religion, there will be reason, that Magistrates be jealous over
it. But now is the Spirit of the Scriptures, and the tendency of it entirely
bent another way.

The New Testament affords no Instance in this kind. As to the Old, I shall
desire, that two Instances may be considered,

1. The Case of David, and Saul.

2. The Case of Corah, and Moses: which two Instances (if the time would bear
it) would take in the Substance of all, that may be alleged in this kind.

1. It is (I conceive) impossible to carry the first sort of Pretenses higher,
then they were stated in the Case of David, and Saul. Saul was at first
declared, and constituted King by Samuel, acting in the Name of the Lord; and,
when he had reigned two years, the same Samuel, in the Name of the same God,
before the same people, denounces publicly, that 1 Samuel xiii. 14.
his Kingdom should not continue; and that God had sought a man after his own
heart, because he invaded the Priest's Office. After this, he limits a certain
day, he tells him, Chap. xv. 13.
This day the Lord has rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee, and given it to
thy neighbor, because of his rebellion against God in the Case of Amalek.

The pretense of Failour, and Forfeiture can go no higher. Now for the
pretenses of David to step into his Government, and wrest it from him: He was
anointed Chap. xvi. 13.
by Samuel; for ought appears, without reservation for the life of Saul. He was
qualified for Government; Ibid. Verse 18.
a valiant man, a man of War, prudent in matters, a comely Person, and the Lord
was with him. He had received Testimony from God of his Election: the Spirit of
God departed from Saul, and rested upon him. He had power in his hand, he was
Chap. xviii. 5.
set over the men of War, accepted by all the people; all Israel, and Iudab
loved him. After all this, you know his Provocations, his Advantages, and his
Behavior; he durst not touch the Lord's anointed; and, when another pretended
to have done it at Readiness entreaty in extremis, he revenged his death, and
lamented over him, 2 Samueli 21.
Ye mountains of Gilboa, etc.

But that other Pretense, that after a lawful Sovereign is established
(according to the Supposition of my Text, and my Discourse) the power still
remains in the people, (in the diffused body of them, or their Representatives)
to alter the Government, as they please; it is in respect of Policy, and
Government, what the Sin against the Holy Ghost is to Religion, it destroys the
foundations of the peace, and safety of men, and makes that to be the Artifice
of man, which is the Ordinance of God. How much God abhorred this Pretense,
will appear in the Case of Corah, and his company. When God sent Moses to bring
the Israelites out of Egypt, he sanctified him, and put his Name upon him; Exodus
iv. 16.
Thou shall be to him instead of God: and when he had brought them forth, he
made him a Acts vii. 35.
Prince, and a Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 4.
Lawgiver over them.

The supreme Power was in Moses, who called to his assistance a Senate, or
Parliament, ((...)) consisting of the Heads of the Tribes of Israel. In this
Council Number xvi.
Nature soon began to work, some Psalm. cvi. 16.
envied Moses, whom God bad chosen, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Dathan,
and Abiram, the Sons of Eliab, Heads of Families, in the Tribe of Reuben,
thought both the Civil Power, and (if that must be transferred, from the
firstborn, to one Tribe) the Priesthood also was due to them, being Eldest
Brethren of the Eldest Tribe. Korah, an eminent man amongst the Levites, was
offended, that the High-Priest's Office went beside him, and was settled upon
Aaron, and his Posterity.

These were their secret griefs; for a redress whereof they make a party in the
Parliament, they gain to them two hundred and fifty men, famous in the
Parliament, men of renown; and, in order to their ambitious Designs, they
remonstrate against Moses, Verse 13. and their Declaration was this Pretense,
which we are upon; that all the Congregation (...) were Holy, and that Moses,
and Aaron had lifted up themselves above them; that is, that their power was a
contrivance of themselves, not an Ordinance of God; that, notwithstanding what
God had done to setle the Civil, and Ecclesiastical power, it remained still in
the people, or their Representatives assembled together. Now the Scripture
tells us, that, since the world began, God was never more highly provoked, then
upon this occasion; when he heard this, he was wrath, and greatly abhorred
them; he invented a new thing in the world for their sakes; for the Number. xvi.
32.
Earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the Congregation of Abiram.

I have now done with these Pretenses, Application.
and my endeavor has been to vindicate Religion from the charges of
unbelieving Politicians, and indeed to show, that it is not a Spirit of carnal
Compliance, but the true, and genuine Spirit of Christianity, which runs
thorough the Doctrine, and Government of the Church of England. After what has
been spoken, I hope, I may presume to say with the Apostle, Romans iii. 31.
Do we now make void the Laws through Faith? yea, we establish the Laws.

We have seen the Christian Theory; does the Philosophical Theory provide
better for the safety of Princes, and the establishment of Government?

It tells us in effect, that Might is Right; that every thing is just, or
unjust; good, or evil according to the pleasure of the prevailing Force, whom
we are to obey till a stronger then he comes, or we be able to go thorough
with resistance.

That, in reference to this life, Obedience is a matter of Wit, and Prudence,
and after life there remain for us no Concernments.

How stramineous is this Theory compared with the Christian Theory, which
speaks in this wise, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, etc?

That this is the genuine Christian Theory, has in some measure been
demonstrated; so that indeed it may be wondered from whence these Prejudices
have arisen.

But alas! that my head were Waters! They have one grand Objection, to which
having spoken I shall conclude.

If this be the Doctrine of Christianity, how comes it to pass, that those, who
pretend the bighest to Religion, and profess themselves the ONLY Christians,
(the Bigot, and Iesuited Romanist; the frighted, and transported Reformist)
have been authors of the most horrible Treasons, and Rebellions?

On the one hand, what mean the Catholic Leagues? On the other, the Solemn
League, and Covenant, forced upon Subjects, renitente Principe?

On one hand what means (shall I say the lowing of the Oxen, or rather) the
roaring of the Bulls, the thundering of Excommunications, the absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance, the actual Murders of Princes, the Attempts for blowing
up King, Lords, and Commons at one clap? What is the meaning of the noise of
the Bells, of the claps of Squibs, and Fireworks, which we hear? On the other
hand what was the meaning of that black, and terrible Dispensation, which will
cause the ears of all Posterity to tingle.

It is but a little while since the anointed of the Lord, the holiest, the
wisest, the best of Kings, was taken in the suares of men pretending to
Reformation, and sacrificed to the fury of men possessed by an evil Spirit from
the Lord. He was offered as a Lamb, that is dumb, or rather like the Lamb of
God, to the rage of wild fanatical Enthusiasts.

It is but a very little while, since the Lamentation of Jeremy was in the
mouth of all the faithful in the Land.

Lam. ii. 9
Our King, and our Princes were amongst the Gentiles ( provoked to serve other
Gods) the Law was no more, the Prophets also received no vision from the Lord.
And all these things were brought to pass by men pretending wonders in Religion.

And they would know the reason of all these Dispensations. But who art thou, O
man! who pressest into the secret of God's Pavilion? How unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out; such knowledge is too wonderful, we
cannot attain unto it.

It may be, these things have been done, that the Sayings of our Savior might
be fulfilled, Matthew. xviii. 7.
It cannot be but offenses will come, but we be to them, by whom they come;
and, Ibid. Verse 6.
It were better, that a millstone, etc.

It may be, the Gunpowder-Treason was permitted to be designed, that the
disappointment might be had in everlasting remembrance, and celebrated, as it
is this day: Ezekiel. xxiv. 2.
Son of man, write the name of the day, even of this same day: the King of
Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day.

It may be, God suffered the late Rebellion to prevail, that he might not leave
himself without witness, but show forth his wonders in our days, in the
miraculous restitution of our gracious Sovereign, and the Church. If he had not
been driven out, how could he have been restored? not by might, nor by power,
but by the Spirit of our God.

It may be, this was done, that we might say no more, The Lord lives, which
delivered us from the Treason of pretended Catholics: but The Lord lives,
which has delivered us from the Tyranny, and bloody rage of the wild Fanatical
Enthusiasts.

Surely, all these things have been permitted, that the Stone, which the
Builders refused, might be made tried, and precious, and that his Patience, his
Piety, his Constancy in Religion, his Christian Magnanimity being manifest to
all the World, by the impatient desire of all Nations, he might become the head
of the Corner.

Surely, these things were suffered, that the Faith, and Patience, and Loyalty
of the Church of England might be made bright and glorious by the Flames of
Persecution: and that in the day, when God shall have given our most Gracious
Sovereign the hearts, or necks of all his Enemies, it may not repent him of the
Kindness he has shown to Religion, and Government, in lifting out of the dust
the despised Head of that only Church, (for ought I know) which makes
Obedience without base restrictions, and limitations, an Article of its
Religion.

Lastly, these things, it may be, have been permitted, that by the Triumph of
this day, and by the vengeance lately executed in the sight of this Sun, the
Atheistical world might be convinced, that the Powers, that be, are ordained of
God, and that, though the wicked do evil an hundred times, and God prolong
their days; yet Vengeance is his, and he will repay it, and They, that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation.

FINIS.

