THE VINDICATION of the SOLEMNITY Of the Nativity of CHRIST; Showing the
grounds upon which the Observation of that and other Festivalls is justified in
the Church.

With a short Answer to certain Quaeries propounded by one Joseph Heming, in
opposition to the aforesaid practice of the Church.

By Thomas Warmstry. D. D.

Let us follow after things that make for peace, and things wherewith we may
edify one another. Romans 14.19. Unto you is borne this day a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord. Luke 1.11. Printed in the Year 1648.

The Vindication of the solemnity of the Nativity of Christ, etc.
BEfore I come to answer these Queries, that I may make way for the clearing of
men's judgments, I shall briefly lay down the grounds upon which the
observation of this, and other Festivalls is justified in the Church; which are
these.

First, It is a thing not only lawful, but justly due unto God, that he
should be praised publicly and solemnly for this, and other such like great
blessings as he has bestowed upon the Church by Christ, and that to this end
the memory of them should be preserved in the Church.

Secondly, That for these ends, the Observation of a yearly day of memorial
is a means conducible in it self, and approved by God in Scripture, who made
use thereof among the ancient people to summon, and stir them up thereby to
the praise of God for those great blessings and deliverances which were
bestowed upon them.

Thirdly, That the appointment of such days being conducible to those ends
before named, which are Scripture ends, has so far its ground in the word of
God.

Fourthly, That the Church has a power from God to promote those ends which
are commanded in his word, by all kind of means which are not contrary
thereunto, and such a mean^^ is this appointment of days, which has been with
approbation practiced by the Church, even in the time of the Jewish Bondage, in
the designation and ordaining of Festivalls yearly to be observed, which were
not enjoined by any express command of God, as is clearly to be seen in the
institution of the Feast of Purim, Esther. 9.17. etc. and of the Feast of
Dedication, Machab. 4.59. honored and confirmed by the presence of our
Savior, Job. 10.22.23.

Fifthly, That this power in the Church is, though unobservedly, yet in clear
consequence, is confirmed by diverse arguments from the allowance and practice
of Adversaries themselves.

As first, look what power private Ministers challenge, that they must much
more allow the Church: But they challenge a power to appoint times for public
worship, which are not expressly commanded by God as upon Lecture days: E go,
And there can be no reason why hey should have more power to appoint an hour
or more in a day, then the Church a day or more in a ye are.

Secondly, There is as good reason that the Church should appoint days of
f^^sting, which are not commanded by God, as d^yes of fasting, which are not
commanded by God; since the end of the former is as exceptable to God, and more
excellent then the latter, and has no plea against it, that lies not equally
against the latter.

Thirdly, That there is much more reason that the Church should appoint solemn
days for praising God for Christ, and for spiritual blessi^^^, then for
remporall ones: But the latter is allowed and pract^^ed by the Parliament, as
may appear by the late Ordinance for the observation of the fifth of November,
in memorial of the deliverance of that very State, Church, and Religion (...)
an outward destruction, which themselves now persecute: by the Army, in
appoynting days of Thanksgiving for their bloody Victories other their
brothren, in an impious way. Therefore the former, viz. the appoynement of
solemn days for greater and sp^^^tuall blessings, cannot reasonably be
condemned by them.

Six^ly, This appointment of days to the purposes aforesaid, is no^ (...), as
no^^^ying in oposi^ion to any Law of G^^, (...) of excellent use and benefit to
Gods people. 1. To preserve and (...) the memory of these great blessings. 2.
To stir up the people to the duties or praise.

3. To call upon the Ministers in their several charges to study, and handle
those great, and necessary parts of Christian knowledge. 4. To give so many
opportunities for the assembling of the people to holy duties. 5. For the
rendering of those great and mystical blessings familiar unto the people,
thereby that being fulfilled in this sense, that the Psalmist speaks in the
9. Psalm. One day tells another, and one night certifieth another; there is
neither speech nor language, yet their speeches are heard among them. Thus it
comes to pass that the Calender of the Church, and ^he Cycle of the Festivalls
presents, is as it were an easy and familiar Catechism unto the people, and
does instruct them almost whether they will or no in the apprehensions or those
high points and comfortable motions of the conception, na^ivity, Circumcision,
Manifestation to the Gentiles, presentation in the Temple, of the death and
passion, resurrection, Ascension of Christ into Heaven, and of the sending of
the holy Ghost, to bring home the fruit of all; which are as so many parts of
the holy Antheme of the Church, the Epiphon^ma, or cl^se of all which is in the
Festival of the T^inity, which is unto all the rest as the Glory be to the
Father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost etc. at the close of a Psalm,
calling upon us to give honor and praise unto the Trinity for all those
incomprehensible blessings and benefits whereby the work of man's redemption is
perfected and brought home unto us: This wisdom and piety of the Church is
not understood, nor considered by those heady and hair brained people, that
weigh things in the corrupt scales of o^ their own contradictory and
antecclesiasticall spirit; but they that are sober and peaceable discover and
admire it, and bless God for it, and do foresee with sad hearts the designs
of Satan moving against this Church of ours, by the abolishing of these and and
other useful Ordinances and customs, to blot out by degrees the memory of the
great and inestimable blessings of God in Christ, and to open the door to
profaneness and infidelity: to the former benefits may be added, the mercy that
does hereby accrue unto servants, and the poor beasts in a relaxation of their
labors upon such days, the incitements that they administer unto works of
charity, neighborhood, and hospitality; things very pleasing in the sight of
God, howsoever disliked by those of this age that place religion in cruelty,
Faction, and Sedition; and the nurcery, and supply that is thereby suggested
unto the exercise of our spiritual joy, and delight in God, and his goodness.

Lastly, The authority of the Church both ancient and modern, both general,
and of this particular Church, coming upon us with all these warrants, and
conveniences to serve the ends of God and Scripture, and strengthened by the
power of the civil Magistrate, and by the authentical Laws of the Kingdom
in those Acts of Parliament which have established these things, must either
engage all that are within the verge of the Church, and of this Church and
State especially, unto a peaceable and pious obedience thereunto, or else leave
the stain of Impiety, Faction, and of a turbulent and disorderly spirit, or
else of folly and blindness upon all those that oppose it.

Indeed there is nothing free from temptations; but it is well said of one, as
I remember, and may be well considered of others, that it is not (at least not
always) the infirmity, but the excellency of things that makes them the
matter of temptation: Abuses of things that are good must teach us wisdom and
caution, but not set us upon confusion.

And truly there is need of more warines in the observation of these days then
has been used by many.

1. That superstition be avoided, that we think not one day in it self better
or more holy then another, but only so far as they are actually designed or
applied unto the service of God: we must remember that these and other
particular times, as places, are but circumstances in the time of the Gospel,
the substance is in the worship and service that is given unto God thereupon,
not in the observation of this or that particular day, which is in it self a
matter of liberty, as the Apostle shows, Romans 14.5. etc. Col. 2.16. And that
may be a satisfactory reason why in the new Testament these things are not
particularly, or expressly injoined in Scripture, because these are but matters
of Order, and of liberty; not of absolute necessity, and therefore left to the
moderation of the Church; but then we must remember that the liberty of
Christians is first the right and interest of the Body, and then of the
Members, who must not urge their particular interest against public
moderations and constitutions in these things; yea, it is a maine liberty that
belongs unto the whole body of the Church, that she has power to restra^ne the
liberty of private Members by public authority for the public good; but
Superstition must be avoided, as I have said; noe humane authority must impose
these, or any such like things, as substantial, unalterable, or absolutely
necessary to salvation; but as matters of Order, as holy circumstances, and
means conducible unto higher ends, and so and no otherwise they are to be
received and obeyed by the people: according to this is that of a late learned
Father of our Church, Non putandum plus sanctitatis uni di^i inesse quam
alteri, sad sciendum quod propter ordinem and. praeceptum Ecclesiae aliasque
causas supra memoratas uno die magis quam alio convenimus, ad hac exercitia
sanctitatis.

And again, Non putandum, Bishop Davenant upon the Coloss. c. 2. v. 16.
etc. we are not to think that the Church of God is tied by any necessity to
the immutable observation of these particular Festival days: Sed statuendum,
says he, dies hosce humana authoritate constitutos cadem posse tolli and
mutari, si utilitas and necessitas Ecclesiae id postulaverit, nam omnis res per
quascunque: Causas nascitur per casdem dissolvitur: But it must be so judged,
that these days which are appointed by humane authority may be abolished, and
altered by the same: where the profit and necessity of the Church does require
it; for all things are dissolved by the same causes whereby they are
established: But then this ought to be done upon good and true grounds, and by
(...) power equal at least to that that has established them.

2. There must be care taken that there be a prudent moderation used in the
number of such days, that nothing be imposed oover burdensome upon the people.

3. That they be rightly employed, not in Superstitious worshipping of Saints or
Angels, as is in use in the Church of Rome, nor yet in riot, intemperance, or
any other sinful liberty, as has been the practice of too many amongst us,
making little or no other use of such times, but to give themselves to
idleness, looseness, and vanity; an evil that has not only violated the
holiness of these Festivals we speak of, but also the Lords day, which some
have turned into Sabbathum Vituli aurei, into the Sabbath of the Golden Calfe,
of which it is said, Exodus 32. That The people sat down to cate and drink,
and rose up to play. Others into Sabbathum B^^^^ and Asinorum, the Sabbath of
the Ox and the Ass, spending it in eating and drinking, and doing nothing;
and too many make little or no other difference between that and other days:
But only in putting on their better clothes, and giving themselves to none,
or else worse employment then all the rest of the week, as if been vestiri and
nihil agere, To be well attired, and to do nothing were to celebrate the
Christian Sabbath.

And indeed it cannot be denied, but as this has been the ill lot that too
many have cast upon the Lords day, and other Festivalls: So it has been too
too much the share of the Solemnities appointed for the celebrating the Birth
of our Savior, and the rest of the Festivalls that the Church has joined with
it, which instead of being made days of praise and thanksgiving to God, and of
the exercise of other holy, christian, and charitable duties with that sobriety
that becomes Christians, have been made days of riot, and gaming, and
wantonness, and unlawful liberty, as if men were to sacrifice to the Devil
for these great and incomprehensible mercies of God: A great and intolerable
abuse of such blessed opportunities, and such as, (although it does not at al
justify men in the abolition of them, but should rather have set them upon the
Reformation of those miscarriages, and the restitution of such times unto the
first and prefitable institution of them, That these evils and corruptions
being removed, the divine Solemnities, and Religious Duties might have been
returned and advanced still amongst us, to the comfort of the Church, and the
honor of the name of God) Yet they may justly provoke God to deprive us of the
comfort of these joyful Celebrities, which we have so miserably abused to his
dishonor, and the hurt of our selves, and of our brethren: But these being the
errors of particular men, they do not blemish the constitution of the Church
in these things, which intends not such times for such evil purposes, but
for the service and honor of God, and the edification of his people. And
therefore as it must be the care of all good Christians to separate the abuses
in practice? So it is their part and duty to yield a ready obedience unto so
profitable and wholesome a constitution; and as in other Festivalls, so in this
of the Nativity of Christ, etc. This being as it were the rising of the Sun
of righteousness upon us with healing in his wings, and that whereon all the
succedent work of our redemption and salvation does depend: And therefore as
this does in an eminent and special manner challenge our praises and solemn
services and acknowledgments unto God for so great a mercy: So the Authority of
the Church in appoynting a solemn time, for such solemn service does serve an
holy and Scripture end, very acceptable to God, and by such a means, which he
himself has approved, and allowed the Church of God to make use off, and does
justly require our obedience thereunto, which we cannot withdraw ordinarily,
without making a breach in that Communion of Saints, which is both our comfort
to enjoy, and our duty to maintain,

And these grounds being thus laid, and well understood, I hope may satisfy
any peaceable minded Christians, and arm them against all material
temptations that your Queries (which you seem to think such Giants) can offer
against it; and therefore I might well though perhaps set a period here unto
this present business: But lest you should think your self despised, or grow
wise in your own conceit, and for your further correction, and the more full
satisfaction of others, I offer you and them this short answer unto your
Queries; and if you or any other shall think them in any thing wanting in that
clearenesse which yours, and some other men's apprehensions may perhaps require;
I shall by Gods grace be ready if I may be allowed liberty to do it: To render
all things out of question and to resolve all doubts that may rest behind in a
fair, calm, and Christian disputation, and discussion of the point with you
or any other that shall in a sober and ingenuous way desire to enter into
discourse with me thereabout.

In the mean time take this brief Reply unto your Demands.

To your first Quaere.
Whether such religious customs as are binding to all the Churches of Jesus
Christ, ought not to have sure footing upon the Word of God or Apostolical
practice?

Answer, That it is ground enough for the establishment of Customs in the
Church, and to bind all Churches to the Christian observation the roof, so far
as is required unto Church Customs, and matters of order. etc. That such
Customs and Observations beingin themselves harmless, and conducible to
those ends which Gods word prescribes, are commanded unto us by the Authority
of the Church Catholic; and because this quaere is somewhat too wide for the
particular drift you aim at; give me leave to take away all doubt, to contract
it a little by adding this Corolary: That in such things the Authority of any
particular Church is sufficient to bind those that are within the Verge of it.
The Examples of the Feast of Purim and of Dedication before mentioned will come
in seasonably here for the confirmation of this.

To your second Quaere.
Whether you can substantially prove that Christ was borne on the 25 of
December? And what your proofs are?

Answer. That because as we have laid down the designation of this or that
particular day is a thing in it self indifferent (though the day being known
wherein such mercies were performed may seem more convenient then another.)
The maine thing that we rest upon being this: That God may be solemnly
praised for so great a mercy, and to this end, that that day what ever it be,
which is set apart by the Church for that holy purpose be duly observed:
Therefore although there is perhaps more to be said heerin then you are a ware
of; yet to make short work, and that they may be the easilier satisfied, who
are not able to examine Antiquities: I answer that it is not at all necessary
for us to prove substantially that Christ was borne upon the 25 of December; it
is sufficient for us that the Authority of the Church has appointed that day
to perform the duty of praise therefore unto God, neither do we so much
depend upon that day, but if upon good reason and equal Authority had designed
any other, it might be indifferent to us; so that God may have his honor in
the solemnization of his great mercies, whether in this month, or that month,
on this day, or that day, is of small concernment, but in point of order,
peace, uniformity, and obedience; to dote upon this or that day otherwise were
superstitious.

To your third Quaere.
Whether the celebration of that day (grant he was borne on it) can be clearly
warranted by you from Scripture? And what your Scriptures are?

Answer, It is answered already in the Reply made to the two former, where you
have been showed, that it is neither necessary to be proved that Christ was
borne upon that day, nor yet that there needs any particular Scripture warrant
for the observation of such days, more then is expressed in the answer to the
first, and the grounds that are laid before you, and so much as has been
showed we have abundantly for this day. Viz. That the Church has power to
appoint a day for so holy and excellent an end prescribed in Scripture, and
warranted unto us by the practice of a Quire of Angels, of Simeon and Anna,
Zachary and Elizabeth, in the Divine Story.

To your fourth Quaere.
Whether you can clear it by sound consequence from the New Testament, though
not set down there in totidem verbis?

Answer, That which has been said may suffice, in that the celebration of this
day is appointed by sufficient Authority, for those ends which are commanded in
the New Testament, as is the rendering praise to God for so great a blessing of
the New Testament, and is a means allowed by God for such purpose, and
conducible thereunto, as has been showed in the grounds.

To the fifth Quaere.
Whether you can do it by universal tradition?

Answer, That it is well known that the observation of this day has been very
Ancient, and does appear to be of universal reception; as (if leisure and
opportunity would permit) might be manifested more abundantly, but for the
present it may suffice to set down that notable testimony of St. Cyprian, a
very Ancient Father, in his book de Nativitate Christ's in initio. Adess (says
he, speaking of this Festival of the Nativity of Christ) Christi multum
desiderata and diu expectata Nativitas, adest Solemnit as inclita, and in
praesentia salvatoris, grates, and lands, Visitatori (no per orbem terrarum
Sancta reddit Ecclesia. There is now present the much desired, and long
expected Nativity of Christ; now is present that famous Solemnity or Festival,
and the holy Church throughout all the World does render thanks and praises to
her visiter in the presence of our Savior; and though it be sufficient to
bind us; that so wholesome custom is enjoined by Authentical Authority in
this Church and Nation; yet this and other testimonies that might be brought of
the Antiquity and universality thereof, do much strengthen the obligation that
lies upon us, for the Religious observation thereof.

To your sixth Quaere.
Whether (in case it can be evidenced by none of these, viz plain Text, solled
Inference, universal Tradition) it be not a mere humane in vention, and so
Will worship? And how you will one day acquit yourselves before God, for
placing, and crying up men's Inventions, instead of the institutions of Jesus
Christ? And whether it were not faithful dealing with poor simple people to
tell them that you have neither of these to warrant it?

I answer, it is already avoided, and needs no further Reply but this, first,
that you have been taught if you can learn that we have inference enough to
satisfy men that will be content with evidence, and wish you would attempt
nothing in the Church, but what you could plead half so much for: Secondly,
that the observation of these particular days is not enjoined by the Church,
or used by us, as any substantially part of worship, but as a circumstance of
worship, and (...) can be no will worship, no more then your appoynting this or
that particular hour for preaching, and prayer upon a Lecture day, or the
appoynting of days of thanksgiving for Victories, for temporal deliverances,
or of Public Fasts by humane Authority (which as to the designation of the
particular times are unquestionably of humane invention) are therefore to be
accounted will worship; unless you will have the will worship to lie in this;
that these days we speak off are appointed by good and full Authority, and
that Christ is remembered therein; and now I entreat you to consider how you
will one day acquit your self before God, for slandering and crying down the
wholesome orders and constitutions of the Church, to bring in division,
confusion, and profanation; and whether it were not faithful dealing with
those poor simple people, that you or others have seduced into seditious and
factious courses, and murmurings against Government and Order, to tell them
that you understood not things your selves, nor have taught them in the ways
of peace and righteousness, as you should have done.

To your seventh Quaere.
(Since days and times commanded by God himself to be observed under the Law,
were and are unlawful under the Gospel) Whether days and times commanded by
men, and not by God, under the Gospel, are not less lawful.

Ans. Those days and times that were commanded by God himself to be observed
under the Law, were appointed by him for that time, as types and figures of the
things of Christ, as Saint Paul will instruct you Coloss. 2.16.17. and in
regard of that typical use, and the Legal necessity thereof are vanished at
the coming of Christ, which is the body and substance of those shadows; and
therefore though they be so far become unlawful, it will by no means. infer
that therefore those days and times which are commanded by men with sufficient
warrant from God under the Gospel as conducible means unto Gospell-ends, and
for the solemnizing of the glory of God for Gospel blessings, should be
concluded unlawful, since the aforesaid reason of the abolition of those
things of the Law, is no way applicable unto the Festivals, or other wholesome
constitutions in the time of the Gospel, which are neither enjoined as types,
nor as things necessary to salvation, but as matters of order, and
circumstantiall means for the promotion of other substantial duties, not
opposing, but asserting and magnifying the great blessings that God has
revealed, and imparted unto us in, and by, the Messiah now come. But for your
further instruction, I desire you to take notice, that in the Feasts of the
Jews, as there was something Ceremonial, so there was something Morrall: that
they were of unalterable necessity restrained to such and such particular
times, that they were to be celebrated with such and such particular
Ceremonies, and were therein types and figures of the things of Christ, and the
time of the Gospel, and that by the indispencible obligation of the divine
praecept; in these and such like considerations, they were Ceremonial and
temporary, belonging unto that Sat of the Jewish Church; But if they be
considered as they were certain solemn and convenient times set apart for the
public worship of God, and for the more solemn testification of their
thankfulness unto him, for those great blessings and deliverances that they
received from him; This was, as a learned Author tells us, morale, and
natural, and cum caeter is omnibus gentibus commune, it was moral and
natural, and common with them unto other nations. Now though that which is
typical and ceremonial be abolished as a shadow by the coming of the
substance, yet that which is moral and natural remains; it is still not
only lawful, but pious for the Jews to set apart some times to praise God for
their deliverance out of Egypt, and for those other blessings which that
Church received from him, and so that the typical and properly legal use,
together with the indispensable necessity of those particular times and
ceremonies be cast away, it were no impiety in them, as matters of order, to
make use of some or more of the same times which they formerly observed for
this moral purpose. Yea we find St Paul Acts 18.21. and 20.16. resolving and
endeavoring to keep one of those Jewish feasts at Jerusalem, long after the
ascension of Christ and the abolition of the ceremonial part of the Jewish
Law, and to take advantage of that solemnity to glorify God amongst them. And
if all this will not save you from a wonder, I entreat you to consider that the
effect of the abolition of the Ceremonial Law, was the taking away of the
legal necessity and the typical use of them, not the rendering of the matter
of those Ceremonies unlawful; and for your better satisfaction in this point,
I refer you to a Treatise of mine lately set forth, called, The sighs of the
Church and Common Wealth of England, page 312.313. etc. where I hope you will
find this matter abundantly cleared. Daven. a Coloss. ^.16.
And now the foundation of your seventh Quaere being thus searched and found to
be of so sandy a constitution, we need not trouble our selves any more about
the Quaere it self: but to tell you in the words of a Reverend Divine,
Quicquid nonnulli contra afferre solent pie and pr^denter prospectum est ab
Antiquis patribus, ut anniversarie in Ecclesia celebrarentur ingentia illa
beneficia incarnationis filii 'Dei, passionis, resurrectionis, ascensionis,
missionis Spiritus Sancti, quorum omnium memoriam solennitatibus constitut is
consecramus, no volumine temporum ingrata surreperet nobis oblivio, ut loquitur
Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 10. c. 4. Whatsoever some are wont to bring to the
contrary, it was piously and prudently provided of the ancient Fathers, That
there should be anniversary or yearly celebrations of those great benefits, of
the incarnation of the son of God, of his passion, resurrection, ascension,
and of the sending of the Holy Ghost; the memorialls of all which, we
consecrate by appointed solemnities, lest, as S. Aug. speaks, by the course
of the times an unthankful forgetfulness thereof should steal upon us. And the
same learned Author will show you that we are invited heerunto by the
obligation of gratitude that we owe unto God, as public benefits are to be
publicly acknowledged, and to be celebrated with public thanksgiving: which
cannot commodiously be done, unless they that have the rule of the Church and
Common wealth, do appoint set days for the people to come together to that
purpose Joel. 2.15.

That we are encouraged heereunto by the peoples benefit which they may reap
hereby in being upon such occasions made acquainted with the chief mysteries
of salvation, which whether they shall be instructed in, or no, is a matter of
too great concernment, to be left to the discretion of every private Minister;
and therefore the Church has thought fit to call upon them for it by these
Festivals. And I pray God the attempts of the abolition of these memorialls, be
not the drifts of some secret plot of Satan, to make way for the stealing of
Christianity out of this Nation: if we consider the motions of some other
engines of his, together with this in these times, I doubt we may find but too
much cause to suspect it, and cause enough for all good people to desire to
prevent it, by being unwilling to part with any the least lawful means, that
may serve to keep up the memory and impressions of Christ, and his wonderful
mercies in our hearts.

He will show you also, as I have done, how this practice is confirmed unto us
by the examples of the godly people in the Scripture, who have appointed set
and yearly days for such purposes, besides those that were commanded expressly
and particularly by God himself. And I can add that the same is yet further
confirmed unto us, by the judgment and practice of holy men in the Christian
Church, not only of the Ancients, but of many famous modern Protestant
Divines. As Melancthon, Hemingins, Scultetus, etc. all which being put into the
same scale with the Authority of the Church of England, and the Law, which has
yet found no Authority equal unto it, to dissolve the Acts thereof in this
kind, will I doubt not weigh down all the seeming reasons or divinity upon
which you have grounded your Quaries.

To your eighth Quaere.
Whether the true and genuine Interpretation of Christmas be Christman? And
whether to persuade people'tis so, be not to abuse and delude them? And whether
we may not as well interpret Candlemas Candleman, Michaelmas Michaelman, as
Christmas Christman?

Answer, That this is a question so childish of so vain importance, and so of
no concernement at all to the business propounded: That I might be excused if
I should say no more, but either to wish you more wisdom and sobriety in the
things of God and his Church, or if you know any that is guilty of making so
foolish a descant upon that name of Christmas as your Quaere presents, to leave
you to him for a Reply; neither the Church of England nor I are bound to
justify the follies of particular men: But least your insinuated quarrel at
the name of Christmas, should meet with any such weak judgments, as to
produce any scruple (premising this, that these are things that neither the
Church of England, nor I conceive any discreet child thereof will stand upon
any further then they serve to make us understand one another, and I wish all
quarrels about names were so at an end amongst us) I say yet further, that the
interpretation of learned Bishop. Andrews might have been better thought on
by you, then that fond one you have mentioned, reducing Christ-mas to Christi
missa, and taking missa for missio; so that it may present the importance of
the Feast. Viz. The sending of Christ into the world, or if this be liable to
some exception; yet it cannot be denied but the word Mass, however it has
been corrupted in latter times, is from missa, and I believe you may find that
the word missa has been of good use in the Church, and derived from a good and
laudable custom of dismissing the Catechumeni before the Communion in the
Primitive times, and may import as much as the Office, or Communion of the
faithful, and then Christs-masse may sound as much as the Office or Communion
of the faithful upon Christ's day, or in the praise of Christ, or in memorial
of him; or if you are loath to admit of this in justification of the word
missa, I entreat you yet to allow thus much: That however evil the word is in
the use of the Church of Rome, yet since you know it has no such evil
importance in the sense of the Church of England (and it is not unlawful to
reform the abuse of words as well as things) there can be no harm in the use
of that title for distinction, no more then it was for St. Luke in the 17. of
the Acts v. 22. to comply so far with custom as to call the street in Athens
by the name of Mars his street, although Mars were an Heathen Idol, or to call
Dionysius by the title of the Areopagite v. 34. I advise you therefore to take
the Counsel of St. Paul hereafter, for your own good and the quiet of others,
and the Church, that instead of being such a one as he condemns, 1. Tim.
6.4.5. sick of a spiritual tympany, and (...), doting or madding about
questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, froward disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth; you would become such as he advises, 2. Tim. 14.23. That you strive not
about words, which is to no profit, but to the perverting of the hearers; and
that you would put away foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they
engender strife.

To your ninth Quaere.
Whether the Saints are bound to rejoice in the Birth of Christ on that day men
superstitiously call Christmas, more then at other times? And whether the Lords
day be not [the] day appointed for them to rejoice on?

Ans. Leaving your imputation that you lay of superstition upon the name of
Christmas to the correction of that which has been already said unto the
Quaere next before. I answer, that though Christians are bound at all times to
rejoice in the birth of Christ, which is sufficient to condemn the boldness
of those that forbid men upon any time or day to do it by that rule of the
Apostle, Philipp. 44. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice; yet
to help our infirmities, and to stir up our backwardness, and to make for the
greater cheerfulness and solemnity of this joy, the Church has done well and
piously to appoint some special times to call us together to rejoice in the
great mercies of God, and in that regard it is more especially required of all
her Children to do it at such times then at other times, and the fault is the
greater to omit it then, in as much as to the neglect of the universal duty is
added the sin of disobedience against the wholesome orders of the Church, and
a division the rein of our selves from the Body, and a denial of that
concurrence and assistance that we ought to give in the communion and
fellowship of Gods people in those things which are publicly performed for the
celebration of the praise and worship of God, and for the advancement of divine
comforts in the Congregations. And though it be true that the Lords day is a
day wherein they ought to rejoice, which yet as to the particular day, is but
an holy circumstance, and a matter of order, though established by great
Authority, notwithstanding it is not (the) day in such a sense, as your
parenthesis would perhaps insinuate, as to exclude all other days from the
business of solemn rejoicing in Gods mercies; for how then will the fifth of
November, and the days of Thanksgiving, that have been of late appointed, be
justified? and thesefore your question makes nothing against our conclusion;
for though that day be to be observed for a day of joy it. God, it does not
forbid others to be so employed.

To the tenth Quaere.
Whether Christmas day ought in any respect to be esteemed above another of the
Week days? And whether people may not without offense to God follow their
lawful vocations on that day?

Answer, In it self no day is necessarily to be esteemed better then another;
for as the Apostle tells us, he that esteems all days alike does it to the
Lord. But in the use of it, as a matter of order, and as it is dedicated by a
lawful power in the Church, in a more especial manner then the rest, in
respect of obedience, order, and compliance with those sacred ends for which
they are so designed, Christmas day, and other Festivalls of the Church ought
to be esteemed above another day: For it is the duty of Christians to comply
with one another, and to obey Authority in those things that are profitable and
conducible to holy and good purposes: And therefore it will follow, that
without necessity, for people to depart from this Rule, and to do it with
contempt of Authority, and to the discouragement and hinderance of such holy
ends and duties, by following their ordinary vocations which are lawful at
other times, is a breach of good order, a violation of unity, an hinderance to
piety, and the holy Solemnity of such times, as well as to do it upon a day of
Fasting or Humiliation, instituted by humane Authority: and cannot be so done
without an offense to God.

To your eleaventh Quaere.
Whether you think the Parliament and assembly have erred and played the
fools in condemning and r^^sing out Holy days not warranted in the Word? And
whether to observe them, be not highly to d^sl^ke and flatly to contradict (in
point of practice at least) their proceedings morder to a Reformation?

Answer. I doubt not to say that they have erred in diverse respects: First, in
making unnecessary changes in the Church, which ought not to be done, but upon
urgent causes; but does discover in them that do it a love unto change, which
the wise man condemns, Prove. v. 4.21. and is ordinarily of evil consequence
to the Church, as we find by too lamentable experience; for whist the people
like those that are sick of a Fever have thought good mutationibus pro
remediis nti, to take such kind of changes for medicines, their remedy, have
proved their greatest diseases; and now we see how sick they are grown of
their Physicians, and how sick the Physicians are of their own
administrations: Secondly, they have erred in going about to abolish so
harmless and useful a means of the promoting of Gods glory, and of the
edification of the people: Thirdly, in undertaking to dissolve so laudable
customs, and so universally and anciently received, and established by full
power of the State and Church, either without any Authority thereunto or by a
power inferior unto that, whereby they were constituted: Fourthly, in doing
those things without any admission of those that are contrary minded to be
heard, or any fair discussion or debate of those differences that are in men's
judgments thereabout: and therefore their proceedings therein are, and may be
justly disliked and contradicted both by declaration and practice, without
lying open to any such charge as you mention of opposing proceedings in order
to Reformation, properly so called; such undertakings with the rest that are
like them, being rather in order to a deformation. But whether in this they
have played the fools, or no, I leave that to you to determine.

To your twelfth Quaere.
Whether ( since most men and women in England do blindely and superstitionsly
believe Christ was borne that day) preaching on it, does not nourish and
strengthen them in that belief?

Answ. Although it be admitted to be a matter of some uncertainty whether our
Savior were borne upon that day, or no, yet (it being not material unto the
lawfulness and wholsomnesse of the observation of the solemnity, as has been
declared) if it be an error in the people to apprehend so, yet it is an
harmless one, and without the danger of superstition, which yet Preaching
upon that day does neither necessarily nourish nor strengthen in them. I shall
not deny but there has been some difference in Antiquity concerning the very
day upon which Christ was borne: but Hospinian, who was no friend unto the
Church in these things, confesses, That from the most ancient times, it was
celebrated on the 25. of December; which he prooveth out of Theophylus, a very
ancient Bishop of Cesaren Palestine, who lived about the time of Commodus and
Severus the Emperors. The Arguments that are brought against the reception of
this day, for the very day of our Saviors Birth, from the imposition of the
Tax of the Roman Emperor, and from the shepherds watching of their sheep
by night, are not at all concludent, but of weak importance, to overthrow so
ancient and received an opinion in the Church: Though that time might be less
convenient for people to travel into their own Countries, as was required in
that imposition of Augustus, yet it is no strange thing in Magistrates, and
those both prudent and pious, to pass through such small and private
inconveniences for the obtaining supplies of public necessities; it would be
a very weak argument, if any should hereafter undertake to prove this unhappy
Parliament began not in November, because that Month is usually none of the
best seasons to travel from the several parts of this Kingdom to London in.
And though sheep are tender creatures, yet that season is not of, the same
bitterness in all Climates, and if I mistake not, as tender as they are, they
are even in this Northern and cold Climate folded sometimes without doors in
the winter: if the difference about this point be such that no certain
resolution can be found, it is lawful for the Church to make choice of such a
day for the purpose of this solemnity, as appears most convenient. And what
day more convenient, then that which as it is confessed to have been most
anciently received, so is commended too by the universality of the practice and
consent at least of all the Western Churches therein? and if God be served and
praised by us in such holy and solemn manner as is due for so great a mercy,
upon that day which the Church has enjoined, it will be, no doubt, as
acceptable to God, as if it were done upon some other day of your choice,
whether it be the very day of Christ's birth or no: and I hope you do think it
fit, that some day or other may be employed in so good a business. The only
question then will remain, whether the Church and Magistrate, or you be
fitter to choose, which is not worth the discussing.

To the thirteenth Quaere.
Whether this Feast had not its rise and growth from Christians conformity to
the mad Feasts Saturnalia ( kept in December to Saturn the Father of Gods) in
which there was a Sheafe offered to Ceret Goddess of Corn; a hymn in her
praise called (...)? And whether those Christians by name, to cloak it, did
not afterward call it Yule; and Christmas (as though it were for Christ's
honor?) And whether it be not yet by some (more ancient then truly or
knowingly religious) called Yule, and the mad plays (wherewith it is celebrated
like those Saturnali^) Yule games? And whether from the offering of that Sheafe
to Ceres; from that song in her praise; from those gifts the Heathens gave
their friends in the Calends of January, om^^is gratia, did not arise or spring
our blazes; Christma Kariles, and New-yeares gifts?

Answ. That the original and growth of so pious and holy a practice in the
Christian Church, should be allowed no other root but a supposed conformity of
Christians to the mad feasts of Saturnalia, when there are so many better and
clearer fountains to derive this from, in the order that it has unto
Scripture end and duties, to Gospel and Christian performances, and in the
warrant that it has from Scripture examples in like matters, is an argument of
some want of charity in those that go about to infect men with such
persuasions. Charity engages us to judge the best even of the actions of
private men, much more of the public constitutions and observations of the
Church; what ever abuses have been brought in by wicked and loose men to
corrupt and deprave these wholesome ordinances, (which we approve not nor will
undertake to justify) There is no conformity nor compliance at all, between
the holy aims and intentions of the Church of God, in the appointment of this
or other festivalls, and the frantic, loose, and impious manage of the
Saturnalia among the Heathens. These are appointed by the Church to be days
of piety and sobriety, of praise unto God for his great mercies, of spiritual
joy in his divine comforts and holy delights in our Christian societies, of
hospitality and mutual offices of Christian love one to another, which are the
true and proper employments of holy festivalls, commended and warranted unto us
by the word of God. If any practices have crept in (as there have too many) to
the depravation of these times, and disappointment of those ends for which they
were instituted, by riot and loosenes, or such rude cariages and demeanours
which may be too truly sorted with the Heathenish Saturnalia, they have been
anciently reproved, as Hospinian will inform you by that which he has cited
out of that famous Oration of Gregory Nazianzen upon the Nativity of Christ:
And he will tell you a Story too if you will believe it of one Otherus and some
others to the number of 15. who being reproved by Rupertus a Priest for
profaning that night of our Lords Nativity, by light and lascivious dancing
and singing, and required from him ut ab hujusmodi lsvitate in nocte tam sancta
desisterent: That they would desist from such lenity in so holy a night, when
they would not yield unto this wholesome advice, But persisted in the vain
exercises they were about, upon the prayer of Rupertus that they might continue
dancing so all the year long, They did so continue night and day for the space
of a whole year: and he cites Trithemius in chron. Hirsang. for the Author of
this Story; which if it be true does not at all oppose, but confirm these
constitutions of the Church, as the judgments of God sent upon those that are
the prophaners of the Lords day, are brought to justify the observation
thereof; it does indeed disallow the abuses thereof, which as they were
anciently condemned, so we condemn them still, being contrary ^s to the
righteous commands of God, so to the wholesome institutions of the Church: I
earnestly exhort all Christians carefully to avoid all such courses and
miscarriges, and to sanctify this and other such like Festivalls unto God in
holy and Christian duties as they ought, and the Church enjoynes, left they
answer the contrary dearly unto God, as well for the enormity of their vicious
carriages, as for the profanation and scandal that they thereby bring upon
these profitable Orders of the Church, and their sacrilegious robbing of God of
such times which are consecrated to his Divine Worship, That they may employ
them in the service of the Devil: But in the mean time I cannot but wonder at
the strange dispensations of these times, wherein for ought appears, there is
more strictnes used against the preaching of the word of God, and holy
exercises upon these days, then against any of the foresaid abuses and
miscariages. We have heard of the persecution and imprisonment of Ministers
for attempting to preach the Word of God, upon the festival of Christ's
Nativity, and of strict and forcible prohibition thereof; but whether there
has been half so much strictness against ^iot, or lightness, or vanity, at
such times, let it be considered; and surely such dealing is no good character
of a Reformation. They that do so, winnow not with Gods sieve, but the D^vels,
shaking out the wheat, and retayning the chafe; they are no good Physicians,
that purge out the good and wholesome humors, and leave those that are corrupt
and distempered behind, nor is this the way to procure health unto the body. In
the name of God if they mean to reform, as they talk, let them distinguish
between good and evil, between healthful and profitable institutions, and
pernicious and abusive depravations, and let these be removed, and those
establish^d: if it does appear that the time of this Festival does comply
with the time of the Heathens Saturnalia, This leaves no charge of impiety upon
it; for since things are best cured by their contraries* it was both wisdom
and piety in the ancient Christians, (whose work it was to convert the Heathens
from such as well as other superstitions and miscarriages) To vindicate such
times from that service of the Devil, by appoynting them to the more solemn
and especial service of God and to recall people from that practice of
wickedness by calling them unto the practice of true holiness thereupon. As
for that you add about your Yule games, it is not material, after that which
has been said, and therefore for brevity sake I pass it over. The Blazes are
foolish and vain, and not countenanced by the Church. Christmasse Kariles if
they be such as are fit for the time, and of holy and sober composures, and
used with Christian sobriety and piety, they are not unlawful, and may be
profitable, if they be sung with grace in the heart. New years gifts, if
performed without superstition (and you must have ground ere you may charge
them with it) may be harmles provocations to Christian love, and mutual
testimonies thereof to good purpose, and never the worse, because the Heathens
have them at the like times. The Heathens use to eat at noone, and so do we,
if it be harmless to join with them in hours designed for acts of nature;
why not in days designed by us for acts of love and mutual affection; if
those days and their practice thereupon be tainted with superstition, it will
not follow that ours must needs be so, or is it not lawful for us to employ
those days well, because they do ill? But this is no Religious but a Civil
matter, and therefore not requisite to stand much upon it; no great matter
whether that custom be held up or no, and yet there is no need in such times
as these to discourage and forbid acts of love and mu^uall kindness. This Age
is not Gok of any superfluities in this kind in the general, and therefore no
great needs of physic for such diseases: Trouble not your selfs therefore any
more about this matter; if you dislike New-yeares gifts. I would advise your
Parishioners not to trouble your conscience with them, and all will be well.

To your fourteenth Quaere.
Whether conformity to, and recention of Heathenish Customs be commendable in
Christians, suitable or agreeable with Gospel Principles, though under pretext
of Christ's Honor and Worship?

Answer, You seem to me to be ignorant, and have taken up opinions at too
easy a rate; give me leave therefore to inform you a little: All Customs are
not Heathenish that are observed among Heathens; it is a custom with Heathens
to kneel at prayer, yet this is no Heathemsh custom; it is a custom with
Heathens to institure public Fasts, and days of Humiliation in times of
danger and calamity, will you say therefore that Christians are Heathenish, or
comply with Heathenish customs in doing the like? Or if we may join with
them in appoynting days of fasting, why not as well in appoynting days of
feasting, as long as we join not with them in superstition about either? We
must not deny Christ because the Devils confessed him. It is no good
Christianity in the people of this Age to hate their brethren, because the
Publicans are friendly unto theirs, Math. 5.47. We are not sure bound to
profane all times that the Heathens have superstitiously consecrated, if we
are, I doubt you will scarce have half an hour in the day or night left you
for your devotions: We may join with Heathens or any in those things, that
are good and wholesome. Heathenish customs cannot be good, but many customs of
Heathens may: They have learnt, it is probable many practices of Religion from
the people of God, and have corrupted the Coppies that they have taken from the
Originalls, it is not necessary therefore for Gods people to cast away the
Originalls which are pure and good. Heathenish customs are such as stand
opposite to the doctrine of Christ and the Gospel: The Religious observation of
these Festivalls makes for both; to appoint and observe a day holyly and
religiously for the solemn praise of God for Christ, and Gospel mercies,
cannot be said to be against Christ or the Gospel; since the former is
honored, and the latter preached and published by this means: This therefore
is no Heatherish custom; take you keed of complying with an Heathenish design
of abolishing the memory of Christ and Christianity from amongst us, it is a
danger worthy of a double caution, it is not a pretext o^ Christ's honor, But
the truth thereof that justifies these days, and is the proper and holy
business of them; we desire not to march under such colors, but leave them
rather to those that under pretext of Religion are busy to overthrow all
Religion amongst us: I need not tell you who they are, but wish you take need
of them.

To your fifteenth Quaere.
Whether you are not bound to prove your practice for the conviction and
satisfaction of your Brethren, whose duty it is to walk with you in things
agreeable to the mind of Christ? And in c^se you cannot; Whether you ought not
to acknowledge your error, lay down your practice (as others have done
theirs) no longer befooling and m^sleading the people committed to your charge?

Answer, I have said thus much for your conviction and satisfaction, and wish
it may work so well with you, that as it is your duty, so it may be your
practice to walk with us in things agreeable to the mind of Christ; and
therefore I hope we are sufficiently discharged from any necessity of
confessing any error in these things, and that it does by this time appear
that there is much more need of reforming yours, and of laying down your
practice as others have done theirs, no longer befooling nor misleading the
people committed unto your Charge; that you may from hence forth teach them the
ways of peace and righteousness.

To your sixteenth Quaere.
Whether in case you return no Answer to these Quaeries, I have not ground
sufficient to conclude you utterly unable to give any rational account of your
practice, now put upon it?

Answer, Sir, you have an Answer to your Quaeries, and therefore have no ground
left you sufficient to conclude us unable to give any rational account of our
practice, which I wish you may receive with a Christian mind, that you and
others may reap the fruit thereof: Let your Study be Unity, for that is the
way to felicity.

The God of peace and holiness direct you and us all into the ways of peace
and holiness, that we may no longer foster divisions and strife amongst us,
to the joy of our adversaries, and the reproach of the Gospel; but that
following the truth in love, we may in all things grow up into him, which is
the head, even Christ.

Now for all the pains I have taken to answer you Quaeries, I shall desire you
to answer but one of mine, viz.
Whether you think does savor of most plety and good will unto Christ and his
honor, to forbid the preaching of Gods word, and the celebration of the praise
of God for his great mercies upon the 25 of December, or upon any other day, or
to enjoyne it? Or whether it becomes Christians to prohibit the work of God at
any time?

An addition of some testimonies out of Antiquity concerning this Festival.
Theophaniam hoe nostrum festum nominamus, in quo mundi saluta rem
concelebramus diem 'Domini natalem, Basil, in Sermon. de huma^^ Caristi
generatione.

Festum est omnium Festorum maxim venerandum, quod si q^is appellet omnium
Festorum Metropolim, hand quaquam aberret, Chry^^stomus in Oratione pro
Philogonio.

(...) natales servatoris and (...) adventum seu apparitionem vocat. Nazianz.

Natalem 'Domini sicut and pascha, and pentecostim majora solem^^^ vocat, Beda.
lib. 5. c. 19.

The Antiquity of this Feast is so great, that Hospinian confesses, Quando and
a quo hoe Festum institutum sit certo sciri non potest. So that for ought he or
any can say against it, it may have its institution even from the Apostles
themselves.

The same Author acknowledges the mention of it to have been very Ancient in
the Church, by Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea Palaestinae, who lived about the
time of Commodus and Severus.

And he she weth how afterward in the time of Maximinus this Festival was
glorified by the Martyrdom of diverse Christians at Nicomedia, who were there
burnt together with the Church wherein they were celebrating this boly day, see
Nicepho^us, lib. 7. cap. 6. and we have good reason to believe these Martyrs
were as good Christians as some that would sequester the holiness of Feasts,
Churches, and all other men upon earth, scarcely sparing the Saints in Heaven,
that they may arrogate the Title of holiness and saintship only to themselves.

FINIS.

