A DEFENSE OF THE DISCOURSE Concerning the EARTH Before the FLOOD.

BEING A full Reply to a late ANSWER to Exceptions made against the Theory of
the Earth: Wherein those Exceptions are Vindicated and Reinforced: And
Objections against the New Hypothesis of the DELUGE, Answered.

Exceptions also are made against the Review of the Theory.

By ERASMUS WARREN, Rector of Worlington, in Suffolk.

2 Timoth. iii, viii, ix. (...).

LONDON: Printed for John Southby, at the Harrow in Cornhil. 1691.

Licensed,

Feb. 11. Rob. Midgley.

A DEFENSE OF THE DISCOURSE Concerning the EARTH Before the Flood.
The Introduction.
WHen in my Exceptions I discoursed so largely against the Theory of the Earth,
I did not intend to engage with it again; nor should I have done it but for
very good Reasons; the principal of which are these four.

First, To vindicate GOD's Veracity. To the doing of which, by speaking, or
writing, upon just and necessary occasions or accounts; I Take my very having
of a Tongue and Hand, to be sufficient Obligations. And truly, what is more
fit, and what can be more needful, than to vindicate this Attribute (one of the
chief of GOD's (...), or Divine Properties) and assert the Perfection and
Inviolableness of it? For upon it depends no less than our future Welfare, or
everlasting Happiness. Take away this Veracity, and the Gospel (according to
Pope Leo the Tenths expression) is but Fabula Christi, a piece of mere Forgery.
And should Scripture be Fabulous, where is our secutity for a better Life? Then
our Faith is vain, and our Hope without foundation, and we can lay no claim to
the high Felicities of the Eternal World. And yet, if all that the Great GOD
has said, be not firm and true, in every punctilio or tittle of it, this
Veracity of His is not Inviolable; and so, what have Mankind left them to trust
to? For should GOD deceive them in one case, he might do it in more; and if he
does it in many, he may do it in all: and then, what shall support them as to
their noblest Interests? The first reason, therefore, of this second sally of
my Pen here, is farther to defend the truth of GOD, and to rescue some Texts of
the Holy Bible from such imputations of falsehood, as the Doctrine of the Theory
involves them in. And indeed, if such imputations could be justly fastened upon
any part of the inspired Volume, they would bid fair toward cancelling the
whole. Do we not plainly see, that if one single link breaks or drops off, the
continuity of the Chain is quite dissolved? So if the least single passage of
GOD's Word be false, it certainly shows the rest to be fallible; and a failure
of truth in any one of its periods, overthrows the credibility of all the
other. And then, in short, we have neither proofs, nor hopes, nor any manner of
assurance of blessed Immortality; that unspeakably excellent and glorious
thing, to which we all do, or should aspire. Our title to that is for ever
blasted, because then the authentic Charter which contains it, proves
counterseit Evidence, and a specious Nullity.

Secondly, To maintain the honor of Moses. Who, if he had not been dignified
with the high Privilege of Divine Inspiration, ought upon his own account, to
have been above all suspicion of fiction or falsehood. And to charge him with
either, tho but indirectly, and even in his naked Personal capacity, must seem
too insufferable a diminution or disparagement of his Greatness and Worthiness.
For according to Philo, as in his Offices he was high; being (...). De Vit.
Mos. lib. 2.
by the Providence of GOD, both a King, and a Lawgiver, and a Prophet, and an
High Priest, and incomparable in every one of the Functions: And as in his
Affections he was holy, being (...). Id. de Nomin. Mutatione.
a most pure Mind, and (...). Id. de vita Mos. lib. 3.
the greatest Saint, and Lover of GOD that ever lived: So in his Writings he
was True; as (...). Id. de Sacrif. Abel. and Cain.
not taking up with things probable, or credible, but following after sincere,
or exactest verity. Yet this most excellent and admirable Author, as he was
sufficiently disregarded by the Theorist before; so by his defending his
Anti-Mosaic assertions, he is little less than despised now. For by making some
Passages in his famous Cosmopoeia, untrue; he degrades it into the rank of mere
fabulous or conjectural Writings.

Thirdly, To pay respect to the Answerer. Who having favored me above others,
with an Answer, as he calls it, to my Exceptions; I had no reason, I thought,
to be behind hand with him in Civility of the like Nature.

Fourthly, To defend and right my self. For besides such blows as are proper,
and becoming an Antagonist to give; and so ought to be born, or returned with
Fairness; I am very sensible, that in this Answer, several Attaques are made
upon me, from another force than that of Reason and Philosophy; and according
to other measures, than those of Learning and Ingenuity. And truly in repelling
these, my style might well have been very cutting, considering what the
Answerer has done to whet it. But as Truth may be defended without Railery; so
I understand not the Wisdom of men's sharping their Pens, to scratch one another
with them till the blood comes, merely to make the Bystanders sport. Yet he
having been pleased to throw Dirt upon me, he must give me leave to brush it
off again; and if any of it chances to fly in his Eyes, he may thank himself
for it.

I thought I had had to with a genteel Platonist, and a Person above all
Cynical Reflections. But he having made them in so great Plenty, I can do no
less than take notice of some of them.

In a word; as the Answerer has thought fit to speak freely, so the Replicant
is forced to speak plainly. For some he perceives, cannot, or will not hear,
unless men shout or hallow to them; and to be mealy-mouthed is a great fault,
where to speak out is absolutely necessary. And necessary it is, where the
cause will bear it, and the Truth requires it.

But before we enter upon our Work, it must be noted, by the way; that to
facilitate his Answer, our Author makes use of Two pretty odd and inallowable
Expedients. As

First, he betakes himself too often to Extraordinary Providence. Where he is
brought to Straits, and (otherwise insuperable) Difficulties; he runs directly
to Extraordinary Providence, to free him from the same. And as if that were to
patronize his extravagant Fantasies, he makes it a common Refuge for them. He
readily ascribes strange Phaenomenaes to it, and thrusts them for shelter under
its Tutelage. And give any man but this sure Clue in his Hand, and how can he
be lost in the Labyrinth of Philosophy? Tho his Principles, Hypotheses, or the
ways he goes in, be very winding, cross, and intricate; it will guide him
quickly, and easily out them.

The Second Expedient, whereby he shortens his work and makes it easy, is this.
Where Objections are made that ought to be answered; he frequently passes them
by with Silence: and sometimes justifies his so doing, by saying the Theory is
not concerned in them. As if slighting Arguments, or neglecting of them; were a
sufficient confuting them. A Practice agreeable to the Country man's purpose.
Who being resolved to argue with a disputacious Quaker; to his Friends
dissuading him, said, hold your Tongues, for I will have a bout with him; and
if he speaks any thing that I cannot answer, I Will either say nothing at all to
it, or else face him down that it is nothing to me.

Besides these two Shifts that he makes; he tells such Untruths; and falls into
such Mistakes; and is guilty of such flat Contradictions to himself, as will
yield no Honor to a Son of Philosophy. Lest this charge, which may seem heavy,
should be suspected to be false; in proof of its truth, the particulars are
noted in the Margent of the Reply.

As to his complaint of the Excepters Vnfairness, Answer p. 26.
in citing the first Edition of the Theory for such things as are left out of
the Second; it is of no weight. For first, the Excepter never heard, nor knew
the least of a Second Edition of any part of the Latin Theory, out of which any
things were left, that were in the First; till the answer to his Exceptions
told him of it; Ib.
and whereas he adds, in way of aggravation, that this Edition was printed
above a Twelvemonth before my Exceptions: My Exceptions, through the Printer's
sickness, were in the Press longer than so.

Secondly, for a Writer to leave some very false things out of a Second Edition
of his Book, which he taught in the First; is not sufficient. To leave them all
out, is the least he can do, even to make the very lowest amends possible for
the wrong done to Truth. But especially if he injured Divine Truths, by
confronting the Doctrine of the sacred Bible, or by clashing with its History.
And this is that which makes what the Theorist has done in this Case, to be
short and imperfect. All the things of this Nature and Tendency, are not left
out of his Second Edition. And they who print things that derogate from
Scripture, or are repugnant to it; will hardly make good men believe, that they
do GOD right, by leaving some of those Derogations or evil Repugnancies out of
a Second Impression, while they keep in others that are as bad. The Subject
that libels his Princes Declaration highly to day, makes no satisfaction by
sending out a lower Libel of it to morrow. No, his second Act is an aggravation
of his first; and as he is chargeable with, and answerable for either, so in
point of Duty he is bound to most serious acknowledgments of both. And so is
the Answerer to disown all these notions (instead of defending them) which
reflect upon Scripture. And truly should the Replicant go on to tax him with
those notions, as the Exceptor did; he would have no great cause to blame him
for the procedure. For notwithstanding that he has left them out of his Book,
his Rejection of them is not so express, but they seem yet to stand, as true,
in his Judgment. For thus he openly declares, Answ. p. 66.
I have not from these Exceptions, found reason to change any part of the
Theory, or to alter my opinion as to any particular in it. And if his opinion
of those particulars, which we excepted against, and he has left out, be still
the same; the same Exceptions might, without Vnfairness, be urged against him.
Yea, his telling the Excepter, that his opinion as to the Theory is not
altered, Ib. p. 79.
but more confirmed by his Exceptions; makes his answering Exceptions against
it, by saying, they are left out; to be a mere Shift. Yet the Replicant takes
but little farther notice of these things, as mentioning them but seldom, and
on special Occasion.

That this Reply came out no sooner, is owing partly to the Fullness of it. I
was willing to say what I had to say to this Answer (and so to the Theory) once
for all; that then I might finally have done with it. And partly to those many
interruptions and frequent avocations that attend my Circumstances. But chiefly
to those indispositions of health, which happened to me, and hindered me, as to
writing, for near a quarter of a Year together.

And now if in some things, or places, it be less pleasing, or profitable, than
the Reader would have it; he must consider this one thing. That we do not here
choose the Paths we go in; but are fain to trace another's Phansy, and to follow
his humor who leads the way.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter there is nothing remarkable, but the Squib which he throws at
the End of it. Where he tells the Excepter, that his looking upon his Discourse
as a Collection of Notes etc. is a severe Censure. Answ. p. 2.
And then adds, but every man best understands his own Works. Which without
doubt must be true of himself; else he could never understand a late Work of
his own, Eng. Theor. p. 96.
to be a true piece of Natural History, and the greatest and most remarkable
that has yet been since the beginning of the World. 1 Kings. 4.33. Tractavit
Historiam Plantarum etc. Grot. in loc.
As for Solomon's, it was nothing to it. Joy to him of the honor he here does
himself, in taking place of all of his own Order. It Is an high Complement that
he makes to his Pen, may it prove as happy a one to his Person. But having cast
the Die, he must take his chance. And by this one Throw, he is either the best
Natural Historian in the World; or a man that understands not his own Works. He
is wiser, that is, than Solomon in his way; or else not right in his
Understanding. But the latter, we may guess, is the likeliest of the two. For
tho the King of Israel's ran upon things of another kind, yet surely it was as
true, and withal as great and remarkable a piece of Natural History; as the
Theory of the Earth.

CHAP. II.
IN the Second Chapter, to the First Exception against the Formation of the
Earth, That it would have taken too much time, the World being made in six
Days: The general answer is this. (...).
Either you take the Hypothesis of an ordinary Providence, or of an
extraordinary, as to the time allowed for the Formation of the Earth; If you
proceed according to an ordinary Providence, the Formation of the Earth would
require much more time than six days. But if according to an extraordinary, you
may suppose it made in six Minutes, if you please. But the Excepter had noted,
p. 59. lin. 24. and 33. etc. Discourse p. 49.
how the Theory acknowledged, that to make the primitive Earth out of
Particles, descending from above, p. 51.
must be a good whiles work; and that it was to become dry by degrees, after it
had done growing; and that the Body or new Concretion of it was increased
DAILY, being fed and supplied both from above and below. And can an Habitable
Earth which is a good while in making, and the body of which must be DAILY
increased; be made in six Minutes, even by Extraordinary Providence it self?
What made the Answerer start out of the way of ordinary Providence, which he
went in, as to the Earth's Formation; into this extraordinary one, to stumble
into such a Contradiction of himself? But so it is, A Contradiction to himself.
when men are pinched and put to pain, they must do and say something, tho it
be little to the purpose, yea, much against it. And this grave distinction
being bestowed upon the first Exception, without more ado it is fairly dropped.
And as for the Arguments contained in the residue of the Chapter, against undue
protraction of the time of the Earth's Formation (which protraction is made
necessary by the Theorist's Hypothesis, Answ. p. 4.
even against the Doctrine or History of Moses) They are left to the Author and
his Readers, the Theory being not concerned in them. And so they are answered
by his Last Expedient.

But before I go farther, I must tell our Answerer, that in allowing this
extraordinary Providence, he condemns his Hypothesis of extraordinary
Impertinence. For what Need, or what Use can there be of his New Hypothesis, as
to solving the Phaenomenaes of the Flood; when by this Concession, the old one
will be enabled to the Solution of them all, for which his was invented?

Thus, for example, was that World to be drowned, and the Flood to surmount the
highest Hills, fifteen Cubits? Why, extraordinary Providence, in six Minutes,
could create water enough to do it. Was that work done by such a prodigious
Flood, and the Mass of Water to be dried up again? Extraordinary Providence
could as soon annihilate it. Was the frame of the World to be enlarged upon the
coming of so vast a quantity of new matter into it? And to be contracted again
upon its going out? Extraordinary Providence could sufficiently provide both
against the one and the other inconvenience. Were men to live a thousand years
before the Flood? The same Providence could effect this, without a continual
Equinox, or an Earth universally paradisiacal. And thus the Theory, instead of
making any Figure here, is by its own Author made to dwindle into a Cipher and
mere superfluity. We hope that henceforward the old method of explaining Noah's
Flood, shall be allowed to be rational and intelligible: for that proceeded
upon extraordinary Providence, and our Answerer is fain to make use of that
kind of Providence in reference to his own Hypothesis at last.

Yea, the truth is, he is now glad, we see, to take up with it at first, and
even to form his Earth by it. And yet he tells us, in the sixth Chapter of the
first Book of his Latin Theory ( Edit. 2.) that this Earth was formed, solo
ductu, by the sole conduct of the most known Laws of Gravity and Levity. And so
this Natural History. the Theory, is in good part, a Natural History of what
was done by Divine Power; or an History of an effect wrought by Extraordinary
Providence, which was done by the sole conduct of Natures Laws and Principles.
And therefore how true this piece of Natural History is, and also how great,
let the World judge; but if it be not extremely remarkable, I am much mistaken.
Another Contradiction.
And so I am if here be not contradiction again.

But tho our Answerer, as he pretends in this Chapter, be such a friend to
extraordinary Providence; yet it is evident, that the Theorist otherwhiles was
not. For tho now his Earth (as he grants) might be made in six minutes; yet
heretofore it was to be increased daily, and to be dried by degrees, before it
could be habitable: that is, it was to be formed in way of ordinary Providence.
And in the second Chap. of the first Book of his English Theory, he tells the
World plainly; that if we come to reflect seriously upon it, we shall find it
extremely difficult, if not impossible, p. 9.
to give an account of the Waters that composed the Deluge, whence they came
and whether they went. And adds, Ib.
to find Water sufficient for this Effect as it is generally explained and
understood, I think is impossible. But had he been hearty for Extraordinary
Providence, here would have appeared no difficulty, I am sure; much less,
extreme difficulty, and least of all, impossibility. For such a Providence
could have created Waters to compose the Deluge, and then have annihilated them
again: and as the quantity of them would thus have been sufficient, so the
account whence they came, and whither they went; would have been as easy.

That this was one way in which some went, as to explaining the Deluge,
according to the general or common Notion of it; the Theorist observed in his
third Chapter. They say in short, says he, Eng. The. p. 18.
That God ALMIGHTY created waters on purpose to make the Deluge, and then
annihilated them again, when the Deluge was to cease. But how did he approve of
this way? That will appear from what follows. Where he presently complains, Ib.
that this is to show us the naked arm of Omnipotency. A sight which he could
not well brook in this case. And why? Why, Ib.
because this is to cut the knot when we cannot loose it. Yet see the change;
he is now fain to show the naked Arm of Omnipotency himself; and to make use of
the Knife of Extraordinary Providence, tho with it he cuts his own Fingers, as
well as several knots of his Hypothesis; as we shall see afterward.

And thus we have gained one extraordinary Point. An Earth that before was to
increase DAILY, in the Body or Concretion of it; and so might be six Days, or
six Weeks, or as many Months, or Years in forming; might now by Extraordinary
Providence, be made in six Minutes. That is, our Author is brought to Cross his
Hypothesis in this Matter. For now he supposes that his Earth might be formed
in six Minutes by extraordinary Providence; whereas the Theory (as is plain
from the cited Expressions) carries on its formation in way of ordinary
Providence; according to which, the Formation of it would require much more
time than six days, as he confesses, Answ. p. 2.

CHAP. III.
THat the Moon was in the Heavens, and in our neighborhood, P. 5.
when the Earth was formed, he proves from the six days Creation, says the
Answerer, of the Excepter, here. But his Argument, he tells him, will be of no
force, unless he can prove that the Fourth days Creation was before the Third.
No? Who shall be Judge? Why one that the Answerer fairly appeals to, and one it
seems of the Excepter's own choosing, namely Scripture. (I and let the same
Judge, says the Excepter, decide the whole Controversy betwixt us.) And what
says this Judge to the case before him? Let all Philosophers who please to be
of the Jury, mind his sentence, and also the Appellant's Argument from it. The
Moon was made the fourth day, and the Earth was formed the third. So says the
Judge, and very truly. Therefore unless the fourth day was before the third,
the Moon could not hinder the Formation of the Earth. So concludes the
Appellant, and very falsely in the case depending. For the Earth formed the
third day, was Moses's Earth; which the Excepter contends for, and could not
possibly think that the Moon should hinder the Formation of that. But the Earth
he disputes against, is the Theorist's, which could not be formed the third
day. For, according to him, it was not only to grow out of a Chaos, by the
rising of Oil out of an Abyss, and the falling of Particles out of the Air; but
moreover was to be increast daily. And therefore had the Moon been made the
fifth, or sixth day, or after; it might have been made time enough to hinder
the Formation of this Earth. But however he intimates here, that his Earth was
formed the third day. And that is mighty well; for now it is to be hoped, that
Moses and he will agree better. Here Is one step toward an accommodation. But
then the mischief on it is, it is a step backwards on our Author's part, and I Am
afraid will do him but little Service. For while he thus endeavors to shun
Charybdis, he falls unluckily into Scylla; is reduced to such an exigence, that
let him choose which way he pleases of these two, he is sure to go in
contradiction to himself. Another Contradiction.
For if he says his Earth was formed the Third day, according to Scripture; he
then contradicts himself in his Theory, which teaches it was daily increased.
And if he says it was daily increased, according to his Theory; then he
contradicts himself in his appeal to Scripture, which (as he now owns) tells us
it was formed the third day. Ib. lin. 21.
And should it be alleged (to evade this) that here are two distinct
Hypotheses (that is to say, of Ordinary and Extraordinary Providence) whereon
these two different Formations of the Earth are respectively founded; this
would be but the same thing over again. As evidently showing, that in his way
of shifting, he has set up two Hypotheses plainly contradictory to one another.
Even as contradictory, as affirming a thing made in one day, and affirming it
made in many days; are contradictory affirmations.

The Excepter had suggested, Disc. p. 74, 75, 76.
that the Moon being present, and causing Tides and Fluctuations in the waters
of the Chaos; that would have hindered the Formation of the Earth upon them.
This, says the Answerer, Answ. p. 6.
we have no reason to believe, according to the Experiences we have now. For
Tides hinder not the Formation of Ice in cold Regions upon the Surface of the
Sea: therefore why should they have hindered the Formation of the Earth, upon
the surface of the Chaos? Some Seas indeed do freeze in some measure; but then
their waters are pretty still. And so the most that can be inferred from thence
is but this; that if the waters of the Chaos were any where so quiet; some
Earth might there have been formed upon them. Tho this Inference withal is far
short of being an evidence of the thing; inasmuch as there is more reason for
Ice to be formed upon the Sea, than there was for Earth to be formed upon the
Chaos. For our Seas have Shoars, where Ice does usually begin its Formation,
spreading wider or farther by a continued or progressive Concretion. Which may
be one chief reason why our Creeks or Harbors are often frozen up (when Seas
that feed or flow into them, are not) even because they are bounded with no far
distant Banks, where Ice can more easily grow from the Sides till it meets in
the Middle. But the waters of the Chaos had no Shoars, Ice also is lighter than
water, and so swims upon it; and therefore if fit chances to be broken in its
first Formation, and while it is thin; it may unite and grow together again, by
a new congelement. But earth is heavier than water, and apt to sink; and
therefore if broken when spread upon it in a thin Covering, it immediately dives
and goes down to the bottom. And upon this account, the same degrees of
Fluctuation that permit Ice to gather upon Seas; would have prevented an
Earth's being formed upon the Chaos. But we must go on.

The Theorist thought that the presence of the Moon was less needful in the
first World. Eng. Theor. p. 241.
And one reason he gave for it was this; because there were no long Winter
nights. To which the Excepter opposed, Disc p. 79.
that as there were no long Winter nights, so there were no short Summer ones
neither. So that set but the one against the other, and the presence of the
Moon may seem to have been as needful then in regard of the length of nights,
as it is now. But this in the Answerer's opinion, tho witty, does not reach the
point. And pray, p. 6.
why? why, because a great Inconvenience attends long nights, when they fall
upon the hours of travel, or the hours of work and business. But then at the
same time that business and journeys are hindered in some places by long Nights;
in other places they are helped forward as much by short ones. And therefore
set but the business and travelings of the Inhabitants of some parts of the
Earth, against the like Concerns of the Inhabitants of other parts of it; and
the Excepter's Observation will reach the point. And truly where can the
presence of a Moon be more needful, than in that World where half the time was
still to be Night; and 12 of every 24 hours, was continually dark all over it
at once? that is, all over its habitable Regions. For then the Earth standing
in a Right Position to the Sun, and having none of its motion of Inclination,
as Astronomy calls it; and the Sun always rising and setting in the
Aequinoctial, and so in the same points of the Heavens, without any Latitude:
as the days would constantly be twelve hours in length, so the nights, by this
means must be as long; but the Crepusculum or Twilight in the praediluvian
World would be very short, and so its Inhabitants immersed in the deeper
darkness, and consequently could very ill spare the Moon.

In the next place the Answerer notes, that Oily Particles in the Chaos, page 7.
were excepted against as Precarious. And he endeavors to take off the
Exception, by giving Reasons for their being Original and Primaeval. Ib.
The first he borrows from D. Carts, who supposes there were Original Salt
Particles, and therefore why may there not be Original Oily Particles? But if
D. Cartes's authority must determine the Question, it will go clearly on our
side: Mete. C. 1.. 3.
For he allows not Oil to be primaeval.

p. 7.
Another Reason he brings, is the vast Quantity of Oleagineous matter that is
dispersed every where; in Vegetables, in Animals, and many sorts of Earths. But
this matter may be bred in them respectively. Thus we see living Creatures grow
fat by Nourishment. And many Plants turn the sap they draw, into very Oil it
self; so that we need but extract it out of their Leaves or fruits. (As other
Animals again breed Milk; and other Vegetables, Wine, Cider, etc.) And so in
some Earths, oleagineous Particles may be generated; as others again are
impregnated with Particles of a Sulphurous, Nitrous, or Aluminous Nature. And
Chemists find other sorts of Particles dispersed every where, which I believe
the Answerer will scarce yield to have been Original in his Chaos.

Thirdly, it is alleged that these Oily particles were Original, p. 7.
because they were principles of Fertility to the New World, and so could not
be extracted from the Inferior Regions in time, forasmuch as that would require
a process of many Ages. Why, therefore it is the more likely that the Fatness
necessary to the Earth's Fruitfulness, was innate or bred in it. And we may
justly look upon it as a gracious effect of that Divine Benediction pronounced
upon the Earth, Genesis 1.11. by virtue of which, it could not but be endued with
all the principles necessary to Fertility. And yet were it needful, this
Oleagineous matter might be both easily and quickly setcht up from the Inferior
Regions. For tho in a natural Course, it could not be derived thence without
Difficulty, and a process of many ages; yet by extraordinary Providence it
might be drawn up with greatest Expedition, as well as Facility: even in a very
few Hours, or (as we are taught a great Work might be done in another case) in
a very few Minutes.

Lastly, He argues that Oily particles might be Original, because, according to
D. Carts, they were tenuious and branchy, too gross to be Air, p. 7.
and too light for Water. It shall not be said that they are therefore a
Compound of both; tho it may happen so in other Cases. For some Bodies seem to
be made of a middle Constitution betwixt those which on both sides stand next
them, in nearest degrees of Physical approximation. And consequently their
Nature is but a medium participationis, or a composition of such things as
border closest upon them, and have the truest Affinity to them, as approaching
nighest them in a kind of congenial likeness of Substance and Qualities. And
certain it is, that some Oils, by keeping, dissolve into Liquors so thin and
watery, that they will not burn; if that will give any countenance to the
thought that water may be an Ingredient of Oil. Tho it is worth noting, Prin.
Phi. l. 4. 76.
that D. Carts in the very Section which the Answerer cites, gives an account
how, and out of what, Oil is made; and so is against its being Orginal. And
since the Answerer refers to him twice in this point, let Him (till we can find
a fitter Judge) decide the Controversy. And indeed the very figure of Oily
Particles offers it self as an Argument against their Primaevity. For they are
supposed to be branchy; and whither can their Ramosity be so well imputed, as
to the Pores of that Matter wherein they were generated; which being of such a
Shape, cast them (as Molds in which they were formed) into the like fashion? Of
this Opinion is that ingenious Philosopher Mr. Rohault; Tract. Phys. Par. 3. c.
5.
but therefore far from believing that Oily Liquors or Particles were ever
Primaeval.

The Second thing which the Answerer observes to be charged with
Precariousness, Answ. p. 8.
is the Separation of this Oily Matter, in due time, so as to make a mixture
and concretion with the Terrestial Particles which fell from above. And this
Objection, he adds, was both made and answered by the Theorist. Eng. The. p.
58, 59.
Now the Substance of his Answer was this. That the Mass of the Air was many
thousand times greater than the Water, and would proportionably require a
greater time to be purified; the Particles in the Air having a far longer way
to come to the watery Mass, than the Oily Particles had to rise to the Surface
of it. That there might be Degrees of littleness and lightness in the Earthy
Particles, so as many of them might float in the Air a good while. And lastly,
that the Air and the Water might begin to purify at the same time. But this
Answer is short and insufficient; and therefore no notice was taken of it
formerly. But since we are urged with it now; to show its lightness and
incompetency, we Reply to it as follows.

First, That the Air being a Finer Element than the Water; would begin its
Purgation sooner than That.

Secondly, Tho the Air was far greater than the Water; yet the Terrestial
Particles in it might sooner reach the Water, than the Oily ones in the Water
could rise to the Surface of that, for sundry Reasons. As 1st, because the
Earthy Particles moved downward, and the Oily ones upward; and (caeteris
paribus) the motion downward would be the swiftest. 2ly, Because the Earthy
Particles were more dry and less clammy than the Oily ones; and their unctious
moisture by rendering them slimy, would make them sluggish, and slacken their
ascent. 3ly, Because the Air was a thin and yielding Medium, through which the
Earthy Particles would more nimbly sift down, than the Oily ones could wriggle
up through the Water, which was more thick and gross. 4ly, Because the very
Make of the Oily and Watery Particles is such, that it would help toward their
mutual Complication, which would retard their separating; and consequently the
Aeral Mass, would begin to refine before the Liquid one; and the Terrestial
Particles would have reached the Water, before the Oily matter was risen. For
the Particles of Oil are of a ramous Figure, and therefore about them the long
and flexible Particles of Water would That Watery Particles are naturally apt to
lay hold of Oily ones, appears from the way of cleansing Vessels, into the
Pores of which the Particles of Oil have in sinuated or soaked. For out of
those their lurking holes, or little fastnesses, there is no fetching them but
by the help of Water. And the same is clear from the Chemists Method of
distilling Oils out of dry Bodies. For in order to that, they first steep and
macerate them in Water; without which Preparative, there would be no extracting
the Oily Matter fairly, by any force of Elicitation. But when through heat, the
Water ascends; in its fumes it snatches up the Particles of Oil, and makes that
evaporate together with it self.
be apt in some measure to twine and wind themselves. Especially at that time,
when they both (upon the Secretion of the Chaos) met and encountered one another
in single naked Particles, before ever they were once united in Bodies, or at
all incorporated in their respective Masses. And although by reason of their
mutual Lubricity, the Watery Particles could not long keep fast the Oily ones,
about which they cling'd with tortuous flexures; yet they might considerably
check and protract their separation and ascent; it requiring some time for the
Oily Particles to extricate themselves, and get loose from those little watery
Wreaths wherewith they were involved and hampered.

Eng. Theor. p. 55, 56, 57.
Thirdly, the liquid Mass of the Chaos being a Collection of all Liquors that
belong to the Earth; every one of these would at first be foul and muddy, and
their respective Impurities must be discharged. Particularly the Water being a
vast Body, would have sent down its grosser parts in great abundance of
Sedimental Stuff. Now this Plenty of Sediment was thrown off by the Water,
either before, or after the Oily Matter was risen, or in the very Rising of it.
Not after it was risen; for this Sediment being more earthy, and so more heavy
than the Oil; it must be allowed to separate as soon as that, or rather
somewhat before it. And yet if it were discharged and sank before the Oily
matter was risen, or when it was rising how could it choose but sweep away that,
and carry it down together with it self to the Bottom of the Abyss? Or say,
these Dreggs should have been too weak or too light, to have overpowred the Oil
alone, and to have sunk it with its self; yet it would certainly have arrested
its motion upwards. By which means the Terrestrial Particles above, taking the
advantage thus given, would have come poudring down a main (fastest at first,
and also the heaviest of them) into the bare Waters; and so joining their
inconceivable Luggage, to the sedimental Clog already hanged upon the Oily
Matter, would have quite over-set it, and weighed it down to the Interior
Earth. And this piece of work will appear the more fecible and easy to be done,
if we consider that it might be half, or better than half effected before. For
all the Bodies or Elements of the Chaos, being of an Original or Primaeval
Nature; and not one compounded or made out of another: we must suppose that
before the very first resolution of it, they did coexist in the Chaos in their
several Principles or Particles; tho they were not locally severed, and made
into distinct and specific Masses till its Separation. So that at the same
time that there were Earthy Particles, there were Oily ones too, dispersed
throughout the^ whole Capacity of the Chaos. And consequently when the grosser
earthy Particles gathered toward the Center of the Chaos; They salling through
the whole Mass (even through every little point or line of it, from its
Superficies downward) where these Oily Particles were diffused and lay in their
way; they must needs catch hold of the greatest part of them (the rather for
their being of a viscuous quality) and bear them down with themselves:
Especially they descending in so vast a Quantity, as to be able to constitute a
central Earth.

Lastly, in case the Terrestrial Principle of the Chaos, would not thus have
hindered the Oily Principle, from doing its part toward the Formation of the
Theory's Earth; yet then the Liquid Part of the Chaos would have hindered the
Terrestrial one in the same Work. For how is it possible that an Ocean of Water
and Oil, should strain through the whole Circumference of the Chaos, settling
down toward the middle of it; and leave earthy Particles behind, floating in
the Air, and that in measures sufficient, upon their Descent, to compose so
immense an Earth as ours? Let the Air be filled never so full of dust, yet a
thin Mist presently lays it all. And such a prodigious Sea of Water falling
through the entire space of the Chaos; could not miss of the like effect upon
the Earthy Particles then in the Air; especially that Water containing so much
Oil in it. For by the Virtue of its Unctiousness in conjunction with its
Gravity, it would have cleansed the Air of Earthy Particles (tho very thoroughly
incorporate with it) as Izing-glass clarifies faeculent Liquors, by carrying
their Dregs to the bottoms of their Vessels. And therefore, whereas it is
alleged in the pretended Answer, that through degrees of Littleness and
Lightness in the Earthy Particles, many of them might float in the Air a good
while: Eng. Theor. p. 59.
we may rather think there would have been very few of them, if any at all,
left there. And then where would have been matter for the first Earth, supposed
to be formed upon the Surface of the Abyss? So we pass to the Third
Precariousness.

Which is concerning the Quantity and Proportion of these Particles, P. 8.
says the Answerer. And from this Charge he seeks to free himself by demanding
to this purpose. Ib.
In what Theory or Hypothesis are Liquors Gagged, and just Measures and
Proportions of each accounted for? But then it may be demanded again, what
Theory or Hypothesis has so much need of just Measures and Proportions of
these, as his; and consequently so much reason to account for them?

Ib.
Then he enquires particularly; has the great Philosopher (meaning D. Carts) in
his Hypothesis of 3 Elements, Or in his several Regions of the Vnform'd Earth,
defined the Quantity and Dimensions of each? Or in the Mineral Particles and
Juices -- does he determine the Quantity of them? Nor is there the like reason
why he should. For that great Philosophers Hypothesis, and this little ones,
are not of the like Nature, they stand not upon the like Foundations. D. Carts
publicly owns his Hypothesis, to be a mere Hypothesis indeed. And tho for the
better Quinimo etiam, ad res naturales melius explicandas, earum. Causas altius
hic repetam, quam ipsas unquam extitisse existimem. Non enim dubium est, quin
Mundas ab initio fuerit creatus cum omni sua perfectione, ita ut in eo, and
Sol, and Terra, and Lana, and Stellae extiterint. Prin. Par. 3. Sect. 45.
explaining of effects in Nature, he searched deeper for their Causes than they
ever lay; yet he declares that he did not doubt, but the World was at first
created with all its Perfection; so that in it there was a Sun, and Earth, and
Moon, and Stars. And therefore here was no need of having his 3 Elements
apportion'd in their Quantity, or accurately adjusted to one another; because,
by his own Confession, there was no World to be formed out of them. Eng. Theor
p. 85.
But is it thus with the Hypothesis of the Theory? No, no, that is a Reality as
its Author tells us. And it must needs be so according to his following
Expressions, To speak the truth, P. 149.
this Theory is something more than a bare Hypothesis. P. 150.
The Theory rises above the Character of a bare Hypothesis. Ib.
We must in equity give more than a moral certitude to this Theory. P. 274.
The Theory carries its own light and proof with it. And most fit it is
therefore, that this Theory, being brought to the Test, should approve it self
far beyond others. And an Earth being formed out of a strange Chaos, (the
Creature of this Theory) and according to the Laws of its Hypothesis; as fit it
is that the Ingredients of this Chaos, should, upon enquiry, be found well
proportioned to one another; beyond the Elements of D. Cartes's Hypothesis,
which arrogates no such certainty to it self, but openly renounces it. Yet if
we compare D. Cartes's Hypothesis, in the principal Instance here alleged;
with that of the Theorist; we shall find it will acquit it self much better
than his.

For suppose the World had been really to have been formed out of the Cartesian
Elements. Yet, upon examination, it will appear, that they were less liable to
just Exceptions, upon account of their possible Disproportionateness; than the
Chaos of the Theory, upon the same account, in regard of its Ingredients. For
of these 3 Elements the entire Universe was to be composed. So that if they had
all of them been more, or less in quantity; the Universe would only have had
the larger, or straiter Bounds. And if any of them singly had been excessive,
or defective; nothing worse would have followed upon this, but that the several
Bodies made out of them respectively, must then have been proportioned
accordingly. Thus, if there had been more, or less of the 1st Element, there
must have been more, or greater; or fewer, or lesser Suns. If there had been
more, or less of the 2d Element; there must have been bigger, or lesser
Vortices. If more or less of the 3d Element; there must have been more, or less
of Terrestrial Matter in being. So that the worst result from an excessive
quantity of any one of the three Elements aforesaid; would have been but an
alteration in the Great World, or at most but an inconvenience here and there
in some parts of it; no way detrimental or pernicious to the whole. But as to
this Earth of ours, the case would have been quite otherwise. For had not the
Materials of that been duly proportioned, but one left to exceed and
predominate over the other; this redundance, or inequality in measure, would
have been of very fatal Consequence. That is, it would have caused a
miscarriage in the production of the Earth, and have ruined the whole work
which Nature was about. And therefore in making the Chaos into an Earth, there
was absolute necessity, as of Regularity of Process in its Formation; so of due
proportion in the Ingredients of its Constitution: otherwise it could never
have been brought to Perfection.

From D. Carts the Answerer turns to the Excepter, and thinks to choke him
with an example of his own. Does the Animadverter in his new Hypothesis
concerning the Deluge, P. 9.
give us the just Proportions of his Rock-water, and the just Proportions of
his Rainwater, that concurred to make the Deluge? And does the Answerer think,
that the like accurate Proportion of things, is needful to destroy a World,
that is necessary to form or rear one? Yet here a World was to be destroyed
only; to be destroyed by being drowned. Now supposing the destructive Flood was
to rise out of Rock-water, and Rainwater; it mattered not, as to the
Destruction they were to bring on, if both were of equal Quantity, or which,
and how much one exceeded the other, so they were together sufficient for the
Work. But what says the Answerer farther? I find no Calculations there (that is
in the Animadverter's Hypothesis) but general Expressions, that one (sort of
Water) was far greater than the other: and that may be easily presumed
concerning the Oily Substance and the Watery in the Chaos. Here he must be
minded of one of these two things: that is to say, either of Shuffling, or of
Mistaking. First, of Shuffling. For he instanceth only in the Oily Substance
and the Watery in the Chaos, which he thought might shift pretty well together,
tho the one in Quantity exceeded the other. But he knows there was a
Terrestrial Substance too; and what would have become of his Paradisiacal Earth
which was to rise out of that, if the Oil had not been fitly proportioned to
it? If it had not been just enough, that is, to mix with the Earthy Particles,
and to make them into a good Soil. For if it had been more than was sufficient
to that purpose, Disc. p. 80.
it would have overflowed them, and rendered the Earth useless as a Greazy Clod.
If less, it would not have imbibed them, but they must have lain loose above in
a fine and dry powder, that would have made the Earth barren as an Heap of
Dust. And this, in these very words, the Excepter told the Theorist before. Yet
here we see the Earthy Substance is taken no notice of, but rather slily
shuffled out of the way. Unless he intended that what he said of the Oily and
Watery Substances, in the Chaos, should be meant of the Earthy one too. And then

Secondly, he must be put in mind of a gross Mistake. For tho in our Waters
that Drowned the Earth, one sort may easily be allowed to be greater than the
other: yet the same thing cannot be easily presumed concerning his Materials
supposed to form it. For Rock-water and Rain water were both alike for
Drowning, and so equally fitted to serve that End whereunto they were
appointed; and the Excess of one above the other, could be no hindrance of the
Effect they were designed to produce. Yea, without such an Excess, the Effect
intended, could never have been wrought; according to our Hypothesis of the
Flood. But Oily Liquor and Earthy Particles, are very different things; out of
a well proportioned mixture of which the Earth it self was to be made. And
therefore to presume the The Oil, that is, far greater than the Earthy
substance; or that unduly proportioned to the Oil.
one was far greater than the other, is to presume they were not duly
proportioned or mixed together; and consequently that the Earth could not be
raised out of them.

But we must not forget the Close of this Paragraph, which runs in these Words.
What Scruples therefore he raises in reference to the Chaos, Answ. p. 9.
against the Theorist, for not having demonstrated the proportions of the
Liquors of the Abyss, fall upon his own Hypothesis, for the same or greater
reasons. And you know what the old verse says; Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa
redarguit ipsum.

Here he goes on in his shuffling or mistaking Way still. For he speaks of
Scruples raised in reference to the chaos only; whereas this refers as well to
the Formation of the Earth. Disc. p. 80.
And he proceeds upon the Proportions of the liquors of the Abyss only; whereas
our Scruples referred as well to the Earthy Matter. Let that be included
therefore, as it ought; and then what he says, will in plain terms amount to
thus much. That tho the Rainwater were far greater than the Rock-water; yet
there would have been greater reason why the Earth should not have been
drowned: than there would have been why the Earth should not have been formed,
tho the Oily substance had been far greater than the Earthy. For the Scruples
against the Theorist's Formation of the Earth, can never, for greater reason,
fall upon the Animadverter's Hypothesis concerning the Flood; unless there be
greater reason why vastly disproportionate Quantities of Oily and Earthy
Substance should make an Earth; than there is why the like disproportioned
Quantities of Rock-water and Rainwater should make a Flood. Now have we
greater reason to think that a little Terrestial Matter, mixed with a vast deal
of Oily matter, should compose the first Earth: than we have to think that a
little Rock-water mixed with a vast deal of Rainwater, should drown it? There
is great reason why one Tun of Rock-water, mingled with an hundred thousand
Tuns of Rainwater, should drown a good Garden. But is there greater reason why
one Tun of Earthy matter, mingled with an hundred thousand Tuns of Oily matter,
should make a good Garden Soil? I hope, tho our Answerer be too great a
Favourer of many Absurdities, he will not be forward to assert this.

Rock-water and Rainwater were similar Causes, and could not but with equal
readiness of natural Disposition, conspire to the effect of Drowning. And tho
the one, in measure, was much inferior to the other; yet if both of them in
conjunction, were but sufficient for the Inundation; that was enough: for the
Deluge depended chiefly upon the quantity of Water in general, and not upon the
Proportion of this or that kind of it in Particular. But Oily matter and Earthy
matter are Heterogeneal Substances, and therefore could not so readily and
immediately conspire to the Earth's Formation. Some other Helps conducive
thereunto, were to come betwixt them and that; and Concretion for one. But then
Concretion depending upon the due proportion of Ingredients; Due Proportions of
Oily, and Earthy matter, must be more needful in forming the Earth, and so
ought to be better demonstrated; than the Proportions of Rock, and Rain-waters
in raising the Flood. And thus it is manifest, that the Scruples raised against
the Theorist by the Animadverter; fall not upon his own Hypothesis, for the
same or greater reasons. He might well therefore have spared his old verse;
which as applied here, was as insignificant as an old Almanac. But since, in
Civility to the Excepter, he would needs send him it; he cannot, but in
kindness, give him a piece of it back again: Letting him know, that to reason,
or answer at such a rate as this, Turpe est Doctori.

To make an end of this point of Precariousness. The Excepter alleged, Disc.
p. 81.
That all these things, that is to say, The Ingredients of the Chaos, and the
Proportions of those Ingredients, and the right timing of their Separations;
should have been more fully explained and clearly made out, for a Personal
reason which the Theorist made peculiar to himself. Namely because he declared
it to be his Judgment, that things of moment (of which nature was the Formation
of his Earth) are to be founded in aliqua clara and invicta evidentia, Lat.
Theor. p. ^.
on some clear and invincible evidence. And what says he to this? To it he
gives a double Answer. Answ. p. 9.
First, that he set that sentence, of which these words are part, in opposition
to such uncertain Arguments as are taken from the interpretation of Fables and
Symbols: or from Etymologies and Grammatical Criticisms. But is there nothing
then of a middle nature betwixt Incertainties, and invincible evidence? No
(...) or (...), Probable, or Credible things to come between them; that he must
needs over-strain himself by taking such a Leap, not over, but into a Ditch?
For thus he plunges into this deep absurdity, of tying himself up to such an
evidence, as he is not able to produce. But therefore he gives in a Second
Answer, more to the purpose. That this Sentence, because it might be taken in
too great an extent, Ib.
is left out in the Second Edition of the Theory. It seems then it was not
taken in a worse sense than it might be taken.

Having done with the Precariousness, he comes next to the Vnphilosophicalness
wherewith the Theory was charged. Answ. p. 9.
The instance is the Descent of the Terrestrial Particles from the whole
capacity of those vast spaces betwixt the Moon and us. And how could this
Phenomenon fall in with a smooth Philosophy Explication? said the Excepter.
For either the bounds of the Chaos, Disc. p. 82.
and the Sphaere of its Gravity reached as high as the Moon, or they did not.
If they did not, how could these Particles ever come there at all, or come down
from thence? If they did extend so high, then as the Excepter quaeried at
first, so he does still; why did not the Moon come down with those Particles?
It is answered by another Question; Answ. p. 10.
why does not the Moon come down now? the same reason which keeps her up now,
kept her up then. But this Answer, is no Answer: for that which kept the Moon
up then, would have kept up these Particles too. And so either there must have
been no Earth composed; or else the Moon as an overplus must have dropped into
its composition. I think I have read of a Bullet shot up so high, that it never
came down upon the Earth more. And then how could those terrestrial Particles
descend, that were dispersed in all that vast space, contained between the
height of the Bullets ascent, and the orb of the Moon?

The Last Charge upon the Theory in this part, was its being Anti-scriptural.
That is, in making the Chaos Dark, whereas the Scripture says, there was light
the first day. He answers to this sense. P. 10.
That the Scripture does not say the Chaos was thoroughly illuminated the first
Day: That the light then was faint and feeble: and yet might be sufficient to
make some distinction of day and night in the Skies. A fair Concession, and
enough to end this part of our Controversy. Only we must observe that the
Theorist in this matter has changed his Mind, and now plainly retracts his
former Doctrine. For how could he think there was any light in the Skies the
first Day; when he taught that the Matter whereof the whole Earth was to be
made, was diffused in Particles through the Air; See Discourse Chap. 3. Parag.
last. Vid. Lat. Theor. Edit. 2. p. 229.
and that after the grossest of these Particles were sunk down, the Air was yet
thick, gross, and dark; and that darkness was lasting Darkness? Not that I
reflect upon the Doctor for his Retractation here; I note it rather in his
commendation. And the more any man does of this nature (where there is cause
for it) and the farther he goes in this way; the more laudable will his action
and procedure be.

Having done with the Chapter, he must now take the Excepter to task. And it
seems he was in a great fault, where he little thought of being so. The
Theorist doubted whether the Moon was in our Neighborhood before the Flood,
and he argued in Defense of this Doubt. Disc. p. 78.
This, said the Excepter, is too bold an Affront to Scripture. But, says the
Answerer, a discreet man is not forward to call every cross word an affront.
Answ. p. 10.
And truly no more was the Excepter forward to that. But every word so cross to
Scripture, as his spoken in the case mentioned, deserves to be so called. It is
said in the Inspired Writings, 1 King. 7.16.
that King Solomon made two Chapiters of Brass. Now should any man doubt and
dispute this, and offer to prove that he made but one; surely here would be too
bold an affront to Scripture, tho the things were little and of low
consideration. The same Writings assure us, that GOD, upon the 4th Day, made
two great Lights (things of an higher Nature and Use) for they were to give
Light upon the Earth; the one for the benefit of Mankind, ruling the Day; and
the other, the night.) The Theorist questions this, disputes against it, and
offers to prove that instead of two Lights, GOD made but one. And must not the
words spoken by him here, be too bold an affront to Scripture? And if they be
so, discreet men may be allowed to call things as they are. Besides, the
Excepter had never engaged with the Theorist, but to show how cross his
Assertions lie to Scripture; and had he not pointed out what was too bold and
affronting that way, he must net have been discreet indeed, as neglecting what
was most proper for his purpose. And lastly, who must be most indiscreet of the
two, he that puts the affront upon Scripture, or he that minds him of it?

But he has somewhat more against us yet, for minding him of the Affront he put
upon Scripture. And it is this. Suppose a man should say boldly, p. 11.
GOD Almighty has no right hand. Oh might the Animadverter cry, that is a bold
affront to Scripture: for I can show you many and plain Texts of Scripture,
where express mention is made of GOD's right hand. But let him show us one
plain Text of Scripture which means that God has a real right hand: That he has
as really a right hand, as he did really make two great Lights. But because he
cannot possibly do this, the Animadverter must needs cry, Oh how the Answerer
here trifles. As if there were no difference betwixt Literal and Allusive
Expressions in the Bible.

In passing to the next Chapter, he throws an Observation in our way. Ib.
Viz. Weak reasons commonly produce strong Passions. Which serves to inform,
why the Answerer's Passions are sometimes so strong against the Excepter: even
because his reasons are weak. Where they fail, out come indiscreet, rude,
injudicious, uncharitable, and the like Brats of Passion; to supply the place
of Arguments. And yet as to any thing of this Nature, the Replicant durst not
twit the Answerer, as he does the Excepter (in this Chapter) by saying it is
Wit and Scolding. Ib. p. 5.
Not the first, lest he should tell a lie: not the Second, lest he should speak
in an unmannerly truth, and make a Philosopher write in an incongruous Style.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter he answers nothing as to what the Excepter objected against
the Central fire of the Earth, See Disc. Chapter 4.
and the Origin of the Chaos. And his reason is, because he had declared he
would not treat of them. Answ. p. 11.
Yet as to the Central fire, Theor. p. 64.
he plainly admits or allows of it; yea, he owns it to be reasonable, and to be
very reasonable. But when he has given so fair occasion for Objections to be
made against it; if then he will not defend what he so highly approves, and
what is so nearly related to his Hypothesis; who can help it?

His not treating of the Origin of the Chaos, the Excepter said, Disc. p. 88.
seemed a Flaw in his Hypothesis. Here therefore he vindicates himself thus.
Answ. p. 12.
When a man declares that he will write only the Roman History, will you say
his Work's Imperfect, because it does not take in the Persian and Assyrian? By
no means. But if a man undertakes to write the Roman History, and begins at the
Middle, or leaves out the Beginning of it; his Work will have a scurvy Defect
in it. And the very same he may imagine it will be in a Natural History;
especially if it be the greatest and most remarkable in the World.

Ib.
The residue of this Chapter he spends in speaking freely of the Excepter. And
he is so free as to tell him first, that his fourth Chapter seems to him in a
great measure Impertinent. But he is not to determine that alone: let it stand
or fall as the Candid shall judge. Yet if it were impertinent but in a great
measure, that implies it was not wholly so: but he answers to nothing in it.

Secondly, he reflects upon the Excepter for dabbling in Philosophy. And when
he will be dabbling against Moses, why may not the Excepter dabble against him?

Thirdly, he condemns him of Skepticism. And he had much rather be too doubtful
in some things, than a Sir positive at all. He does not pretend that all he
writes, is true Natural History. Nor will he leave out in a second Edition,
what is in his first.

Fourthly, he lets fly at him for rambling. But he rambled after him and his
notions, as any Reader may see.

Lastly, he says, he ends in nothing as to the formation of the Earth. How can
that be, when he bestows the greatest part of that Chapter in disproving the
Chaos, out of which the Earth was to be formed? by showing that such a Chaos
was not created, nor could it be produced in the Cartesian way; or if it could,
yet it was not for the Theory to allow of that method of its production, as
being enough to subvert its own hypothesis.

This is some of that freeness of Speech which the Answerer is pleased to use
toward the Excepter. And therefore he must not wonder to see some freeness
used toward himself, upon more just occasions.

But the Excepter in his fourth Chapter encountered Two other Notions, See Disc.
p. 99. etc.
which are stiffly asserted by the Theorist. Namely, Vid. Lat. Theor. lib. 2.
cap. 8. Edit. 2.
that Moses's Story of the Creation is to be limited to the Formation of our
(lower) World, and those parts of Nature which could be made out of the Earthly
Chaos. And that when he speaks of the Celestial parts of the Universe (the
Luminaries; Ib. cap. 7. p. 232. Edit. 1.
) he meant no more than that they were then made Conspicuous: and this, if need
be, he declares he could demonstrate. But the Objections made against these
Confident Notions of his, are answered only by being in part left out of the
second Edition of the Latin Theory. A farther Evidence that what he wrote, was
true and remarkable Natural History. And also plain Demonstration in the case
too. But then it is of the weakness (to speak freely) not of the truth or
validity of his Assertions. And withal here is some proof, that notwithstanding
the great impertinence of this Chapter, it reached the Theory in some things,
which ought to be taken notice of, and spoken against; for they were so very
culpable it seems, that they deserved to be cashiered, or left out.

CHAP. V.
HEre the Answerer observes the Form of the Earth to be Excepted against, upon
the account that it would have wanted Waters, or Rivers to Water it; in that
there would either be no Rivers at all; or none, at least, in due time. But
before he opposes these Reasons, he gives a short account of the state of the
Waters in his primeval Earth; and then declares ( p. 13.) This, I believe, is
an Idea more easily conceived, than any we could form concerning the Waters and
Rivers of this present Earth, if we had not experience of them. On the other
side, I believe the contrary so easy to be conceived, that I shall not spend
time in making it out. I only say thus much. In case his Idea were most easy
to be conceived; yet what is most fair and easy in the Idea, or speculation of
a thing, is not always most true, but may be most false in Nature. Look to the
constitution or posture of the Heavens. There the Equator and Ecliptic
intersect each other in an angle of twenty three Degrees and better. But the
Philosophers Idea represents a Parallelism in the axes of these two Circles,
and a Coincidence in their Plains, most easy and natural. Yet this angular
intersection holds, tho, it is thought, some Mechanic or Physical Causes would
bring them nearer to the site we speak of. And this very position, tho it seems
to be forced and violent, and that as well to the Course of Nature, as the
Philosophers Conception or Idea; is yet the most convenient that possibly can
be for the Earths Inhabitants; and by its lasting continuance, becomes a choice
argument to confute the Atheist, and evince a Providence.

The Reason why there would be no Rivers at all, Answ. p. 14.
he notes, was because the Regions toward the Poles where the Rains are
supposed to fall, and the Rivers to rise, would have been all frozen and
congealed. And he goes on; Why we should think those Regions would be frozen,
and the Rains that fell in them; he (the Excepter) gives two reasons, the
Distance, and the Obliquity of the Sun. As also the Experience we have now, of
the Coldness and Frozenness of those parts of the Earth. And what says he to
these our Reasons? As to the Distance of the Sun, he would make the Excepter
answer that Himself, bringing him in thus. He confesses, Ib.
That is not the thing that does only or chiefly make a climate cold. Ay, and
that Confession he keeps to still, supposing the Suns Distance be
Perpendicular, which was the Distance he spoke of. Disc. p. 118.
But if the Sun moved always in the Aequinoctial, his Distance from the
Circumpolar or Raining Regions, must be an Oblique Distance. And if that
Distance were but as great, betwixt the Sun and the imaginary Raining Regions,
as it is betwixt the Sun and us, in the Depth of Winter; it may from hence be
concluded, that the Cold in those Regions must be as great, as, in Winter time,
it is in ours, by reason of his distance.

As to the Obliquity of the Sun, the Answerer says it was neither so great nor
so considerable in the first Earth as in the Present. Answ. p. 14.
But tho the Obliquity of the Sun be greater now, because the body of this
Earth lies in an oblique Position to him: yet his Distance from us in Winter is
far less now, in this present Earth, than his Distance from the Raining Regions
was in the primitive Earth. Because that being an oval or Oblong Earth, its
circumpolar Regions must be far more remote from the Equator, See Discourse c.
5. 4.
than if it had been Round or Globular. And so the Raining Regions then, must
be much colder than our Climate is now, in the dead of Winter. For as it is not
the Distance of the Sun alone, that makes a Climate vehemently cold; so it is
not his Obliquity alone, that does it neither; but a great oblique Distance.
And so great and considerable must the Sun's Distance of this Nature be, from
the Raining Regions in the Primitive Earth; as to leave them in a very freezing
Condition. Especially if the Experiences alleged by the Excepter be well
considered: Ibid.
to which there is nothing distinctly answered. Instead of applying himself to
take off them, the Answerer is pleased to tell us thus. Answ. p. 14.
That if the Excepter had well considered the differences betwixt the present
and the primitive Earth; as to Obliquity of Position, and that which follows
from it, length of nights: he would have found no reason to have charged that
Earth with nipping and freezing Cold; where there was not, I believe, one
morsel of Ice, from one Pole to another. As to his belief, who can regard it?
It comprehends such things, as no Christian Philosopher ever yet did, nor ever
can, or will put into his Creed. And as for the Fxcepter, he has well
considered the things he speaks of; and still finds he has sufficient reason,
to charge the primitive Earth in its Rainy Regions, with Nipping and freezing
Cold: even with a Cold more nipping and freezing, than is felt in our Climate
in the Winter Season. Indeed he instances in one thing in this present Earth,
which he thinks should cast the Advantage, for Coldness, on our Climate's side;
that is, the Length of Nights. Ibid
But consider all Circumstances aright, and the real Advantage as to Cold, will
appear to be with the First Earth; its Rainy Regions must be colder than ours.
For in that Earth the Nights were continually twelve hours in length; and in
our Climate, if we take one with another, throughout the Winter Months, we
shall find that our Nights do not much exceed those in Length. For tho in
December, they be above four hours longer than they; yet in February, they are
never longer by two hours and an half, and in the end of that Month, but little
above half an hour. And then to counter-ballance, or weigh down this single
Difference, in length of Nights (the pretended Cause of prevailing or excessive
degrees of Cold, in this present state of Nature, beyond what could be in the
praediluvian World) we hinted several other Causes of vehement Cold in that
World, Disc. Chap. 5:
which are not in this; tho the Answerer takes no notice of them. As

First, upon supposition that That Earth was Oval, the Wet Regions in it, must
have been several hundreds of Miles farther removed from the Sun, than our
Climate is; and so the Cold there must have been proportionably stronger.

Secondly, in the primitive Earth there was no Clouds; which contribute much
toward warming the Air. That is, as they reverberate or beat back the Beams of
the Sun, reflected from the Earth: As they straiten and compress Vapors in
their Motion and agitation: And as, (at some times, and in some measure) they
transmit the Celestial Rays, not altogether unlike to Burning-glasses.

Thirdly, in the first Earth there was no open Seas; which fill the Air with
Mists, and Foggs, and great store of Vapors, that do mightily thicken it, and
consequently mitigate the sharpness of it.

Fourthly, There was no Hills nor Valleys, Ruggednesses nor Inequalities upon
the Surface of that Earth; which cause Heat again by confused and irregular
Reflections of the Sunbeams.

Now put but these Four Causes of Cold (extant in the first World) into the
Scales, against the Length of Nights in the Second, which the Answerer insists
upon; and they will not fail to weigh it down sufficiently. Especially if we
add, that in our Nights, shorter, by near Four hours, than those before the
Flood; we have sometimes very brisk kind of Frosts. In the Beginning, that is
to say, or in the Middle of May; when the Sun is far advanced on our side of
the Equator, in a World that has Clouds, and Seas, and Hills.

Answ. p. 15.
As to the other part of the Exception, These Rivers could not have been made in
due time: He answers thus. That Is wholly according to the Process you take; if
you take a mere natural Process, the Rivers could not flow throughout the
Earth, all on a sudden: but you may accelerate that process, as much as you
please, by a Divine Hand, And so this is answered by the first Expedient;
Extraordinary Providence: which is here at a Pinch, brought in again, to serve
this Extraordinary Hypothesis. And thus indeed there might be Rivers for
Fishes, and a River in Paradise; and the one as soon, and the other as great,
as needed to be; even as big as Euphrates it self. Here therefore this
Controversy must end, for who can stand out against such an Answer? Only, we
must say, it is a very Philosophical one; and it is pity he made not shorter
Work in the Case. For he might have told us, that Men, and Animals, and all
kind of Plants, by the power of a Divine Hand, lived without water before the
Flood; and then he had saved himself the whole trouble, as well of raising, as
of propagating his Rivers. And truly so difficult a Work is the latter of
these, Another Contradiction.
that it will cost him no less than a Contradiction to do it. For he tells us
in his English Theory (p. 228.) that the derivations of the waters, at first
would be very irregular and diffuse, till the Channels were a little worn and
hollowed. And (p. 229.) that the Current would be easy and gentle all along,
and if it chanced in some places to rest or be stopped, it would spread it self
into a pleasant Lake, till by fresh supplies it had raised its waters so high,
as to overflow and break loose again. Now when at first there were no Rivers,
but diffused waters; and afterward they were to flow in Channels worn and
hollowed by themselves: When their Currents were to be easy and gentle all
along, and to rest, and stop, and spread at places, till they waxed strong
enough to run forward: Were these waters accelerated by a divine hand? No more
than what is natural, is at the same time miraculous: No more than what is
slow, is at the same time swift: Or than flat Contradictions can fall in with
truth.

CHAP. VI.
PART of the Theorist's Design, in explaining the Deluge his way, was to
silence the Cavils of Atheists. Eng. Theor. p. 17.
That is, by superseding the Miracle of Creating Waters, in that Case, and then
of Annihilating the same; which seemed to him a Method irrational and
unintelligible; and by making it the effect of natural Causes; and so, in his
opinion, more agreeable to reason, and more easy to be understood. Ib. p. 20.
And accordingly he declares, that the Design of his Treatise is to show a way
of making the Deluge fairly intelligible, and accountable without creating of
new waters. And in another place, explaining the Deluge in a natural way, Chap.
8.
or by natural Causes; he makes these Causes to be Vapors within the Earth,
and Rains without it, and Cracks and Chasms made by the Sun in the Arch of it.
All which natural Causes together, brought on the Disruption of that Earth, and
this Disruption occasioned the Innundation. But if his Hypothesis which takes
off one Miracle, brings on another; or (as the event of things might prove)
makes it necessary to suppose another Miracle interwoven with the Contexture of
it: it will then contribute just nothing toward silencing the Atheist, who
cannot possibly be reconciled to Miracle, as professing principles most
repugnant to it. Now the great Flood being made, by the Theory, an Effect of
Natural Causes; it must needs have come on in a Course of Nature. Yea, tho it
was to come as a Judgment upon obstinate Sinners; yet it must have happened
inevitably tho Mankind had been Innocent, or truly Penitent: unless the power
of a miraculous hand, had forcibly stopped the Course of Nature, and held her
from running on into this otherwise certain and inavoidable issue. And when it
is as necessary to admit Miracle into this new Hypothesis; as it was to allow
it in the Old; how is the Atheist silenced by it? Yea, when he sees this
Hypothesis making Ruin the Lot, either of a righteous, or repenting World;
this must open his mouth, instead of silencing his tongue, and make him more
fierce and clamorous than ever. This is the Substance of the Excepter's Sixth
Chapter, which runs upon what the Cavilling Athiest would be apt to allege,
against the Theory of the Flood.

It is answered thus. Answ. p. 19.
What the Excepter suggests concerning Athiests, and their presumed Cavils at
such an explication of the Deluge, is a thing only said at random and without
grounds. And why so? Surely it must be because of something the Answerer had
said before. Ib. p. 18. p. 19.
Namely, that GOD's Praescience is infallible, and God is the Author and
Governor of the Natural World, as well as of the Moral: and he sees thorough
the Futuritions of both, and has so disposed the one, as to serve him in his
just Judgments upon the other. But is this to satisfy or silence the Athiest?
Can the Answerer think, that he who denies the being of a GOD, should
acknowledge his Attribute? and consent to a Providence directed by Proescience?
This is as much as to say, let an Atheist become no Atheist, and then he will
silence this Athiest's Cavils

The Two Questions he puts in the Beginning of his Chapter, touching GOD's
Praescience; are little to the purpose. Inasmuch as the Athiest, whom the
Excepter justly brings in (the silencing of his Cavils being the aim of the
Theory) does absolutely disown and disavow the Property, together with the
Essence of the GLORIOUS DEITY. However let us reply to these Questions; that
nothing may seem to be passed over, which but looks as if it required an Answer.

The first Question is this. Suppose Adam had not sinned, what would have
become of the Messiah, p. 17.
and the Dispensation of the Gospel? Why, then the Messiah need not have been
born, nor need the Gospel have been dispensed. And truly both the Incarnation
of the one, and the Dispensation of the other, might have been prevented or put
by; without any stop or interruption in the Course of nature, made by the
intervention of a miraculous Power. But the like cannot be affirmed of the
Deluge. For had that been put off, the order of Nature must thereby have been
broken; and the hand of Omnipotence must have supported the Earth by the
strength of Miracle. Else in a certain period of time, (in that Juncture
suppose, when the Flood, according to the Theory, fell out) it must have
suffered Disruption; and have sunk into the Abyss.

But it is farther urged, that the Dispensation of the Gospel is said to be
very early determined: Ibid.
in Scripture that is. It must be allowed therefore that that Determination had
respect to man's Sin. But that the like may be allowed to the Theory of the
Flood, it must be proved as well, that the Deluge was decreed or determined to
come in, according to its Method. And where has Scripture determined that, as
it did things relating to the Blessed MESSIAH, and his eternal Gospel? But
This, believe it, is a lofty Instance to be fetched down into comparison with a
phansiful Hypothesis. The next therefore is of a lower strain, upon which the
Second Question runs; which is This.

Ibid.
Suppose Adam had not eaten the forbidden Fruit; how could he, and all his
Posterity have lived in Paradise? A few Generations would have filled that
place, and should the rest have been turned out into the wide World, without
any sin or fault of theirs? To it we Reply,

First; that if Adam had not eaten the foibidden fruit; yet it does not appear
that he and all his Posterity were to have lived in Paradise. For That, in a
few ages, might not only have been sufficiently replenisht, but overcharged
with Inhabitants.

Secondly; when that place had been filled, and the rest, (as the Answerer
expresses it) must have been turned out into the wide World: yet they (being
without sin) should not have felt the Inconveniences which we do. For as the
Barrenness of the Earth; so, many Inconveniences (perhaps secondary Causes of
it) might proceed from the Curse of GOD, pulled down upon the Ground by the sin
of man. And thus much Moses has left upon record; that as the Earth by GOD's
blessing brought forth useful Products, while man stood, Genesis 1.12. so Thorns
and Thistles were the just effect or punishment of his Fall, Genesis 3.18. But
then as the Answerer has noted, that a Supernatural curse might have its effect
in any position of the Earth: so it is as certain, P. 29.
that a supernatural Blessing might have its proper effects too. And if GOD, as
he says, Ibid.
can make a Land barren, if he think fit, in spite of the Course of Nature:
then in spite of the Course of nature, he can as well make it fruitful and
pleasant. And therefore so he might have made the Praediluvian earth (had not
Adam eat the forbidden fruit) notwithstanding its oblique Position to the Sun.
Then, as there should have been no Death amongst men; so there should have been
nothing like it, or tending to it. No such excessive heat and cold, as now rage
in several Climates: No such noxious Vapors and Exhalations, as now rise from,
or breath out of the Earth: No such impurities and unwholsom corruptions, as
now breed in, and distemper the Air: No such blustering Storms and violent
Tempests, as now disquiet, and toss, and cause Breaches by the Sea: No such
mighty Floods and dreadful Earthquakes, as now do unspeakable Mischiefs at
Land. But men's Souls being upright and clear from sin; their Bodies should have
been safe from dangers, and free from sufferings; and the security and pleasure
of their outward Condition, would have been answerable to their inward Peace
and Purity.

When Israel passed through the Arabian Desert, because they were a chosen and
peculiar People, and dear unto his MAJESTY; the ALMIGHTY saved them from the
great Inconveniences of that desolate Region, by ministering to their Wants,
most suitable and seasonable Defensatives and Supplies. Thus, the Drieness of
the place, and the lack of Waters; he supplied by the streams from Rocks, Its
Barrenness, or lack of Food; by Quails and Manna. Its heat and lack of shades;
by a Cloudy Canopy. Its Wildness, and lack of Roads and Way-marks; by the
Pillar of a Cloud, guiding them by day, when their Camp moved; and by a Pillar
of fire leading them by night. The lack of new Clothes, and the lack of new
shoes; by the lastingness of their old ones, and by their not wearing out. And
when the Good GOD had such care and kindness for a sinful People; yea, for a
stubborn, perverse, and provoking Generation; as thus to sense and furnish them
against the most grievous external Inconveniences, that could readily beset
them: we may well conclude how tender he would have been of an Innocent World,
and how inconceivably gracious and indulgent to them, in the like Nature. The
wide World therefore should not have been inconvenient to Adam and his
Posterity (as this World now is to us) if he had not eaten the forbidden fruit.
The supernatural Blessing of Heaven, would then have made their Circumstances
happy upon Earth. Nor should they ever have overstockt it, tho they had
multiplied never so fast. For still as they grew aged, that they might not grow
too numerous, they might, in due time, have been translated hence, as Enoch
was, to the higher State of bliss and felicity. Nor is there any thing here
overstrain'd in the least. For tho we must not be too bold with Extraordinary
Providence in the Philosophic Schools; it was ever a standing Hypothesis in the
Church. And upon the principle of it, the most glorious Phaenomenaes of heavens
kindness, that have been, or can appear, are properly to be solved.

CHAP. VII.
HEre the Answerer applies himself to vindicate those Texts of Scripture, which
being alleged in confirmation of the Theory; were excepted against.

The first is that in the Second Epistle of S. Peter. C. 3. v. 5. For this they
willingly are ignorant of, etc. But he quarrels with the Excepter for rendering
it generally Wilfully ignorant. Answ. p. 19.
Now who can say they were not thus ignorant? And is it not most probable that
they really were so? Or who can clearly discern, and justly dinstinguish
betwixt Willing and Wilful Ignorance; and rightly determine which of the two,
men are guilty of in all cases? It is hard to set an exact boundary, between
Willing and Wilful Sin; so as positively to say, where the one ends, and the
other begins. The Difference here is so nice and obscure, as not easily to be
discovered. If we look to the sins of the Tongue; they that Ly and Swear
Willingly; commonly do it Wilfully. If we look to the sins of the Hand; they
that Rob and Kill willingly; commonly do it wilfully. And so it is commonly as
to sins of the mind, and particularly as to the sin of Ignorance. They that are
willingly ignorant, are wilfully ignorant. For they are usually ignorant,
because they forbear to consult men; or because they neglect to peruse Books;
or because they refuse to observe, or consider, or examine things. And these
Omissions being deliberate, chosen, and affected; must consequently be wilful,
and make their ignorance of the same stamp. Especially if men persist in their
ignorance, till it becomes high and heinous, by being customary and habitual;
which seems to be the Case of them here reprehended.

Ib.
And whereas the Answerer says, that the Excepter lays a great stress upon the
word, Wilfully: That he did not do, nor was there any need of it. For whether
they were willingly, or wilfully ignorant, it matters not; because they could
in neither sense be blameably ignorant of such things, as the Theorist presumes
they were; inasmuch as they were in no capacity of acquiring the Knowledge of
them, supposing they had been Real. This the Excepter fairly made out. To have
proved them culpably ignorant therefore, in either of these senses; Disc. p.
128. 129. etc.
the Answerer should have taken off what the Excepter objected against the
likelihood of their attaining to the knowledge of those Matters: and should
have shown that the Pseudo-Christians reproved by St. Peter, might by the use
of such means as they had, have come to a competent understanding of those
Phaenomenaes, which he believes the Apostle chid them for being unacquainted
with. But the doing of this, he either willingly, or wilfully omitted; it being
much easier to run out into an empty debate about a word; than (as he should
have done) to pursue the proper and material things. He says indeed (p. 20.)
The mutability and changes of the World, which these Pseudo-Christians would
not allow of, was a knowable thing, taking all the means which they might and
ought to have attended to. Great news this, that the Changes of the World,
which they were checked for being ignorant of, were knowable by the means which
they enjoyed. Did GOD ever blame ignorance, but in such Circumstances? But let
him prove that the first Constitution of the Heavens and the Earth, and the
changes and dissolution which happened to them at the Deluge; were knowable
things to them, according to his Notions of them; let him prove that they had
means to bring them to the knowledge of these, as he represents them; and then
he does something. But he must first prove that there ever were such things.

And because he is for Instances out of Scripture, where the Phrase (used by S.
Peter signifies wilful and obstinate ignorance; let him take these that follow,
Answ. p. 19.
as proofs of as much. The forgiven Servant, obstinately refusing to show mercy
to his fellow servants; it is said of him, (...), he would not, S. Mat. 18.30.
The Inhabitants of Jerusalem, obstinately refusing to come under GOD's
Protection; it is said of them, (...), ye would not, S. Mat. 23.37. And so
again, S. Luke. 13.34. Now if, (...), with a negative Particle before it,
signifies a Wilful and obstinate Refusal of a thing; then, (...), without a
Negative, may signify a wilful and obstinate Consent to a thing, or Compliance
with it. And so the Phrase here, (...), might signify a wilful and obstinate
ignorance.

And because he is for Proofs out of Greek Authors; Ib.
one Proof shall be given him out of an Author that he knows understood Greek
well enough. I mean the very learned and judicious Dr. Hammond: Who, in his
Annotations, writes thus upon this Text. The word (...) seems here to be taken
in a sense, not ordinary in other places, for being of opinion, or affirming,
perhaps with this addition of asserting it magisterially, without any reason
rendered for it, but a sic volo etc. So I will, I command, my Will is my reason.
And according to this excellent Annotator, the word, (...), imports
extraordinary Wilfulness here.

Nor let him think that he gains any thing, by noting, p. 20.
that it was not their ignorance that S. Peter chiefly reproves, but their
deriding and scoffing at the Doctrine of the coming of our Savior. For if he
reproved them as Scoffers; yet in the words considered, he reproves them
chiefly for their Ignorance, and in all likelihood, for their Wilful Ignorance.

p. 12^
Next he checks the Excepter, for Dispatching Scriptures quickly by the help of
a Particle and a Figure. But if arguments be so weak that they will fall with a
Fillip, why should greater force be used to beat them down? The fault is in him
that should have brought stronger. To draw a Rapier to stab a Fly; or to charge
a Pistol, to kill a Spider; I think would be preposterous.

He goes on next, to Psalm. 33.7. He gathers the waters of the Sea, Eng. The.
p. 86.
as in a Bagg: He lays up the Abysses in Storehouses. Which, according to
the Theory, hints that the Sea or Abyss before the Deluge, was enclosed within
the Vault of the Earth. In confutation of this Phantsy, So the Vulgate and
Septuagint both render it: which the Theorist quoted for rendering the forecited
place, Psalm. 33.7. as in a bag.
the Excepter brought in that Passage, Psalm. 78.13. He set the waters as in a
Bag. Which proves (according to the known Rule of Expounding one Scripture by
another) that by the waters being as in a bag, Psalm. 33.7. could not be meant
their being enclosed within the vault of the Earth. Because this Text, which
says the same thing, speaks of an open Sea, viz. the Red Sea; See Disc. p. 139,
140.
and that when it was so open, that Moses and the Israelites marched through
it. How does the Answerer take off this Objection? Why, because the Excepter
had said, that as in a Bag, Psalm. 33.7. Should be rendered, as on an heap; and
proved it by Authorities: he gives him leave to render this place so, as on an
heap. For, says he, it was done by a miracle. But if when by miracle the waters
in an open Sea stood on an heap, they were said to be in a Bag: then this shows
more plainly still, that that Expression, He gathers the waters of ahe Sea as
in a bagg, can be no manner of proof that they were ever enclosed within the
Vault of the Earth. And at last indeed he in effect confesses that he
mis-interpreted the Psalmist's words. For he declares now, that that other
place (Psalm. 33.7. Answ. p. 21.
) speaks of the ordinary posture and constitution of the Waters; which is not
on an heap, but in a level or spherical convexity with the rest of the Earth.
And thus he catches himself in a trap. For if the Text speaks of the Ordinary
posture of the waters, lying in a Level with the rest of the earth; Eng. Theor.
p. 86.
why did he wrest and misapply it, by making it speak of an Extraordinary
posture of them (an invention of his own) whereby they lay within the Vault of
the Earth?

But the Excepter must not escape here neither. Answ. p. 21.
For he complains of him for an unfair citation of a Paragraph of the Theory,
which he applies peculiarly to this Text of Psalm. 33.7. whereas it belongs to
all the Texts alleged out of the Psalms, and is a modest reflection upon the
explication of them. Now if the Paragraph belonging to all those Texts did
agree properly with none, and with one less than with the rest; surely the
Excepter might, without unfairness, cite and apply it to that one, without
meddling with the rest. And so the Complaint is frivolous. Tho how modest the
Reflection he speaks of, was, he may consider; when it backs such an
explication of Scripture, as would make Moses and the Hebrews pass through a
Sea, See Disc. p. 140.
which at the time of their passing, was enclosed within the Vault of the Earth.

He proceeds next to Job 26.7. He stretches out the North over the empty
place, and hangs the Earth upon nothing. But how can this most aptly agree to
the structure of the Theory's first Earth? when (as the Excepter noted) the
Theory it self testifies concerning Ib. p. 142.
it, that it rise upon the face of the Chaos: And could not have been formed
unless by a Concretion upon the face of the Waters: And that it had the mass of
the waters as a basis or foundation to rest upon. And so was no more stretched
out upon emptiness, and hanged upon nothing, than an Arch when built upon its
Center. And but just before, the Theory contended, from Psalm. 24.2. that it was
founded upon the Seas, and established upon the Floods. What says the Answerer
to this? (...). Not one Syllable. We must take it to be answered by the last
Expedient.

The next place is Job 38.4, 5, 6. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations
of the Earth? -- Who has laid the Measures thereof? -- Who has stretched the
line upon it? -- Who laid the cornerstone thereof. Where Measures and Line,
said the Excepter imply only that the Earth was made of a fitting Accuracy. And
he affirmed that this Earth of ours, may be compared with, and be thought to
outgo the imaginary first Earth of the Theorist's inventing, in Two things;
Comeliness, and Usefulness.

But because under the first Head of Comeliness, the Excepter makes Hills and
Mountains to be a piece of the Earth's Beauty; P. 22.
the Answerer seems much offended with him. Not at all considering, that at the
same time he allows them to be Irregularities, Dis. p. 144. and 146.
and Rudenesses, and void of Exactness and Order; and calls them the most
horrid visible pieces of Nature, and hideously amazing, etc. Only they conduce
to the natural Pulchritude of the Earth, because it consists in Asymetries and
a Wild Variety. Yet in respect of these the Earth is more comely, than if it
were one vast plain, or lay every where in a smooth and regular sphaerical
Convexity. Ib. p. 147.
Nor considering neither, that the inspired Psalmist (as the Excepter noted)
did devoutly celebrate the Wisdom of GOD, exhibited in making the Mountains and
high Hills: which, if they had been nothing but monstrous Scarrs or deformities
in the Earthly Body, or the Rubbish or Ruins of a decayed Building; he would
scarce have done so solemnly.

But as to making the Theorist admire the Beauty of Mountains; it was never in
the Excepter's thoughts. Answ. p. 22.
Disc. p. 146.
Tho he takes notice that he was mightily pleased and raised by the sight and
contemplation of them. But between the Beauty of an Object, and the Pleasure of
seeing and contemplating it, there is great Difference. And (to turn the
Answerers Complement upon himself) he that has not sense and, judgment enough
to see the difference, Answ. p. 22.
it would be very tedious to beat it into him by multitude of words.

The Usefulness of the Earth in its present Form and State, beyond that of the
Theory: the Excepter noted in Three Particulars. First, in that it had Seas for
Traffic and Navigation. Secondly, in that it had Mountains, for Bounding
Nations, for Dividing Kingdoms, for Deriving Rivers, for Yielding Minerals,
etc. Thirdly, in that it had Rains and seasonable Showers. And that Rains and
Showers were proper Rules whereby to measure the Usefulness of the Earth, and
to show that it excells that of the Theory; is manifest from GOD's making use
of the same, in a Case not unlike, said the Excepter. Disc. p. 148.
For GOD comparing Egypt and Palestine, prefers the latter before the former;
because in Egypt the Seed sown was watered with the foot as a Garden of Herbs:
but Palestine was a Land of hills and valleys, and drank water of the Rain of
heaven, Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11.

Here the Answerer at lasts chops in, and tells the Excepter how unluckily it
falls out for him, p. 23.
that a Country, that had no Rain, should be compared in Scripture, or joined
in privilege, with Paradise it self, and the Garden of GOD. For so is this very
Egypt, Genesis 13.10. tho it had no Rain, but was watered by Rivers. And Lot
lifted up his eyes, and beheld the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered
every where, (before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha) even as the Garden
of the LORD, like the Land of Egypt. Therefore, says he, the greatest
commendation of a Land, for pleasure and fertility, according to Scripture, is
its being well watered with Rivers. But that is more than the cited Scripture
speaks, and more than it means; as will appear if we consider the Occasion of
the Words, which is this. Abraham and Lot were both very rich in Cattle. Their
Stocks were so numerous, that the Tract of land where they abode together, was
not able sufficiently to feed them: for their Shepherds strove one with another
for pasture. This made it necessary that they should separate; and accordingly
they agreed to do. Lot having liberty to choose his station, or the place where
to settle himself; takes a view of the Plain of Jordan, and makes choice of
that. And the chief reason why he chose it, was upon the account of its being
well watered. And how well watered was it? Why, every where very well for the
nourishing of Cattle, it being as well supplied with River-waters, as a
pleasant Garden, or Egypt. I say, as a pleasant Garden. For were the true
Paradise meant here; Egypt, by being comparable to that (which was certainly
the sweetest place in the World) would have been preferable to Palestine.
Whereas it is evident that GOD prefers Palestine to Egypt, Deuteronomy. 11.10. But
therefore there is no necessity that this Garden of the LORD, should be the
real Paradise. For the word Lord, or God, is commonly joined to several things
in Scripture, in way of amplification, or to show the greatness and
extraordinariness of them. Thus we read of the Terror of GOD, Genesis 35. 5. that
is, an extraordinary terror. And of the Sleep of the LORD, 1 Samuel 26.12. that
is, an extraordinary Sleep. And of the Trees of GOD, Psalm. 104.16. that is,
extraordinary Trees. So here the Garden of the LORD, signifies no more than a
pleasant garden extraordinarily watered. And therefore, says the Interlineary
Gloss, it was hortus deliciosus and irriguus; a delicate and well watered
Garden.

But still notwithstanding this, a Land watered with Rivers and Showers at
once, may excel a Land watered with Rivers only. And upon this account Scripture
commends Palestine above, and prefers it much before Egypt. Even because it
being happy in Rains, as well as in Rivers; it was free from that great trouble
and slavery of watering with the foot, to which Egypt, through want of Rain,
was subject. Thus the hard task which the Answerer conceited he put upon the
Excepter, Ib.
when he bad him consider how he would interpret and apply his place in
Deuteronomy, and make it consistent with this in Genesis; is done with ease.
For albeit Egypt was as well watered as a pleasant garden, in respect of
River-water (it being watered by the overflowing of Nilus) yet it was not so
well watered as Palestine; which besides a sufficiency of Rivers, had moreover
the benefit of seasonable showers superseding the trouble, of watering with the
foot. Tho withal we must here note, that he would have put a trick upon us. For
whereas he says, Egypt, a Country that had no Rain, is compared or joined in
privilege with Paradise; it is not so. For the whole Country of Egypt is not
brought into this Comparison or Privilege; but only a Part of it leading to
Zoar, better watered than the Rest. But these words, as thou come unto Zoar,
he left out of the Quotation; which should have been in it, not only to perfect
the Clause, but to clear the sense. So that Palestine had still more reason to
be preferred before Egypt in general, because it was but one particular Part of
it, which was resembled to a fine garden; and that but in one particular thing
neither, its being watered by Rivers. Which tho they suited Cattle best, were
not so convenient for Corn, as Rains: Which where they do not fall; the seed
sown requires manual waterings. And thus at last, the thing is fairly come
about again, and we are just where we were at first, and so is Egypt too. For
GOD, in Deuteronomy, compared it to a Garden of herbs, where the seed sown was
to be watered with the foot: and here in Genesis, to a pleasant Garden, which
by reason of its Rivers, could want no water convenient for that use. But still
'twas short of Palestine.

And as for his Interpretation of the place in Deuteronomy, which he likes so
very well, (Namely, that they were not to expect such a land as Egypt, that was
a Plain naturally fruitful, as being well watered; but the land they were to
possess depended upon the Benediction of Heaven; and therefore they might
expect more or less fertility, Ib. p. 24.
according as they kept God's Commandments:) it is improper, and ill grounded.
For it supposes the fruitfulness of a Land, caused by Rains, to be less
natural, than that caused by Rivers, and it supposes the overflow of Rivers, to
depend less upon GOD's Blessing, than the Downfall of Rains. Whereas they being
both alike natural, and their Dependence upon GOD's Benediction, equal; the
Hebrews had as much reason, and as great obligation upon them, to keep GOD's
Commandments in Egypt, as in Canaan, whither they were going. Yea, (if a
comparison must be made) all things considered, they might seem to have better
grounds for expecting fertility in Canaan, upon their obedience; than they
could have in Egypt. For rains depend solely upon Providence. (And therefore
the giving of Rain, is all along ascribed to GOD, in Scripture: And of the four
Keys which the Rabbis put into the ALMIGHTY's hand, the Key of the Clouds is
one.) But the regular and fruitful Overflowing of the Nile, depends not only
upon the providence of GOD, but upon the pleasure of a great man, Heylyn,
Cosmog. in his Description of Aethiopia Superior.
the Abassine Emperor. For to him, as one tells us, the Egyptians pay tribute,
to have the Flooding Nile kept within compass. And tho Providence can easily
overrule Emperors, yet it must be allowed, that they may well be more
refractory than the Clouds. And thus again Palestine has another Advantage of
Egypt, that it pays no Fees for any Rivers or fruitful Showers. It is generally
attended with that privilege, which Caleb gave his Daughter, as an accession to
her Fortune: Judge. 1.15.
the upper and the nether Springs. That is, according to Bochart, Rains above,
and Rivers and Fountains below. And where these meet, ei solo nihil deest, says
he; there is nothing wanting to make that Soil fruitful. So that if there be
any unluckiness in this Case, it lights upon the Answerer.

To the objected Impropriety of Foundations and a Cornerstone in the Circle or
sphaerical Arch of his Primitive Earth: he answers, Ib.
that those Expressions seem an Elegancy to him. Whether understood as an
Allusion to our manner of building; or as an Ironical Interrogation, implying
that there was no Foundation (strictly so called) nor corner stone, in that
great work. Ib. p. 21. l. 16.17.
It was but just three Pages before, that he flung at the Excepter for saying
some Texts of Scripture (of which this is one) were Figurative. And now, we
see, he is fain to fetch in a Figure himself, to help to explain this very
Text. So that it is evident he will do any thing (even what he openly condemns)
to support (as he thinks) his tottering Hypothesis; which when he has done all
that he can, will fall at last.

Ibid.
Then he passes to the following verses in that 38th. Chapter. Who shut up the
Sea with doors, when it brake forth as if it had issued out of a womb? etc.
Here the Excepter gave reasons why these words must refer to what was done in
the Beginning of the World. Disc. p. 150. p. 150. 151.
(As also reasons why by the Womb here mentioned, could not be meant the
enclosure of the Abyss, as the Theory would have it.) And none of them being
answered (but by the Expedient, of passing them by) they (both) stand good. Now
if the HOLY GHOST speaks here, of the Sea when it first brake forth into being
(which all but the Theorist allow he does) what Womb could it issue out of, but
the Womb of Nothing? But instead of removing our Objections, the Answerer
brings in two of his own; which the Replicant will not answer, as he does the
Excepter's.

The first is this. If you understand the Womb of Nonentity; Answ. p. 25.
the Sea broke out of that womb the first day, and had no bars or doors set to
it, but flowed over all the Earth without check or control. Therefore that
could not be the time or state here spoken of. And to refer that restraint, or
those bars and doors, to another time, which are spoken of here in the same
verse, would be very inexcusable in the Excepter: seeing he will not allow the
Theorist to suppose those things that are spoken of in different Verses, to be
understood of different times. Now pray, what is the difference betwixt the
time of the Sea's breaking forth of the womb, and the time of its being
restrained with doors; that the Excepter should be so very inexcusable, for
allowing that difference? It was but the space of one poor day. And truly if he
had not allowed of this difference; when GOD Himself signifies, that he made
the breaking forth of the waters into being, part of his first day's work; and
the gathering them together into one place (the decreed place) where they were
shut up with bars and doors, his Third days work: he must have been very
inexcusable indeed. O but therefore the Excepter is very inexcusable, because
he will not allow the Theorist to suppose those things that are spoken of in
different verses, to be understood of different times. Be it so. But were the
different times of the Theorist then no more distant, than the different times
of the Excepter? The space between the Excepter's times, was one single day:
that between the Theorist's times, was more than sixteen hundred years. And yet
let him bring but as good authority for the Different times which he contends
for, as the Excepter does for his different times (which GOD has clearly
distinguished by different works; his creating Waters on one of the times, and
his collecting and confining them on the other:) and his different times will
by all be allowed. But because he can bring no such authority, nor any at all
besides his own; not the Excepter, but he himself, must be the very inexcusable
person in this Matter.

His second Objection runs thus. Ib.
This Metaphysical notion of the womb of nothing, is altogether impertinent, at
least in this case: for the Text is plainly speaking of things local and
corporeal, and this prison of the Sea must be understood as such. Must it so?
What necessity is there for it? None at all but to support the Theorist's
sinking Hypothesis. And for him to say it must be so understood in favor of
that; is to beg the Question. And however that may be less metaphysical, it
will be more impertinent, than our Notion is. For that we can presently make
very pertinent, by a way which himself just now cut out. Foundations and
Corner-stones are as local and corporeal things, as the rest which the Text
speaks of. Yet these, he told us, in the immediately foregoing Page, P. 24. l.
15. 16.
may be understood in way of Allusion. And let but this Womb be understood the
same way, (as it ever was) and then the Notion will be pertinent enough. But
who is impertinent for suggesting it was not so?

The last place is Prove. 8.27, 28. When he prepared the Heavens, I was there;
when he set a compass upon the face of the deep, etc. That by the word, Compass
here, could not be meant the first habitable Earth, as a Sphaere, Orb, or Arch
in the beginning set round the Abyss, according to the Theory: the Excepter
showed very plainly. Disc. p. 153, 154, 155.
But what he alleged of that nature, is answered only by the Second Expedient
(which is made great use of) that is, it is passed by with silence. Yet that
the Answerer might seem to say something; he sets up a shadow or phantsy of his
own, Answ. p. 25.
and then encounters it. The word (...) which we render compass, he (the
Excepter) says, signifies no more than the rotundity or spherical figure of the
Abyss. Let the Answerer show where the Excepter says thus. In this he charges
him falsely. A plain Untruth. Disc. p. 154.
He only said, that by the word compass, might be meant, either Earthly bounds
about the open Waters; or the Firmament of Heaven, as a Sphaere, Orb, or Arch,
set upon the face of the Deep. And are either of these, the Rotundity or
Sphaerical figure of the Abyss? Yet if they are not, (as they cannot be;) has
not the Answerer done manifest wrong to the Excepter, by suggesting a vain
Phantsy or Notion of his own, and fathering it upon him, as his? This, to speak
freely, is fencing with an unlawful Weapon, which never commends either the
Skill or Ingenuity of them that use it. He might therefore as well have waved
the false charge here, by which he would turn the point of nonsense upon the
Excepter. For what can be more highly nonsensical, than to say that the banks
about the sides, or the Air about the Surface of the Sea, are but the shape or
mere figure of it? This Gentleman in this very Chapter complains of unfairness.

And is it possible? He that does this wrong, in the very next paragraph cries
out of injury. Answ. p. 26.
Of an injustice which the Excepter has done the Theory -- by a false
accusation. For he says, the Theory makes the Construction of the first Earth
to have been merely Mechanical. And did it not make it so? Proferte tabulas.
How read we in the beginning of the Sixth Chapter of the Latin Theory? Edit. 2.
Secutus sum leges notissimas gravitatis and levitatis, and earum solo ductu
vidimus massam illam primigeniam -- pervenisse tandem in formam stabilem
regionis terrae. I have followed the most known laws of gravity and levity, and
by the sole leading of them we have seen that primigenial Mass to have come at
length into the steady form of a Region of earth. Now that Body which is led
into its form by the laws of Gravity and Levity, must certainly be made
Mechanically. And the Earth being brought into its form, by the sole guidance
of those Laws, its formation must be merely Mechanical. And then upon whom
rests the Injustice here, and the guilt of raising a false accusation? A plain
Untruth.
But for all this, the Answerer says; That the Construction of the Earth was
not merely Mechanical, in the opinion of the Theorist, you may see, Eng. Theor.
p. 65. That is, he says and unsays; and is so like a Proteus in his Philosophy,
that it is hard to discern his shape and color.

Then he brings two other Complaints against the Excepter. One, for citing the
first Edition of the Theory; for things left out in the Second. The other,
Answ. p. 26.
for defective Citations. The first, In the Introduction.
had its answer in the beginning of the Reply. The Second, must be better made
out before it can deserve one.

And whereas to show that the aforesaid Places of Scripture, cited by the
Theory, were but figurative; the Excepter confronted them with that one Text
(instead of many) who shakes the Earth out of her place, Disc. p. 155.
and the Pillars thereof tremble; which cannot be literally interpreted: The
Answerer will not allow Pillars there to be understood literally, for this
worthy reason. Even because there are no such Pillars of the Earth upon any
Hypothesis. Answ. p. 27.
So that it seems Hypotheses are not to be regulated by Scripture-Expressions,
but the signification or sense of them, is to be overul'd and determined by
Hypotheses. At which rate, the Hands and Eyes of ALMIGHTY GOD, in the holy
Bible, must be, or at least may be understood literally; as being agreeable to
the Hypothesis of the Anthropomorphites.

CHAP. VIII.
THis Chapter treats of the perpetual Equinox of the Theory, before the Flood.
And the Answerer would fain make the World believe, that the Excepter thinks
that the Earth (when it changed its supposed Situation or Right Position to the
Sun) was translated from the Equator into the Ecliptic: Ib.
and that before the change, in the Antediluvian state, it moved directly under
the Equator. A pretty Mistake indeed, had it been really thus. But we shall see
it proved, just as some other false Charges have been. However to show that his
Will is good, he endeavors to squeeze Evidence out of these (the Excepter's)
words. So that in her annual motion about the Sun, she was carried directly
under the Equinoctial, without any manner of obliquity in her site, or
declination toward either of the Tropics, in her course: And therefore could
never cut the Equinoctial, by passing (as now she is presumed to do) from one
Tropic to the other. Now pray, was not the Ecliptic, the Equinoctial in the
Theorist's first World? And was not the Earth carried directly under the
Equinoctial? And was not that World without Tropics? And must it not be true
then that the Earth never cut the Equinoctial, by passing (as she is now
presumed to do) from one Tropic to the other? But where does the Excepter speak
a word here, of her being translated from the Equator, at the change of her
position? or of her moving directly under it, in the Antediluvian state? So far
was he from that, that what he says, is of the quite contrary Importance. As
showing that the Earth moved always under the Equinoctial of the Praediluvian
World, which was the Ecliptic; and could not possibly have an Excursion to the
Tropics, as now she has: For in that State there were no such things. And
besides that the words cited carry this sense most plainly in them, the
Excepter, Disc. p. 158.
in the very Sentence immediately preceding them, declares; that by the Earth's
right situation to the Sun, is meant that the axis of the Earth was always kept
in a Parallelism to that of the Ecliptic. And could it then in the
Antediluvian state, move directly under the Equator? Or could the Answerer
perceive (as his word is) that the Excepter thought it did so? Then his
Perception was more quick than true. And now it is to be hoped that he will
better perceive, that he might have spared those Leavers and Pullies, Answ. p.
27.
he speaks of for removing the Earth. And so he might have done the unlucky
Screws of this unhappy Mistake, A mistake.
whereby he would have forced the Excepters words, into a crooked meaning: but
they only make his own Observation stand awry.

But that the Earth had a Direct Situation to the Sun, causing a perpetual
Equinox; is very unlikely, said the Excepter, Disc. p. 159.
for this Reason. Because then the same would have remained until now, or else
in the World there would have been found a more full account of the Change
thereof. To this the Answerer opposes, that other things are lost out of
memory. Answ. p. 28.
And instances in two, the Age of the World, and the place of Paradise. But
Time and Place are but Circumstances of things, and so might sooner and more
easily slip out of mind. Whereas the Loss of the Equinox, by the variation of
the Earth's Position would not only have been a real, but a mighty thing. For
it must have been attended not only with a strange Alteration as to Seasons of
the year, as to the Temperature of the Air, and as to the condition of the
Earth; but also with sensible Effects upon the Bodies of men, as Heat, Cold,
etc. Which Effects would not only have caused Noah and his Family to Observe
this Change, (so mighty in its Consequences as well as in it self) but likewise
would have so far imprinted, and set home the Observation upon them; as to have
given occasion to a lasting traditional Remembrance of the same. And what if
the just Age of the World be lost, (the Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins differing
about it;) and Chronology being a difficult thing, subject to innumerable
intricacies and entanglements?) Yet it is clear enough that the World had a
Beginning. And what if we be at a loss for the true Place of Paradise, which
was known to none but Adam and Eve; and which GOD perhaps designed to bury out
of the memory of men, as he did Moses's Body out of Israel's knowledge, to
prevent Superstition? Yet still that there was a Paradise, is most certain. But
this is that which the pretended Equinox fails in; in the truth or certainty of
its Existence. We have no Evidence, no clear and convincing Evidence to prove
that it ever was in Nature.

The Excepter farther objected, Disc. p. 166.
that Scripture does not favor this Equinox, but rather discountenance it. And
to make the Objection good, he cited Genesis 8.22. While the Earth remains, seed
time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and night and day
shall not cease. Which place the Answerer owns, Answ. p. 29.
may be understood of the restoration of a former order in the Seasons of the
year; and so by his own Confession, it is good evidence on our side. Ib.
And whereas he tells of Reasons which the Theorist set down, to make it
probable, that the words ought to be understood as a Declaration of such an
Order for the Seasons of the Year, as was brought in at that time; which
Reasons the Excepter has not thought fit to take notice of, or refute: These
Reasons seem to be the perpetual Equinox, the Longaevity of the Antediluvians,
and the Appearance of the Rainbow, first in the new World. But before such
Phaenomonaes can be offered as good Reasons to prove other things, they must be
better established themselves. To go about to prove one part of an Hypothesis,
by another part of it, when the whole is questioned, and lies under debate; is
no allowable way of proceeding. Yet these Reasons the Excepter did take
sufficient notice of.

But the Answerer's finding fault with the Excepter here, for not taking notice
of Reasons; puts him upon a more just, and most seasonable Recrimination. For
five Instances heing alleged by the Excepter, Disc. p. 166, 167, 168.
in proof of what he affirmed of the Scripture; viz. that it rather
discountenances the Equinox than favors it: He answers three of them, only by
his last Expedient; that is, by passing them by.

To the Fourth, being the Barrenness of the Earth, from the divine Malediction
denounced against it for Adam's sin; which Barrenness is utterly inconsistent
with the Doctrine of the Equinox: his Answer is this. Answ. p. 29.
That Curse was supernatural, and might have its effect in any Position of the
Earth. But then this Effect overthrows his Hypothesis, which maintains a
perpetual Spring to all the World, and a continual verdure of the Earth. Eng.
Theor. p. 196.

Disc. p. 169.
Lastly, the Intemperature of the Air in Paradise, inferred from the Coats of
Skins, made by GOD, to cloth the Protoplasts with, and defend them from cold;
was brought in as an Instance to show that Scripture does not favor the
Equinox but discountenance it. And to this it is answered thus. Answ. p. 30.
He (the Excepter) must tell us in what Climate he supposes Paradise to have
stood: and which way and how far, Adam and Eve were banished from it. When those
things are determined, we shall know what to Judge of his Argument, and of
Coats of skins. In the mean time he may please to consider these Four things.
Disc. p. 169, 170
First, that it has been already showed, that in all likelihood these coats of
skins were made to defend our first Parents from Cold. Secondly, that for ought
appears in the sacred Story, they were clothed with these Coats, before they
were turned out of Paradise, Thirdly, that they could not be banished far from
it, because when they were thrown out of it, Cherubim were set to guard the
Entrance, lest they should return into it again. And therefore if Paradise
stood in a pleasant and temperate Region of the Earth (as who can think
otherwise?) they may be supposed (for a great while) to abide in the
Neighborhood of it. Fourthly, Suppose them banished which way you will, and as
far from it as you please; yet they could have needed no Coats to defend them
from Cold, in case the Theory's Hypothesis were true. Eng. Theor. p. 251:
For according to that, in the primaeval Earth, we have every where through the
temperate Climates, all the general Characters of Paradise, so that the trouble
will be rather in that competition, what part or Region to pitch upon in
particular: than to find a seat that had all those beauties and conveniences.
And therefore had Adam and Eve been banished never so far from Paradise into any
temperate Climates (and none were then intemperate but those that were also
uninhabitable) yet they must still have been in Paradisiacal Regions and
circumstances; and so could have needed no Coats of Skins. But GOD being
pleased to make them such Coats to defend them from the Cold, this subverts the
General Paradisiacalness of the primitive Earth, and consequently its Equinox;
by implying there was a cold or intemperate air, in the habitable parts of it.

The Answerer proceeds thus in the next Paragraph. After Lastly, I expected no
more: Answ. p. 30.
but he has two or three Reasons after the Last. Thus he cannot forbear
playing upon the Excepter, tho he does it with the worst luck that ever man
had. For even by this Reflection (intended to disparage him) he only exposes
himself, by betraying and proclaiming his own Inadvertency. For the Lastly he
notes, plainly belongs (as any one may see) to the Last of the Instances
showing that Scripture does not favor the Equinox. Disc. p. 169.
But still the Reasons against the Equinox alleged in that Chapter, might
follow in their due Course or Order. So that tho it be about a little thing, he
here again falls into a great mistake. Another Mistake.


The next Argument of the Excepter's against the Equinox, is, Ib. p. 171.
That it would have kept one Hemispaere of the terrestrial Globe unpeopled. For
grant Adam to have been planted on either side of the Torrid Zone, such was the
fiery heat thereof, that neither he nor his could have gone through it to the
other side. And here the Answerer is so put to it, that he is forced to betake
himself to his first Expedient to solve the Objection by Extraordinary
Providence. Answ. p. 30.
Telling us that the Theorist never excluded the Ministry of Angels; and they
could as easily carry them through the Torrid Zone, as over the Ocean. As for
Angels carrying men over the Ocean, let him blame those that assert it: he
knows the Excepter to be very clear from it. See Disc. chapter 11. 7.
But if he will have them carried through the Torrid Zone by their miraculous
Ministry; he must remember, that this is to show us the arm of Omnipotency,
Eng. Theor. p. 18.
and to cut the knot when we cannot loose it. Tho had Providence shown this
signal favor to Mankind, we need not question but it would have been entered in
the Records of Heaven. But the inspired Writings remember nothing of it.

Another Reason brought by the Excepter why there could be no Equinox, Disc. p.
174.
is, that it would have put by the Rains which helped to raise the Flood. And
here the Philosopher is fain to run to his old Refuge again, and to answer (by
the same Expedient) That those rains that made the Flood were Extraordinary,
Answ. p. 30.
and out of the course of Nature. But this is little less than giving up his
Hypothesis; at least it is condemning it as weak and insufficient. And truly
what Hypothesis, tho never so mean and full of Defects, would not support it
self under all its flaws and imperfections, by such a lawless liberty as this?
A liberty of recourse to Extraordinary Providence, and of bringing in Miracles,
and the Ministry of Angels, to help to take off and solve those Difficulties,
which puzzle its Author, and baffle its Principles. To what purpose did he
invent a Theory, and write a Treatise with design to shut out one Extraordinary
Providence, Eng. Theor. p. 2^. l. 33, 34.
the creating of new Waters to make the Deluge; when in this Treatise, and to
uphold that Theory, he is constrained to let in thus many?

But here the Answerer is plainly for shifting, to avoid a blow; which, for
that, falls but the heavier upon him. The Theory, said the Excepter, Disc. p.
175:
will have the Rains to be antecedent to the Description of the Abyss: Eng.
Theor. p. 98.
And he quoted these words, in proof of it. I do not suppose the Abyss broken
open till after the forty days rain. But then, adds the Excepter, this is most
directly against Scripture; for that plainly affirms, that the Fountains of the
great Deep, and the windows of Heaven were both opened on one day, Genesis 7.11.
Now to salve this repugnancy to Scripture, the Answerer here declares, that he
does not suppose the Cataracts of Heaven to have been opened before, which made
the Grand rains. Answ. p. 31.
But then he must suppose that there were two forty-days-rains; one, before the
Abyss was broke up, and another beginning with it, and continuing after it. But
is not this also as much against Scripture, which owns but one forty-days rain,
that commenced with the Disruption? And truly had the Vapors of the
Atmosphaere been exhausted (as they must have been) by the first continued
forty-days rain (according to the Answerer's Supposition;) where could have
been a supply for the second forty-days rain (especially when the Rains that
fell then, were to be grand rains) without a new Creation of Waters, which the
Theory designedly opposes? And then the LORD said unto Noah, Genesis 7.4. Yet
seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the Earth forty days and forty
nights. And is it likely that GOD would have given that Preserver of the World
notice, that Rains to make the Flood, should begin a Week after; if it had
already rained for three and thirty days before, or for above a Month past?

Lastly, against the Equinox it was suggested, that Authors of all sorts have
disputed, Disc. p. 176.
in what Season of the year the Flood came in, and the World had its beginning.
Which hints that there was not any one Season through all the Earth at once.
But the Answerer intimates, that upon Supposition of an Equinox according to
the Theory, Answ. p. 31.
it might be so. And why, says he, may not that have given occasion to the
general belief, that the World began in the Spring? Did he insist upon that
Belief, he must prove it to be general, and to be occasioned by the Equinox;
and not take it for granted. Ib.
But because he says he does not depend upon it, we need not reply to it any
farther neither.

In the next place the Excepter considered the Authorities, called in to
establish the Doctrine of the Equinox. That is, by proving that the Earth had
suffered a change as to its Position, and thereby had lost its former Right
Situation. But these Authorities were not found clear enough to do the Theory's
business; as will best appear to them that shall peruse the Examination of the
same. Disc. Chapter 8. 7.
And here the Answerer is much offended, as if his Witnesses were not fairly
heard, Answ. p. 32.
but rather unjustly and illegally rejected, because they were unskilful in
giving the Causes or Reasons of a matter of fact. We reply. All Testimonies
must be taken as they are. And where evidence is not clear, for the same reason
it is not certain, nor can it be valid. And when Witnesses give it in, if they
trip and faulter in any part of it; we have good reason to suspect the whole.
And as improbable Circumstances in their Allegations, will invalidate them in
matter of fact: so impossible ones, if mingled with them, will quite overthrow
them. The true case of the Testimonies before us. They contain such improbable
and impossible things, as do not only weaken, but destroy them. Should twenty
Mariners confidently affirm, that they sailed in a Ship from Dover to Calice,
by a brisk Gale out of a pair of Bellows: tho this be a matter of fact, must
they not be reckoned notorious Liars? Or if forty Engineers should positively
swear, that the Powder-mill near London, was lately blown up, by a Mine then
sprung at Great Waradin in Hungary; must they not be grievously perjured
Persons? And the Philosophers attesting the Earth's Inclination, having charged
their Evidence with as great Impossibilities; the Reports they make, must be as
little credible. Or let us take the Instance which the Answerer gives, the
Peloponesian War. Ibid.
If the Historian that writes it, had told that the Soldiers who fell in it,
fought only with Sunbeams, and single Currants which grew thereabouts; and
that hundreds and thousands were stabbed with the one, and knocked on the head
with the other: who would believe that ever there were such Weapons in that
war; that ever there was such a fatal War in that Country? Yet as possible it
was for multitudes of men to be killed by these Instruments; as for the
Position of the Earth to be changed by those Causes, which were assigned by the
Theory's Philosophic Witnesses. For how could the Southern Pole of the Earth
dip into the Air, through excess of heat, or excess of Fruits thereabouts; when
at both Poles the heat of the Sun was equal, and so was the fatness and
fertility of the Soil? (See Disc. p. 180, 181.) Or if these were the Causes of
that great Effect, why then was it not wrought sooner, than at the end of above
sixteen hundred and fifty years? And yet these very Causes being not only
brought into their Evidence, but made as true and express a part thereof, as
the Inclination of the Earth it self; their Testimonies must extend to both
alike: and in case the one be of doubtful credit, the other must be the same.
Yea, the one, according to their Allegations, being Causes, and the other but
an effect of them; if they be false witnesses as to the Causes upon which the
Effect, according to their evidence, had its whole dependence; their
Testimonies, as to the Effect, must needs fail and be nothing worth. For they
plainly ascribing it to causes that were not, Disc. p. 179, 189, etc.
and so could not produce it; at the same time, and by the same words that they
attest there was such an Effect; they witness withal that it could not be. And
so their Evidence is as far from being valid and authentic; as contradiction is
from truth.

But what ill has the Excepter said of Anaxagoras; that the Answerer taxes him
not only with a Groundless, Answ. p. 33.
but also a Rude Censure of that famous man? Why, Disc. p. 184.
he asserted that an huge stone at the River Aegos in Thracia fell down from
the Sun. And he being a Principal Witness of the change of the Earth's
Position: the Excepter brings in this against him to weaken his evidence. Which
it may well do upon this account; because it bespeaks him a man as like to be
Heterodox, as any of the Learned Ancients. And this Censure is neither
Groundless, nor Rude. Not Groundless. For as his Assertion was most wild, and
childish, and ridiculous, and false; so it was as absurd, unreasonable, and
extravagantly Heterodox as could readily be invented in Astronomy. Nor could he
slip into this Error by chance, nor could he mean any thing else by the
Assertion, than what he expressed; because it agrees so well (as the Excepter
observed) to the strain of his Philosophy, Ib.
it being suitable to his Hypothesis of generating Stars out of Stones. Now that
man (be he who, or what he will, even Anaxagoras himself) who is guilty of one
so abominably gross and shameful an Heterodoxness in Astronomy; is certainly as
like to be guilty of another, as any of the Learned: and therefore the Censure
cannot be Groundless. Nor is it Rude. For first, as we see, it is well
grounded. Built (as the Excepter said before) upon a wretched foundation of his
own laying. Ib.
He pulled down the censure upon himself, by giving most just occasion for it.
Secondly, it was spoken of him as a Witness chiefly. As a Witness in that Case
where the Excepter was concerned. And witnesses, we know, may be canvass'd and
looked into, as well as what they say. They may be sifted, and explored, and
spoken against too; if they give in false evidence, instead of true. Thirdly,
it was spoken with this Caution, not to disparage Anaxagoras, Ib. p. 185.
but only to signify -- that in any dark or doubtful opinion, we have no reason
-- to lay the stress of our belief upon his Authority, -- contrary to the whole
World of the Learned. Fourthly, Pliny passed an heavier Censure upon him, which
hitherto was never said to be rude. For speaking of Anaxagoras, and this stone
which he phantsied fell out of the Sun: Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 58.
Farewell the knowledge of Natures works, says he, and welcome confusion of all,
in case we should believe it. And how could he possibly reflect more highly
upon an eminent Philosopher, than to make him the Author of such an Assertion,
or to make him the Patron of such an opinion; as if People had believed it,
would have let confusion into the World, by banishing natural Philosophy out of
it? Is not this a more rugged Censure, than saying he was a man as like to be
Heterodox, as any of the learned Ancients? Yet who ever called it Rude?

But how extravagant soever Pliny thought him, the Answerer takes him to be
very excusable. And accordingly offers to make his excuse two ways. First, by
saying, that we are not to imagine, Answ. p. 34.
that all the opinions of the ancient Philosophers, are truly conveyed to us.
And so the Earth's Inclination or its changed Position, which he conceives to
be the Opinion of several Philosophers; may be nothing but a falsity, or
misrepresented Notion of theirs. Secondly, by saying, that his Assertion of a
Stone that fell from the Sun, cannot be literally true. Ib.
And therefore like a witty Mythologist, he interprets it of the Incrustation
of a fixed star, and its descent into the lower World. But did ever any star
come down so low, as to rest upon the Earth? Or did ever any star lie to be
seen and wondered at by a Rivers side? Plutar. Lysand.
Or could the smallest fixed star be contained in Thracia? Or would it amount to
no bigger bulk or burden, than might be carried at one Waggon-load? Pliny.
Or can a Star entrusted with maculaes come out of the Sun? Yet all these
Circumstances (besides the generating of Stars out of stones, which is capable
of no very clever Mythological Exposition) belong to Anaxagoras's monstrous
Assertion, according to the account that is given us of it. And if it be not
truly his; and if it be not literally true: let the Answerer blame Plutarch and
Laertius for making it so. But they two are the very authors out of whole Books
he cites his Testimonies, for the Earth's changing of its Position. And we only
bring in a third Person, telling the same story (of this stony fiery fallen
star) for a literal truth; namely Pliny. And his Authority cannot but help much
to confirm the thing, he being well known to be no trivial Writer.

But does not the Answerer forget himself in this case? Is there not a greater
than Anaxagoras here? What thinks he of Moses? We might fill many Pages with
his glorious Character, and yet come short of his real worth. Let us only note
that Encomium therefore which the H. GHOST bestows upon him; where for his
Excellency, he compares the very Messiah to him, Act. 3.22. A Prophet shall the
LORD your GOD raise up unto you, like unto me. That is, for Wisdom, Miracles,
etc. Now is not the Theorist more rude to this great and illustrious Prophet;
than the Excepter was to the aforesaid Philosopher? The Excepter only noted
Anaxagoras's Doctrine, as delivered to the World by unexceptionable Pens; and
made a just Observation upon it, more mild, or less severe, than a considerable
Author (upon the same Passage) had made before him. But the Theorist confronted
the inspired Doctrine of Moses; and that not only by implied, but also by
explicit contradiction, in sundry instances. For Moses teaches, Genesis 1.16.
that GOD made Two great Lights. The Theorist argues that he made but one, Eng.
Theor. p. 241.
by doubting of and disputing against the Presence of the Moon in the first
World. Moses, in his Cosmopoeia, treats of Light, of Stars, of the Soul of man,
Genesis 1.3. v. 16. Genesis 2.7. v. 1. Subjectum autem Geneseos Mosaicae, etc. Theor.
Edit. 2. p. 234. Eng. Theor. p. 288. Genesis 4.22.
and of the Host of the Heavens. The Theorist averrs, that the Subject of his
Genesis is the Chaos, and that most confused and earthly; and the things made
out of this Chaos and related to it as a Center. Moses teaches, that GOD gave
Adam Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, as He did, over the Fowl of the Air,
and over every living thing that moves upon the Earth. The Theorist makes it
one Vital or Primary Assertion of his Hypothesis; Eng. Theor. p. 244.
that the Primitive Earth was without Mountains, or a Sea. Moses assures us,
that Tubal Cain was an Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron. The
Theorist says, that in the first Earth they had no Metals nor Minerals, as he
believed. Are not these plain Contradictions of Moses? Yet the Replicant does
not say that they were Rude ones. Tho whether they are not more Rude and
Groundless, than the Excepter's Censure of Anaxagoras was; let the Ingenuous
and Impartial, judge. And besides, in his English Theory (p. 288.) he puts this
amongst the Vital Assertions of it. That neither Noah 's flood, nor the present
Form of the Earth, can be explained in any other method that is rational, nor
by any other causes that are intelligible. And speaking of the Ancient Earth
and Abyss (p. 93.) he delivers himself thus. If they were in no other Form, nor
other state than what they are under now, the expressions of the Sacred Writers
concerning them are very strange and inaccountable, without any sufficient
ground, or any just occasion for such uncouth representations. Some perhaps may
see as much rudeness here, as in any thing that the Excepter said of
Anaxagoras. And should absolute strangers to his Religion read this Author:
they might possibly be apt to think, from many passages in his books, that
instead of believing these sacred Writers in several Matters; he designs to
confute them. And should they at the same time be strangers to these Writers
too, they might be apt to think also that they deserve to be confuted, or that
they were not worth confuting. For to say that their representations of things
are uncouth, and that their Expressions are occasionless and groundless, and
very strange, and inaccountable; is the same thing as to say that they writ
nonsense. These are our Authors words: and if we will believe him (who must
needs know best) he finds no reason to alter his Opinion in any one particular.
And when he can thus express himself of sacred Writers, because their Doctrines
differ from his Notions: is he not like to be thought by some, to be as deep in
the dirt of rudeness, as the Excepter is in the mire, for saying what he did of
an heathen Author?

To the Philosophers, the Answerer says, he might have added the Testimonies of
Poets, who tell us of a perpetual Spring. And particularly he quotes Ovid for
it. But if his Evidence must be admitted, it is but reason that we should have
the whole of it. And if we take it in its full latitude, there is nothing more
contrary to the Assertions of the Theory, than that. For as after that
Testimony of his, ver erat Aeternum, Answ. p. 35.
etc. there was a perpetual Spring; he says, Flumina jam Lactis, jam flumina
Nectaris ibant.

Sometimes Rivers flowed with Milk, sometimes with Nectar: so before it, he
speaks many things, Metamor. l. 1. in initio.
perfectly destructive to the Doctrine of the Theory. For he tells, that in the
Beginning, and even before man was created; some Deity or other made Seas; such
Seas as had Shores, and were tossed with Winds, and so were open Seas.

Tum Freta diffudit, rapidisque tumescere ventis
Jussit, and ambitae circundare littora terrae.
Then Seas he made, with blustering Storms to swell;
And Shores to the Earth enclosed he gave as well.
Then he says there were Valleys, and Stony Mountains.

Jussit and extendi campos, subsidere Valles,
Fronde tegi sylvas, lapidosos surgere montes.
Next Fields came forth, and Valleys sunk below,
And leavy Trees, and stony Hills did grow.
And tells us farther, that at the same time, there were two Zones of the five,
covered with deep Snows. And that there were not only Mists but Clouds, and
dreadful Thunders, and cold Winds, with Lightnings.

Nix tegit alta duas. --
Illic and nebulas, illic consistere nubes
Jussit, and humanas motura tonitrua mentes,
Et cum fulminibus facientes frigora ventos.
With pure white Snows Two Zones were covered,
There Mists did fall, and Clouds were gathered;
And frightful Thunders dwelt that awe men's minds,
And flashing Lightnings, with most nipping Winds.
So that if he spoke one word for the Theory, he spoke many against it. And
therefore it had been better that he had said nothing; and that the Answerer
had waved this Testimony of his.

Answ. p. 36.
In the next place he brings in the Christian Father's Character of Paradise, in
proof of his perpetual praediluvian Equinox. And this Character he takes from
Bella^mine, De Great. prim. hom cap. 12.
who delivers it in these words. Paradisus ita describitur a Sancto Basilio,
etc. Paradise is so described by S. Basil, in his Book of Paradise; by John
Damascen in his second Book of the Faith, and the eleventh Chapter; By S.
Austin in the fourteenth book of the City of GOD, and the tenth Chapter; by
Alchimus Avitus, and Claudius Marius Victor, and others above cited; by Isidore
in his fourteenth book of Etymologys, and third Chapter; and others commonly:
as if in it there were a perpetual Spring, no colds, no heats, no rains, snows,
hails, also no clouds; which very thing the Scripture signifies, when it says
the first of mankind were naked in Paradise. We reply. First, that the Cardinal
who here sums up the Evidence of these Witnesses, as a Judge; did himself
pronounce Extravagant things in the Case. And therefore no wonder if he picks
up, and brings in such kind of Testimonies, as may be somewhat suitable to his
own He believed that the waters of the Flood came not into Paradise; But that
Enoch was kept alive there when the Earth was drowned; and that he and Elias do
dwell together there now, and shall continue to do so, till such time as they
come from thence to oppose Antichrist. vid. Cap. 14. De Great. prim. hom. De
great. prim. hom. Cap. 12. Answ. p. 37.
Notions. Secondly, the Testimonies brought in by his own Pen, he blots out
again with his own hand. For speaking of Bede's opinion, that Paradise was a
place as high as the Moon; (which he makes the opinion of Bridefert rather, who
glossed upon Bid) he says, that the Author of that opinion, was pleased to
make use of an Hyperbole; that by the height of that, Paradisi excellentiam
demonstraret, he might set forth the excellency of Paradise. Quemidmodum
intelligimus verba Sancti Basilii, etc. After the same manner that we
understand the words of S. Basil -- of John Damascen, -- of Alchimus Avitus,
etc. And when what they said was Hyperbolical; to the Theory's purpose it
cannot be material.

After this he attaques the two Queries made by the Excepter against the
praediluvian Equinox. The First was this. Disc. p. 185.
Would it (in likelihood) have continued till the Flood? For the water of the
Abyss being in process of time exhausted, and the exterior Earth hanging hollow
over an empty space round it; by being pendulous and oblong, the waters upon
that Earth abounding (for some reasons given) more at one Pole of it, Disc. p.
187.
than at the other: might have sunk or swayed down that Pole which was
overcharged. To this the Answerer opposes; P. 37.
the Waters were not more rarifi'd toward one Pole, than toward another. And
we never said or thought they were. But in his English Theory we read (p. 229.)
that the Current (of the waters from the Poles) might in some places rest and
be stopped; and then it would spread it self into Lakes, and rise till it grew to
such an height, as to be able by its force or weight, to overflow and break
loose again, before it could pass farther. Now in case the Current might thue
be stopped, and the obstruction be so great as to cause the Waters to swell into
Lakes; how easily might there be more or greater Lakes near to one of the Poles
than the other? And so how easily would the overweight of water have sunk the
Earth down at the praeponderating Pole, tho the Waters were no more rarified
there than at the other? That therefore being wide of the Mark he should have
hit; he sends another Arrow after it, taken out of the Quiver of Philosophy. Ib.
The empty space betwixt the exterior Region of the Earth, and the Abyss below,
would be filled with such gross vapors, that it would be little purer than
water: and would stick to the Earth much closer than its Atmosphaere that is
carried about with it. But this shaft also, tho levelled more directly at it,
misses the intended Scope. For if those Vapors were but a little purer than
water, yet look how much they were so, and so much the weaker they would be,
and less able to keep the pendulous Earth in its Aequilibrious or even posture.
And that grossest Vapors are very much purer or thinner than water, is evident
from hence; that they cannot sustain or buoy up a piece of light Cork; whereas
upon waters, ships of greatest Burden float and swim. And tho the Atmosphaere
be carried about with the Earth; yet if that were enclosed with an oblong or
Oval Orb of Earth; this Orb would not sit half so fast and steady upon that
Sphaere of Vapors, as it would do upon a Sphaere of Waters: the Consistency of
Water being many times as thick again, as any Mass of Vapors can be, in their
natural Constitution.

The Second Query is this. Granting there was such an Equinox in the first
World, Disc. p. 187.
Would not the natural day, toward the latter end of that World, have been
longer, than in the former periods of the same? Yet that the days just before
the Flood were of no unusual length, is evident in the very Story of the Flood;
the Duration of which we find computed by Months consisting of Thirty days
apiece. Whereas, says the Excepter, had Days been grown longer, fewer of them
would have made a Month. This, says the Answerer, is a mere Blunder. And he
proves it thus. If thirty days were to go to a Month, Answ. p. 28.
whether the days were longer or shorter, there must be thirty of them; and the
Scripture does not determine the length if the days. Tho Scripture does not
limit or account for the length of days expressly, yet it does it implicitly,
and withal very plainly and intelligibly. For it gives us to understand, that
days before the flood, were of the same length that they are of now; by
informing us that months and years which were of the same length then, that
they are of at present, were made up of the same numbers of days. For how could
there be just twelve Months in the Year, at the time of the Deluge, and thirty
days in each of those Months; if days then had not consisted, as they do now,
of four and twenty hours a piece? And as Providence has so ordered Nature, that
days (which depend upon its Diurnal motion) should be measured by
Circumgyrations of the Earth: So it has ordered likewise that Months (which
depend upon its Annual Motion) should be measured by its progress in the
Heavens. And as it has so suited these Motions, that the Earth, while it makes a
Month, by running from one Sign in the Zodiac to another; should turn about
thirty times upon its own Axis, and thereby make so many Days: So it has taken
care, that each of these Circumrotations should be performed in four and twenty
hours, and consequently that every day should be just so long; that thirty of
them (in way of round reckoning) might complete a Month. But now had the
Circumgyrations of the Earth grown more slow toward the Deluge (by such causes
as the Excepter suggested) so that every day had consisted of thirty hours,
suppose: it is manifest that fewer than thirty days (they being longer than
formerly) must have made a Month. Because then before the Earth could have
turned round thirty times; she would have been translated, by her progressive
motion, from one Celestial Constellation to another; and so the Month would
have been consummated. But to talk, as the Answerer does, that the Month should
be lengthened by the days being so; is a fearful Blunder indeed. Tho as luck
will have it still, it falls upon himself. For let the days (by slackning of
the Earth's Diurnal motion) have been never so long; yet (its Annual motion
continuing the same) the Month must needs have kept its usual Length; only
fewer days would have made it up; the very thing objected.

The Answerer therefore need not have been so officious, as to undertake to
teach the Excepter to speak: which he was pleased to do in these Words. Answ.
p. 30.
I suppose that which he would have said, and which he had confusedly in his
mind, was this; That the Month would have been longer at the Flood, than it was
before. The Answerer it seems, had such a confused thought in his mind; but the
Excepter ('it is plain) was clear from it. And truly had he been guilty of it, he
should have counted it a Mere Blunder. For how could the Month be longer, for
the Earth's Circumgyrations being slower; when the Month was measured by such a
motion of the Earth, as would have continued as swift as ever, tho its
Circumgyrations had been never so slack? The Moon never turns circularly upon
her own Center, to make days and nights; and yet she makes regular Months and
Years by her Periodical and Synodical Courses. And had the Circumgyrations of
the Earth been never so swift at the Deluge, or had they been never so slow, or
had they been none at all; still the Months would have been the same that they
were; and neither longer nor shorter. Tho then indeed they could not have
consisted of so many days and nights, following each other in an orderly
succession; because through want of the Earth's Diurnal motion, there would
have been no such vicissitude of them.

And since the Answerer took upon him to tell the Excepter what he had in his
mind, as he supposed: the Replicant, in requital of his kindness, as well as in
imitation of his Pattern; may suggest to him what he should have had in his
thoughts. When he said, if thirty days were to go to a Month, whether the days
were longer or shorter, there must be thirty of them: he should have
considered, that these thirty days were to be of such a length just, as that
that Number of them might make a Solar Month. For supposing them either longer
or shorter than so, they could not be such days as the Scripture speaks of;
because thirty of them still made such a Month. Whereas if they had been
shorter, as there must have been more; so if they had been Longer, fewer would
have done it. And thus the Answerer's design of throwing a Blunder upon the
Excepter, is quite defeated: and while he made an awkward Blow at him, he only
struck and wounded himself.

Yet the Dust he here raises, can neither hide the Objection which the Excepter
made; nor yet so blind the Reader's eyes, as that he should not see it remains
unanswered. For after all, if the Contiguity of the Sphaere of the Exterior
Earth with the Abyss, ceased; by reason the Waters of the Abyss were exhaled:
that Sphaere of the Earth must be carried about with less Celerity than before
it was. Especially if the Moon came late into the Earth's Neighborhood; which
being an heavy Luggage in the outward part of the Earth's Vortex; like a Clog
hanged upon the Rim of a Wheel, would make it turn more slowly, as the Excepter
objected.

But because we have hinted, that Scripture gives us to understand, that there
were twelve Months in the Antediluvian year, and thirty days in each of those
Months; it will not be amiss to conclude this Chapter, with showing how
Scripture makes the things out. In the eighth of Genesis then, and the fifth
verse, it informs us, that the waters decreased until the tenth Month. And
after this, that at the end of forty days Noah opened the window of the ark, v.
6th. And that he stayed yet other seven days, and sent forth the Dove, v. 10th.
And that he stayed yet other seven days, and sent forth the Dove again, v.
12th. Which fifty four days following the first day of the tenth Month, on
which the tops of the Mountains were seen, v. 5th. show that there must be
twelve months in the year; and indeed they make them up so many, bating five
days, which we must suppose were still to run out, before the first Month of
the next year came in, v. 13th. And then it shows that there were thirty days
in each Month. For first we find twenty seven days in one Month in this
Chapter, v. 14th. And as we read in the Seventh Chapter, the Waters prevailed
upon the Earth one hundred and fifty days, v. 24th. Yet they began to come in,
the seventeenth day of the second month, v. 11th. and they began to decrease by
the seventeenth day of the seventh month. Chap. 8th. v. 3d. Whence it is plain
that the hundred and fifty days made just five months, during which the Waters
prevailed; and so every month must consist of thirty days.

CHAP. IX.
IN the beginning of this Chapter, relating to the Oval Figure of the first
Earth; he goes about to rectify a Principle of the Excepter's: Answ. p. 38.
That terrestrial Bodies have a nitency inwards or downwards toward their
Central point. But let this be understood of Self-centred and Quiescent Earthly
Bodies; and the Assertion will need no Rectification. And so the Excepter
really meant it should be understood. For he was not yet come to Consider the
Mass upon which the Primitive Earth was founded, as turning upon its own
Center; See Disc. p. 190.
but was going on toward the Consideration.

The Waters of that Mass (Globular at first) rising up above the Equator, by
its gyration upon its own Axis: became oval (and so made the Earth of that
Figure) defluendo ad latera, Disc. p. 193, 194. Answ. p. 39.
by flowing down at the sides of the Globe. So the Theorist said at first. To
this word the Excepter spoke so home, that the Answerer, we see, was almost
angry, by the Reflections he makes. We will therefore touch that tender place
no more, for fear of giving farther Provocation. And we the rather forbear to
press upon it, because the Answerer, we find, is sensible it is sore, by the
Plaster he is fain to apply to it. For now he has explained that word by
another, as he tells us; namely, Detrusione. Ib.
Let us therefore to the Thing. Only in our passage to it, it will not be amiss
to observe his humor. When he was fain to flinch, and forced thus to shift
from one word to another; he falls upon the Excepter with a causeless censure
of Pedantry and little triumphs. He resolves, that is, to shoot Powder, where
he wants Bullets: and at the same time that he gives Ground, he will be as
fierce as if he gained it. Very pleasant to see to! that he who blamed strong
Passions as producing weak Arguments; should thus, by his Anger, show his
Impotence. But we are to consider the Thing.

And here the Answerer interrogates; Ib.
May not waters ascend by force and detrusion; when it is the easiest way they
can take to free themselves from that force, and persevere in their motion?
Without all Question they may: provided that force and detrusion be of power
sufficient to compel them to ascend, against the Principle of their natural
Gravity, and such extrinsic accidental Obstacles, as may chance to lie in their
way and hinder them. But what then? He goes on: Ib.
This is the case we are speaking to. They were impelled to ascend, or recede
from the Center, and it was easier for them to ascend laterally, than to ascend
directly: upon an inclined Plain, than upon a perpendicular one. This assertion
wants a great deal of Proof. For that the Waters of the Chaos, should, through
the Circumgyration of it, rise or ascend any way, is very improbable: as being
bound down by the circumambient Air, which is carried about therewith. Fill a
sphaerical Glass with water, and then turn it swiftly upon its own Center.
However the water in this Glass, may have a strong and constant Conatus (during
that its Motion) toward rising up: yet certain it is, the Glass that contains
it, would keep it from swelling out beyond those Bounds to which it self
confines it. In like manner, the Body of the Air (in which at that time, was
the whole matter of the Exterior Earth diffused, surrounding the entire Element
of the Water; would have kept that from actual receding from the Center; tho it
were impregnated with a conatus that way. It Is confessed, if we take a Globe
and turn it round swiftly; Water, or Sand, if we lay either upon it, will fly
off it violently. And one reason is, because the ambient Air does not turn with
this Globe: but gliding close upon its wheeling Surface, by a renitency against
it, sweeps off whatever lies loose upon it. But were the Air about it, carried
round with it; the lightest things, that lie loosest on its Superficies, would
rest there unmoved; supposing it the proper Center of their Gravity. And for
the same reason, finest Dust lies undisturbed, even upon the tops of highest
Mountains; tho they whisk about with such celerity, as no humane Art and
strength can imitate. And if the Earth's Rotation, as rapid as it is, cannot
cause small Dust to rise from Hills, in way of recession from the Center: much
less could it produce that great effect upon the Mass of Water; which as it was
a vast and ponderous Body, so it couched the closer to the Earth under it.

And the truth is, as to a competent or sufficient Cause of the Wate 's
supposed Rise or Ascent; we are yet at a loss. For the Cause assigned, is
Detrusion; Detrusion made by the superambient Air. Answ. p. 39.
Methinks the Observator might have conceived this Detrusion of waters toward
the Poles, by the resistance of the superambient Air. But now if this Cause
failed, and was not able to detrude the Waters at the Equinoctial, where they
were to be thrust down: Or, which is worse, if it be sound a more effectual
Cause to detrude them at the Poles, where they were to rise up: what then
becomes of this Assertion we ore upon: or of that Essential of the Theory it
relates to; the Oval form of the Primitive Earth? Yet in Reality thus it was.
The Air that should have depressed or thrust down the Waters, at the Equator
of the liquid Globe; was more disposed to do it at its Polar parts. For the Sun
moving always in the Equinoctial of that Globe; the Air thereabouts must needs
be very hot; and so, very thin; and so, very yielding; and so, less able to
resist and detrude the Waters. And on the contrary, the Sun being always very
distant from the Poles; the Air in those parts must needs be more cold: and so,
more thick, and so, more stiff and heavy; and so, more fit to make Resistance
and Detrusion there, than any where else. Yet see the unluckiness of this
contrivance: the Waters were to rise higher there, much higher at the Poles,
where the Air would most resist them; and to be thrust down lowest at the
Equator, by the Air, where it could least depress them. And if by the Air's
Resistance, be meant any thing else, but a mere Detrusion arising from its
natural weight (which, as is said, had most force to keep the Waters down,
where it was most needful they should have risen up) such a Resistance cannot
be conceived; considering that the whole Mass of the Air was carried about in
Circumgyration with the Globe of Water. The Deserts of Biledulgerid, Lybia,
etc. lie betwixt the Equator and our Northern Tropic; and so within the
compass of that Latitude, where the Waters of the liquid Globe, should have
felt a Resistance of the Air. But what reason have we to believe they did so,
when the light or running Sands there, are no more ruffled, or in the least
stirred by such Resistance; than if they were a crust of Flint or Adamant? and
the like may by said of Mare del Zur. It lies under the Line, and so in the
Equinoctial part of this Terraqueous Globe. Which being there of the biggest
Circumference, it must turn thereabouts most swiftly, and so cause the greater
resistance of the Air (were there any such thing) and that would produce as
great a disturbance in the Water. But on the contrary, so quiet, and still, and
smooth, and even, is this vast Ocean; that it is called the Pacific Sea. And if
these spacious Waters, so exactly fitted for this Resistance, both by their
situation, and immensely wide and far extended Surface; feel nothing of it now,
why should or how could the waters of the Abyss do it at first? No, the Air
resisted and detruded then, but as it does now: That is, so far as its own
Gravity caused a Compression. Which as it was gentle, so it was general;
comparing the entire Globe at once with a soft constringency. Only there was
reason (as we have showed) why this compression should be lightest at the
Equinoctial, and why it should be heaviest at the Poles of the Globe; and why
it could not make such Resistance, or Detrusion, as is imputed to the Air. In
short. If it did make Resistance; either it was gentle, and would only have
rimpled the Surface of the turning Waters (as the Subsolanus does, which blows
constantly about the Equator) and so would not have been of force sufficient to
depress them into an oval Figure: or else it was violent; and so would have
discomposed the Abyss so much, that the Earth could never have been founded
upon it. And truly what less than such a violence as would so have discomposed
it, could alter the Figure of it?

But yet that there neither was, nor could be such a violent resistance made by
the Air, as to detrude the Waters of the Chaotic Mass; may, I think be
demonstrated from the Motion of the Moon. Her Distance from hence in her
Perigee, or nearest approach to us, is about 51 Semidiameters of the Earth: in
her Apogee, or farthest remove from us, about 65. To take a moderate or
middling Distance therefore betwixt both, let us suppose her always 56 of those
Semidiameters off us. And then let us suppose again, that she performs her
Periodical Circuit in 28 Days; tho she does it in less. Now she absolving her
Circuit at 56 Semidiameters distance from the Earth, in 28 Days; in case She
were but 28 Semidiameters distant, which is but half the Space; she must do it
in 14 Days, which is but half the time. And so were she distant but 14
Semidiameters; she must do it consequently in 7 Days. According to which
proportion, the Air toward the Earth, at the height of one Semidiameter above
it, must wheel about as fast as the Earth it self does, to the space of half a
Day. Now every Semidiameter of the Earth containing, says Mr. Rohault (Tract.
Phys. par. 2. cap. 12.) near 1431 Leagues; or 4293 English Miles: hence it will
follow, that the Air at the height of 2146 Miles, turns about as fast as the
Earth, bating but 6 Hours. And at the height of 1073 Miles, as fast as that,
bating 3 Hours. And so at the height of 357 Miles (to avoid fractions) to one
Hour. Which divide into 60 parts, because in an Hour there are 60 Minutes; and
the Air at the height of 6 Miles, must turn as fast as the Earth (in round
reckoning) to the space of one Minute. And (if we drive down the Account so
low) at 3 quarters of a Miles height, it must turn as fast, to the eighth part
of a Minute. And so just on its Surface, even with it. And when the Air
encompassing the Earth, does thus conspire and circulate with it in its
Gyration; how could it possibly resist the Waters of the turning Abyss, so as
to change their figure, from Sphaerical, to Oval?

Nor will the Answerer's Simile help here, unless it be to aggravate the thing
against himself. He thinks this Detrusion of the Waters may be conceived, Answ.
p. 39.
as well as their flowing toward and upon the Shores, by the pressure of the
Air under the Moon. And so indeed it may, by those that can conceive the Air
alone to be as heavy in it self; as that and the Moon are both together. But
who in reason can conceive this?

And to say it was easier for waters to ascend laterally, than directly; to
ascend upon an inclined Plain, than a perpendicular one: is vain in this case.
For what real Inclination could there be on a Globe, toward the Poles, more
than at the Equator; every point of whose Superficies is Equidistant from the
Center? And how could the Ascent of Waters at the Poles of a Globe, be other
than Direct and perpendicular; when its Polar parts are always as much a Plain,
as its Aequinoctial ones can possibly be? So that to suppose waters could
ascend more easily at the Poles, than at the Equator of the Chaotic Abyss; is
in effect to suppose, that they could ascend perpendicularly more easily than
they could ascend perpendicularly. For at the Poles they were to ascend as
directly as at the Aequinoctial; (the waters being exactly globular at first,
till by this supposed ascent they grew oval.) Only there they must have met
with these two Disadvantages, which at the Equinoctial they were free from.
First, (as we have hinted already) a more cold, and thick and stark Air. Which
we may be sure would crowd them down at the Poles; because an Air more warm,
and fine, and soft, and open, is presumed to do it at the Equator. Secondly, a
weaker Spring or power to impel them. For in the Middle of the turning Globe,
there was a Conatus or tendency of the Waters toward receding from the Center;
but at the Sides of it, none at all. So that at the sides they were to rise, by
that Conatus or Nitency in the Middle. And if a thin and open Air could prevail
against that force, in its direct and primary efforts at the Aequinoctial; how
much more would a thicker, closer Air have overpowred it, where it could be
exerted but obliquely, remotely, and as it were at second hand: at the Poles of
the Abyss?

From what has been said, it will follow; that without a better Defense of this
Vital Assertion of the Theory, its whole Hypothesis will fall to the Ground,
for want of an Oval Earth to support it. And whereas the Answerer in the Close
of his 14th. Chapter, makes this Reflection. Some men, they say, though of no
great valor, yet will fight excellently well behind a Wall: So the Excepter,
behind a Text of Scripture, is very fierce and rugged: He may please to take
notice, that (tho it be much better fighting behind the Wall of a Text, than
against it) the Excepter is here behind no such Wall: but ingages him in the
open field of Reason and Philosophy, and doubts not but to keep his Post. That
is, if he does not run to his First Expedient (as his wont is) and turn the
great Artillery of Extraordinary Providence upon him, before which there is no
standing. For that mows down the best Arguments, and makes a Lane through them;
as Chainshot does through a Company of the bravest Soldiers, tho they fight
never so well, and have all imaginable Right on their side. But then he must
desert his Hypothesis again (as he has often done;) and the World knows what he
is that runs from his Colors: One, they say, of no great Valor. But truly if
it be matter of reproach to a man, to fight behind a Text of Scripture; the
Excepter desires that it may always stick close to him. To adhere to the divine
and holy Word, and to oppose error by revealed truth; he thinks is far enough
from Cowardice. Blessed be GOD that we have such a wall as His Scripture is,
behind which, to fight against Truth's Enemies.

Yet in this very Instance of forming an Oval Earth, he flies to the help of
Extraordinary Providence, and thereby turns this necessary and indispensable
Notion of the Air's resistance or detrusion, quite out of doors. I mean by a
certain Dilemma of his own, brought in in the second Page of his Answer. I
apply it to him in his own words. Either you take the Hypothesis of an ordinary
Providence, or of an extraordinary, as to the time allowed for the Formation of
the Earth. If you proceed according to an ordinary Providence, the formation of
the Earth would require much more time than six days. And so you must not take
that Hypothesis, because as you your self own, in the fifth page of your
Answer, Scripture tell us that the Earth was formed the third day. But if
according to an extraordinary, you may suppose it made in six minutes. But then
the Resistance or Detrusion of the Air, could not make the Waters oval, that
the Earth might be so. For that being an ordinary, natural Cause (supposing it
could be a cause) would have required much more time than six days, for the
production of such an Effect. And consequently this Resistance, or Detrusion,
is made vain here and utterly useless by your self.

But if against the Answerer's concession of an extraordinary or miraculous
efficiency here, we should suppose an oval Earth to be made in a natural way;
and that in order thereunto a globular Abyss were to be formed into an oval
figure: yet how could this be done according to the rule or method of the
Theory? For if the Waters of the Chaos, by receding from the Center, did rise
up at the Equinoctial part of it, and above fall off toward the Poles: then
underneath there must be a draught of Waters back again from the Poles toward
the Equinoctial; which continuing to rise there, might push or drive on the
stream toward the Poles, that otherwise would not hold on its motion;
forasmuch as it flowed on a true Globe, the surface of which is equivalent to a
Plain, where Waters never flow but by force or impulse. And yet if such
counter-motions as these be allowed to those Waters, they might thus flow and
reflow for ever, without producing the designed effect. For the draught of
Waters below toward the Equinoctial, would draw in the liquid Mass at the
Poles, and so hinder its growing into an oblong or oval figure; as much as the
Drift of them above toward the Poles could swell them out there, and so help
toward the same.

The first Argument against the Oval Figure of the Earth, was its inconvenient
Position, which would have followed thereupon. For then it must have lain cross
the vehicular Stream, by which it was carried round the Sun; and have been
directed not unlike to Ships sailing side-ways: and so it could not have kept
that Position long, but must have changed its Site in compliance with the duct
or tendency of that Current wherein it swam. In answer to this it is suggested;
that such a posture as lying cross the Stream, would be more likely to effect
the Earth's turning upon its own axis, as it does. And the Stream would take
more hold of an oblong Body, than of a round. (Answ. p. 40.) And because it
would take more hold of it, for that very reason it would the sooner turn it
out of its Position. For what makes the force of a stream, turn a long Body
that lies cross it; sooner than another as long, which already lies length-ways
in it; but only its taking more hold of it? And then as to the Earth's turning
upon its own axis, it would rather have promoted than prevented the change of
its situation; considering its wallowings in its Annual Circuit. For where a
Body has two Motions upon the same Center, if one of them chances to be
irregular; the other commonly disorders it farther, rather than helps to
correct its Exorbitance. Somewhat like a Bowl, which being not set out of hand
right; the oftener it turns round in its progressive motion, the farther it runs
on in a wrong Course.

The second Argument against the Oval Figure of the first Earth, Disc. p. 196.
is the Sphaericalness of the present Earth. And that the present Earth is
Sphaerical, is not only the Opinion of Modern, but also of Ancient
Philosophers, said the Excepter; and he named some. But the Theorist, Answ. p.
40.
says the Answerer, alleged many more Authorities in favor of the Oval Figure
of the Earth. For besides Empedocles in particular, he affirms that the
Philosophy of Orpheus, the Phoenician, Egyptian, and Persian Philosophers, did
all compare the Earth to an Egg, with respect to its Oval External Form. Here
we must reply, Another untruth.
1st, That this is another very false Assertion. For those Philosophers made
the comparison betwixt the World and the Egg, not betwixt the Earth and the Egg
(tho our Author would put that sense upon them.) Only two of the Authorities
cited by him, Lat. Theor. Edit. 2. p. 267.
resemble the Earth to the Yolk of the Egg very unluckily; for that, we know,
is of a round Figure. 2ly, Where the Ancients compare the World to an Egg, they
do it usually with respect to its Production, as well as to its Form. A Notion
which the Answerer, or any Theist, would be loath to admit of; that Heaven, and
Earth, and all things therein, should spring out of a material Egg. A pregnant
Instance of this, occurs in Athenagoras (which upon occasion we noted formerly)
who tells us, that Orpheus (the Author, we may suppose, Legate. pro Christ. pa.
(mihi) 72. Disc. p. 105. Sympos. l. 2. Qu. 3.
of the Doctrine of the Mundane Egg; for Plutarch calls it* (...), the Orphic
Doctrine) taught; that a vast Egg brought forth by Hercules, being broke by
him, fell into two parts. Of the upper part, Heaven was made; and of the lower,
the Earth. (So that Heaven was contained in, and sprung out of this Egg, as
well as the Earth.) And then, (...), etc. Heaven being mingled with Earth,
brought forth Men, Women, and GODS. And what is this less (tho the Gentil
Divinity was tinctured with it) than a piece of rankest Atheistic Physiology?
For it makes Mankind and Gods, to rise out of mere Matter, without allowing
such a Principle as Soul or Spirit to any one of them. And this Egg, out of
which Aristophanes will have (...), In Avib.
the Race of Gods to be hatched, as well as mortal and inanimate Creatures; was
laid, he says, by Chaos and Night. And so gives us a plain account of the old
Atheistic Theology; which made (...), and (...), the Production of the Gods,
and the Production of the World, the same thing. Yet the Theorist was pleased
to show, Vid. Lat. Theor. li. 2. c. 7. and 10. Edit. 2.
that between this Doctrine, and his, there is an Harmony or Affinity. Which if
it will conciliate Reputation to his Hypothesis, let it. But so far as it
agrees with the Aristophanic or Atheistic Cosmogony; so far it will be the less
reconcilable to the Mosaic Cosmology, or inspired Doctrine of the Creation.

Disc. p. 197.
The Sphaericalness of this present Earth was argued; First, from the Conical
Figure of its shadow cast upon the Moon. Answ p. 41.
But that, says the Answerer, cannot make a Difference, sensible to us at this
distance, whether the Body that cast the shadow was exactly Sphaerical or Oval.
This is gratis dictum, and spoken against a common and approved Argument; and
so of little weight.

Secondly, It was inferred from the place of the Waters. Which are deepest, so
far as we know, near the Poles: whereas were the Earth Oval, the middle Regions
thereof being lowest, the Waters would have run thither, and settled under the
Equator. But this, he tells us, has been answered before. The same Cause that
drive the Waters thither, would have kept them there. And that Answer has been
replied to already: and the Replicant has showed, that there was no sufficient
Cause to drive the Waters thither; and so none to keep them there.

Thirdly, It was urged, That if this Earth was Oval, Navigation toward the
Poles would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, because of Sailing up an
Ascent. But, says the Answerer, If there be a continual draught of Waters from
the Equator toward the Poles, this will Balance the Difficulty. But if there
be no such draught, the difficulty holds: and that there is such a Draught,
remains to be proved.

That the Figure of this Earth is truly Sphaerical, is fairly discovered and
determined by this Observation. That the Gibbosity of the Sea rises as fast
behind a Ship Sailing in direct Latitude, toward the Poles: as behind one
whose course lies in direct Longitude, toward East or West.

CHAP. X.
THE Excepter proved that Mountains were before the Flood, from the words of
Moses, Psalm. 90. Read Disc. c. 10. 1.
Before the Mountains were brought forth -- Thou art GOD from everlasting. And
from Pro. 8.22, 25. where we read, that the LORD possessed WISDOM, -- before
the Mountains were settled. And the Answerer grants, that the design and
intention of the H. GHOST is plain in both these places: in the one, Answ. p.
43^
to set out the Eternity of GOD; and in the other, of the Logos in particular.
Now where it was the design and intention of the H. GHOST, to set out the
Existence of GOD and the Divine Logos, which were from everlasting, by temporal
things; would he do it by any but such as were soonest brought into being? Or
would Moses himself, without the H. GHOST, have done it by any other things
than such? Surely it would have been a very faint and improper Illustration of
GOD's Eternity (unbecoming Moses, much more the H. SPIRIT) to say that he
existed before the World was seventeen hundred years old. Yet when he said He
was before the Mountains, what did he say less, if the Mountains were made in
the time of the Flood: the World having stood above sixteen hundred and fifty
years, before that came in?

And whereas the Answerer suggests, Ib.
that the Psalmist's words might have a gradation in them from a lower Epoch
to an higher; when he said, before the Mountains were brought forth, and the
Earth and the World were made: Let him show when, and where, any such gradation
was ever made use of, by an inspired Writer, to set out the Eternity of the
EVERLASTING GOD. And whereas he adds, as for that place in Prove. 8. it would be
very hard to reduce all those things that are mentioned there, (from ver. 22.
to the 30) to the same time of existence: Let him show, if he pleases, why the
things there mentioned, called GOD's Works of old, may not very easily be
reduced (as to their first existence) within the time of the six days of
Creation.

Disc. p. 202.
Moses (the Excepter added) mentions lasting hills, and ancient Mountains,
Deuteronomy. 33.15. But he would hardly have called them so had they risen at the
Flood, because then they would have been but few ages older than himself; that
is about seven hundred years. To this it is answered; the River Kishon is
called the ancient River; Answ. p. 43.
but I do not therefore think it necessary, that that brook should have been
before the flood. Nor does he think it necessary that several other things
should have been before the Flood. Yea, his Hypothesis makes it necessary that
they should not then be. But does it follow ever the more from hence that they
were not? He goes on. Things may very well deserve that Character of lasting,
Ib.
or ancient, tho they be of less antiquity than the Deluge; as lasting
Pyramids, and ancient Babylon. But were the Mountains, supposing them made at
the Flood, as lasting and ancient in Moses's time; as the Pyramids and Babylon
are now?

Disc. p. 205:
The next Argument was drawn from the Mountains in the Moon. They, as we are
told, are better than four times as high as the Mountains of the Earth. And
therefore they seem to be her native Features, rather than Effects of her
Dissolution. For had they been raised by her being dissolved, they could not
have been so strangely over-proportion'd to the Mountains of the Earth, she
being a much less Planet than that. And in case the Moon had Mountains from the
beginning, why might not the Earth have so too?

Answ. p. 44.
It Is easy to see, the Answerer says, that this is no good Argument. For besides
that the Orb there might be more thick, all ruins do not fall alike. And it is
as easy to see that this is no good Answer. For the Moon being more than forty
times less than the Earth; the Chaos out of which She was formed at first, must
be more than forty times less than the Earth's Chaos was: else she could never
have been so little. For a larger Chaos would have contained more matter; and
more matter would have made her Dimensions bigger. But if the Chaos out of
which the Moon was made, was forty times less than that out of which the Earth
arose; then its central Earth, together with its Abyss, and exterior Orb, must
be so much less than the same parts of the Earth respectively were, as being
made of Ingredients which were forty times less than theirs. And so the Orb of
the Moon could not possibly be thicker than the Orb of the Earth; nor could its
Mountains be higher than the Earths Mountains are, much less above four times
higher, upon that account. And then as to the falling of its Ruins, if we
allow it to have been done with all imaginable Advantages; which way could they
have pil'd themselves up so much higher than the ruins of the Earth?
Especially if we consider that their Materials were alike (I speak of the
primitive Bodies of the Earth and Moon) their Figures alike, and also the
manner of their Dissolution. Only if we suppose the Earth to have been twenty
thousand miles in perimeter; the Moon must be less than five hundred.

As to the Historical Arguments alleged in this case, he demands over and over
why they were mentioned. But such Questions had an anticipative Answer made to
them in our Discourse; and that excuses all farther reply. p. 207.


In the next place he falls upon the Excepter's Conjecture about the Original
of Mountain. And in this New Hypothesis as he calls it, Answ. p. 45, 46.
he finds many palpable defects or oversights; whereof, he says, this is one of
the grossest, that he supposes the Sun, by his heat, the third day to have
raised the Mountains of the Earth; whereas the Sun was not created till the
fourth day. But here he relapses into his wonted Infirmity of Mistaking
egregiously. Another Mistake.
For first the Excepter did not suppose that the Sun alone raised the Earth's
Mountains. This plainly appears from what he said in his entrance upon the
Conjecture. Disc. p. 208.
That Nature might have a considerable stroke in the Work. And if Nature were
to have but a considerable stroke in that work, the whole of it could not be
done by the Sun. No, the main part of it was still to be effected by the hand
of GOD. And the concurrence of his Power with the influence of the Sun, in
producing Mountains, the Excepter acknowledged in these words. Disc. p. 209.
Tho GOD could, and it is like did produce them another way; I will venture to
guess HE might do it thus. So that still it was HE, that is, GOD, who thus
produced the Mountains, not the Sun alone. And then follows an account how or
wherein the Sun helped forward this extraordinary Work; tho he must not be
understood to accomplish the same by his own sole and proper efficiency; but as
he was an Instrument in the hand of Omnipotence, and so enabled to do that
which of himself* he could never have done. Tho I must add withal, that at that
time he was capable of doing a great deal in this Work. For 1st, Perhaps he had
then no Maculaes about him; which now swimming upon his face in great
abundance, do check, and damp, and weaken his influence. 2dly, There being then
a Fla^uous Moisture in the Earth, put into it on purpose to make it Heave; His
piercing Beams soon gave it such an heat and agitation, as made it dilate it
self with furious Rarefaction. 3ly, The Earth it self being then most light,
and soft, and unctuous; was also of a more pliant yielding nature, and so more
apt and easy to ascend. Lastly, The Pores of this Earth being then close shut;
and the vehement Vapors rarefy'd within, having no other possible way to get
out, but by elevating the Ground which lay upon them, and so confined and kept
them down: no wonder if they threw it up with a mighty Force, and made it rise
into many and prodigious inequalities. And these things are here mentioned the
rather, as being a full answer to a Question that is put. Namely, why we have
no Mountains made now. Answ. p. 48.
It might as well have been asked, Why does not the Fire make a down-bak'd Loaf
swell and huff up; because it made it do so when it was Dough? But then it was
a soft and puffy Mass; whereas since, it is hardened; and the strength of that
Leaven, which was put into it, is wholly spent. And such is the changed State
of the Earth. It is dried and hardened very much over what it was: and its
Original fermentive flatulent Principle, designed to assist in blowing it up,
is quite exhausted. And tho GOD himself did cooperate with the Sun, in the
production of Mountains; yet still this Answer must be fully satisfactory, as
to the Question propounded. For when subject matter grows indisposed, or
secondary Causes flagg and fail: the first and great Cause most commonly stops,
and ceases to act. GOD ordinarily limits his Almighty Power by the Creatures
Capacity. And where he is pleased to make use of means, if those be wanting, he
does nothing of himself; as being destitute of their concomitant Causality. And
if He did not thus desist from acting, He must violate the Laws which he has
given to Nature; and invert or dissolve that fixed Regularity, or methodical
Order, that His Wisdom has appointed and established in the Universe. Thus, He
gives us Fruits, but Plants bear them: He gives us Plants, but Rains nourish
them: He gives us Rains, but Clouds disburse them: and those Clouds arise from
Vapors; and those Vapors are exhaled from the Earth; and that Exhalation is
performed by the Sun. So that take but one Cause out of this whole Series of
them, and this orderly train of Effects would cease, notwithstanding the Power
of ALMIGHTY GOD; as depending secondarily upon the entireness of this chain of
Causes, the agency of which must needs be suspended or finally stopped, upon the
disjunction or interruption of their effective connection or concatenation. Thus
also he gives Sight to Animals, but it is by their Eyes; He gives them hearing,
but it is by their Ears: and if their Organs fail, their Senses must do so. In
like manner he thought sit to give Mountains to the Earth; but then it was by
imparting such an Habit to it, or by conferring such Qualities upon it, as
might prepare and dispose it toward their Production. And those Qualities
being perfectly altered; and that Habit decayed or destroyed: we are not now to
expect that more Mountains should be raised. And tho we never supposed the Sun
could make them alone; yet we hope it will be granted that GOD and the Sun
could easily do it. That They could raise the vastest Mountains of all, in the
Northern parts of the Earth: Yea, even mighty Taurus it self. As in making
Rivers, the Answer says (p. 15.) the Waters were accelerated by a divine hand;
so in raising Mountains the Sun might be assisted by the same. But for the
Excepter to have supposed that that, and other Mountains, were drawn up by the
sole power of the Sun; would have been to run himself under the Dint of his own
Invective against abusing Philosophy, Disc. p. 34. etc.
by screwing it too high.

But Secondly; as the Answerer mistook greatly concerning the Thing: Another
Mistake.
so he mistook as greatly concerning the Time. For the Excepter was so far from
supposing that the Sun did raise the Mountains on the third day: that he
supposed them to issue forth into being, but as fast as Nature could permit.
ib. p. 202.
Not that they were produced by a far distant succession neither (as he says in
the same sentence) but all together; that is, in a short space of time, as fast
as they could well be, one after another. And however the Earliest, that is to
say, the Maritime Mountains, and such as were made with the Hollow of the Sea,
must rise when that was sunk or depressed; yet touching the Inland ones, in
raising which the Sun was cencern'd: he said, as plainly as he could speak,
that in some Countries they were produced earlier, and in some later. Ib. p.
208.
And could he suppose then that the Sun by his heat, raised them the third day?
How strange is it that an Answerer should thus run on in Mistaking? That having
once got into the way of doing it, he should never know when to come out of it
again? Surely by fair and just dealings with the Excepter, he had better
consulted his own ease, as well as his Credit. For by making these false
charges upon him, he occasioned himself the trouble of spending most of this
long Chapter, in confuting nothing? by things which he took to be plainly
unanswerable. Answ. p. 4^.
For still we stand the ground of our Conjecture, and are like to abide unmoved
by it. Namely, that Nature had a considerable stroke in making the Mountains;
and tho GOD could, and it is like did produce them another way; yet He might do
it partly by the instrumental Efficiency of the Sun; raising the Inland ones
some earlier, and some later; but all together as fast as Nature could permit.
Tho when GOD caused the Sun to raise the Mountains, it was as he caused the
Earth to bring forth Trees on the third day, Genesis 1.12.
after the Waters were drained off it: that is by a special Blessing and Divine
assistance. And so he might cause those Trees again to bring forth Fruits; and
those Fruits to ripen by that time Adam was created; that so they might be in a
readiness for his nourishment. And here it may be remembered that what the
Excepter said in this matter, as to GOD's producing the Mountains by the
instrumentality of the Sun; was but to humor Philosophy (Disc. p. 208.) and
was merely conjectural: I will venture to guess he might do it thus. (p. 209.)

The last argument to prove that there were Mountains in the First World, Disc.
p. 215.
was this. There were Metals in it; which are usually found at the Roots of
Mountains. Answ. p. 49.
And here he tells the Excepter, that he is hard put to it, to prove that the
Theorist has any where asserted, whatsoever he thought, that there were no
Metals then. Yet he did prove it, and that so plainly, that the Answerer (if he
considers) will be much harder put to it to deny it. The proof consists of his
own words, cited out of the English Theory ( p. 244. Disc. p. 216.
) As for subterraneous things, Metals, and Minerals, I believe they had none in
the first Earth: and the happier they; no Gold, nor Silver, nor Courser Metals.
And then he proceeds to give Reasons why there could be none. And does not he
that says, he believes there were no Metals in the Earth; and then gives
Reasons why there could be none; and declares men were happier because there
were none: assert that there were no Metals?

But that there were Metals before the Flood, was showed from the Building of
Noah's Ark; See Disc. c. 10. ult.
from the building of Cain's City; and from Tubal Cain's being an Instructor of
every Artificer in Brass and Iron.

Answ. p. 49.
To the First Instance it is answered. That Scripture does not mention Iron
Tools in Building the Ark, but only Gopher Wood and Pitch: and therefore it is a
Presumption rather; that there were no other Materials used. Had the Theorist
kept close to holy Scripture, and regulated his Principles and Hypothesis by
that; none of this Controversy or Dispute had happened. But now, we see, where
he has least reason for it; there he is forwardest to adhere to it. As if it
were a Fate on him, for deserting it so much in other Cases, and going against
it. If he can presume that the Ark was made of Gopher Wood and Pitch only,
because Scripture mentions nothing else: why could he not admit of a Sea as
well, which the Scripture mentions every whit as expressly? Or if Scripture's
Silence concerning Things, be a ground of Presumption that they were not; what
then shall we think of an Oval and unmountainous Earth, an enclosed Abyss, a
Paradisiacal World, and the like; which the Scripture makes no mention of?
Surely it is a presumption rather that there were no such things. But not to
digress. What kind of Fabric the Ark was, the H. GHOST informs us. Genesis 6.15,
6.
Three hundred Cubits long, fifty broad, and thirty high. Made with three
Stories; divided into Rooms; and having a Window above, and a Door on its Side.
Now it being so great a Vessel, it could not be made but of very strong and
substantial Timber. Especially if we consider the use or service whereunto it
was appointed. For besides Mankind, seven clean Beasts, and as many Fowls, and
two unclean of every sort, were to be preserved alive in it, and that for above
the space of a whole Year. And so it was to hold their food likewise, as well
as themselves; and to carry them all, upon deep, and spacious, and boundless
Waters. And it being necessary upon these accounts, that it should be framed of
strong Timber; in case it was done without Iron Tools, what can be thought, but
that Noah and his Sons must pluck up well grown Trees by the Roots; and then
whole, and round, and rough as they were, fasten them together with store of
Pitch? But how all the pains and art in the World, could make this Ark of due
form and strength, in such a Method, and of such Materials; who can imagine,
besides our Answerer? Doubtless Noah had a singular knack at Ark-making, that
he could raise such a Structure all out of whole Trees; and when he had placed
them in their order, could six them in it, merely by Pitching them within and
without. Genesis 6.14.
And so well did he fix them, that neither the fall of the Earth, nor the fury
of the Flood, could move them one jot. Yet what was ever so raging and
tumultuous as that mighty Flood? Let the Theorist describe it. Eng. Theor. p.
99.
No Sea was ever so tumultuous as this, nor is there any thing in present
Nature to be compared with the disorder of these Waters; All the Poetry, and
all Hyperboles that are used in the description of Storms and raging Seas, were
literally true in this, if not beneath it: The Ark was really carried to the
tops of highest Mountains, and into the places of the Clouds, and thrown down
again into the deepest Gulfs. Brave Ark! and as bravely built; that could
endure all this, and yet never spring so much as one Tree. What would our
Merchants give, I Will warrant you, for Ships of such Gopher Wood and Pitch? But
alas! this strong way of building, was calculated only for the Deluge. The
Mystery of doing it lest the World together with the Equinox: and never since
the Earth has stood awry, could Men lay Trees so well in Pitch.

In answer to the Second Instance it is supposed; that the City built by Cain,
Answ. p. 50.
was a number of Cottages, made of branches of Trees, of Osiers, and Bulrushes;
and what needed they any other houses, when the Air was so temperate? But
First, This Supposition is bottomed upon a false Foundation. For they who
conceive the City Enochia to be so mean; commonly think it was so for want of
Workmen, not for lack of Tools to build it. But that being not built till after
the death of Abel; and he being not slain before the hundred and twenty ninth
year of Adam; by that time there might be Myriads of men upon the Earth;
Poterant illo spatio non centur^ae, sed Myriades, hominum esse. Mares. in
Refut. Fab. Praead. Qu. 3.
and so great store of Architects. And therefore Cain's City need not be
supposed to consist of such Cottages; because there was a scarcity of good
Artificers. Secondly, To say the Air was so temperate then, as that there
needed no other than Osier Cottages; is to take that for determined, which is
under debate. And besides, houses are reared for other uses, as well as for
Defensatives against intemperate Air. And in Cities commonly they are best and
most sumptuous. Thirdly, Ad sui defensionem, quia semper erat in timore and
tremore positus. Lyr. in Genesis 4.17.
It is thought that Cain built this City for his own safety. Being full of
guilt, and so of fear; he was for dwelling in a strong place. But what
fortifications were Mud-walls and Osiers capable of? Such a Fortress could
yield but a little satisfaction to his mind, as being a poor defense or
security to his Person. Fourthly, If Henochia did not outstand the Flood, we
are better assured that Joppa did. And then, we hope, it must be built of such
Materials, as could not be fitted and made into Aedifices, without the help of
Iron Tools.

And whereas it is urged, that the Excepter says, that the Indians had no
Instruments of Iron, when the Spaniards came amongst them: That Is very true.
Answ. p. 50.
But then they built no such Ark as Noah's was; nor had they any Tubals,
Master-Black-smiths, Braziers, etc. in their Country. Nor were there such
Cities found amongst them, as we have reason to believe were erected in good
plenty before the Deluge. For here methinks the Rule of Hornius, which he lays
down in his Introduction to the Ancient Geography, may take place. Si quis
mente concipere velit, qualis ante diluvium terrarum sacies suerit, is sibi
totidem post diluvium secula proponat, and inde, de praeteritis conjecturam
faciat. If any one would conceive in his mind, what kind of face the Earth had
before the Flood, let him cast with himself how it was so many ages after the
Flood, and from thence guess concerning those that are past. And so there must
be as many Cities in the World, at the time of the Flood, as there was since
the flood, about the time of Nebuchadnezzar: it being as long from the Deluge
to his time; as it was from the Creation to the Deluge. And tho he takes
notice, that no Cities are remembered by Writers, but Henoch, by Moses; and
Joppa by profane Authors; yet he puts the Question, Quis dubitet adeo jam aucto
genere humano, plurimas regiones, imo totam pene Asiam and Egyptum, Urbibus,
oppidis, pagis, ante diluvium suisse exornatas. Who can doubt, that very many
countries, yea, almost all Asia and Egypt, were garnished with Cities, Towns,
and Villages, before the flood; mankind being so increased?

To his Questions, how the Children of Cain came to find out Iron; Answ. p. 50.
and then to know the Nature and use of it; and then the way of preparing and
tempering it: I think we may reply; that in this matter they had instructions
from Adam, as he had his knowledge from GOD. Or if we should say, they
understood this by Inspiration, it would be no rash or extravagant assertion.
For why might not some of Cain's Children be inspired to find out Brass, etc.
as well as Aholiab was inspired to work in it, Exodus 31.3, 5.? And yet they
might find out Iron, and other Metals in a lower way than that. For the Flaming
Sword at the East of Eden, might be a burning of the Earth ( Discourse p. 270.)
And that it could not be the Torrid Zone (as the Theory allows it to have been)
two Reasons were given ( Disc. p. 272.) Tho neither is answered but by the Last
Expedient. Now the Earth being once fired, and burning continually; at length
it might reach to some Mine below, and melting the Metal, cause it to run, and
boil up upon the Ground. And then observation and wise experience, could not
but lead men into a speedy acquaintance with its Nature and Use: And also make
the first Iron that they had, instrumental in helping them to procure more.
Thus (according to Herodotus, lib. 7. and Natalis Comes, lib. 9.) the Idaei
Dactyli (the same with the Curetes or Corybantes) both found out Iron, and
learnt the Art of using it; by the burning of Ida. And why then might not the
Progeny of Cain, both get Iron, and skill in it, the same way? But however they
came by Iron, or by skill to use it, and make Tools of it; it is certain that
they had it, and that is enough for us. And truly if they had not made Tools of
it also, Jubal could no more have attained to his Art; than his Brother Tubal
could have taught his Trade. Jubal was the Father of all such as handle the
Harp and Organ, Genesis 4.21. And how could such Musical Instruments be made
without Iron Tools? But now I think on it, there might be Gopher Wood and Pitch
as well in Jubal's time, as there was in Noah's: and they might serve as well
to make the Harp and Organ of the one; as they did to make the Ark of the
other, without Tools of Iron. Yet then the mischief on it is, Scripture does not
mention either: and therefore according to the Answerer's Rule above, it is a
presumption rather, that there were no such Materials used upon those
occasions. But then it is a presumption withal, that no such Harp or Organ were
made. And another as shrewd a presumption will follow: that Jubal was a Father
without Children. Or if you will, that he could not possibly be a Father of
Music himself, because he wanted Instruments whereon to learn: nor could he
possibly beget any Sons of that Science, because he had no Instruments whereby
to teach.

He answers the last instance thus. As to Tubal Cain, let those that positively
assert that there was no Iron in the first World, tell us in what sense that
place is to be understood. I believe Iron or Brass is not once mentioned in all
the Theory. But why so indirect an Answer? One would think that the Argument
here, which consists of Iron, were red-hot, to see how he handles it. And the
truth is, let him touch it never so Gingerly, it will all at once both burn his
Fingers, and Brand his Hypothesis. Iron or Brass is not once mentioned in all
the Theory. Very good: Yet for all that, the Theorist flatly denies the being
of them both, before the Flood. The Clause forecited witnesses as much.
Metals and Minerals, I believe they had none in the first Earth. And if they
had no Metals, for certain they had no Iron nor Brass. He adds; the happier
they; no Gold, nor Silver, nor courser Metals. If therefore Iron and Brass, be
Courser Metals than Gold and Silver; he excludes them out of the first World,
as much as he does the finer ones named. Nor does he more absolutely exclude
them by his words; than he effectually bars them out of the first State of
Nature, by the tenor of his Hypothesis. For that lodges the Abyss betwixt the
Central and External Earth, and so renders their Ascent from below, into the
superior Terrestial Region, quite impossible. And so what sorry and unmanly
shifting is this? And all to save the downright acknowledgement of an Error;
which would have been more ingenuous, and I think, more easy. It Is unlucky for
one to run his Head against a Post. But when he has done, if he will say he did
not do it, and stand in and defend what he says; it is a sign he is as
senseless, as he was unfortunate; and is fitter to be pitied, than confuted.
Good is the advice of the Son of Sirach; In no wise speak against the Truth,
but be abashed of the error of thine Ignorance, Eccus. 4.25.

CHAP. XI.
THat there was an Open Sea before the Flood, the Excepter proved by Scripture
and by Reason, in his Eleventh Chapter. But the Answerer inverts the Order of
that Chapter, and thinks fit to begin with the last first. As if he designed by
altering the Method, to perplex the Matter, and pervert the Arguments. Or at
least to raise such a Mist of Confusion, as might dim the Eye of the Reader's
Observation, and partly obscure the Weakness of his Answer. But let us follow
him in his own way, and not fear in the least, but 'twill be every whit as easy
for us. For indeed let him go even which way he pleases, we are bound in
Justice to give him this Commendation; that he never leads us into any
difficulties.

The Reason offered in proof of an Open Sea, was this. Because otherwise the
subterraneous Abyss must have been the Receptacle for Fishes, Dsc. p. 224.
or the only place of their abode. And that Abyss could by no means have been a
fit Dwelling for them, upon Three Accounts: As being too Dark, too Close, and
too Cold.

But the Answerer would persuade us to believe otherwise. As for Coldness,
methinks, says he, he might have left that out, Answ. p. 51.
unless he supposes that there are no Fish in the frozen Seas, toward the
North and South; which is against all sense and experience: for Cold Countries
abound most in Fish. But are there any where any frozen Seas, on which the Sun
never shined for sixteen hundred years together? He must show us such Seas, if
he would bring his Answer home to the Objection. For in whatsoever Seas Fishes
do breed, those Seas must certainly at times, feel a great deal of Warmth and
Influence from the Sun: else these Creatures, so cold of themselves, could
never Multiply. And therefore, we see, that even in our Seas, they breed not in
Winter, for want of the Sun. And if the Sun's Declination or withdrawment from
us, hinders their Production in our Seas (and Rivers) as sense and experience
sufficiently testify; his total Absence and constant Exclusion, would put a
final stop to their Procreation. Yet such was his Absence, and such his
Exclusion from the enclosed Abyss. It may be made a Question, whether Fishes
can live and breed in a Deep Well, which is open; by reason of its Coldness.
And if they cannot, how much less in the Abyss? which being close, and much
Deeper; was answerably colder. In case it be objected, that in such a Well they
would lack Nourishment: the Objection turns much more forcibly upon the Abyss.
For whereas the smaller Sorts of Fish live on Flies and Worms; where should
they have found them so far under ground? And yet necessary it was that the
lesser Kinds of Fish should exist; that so they might be food, and sustenance
for the Greater.

As for Darkness and Closeness; he opposes to them the Saying of Maimonides,
Answ. p. 51.
That no man ever would believe, that a Child could live so many months, shut
up in its Mothers Belly, if he had never seen the experience of it. For, says
the Answerer, there is Closeness and Darkness in the highest degree: and in
Animals, that, as soon as born, cannot live without Respiration. But surely the
Difference betwixt Children in the Womb, and Fishes in the Abyss; is very
great. For 1st. Children unborn, are imperfect; (and so indeed they are, when
new born, and long after; (they may be perfect in Shape, but they are imperfect
in strength:) But with Fishes in the Abyss, it could not be so. Secondly,
Children in the Womb, have no local Motion; which to Fishes in the Abyss, must
be allowed. Thirdly, Children in the womb, are supplied with suitable and
sufficient Nourishment, by easy and natural Derivation from their Mothers: But
Fishes in the Abyss, were to seek out for theirs, and to get it when, and where
they could find it. Fourthly, Fishes in the Abyss, were to propagate there; (A
sure Indication of their true Perfection in that State:) But Children unborn,
were far enough from doing that. Lastly, That great Body of water, being close
shut up, and always quiescent, and having no way to purge and clarify it self;
would have putrified, and poisoned all the Fish; especially if it inclined to
any degree of warmth, as the Answerer here surmises: There would he more danger
of too much warmth. But from this Inconvenience, Ib.
in their vital Habitation (supposing it to continue in its natural State)
Children in the Womb are free.

And whereas he urges that Fishes Prey on the night time: That signifies
nothing. For first, Ib.
the Darkness of our nights above the Earth; is not comparable to the Darkness
a Mile under it. And Secondly, in very dark nights. it is like they prey only
upon dead Baits; or upon such living ones, as are set for them, and made so
fast that they cannot get away. And to his Objection, of Fishes living in
subterraneous Lakes; the reply is as easy. For no subterraneous Lakes in which
Fishes live; are so close, and deep into the Earth; as this pretended
subterraneous Abyss.

But farther; that there was an Open Sea in the primaeval World, the Excepter
proved, against the Theory, from Scripture. And the first Argument, Disc. p.
219, 220
was the Dominion which GOD gave unto Adam, over the Fish of the Sea. Genesis
1.26, 28. But if there were not an open Sea, impossible it was, that he should
have or exercise such a Dominion as GOD ALMIGHTY gave him. Whereunto it is
answered thus. Adam had no more Dominion given him over the Fish of the Sea,
Answ. p. 52.
than over the Fowls of the Air. And did the Excepter affirm that he had? Let
it be granted that he had but as much; and our Business is done, and so is the
Theorist's. This, the Gentleman knew very well; and therefore we see how shie
he is of a direct Answer, and how aloof he stands in what he says. As for
Adam's Power over the Fowls, it was sufficient; such as showed his Dominion to
be real. For he exercised it thou, at least as much as we do now. That is, he
could take them in Fields, or Fens, or Heaths, or Rivers; and have them in good
plenty about Him. But had he an equal power over the Fish, when they kept only
in a subterraneous Pond; and that was walled round at such a rate, that even
through all his long life, Ib.
he could not command so much as a Pair of Sprats? He adds, concerning the
Fowls; that Adam could not come at them. or seize them at his pleasure, unless
he could fly into the Air after them. Very much to the purpose. As if he could
have had no Dominion over the Fowls, without the use of Wings. And because he
had not a Power over the Fowls, above his capacity; and such a Command as
neither his Nature and Circumstances, nor theirs would allow: therefore he had
none at all over the Fish. Notably argued, and with mighty good Consequence.
Adam was not tall enough to stand upon the ground, and take the Weathercock of
a Church-steeple; and therefore, good man, he could not stand upon tip-toe
neither. Because he had not such a Dominion over the Sea, as was impossible;
therefore he could not have one of which he was capable. Certainly he must be
akin to the Sages of Gotham, who argues that Man is not Lord of the Creatures,
because they could not hedge in the poor Cuckoo; or drown the Eel as they might
have done a Kitling.

When a King makes a Gentleman, Lord Lieutenant of a County; by virtue of his
Commission, is he presently the strongest man that is in it? Does it enable him
to encounter whole Regiments of Soldiers in his single Person; or to vanquish
all the Militia under him, at once? Does it empower him to carry a Canon upon
his Neck? Or when the great Gun is fired off, to catch the Bullet as it flies,
and put it up in his Pocket? Can he not hold the place, and execute the Office
of a Lord Lieutenant, without such preternatural and monstrous abilities? So
when GOD gave Adam Dominion over the Fowls; did he mean that he should dive
like a Duck, or soar like a Falcon? That he should swim as naturally as the
Swan; and hunt the Kite, or Hobby, as Boys do the Wren? Did he mean that he
should hang up Ostritches in a Cage, as people do Linnets? Or fetch down the
Eagles to feed with his Pullen, and make them perch with his Chickens in the
Henroost? Or else could he have no command over the Fowls? And in like manner
when he gave the same Adam Dominion over the Sea; was he to be able to dwell at
the bottom, or to walk on the top of it? To drain it as a Ditch; or take all
its Fry at once in a Drag-net? Was he to Snare the Shark as we do young
Pickarels? Or to bridle the Seahorse, and ride him for his Pad? Or to put a
slip upon the Crocodiles Neck, and play with him as with a Dog? Or else must he
have no Dominion over that Element, and the Creatures in it? Certainly betwixt
having Dominion over the Fowls, and flying after them in the Air; there is
great difference. And so there is betwixt the real Dominion which Adam had over
the Sea, and its Fish; and all excess or extravagance of Rule.

When GOD set Adam over the Fish of the Sea, he placed him under his Glorious
SELF. For had his Dominion been supreme and absolute, he must have partook of
GOD's Nature; as well as he did of his Image, and Empire. But as we very well
know, all Subordinate Power must be limited: and so was Adam's. And therefore
he could not go beyond his prescribed Bounds; but was to command the Fish, as
he did other Creatures. That is, according to the Order of the World, and the
Laws of Providence; according to the Capacity of his own Nature, and the
Quality of theirs. And if so be he did but act in his Station, in pursuance of
his Commission; governing his Subjects as in Duty he was obliged, and as in
Power he was enabled; that is, according to the Will of GOD, and the measures
of a Man: this will be sufficient for him who had the Dominion; and so it will
be for us who defend it.

The Answerer proceeds; Adam was made Lord of all Animals upon the Earth, P. 52^
and had a right to use them for his convenience, when they came into his
power. Here he speaks as out of a Cloud; and we may justly suspect that what he
says, had need be cleared from doubtful meaning. For Fishes, if his Hypothesis
may be believed, were never upon this Earth, but always under it, during Adam's
time; and so they never came into his power neither. And therefore it may be
questioned, whether he means that Adam was Lord of them or not. But if in, all
Animals, he includes the Fishes; then we reply as follows. That in case the
Doctrine of the Theory be true, Adam could be but a poor and sorry Lord over
the Fishes; which are a considerable part of the living Creatures. Lib. 32. C.
11.
Pliny attempts, in his Natural History, to reduce all of them, that belong to
the Sea, to an hundred seventy and six kinds; and to particularize the several
Names of them respectively. But so mean a Lord was Adam over them, that indeed
to call him by this Title, in reference to those Animals; would be but to put
an affront upon him, he enjoying no more (if the Theorist errs not) than a mere
color or shadow of that honor. Should an Emperor grant one of his Courtiers a
Commission, to be his Viceroy, or Deputy, in a certain Country, which it is
utterly impossible he should ever come at; as this Patent would reproach the
Majesty that gives it, so would it not be Mockage to the Favorite that
receives it? Yet just such is the Case here. As impossible it was for Adam to
come at the Abyss below; as it was for him to dart downward, for a Mile or
two's Thickness, through the compact and solid Earth. So that his Lordship over
the Fishes there, must be a bare nominal and titular thing. And he might as
well have been Lord over the Fish in the Moon (supposing she had any) as over
the Fish in the Infernal Sea. For his descent to the one, was as difficult, as
his ascent would have been to the other; and his Power was exercised alike in
both: for he died above seven hundred years, before the Ocean, or so much as
one Fish, appeared in the World. Now pray, when, or to whom? in what Ages, and
to which of his Servants, did the GOD of Heaven ever assign such mock
Seigniories, and pitiful airy Royalties, as this? No, they are windy promises
that convey empty Donatives; and neither can proceed from that Glorious Being,
which is the fullness of Sincerity and all Munificence. Where GOD is pleased to
impart Dominion; we may assure our selves it shall not be a name or empty
notion. But as there shall be a Scaene for Jurisdiction to act in; so there
shall be Subjects for it to be exercised upon; and Matters also to employ it
about.

And so here is something more suggested (in way of Reply) as to the Favor
which GOD bestowed upon Adam, in relation to the Fishes: namely, that he
imparted to him a Dominion over them. And that I hope, is quite different from
a Titular Lordship. And so Titular was his Lordship (according to the Theory)
over the Fish; that tho he held it near a thousand years, it did not all that
time bring one of them to his Sight. A man may have a Title to things, and
Right to use them when he can get them; tho he never had, nor ever shall have
Dominion over them. I do by no means wish the Answerer to be unjustly barred
from his Estate. But if he were so, he would find that a Title to it, and a
Right to use it when it should come into his Power; must not be compared to a
real Dominion or Command over it. But now it was an actual Dominion which GOD
gave Adam over the Fish. And therefore he did not say, have thou the Title of
Lord over them, and use them for thy convenience, when they come into thy
power; (which yet would have been a plain Jeer (such as Heaven never put upon
an Innocent) because into his power they were not to come:) but have DOMINION
over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over every living
thing which moves upon the Earth, Genesis 1.28. Where, (...), which the Targum
renders, (...), and have the Dominion; does signify an actual Rule, and the
very exercise of it. And the Word is used in this Sense, in too many Places of
the H. Bible to be here recited. So that Adam's Dominion over the Fish, was not
(as the Answerer would most unreasonably make it) a Titular Lordship, or
imaginary Right: which was to hang in the Air, and not be realiz'd even to his
Posterity, till above sixteen hundred Years should be past; and till the World
in which they lived should be quite destroyed, and a new one founded: but it
was a real Power actually conferred upon, and exercised in his own Person; and
with him, by his Children, jointly; and after him, by them, successively. And
truly when in the Grant of this power over the Fish, the Advantage lay so much
on Adam's side, more than on his Offspring's; (it being made to him in his
Person, and also in his Innocence:) it may seem somewhat strange, that he who
shared most in the conveyance of the Privilege; should (in the Judgment of a
wise Civilian) have nothing to do with the Possesion of it. Especially when
this Grant was made by the GOD of faithfulness and truth; with Whom, as there
is no shadow of Change, so there can be no semblance of Fraud. Yet had the Case
here been as the Theory makes it; there must have been wrong on GOD's part, as
well as fallacy; and his creatures he must have injured, by imposing upon them;
which who can think? As if that righteous Being, whose Nature is the Rule of
eternal Justice, could violate that Law which Himself had made: And when he had
commanded, not to steal; could rob poor men of that common Right, which his own
free Goodness, and his own kind Promise, settled on them.

Not to be too toedious. Either Adam had actual Dominion over the Fish; or he
had not. If he had not, why did GOD say to him, Have Dominion over the Fish of
the Sea? If he had, why does the Answerer so mince it, as if he intended to
make away with it? Again; Either Adam had as much Power over the Fish of the
Sea, as he had over the Fowls of the Air, and the Living things upon the Earth;
or he had not. If he had as much; we have what we contend for. If he had not;
the Answerer must show, that the Divine Grant now recited, vesting Adam with
Dominion over the Creatures; did confer more Power in the latter part of it,
than it did in the first. But that he cannot do; and therefore his Cause is
lost. For if Adam had as much power over the Fish, as he had over the Fowls,
and over other Animals; there must be an open Sea at first. And if there was an
open Sea; there was Mountains too. And if there was Mountains; there was Clouds
also. And if there was Clouds; there was Winds, and Rains, and Hails, and
Snows, and Thunders, etc. And then where is the Theorists Primitive Earth, and
his Paradisiacal World before the Flood? In the Fourth Chapter of his Answer he
reflected upon the Excepter for Dabbling in Philosophy. And now I think he has
dabbled in it fairly himself; even till he has drowned his hopeful Hypothesis,
in an enclosed Abyss. And as for Extraordinary Providence, it affords no help
in this Case. However it be made too much a Pack-horse to carry the Theory
through several Difficulties, which otherwise must have been impassable: yet
here it fails, and is able to yield no manner of assistance. For he who can
imagine, that Adam upon the Earth, could have Dominion over the Fish in this
enclosed Sea, by Extraordinary Providence; must be guilty of most amazing and
unmerciful Extravagance. Yet by another Expedient he may find relief. When, to
leave things out, he prints his Theory next; he may leave this enclosed Abyss
out of that Edition. And tho he can worse spare it; yet whether he has not as
much reason to leave it out, as he had to leave any thing out, which he did
leave out; Disc. p. 226.
let any unbias'd Person judge.

That there was Open Seas before the Flood, we argued Secondly, from the Waters
under the Firmament, Genesis 1.7. For had there been none but River-waters in the
first World; the Earth might have been said to be under the Firmament, more
properly, than the Waters. And the Firmament, which in the 6th. verse, is said
to be in the midst of the Waters, and to divide the Waters from the Waters;
Ibid.
might better have been said to be in the midst betwixt the Earth and the
Waters; and to divide the Waters from that. For, as for the River-waters, they
would have been too inconsiderable, to have had the Partition made by the
Firmament, praedicated of them, in exclusion of the Earth, or in preference to
it.

Well, allow this, says the Answerer, Answ. p. 52.
that a Firmament was made to divide the Waters from the Waters. Tell us then
what that Firmament was, For it is said there, that GOD set the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, in the Firmament. We own it is said so, and that GOD did do so. But if
he cannot tell what this Firmament was; a few words will inform him. It is
plain that Moses, in his Cosmopaeia, makes mention of Two Firmaments; (and we
have told him of them once already.) Disc. p. 22^.
) One we may call the Aeral; the other, the Ethereal Firmament. The First is
the Interaqueous Firmament, as lying between Waters: for it is bounded by the
Waters here below; and by those supernal Fountains of Water, the Clouds above.
Genesis 1.8.20.
And yet it is properly called Heaven; as being not only limited to, but also
consisting of the Lowest, or Subnubilar Heaven. The Second is the Firmament of
Lights. Because in it the Moon, and all the Planets; the Sun, and all the fixed
Stars are placed. And a most stately and glorious Expanse it is; as being of
immense and indefinite Amplitude or Extent.

Here the Excepter encountered that New Notion of the Firmament, See Disc. p.
226, 227, 228.
which the Theorist vouchsaft to recommend to the World; where he makes it
expressly to be the Orb of his exterior habitable Earth. But what was said
against it, he answered the best way, viz. by declaring that the Things cited
and opposed, Answ. p. 52.
are not in the Second Edition of the Theory. Ausim enim dicere quantum rerum
natura innotescit adhuc, Firmamentum Mosaicum prout vulgo intelligitur, esse
prorsus (...) Theor. Edit. 1. p. 254.
But the best on it is, when he had been so brisk as to give us all a
Magisterial Reprimand; by telling us plainly that Moses's Firmament as commonly
understood, is an Vnphilosophic thing: on the other-side he was so bashful,
that he would not stand by his own opinion, tho more Philosophic, as he
thought. But having conceived it, and brought it forth, he very fairly gives it
the slip; and leaves the infant Notion, defenseless as it is, to shift for it
self.

Concerning what we said in vindication of the Clouds from that contempt which
the Thorist threw upon them; Answ. p. 53.
he thus pronounces. With submission to better Judgments, I take it to be a
Country-Sermon, about the usefulness of Rain. But I do assure him (tho that is
no strange nor new thing with him) he is very much mistaken. Yet if he will
needs have it be a Sermon; with submission to better Judgments, I take it to be
a Funeral-Sermon for one of his Notions. Namely, that the Clouds were no such
eminent and remarkable things, Eng. Theor. p. 234.
as to deserve a particular commemoration by Moses in his six days work.

As for what follows (toward the end of our Chapter) against the Theorist's
Objection, touching the difficult Propagation of Mankind into the Islands and
Continents of the first world; the Answerer declares, that it does but confirm
his Objection. Answ. p. 53^
But did the Excepter say any thing in confirmation of such a Difficulty in the
business of this Propagation; as brings on a Necessity of calling in the help
of the Angelic Ministry, to translate or convey men from place to place? He
showed plainly, See Disc. c. 11.. 7.
that a few sorry Sciphs, or rude kind of Boats, might very well do what was
here to be done, without making Angels to be Carriers of men, and to transport
their Colonies, through the Torrid Zone, into new Plantations. But this is a
Difficulty which attends the Theory: or else the Answerer wrongs his
Hypothesis, by flying to those Spirits for such their Assistance. Answ. p. 30.


CHAP. XII.
THIS is a short Chapter, and will soon be dispatched. Ibid. p. 53.
So the Answerer begins. But his Dispatch was so quick, that he made more haste
than good speed. For besides that he forgot to leave any thing behind him that
needs a Reply: such was his Expedition, that he could not see his way before
him neither; but ran unhandsomely into the Assertion of a plain Untruth.
Another Untruth. Ib. p. 53, 54.
For thus he positively affirms of the Excepter. He says, GOD might as well as
to significancy have appointed the Sun, as the Rainbow, for a sign that there
should never have been another Flood. And again, This would have done as well,
he says, as the Rainbow. But this is utterly false; for, as any one may see,
the Excepter said not so. His words are these. Disc. p. 253, 254
If GOD had appointed the Sun to that use, he would have signified the same
thing that the Bow does. But he did not say, he would have signified it as
well. Nay, in effect, he said the quite contrary, as appears by what follows.
Ib. p. 254.
Tho as all must grant, the Bow is the most fit Emblem of the two; and
therefore it was chosen. And when the Excepter said, the Bow is the most fit
Emblem of the two, and that GOD chose it for that Reason: what did he say less,
than that it must do better than the Sun; and consequently that the Sun could
not do so well as that? which is contrary to the Answerers Affirmation. Another
man, I hope, may write a piece of Natural History, tho he does it not as well
and remarkably as the Theorist has done: for there are degrees of Comparison in
doing things. But will he never leave falsifying, and speak the truth?

Ib. p. 259, 260.
As to our Argument proving the Existence of Clouds before the Flood; and
consequently the Appearance of the Rainbow then: He answers it by his last
Expedient only.

CHAP. XIII.
Answ. p. 55.
HE begins this Chapter, which is about Paradise, with a warm Charge upon the
Excepter, thus. He fairly baulks all the the Difficulties in that Doctrine, and
contents himself with a few generals, which every body knows. Betwixt the
Doctrine and Difficulties of an Article, there may be great Difference. And
where there is so, they must be warily noted and distinguished. There we must
duly consider and examine, whether these Difficulties be inherent in the
Doctrine, and inseparable from it; or whether they be Appendages or Additionals
to it. Whether the Doctrine delivered were interwoven or wrapped up in
Difficulties by GOD; or whether those Difficulties were the mere phantsiful
inventions of men, annexed to it, or clapped upon it. And in case they appear to
be extrinsic Accessaries, humane Conjectures, or perhaps Extravagancies and
Mistakes: what have we more to do with them, or how can we do better by them,
than part the Shadows from the true Substance, and so throwing off the one,
keep close to the other? Disc. p. 265.
And this was what we proposed to our selves, when passing by the Fictions of
Poets, and the Phantsies of Fathers, we betook our selves directly to the
Oracles of Heaven; resolving to take up our Rest there, and to rely upon
nothing that Writers say concerning Paradise (a Scripture Doctrine) but what is
consonant to the Sacred Scriptures; where alone that Doctrine is clearly
taught, so far as Divine Wisdom thought fit to reveal it, and acquaint us with
it. It Is true, we may go farther if we please, and so stretch this Doctrine (as
the Theorist does) that it shall comprehend several other things. But then if
these things prove, Difficulties; at the same time they are but Superfluities.
Such as GOD never put into the Doctrine of Paradise, and men had much better
have kept out. And that they are much fitter to be quite cut off, than
vigorously pursued, and seriously insisted on: may in part be gathered from
hence. That they who labor most in them, get nothing by them. Their profit
will not countervail their trouble: but Study here must be, what some
Philosophers thought Virtue was; a Reward to it self. The Theorist has made
himself a pregnant Instance to prove this. He has taken pains to find out what
the Ancients determined concerning the Seat of the Terrestial Paradise; but to
how little purpose? For notwithstanding that its Place was a Real Circumstance
(which his Properties of it were not;) he had no Requital for his Endeavors to
discover it. The Search he made after it, was without Success, and so without
Satisfaction or Benefit. The 7th. Chapter of the second Book of his English
Theory, shows as much. There he informs us, p. 253. p. 257. p. 253. p. 254.
that as for the Jews and Hebrew Doctors they place Paradise under the
Aequinoctial. Where others of the Learned placed the Ocean, and where he
himself places the Fiery Zone. He might have added, that their common Opinion
was, that GOD made Paradise before the World: And when there was neither Heaven
nor Earth in being, Where was the Aequinoctial to place it under? As for
Ancient Heathens, Poets, and Philosophers, they, he tells us, were rather for
several Paradises in the Earth. As for Christian Fathers, he says, they
disputed, whether Paradise was That Paradise was Corporeal, seems to be the
constant Doctrine of all the Fathers except Origin (whom some count a Corrupter
of the Scriptures simplicity) and St. Ambrose.
Corporeal, or Intellectual only, and Allegorical; This was the grand point
amongst them. And so they were like to make good work of the place of Paradise.
And of those of them that thought it local, Ib. and 255.
most did not determine any thing concerning the Particular place of it. But
the rest that did, expressed themselves in various ways, yet, upon a due
interpretation, they agree, that Paradise was seated in the other Hemisphere:
And having well observed, p. 260.
their Ignorance of the Globe of the Earth (which could not but betray them
into false Notions about the Form of it, and about Places in it) at length he
concludes thus. Wherefore laying aside all Natural Topics, p. 262.
we are willing in this particular to refer our selves wholly to the report and
majority of Votes amongst the Ancients whether Christians or others, who seem
generally to incline to the South or South-East Land. And so the place of
Paradise is still GOD knows where. Tho to bring it to this, even to the South,
or South-East Land; he was fain to take pains, we see, and use some art. That
is, in making a due Interpretation of those Passages in the Ancients Writings,
by which they expressed themselves in various ways touching this Matter. And all
that he could get out of them at last, was but this neither; Who seem generally
to incline to the South or South-East Land. And those of the Fathers, who were
ignorant of the Globe of the Earth, and variously expressive of themselves in
this point; so that their Expressions wanted a due interpretation, to make them
speak this seeming Inclination of theirs: were but a few: The rest, as he calls
them. A certain Remnant that did not dispute whether Paradise were
intellectual, etc. So that the Place of it, I say, is still to seek: As much to
seek as ever. And as for the Theorist, if he will but look impartially upon
Particulars, and fairly cast up what the whole amounts to; he may very justly
for the Total Sum of his Gains, set down a Cipher, at the Bottom of his
Account. And truly it would be well if that were all. If he could cross his
Books, and make things so even; as after his Travels in this search for
Paradise to cry he is clear with all the World. But alas he must come to
another Reckoning, and will find he came home a much worse man, than he went
out; Eng. Theor. p. ^.
as being deeply run in Debt in his Reputation. We will never depend wholly
upon their Credit, nor assert any thing upon the authority of the Ancients,
which is not first proved by natural Reason, or warranted by Scripture. A
positive engagement made, and public enough: but let us see how well he stood
to it. Does Reason prove the place of Paradise to be in the other World? No.
Does Scripture warrant it to be there? No. For he himself tells us expressly,
neither Scripture, nor Reason determine the Place of Paradise. Answ. p. 55.
Yet notwithstanding his Complement to both; he leaves them both, and depends,
and depends wholly upon the Credit of the Ancients in this Point, and upon
their Authority; as his own Words testify. For sureness we will repeat them.
Wherefore laying aside all natural Topics, we are willing in this Particular to
refer our selves wholly to the report and majority of Votes amongst the
Ancients, whether Christians or others, who seem generally to incline to the
South, or South-East Land. As if he had set up his Resolution of adhering to
Scripture and Reason, (as firm one would think) as a Rock; merely to dash his
Credit in pieces against it. It was a very good Declaration which he made that
way, and contains a Rule proper for him to go by. But it is as strange that he
should break it so soon, Another Contradiction.
and so plainly contradict that and himself. Especially when he thus backed and
strengthened it by what follows. This Theory being chiefly Philosophical, Eng.
Theorp. 6.
Reason is to be our first Guide; and where that falls short, we may receive
further light and confirmation from the sacred Writings. -- But as for
Antiquity and the testimonies of the Ancients, we only make general Reflections
upon them, for illustration rather than proof of what we propose. Put this to
what was declared before, and from both we learn this useful Lesson. That in
the Theory, not any thing is to be taken up upon the Authority of the Ancients,
or to depend wholly upon their Credit; but it is first to be proved by Reason,
or warranted by Scripture. Natural Reason is to be the Chief Guide, and
Confirmation of what is proposed must come from the Sacred Writings; and the
Testimonies of the Ancients are for illustration rather than for Proof. But
this being the declared Judgment of the Theorist, what means he so flatly to
contradict it in his practice; by yielding Paradise was in the Southern
Hemisphere wholly upon the Authority of the Ancients; without either natural
Reason to prove it, or Scripture to warrant and confirm it? And thereby indeed
he contradicts Great Moses too, as well as himself. For his inspired Pen
describing that Garden, by the Rivers Euphrates, Hiddekel, etc. as principal
Marks of its Situation; does place it originally in our Northern World.

Now had we not better content our selves with a few Generals which every body
knows, that are certain; than go thus far, and pay thus dear, for singular
Notions which are vain and void of truth? But if against the Divine Caveat from
above, men will (...), be wise in their own conceits; and without Reason to
prove them, or Scripture to warrant them, will form Opinions to themselves
about sacred Doctrines; or recommend them to others, even against Scripture: no
wonder that their Studies should tend to Vanity; and that their Disquisitions
should run out into wild Extravagance; and that having roiled the limpid
Streams of Truth, they should drink in the muddy waters of Error, to quench
their inordinate thirst of knowledge.

This is spoken in remark of the Nature of those Difficulties, which according
to the Theory, attend the Doctrine of Paradise; and with Baulking of which we
are charged by the Answer. The place of Paradise our Author makes to be the
first of them, and he yields it to be in the South-East-Land. But then in
yielding it there, by his own Confession, he proceeds without Reason, and
without Scripture, and we may add against both; inasmuch as it is against
Reason, for a Christian Doctor to go against Scripture. Yet if the place of
Paradise is such an hidden, hampered, difficult Thing (as the Theorist makes
it) which in it self must needs be real, because Paradise was Local: If that, I
say, in the Circumstance of its Situation, is so difficult, latent, and
uncertain; as to baffle his best Attempts of finding it, and render them
insignificant: What shall we think of the rest of those Difficulties, which he
calls the Properties of Paradise? Surely they must be strange and unreasonable
Things, to be appropriated to the true Doctrine of Paradise; as having nothing
of that certain Reality in them, which the place of Paradise had; the mere Site
of which proved so puzzling to him, as to defeat his Labors in searching after
it, and make them vain and unhappy. And These Difficulties being of this
Quality; no certain, Real Things; no better than Chimaerical Figments, or
Romantic Forgeries; no other than fine and light Ideas, which float only in
the Imaginations of the Phantsiful: Such things as GOD never put into the
Doctrine of Paradise; Such as want Scripture to warrant them, Reason to prove
them, and even so much as clear and sound Authorities to vouch and recommend
them; Such as yield no profit, but rather bring Prejudice to Doters upon them,
and writers about them; as we see by a fair Example before us. These
Difficulties, I say, being of this Strain; if we had baulked them, we might
well have born the Censure of doing it, and as well have justified the censured
Action. But then they were not so Baulked neither, but that at the same time
they were confuted also. For while our short paraphrase upon the holy Texts,
relating to the Place of Paradise (and containing the Divine and only authentic
Account thereof) lays down the Generals which Scripture affirms or teaches
concerning it; it so far confutes the Theory's Singularitys, or Properties of
it, as it shows, that (however they may be Difficulties indeed) they are no
real Parts of the true and genuine Doctrine of Paradise. If they were, why do
not the sacred writings take some notice of them at least? But they make not
the least mention of a Perpetual Aequinox, of a perpetual Spring, or of the
Earth's spontaneous Production of Animals; which the Theory makes to be
Properties of Paradise. Tho from hence we may conclude, that they are falsely
so counted, they are falsely so called, because the Scripture owns them not;
nor are they consentaneous to its Doctrine, either in themselves, or in the
train of their Consequences. It approves of them no more, than it does of
Paradise's Prae-existence to the World; than it does of its Situation under the
Aequinoctial; than it does of its being placed near to the Moon, or set up so
high, as to be above Darkness, and out of the reach of the Flood. (Which made
the Sons of Infallibility (a sort of Theological Theorists) mount Enoch thither
before the Deluge; whither after it, they sent Elias, to keep him Company.)
These Conceits, in the Judgments of Some (both learned men and ancient Fathers)
were Properties of Paradise. But for all that, they were mere empty Conceits
still, nor could they be other. Yet let it be noted, they all stand in the same
Rank, and are built on every whit as good Foundations, as the Theory's
Properties of Paradise are. For tho neither Reason nor Scripture do allow or
confirm them; yet they are reared on express Authorities of the Ancients, and
ratified by them. But are they of power to authenticate Phantsies, and turn
them into Realities?

But to go on with this Point, upon which I little thought to have said thus
much. Baulking all the Difficulties in the Doctrine of Paradise; Another
Untruth.
is falsely charged upon us. And that not only because (as we have said) these
Difficulties are Shadows, Phantsies, and Falsehoods; And because we have
confuted them in a general way, by alleging and explaining the true Doctrine
of Paradise delivered from above; which rather contradicts them, than gives
countenance to them: But because (as it is evident) we did not baulk all those
Difficulties. For the Properties of Paradise, that is to say, the Perpetual
Aequinox, the Longaevity of the Antediluvians, and the Spontaneous or Vital
Fertility of the Earth, were at least some of the Difficulties meant. Now to
the First of these we spoke in the Eighth Chapter of our Discourse, and so had
no reason to return to it in the Thirteenth. And in the Thirteenth Chapter we
handled the other Two; else what means the Answer given in to them here?

But before we consider the Answer he has made, there is one Objection to be
removed, which he has thrown in our way. He tells the Animadverter, that if he
would undertake to confute the Theory in this Point, Answ. p. 55.
he should have confuted four of his Particulars concerning the Place of
Paradise; But he slips over these. The Animadverter was to confute this
Assertion of the Theory. The Doctrine of Paradise cannot be understood, but
upon supposition of the Primitive Earth and its Properties. Now if he could
make it out, that the Doctrine of Paradise is intelligible without the Theory;
as intelligible without it, as it is with it; this Assertion must needs be
confuted. This therefore he undertook to do. And it being done, what he
intended, and what he was obliged to, was performed. And even these particular
Objections too, tho before not so distinctly made: were virtually answered, and
confuted in the Substance of them. But however it being expected we should do
it, let us speak more expressly to these Four Particulars.

Answ. p. 55:
The First is this. The Place of Paradise cannot be determined by Scripture
only. First, if it cannot be determined by Scripture only, it must be
determined by Scripture chiefly. For that alone gives the best grounds whereon,
and the best light whereby to describe the Place, so far as it can be done. And
secondly, it is not to be doubted, but that at first it did more exactly define
or bound it out: only since that time, such changes have happened to the
Channels of Rivers, and the Boundaries of it; as render the Draught or
Description of the Country, which was then more exact and clear; dark now and
insufficient. And Scripture having described Paradise so well at first, and
contributing so peculiarly to the best possible description of it still; it is
that which did determine it only, in a more satisfactory measure, once; and
that which does determine it only, in a well qualified sense, to this day; so
far, that is, as it is determinable. And what can be expected from it more?

The Second is this. The place of Paradise cannot be determined by the Theory.
And how should it, when GOD signifies it (as we shall see immediately) to be
seated in one Hemisphere, and that fixes it in the other? But is it not pretty
then, that the Animadverter, if he would confute the Theory, should be put to
confute this Particular? That is, he must prove the Theory can do, what it
cannot do. A notable way of securing an Hypothesis; to tie him who attaques it,
to do a thing that is impossible, whereby to overthrow it.

The Third is this. If we appeal to Antiquity in this case, we shall find that
it (Paradise) was not in Mesopotamia. But according to his own Rule, Antiquity
without Reason and Scripture to back it, is not to be depended on. And for the
same reason, his Fourth Particular falls of it self; which is this, According
to the plurality of Votes, both amongst the Heathen and Christian Authors, it
was placed in the other Hemisphere. But these Heathen and Christian Authors,
having neither Reason nor Scripture to second what they say; (again we repeat
it) they are not to be depended on: nor can the Answerer, if he stands to his
word, assert Paradise to have been where they place it, upon their credit or
authority. But we have something else to offer, which will reach both the
Particulars at once. The Best Antiquity in the whole World, is Scripture. And
if we appeal to that, we shall find it most probable, that the seat of Paradise
was Mesopotamia, or some Region thereabouts; by the several broad Signs which
it gives us thereof, in the Second Chapter of Genesis. For

First, That is Eastward of the place where Moses wrote. And it is said, Genesis
2.8. that the LORD GOD planted a Garden Eastward. Eng. Theor. p. 251.
And whereas our Author would have Mikkedhem there, to signify, in the
beginning; Moses teaches us plainly that it signifies, in the East, by using
the word in that sense himself, in the very next Chapter. For in the last Verse
of it, he says, that GOD placed Cherubim and a flaming Sword, (...) in the East
of the Garden of Eden. But to have rendered it thus, he placed in the Beginning
of the Garden of Eden, Cherubim and a flaming Sword; would have been a very
improper and ill Reddition. And as often as (...) do occur in the Pentateuch,
which I think, is at least thirty times, besides Genesis 2.8. I do not find that
they can, in any one place, be rendered otherwise than, East, Eastward, of the
East, or in the East. Which if they cannot, it is enough to convince us, that
Mikkedhem, Genesis 2.8. must be rendered, in the East; not, in the Beginning.

Secondly, Eden is there; the Country wherein Paradise was planted. So we read
again, Genesis 2.8 that the LORD GOD planted a Garden Eastward in EDEN. And tho He
would have Eden signify, Ibid.
pleasure, and so read the Text thus; the LORD GOD planted a Garden in
pleasure: that cannot be the true meaning. For the word is (...); and so it
must be read, the LORD GOD planted a Garden in pleasure; which would sound but
harshly. And in the next Very but one, it is said, that a River went out of
Eden to water the Garden. But to say a River went out of pleasure to water the
Garden; would be no good sense. And in the fourth of Genesis we meet with a
Passage, which shows that Moses, by Mikkedhem, must mean the East, and not the
Beginning; and by Eden, a Country, and not pleasure. For telling us there at
the 16th. Verse, which way the Land of Nod lay, where Cain dwelt; he says, it
was on the East of Eden. But for him to have said, it was in the beginning of
Pleasure; would have been an odd account of its Situation. After all which (if
it will not seem superfluous) may be added the words spoken by Rabshakeh in the
person of his Master, and recorded by the Prophet, Jer. 37.12. Have the GODS of
the Nations delivered them which my Fathers have destroyed, as Gozan, and
Haran, and Rezeph, and the Children of Eden which were in Talassar? Chapter 27. v.
23.
Ezekiel also puts Haran, and Canneh, and Eden together. Whence it plainly
appears, that Eden was as much the proper name of a place, as Rezeph, or
Canneh, or any of those mentioned. And also that that place was in the Eastern
part of our Continent; because the other places or Regions here joined with it,
lay about it, or bordered upon it. And so it might be in Mesopotamia too; tho
it could not be in the Southern Hemisphere. And it is observable that when
Jacob journied to Haran in Mesopotamia; he is said to come into the land of the
Children of the East, Genesis 29.1. And Balaam who was brought out of the
Mountains of the East, Numb. 23.7; is said to be of Mesopotamia, Deuteronomy. 23.4.

Thirdly, the Land of Havilah is there; about which the River Pison is said to
fetch a compass, Genesis 2.11. Not the Indian Havilah (as some have greatly
mistaken: and by that mistake have been led into another, that Pison was
Ganges:) but that Havilah which was so called from the Son of Cush. Whereas the
other Havilah took its denomination from the Son of Joctan. Strabo also places
the Havilah that relates to Paradise, in the Confines of Arabia and Mesopotamia.

Fourthly, the Land of Cush is there; so denominated from Cush the Son of Ham,
who settled himself and his Family in it. It is said to be compassed with the
River Gihon, Genesis 2.13. and it is the Asiatic Aethiopia. Tho some presuming
that the African Aethiopia was there meant, concluded that Gihon must be the
Nile.

Fifthly, Hiddekel or Tigris is there; which is said to run toward the East of
Assyria, Genesis 2.14. Upon whose Stream rising from the Gordian Mountains in the
greater Armenia, and flowing Southwards to the dividing of Mesopotamia from
Assyria; stands the Principal City of that Country, the famous Ninive, built by
Assure.

Sixthly, Euphrates, that Celebrated River of Asia, is there also, Genesis 2.14. I
mean in that Eastern part of our Continent.

Now are not all these Regions and Rivers, in, or about Eden, or Mesopotamia?
And are they not Marks of the Earthly Paradise? And were they not made so by
Moses himself? And was not he directed by the H. GHOST? And might it not be in
Mesopotamia then, or must it not be near it? For had it been out of it, and
remote from it; what wise man inspired by GOD, would have described it by such
Rivers, and described it by such Regions as lay about Mesopotamia, and were
conterminous with it, or bordering upon it? and if some of these Rivers, and
some of these Regions, be very much changed in their Names and Postures, since
Moses wrote; that is no marvel. It would rather be a wonder (considering Certum
est insignes variationes in terrae partibus continuo evenire, propter bellorum
incurpiones; aquarum inundationes; Marium praeruptiones ac recessus;
imperiorum, regnorum, and dominiorum instabilitates. Etenim non solum regiones,
urbes, oppida, flumina, and alia hujusmodi sua nomina pro tempore mutant,
amissis prorsus prioribus, verum etiam and sines ipsarum regionum variantur,
and urbes, oppidaque senectute dele^tur, bellorum calamitate evertuntur,
aliaque de novo conduntur, and mare uno in le^o continentem terrae dilatat, in
alio coarctat, and flumina quandoque augescunt, quandoque minuuntur, quandeque
cursus variant, quandoque etiam prorsus, deficiunt. Sic quoque, fontes, stagna,
paludes alibi exiccantur, alibi vero procreantur, etc. Magin. in praef. ad
Geogr.
the Mutability of Nature here below) if in so long a time they were not
greatly altered. Tho these Alterations do not argue in the least, that Paradise
was not situate in Mesopotamia, or some adjacent Region. Where after so many
thousands of years, we are no more to look for the same Features in the Earth's
Face; than for the same Fruitfulness in its Soil. Tho if we will believe
Herodotus, Clia. l. 1. Geog. l. 16.
Strabo, and Q. Curtius; the Babylonian Soil does still retain a strange and
happy Fertility. For they assure us, that it yields Corn at the rate of two
hundred fold; and that it bears Palm Trees of its own accord; which afford
Bread, Wine, Honey, etc. And as Pliny informs us, Not. Hist. l. 18. c. 17.
their Corn grows so rank, that men are fain to cut it twice, and after that,
turn Sheep into it to eat it down. And then Crops are so plentiful, that one
year, they sow themselves against the next; and sponte restibilis fit seges,
Corn grows of its own accord, and yields an harvest without Tillage. And if
this Soil be so fertile now; what was it before the Curse, when it was newly
created, and in its prime Perfection?

So that upon the whole Matter, let Rabbis, and Fathers, and Poets, and
Theorists say what they please; yet so long as Moses wrote the second Chapter
of Genesis, and his hand was guided by the most HOLY and unerring SPIRIT; we
cannot but think, that men in reason ought to conclude, and that in duty they
ought to believe, that Paradise was seated in Mesopotamia, or thereabouts. And
we hope it is as intelligible that it should be there seated, as that it was
situate in the Southern Hemisphere. For who ever yet understood, or who can
understand; That Eden, and Havilah, and Cush, and Assyria, were Countries; and
that Pison, and Gihon, and Hiddekel, and Euphrates, were Rivers, in that
Southern Hemisphere? In case they were so, how came they from thence hither? I
remember Sir Richard Baker tells it, as a great Wonder, amongst the Casualties
that happened in our Queen Elizabeth's Reign; that a certain hill in
Herefordshire, beginning to remove out of its place, on Saturday Evening,
continued walking till Monday noon. But if such large Countries as these, could
take so long a Journey; the ambulatory Mount may stand by for a diminutive
Prodigy.

Tho we must observe withal, that the Fathers never seated Paradise in the
other Hemisphere neither. They only seem to incline to that, by the Theorists
due interpretation of them, as was noted above. And as to the Seat of Paradise
(as he says) they expressed themselves in various ways. That is, their Notions
of it were uncertain; and in plain terms, they knew not where to fix it. But so
far were they from believing it to be in the Southern Hemisphere, that they did
not believe that Hemisphere was ever inhabited; for they did not believe that
there were Antipodes. And when some of them would have Paradise to be Mystical
only; and others would have it to be the whole Earth; and others place it under
the Aequinoctial; and others under the Globe or Circle of the Moon; and others
in the exterior part of a flat or plain Earth, round the inward part of which,
they supposed the Ocean to stand like a Ring: Which of them set it in the
Southern Hemisphere? Tho if they had, we need not have been much surpised at
it neither. For being but men, they might have done as men; have erred, that
is, in their Opinion. And truly ever since Adam, through desire of Knowledge,
first planted error in Paradise; that poisonous Weed has been apt to Spring up
and spread unhappily in other places, and the best Gardens of Antiquity have
been stained with it. Witness the Millenium; the Rebaptizing of Haeretics; the
Limbus Patrum; the Communicating of Infants; and the like. And if we'll take in
Errors of a lower Strain, we shall find the false Notions entertained by the
Ancients, of the Form of the Earth, of the Figure and Situation of the Sea, of
the nonexistence of Antipodes, etc. ready to confirm and corroborate the
Testimony. And what does the famous Aristotelian Hypothesis seem to be now in
this present Age, Aristotle believed the Milky Way to be a Meteor. He also
allowed but Eight Heavenly Sphaeres; which Timocaris, above three hundred years
before the Incarnation, improved to Nine; and Alphonsus (in the thirteeneth
Century after it) into Ten; and afterward they were commonly reckoned Eleven.
And not only Egyptians, Graecians, and Arabians, but even Hebrew and Christian
Doctors, took the Stars to be living Bodies actuated with Souls; as Espencaeus
informs us in his Treatise de Call. animat.
but a Mass of Errors? Where such a Systeme was contrived for the Heavens, and
such a situation assigned to the Earth; as neither Reason can approve, nor
Nature allow. Yet so prosperous and prevailing was this Hypothesis, that it was
generally received and successfully propagated for many Ages. And when the
Heavens were so misconceived, and the Earth so misplaced; and the Errors
touching both, were spread so far, and continued so long: why might not the
same happen as to Paradise? Why might not the Ancients, and the choicest of the
Ancients mistake concerning it, particularly concerning the place of it?

Were an Account to be given of the Original or Occasion of this their Mistake;
it might seem methinks to have risen thus, or proceeded from hence. They
thought and spoke too Great things of Paradise, and supposed such Properties
and Excellencies in it, as it never had, nor was capable of. And having raised
their Phantsies to so high a Pitch, they could not tell how to let them fall
again, and stoop so low as Mesopotamia. And so they conceited that Paradise was
in some remote, unknown, inaccessible Region, or as it were in another World,
because they could find out no place in this, which answered the gay Notions
that they had, and their fine but false Idea's of it. Just as the Jews
overlookt the Person of the true Messiah, because it came not up to that vain
and extravagant Character of Him, unhappily imprinted on their Minds: So these
pious, learned, and incomparable men, took no notice of the real Place of
Paradise, as being prepossest with misapprehensions of it. The lofty Opinions
which they had concerning it, lifted up their Thoughts far above it, and
carried them away quite beyond it. They imagined that it was they knew not well
what, and so they placed it they knew not well where; believing they should
wrong it, if they fixed it any where in this ordinary World.

The Excepter having done with the Place of Paradise; he objected next against
the Longaevity of men before the flood, as a Property of it. But this, p. 55.
says the Answerer, he handles so loosely, that in the conclusion of his
Discourse, one cannot tell whether he affirms it or denies it. The Excepter
begins his discourse of this matter, Disc. p. 273.
with these very words. As for the Longaevity of the Antediluvians, that could
be no Property or Adjunct of Paradise. And did he not deny then, and positively
deny the Longaevity of the Antediluvians, as a Property of Paradise, which is
his notion of it? And because the Answerer does affirm the thing, by dividing
the Doctrine of the local Paradise into two parts, Answer. p. 55.
the Place, and the Properties of it, and making this Antediluvian Longevity
one of those Properties: the Replicant continues the positive Negation, and
says expressly as before, that the Longaevity of the Antediluvians could be no
Property of Paradise. He makes it good thus. If it had been so, it would have
ceased, or have been extinguished in Mankind, by their loss of that Place. For
wherever Privileges are the Properties of a Place, he that enjoys them, can
hold them no longer than he continues in that place. If once he forfeits the
Place, and be dispossessed of that; together with it, he must actually lose all
those Privileges which are Properties of it, and be deprived of them. And this
Longaevity being (according to our Author) a Property of the Place of Paradise;
Adam and his Children could not be priviledg'd with it as such, when he himself
was soon turned out of it, and none of them were ever in it. Besides, how could
this Longaevity be a Property of the Particular Topical Paradise; when he makes
it to be one of his three general Characters, Eng. Theor. l. 2. c. 2, 3.
common to the whole Primitive Earth? Yet a Property of the particular Paradise
it must needs be, because it is one of the Properties meant, where he divides
the Doctrine of that Paradise, into the Place, and the Properties of, that
Place. But then is not here something like Contradiction again, where a
Property of one particular Place of the Earth, is made common to the whole
habitable Earth?

Indeed the Excepter did not positively deny the Longaevity of the
Antediluvians to be General. And therefore the Answerer taxes him with
Skeptical humor. Answ. p. 55.
But if the contrary humor will please him better, the Replicant will so far
put it on, as positively to affirm that the Praediluvian Longaevity cannot be
founded upon the Hypothesis of the Theory. For in case it stands upon that
foundation, it must be supported by a constant Aequinox and an Oval Earth. And
that Earth must be without Metals and without a Sea. And then as Adam could
have no Dominion over the Fish; so neither could Tubal-Cain trade in Brass or
Iron. And if these things were thus, plain Scripture must be false, and Moses
must be out in the history of the Creation. He was deceived, that is, that we
might be so; and the SPIRIT of Truth which actuated him, is become the Author
of Lies to us; which GOD forbid any one should think.

After this he observes, ib. p. 56.
that the Excepter did not take notice of the two last Reosons he gave, in
confirmation of the Antediluvian Longaevity. One of them runs thus. The
generations recorded in Scripture after the Flood, as they exceed the term of
succeeding Ages, so they decline by degrees from the Antediluvian Longaevity.
To this we answered sufficiently, (tho we did not expressly apply it to that
particular Reason) where we said, Shem, Arphaxad, Salah, and Eber, living much
longer just after the Flood, than others did then, See Disc. p. 27^.
or have done since; did live so long for the same reasons that the ten men in
a lineal descent Genesis 5. were such long-livers. For so their lives are not to
be looked upon as declining from the Antediluvian Longaevity, as the Answerer
conceits; but as extraordinarily lengthened, by a special Blessing; the
elongation of them being a work of Providence, not of Nature.

The other Reason was this. Jacob complains of the shortness of his life, Answ.
p. 56.
and fewness of his days, in comparison of his Forefathers, when he had lived
one hundred and thirty years; which had been a groundless complaint, if his
Ancestors had not lived much longer. The Answer to this is so obvious and easy,
that it was not worth troubling the Reader with it. The days of the years of my
Pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years; few and evil have the days of the
years of my Life been, and have not attained to the days of the years of the
life of my Fathers: So Jacob complained, Genesis 47.9. Now his days being spent,
or so far past, they could not but seem few to the good Patriarch, tho they
were an hundred and thirty years. And being no more, he might truly say, that
they had not attained to the years of his Fathers; without any manner of
reference to, or so much as thought of, the Antediluvian long-livers. For his
Great-Grandfather Terah lived two hundred and five years. Genesis 11.32.
C. 25.7.
His Grandfather Abraham, an hundred and threescore and fifteen. C. 35.28.
And his Father Isaac, an hundred and fourscore. So that the shortest liver of
these his Ancestors lived much longer than he had then done: even by more than
a Third part of his Time mentioned.

That those remembered by Moses as Long-livers before the Flood, do not show all
in general to be so; the Excepter argued from these words of his: Disc. p. 277.
Genesis 6.4.
There were Giants on the Earth in those days. Now as his telling the World,
there were some Giants then, does not imply that the whole Race of Mankind were
such; but does rather import that the rest were otherwise: so his mentioning
some so very Long-livers; may insinuate that the rest were not so. To this it
is answered; there had been some pretense for this, Answ. p. 57.
if Moses had made a distinction of two races of men in the first World:
Long-livers and Short-livers; as he has distinguished the Giants from the
Common race of Mankind. And is not his Distinction equally plain in both cases?
Or if there be any difference, does he not distinguish better betwixt
long-livers and short-livers; than he does betwixt men of Gigantic, and of
usual Proportions? For whereas to distinguish Giants from ordinary men, he only
said, there were Giants on the Earth in those days; he did more than say there
were Long-livers on the Earth in those days: for he specified their Names, and
he set down their Ages, signifying clearly both who they were, and to what
years they reached. But on the other side, he neither expressed who the Giants
were, nor what their Stature and Dimensions. So that of the two, he
distinguishes more plainly betwixt long-livers and short-livers; than betwixt
the Giants and men of common size. For thus indeed he fairly intimated that the
Generality of the praediluvians were short livers, by his care to particularize
those that lived long; and both by their names, and by the length of their
days, to discriminate them from the rest. And tho the Answerer says, in the
close of his Paragraph, that not to suppose long life general to Mankind at
that time, is a groundless restriction, which is neither founded upon Scripture
nor reason: We reply, that it may be founded upon both. For Scripture says, in
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17. And tho this
Sentence was denounced against man conditionally at first, in case he sinned;
yet upon his actual disobedience, it became positive as it were, and absolute.
And when Scripture makes this the Sentence of GOD; (Who had sufficient power to
execute it, as well as just and mighty provocation to do it:) after once it
took place, it must be consonant to Reason, that short life rather than long
life, should be the general lot of men. And so both Scripture and Reason
plainly suggest, that they who lived eight or nine hundred years, under this
Sentence, must in all likelihood ow their Longaevity to the favor of Heaven,
and a special Benediction; rather than to the strength of their own nature
within, or any Course or Order of Nature without. Especially if we consider,
that even the pretended Aequinoctial State of Nature, would have shortened men's
days, Se^ Disc. p. 281.
as we noted. And if that alone would have hindered Longaevity: how much more
would it have done it, when the sin of man concurred with it; and the curse of
GOD upon the Earth, occasioned by that sin?

As to the Testimonies of the Ancients cited by Josephus, Eng. Theor. p. 315.
and alleged by the Theorist in proof of the Antediluvian Longaevity; they
were noted by the Excepter to be utterly false. Disc. p. 276.
For whereas they witness that in the first age of the World, men lived a
thousand years; none of mankind, according to the account that the Divine
Writings give, ever did so: but some of them (tho this is answered by his last
Expedient only) fell very short of it. Thus, Seth came short of a thousand
years, by almost Ninety; Enos, by almost an Hundred; Mahalaleel, by above an
Hundred; Lamech, by above two Hundred and Twenty. The Answerer therefore need
not have insisted upon the Ancients Tradition. And tho he tells the Excepter
that he seems content, Answ. p. 57. Disc. p. 278.
this Tradition should be admitted: Yet as the Context plainly shows, he
yielded it only so far, as to make the Concession introductive to an Enquiry
after farther Tradition, about a constant Equinox and Perpetual Spring; how it
comes to pass that Tradition is so partial, as not to tell us explicitly of
them, the Causes of this Longaevity? But this Question, he says, is fully
answered, and the Tradition fully made out before, in the 8th. Chapter. And to
that 8th Chapter of his Answer, the 8th Chapter here does as fully Reply. But
let us go on to the Reasons alleged against the General Longaevity of the
Praediluvians.

The First was this. Disc. p. 279. Answ. p. 58.
Their Multitudes would have overstockt the Earth. To which he answers, That
Earth was more capacious than this is, where the Sea takes away half of its
Surface. But as the Sea takes away from this Earth, so the Torrid Zone and
Rainy Regions took away from that. That Earth also had no Mountains, which in
this are great as well as numerous; and do very much enlarge its Capacity or
room for Inhabitants. And whereas he suggests, that Mountains are less
habitable than Plains, Ib.
by reason of their barrenness: It must be considered first, that a Mountainous
Earth must have Valleys in it. And as Mountains are more barren than Plains, so
Valleys are oftentimes more fruitful than they; and also receptive of more
Dwellers. That is, by reason of their hollowness and declivities, they are more
capacious than Plains, whose superficial extent is equal to the tops of these
Valleys, if measured by lines drawn from side to side. Secondly, tho some
Mountains be barren, others are as fruitful. Taurus, for instance, which takes
its Denomination, as some think, from its Magnitude; and is the Greatest
Mountain in all Asia (being as we are told, fifty Miles broad in some places on
the Top of it, and fifteen hundred long, reaching from the Ocean of Chinah, to
the Sea of Pamphylia;) on the sides of it is prodigious fruitful, tho its
highest parts are covered with Snow. For it affords Honey, Wheat, Gums, Wines,
and Fruits in vast Quantities. What he intimates touching Holland, that there
are more people in it, Ibid.
than upon a like number of Acres upon the Alps or Pyreneans; is allowed to be
true. But then the Populousness of that Place (as of many others) is not owing
to the Fruitfulness of the Soil, but to the Traffic by Sea. And therefore he
had the less reason to accuse the Sea of straightning the Earth; when by virtue
of its Trade, it inables so great a multitude of People, Answ. p. 58.
to live in so little a compass of Ground. Here he adds, that he has Two things
to complain of as foul play; Citing the Theory partially; and not marking the
place whence the Citation was taken. As to this Latter, it was not so needful
to mark the place of the Citation, because the place of another Citation
immediately before this, and relating to the same matter, was marked: See Disc.
p. 279.
And this Citation here meant, was but six lines distant from that, on the very
next page. As to the Former, He had no cause to blame the Excepter for a
Partial Citation; for he cited enough to confute the Theory fairly, as to this
Point, out of it self; and what needed he to cite more? The Citation was this.
If we allow the first Couple, Ib. 279, 280.
at the end of one hundred years, or of the first Century, to have left ten
pair of breeders which is an easy supposition, there would arise from these in
fifteen hundred years, a greater number than the Earth was capable of, allowing
every pair to multiply in the same decuple proportion the first pair did. So
that admitting this easy Supposition, either the Longaevity of the
Antediluvians must not be universal, or the Earth was incapable of its
Inhabitants, said the Excepter. But therefore, says the Answerer, the Theorist
tells you, the same measure cannot run equally through all Ages. Answ. p. 58,
59.
And in his calculation you see, after the first Century, he has taken only a
quadruple proportion for the increase of mankind. This the Excepter might have
observed. And this the Excepter did observe. But then he observed withal, that
he had no reason to go off from this easy supposition of a decuple proportion.
And therefore he stopped at it, and did not concern himself with the Quadruple
proportion, as being a groundless diminution of that Decuple Measure of
increase, which would have easily held on through all following Centuries, in a
proportion equal to that of the first. For if Adam and Eve, the first pair of
Breeders at the end of the first Century, lest ten pair; why should not every
other pair be allowed to multiply at the same rate? The reason given seems to
be this. Ib. p. 58.
This is an easy supposition for the first century, but it would be a very
uneasy one for the following Centuries. And why? I find no reason again but
this: Eng. The. p. 23.
because this (decuple proportion) would rise far beyond the capacities of this
Earth. That is, it would not be uneasy in the truth and reality of the thing;
but uneasy in regard of the Theory's Hypothesis. It would not be uneasy for
Mankind to multiply in a decuple proportion; but it would be uneasy for the
Theory to allow they did so; because then, as the Excepter urges, the Earth
would have been overcharged with their numerous increase. And when the Excepter
cited so much of the Theory, as carried the whole Truth of the Matter in it; he
had no reason to go farther in citing more of it, which was added but to serve
the Theory against the Truth: nor is there reason why he should be counted or
called partial, because he did not do it. That every Pair of breeders should at
the end of every Century leave ten pair more; is easy and allowable, because,
in all likelihood, true in it self: and was the Excepter to take in a lower
proportion, because this higher one was not for the Theorist's purpose? The
first Supposition being easy, and in all probability true; why should a second
be admitted, to render that uneasy and false, merely because it favors not him
who made it? But let him show why Seth and his Wife, and Enos and his Wife, and
other pairs downward, may not be allowed to multiply in the same decuple
proportion that the first pair are allowed to do; and then the Excepter will
own himself faulty for not enlarging the Citation, and taking in the Quadruple
proportion mentioned. But because in all probability, they multiplied in equal
measures; he had no reason to be blamed as partial, for leaving it out. Tho the
truth is, if but the Quadruple proportion be admitted, it will set the Number
of the Praediluvians very much too high, if compared with the Number of the
present Earth's Inhabitants; as the Theorist computes them both. For whereas he
thinks that the present number of men upon the face of the Earth, is commonly
estimated to be betwixt three and four hundred Millions: Eng. Theor. p. 23.
the Quadruple proportion, in sixteen hundred and fifty years (which passed
before the Flood came in) would raise it to 21474836480. A most prodigious
Excess: as raising the number more than one and twenty thousand Millions above
the common account. Or if we quite lay aside this Quadruple proportion, and go
but according to that other Citation out of the Theory before this; the Earth
would still be overlaid with the multitude of its Inhabitants. See Disc. p. 279.
The Citation runs thus. It Is likely they were more fruitful in the first Ages
of the World, than after the Flood; and they lived six, seven, eight, nine
hundred years apiece, getting Sons and Daughters. And when men lived so many
hundreds of years before the Flood, and lived getting of Sons and Daughters,
and were more fruitful, then, than since; how is it possible but that the first
Earth in sixteen hundred years, must be mightily over-peopled; especially when
Digamy, and (as the H. GHOST seems to intimate) Poligamy too, Gen 6.2.
were in fashion in the first World? So that go which way you please; by your
Decuple, that is, or by your Quadruple proportion, or else by the last clause
cited out of your Theory; and according to any, or according to all of them,
the primitive Earth would have been greatly overstockt, in case the Longaevity
of the Antediluvians had been universal.

The second Reason against that Longaevity was the inequality of it; or the
difference as to length of days, Disc. p. 280.
amongst them that lived before the Flood. To this it is answered, Answ. p. 59.
their Stamina and Constitutions might then be of a different strength, as well
as now. The length of Men's days depends naturally upon the strength of their
Bodies; and the strength of their Bodies, upon the goodness of their Stamina,
and Constitutions. And therefore if These were as different before the Flood,
as they are since; many Millions might dye then as soon as they were born, and
as many in their Infancy, and as many very young, and so the Longaevity of the
Praediluvians could not be General: which was the Thing objected.

The last Reason against the Praediluvian Longaevity supposed to proceed from a
constant Equinox; Answ. p. 59. Disc. p. 281, 282, 283, The second Character is
the Longaevity of men; and, as is probable, of all other Animals in proportion.
Eng. Theor. p. 180.
was the proportionable long life of other Animals. For that would have been an
Effect of the same Cause. And they multiplying much faster than Mankind; had
they lived long, they would have grown so numerous as to have been pernicious.
To which it is answered thus. I can say nothing to that, nor he neither upon
good grounds, unless we knew what species's of Animals were then made, and in
what degrees they Multiplied. He formerly yielded, that the Earth then brought
forth the principles of life, and all living Creatures, Man excepted: Eng. The.
p. 179,
But now it appears that he then said he knew not what; for he owns that he
knows not what species's of Animals were then made.

And then as to the Degrees which they multiplied in, they must needs be
strangely high. For besides that the Ground was then most fat and fruitful, and
the Air most warm and cherishing, and all advantages imaginable concurred to
constant and numerous propagations of them; the Earth brought forth the
principles of life, we see, and all living creatures: and so by spontaneous
Births they would have increased even sans number; and such a consuming
multitude of them would have been produced, as would not only have greatly
annoyed, but utterly ruined Mankind. For while Horses, Asses, Cows, Sheep,
Goats, Swine, Dogs, Lions, Bears, Wolves, Crocodiles, Serpents, Scorpions,
Rats, Mice, Fowls, Hornets, etc. grew out of the Earth in strange plenty; and
this Terrigenous Breed (by the help and influence of a perpetual Equinox) were
naturally far more prolific than now these Creatures are, and there were no
hands to hinder their Procreations, or to destroy either young or old: how
could Mankind who multiplied (in comparison) so very slowly, have defended
either themselves or their Provisions (naked and destitute of Weapons as they
were) from the Assaults and Invasions of such inconceiveable Herds or Swarms of
Vermin, as would have come upon them? But here therefore the old Expedient,
Extraordinary Providence, is called in again for Remedy or Prevention. Ib.
The Theorist always supposes a Divine Providence to superintend, proportion
and determine, both the number and food of Animals upon the Earth: suitably to
the constitution and circumstances of every World. That is, when ordinary
Providence had put Nature into such a condition, as to bring forth the
aforesaid animals, and many other, out of the Earth; Extraordinary Providence
was to stand by, and either hinder them from rising into animation; or else
knock them on the head as fast as they quickened, and send them packing out of
life again. As if divine Providence imitated Penelope; unravelling by night,
what it weaved by day. Thus he pulls down his own Censure upon himself:
Methinks they make very bold with the Deity, Eng. The. p. 20.
when they make Him do and undo, go forward and backwards by such
countermarches and retractions, as we do not willingly impute to the Wisdom of
GOD ALMIGHTY.

CHAP. XIV.
HEre another Vital Assertion of the Theory's is excepted against; and Reasons
are given why the Deluge cannot be rightly explicated by the Dissolution of the
Earth, or its Disruption and fall into the Abyss. The first is, Disc. p. 285.
because it would be inconsistent with Moses 's Description of Paradise; which
he has made according to proper Rules of Topography. But, says the Answerer,
this Objection, I Am afraid, will fall heavier upon Moses, Answ. p. 60.
or upon the Excepter himself, than upon the Theorist. And why so? Why, Ib.
because that place of Paradise cannot be understood or determined by the
Mosaical Topography, one of these two things must be allowed; either that the
description was insufficient and ineffectual: or that there has been some great
change in the Earth, whereby the Marks of it are destroyed. -- If he take the
second of these Answers, he joins with the Theorist. If the first, he reflects
upon the honor of Moses, or confutes himself. Moses's Topography of Paradise,
as it was done by proper Rules, so it was sufficient and effectual enough for
marking it out, as it once stood. And that it is not so now, is because (as the
second Answer intimates) there has been a great change in the Earth, in that
part of the Earth where the Paradisiacal Region was. And such a change may be
allowed without joining with the Theorist, as he Himself assures us. For he
tells us in the same page, that good interpreters suppose, that the Channels of
Rivers were very much changed by the Flood. And a great change in the Channels
of Rivers, must make a great change in a Country: Especially where that Country
is described by those Rivers; which is the case of Paradise. And this change is
the very thing which makes the place of Paradise so hard to be found. Yet this,
I say, is very far from joining with the Theorist. For according to him, the
Channels of Rivers were not only changed, Eng. Theor. p. 252.
but all broke up, and so quite put by, by that Fraction of the Earth which
made the Flood. And not only the Channels of Rivers were destroyed, but even the
Sources of them too, by his Hypothesis. For whereas the general Sources of all
Rivers in the primitive World, were the Rainy Regions about the Poles; Those
Polar Regions fell in together with the rest, and so Rivers which were before,
could not afterward continue. Let him please to say therefore whether Tygris
and Euphrates were before the Flood or not. If they were not, how could Moses
describe Paradise by them? If they were, had the Flood come in by the Earth's
Dissolution, they must inevitably have been destroyed. But instead of that,
they are still in being; and this is an evidence that the Earth was not
deluged, by being dissolved. Nor is this the only difficulty upon the Theorist
here. For as to the place of Paradise, he refers himself wholly (as we have
heard) to the Ancients; and they incline to seat it in the South, or South-East
Land, in the other World. And can it enter into the mind of man to think, that
Havilah, and Aethiopia, and Assyria, and Hiddekel, and Euphrates, which Moses
takes into the description of Paradise; could ever be situate in the other
Hemisphere, when they are now found in this? If the Earth fell in, without
question it gave a deadly jounce. But could it make these Countries and Rivers
rebound with such force, as to leap quite beyond the torrid Zone, and settle
some degrees on this side of our Tropic? There are a sort of Divinity
Theorists, Annus ipse nonagesimus primus ejus seculi erat, quod eodem anno, ac
pene mense, natalis Deiparae Virginis domus, deficiente cultu, ex Asia in
Europam, coelestium ministerio transit. Quae primo in Dalmatia, inde quadrienno
post in Piceno consedit. Hor. Tursel. Epit. Hist. lib. 9. page (mihi) 302.
who would fain persuade us, that the Lady of Loretto's Chamber went thither a
Pilgrimage out of Nazareth. This is strangely mavelous: but the wonder of it
will be much abated, if we can find the Regions and Rivers we speak of, going
on procession out of the South-East Land, into this Northern Continent. I
confess we are taught strange things of Paradise; but this its translation
would surpass all. And how good soever its Soil was at first, certainly it grew
very light at last, to hop thus far. Were this an effect of the Earth's fall,
believe it, here is either a very fair tumbling Cast; or else our Author is in
a foul mistake. And so indeed he must be; and the Objection which he was afraid
would fall on Moses, or the Excepter; lights heavy on the Theorist.

But out of this fear, he quickly rises into another Passion, if we may guess
by his expressions in the next Paragraph. Tho I cannot but say, his Passion is
as causeless, as his fear was groundless. For, speaking truth in a controversy,
should never move choler. And did the Excepter do more than so, when he said,
that to affirm Moses's Description of Paradise to be false, Disc. p. 286.
must be horrid Blasphemy, it being Dictated by the H. GHOST? Yet this is the
word which he takes so ill. And truly so far as he has said any thing, that
implies Mose's Topography of Paradise to be false; So far he ought to resent
what was spoken; tho not with anger. And, pray, how can he (allowing own
Hypothesis to be true) defend Moses's description of Paradise from being false;
seeing he describes it by Rivers, and those Rivers, according to the Theory,
could not be before the Flood? He attempts the Defense thus. The Theorist
supposes Rivers before the Flood, Answer. p. 60.
in great plenty, and why not like to these? He himself has given Reasons why
they could not be like them. Eng. The. p. 252.
It Is true, if you admit our Hypothesis, concerning the fraction and disruption
of the Earth at the Deluge, then we cannot expect to find rivers, as they were
before, their general source is changed, and their Channels are all broke up.
And if Rivers after the Flood, are not as they were before it; how can they be
alike? And when their source was changed at the Deluge, and their Channels all
broke up; how is it possible but that they must differ greatly from what they
were, in their situations, Courses, etc? Which must utterly spoil them for
being topographical marks; I mean the same true topographical marks to any
Country, to which they formerly were so: And can they then be alike? That
Person who can think that the Earth was dissolved, and by that dissolution fell
a Mile or two downward, and by that fall was broken to pieces, and by that
fraction was thrown into wildest disorders; so that whereas before it had one
entire, smooth, level, uniform Surface; it was thus made into Mountains, Hills,
Valleys, Islands, Rocks, Seas, Gulphs, Lakes, etc. And yet can think again,
that those Rivers which were before this happened, should in their situations
and channels (the principal circumstances we are now concerned in) be just like
these after it; he must be one of a very strong Phantsy, but withal of as weak
a Judgment. And farther, Moses does not describe Paradise by Rivers like to
Tygris, and Euphrates, and Pison, and Gihon; but by those very same Rivers as
originally flowing there. And every like, we know, is far from being the very
same. Men and Animals now upon Earth, are like to them before the Deluge: yet I
hope they are not the same revived.

And then lastly, the Theorist yields Paradise was in the Southern Hemisphere,
and so the Rivers of it before the Flood must be there too, and so they must
rise from the rainy Region at the Antarctic Pole, and so they must be very
remote from the Land of Havilah and Assyria. Whereas since the Flood, Moses
describes Paradise by Tygris and Euphrates, and these are Rivers in this
Northern Hemisphere, and they spring up from the Mountains of Armenia, and they
run by or through the aforesaid Countries. And is it to be thought then that
those Rivers before the Flood, and these Rivers since the Flood, could be
alike? Especially alike in showing the Situation and the bounds of Paradise?
from Moses's Description or Topography of which, was the first Reason borrowed
against the Earth's Dissolution. Concerning which he expostulates; Answ. p. 61.
Is it not a strange thing that the Dissolution of the Earth should be made
Blasphemy? Yes, very strange, and let them that make it so, be blamed for it.
But still to affirm that Moses's Description of Paradise is false, would be
horrid Blasphemy, it being dictated by the H. GHOST. And this was the thing
which the Excepter made Blasphemy, (which the Answerer, if he thinks fit, may
contradict.) And now the Replicant says farther, that to assert such a
Dissolution of the Earth, as destroys Moses's Description of Paradise, or
implies it to be false; will indirectly, consequentially, and reductively at
least, be of Blasphemous importance. But the Answerer alleges; that very
Expression, Ibid.
the Earth is dissolved, is a Scripture Expression (Psalm. 75.3. Isai. 24.19.
Amos 9.5.) which, methinks, might have been enough to have protected it from
the imputation of Blasphemy. How well this Allegation will protect him or what
he has said, in any capacity or respect; I know not. I only ask, what
dissolution of the Earth, do the Psalmist and Prophets mean, in the Places
cited? Do they mean a figurative, tropological Dissolution; or a literal, and
such a real one as the Theorist has invented, and which, according to him, did
drown the World? If the first, their notion is nothing to the Answerer's
purpose: if the Second, the Earth must have been deluged, as often as they say
it has been dissolved. I cannot think, that our Answerer believes, that
Palestine was literally or really dissolved, in the prophet Esay's time. Yet
it is plain it was so, according to Scripture-expression. Thou whole Palestina
are dissolved, Isai. 14.31. Which shows him clearly what Dissolution of the
Earth, Scripture means in the places cited; and what kind of protection that
Scripture expression will afford him: and consequently how weak the Sanctuary
is that he here flies to. In this Paragraph he insinuates odious things of the
Excepter. As if he were guilty of a rude and injudicious defending of
Scripture, by railing and ill language, such as tends to the diminution and
disparagement of it. As if he made his own Consequences to be of the same
authority with the word of GOD; and so whatsoever is against them, must be
charged with Blasphemy against the H. GHOST. And as if there were nothing safe
against his blind zeal and opinionative ignorance. How easy were it here to
retort and retaliate? But we must not render (...) Yet he having observed, that
weak reasons commonly produce strong passions; we may without offense, Answ. p.
11.
measure his Arguments by his own Rule, and judge of their weakness by the
sentence proceeding out of his own mouth; and conclude that his Reasons are
like to be invalid, because his Passions are so violent. By them, one would
think he had taken a turn in his Torrid Zone, and was just now come piping hot
out of it.

Secondly, the Dissolution of the Earth could not be the cause of the general
flood; because it would have utterly destroyed Noah 's Ark and all that was in
it: Disc. p. 288.
said the Excepter. But this was prevented by the Theorist's putting the Ark
under the Conduct of its Guardian Angels, and a miraculous Providence, says the
Answerer. p. 61.
And in proof that he did thus put the Ark under the Conduct of Angels; he
cites these words out of the English Theory. Ib.
I think it had been impossible for the Ark to have lived upon the raging
Abyss; or for Noah and his Family to have been preserved, if there had not been
a miraculous hand of Providence to take care of them. And then again he must
needs fall pell-mell on the Excepter, tho he comes off as he uses to do. Ib. p.
62.
Now either the Excepter did not take notice of this passage in the Theory, or
he does not allow that a miraculous hand was sufficient to preserve the Ark: or
thirdly, that he made an objection, which he knew himself to be impertinent.
And I confess, I am inclinable to think the last is true. But by his leave,
none of these three things are true, and the real truth is this. Tho he put the
Ark under the conduct of Angels in the extremity of the Flood, and when it was
upon the raging Abyss; yet he lest it without a miraculous hand to take care of
it, in its fall. Yea, instead of that, it is evident, that he only put it into
a River, or Dock, Ib.
or Cistern, that it might be afloat there before the Abyss was broken open; as
if that could have saved it from being dashed to pieces. And because the
Excepter did not take notice of this Contrivance, of this River, or Dock: he
tells him of it in both ears: p. 31.
In the eighth Chapter of his Answer, and here in the fourteenth. p. 62:
But was there so great an injury done him, and had he such mighty cause to
complain, that that Thing was omitted, which himself now looks upon as
unnecessary? For he says, after all, there is no necessity that the Ark should
be afloat, Ib.
before the Earth broke. And for what reason? Why, ordinary providence being
thus laid aside, what can be expected but Extraordinary providence should be
brought in next? And so it is with a witness, Ib.
in these words. The Angels, (whose ministry we own openly upon these grand
occasions) could as easily have held the Ark afloat, in the Air, as on the
Water. But because Angels could do this, may we argue from thence with good
consequence that they did do it? and from their power to act it, conclude they
effected it? Without question they could have kept Judea dry, when all the rest
of the World was drowned; yet, we know, this was not done. But the Ark however
was held afloat in the Air, by them. For it follows, the Ark, being an Emblem
of the Church, GOD certainly did give his Angels charge over it; that they
should bear it up in their hands, that it might not be dashed against a stone.
Surely this Hypothesis must needs be very strong and lasting, that has so much
miracle, and ministry of Angels to support it. And then what matter for
Philosophy (tho the Theory is to be chiefly Philosophical, Eng. Th. p. 6.) when
it may stand much better without it? But the same pen writes thus in another
place. Eng. The. p. 98.
Noah and his Family were saved by water; so as the water which destroyed the
rest of the World, was an instrument of their Conservation, inasmuch as it bore
up the Ark, and kept it from that impetuous shock, which it would have had, if
it had either stood upon dry land when the Earth fell, or if the Earth had been
dissolved without any water on it or under it. Now if Noah and his Family were
saved by water; if the water which destroyed the rest of the world, was an
instrument of their Conservation; if it conserved them as it bore up the Ark;
and if it so bore it up, as that it kept it from an impetuous shock, which
otherwise it would have had when the Earth fell: how could the Answerer say,
there was no necessity that the Ark should be afloat before the Earth broke;
and now make the conservation of Noah and his Ark, at the fall of the Earth, to
be wholly Angelical? In short; the Theorist affirms, that mankind was saved by
water that bore up the Ark, and kept it from an impetuous shock when the Earth
fell; it having the Advantage of a River, or of a Dock, or Cistern, wherein to
float. The Answerer, that there was no necessity that the Ark should be afloat
before the Earth broke, because the Angels could hold it in the Air; and they
having charge over it, did bear it up in their hands. The Question therefore
might be put, which of the two speaks truest. But even let them agree the
difference as they please, Another Contradiction.
and reconcile the plain Contradiction between them. But for the Ark's being
afloat in a River, or Dock, or Cistern, before the Earth fell; he has this
pretense. Those things were premised in the Theory, Answ: p. 62.
only to soften the way to men that are hard of belief in such extraordinary
matters. Truly these matters are very Extraordinary; and the way to believing
them had need be well softened. But when that is softened, if so be men are not
softened withal, and made extraordinarily soft too; they will hardly ever
believe them at last. And pray, what are the Extraordinary matters, to the
belief of which, the Arks being afloat in a River, or Dock, or Cistern; was to
soften the way? They seem to be the saving of Noah, and the saving of his
Family, and the saving of the Ark, when the Earth fell. But then in truth these
things could not be those matters. For we are here told (at the same time) that
there was no necessity of the Arks being afloat in water, in order to these
things: and that Noah, and his Family, and the Ark, were saved by the Ministry
of Angels. And to the belief of the Angels saving them, such a mollification
would be vain and needless; inasmuch as every one who believes their Existence,
believes also what the Answerer says of them; that they could as easily have
held the Ark afloat in the Air, as in the Water. And so what was premised in
the Theory, of this softning Nature; and what the Excepter is blamed for not
noting, was of as little use, as it is of truth. And to shut up this
particular; by calling in this extraordinary help of the Angels, he renders the
Rains at the Deluge (the principal Cause of it, Genesis 7.4.) wholly unnecessary.
For tho at first he would have them to save the Ark by setting it afloat; yet
now we see there was no necessity of that. And then if the Earth fell into the
Abyss, and by its fall made the waters of it so raging and destructive to all
things, as he represents them; there could be no more need of forty days rain
in order to the Flood; than of forty Candles to give light to the Sun. And so
GOD did a great work to no end or purpose. Especially this 40 days rain
following the Disruption; Which happened the very first day that Noah entered
the Ark.

A Third Reason against the Floods coming in by the Dissolution of the Earth,
was this. The Earth (or dry Land of this Terraqueous Globe) would in likelihood
have been of another Figure than what it now bears. Disc. p. 289.
But instead of answering it, Answ. p. 63.
he speaks against a change in the Poles and Circles of the Earth; a needless
trouble, and occasioned by his own oversight. For had he but looked into the
Errata's, he might have seen there, that those Parentheses, upon which he
grounded what he says, should have been left out. And in case he did peruse the
Errata's, and observe that these Parentheses were marked for such; I may say of
him, as he said of the Excepter, it must be a wilful dissimulation not to take
notice of them. Ib. p. 62.
And if he had taken notice of them as Errata's, he need not have troubled
himself farther about them. And so we pass to

The Fourth Reason. Had the Earth been dissolved to make the Flood; Read Disc.
p. 290, 291, 292.
its Dissolution would have brought it into lamentable barrenness. For the dry
and dead Soil would have been turned up by whole Countries at once: and where
the outward part of the Earth continued outward still; the top of the Ground
would have been rinsed off, by the vehement workings and incessant beatings of
the Flood upon it. And then the furious commotions and aestuations of the
Waters, washing off an abundance of Earth, from the innumerable Fragments which
fell into the Abyss; and this Earthy stuff being carried into all places, and
spread thick upon the Ground, and mixed and incorporated with much other Filth;
it would have hardened (upon the going off of the Flood) into a Crust or Cap on
the surface of the Earth, and so have been very destructive to its
Fruitfulness. It is answered first, I willingly allow, Answ. p. 64.
that some of the interior and barren parts of the Earth might be turned up;
as we now see in mountainous and wild Countries: but this rather confirms the
Theory, than weakens it. He must allow (according to the tenor of his
Hypothesis) not only that some, but that many of the interior barren parts of
the Earth were turned up everywhere. And then the Waters being so strangely
tumultuous, and the fluctuations of them so extremely boisterous, The Tumult of
the Waters, and the extremity of the Deluge lasted for some Months. Eng. Theor.
p. 76. Ib. p. 75.
and their mighty rage of so long continuance; While they were carried up to a
great height in the Air, and fell down again with prodigious weight and force;
they could not but harrass the Ground at such a rate, as to wear away the upper
part of it, and make the top of the Earth as bare and barren as the bottom of a
river, by their monstrous and unspeakable Surgings. Secondly, he answers, that
the filth and soil would have made the Earth more barren, p. 64.
I cannot allow. For good husbandmen overflow their grounds, to make their
Crops more Rich. And it is generally supposed that the inundation of the Nile,
and the mud it leaves behind it, makes Egypt more fruitful. Besides, this part
of the objection lies against the common Explication of the Deluge, as well as
against that which is given by the Theory. But when good Husbandmen overflow
their grounds to improve their Crops; they do it seasonably, and they do it
moderately, and to be sure they do not at the same time turn them up for half a
mile or a mile deep. And tho several Rivers do enrich grounds by their
Inundations, by virtue of a great plenty of unctuous mud which they bring upon
them, that makes the Soil new as it were; Nearchus de fluviorum effusione haec
affert exempla, quod dictum est, Hermi, and Caystri, and Maeandri, and Caici,
campos similes esse, propter limum qui e montibus delatus campos ^^get, imo
facit. Strabo Geogr. li. 15.
(so Hermus does, and also Cayster, Menander, and Caicus, as Strabo informs us
from Nearchus) yet that mud which the Deluge would have left, would have been
of a silty and sandy nature, and so of a lean, and hungry, and starven quality,
as being mostly washed off from the Edges of those pieces into which the
dissolved Earth was shattered: and consequently would rather have prevented and
hindered, than helped or promoted the Earth's fruitfulness. And therefore the
Geographer notes, that the mud of the aforesaid Rivers, which makes the fields
over which they flow; is not coarse and dry (like that which would have been
eaten off of the verges of the terrestrial Fragments) but of a softer and
fatter sort. Defer autem flumina eum qui mollior sit, and pinguior ex quo
campi fiunt. Id. Ib.
And then as to the Nile, that the Mud it brings down upon the Land of Egypt,
is light and soft, and fat; and so fit to impregnate it with a strong
Fertility: we may properly infer from the sweetness of its Waters. For as
Diodorus reports, they are the sweetest of all that are in the whole Earth.
Which made that famous General, Piscenius Niger, (who contended with Septimus
Severus for the Empire) reprimand his Soldiers for hankering after wine, and
for muttering for the want of it; when they might drink their fill of this
pleasant Stream. Tho it is well known, that an ingenious French Writer, I mean
Duval (in his Geogr. Universe.) ascribes both the Muddiness, Fruitfulness, and
Overflow of it; to its Nitrous Quality. His words are to this purpose. It has
lately been found out, that the Nitre wherewith the Nile abounds so much, is
the cause of all those wonderful Effects; and that being heated by the sun, it
mingles it self with the water, renders it troubled, swells it, and makes it
pass over its Banks. But yet concerning this noble River it is as well known;
that as sometimes it has not increased at all, (as in the tenth and eleventh
year of Cleopatra, against the downfall and the death of that Princess, and her
admired Anthony:) and as sometimes it is defective in its increase, to
lamentable failures in the usual Products of that plentiful Country: So if at
any time it happens to exceed in its increment, but two or three Cubits; that
excess is at once both a clear Prognostic, and a certain Cause, of a dearth or
scarcity in the ensuing year. But then that such a Deluge as the Theory
supposes, (it being Universal, and of long continuance, and made of lean
subterraneous water, and full of dead, and harsh, and heavy soil, fetched off
from numberless pieces of the broken Earth) should occasion barrenness, for a
considerable time, in the post-diluvian World; is but reasonable to conclude.
Nor lastly does this part of the Objection lie against the common Explication
of the Deluge, with such force as it does against the Theory's Explication of
it. For tho a General Flood overtopping the Mountains, must have left mud, and
slime, and filth behind it; yet where the water rise upon an Earth that
remained unbroken, they could be nothing in quantity, to what they must have
been where the Earth was dissolved and fell all to pieces; and where the water
boiling up from under these Fragments, and then falling down again violently
upon them, raged amongst them with lasting, incessant, and unimaginable
turbulence.

As a Fifth Reason against the Earth's being drowned, by its being dissolved,
Disc. p. 292:
the Excepter added this. All the Buildings erected before the Flood, would
have been shaken down, or else overwhelmed. Here, as to the City Joppa (which
is the main hinge upon which the Objection turns) he Answers: it is uncertain
whether it was built before the Flood. ^. 64.
But besides the authorities of Mela and Solinus cited for it, it is generally
granted to be so ancient; and none that speak of its Antiquity, take upon them
to deny it. Nor will the Fiction concerning Perseus and Andromeda, subvert the
received opinion in this matter. For as many Fables are made out of true
stories, so many again are tacked to them. ^. 64, 65.
He goes on; However suppose the ruins of one Town remained after the Flood;
does this prove that the Earth was not dissolved? I do not doubt, but there
were several tracts of the Earth, much greater than that Town, that were not
broken all to pieces by their fall. Had that tract, whereon Joppa stood,
continued whole; yet falling down so very low (a mile at least;) by the force
of its weight it would have suffered such a shock, as could not but have
levelled its Buildings with the ground. Thus very good houses are oftentimes
shattered down in Earthquakes, merely by the concussion or shaking of the
Ground, tho it never breaks. And truly if only the bare ruins of it had
remained (which we do not, nor need not grant) yet these must have given as
fatal a blow to the Theory, as the fall of the Earth would have done to this
City. For their very out-lasting the fury of the Deluge, would prove that Joppa
consisted, not of a Number of Cottages, made of branches of trees, Answ: p. 50.
of Osiers, and Bull-rushes; or of Mud-Walls and Straw Roofs (which then must
all have been quite washed away:) but of Edifices made of such Materials, as
could never be prepared, formed, and set up, without Iron tools. And so we come
to

The Last Reason against the supposed dissolution of the Earth. It would have
made GOD's Covenant with Noah, See Disc. p. 296, 297, 298.
a very vain and trifling thing. Because then the Earth was not capable of, or
liable to such another Deluge. It is here answered: So much is true, p. 65.
that the Deluge in the course of Nature, will not return again in the same
way. If it returns not in the same way, that is, in the course of nature; it
cannot be such another Deluge as Noah's was: for that came in by the Course of
Nature. Read the beginning of the 6th. Chapter of this Reply. Answ. p. 65.
He proceeds; But unless GOD prevents it, it both may and will return in
another way. That is, if the World, continues long enough, the Mountains will
wear and sink and the Waters, in proportion, rise; and overflow the whole
Earth. How possible soever such a Deluge may be in long process of time; yet
Christians, who believe the Doctrine of the Gospel, and that principal Article
of it, the World's Conflagration; can never think that it shall come to pass.
For if the World in the end, were to be overflowed with Water; how could it,
according to St. Peter, be reserved unto fire? 2 Pet. 3.^
And GOD having thus declared that he will prevent it, His Covenant with Noah
could have no relation to such a natural Overflow. This piece of answer
therefore is so very thin, that a weak eye may easily see through it, and
discern that there is shifting at the bottom of it. He adds therefore; Answ. p.
65.
GOD might, when He pleased, by an extraordinary power, and for the sins of
men, bring another Deluge upon the World. And that is the thing which Noah
seems to have feared, and which GOD, by his Covenant, secured him against.
Noah's Flood was brought upon the World for the sins of men; And if another
Flood may be brought in, upon that account, by GOD's extraordinary power; then
Noah's Flood might come in by that power too, even by its creating waters to
make it. Which in case it had been but yielded at first, it might have saved
the pains, of setting up this Hypothesis. And not only so, but likewise have
superseded the collateral trouble, of too weak and ineffectual endeavors to
support it. And when all is said, the sole reason why such another flood as
Noah's was, shall never come in again; is not any change in Nature, rendering
the thing difficult or impossible; but the unchangeable covenant of GOD, as
appears, Isai. 54.9. Where GOD, to illustrate the stability of his kindness to
the Jewish Church, and to show that its calamity shall never be reiterated;
compares it to the sure and perpetual exclusion of the waters of Noah, to the
return of which, his immutable Oath is the eternal bar. For this is as the
waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no
more go over the Earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee,
nor rebuke thee.

Thus we have done with the Answer to our Exceptions. In which I am not
conscious to my self, that I have omitted any one thing, which deserves notice
and a Reply. And here I might speak freely of this Answer. But because its
defects are plain and obvious enough to the intelligent; I only say this much.
That I expected a better from the Author of the Theory, or none at all.

CHAP. XV.
HEre the Scaene changes; and our Answerer now becomes an Objector; and manages
this part, as he did the other. And as an instance of as much, he trips in the
first step that he makes, and stumbles into a Mistake. For he affirms, Answ. p.
66.
that the first Proposition laid down for the establishing of our Hypothesis,
is this. That the Flood was but fifteen Cubits high, above the ordinary level
of the Earth. But as any one, that pleases, may see, the Proposition laid down
as the foundation of our Hypothesis, is verbatim this. Disc. p. 30^
That the highest parts of the Earth, that is, of the common surface of it,
were under Water but fifteen Cubits in depth. And between the common surface
(or ordinary level) of the Earth; and the highest parts of that surface, or
level; there is great difference. For according to the first, the Waters were
not 30 foot high, as he noted: Ib. l. 12.
but according to the latter, they might, in most places, be thirty, forty, or
fifty Cubits high, or higher, as we observed. Disc. p. 300. l. 31. Ib. l. 27.
And whereas it is said of the Waters of the Flood, that they were but fifteen
Cubits high in all, above the surface of the Earth; it is manifest that the
highest parts of its surface were there intended, by what follows, in
explanation of that Clause, even to the end of the Paragraph. Touching the
Proposition he cries out, This is an unmerciful Paradox. Answ. p. 66.
But who could have looked for such an Exclamation, from him whose own Paradoxes
are so many and unmerciful! Here therefore (...). His Censure returns double
upon himself. And while he finds fault with the sliver in my Teeth; I may
justly give him the Talmudic answer, usually directed to the more guilty
Reprehender, (...) take the Beam out of thine eyes. Then he enquires, Ib. p.
66, 67.
under what notion must this Proposition be received? as a Postulatum, or as a
Conclusion? If it be a Postulatum, it must be clear from its own light, or
acknowledged by general consent. It cannot pretend to be clear from its own
light, because it is matter of fact, which is not known, but by Testimony.
Neither is it generally acknowledged: for the general opinion is, that the
Waters covered the tops of the Mountains, and were fifteen Cubits higher. We
might bring this home to the vital Assertions of the Theory; but let us try but
one of them. Namely, that the Primitive Earth was without a Sea. Under what
notion must this Proposition be received? As a Postulatum, or as a Conclusion?
If it be a Postulatum, it must be clear from its own light, or acknowledged by
general consent. It cannot pretend to be clear from its own light, because it
is matter of fact, which is not known but by testimony. Neither is it generally
acknowledged; For the general opinion is, that the First Earth had an Open Sea.
Wherefore we may well goon (with a little variation) against the Answerer, as
he does against the Excepter. It must not therefore be made a Postulatum, that
such an Assertion is true, but the truth of it must be demonstrated by good
proofs. Ib. p. 67.
But the good and demonstrating proofs of this, are still wanting. And so that
blame which he would fling upon the Excepter, falls upon himself; recoiling
back by just recrimination.

Next he is for noting one or two things, wherein the Excepter seems to be
inconsistent with himself, or with good sense. Ib.
An high Charge, and such as inevitably draws shame after it, either upon him
against whom it is made, or else upon the Maker of it. And where will he find
this inconsistency to clear himself? He looks for it first in these words of
the Excepter. Not that I will be bound to defend what I say, as true and real.
Now where is the inconsistency of these words, either with him that spoke them,
or with good sense? Rather how consistent is it with a man's self, and with good
sense; not to be bound to defend, what he thinks may not be true and real? Yet
as if he would make good his charge out of these very words; he Querys
immediately, But why does he then trouble himself, or the World, with an
Hypothesis, which he does not believe to be true and real? Many have written
ingenious and useful things, which they never believed to be true and real: but
were they for this troublers of the World, and inconsistent with themselves, or
with good sense? And why then should the Excepter's Hypothesis be so, for his
not believing it to be true and real? Especially when he so far insinuates his
mistrust or doubt of it, as to declare he would not defend it as true and real.
Besides, an Hypothesis, in the very term of it, being but a Supposition; it
would have been more like inconsistency with himself, or with good sense; if he
had believed it to be true and real. For in case it be a true and real thing,
why should it any longer be an hypothesis? And therefore he who fancies the
Theory to be a Reality; affirms it to be something more than a bare Hypothesis:
Eng. Theo. p. 149. Ib. p. 150.
and will have it to rise above the character of a bare Hypothesis; and be a
true piece of natural history, and the greatest and most remarkable that has
yet been since the beginning of the World. The Inconsistency he talks of, is
not to be found here; whither goes he to seek it next? Why, he has recourse to
this saying of the Excepter's. Answ. p. 67.
Our Supposition stands supported by Divine authority: as being founded upon
Scripture. Which tells us, as plainly as it can speak, that the Waters
prevailed but fifteen Cubits upon the Earth. Now tho nothing of the suggested
Inconsistency, appears here neither, prima facie, or at first glance; yet he
labors to discover it by what follows. If his Hypothesis be founded upon
Scripture; Ib. p. 67, 68.
and upon Scripture as plainly as it can speak; why will not he defend it as
true and real? For to be supported by Scripture, and plain Scripture, is as
much as we can allege for the Articles of our faith; which every one surely is
bound to defend. In our entrance on this new Hypothesis, we desired allowance
to make bold with Scripture a little, as the Theory had done a great deal.
Disc. p. 299.
And afterward we declared, that we had no reason to take our singularity in
expounding a Text or two of Scripture, Ib. p. 325.
as an Objection against us; if brought by the Theorist, or them that hold with
him. For that indeed is but an imperfect Transcript of his own Copy, and a
faint imitation of his extravagant Pattern; showing him, as in a dark and short
resemblance, a shadow of that large unusual Liberty, which he assumed to
himself, not easy to be paralleled. And therefore for him to lay hold of our
supporting our Hypothesis by plain Scripture (as if we forced or wrested,
misinterpreted or misapplied it in so doing, when at the same time we openly
profess, that we make bold with it;) is no better than a forestalled Argument;
otherwise a Cavil. And farther, (as the Answerer himself noted just now) we
would not be bound to defend what we say, of the new Hypothesis, as true and
real. And therefore the founding it upon Scripture, and making that to support
it plainly; cannot possibly be understood, by men of sense, to be done
otherwise than in an hypothetic or suppositious way. And thus the Excepter is
so far from proving inconsistent with himself or good sense; that how could he
be more consistent with both, than in refusing to defend, as true and real,
what he only supposed to be thus founded upon Scripture and supported by it.
And whatever he said of that nature, was spoken only in way of supposition
conjectural. Yea, tho it was spoken never so positively, it was but to set
forth, rei personam; to make the more full and lively representation of the
supposed thing. And therefore before he began his new Explication of the Flood,
he premised this caution ( Disc. p. 300.) Where we speak never so positively,
still what we deliver is to be looked upon, not as an absolute, but as a
comparative Hypothesis. And so not as really founded upon Scripture, and
supported by it; but as supposed to be so only. The Answerer therefore, in this
business need not have brought in so over-strain'd a comparison, as the
Articles of our Faith. p. 68.
Betwixt which and Hypotheses, there is greatest Difference; the one, being no
less than truths of GOD; and the other, no more than Imaginations of men. And
as they are very different things, so Scripture supports them very different
ways. Articles of Faith it supports directly, and mainly, by Divine Revelation:
Hypotheses, collaterally and presumptively, by humane fiction or imputation.
And as Scripture supports them in a different manner; so we are bound to defend
them in as different a measure. For Articles of Faith we are bound to defend to
the very Death; but who are obliged to be Martyrs for Philosophy? Yea, some who
build Hypotheses upon Scripture-Foundations; I believe will rather let them
fall, and moreover help to pull them down; than stand a fiery Trial to uphold
them. We are told, that S. Peter convinces us, Eng. Theor. p. 85.
that the Theorist's Description of the Antediluvian Earth, and of the Deluge;
is a reality. And that other places of Scripture seem manifestly to describe
the form of his Abyss with the Earth above it. Ib. p. 86.
And that Scripture it self does assure us that the Earth rise at first out of
his Chaos. Ib. p. 150.
Yet I am apt to think (and I hope without breaking the Law of Charity) That
the Learned Author of these Notions, would hardly venture to defend them in
Smithfield; as glorious Witnesses have done the Articles of our Faith.

The pretended Inconsistency is hitherto invisible; and concerning it we may
return, a non est inventa. On he goes therefore, as by a melius Inquirendo, and
makes farther search after it in the ensuing Paragraph. The strength it has,
lies much in the close of it, and expresses it self in this Argument. Answ. p.
69.
The Church Way of explaining the Deluge, is either rational, or irrational. If
he say it is rational, why does he desert it, and invent a new one? And if he
say it is irrational, then that dreadful thing, which, he cannot well endure to
speak, That the Church of GOD has ever gone on in an irrational way of
explaining the Deluge, falls flat upon himself. The last vital Assertion of the
Theory, which the Excepter undertook in his Fifteenth Chapter, is this. That
neither Noah 's Flood, nor the present form of the Earth, can be explained in
any other method that is rational, nor by any other causes that are
intelligible, besides those which the Theory assigns. Whence follows ( what I
cannot well endure to speak, said the Excepter,) that the Church of GOD has
ever gone on in an irrational way of explaining the Deluge. Now, says the
Answerer, this charge falls flat upon himself: and he attempts to prove it, by
the Argument produced. But we take it off with this direct and plain Reply.

First, we say, that the Church way of explaining the Deluge is very rational.
For it implies no more than GOD's creating Waters sufficient for it, and his
annihilating them again: which is not in the least inconsistent with reason or
repugnant to it. Tho evident it is, that his vital Assertion, expressly
condemns this way, in which GOD's Church has ever gone, as both irrational and
unintelligible at once. Methinks an excuse or defense of this should have been
more seasonable, than what we here meet with. Unless he thinks that so black a
blemish, can be fastened on the wisest and noblest Society in the whole World,
without offense; or means that the Readers Judgment, for his unadvised rashness
should pass upon him in course, by nihil dicit.

Secondly, we say, that we do not desert or reject the Church Way of explaining
the Deluge. We allow indeed, as he notes, That it may be disgustful to the best
and soundest Philosophic Judgments: Disc. p. 313.
and the reasons are given, why. But then it is manifest, that we shut out
Philosophy from ruling in this Case, as being in a good degree miraculous. Ib.
p. 355.
The Flood was a Miracle in good measure. Or had so much miracle running
through it, and interwoven with it; that all passages in it, are not to be
accounted for by Reason and Philosophy. And truly where Nature was overruled
by Providence; it is but fit that Philosophy should give place to Omnipotence.
And whereas he observes, that we say, that by our Hypothesis, Answ. p. 68.
we are excused from running to those Causes or Methods, which seem
unreasonable to some, and unintelligible to others, and unsatisfactory to most:
This is no proof that the Excepter deserts the Churches way of Explaining the
Deluge. For however some, or others, may think it unreasonable, and
unintelligible, as the Theorist makes it: and how unsatisfactory soever some of
the causes or methods alleged by the Excepter, may be to most: yet the
Excepter is of the mind that the Churches method, is very rational, and easy to
be understood. And tho he farther remarks, that the Excepter says, that the
ordinary Supposition, that the Mountains were covered with water in the Deluge,
Ib.
brings on a necessity of setting up a new Hypothesis for explaining the Flood:
yet that necessary new Hypothesis, which the Excepter means, will plainly show,
that he justifies and defends the Church-Hypothesis; instead of deserting it.
For it is only this. We must suppose that the Mountains of Ararat, whereon the
Ark rested in the height of the Deluge, were then the highest Mountains in the
World: but since that time they are either worn down, or sunk and settled lower
than some others. Admit but this; and then Scripture, Geography, and the
Churches method of explaining the Flood, will all be reconciled: and the usual
Hypothesis will stand clear of material Difficulties and Objections.

Thirdly, we say, that tho we invented a new Hypothesis; it was not set up in
competition with this of the Church, but in comparison with that of the Theory,
and in Confutation of its last vital Assertion. For it makes it evident, that
there is another way of explaining Noah's Flood, both rational in its method,
and intelligible in its causes; Disc. p. 300. l. 18.
at least as rational and intelligible as his. And as such a Comparative
Hypothesis (as we have made it) it may possibly stand almost as long as the
Theorist's (which draws more and greater Absurdities after it.) Especially if
it should have but a Second Edition to support it on the one side, and a Review
to prop it up on the other, and have many things left out of it, and have one
word in it explained by another, and have here and there a Contradiction
allowed it, etc. And thus the Excepter is freed from the objected inconsistency
with himself and good sense.

This same Reply will take off those Objections also, which are brought on by
the Answerer, at the bottom of his seventieth Page; as being of near affinity
with what he last alleged.

Having thus made his general Observations, he comes now to Particulars. The
first he pitches upon, is the Height of the Deluge-waters, which we set at
fifteen Cubits above the highest parts of the common Surface of the Earth;
making it the Foundation of our Hypothesis, and supposing it to rest upon
Scripture, and to be supported by that. This therefore, he says, Answ. p. 69.
must needs raise our Curiosity, to see that place of Scripture, which has been
overlookt by all the Learned hitherto. But if learned men's overlooking this
Text, as to the sense that we apply it to, be a just Objection against our
alleging it: how much more strongly must the same Objection come against the
Theorist, for alleging so many Texts as he does, in confirmation of such new
and strange notions, as none of the learned could ever see contained in them,
or confirmed by them; but always overlookt them as to such meanings? Answ; p.
67.
Then he urges; Scripture says plainly that the Mountains were covered with
waters; Ib. p. 69.
and how could fifteen Cubits reach to the tops of the Mountains? This
Objection is fully answered in our Discourse: only thus much may be here put
in. Chap. 16. Pagr. 3. Genesis 7.20.
As the high Mountains were covered with Waters, so the Camp of Israel was
covered with Quails. Yet those Quails which covered the Camp, Exodus 16.13.
were but two Cubits high upon the face of the Earth, Numb. 11.31. Now if two
Cubits of Quails could cover this Camp; then fifteen Cubits of Water might
cover these Mountains. And as for the Tops of the Mountains, they are no where
said to be covered, any more than the top of the Camp was. But he says, the
Tops of the Mountains were discovered, Answ. p. 70.
when the Waters began to decrease, Genesis 8.5. Is not that a plain demonstration
that they were covered before, and covered with those Waters? To this Objection
also an answer was given by the Excepter. Disc. Chapter 16.. 5.
However to make it more full, we are content to recite part of what was
formerly said, and to add somewhat new, as occasion requires. We say therefore
that the tops of the Mountains being discovered upon the decrease of the
Waters, is no demonstration that they were covered with them: for they might be
discovered by their Emergency out of darkness. Upon that Answer he brings this
Quaery. Answ. p. 73.
Where finds he this Account? it is neither in the Text nor in Reason. It was
fairly gathered out of both, as plainly appears in our Discourse. The holy Text
we went upon, was Genesis 8. ult. Where day being settled upon the recovering
World: the very settling of it then, implies, that in time of the Flood, the
Earth was strangely benighted. And for a Reason, was suggested, the Exclusion
of Frost. Which, had not the Air been very thick (thick enough to hide the Tops
of the Mountains from the Eyes of men) would have seized the Waters with
exceeding vehemence, and have thereby hindered the so speedy drying of the
Earth. But he goes on in his way of objecting: If it was always so dark, and
the Tops of the Mountains and Rocks naked and prominent every where, Ib.
how could the Ark avoid them in that darkness? And could it, by an ordinary
Providence, have avoided them in the Light? For tho the H. GHOST, in that
Description which he was pleased to give of the Ark, descends even to
Particulars, and that to the very Door, and the Window of it; yet He hints not
the least concerning a Rudder belonging to it. And being destitute of that,
there could be nothing whereby to turn or govern it; but at all times it must
be left to drive right on, whatever Dangers (tho great and visible) might come
in its way. Or say it had an Helm; yet what Pilot, without inspiration, could
have steered its Course safely, in those perilous, new-made Seas upon Earth?
Where, as Rocks, and Banks, and Flats, and Sands, were thick set and
innumerable; so there was not so much as one Buoy or Sea-mark, which, by
showing any of them, might help to shun them. And as these dangers, according
to the Common Hypothesis, would have been equal, when first this Vessel was set
afloat; so according to the Theory, they would have been much greater. He
continues to object. Ib.
I see no reason to imagine, that there would be darkness after the forty days
rain. -- For he (the Excepter) says, the Atmosphaere was never so exhausted of
Vapors, and never so thin; as when the waters were newly come down. Tho the
Atmosphaere was never so exhausted of Vapors, and never so thin as at that
time, in the vast Body, or general Comprehension of it upwards; yet here below,
the Air might still be foggy and thick. So we are often invelop'd with
caliginous Mists in this lower Region next the Earth; when let them but
disperse and wear off, and the heaven above is most serene, and in the Sky
there is nothing but glorious day. He objects still. Ib. p. 74.
It was in the Tenth month that they (the Mountains) begun to be seen, when the
Waters were decreased; 'twas therefore the Waters, not the gross Air, that
hindered the sight of them before. For if according to the method of the
Excepter, the Deluge begun to decrease after the first forty days rain, by the
Sun's resolving waters into Vapors and Exhalations: this, in proportion, must
lessen the waters of the Deluge. But we do not read in Moses of any abatement
in the Deluge, till the end of one hundred and fifty days (Genesis 8.3.) which is
four Months after this term. Nor do we imagine that there was any considerable
abatement of the Waters till that time. For after the Flood was come to its
height, it was necessary it should stand there a good while, the better to
effect that fatal destruction of the Animal World, for which it was sent. Yet
during the time that the Flood was thus Stationary, we suppose that GOD did
work no Miracle (for we read of none) to weaken Nature in its force, and put by
its proper Operations. And so the Sun, which had then a more than ordinary
power upon the outrageous and prevailing Waters; as shining on them through a
thinner Medium than ever yet he did; could not but turn them a great pace into
Misty Vapors and Exhalations. And these ascending swiftly and copiously, to
replenish the Atmosphaere so lately emptied by excessive Resolution; might
render the Mountains (as Mists always do) quite invisible at a little Distance.
Yet this work being done only by Nature's hand; or, to use the Answerer's
elegant style, by the Sun's setting his Engines awork; tho it was carried on
for several Months, the diminution of the Waters, I say, might be
inconsiderable. So inconsiderable, as not to be worth the Spirits notice. And
withal so ineffectual, that if some better course had not been taken, the
Waters would have remained a very long time upon the drowned Earth, beyond the
hundred and fifty days mentioned, without any considerable degree of abatement.
For if in the hundred and ten days, succeeding those in which the rains fell,
the Waters went up in misty Vapors (toward restoring the Atmosphaere to its
lost Consistency) in such a quantity as to sink the Flood suppose but one or
two Cubits; tho this reeking evaporation might so darken the Air, as to hide
the Mountains; yet how little would such a diminution of the Deluge, be taken
notice of by Heaven, or how little would it contribute to drying of the Earth?
And therefore to speed the work, which by the strength of Nature went on but
slowly; GOD made use of a certain Wind (Genesis 8.1.) as an extraordinary
Instrument. And by this, added at length to the Attractive influence of the
Sun, the Waters assuaged so very fast; that as the SPIRIT notes, on the first
day of the Tenth Month the Tops of the Mountains were seen, Genesis 8.5. And
whereas the sacred Story makes the appearance of these Mountain-tops, to follow
the decrease of the Deluge-waters; nothing could be done more properly
according to the tenor of this new Hypothesis. For in case the Waters had not
been decreased; and so decreased as to have refill'd the Atmosphaere with
Vapors; and so decreased, as to have dampt the attractive power of the sun;
and so decreased, as to be drawn so low, and grown so gross, and foul, and
heavy, as to resist the attenuating force of the Wind aforesaid: these tops of
the Mountains could not have shown themselves as yet. For had not the Waters
been thus decreased, they would still have gone away into Vapors and
Exhalations at such a rate; as that the air by them would have been so
bemisted, and the Mountains by that would have been so obscured, that the tops
of them could not have been so soon discovered. And why the tops of them were
discerned before their lower and their larger parts, Disc. p. 342.
an account has been already given. Answ. p. 74.


Lastly, as to this matter, he objects. That the whole notion of spending the
waters of the Deluge by Evaporation has no foundation in Scripture or Reason
But in short, it is founded upon both. 1st, Upon Reason. For how reasonable is
it that Waters should be turned into Vapors; it being a thing most natural?
And how reasonable that they should be so turned at an extraordinary rate,
where the Sun had an extraordinary power; and when to the force of the Sun, was
joined the assistance of a mighty Wind? 2ly, Upon Scripture. For their
Returning off the Earth continually, Genesis 8.3. might be but their returning
into that Principle out of which they were made; namely, into Vapors. See
Disc. p. 340, 341.
And that Expression, the Waters were going and decreasing, Genesis 8.5. may be
understood of their going away quite by a wasting or diminishing of them. And
the learned Schindler makes the word, (...), in that very place, to signify
this very thing. And so the Notion was not only founded upon Scripture, and
Reason, but moreover upon good Authority. And whereas the Answerer would have
the first of these two cited Texts, to denote the local motion of the Waters,
or their returning to the place from whence they came; Answ. p. 76.
this they did do when they were resolved into Vapors, and were retracted into
the Atmosphaere, whence they descended. Tho such a Return they could not be so
fully capable of, according to the Theory's Hypothesis; the enclosed Abyss
being filled up in a great measure by the fallen Earth. And whereas he says
farther, that then the Dove's returning, Ib. p. 77.
was her returning into her principles; that is, into an Egg: It is said
expressly of the Dove, that she returned unto him (Noah) into the Ark: Genesis 8.9.
and neither here is, nor the Raven's return into Eggs, could have been agreeable
to Nature, or Reason, or have been of any manner of use. Tho as nothing was
more rational, and nothing more natural; so nothing could possibly be more
useful than the Evaporation of the Waters; both to the Earth and Atmosphaere at
once. For by their thus returning, or going away into Vapors, the one was
dried by their reascending the other. And so whereas he demands, concerning the
Evaporation of the Waters, where does he find this notion in Scripture? (Answ.
p. 74.) I might better put the like question to him; where does he in Scripture
find the vital Assertions of his Theory? Which yet for the relation it has to
Scripture, he calls, Theoria sacra, the holy Theory; tho in sundry things, it
be inconsistent with Scripture and opposite to it.

I must take my leave of this point, with remarking an Untruth which he lays
upon the Excepter: Another Untruth. Answ. p. 73^ li. 24^
It is this. He gives him (the Sun) a miraculous power to draw up waters. But
where does he ascribe such a power to him? The Answerer must show it, or else
incur the Censure of a false Accuser. Indeed that the Sun has power to exhale
Water now, by agitating its Particles, and so dilating and putting them into a
flying motion; is not to be doubted. Nor is it to be questioned but this his
power of Exhalation was most operative, just after the full Rise of the Deluge.
For then the Atmosphaere having newly suffered a through Solution of its
Continuity, and the stock of its Vapors being greatly exhausted; and the whole
Earth, except the higher parts of the Mountains, being covered with the Flood;
his Beams, having now a freer Passage through a finer Air, could not but shoot
down much more forcibly upon the diffused Water, and agitating it more
vehemently, make Vapors to rise at a far greater Rate than they used to do.
And these Vapors being once raised by the action of the Sun, would immediately
take wing and fly into the empty Atmosphaere above, there being such room and
reception for them. And as fast as some gave way, others following, while the
void Atmosphaere sucked them up as it were, and helped them to ascend by its
readiness to receive them; an excessive plenty of misty Vapors must needs go
up, in continued streams, from the steaming surface of the rarefying Water.
Thus, I confess, the Sun had power to draw up Water, and power to attract it
very copiously at the time we speak of, till confused Nature came to be
resettled in its first Order. Yea, so plentifully did he draw up Water in that
juncture, and such a mistiness thereby did he cause in the Air; as he never did
do before, nor never (in likelihood) shall do again; because there never was,
nor will be the like reasons for it. But that the Excepter gave him miraculous
power to do it, is incumbent upon the Answerer, who was pleased to say it, to
make it out. A miraculous Wind indeed the Excepter owned, Dsc. p. 341.
sent on purpose to hasten the work of drying up the Water, Hic ventus non tam
naturali, quam divina visiccavit aquas. a Lapide in loc.
Genesis 8.1. which in course of Nature could never have been done in so short a
time, if it could have been done at all: but as for a miraculous influence of
the Sun, as it would have been needless in conjunction with such a Wind, so he
knows of none, nor did he ever think of any.

But besides all this, at length he would find out an Insufficiency in the new
Hypothesis; as if the measure of its Waters could not reach to the Execution,
which was necessary to be done upon the Animal World. For whereas an Universal
Destruction was made by the Flood; Answ. p. 71.
I would gladly know, says he, how this could be in a fifteen-Cubit Deluge. For
Birds would naturally fly to the tops of Trees. And Beasts would retire by
degrees to Mountains. Men also could not fail to retire into Mountains. Or the
upper stories of their houses might be sufficient to save them. Or an house
seated upon an Eminency, or a Castle upon a Rock, would always be a safe
retreat from this diminutive Deluge. Ib. 72.
And those that were upon the Sea, in Ships, would never come in danger. This
is the substance of the Answerers Objections, where he reflects upon the
incompetency of the new Hypothesis, in regard of the Quantity or height of
those Waters of which it supposes the flood to be made. But how easily are they
taken off? For the common unmountainous Surface of the Earth, See Disc. p. 301.
being by necessary and providential contrivance, made inequal: hence it will
follow, that when the Waters were fifteen Cubits higher than the highest parts
of that common Surface (which is the Fundamental Assertion of the new
Hypothesis) they might be forty, or fifty, or an hundred, or two hundred Cubits
higher than the general ordinary Plain of the Earth. And when fifteen Cubits
Water above the highest parts of the Earths common surface, would drown the
Level of it generally to so prodigious a pitch; instead of a diminutive (as the
Answerer calls it) here must be a most dreadful and destructive Deluge, both to
Mankind and all Living Creatures. For put case that the Birds, upon the rise of
the waters, flew unto trees; yet where are the trees whose tops are an hundred
or two hundred Cubits high? Or say, the tops of some trees stood out of the
Waters, as growing upon the highest parts of the Earth's common Surface: yet
could the poor Fowls be able to roost there, during the time of the whole forty
days Rain; and then on to the end of the Flood? And grant that Men and Beasts
retired to the Mountains, when the Waters began to swell and threaten them: Yet
then they were great Mountains to which they betook themselves, or else they
were lesser ones. If they were great ones, See Disc. c. 16.. 6.
they could not run to a more improper Refuge. If they were lesser ones, how
could they possibly subsist there, without Shelter or Sustenance, till the
Deluge was drawn off, and the Earth dried up? And the like may be said of those
in the upper Stories of their houses. Admit that the Flood did not reach them;
yet how could they live there, to come down again at last, when their Domestic
Stores, in their Cellars etc. were all overflowed, and were so to continue for
a great while? And as for them in Castles, and high situate Habitations, if any
were seated above the Water-mark of the Deluge; how could they shift for food
and fuel, and keep themselves from famishing for a year together? For either
they were well furnished with Provisions, or they were not. If they were not,
they could not hold out. If they were, it was because a number was to be
maintained by them. And many will as soon devour much; as a few spend a little.
And where is the Castle, that being well stockt with men, as well us stored
with necessaries (which commonly go together) does not fall into want before a
year comes about, where there is no kind of Forage, or provisionary Recruits?
And therefore these Castles on Rocks, as to the Answerer's purpose, are but
Castles in the air: for being on every side so surrounded with water, they who
were in them would be starved to death. And methinks there is one thing which
seems to insinuate, that a good part of the Animal World might perhaps come to
an end thus: By being driven to such streights by the overflowing waters as to
be famished or starved to death. The thing is this. Tho the Instrument of
Vengeance upon the wicked World was an Universal Flood; and tho the proper way
of that Instrument's killing, is by drowning: yet in all the sacred story of
the Deluge, it is no where said of men and living creatures, (...), they were
drowned; but all-a-long, (...), they died, (...), and they were destroyed. As
if the SPIRIT would give us to understand, that all the living Creatures which
perished at the Flood, were not directly overwhelmed and absorpt by it; but by
means of its Waters were forced to die, very many of them, and were fearfully
destroyed some other way; even that which we have hinted. And then lastly as to
Ships, I will not deny that there were any before the Flood; (for all I find
Hornius does it positively in his Introduction; Noachi aevo nullae adhuc naves;
in Noah 's Age there were not as yet any ships: tho could we allow them, at the
Deluge, to be as good as ours, which are the best in the World; yet the persons
in them at that time, must needs be in most imminent Dangers. For at first, for
forty days together, they were to sail in darkness. And after that, for several
Months, in such foggy Mists, as obscured the Tops of the vastest Mountains. By
the increase of the Waters also the whole World became one boundless Ocean. And
the Sea, by that means, having lost its Shores, the Mariners skill would be
strangely lost or non-plust too. For instead of finding the Seas in their usual
Figures and Channels, and of making their Ports, at the wonted places and
Distances; wild Waters would lead them into unknown Rodes, and trapan them on
to land. And there being Rocks in great plenty to split them, Hills to stave
them, Banks to strand them, Buildings to annoy them, Woods and Forests to
hamper and entangle them: their dangers being new, they could not apprehend
them; and being so many, and various, and unexpected, how could they avoid
them? And then we must consider farther yet, that Shipping, at the Flood, was
very far short of that strength and perfection, which now it has attained to.
The first considerable Vessel that we read of, I think, was the Argo. And
indeed some necessary Appendages of a Ship, were not found out, till about the
time that she was equipped for Colchis. For famous Daedalus, who invented the
Mast and Main-yard; and his Son Icarus, who invented the Sails; lived then.
Typhis also, who invented the Rudder, was one of those Heroes which attended
Jason, when the young Gallants of Thessaly, or the flower of its Nobility, went
along with him in the Argonautick Expedition. And yet this Ship, as Pliny tells
us, in the Six and fiftieth Chapter of the Seventh Book of his Natural History;
was but a Gally. And he adds (which it will not be wide of our purpose to
recite) That Troughs or flat Planks were used by King Erythras to cross from
one Island to another in the Red Sea. That in the British Ocean were made
certain Wicker-Boats of twigs covered with Leather, and stitcht round about. In
Nilus, Boats of Paper, Cane-reed, and Rushes. That the Erythraeans made the
Bireme, or Gally with two Banks of Oars. Aminacles the Corinthian, the first
Trireme. The Carthaginians, the Quadrireme. Nesichton the Salaminian, the first
Quinquereme. And so they were raised, by Zenagoras of Syracuse, by Mnesigeton,
by Alexander the great, by Ptolomy Soter, by Demetrius Son of Antigonus, by
Ptolomy Philadelphus, and by Ptolomy Philopater, till they came to fifty Banks
or Courses of Oars on a side. So that here we have an account of Two things not
unworthy of our notice. The First is the low, and mean, and rude Beginnings of
Shipping. In some places it commenced in Troughs or Hollowed trees. So it did
in Egypt; Lib. 16. c. 40.
and as this same Writer tells us, Pirates on the Coasts of Germany, made some
of these Trunks so large, that they would carry thirty men. And where they had
not Instruments fit for the Excavation of these trees; we must conclude it was
done by fire. In other places it began in Wicker Sciphs, covered with Leather
well sticht together. Carinae primum ac statumina ex levi materia fiebant:
reliquum corpus navium viminibus contextum coriis integebatur. De Bello Civil.
l. 1.
So it did here in our Country. For Caesar in his Commentaries says thus of the
British ships. Their Keels and Footstocks were made of light timber, but the
rest of their body was covered with Hides, and made of Osiers wrought together.
Nor were the Venetians Ships, any better than the Britains, if we may take
Lucan's word for it.

Primum cana Salix madefacto Vimine parvam
Texerat in puppim, caesoque induta juvenco
Victoris patiens, tumidum superenatat amnem.
Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, susoque Britannus
Navigat Oceano.
A Ship first made of moist hoar Willow twiggs,
And covered with a Bullocks Hide;
Tho small it be, when it the Master riggs,
Does on the swelling River ride.
Thus the Venetian sails on the smooth Po,
And Britains on vast Ocean go.
In other places again, it began in Rushen, or Reeden Canoes, and the Vessels
they used, were Paper things, even in the very letter. So it was upon the Nile.
And Scripture tells us of Ambassadors being sent upon negotiations, (...) in
vessels of Bul-rushes, Isai. 18.2

The Second thing worthy of remark, is that degree of Perfection to which
Shipping arrived. And as our aforesaid Author informs us, it was grown up no
higher than to great Galleys in Ptolomy Philopator's time. And he reigning
after the Year of the World 3750; Vid. Helvic. Theatr. Histor.
this World had then stood near five hundred years longer than that before the
Flood. And whereas he affirms the first Quadrireme to be built by the
Carthaginians; we must consider that Carthage it self was not built till An.
Mun. 3080. Id. ib.
So that if we allow that Commonwealth but 150 years to settle in, and to
improve in mechanical Seize, and in Ship-Carpentry, for one: Then if we
reckon (which is no ill way of counting) that the first World made equal
proficience in the same Art with this latter, in proportion to its standing; it
might so be furnished with such kind of Galleys as the Carthaginians were, just
a little before the Deluge. But then they seem to have been Vessels not over
strong. Nor indeed is it possible that Ships in those days, should be of any
great strength, if we consider with what strange Expedition they were built.
For as that excellent Historian Florus tells us, Lib. 2. cap. 2^
a Navy of the Romans of an hundred and sixty Ships (in the time of the first
Punic War) was set out and lay at anchor, intra sexegesimum diem; within sixty
days after the timber they were made of, was cut down in the wood. Insomuch
that they might seem to be non art factae; not framed by art, sed quodam
munere Deorum, etc. but by a certain favor of the GODS, turned out of trees
into Ships. And yet that they were as strong as any that the Carthaginians, or
that the King of Syracuse, their Confederate, had; the event proved. For then
it was that Duilius the Roman Admiral, so quickly overcame that Prince, that he
confessed he was conquered before he saw the Enemy. And having broken in
pieces, and put to flight the Fleet at Lipara, he was the first that was
honored with a Sea-triumph, as the same Writer says. Adding withal, that for
this he triumphed every day; never at any time returning from supper without
Torches and Music before him. Nor is Florus alone in reporting the strange and
wonderful celerity, wherewith the Romans of old builded their ships. Pliny
joins with him; Not. Hist. l. 16; c. 3^.
and testifies that in the second Punic War, the Armado which Scipio commanded,
was under sail within forty days after the timber was felled, whereof it was
made. And acquaints us farther, that L. Piso left it in writing, that against
King Hiero, two hundred and twenty Ships were built and furnished, within five
and forty days after the timber grew. Surely these could be no very stout or
strong Ships. And yet, I say, they matched the strongest in the World. For the
only Commonwealth which could then pretend to cope with Rome, was that of
Carthage. And indeed with Rome it did contend in two very sharp and tedious
Wars (tho it sell in the third) the first holding four and twenty years, and
the second, eighteen; between which, says Florus, there was vix quadriennis
requies, scarce four years respite. And Carthage being built by the Tyrians, or
at leastwise peopled with a Colony of Phaenicians, who were ever well skilled
in Sea affairs, and eminent in Shipping: This City being older than Rome
Condita est urbs haec LXXII. annis antequam Roma Justin. lib. 18.
seventy two years, and mighty powerful; was the most likely of all other, to
exceed Rome in Naval force. Yet so far was it from doing this; that the
Carthaginians were frequently vanquished by the Romans, in Sea Engagements.
Particularly in that which the incomparable Livy gives account of; Hist. Dec.
3. lib. 1.
when the Roman Fleet put to flight that of Carthage, and took seven of their
Ships, extemplo, as his word is, even immediately. And yet those Ships were not
so inconsiderable, but in them were taken seventeen hundred Soldiers. And when
they had done that (as he continues the story) they sailed to Lilybaeum, or
Messala, and gave their enemies Navy there a great overthrow. And when the
Romans could thus worst the Carthaginians, who had reason to have the best
shipping; it is a sign that their shipping was as good as theirs. But then the
Roman Ships being so hastily built, they could not excel in strength neither.
And yet at the time of the first Punic War, this World had stood four hundred
years longer than the first did. And so we cannot imagine that the Shipping of
that World, was ever better than the Roman shipping was then in this. And in
case it was not, we have no cause to think, that any of its Ships could
possibly endure and out-last the Flood. And truly if we look forward, we shall
find that Ships in some succeeding Ages, were of no great bulk or burden. For
had they been so in Julius Caesar's time, (who lived about three hundred years
after the Punic War) he needed not to have invaded Britain with above eight
hundred at once, as we find he did. Commentar. lib. 5. De. Bell. Gall.
And therefore when we read of Agamemnon's Fleet of a thousand Sail, and of
Xerxes's that covered the Hellespont; or the like; we need not be surpised at
the number of Ships, so we do but think of the Dimensions of them. And as for
those which were very large and strong, they seem to have been made for some
special service, and that being done to be useless after it; as being perhaps,
too big to be managed in those days. Such were the two wonderful ones that
Pliny speaks of, Not. Hist. l. 36. c. 9.
which transported huge Obelisks from Egypt to Rome. The first of them Augustus
laid up in the haven of Puteoli, to be looked on; where it remained till it was
accidentally burnt. The second, Id. ib. l. 16. c. 4^
which required an hundred and twenty thousand Modij of Lintels for its
Ballast, after Caligula had kept it some years as a kind of wonder to be gazed
at; Claudius caused it to be brought to Ostia, and to be sunk there for the
security of the Harbor. But not to dwell too long upon this head.

If so be we measure the first Worlds perfection in Shipping and Navigation, by
what men in this World gained of that nature, in the like Period of time (which
I think is the best Rule we can go by:) we shall find the praediluvians
deficient in, yea, destitute of two most necessary things. For first, they had
no Anchors. And secondly, they had none of the Sea-chart or Compass.

(...). Diog. Laert. in vit.
First, they could have no Anchors. For the Inventer of the Anchor (as also of
the Potters Wheel) was Anacharsis, that noble Scythian (or rather that Royal
one, for he was brother to Caduides the King of Scythia) and the only learned
man and rare Philosopher of that barbarous Country. Which gave occasion to the
Proverb, Anacharsis inter Scythas. Now he (being contemporary with Solon, as
Laertius tells us) flourisht after the year of the World 3340. For then it was
that Solon wrote the Athenian Laws, Solonem ergo accepimus unum ex illo nobili
numero sapientum leges scripsisse Atheniensium, Tarquinio Prisco regnante, anno
regni ejus tricesimo tertio. Aul. Gell. Noct. At. lib. 17. cap. 21.
toward the latter end of the Reign of Tarquinius Priscus, And so the Anchor
could not be found out, till such time as this World had out-lasted the other.
And consequently, according to the best Measures we can take, the Antediluvians
had no Anchors to their Ships.

And Secondly, by the same Rule, they must want the Compass too; that being a
much later Invention than the Anchor. For however some will have it to be
ancient, their opinion is certainly without all good grounds. As for the
Comaedians Authority, De occult. Nature. Mirac. li. 3. ca. 4. Plaut. in Merc.
Advers. li. 20. ca. 4.
which Lev. Lemnius alleges, cape modo versoriam; it is of no force. For by
Versoria, he might mean the Rudder only; or as Turnebus expounds it, and some
Dictionaries render the word: funis quo vertitur velum, the Rope that turns the
Sail to the Wind-ward. Nor is there the least mention made of this Compass
(that I find) amongst any of the Ancients, be they Philosophers, Historians, or
others. Yea, instead of that, diverse modern Authors of note, make it the
Discovery of latter Ages. So does Bodinus; usum ejus plane divinum Antiqui
ignorarunt: Method. Hist. cap. 7. Ital. illustr. Region. 13.
The Ancients were ignorant of the Divine (or excellent) use of it. And so does
Blondus, in his Description of Italy. Certum est id navigandi auxilium priscis
omnino fuisse incognitum: De Subtle. li. 17.
Certain it is that help of navigating was altogether unknown to the Ancients.
Cardan also declares, his tribus tota Antiquitas nihil par habet. All Antiquity
has nothing equal to these three things. Of which the Mariners Compass was one,
the other two being Guns, and Printing. And therefore Voyages heretofore could
be performed only by crossing over some narrow Seas, or else by Coasting it
along by the Shores side, from one Country to another. And for this reason King
Solomon's Navy was three years in making a Voyage to Ophir; because for lack of
the Compass they were fain to creep along close by the Shores, and durst not
venture to take a shorter Cut, by lanching out into the main Ocean. Nor could
those Glorious Voyages not long since made (as well by the English as other
Nations) ever have been accomplished, without the help of this admirable
Instrument; which yields a most strange direction, and thereby a suitable safety
unto Sailors.

And thus I think enough has been said, to show that the circumstances of men
in Ships, at the coming in of the Flood, were not only dangerous but desperate.
For if we consider aright, that their ships were much weaker than ours are; and
that those weak Ships had no Anchors; and that they themselves had no Compass;
and that the Seas they navigated had no Shores, by which they used to steer
their course: And so tho they could stop no where, yet their motion carried
them they knew not whither; even amongst Rocks and Clifts, and Hills, and
Mountains, and Cities, and Trees, and Villages. If this, I say, be rightly
considered, we may well conclude their condition hopeless. And not only that
all hope of their being saved was taken away, as it was from them in the Ship
of Adramyttium, Acts 27. but likewise all possibility of their being so.

But if after all, any hill, or Castle, or house, or Ship, could be able to
save any creatures from the Deluge; we need but fly to Extraordinary
Providence, (as the Answerer does often) and the power of that would
effectually dispatch them. When Heaven was pleased to give Satan leave, he
caused the fire to consume Job's Sheep, and caused the Wind to destroy his
Children. And how easily could those Spirits, that are Ministers of GOD's
vengeance, have made the waters of the Flood (in that terrible day of general
execution) fatal to those Creatures that might have escaped them, if any could
have done it. For when GOD thinks fit to appoint him to the work, there is never
a one of those Spirits, but really is, (what Homer so commonly calls Jupiter)
(...), a Gatherer of Clouds. And so with greatest ease, could so drive, and
thrust, and squeeze them together; as to force them to discharge themselves in
such mighty Defluxions, as would not fail to drown men, and all Land-animals,
in whatever Securities they were lodged.

And now (as it is high time) let us see what the Answerer says, to our notion
of the Fountains of the great Deep. Disc. p. 303.
They are supposed to be Caverns in Rocks and Mountains. But to this notion he
opposes, first, That we allege but one single text of Scripture to support it.
Answ. p. 75.
And is not that sufficient to do it? How many Truths stand upon such single
Testimonies? nor need they any better evidence to authenticate and confirm
them. And 'twere well if every vital Assertion of the Theory's, had one single
text to support it. And yet how easy were it to cite seveval texts of
Scripture, that fall in most naturally with our sense? I will instance but in
two. He lays up the Deeps in treasuries, Psalm. 33.7. And what could these
(...) Treasuries be, so properly, as huge Caverns in Rocks and Mountains; where
GOD, by the hand of Nature, did of old, and still does lay up Deep Waters? And
Pro. 3.20. GOD says, by his knowledge the Depths are broken up, or cleaved. And
to what can this Text be applied more fitly, and of what can it be understood
more fairly, or expounded more emphatically, than these Caverns? Which as they
were more generally broke up at the time of the Flood, according as GOD in his
Wisdom thought fit; so at certain times, and in certain places, many have been
cleaved or opened since. Sometimes miraculously, as in Rephidim and Cadesh; and
sometimes otherwise by ordinary Providence; New Springs breaking forth and
running continually out of the opened Caverns. Whence as some Water issued or
flowed out? other again was still generated within, by the Resolution of
Vapors drawn up from the Great Deep below, to which the Roots of many high
Rocks and Mountains may descend. Yea, if they did not go down below the bottom
of the Deep; how could we come by the Metals that we have? Next he intimates,
that the Text we allege, Ib.
has been generally understood otherwise. And so have many Texts which he
alleges in favor of his Hypothesis. And yet he thought that they might be
interpreted to his sense, and were very applicable to his purpose. Ib.
Then he says, that the Excepter, by all means, will have these holes in the
Rocks, to be the same with the Mosaical Abyss, or Great Deep, that was broken
up at the Deluge. This is a meaning quite beyond our intention: For we mean
only this. That our Caverns were but the fountains of the great Deep, broken up
at the Flood; not the Great Deep it self. And this is evident from several
Expressions; three of which occur in the same page where our Notion is
delivered. 303. li. 2.
What those Fountains of the Great Deep were, which at the time of the Flood
were cleaved, etc. Li. 8.
And again, The breaking up of the Fountains of Tehom Rabbah, or the great Deep
(which the Theory insists so much upon) was no more than the breaking up of
such Caverns. And presently after, the breaking open of the Fountains of the
great Deep, Li. 20.
Genesis 7.11. and the cleaving of those Rocks in the Wilderness, Psalm. 78.15.
were in effect but the same thing. p. 310. li. 12.
And afterward, Still the great deep Caverns of the Mountains, may very well
pass for the Fountains of Moses 's Tehom Rabbah. So that whereas it is said (
p. 312. Li. 1.
) supposing that the Caverns in the mountains were this great Deep, etc. And
where speaking of the Psalmist's great Deeps, and Moses's great Deep; it is
said, p. 305. li. 30.
that the same thing might be meant by both: it is plain that by those Caverns
and the Psalmist's Great Deeps, must be meant, that they were the same with the
Fountains of Moses's Tehom Rabbah, or Great Deep; and not that Great Deep it
self. And whereas it is said in our Discourse (p. 153.) that the great Deep, or
the fountains then broken up, had no relation to the Sea: it is to be
understood that they had no such relation to it, as that the breaking them up,
should occasion the proud waves of the Sea to pass their bounds in making the
Deluge; the thing there spoken of. And lastly tho Moses's word be Deep, and the
Psalmist's word be, Deeps; yet as the different Numbers they use, need not set
them at variance? so according to our meaning, p. 306.
they are very reconcilable. For such Deeps as the Psalmist mentions, were but
the fountains of Moses's Deep; and so in effect (as was said even now) but the
same thing. As much the same, as fountains rising from a Springhead, and that
Springhead can be the same. And we may observe (in concent with this) that
Moses does not say that the Great Deep was broken up, but that the Fountains of
the great Deep were so. And what true Fountains of the Great Deep, were our
Caverns of Water? For the waters that filled them, might all be drawn up (by
the influence of the Sun) out of Moses's Great Deep; and then when Providence
cleaved these Caverns, and set them a flowing; how properly and really might it
be said, that the Fountains of the Great Deep were broken up? seeing that might
be the Source, from whence originally the waters of these Fountains were
extracted. The Answerer adds, Answ. p. 75.
that according to the Excepter, the Great Deep was not one thing, or one
continued Cavity, as Moses represents it, but ten thousand holes separate and
distant from one another. Tho our Great Deeps were many, and separate, and
distant from one another; yet they do not hinder Moses's Great Deep, from being
one continued Cavity: for ours were but the fountains of his. Tho enough was
said besides, to take off the edge of this Objection, Disc. p. 305, 306.
where we showed that Scripture does use the singular and plural Numbers
promiscuously, sometimes putting one for the other. Were there not above ten
thousand Quails about the Hebrews Camp, when they fell round about it as it
were two Cubits high? Number. 11.31.
Yet the Scripture says only, (...), and the Quail came up, Exodus 16.13. As if
(as many as they were) they had been but one. The Answerer proceeds; Neither
must the Great Deep, according to him, signify a low place, but an high place.
For he confesses these Caverns were higher than the common level of the Earth.
Answ. p. 75.
Moses's Great Deep may lie as low as you please; But our Great Deeps were but
as Fountains of his, and so might be as high as we placed them. And yet some of
them might be full out as deep as the Sea it self is, in most places, if we
consider the wonderful height of some Mountains. And so they might be
strangely vast also, considering how big some Mountains are. And this our
notion of the Fountains of the Great Deep falls in most fairly with the
Scripture Doctrine of the Original of Fountains. For that makes them to come
from the Sea, or Great Abyss; and we suppose ours to be derived from thence.
Let these things be duly weighed, and I hope it will appear, that the Answerer
had no reason at all to charge us, with breaking thorough so many plain Texts
of Scripture. Ib. p. 76.
Will he who finds this great fault, be found free from the like himself? But
here I appeal to any indifferent Judge, if our Notion of the fountains of the
great Deep be not as consonant to Scripture, as any other.

And thus we come to his concluding Objection against our Caverns. What reason
have we to believe, that there were such Vessels then, Ib. p. 77.
more than now? To this we have spoken so very fully, Disc. p. 306, 307, 308.
that nothing more needs here be added in way of reply. Who would have thought
there had been such fountains in the Rocks of Rephidim and Cadesh; if God had
not opened them? But he draws out the Objection farther, thus. Answ. p. 77.
If the opening the Abyss at the Deluge, had been the opening of Rocks, why did
not Moses express it so: and tell us, that the Rocks were cloven, and the
waters gushed out; and so made the Deluge; This would have been as intelligible
if it had been true, as to tell us, that the Tehom Rabbah was broken open. But
there is not one word of Rocks, or the cleaving of Rocks, in the History of the
Flood. To which we reply, first; Moses does not say, that the Tehom Rabbah was
broken open, but only the fountains of it were broken up. And what fountains
belonging to the Tehom Rabbah, could more properly be so broken up, than these
Caverns? Secondly, the Intelligibility of a thing, is no reason why it must
needs be expressed. How many things are passed by with silence in Scripture,
even where occasion is offered to speak of them; which yet are true, and had
they been expressed, might easily have been understood? And thirdly, the same
Objection which he throws at the Excepter; rebounds back with violence upon
himself. If the breaking up of the Abyss, at the Deluge, had been the
Disruption and fall of the Earth into the Abyss which lay under it (according
to the Vital Assertion of the Theory, in that case;) why did not Moses express
it so: and tell us that this Disruption and Fall of the Earth into the Abyss
which lay under it, made the Deluge? This would have been as intelligible, if
it had been true, as to tell us that the Fountains of the Jehom Rabbah were
broken up. But there is not one word of this Fall of the Earth, in the History
of the Flood.

Thus have we seen the Assaults that are made upon the new Hypothesis for the
Explication of the Deluge: But so far are they from overthrowing it, that they
seem to me, not to shake it in the least. And I cannot but own, that I am never
so inclinable to believe it may be true, as when I consider how weak the
answers are to the reasons and arguments alleged to confirm it; and how
inconsiderable the Objections against it. But yet I do no more affirm it to be
true now, than I did at first. Tho I am apt to think it may as well pass for
true, and may as easily be maintained to be true, as that Hypothesis to which
it is compared, and which arrogates to it self, the glorious Title, not only of
a true piece of Natural History; but also of the greatest and most remarkable,
that has yet been since the beginning of the World.

CHAP. XVI.
THE principal matter, and the only thing to be noted in this Chapter; is what
our Author omitted in its proper place, and is here thought on by him to be
answered. According to his usual way of mistaking, Answ. p. 78.
he calls it one objection, tho there be two very distinct ones. He answers the
last first, and therefore I begin with that, Disc. p. 311.
which was this. If the Abyss under the Earth (to wave the other things
mentioned) had been the great Deep meant by Moses; it had not had any true or
proper Fountains in it. And so what will become of all the Fountains of the
great Deep? His Answer is, Answ. p. 78.
there were fountains in the Abyss, as much as Windows in Heaven. The word,
(...), rendered, Windows; signifies as well, Cataracts; and it might have been
rendered so more properly. And indeed in the Margent, Genesis 7.11. it is rendered,
Floodgates; which in signification is somewhat nearer to, Cataracts Tho that, I
say, would have been the properest reddition in this Text. For Cataracts are
high and broken places, from whence waters do impetuously rush down. And
therefore thick, and broken Clouds, condensed into hardness or an Icy
consistency, from which, prodigious waters, (by falls from one concameration of
them to another) came tumbling down in excessive quantities, and at last were
discharged hideously on the Earth, in many places, especially about the lofty
Mountains; were at that time true celestial Cataracts, which by ALMIGHTY GOD
were then opened even in a literal sense. And therefore these Cataracts (or
Windows of Heaven) by some learned Commentators, are expounded to be, Nubes
densae and Copiosae; thick and huge Clouds. But now in the enclosed Abyss,
there were no answerable Fountains broken up; no such real Fountains, as these
were real Cataracts of Heaven: and therefore the Answer given, is not home to
the purpose.

The other Objection was this. Whereas it is said, Disc. p. 311.
Genesis 8.2. That the Fountains of the Deep were stopped: the Earth broken down
into the Abyss was never made up again. He answers; those were shut up; that
is, Answ. p. 78.
ceased to act, and were put into a condition to continue the Deluge no longer.
But then if the Stoppage of these Fountains was Figurative, the Fountains
themselves must be the same. And so they were not so real as the Cataracts of
Heaven were. Nor could they be stopped so properly as our Caverns might be: the
thing that we argued for, and the drift of our Objection was to make it out.
And as for this answer, it rather strengthens the Objection, than takes it off.

CHAP. XVII.
IN justification of that Positiveness wherewith he was charged; in the
beginning of this Chapter, he makes profession of his belief of the Theory. And
let them that can do it, envy him the satisfaction and benefit of it. But if he
has no better proofs of its certainty, than what he has produced; when by his
faith he apprehends it for a Reality, he may do no better than he did, who
embraced a shadow for the Goddess. There are many thousands and they not
unlearned, who take Legends, for truths; and equal Tradition to the written
Word. Who put Apocryphal Books into the holy Canon; and give fullest assent to
that pregnant absurdity, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But this is so far
from changing the Nature of the things, that it only betrays the folly of the
Persons. For it evidently shows the blindness of their Minds, that they are so
strangely imposed on; and the weakness of their Judgments, that can be led
captive into such gross and groundless Errors. And from these and other
Instances we may infer; that a strong faith and confident assurance, may be no
arguments of the objects truth; but of the Believers Credulity. It is a notable
word that Demosthenes spoke in his Third Oration to the Olynthians. (...). See
Disc. p. 358.
It Is easiest of all to deceive ones self; For that which every one wills, he
phantsies, is: But the nature of things is often otherwise. The eloquent Man
gave this hint in another Case: but it is not inapplicable to that in hand. Our
Answerer believes his Theory to be true. But may he not here practice that upon
himself, which is so easy to be done? The Man that would fain have a thing be
real, will soon believe it is so; strong inclination being equivalent to
evidence. And (which we may well wonder at) as one symptom of the strong faith
he has for his Hypothesis; he declares, that his believing his Theory to be no
more than a Romance or fantastical Idea, would be both to belly his own
Conscience, and to mock the World. Now in short, if his Theory be not true, it
is but a Romance or phantastic Idea. And if it be true, I speak it with
reverence, the HOLY GHOST, the SPIRIT of truth, must be no longer so; and GOD
did most certainly mock the World, the thing which our Answerer is ashamed to
do. For He granted to Adam, and his Offspring, a Dominion over the Fish of the
Sea, as well as over the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Earth: and the
H. GHOST recorded as much, Genesis 1.28. But when GOD passed that Grant to Adam
and his Posterity; if there was no Sea nor Fish, for him, or them, to command,
or come at, in the Primitive Earth; must not this be down right Mocking of the
first World? And yet if he did not pass that Grant, the H. GHOST, for recording
it done, must be as was said, and what I love not to repeat. Tho at last this
Grant could never pass and take place, unless the Theory be a Romance and
phantastic Idea. For it asserts expressly of the first Earth, that it was
without a Sea. Yea, this is put amongst its Vital assertions, and therefore if
it fails, the Theory dies, and the whole Hypothesis is ruined at once. But how
much better is it, that this piece of Natural History (as true, and great, and
remarkable as it is, in its Authors esteem) should prove a Romance; than that
any piece of the Divine History should prove an untruth; and the H. GHOST, and
the HOLY GOD should be supposed to do such unworthy things, as would mightily
disgrace any honest man. The next Passage that presents it self to notice, is
this. Ib:
I remember I have heard a good Author once wish, that there were an Act of
Parliament, that whoever Printed a Book, should, when he took a License, swear,
that he thought the Contents of his Book to be true, as to the substance. And I
think such a method would keep off a great many impertinencies. Had our
Honorable Senate a power to overruled the minds of men, and to enact that none
should think things true, which in themselves are false; I doubt not but they
would soon secure us by Law, from erroneous impertinencies: But so long as
Authors can believe their Writings, and think them true; when if they be so,
even in the substance of them, the Word from Heaven must be false: There is
little hope that the wished Act imposing such an Oath, should be an effectual
Expedient. However it might keep off some impertinent errors, many would come
on; and the greatest and most remarkable Natural History, would have been a
proof and pregnant exemplification of as much; had such an Act been passed.

After this, he compares his own Positiveness, with my Partiality: Wishing the
Excepter had not more to answer for, as to that; than the Theorist has for the
other. Here I am most ready to join Issue with him, and to go to Trial
immediately at any Bar. And let the Judge be even who he will, so he be no more
partial, than the Excepter has been. Then I shall fear neither his Examination,
nor yet his Sentence: let the one be as strict, and the other as severe, as
Justice can make them. Then he comes upon us with a double charge, Ib.
as if we had failed in the Sincerity, and also in the Meekness, which we
promised to use. But it is a sign he wants matter for accusation, when he is
fain to make these things Instances of it. As to failing in Sincerity, tho the
charge be heavy; the Proofs of it (for our comfort) are light enough. For they
are only defective and partial Citations; and our not taking notice of the last
Edition of the Theory: to which we have sufficiently answered already, that is,
in the last Paragraph save one, of the seventh Chapter of this Reply. But his
pursuing us thus with this clamor, of our not taking notice of his last
Edition; minds me of what a certain Friend did once suggest. Who observing how
many particulars were left out of that Edition, which were censured in my
Exceptions; and understanding that those Exceptions in writing, were about the
Town (where at last they were printed) for above a year and half together at
one time, long before his Edition came forth: would fain persuade me, that
during that time, my Exceptions straggled into the Theorist's hands; or that by
one or other he was made acquainted with them; and so shifted as many of his
Errors as he conveniently could, out of the way, as being sensible they could
not bear that blow, which he foresaw was coming. Our want of Meekness, is a new
crimination; and he proves it by this fierce Charge, as he calls it, in our
Preface. The Theorist has assaulted Religion, and that in the very foundation
of it. If any thing like fierceness can be found here; it must be forced out of
the form of the words. And that, I do declare, is not owing in the least to any
heat of Spirit; but merely to the real truth of the Matter, which in other
terms, could not be better expressed. For I hope it will be granted, that holy
Scripture is the Foundation of our Religion. And then, of necessity,
Contradicting Scripture, must be assaulting that Foundation. And there was no
more of Fierceness, (let him assure himself,) than there is of Falseness, in
our Assertion. But I plainly see, that he who touches a Sore, tho with greatest
tenderness, and with no other intention than purely to heal it; must have hard
words, as well as heavy complaints, from the Party affected. But this charge,
it seems, ran too high. For here, Ib.
says he, I expected to have found two or three Articles of the Creed assaulted
or knocked down by the Theory. I must tell him freely (and I do it meekly) that
contradicting Scripture (the burden of our charge) is the readiest way not
only to knock down two or three; but even all the Articles of the Creed at
once. Undermining the Foundation, must needs sink the whole Building. But what
course does the Doctor take, to free himself from this Charge; which because it
lies justly against him, lies heavy upon him? Why, he makes Two faint Offers at
removing it. Ib. p. 81.
The first is this. Let us remember, that this contradicting Scripture, here
pretended, is only in natural things. And is his contradicting Scripture then,
but pretended only? I heartily wish, for his sake, that it were so. But what is
said in the Eighth Chapter of this Reply, makes it too real and apparent. To
extenuate it therefore, he here remembers us, that his contradicting Scripture,
is only in natural things. And now I must confess my self to be at a stand. I
have often been surpised at occurrencies in his Writings; but now I am almost
amazed: To see that so wild a word as this, should come from the Pen of a
Christian Doctor. That he should allege for himself, as a kind of defense,
that he contradicted Scripture only in natural things. As if when the H. SPIRIT
spoke of such things, he did not mind what it was he said; or men might
interpret it even as they list, and turn it to a contrary meaning if they
please, without offense. As if it were lawful in some things to give GOD the
lie, so we but allow him to speak truth in others. Believe it, I take no
pleasure at all in these expressions; but yet I cannot forbear neither, to
think the Oracles of Heaven should be thus treated. I formerly minded him of
too bold an affront to Scripture, and how he might approach toward another
enormity: and, GOD knows, I did it in meekness and kindness. And however it was
taken, it is now plain, 81.
it was necessary. For in that very page where he reflects on those things; he
runs unhappily into this new exorbitance, of excusing his contradicting
Scripture, by saying he did it only in natural things. As he bids us remember
this, so I hope he will remember it seriously. Else by the memento he here puts
in, he will but heat a Brand as it were, to mark himself for extravagance. And
truly admit but this one Extravagance of contradicting Scripture in natural
things: and it will draw such a number of others after it, and those so
notorious; that no tongue can be able either to reckon them up, or represent
them. It would even match the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; that Hydra of
non-sensical errors, and monstrous Jargon of absurdities. As a specimen of
this, take what follows. From the very beginning, as Scripture assures us, the
Sun shone in the Heavens; the Light filled the Air; and Day and Night were
alternately on the Earth. But these were Natural things; and may we venture
therefore to contradict Scripture in them, and say they were not so? Then how
could the World possibly subsist? As Scripture informs us, the Ground yielded
trees, and trees brought forth fruits, and of one sort of fruit did our first
Parents eat (tho it was forbidden them.) But these were Natural things; and may
we therefore presume to contradict Scripture, and deny that they were thus?
Then how came these Products into being, which gave occasion to the sin and
fall of man? As Scripture instructs us, Adam begat some Children, and they
begat others, and they again others, and so on. But these Generations were
Natural things; and may we therefore take upon us to contradict Scripture, and
say there was no such way of propagation? Then how could Mankind be increased
and multiplied? As Scripture teaches us, the Body of our LORD was flesh and
blood. But flesh and blood are Natural things; and may we therefore be so bold
as to contradict Scripture, and say that his body was not carnal? Then how can
his blood cleanse us from our sins? or how shall we ever be saved by his Cross?
And when to such a monstrous and mischievous pitch of absurdity, contradicting
Scripture in Natural things, would rise; this aloud proclaims it to be an evil
practice, and a method too licentious, to be allowable. And farther; Natural
things may be matter of divine Declarations and Promises in Scripture. And when
they are so, to contradict Scripture, by saying they are otherwise than that
declares or promises they should be; must be indirect impeachment of the Truth,
Fidelity, and Righteousness of Heaven. Thus, for example, it was of old
declared or promised to Noah, that while the Earth continues, seed-time, and
harvest, and summer, and winter, shall not cease, Genesis 8.22. But therefore
should we say that these various Seasons shall not be constant, and run
parallel with this Earthly Worlds existence; but shall either be suspended by
discontinuance or interruption; or else cease by praemature abolition or
expiration: by contradicting Scripture in these tempestival Natural
Vicissitudes, we should break in too rudely upon GOD's most glorious Attributes
aforesaid. We may very easily bring this home, to the Dominion over the Fish of
the Sea. That was a Privilege which GOD declared or promised should be Adam's.
He therefore that denies the being of a Sea, till long after his death; by
contradicting Scripture in a Natural thing, must reflect dishonourably upon
that GOD, Who keeps truth for ever, Psalm. 146.6. In spite of this his
Character (which I would not should fail for ten thousand Worlds) he makes him
at once to be false to his Word, unfaithful to his Promise, and unjust to his
Creature. But as He that is righteous in all his Ways, must needs abhor to be
thus; so we must abhor to think it of him. And farther yet; should GOD
evidently violate, but one express Declaration or Promise he has made, tho in
Natural things; what a Damp would it cast upon men's belief of him in Celestial
Concerns? What a jealousy might it raise, and what a vehement suspicion might
it justly create in them, as to all his highest promissory engagements; making
them apt to question whether he would stand to any, if not ready to conclude
that he would keep none. And thus again the evil, of contradicting Scripture,
in Natural things, will discover it self. He was pleased to signify, Genesis 3.15.
that the seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head. Of how high a
Nature, and of what infinite Consequence, was this most gracious Declaration or
Promise? It was the authentic Patent of Heavens renewed kindness to Sinners;
and the grand Assurance the Praediluvians had, of its Spiritual and Eternal
favors. But if Adam and his Children of the first world, had found by
experience, that the GOD who made it, could break faith with men; why should
they regard it? And what convincing experience had they of this, if when he
promised the Dominion over Seafish to them, he did so grievously tantalize and
abuse them, as to hide both the Sea, and all its Fish from them, to the end of
that World? Manifest it is, that He assured the Inhabitants of the primitive
World, as much of Dominion over the Sea; as he did of the benefit of an
incarnate Savior: but then if he cheated them so egregiously at present, how
could they in prudence trust him for the future; and take his word to be what
the Psalmist styles it, (...) the word of righteousness, Psalm. 119.123? or as
some render it (and not improperly) the word of bounty, or kindness. Fraudulent
dealing makes Confidence shie; and they that have been choused, will be
cautelous after it. If one says he will give me but two Guineas, and basely
deceives me; when he tells me he designs a thousand for me, in reason I must
think he puts a trick upon me. So if GOD brake promise with the Antediluvians,
in a lesser matter; how could they expect he should perform a greater? His
unfair disappointing them of a temporal blessing; would rather have flung them
into fatal despair of his everlasting Mercy. His imposing on them so openly
once, would have awed their faith into such fear and diffidence: that they
could no more have reli'd upon his broken fidelity. No more than they could
believe, that he made Adam and them, to be Lords of the Fish, and Sovereigns of
the Sea; when neither he nor they, saw one or the other, to their dying day.
And thus for the Credit of contradicting Scripture in Natural things, we see
what the tendency of it is, and how excellent the products of it will be. It
turns the most solemn Grants of Heaven, into shameful Mockeries; and besides
the dishonor it brings to GOD, lets in fatal despondency upon men. So much for
the first piece of his apology: the second part of it follows.

And here in way of farther answer to the Charge of contradicting Scripture;
Answ. p. 81.
he is disposed to observe, how far the Excepter himself, in such (natural)
things, has contradicted Scripture. And because the Excepter used dreadful
Sentences toward the Theorist, he goes about to show, that he has made
himself obnoxious to them: And that this might be done the more fairly, we must
(says he) state the case truly. And he does it thus. Whether to go contrary to
the letter of Scripture, in things that relate to the Natural World, ^b.
be destroying the Foundations of Religion; affronting Scripture; and
blaspheming the H. GHOST. Now however he pretends to state this case truly; it
is evident that he does it falsely. For it is not going contrary to the letter
of Scripture, that draws such evil consequences after it; but going contrary to
the letter of Scripture, where it is to be literally understood. This
Circumstance therefore (which was left out) should have been taken into the
Case. And this is the great oversight of the Theorist; going contrary to
Scripture in Natural things, where it is to be taken in a literal sense. By
this means he exposes himself. But the Excepter is guilty of no such
procedure, and therefore the Scriptures alleged against him, can take no hold
of him. In demonstration of as much, let us but consider the first of them,
that he cites in his Answer, which is, Psalm. 19.5. Ib.
The whole verse runs thus, being spoken by David, of the Sun. Which is as a
Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices, as a strong man, to run a
race. So that according to the letter of this Text, the Sun moves. But says the
Answerer, the Sun stands still, and the Earth moves, Ib.
according to the Excepter's Doctrine. Very true. But yet that Doctrine is not
contrary to this Scripture, for the reason just now suggested; even because its
meaning is not literal. For which reason also the alleging it is improper and
insignificant. And that its meaning cannot be literal, it proves irrafragably
for its self. For take it in that sense, and what a numerous throng of
ridiculous Absurdities, will issue from it upon the acception? Then the Sun
must be a man, and must be upon his Marriage, and must be dressed in fine
clothes, as a Bridegroom is. Then he must come out of a Chamber, and must give
no more light, and cast no more heat, than a Bridegroom does. Then he must have
life too, and he must have sense; he must have passions, and he must have
legs; else how can he rejoice, and rejoice, as a strong man, to run a race? So
that, in short, what is here said of the Sun's motion, needs not be literally
understood. It may be spoken only quoad apparentiam vel ad captum vulgi:
according to appearance, or common apprehension. And the like may be said of
the rest of those Scriptures, which the Answer quotes to the same purpose,
either in the Body, or the Margent of it. What therefore was said before, we
may think still; that the alleging this Text was improper and superfluous. And
the Answerer himself confirms this thought. For he says ( p. 85.) that we all
leave the literal sense in certain cases, and therefore that alone is no
sufficient charge against any man. And thus he is so kind or complaisant, as to
censure and take off his own Objection; and to save us the trouble of confuting
his Argument, by baffling it himself. And which is kinder yet, he tells us ( p.
84.) the truth is, if we should follow the Vulgar style, and literal sense of
Scripture, we must renounce Philosophy and natural Experience. And so by a
pretty and unusual sort of method, the skain which he ruffled, he brings to
rights again. First he observed that we contradicted Scripture. Then he showed
wherein we did it. Then he charged us for so doing. Then he proclaimed his
Charge insufficient. And lastly he allows the very thing he attaqu'd. For he
makes it necessary to contradict Scripture in some Cases, and not to follow its
literal sense in all things; Unless we will renounce Philosophy and Experience.
A thing which the Excepter is loath to do. As to the Instances he brings, of the
Sun's raising Mountains, and the Moon's hindering the formation of the Earth:
they are so far from being Arguments against the Excepter, that they are but
mere mistakes of his own, as we have here showed. But another Argument he has
found out (tho by an odd way of invention) or mustered up to bring up the Rear,
Chap. 3d. and 10th.
in this Battalion. And by it he intends to make an absolute conquest of us,
and to beat us down into humble subjection to his own sentiment: in which he
thus triumphs over us, tho before the Victory. Answ. p. 82.
This, I think, is truly to contradict Scripture. Here therefore, I trow, he
goes upon good grounds and treads sure. For should his heels fly up, as they
have frequently done, his fall would be the worse, for running so high against
his adversary; as he calls the Excepter, in the foregoing Paragraph. And pray,
what is this last Argument? Why, the Excepter, in his new Hypothesis, makes the
Waters of the Deluge, to be but fifteen Cubits higher than the Plain or common
surface of the Earth, Which Scripture affirms expressly, to have covered the
tops of the highest hills. And again he vouches it; The Scripture says, they
covered the tops of the highest Mountains. But this the Scripture does not do.
It does not affirm expressly, that the Waters covered the Tops of the highest
Hills. It does not say, that they covered the tops of the highest Mountains.
And therefore for the Answerer to say, it did affirm and say so expressly;
This, I think, is truly to force and falsify Scripture. And thus his ill
fortune haunts him still; and where he thought to have caught his adversary in
a Net? he only hampers and intangles himself. For he relapses unhappily, into
his old infirmity, and asserts what is not. For where is it, that Scripture
says, that the waters of the Flood did cover the tops of the highest Hills? Yet
he twice together asserts it did; Two Untruths.
and so his recidivation is double, and two untruths he tells at once. It Is
confessed Scripture says, that the Mountains, at the Flood, were covered with
waters. But so it says also (as we have observed) that the Camp of Israel, in
the Wilderness, was covered with Quails. But as Quails, two Cubits high upon
the ground, could not cover the Tops of the highest Tents; so Waters fifteen
Cubits high upon the Earth, might not cover the Tops of the highest Hills. For
certain Scripture does not say, it does not affirm expressly that they did. Yet
by this, the Gentleman gives us to understand, that what the Scripture says,
and expressly affirms; is to be believed, and ought to be received. And then
why is the being of a Sea, before the Flood rejected, and Adam's dominion over
its fish denied? I instance often in that Sea; because I find it is of the
Substance of the Theory, and a piece of one of its Vital Assertions; that the
primitive Earth was without a Sea. Ib.
These Observations, says the Answerer, I know, are of small use unless perhaps
to the Excepter himself. But without a perhaps, the Replicant finds they are of
no use at all, unless to the Observator. May he that made them, make the best
use of them.

Here he takes occasion to reflect upon the Literal Style of Scripture. And the
last Head he speaks to (and the only head that concerns us) is of such things
as belong to the Natural World. Ib. p. 84.
And to this, he says, may be reduced innumerable Instances, where we leave the
literal sense, if inconsistent with Science, or Experience. What meant he then,
to charge us with going contrary to the Letter of Scripture, for supposing the
fixedness of the Sun, and the motion of the Earth? by his own confession
before, that charge was incompetent; and by his own Rule here, it must be
impertinent. By and by he has this Fling, but I know not at whom. Some men, out
of love to their own ease, (...)
and in defense of their ignorance, are not only for a Scripture-Divinity, but
also for a Scripture-Philosophy. For my own part, as I hate too lazy a
Philosophy, so I despise too busy a one. Sound Philosophy is a noble thing; and
let all advance in it as far as they can: the more expert Philosophers they
are, the wiser and better they are like to be. But still we must remember, that
true Philosophy being bounded by the Light of Nature, must never interfere with
Revelation. As on the one side, it should not be slothful? so on the other
side, it must not be pragmatical. Scripture is no enemy to Philosophy; and
Philosophy by no means must affront Scripture. GOD allows men the freest use of
their Reason; but it is unreasonable they should oppose it to Inspiration; and
by using it confront his authority who gave them it. So concerned was Plato to
shun all such indecency; that being (in his Timaeus) to debate concerning the
Universe, (...), whether it were made, or not made; he thought it necessary to
invoke all the GODS and Goddesses, that what should be said, might be (...):
agreeable to them, and spoken consistently. Change but the Object of the
petition, and the matter of it will be fit for any Philosophers Litany. Direct
the address to the One True GOD, and there can be no fault in its application.
And let Notions be squared by the Rules that it contains, and then Philosophy
may take its liberty. Scripture allows it sufficient latitude, and the
Christian Church will do no less. So I am sure she did of old. For then in her
earlier and purer times, she was so far from discouraging Philosophy, that she
took men's passing through its Schools, to be a laudable preparative or
qualification for their preferment. Witness Origin (cont. Cel. l. 3.) (...),
etc. We will not turn away young men from those that teach Philosophy; but
where they have been exercised, and have gone the round with them, I will try
to advance them higher etc. But if any will abuse this noble liberty, they must
answer it to him who is philosophorum Deus (as Tertullian told Marcion) the GOD
of Philosophers. And if we would not aggravate our account here, we must take
heed of one thing: Of entertaining Philosophy with trifling Notions. For if
once we suffer it to seed upon such trash, we may expect it will soon get a
surfeit, and fall sick of Phantsy; and that is a Disease which commonly rises up
into paroxysms of extravagance. And then the vital heat of reason, as I may
call it, turns into a violent and raging Fever. And so the fire that should be
kept orderly on the hearth, furiously flies up to the house top. And the flame
which should burn only upon the Altar, consumes the Temple.

Then he Observers; Upon the whole, you see, it is no fault to recede from the
literal sense of Scripture, but the fault is when we leave it without a just
cause. As it is no fault for a man to separate from a Church: -- but to do it
without a just cause, is a real fault. The beginning of this Observation does
still farther justify us, against his late insufficient Charge. And the rest
of it gives us occasion to enquire, what just cause he had to recede from the
literal sense of Scripture, as in too many instances he has done. For if he
left that sense without just: cause, he is (...), condemned by a sentence out
of his own mouth. The Letter of Scripture plainly says, that GOD made two great
Lights: that He gave Adam Dominion over the Fish of the Sea: that Tubal Cain,
was an Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron: That the Fountains of
the Great Deep were broken up, and the Windows of Heaven opened, the same day.
Now, pray, what good reason, or what just cause is there for his departing from
the Literal sense of Scripture in these things? For to recede from it without
Cause, is as real a fault, by his own confession; as it is, without cause to
separate from a Church. And therefore as causless separation from a Church, is
criminous Schism; so causeless recession from that sense of Scripture, must be
culpable desertion. And so if any Writer knowingly and causelessly deserts the
literal sense of Scripture or dissents from it; he cannot be innocent. For to
use the Answerers own words, Ib. p. 85.
tho we all leave the literal sense in certain cases, and therefore that alone
is no sufficient charge against any man: Yet he that makes a separation, if I
may so call it, without good reasons, he is truly obnoxious to censure. And so,
in short, he becomes his own Judge, and pronounces a most just sentence on
himself.

Ib.
And thus he comes to the great result of all which is this. To have some common
Rule to direct us, when every one ought to follow, and when to leave the
Literal Sense. And such a Rule, it seems, is not wanting. For as he tells us in
the next words, That Rule which is generally agreed upon by good Interpreters,
is this. Not to leave the literal sense, when the subject matter will bear it,
without absurdity or incongruity. But must not the knowledge then of this good
Rule, aggravate the breaking it? Ignorance, which sometimes excuses error, does
always extenuate it. But if with open eyes we go against the light, and swerve
from the Rule we see standing before us; our senses take from us all plea of
oversight, and our presumptuous enormity will admit of little or no apology.
But yet the Answerer offers somewhat to clear him in this matter; and it
follows immediately in the next words. This Rule I have always proposed to my
self, and always endeavored to keep close to it. May his next proposal then,
and endeavor of this nature, be more fortunate. And to that end perhaps it may
be proper they should be better enforced. For must not his proposal here be too
slight, and must not his endeavor be too faint, when both of them proved so
insuccessful? For had the one been as serious, and the other as vigorous as it
ought; what could have defeated him, in so just an Enterprise, or diverted him
from it? For example; had he really proposed, and heartily endeavored to keep
close to the letter, where Scripture says, GOD made two great Lights; or where
it says, he gave Adam Dominion over Seafish; or the like; what could have
hindered him, or beat him off it? As for absurditys or incongruitys in the
subject Matters (the only Bar (according to the Rule) which can exclude that
sense) nothing can be more vain than to pretend any here. For as we have
plainly seen, the readiest way to open a wide Door, and let them in, is to
receede from the literal sense. It Is confessed indeed, that the literal sense, in
these, and other cases, would have brought in absurdities and inconveniences
upon the Theory, in good plenty. But then this is so far from being any reason,
why the literal sense of those places should not be received; that it is a most
clear and convincing Argument, that that Hypothesis is to be rejected. For by
the Rule laid down, I say, where no kind of absurdities or incongruitys do
accrue to any Texts, from the literal sense; there it must be kept to. And
therefore if the Theory cannot stand, and maintain it self free from
absurdities and incongruities, without perverting or depraving the literal
sense of the now cited Texts, or any other; and without causing a needless
departure from it: it must sink and fall. And then (as he somewhere
interrogates the Excepter) why does he trouble himself, Answ. p. 67.
or the World, with such an Hypothesis? Ib. p. 79.
Did he do it merely out of an itch of Scripturiency, as he speaks; methinks he
might have laid that prurient humor, by scratching himself with the briars of
a more innocent Controversy; or by scrubbing soundly against something else
than the holy Scripture. Ib. p. 85.
He goes on. But some inconsiderate minds make every departure from the letter,
let the Matter or Cause be what it will, to be an affront to Scripture. And
there, where we have the greatest liberty, I mean in things that relate to the
natural World, they have no more indulgence or moderation, than if it was an
intrenchment upon the Articles of Faith. Let them that are thus inconsiderate
in their minds, and immoderate in their ways; answer this charge. Prove the
Excepter concerned, and besides acknowledging his past fault, he will be cautious
of recommitting it for the future. But yet the greatest liberty we have, or may
pretend to, in things relating to the natural World; can by no means authorize
us to go against the letter of Scripture in any case, where it is to be
literally taken, or may be so understood without absurdity. If we do, we go
directly against the Rule of faith, and so shall soon come to intrenchment upon
its Articles. He concludes thus. Ib.
In this particular I cannot excuse the present Animadverter; yet I must needs
say, he is a very Saint in comparison of another Animadverter, who has written
upon the same subject, etc. In this particular, as the Animadverter needs no
excuse, so he asks none. Yet if he used the Theorist so well; he again should
have used him the better. But whoever reads over the present Answer, will
easily find, that he is treated rather as a grievous sinner against the holy
Theory; than as a Saint Excepter. Who that Animadverter is, of whom he
complains, I know not. I have seen no other Writings or Animadversions upon the
Subject he speaks of, but the Lord Bishop of Hereford's. And I own that his
Lordships publishing his Animadversions, was good encouragement to me to Print
my Exceptions at first, and to Defend them now. To see that therein I should
follow the great Example of a Reverend Prelate; and in fighting for the Truth,
against the Theory of the Earth, should militate under the Episcopal Banner.

I was now thinking that I had done, and just about to lay down my Pen. But
then calling to mind that the Answerer quoted a Review of the Theory against
us, as to some Texts of Scripture, on which the Theory is bottomed or does
depend: I held my self obliged to take notice of this Review. And because in it
he offers to justify his Exposition, which he formerly made of S. Peter's
words, and we endeavored to confute; It will not be improper briefly to except
against what is there said to that purpose. And tho enough has been alleged
against the Theory's sense of those words already; yet, ex abundanti, we'll
here cast in a little more, speaking to S. Peter's words chiefly, tho not to
them only. And yet we shall speak only to Scriptures, because in reference to
them alone, was this Review cited against us. Answ. p. 21. and 61. Review. p. 8.


In it he tells us, that the sacred Basis upon which the whole Theory stands,
is the Doctrine of S. Peter, delivered in his second Epistle and third Chapter,
concerning the Triple Order and succession of the heavens and earth; and is
comprehended in seven verses of that Chapter, which run thus, in the Review.

Ver. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts. 4. And saying, where is the promise of his
coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the Creation. 5. For this they are willingly ignorant of,
that by the Word of GOD, the heavens were of old, and the earth consisting of
water and by water. 6. Whereby the World that then was, being overflowed with
water perished. 7. But the heavens and the earth that are now, by the same
word, are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment and
perdition of ungodly men. -- 10. The day of the LORD will come as a thief in
the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up. 13. Nevertheless we according to his promise, look
for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. But that such
a triplicity of heavens and earth, as the Review contends for, is signified or
set out by S. Peter's words, is very unlikely; and the following Exceptions lie
against it.

First, those words are so opposite to the first state of the heavens and
earth, that they cannot admit of it, unless one passage in them be false: which
is this. (...) which the Review renders consisting of water and by water. This
must be applied both to the Heavens, and to the Earth, as being spoken of both.
And if it be to be understood, not of the Posture of them (according to our
Translation) but as the Review interprets it; it must be void of truth. For
first, apply it to the heavens, and they must consist by water as well as of
water; that is, by the help of water, tanquam per causam sustmentem, as by a
sustaining cause, says the Review. p. 20.
But how did water sustain the first heavens; or Neptune, in that State,
perform the task of Atlas? Secondly, apply it to the earth, and that must
consist of water, as well as by water. But how did the first Earth in order,
consist of water more than the second? Instead of that, this second Earth is of
a far more watery constitution than the first; half the surface of the present
Globe being nothing but Sea. And if it be urged, that (...), of water, relates
to the Heavens; and (...), by water, relates to the Earth: the very form of the
words will not allow it. For as the H. GHOST has set them, both the Expressions
relate as much to the Heavens, as they do to the Earth; and as much to the
Earth, as they do to the Heavens; and to both alike. And the Review gives us
leave to refer both to both, because it will make no great difference in its
interpretation. p. 21.

Secondly, S. Peter's words are so opposite to the second state of the Heavens
and Earth; that they cannot admit of it, unless one Passage in them be
inverted. For the SPIRIT says, that the world that then was, being overflowed
with water perished. And so plainly makes the watery inundation, the cause of
the Worlds destruction. But grant there were Heavens and Earth of a second
Order according to the Review; and the Earth's Destruction or Dissolution must
be the cause of that inundation. And is it likely that St. Peter would so teach
Philosophy, that it should not be understood without transposing the terms in
which it is delivered, or drawing them to a kind of contrary sense? Who can
believe that he allowed this second state of heavens and earth, much less
asserted it in disputing with Philosophers; when if he did so, in his
expression (as properly and most naturally taken) he mistook the Cause for the
Effect; and made the Earth to perish by its being drowned, when indeed it was
drowned by its perishing, or being dissolved?

Thirdly, the Apostle's words are so opposite to the Third state of Heavens and
Earth; that they cannot admit of it, unless one Passage in them be
contradicted. For this Third state, which is the same with the new Heavens, and
new Earth, is by the Review, post-pon'd to the Conflagration. For it tells us
that the Earth, by that fire, being reduced to a second Chaos; from that, as
from the first, arises a new Creation, or new Heavens, and a new Earth. (p. 6.)
And therefore the Theorist's asserting that these shall rise before the day of
Judgment; must needs be plain Contradiction to what the Apostle lays down in
the 7th. verse. For there he says, that the Heavens and the Earth that are now,
are kept in store, reserved unto fire, against the day of Judgment, and
perdition of ungodly men. And when he has said that (...), the present Heavens
and the Earth, shall be kept and reserved till the day of Judgment; the
Doctrine of New Heavens and a new Earth to be introduced before then, must be
downright Contradiction to this. And truly the same it must be, to affirm that
these New Heavens and Earth, shall be consequent to the general Conflagration.
Nor is there any way to avoid these barefaced Contradictions; unless in
complaisance to this pretty Hypothesis, there must be two Conflagrations, and
two Days of Judgment, and two ends of the World; which is one of each sort more
than GOD has revealed.

By S. Peter's New heavens therefore and his new Earth, we are to understand a
new and excellent state of things, upon which the blessed Saints are all to
enter, at the consummation of this present World. And as to what the Review
says, p. 10.
they must be material and natural, in the same sense and signification with
the former Heavens and Earth: this does not appear from the Apostle's words.
The other sense now mentioned, may rather be inferred from them, considering
the way or usage of the holy Writers. For with them it is common, in passing
from one thing to another, to carry a word or Notion used just before, along
with them farther; or to rise from a Literal, to an Allegorical, or Anagogical
meaning. Such Transitions as these (to confine our Observation to one sacred
Author) occur very frequently in the Gospel of S. John. Thus (in the 4th.
Chapter) our SAVIOR discoursing with the Samaritan Woman, about drawing water
out of a Deep Well; carries on the matter to Water that he could give. To such
Water as he that drinks of it shall never thirst; but it shall be in him a
Well springing up into everlasting life. But tho the Well and the Water first
mentioned were Material; it does not follow from thence: that the latter were
the same, or that they could be such. So (Chap. 6.) from speaking of Loaves,
and of eating bread; he raises his Discourse, to that meat which endures unto
everlasting life. But yet it is never the more Material food; because the first
spoken of, was of that nature. And (in the same Chapter) the Jews telling of
Manna, or bread from Heaven, which their Fathers eat; JESUS said unto them, I
am the bread of life, he that comes unto me shall never hunger. But this does
not make our SAVIOR, real Manna, nor was it possible he should be Material
bread. Yea, being but in the Jewish Temple, he took occasion from thence, to
call his body by that name (Chap. 2.) Destroy this Temple, and I will build it
again in three days. But was his sacred Body ever the more a stony building?
And when this was the way of our Great REDEEMER, what wonder that his chief
Apostle should imitate him? And that speaking of the old Heavens and Earth kept
in store, and reserved unto fire: should, in raising his Discourse to a future,
spiritual, blessed state; speak of it in the terms, and under the notions, of
new Heavens, and a new Earth.

But fourthly, that the Apostles words should point at a triform state of
Heavens and Earth; is very improbable from that change which he makes in the
Terms that he uses. For in the 5th verse he uses the words Heavens and Earth:
and in the 7th. verse again, Heavens and Earth: but in the verse betwixt both,
he says, the World that then was. Now if he meant the same thing in all three
verses, why did he not use the same Words? and say, the Heavens and the Earth
that were then. This fairly intimates, that he intended not the natural, but
animate World; and principally Mankind, whom he called, the old World, in this
Chapter; and in the preceding Chapter, the world of the ungodly.

Fifthly, that this threefold state of Heavens and Earth, should be denoted in
these words, is not to be thought; because they certify us, that the World that
then was perished. Now could that be true of the natural World? Yet it must be
true of some World because GOD says it: and therefore it must relate to a World
which could, and did actually perish; which must be the Animal World. Indeed by
this Perishing, the Review understands a change only in the constitution and
form of the Heavens and Earth. But is, or can that be a perishing? Suppose ones
temper or constitution be changed from Phlegmatic to Choleric; is the man
therefore perished? Or suppose the Shell of an Egg should crack and sink inward
a little; is the Egg therefore perished? No more could the Material Heavens and
Earth perish, by a mere change of their Constitution and form: And had but such
a change as that befallen them; the Apostle would certainly have expressed it
accordingly, and not have said, the World that then was perished. But since he
has thus expressed it, the animate World must be here understood, that so the
Word spoken may come up to the thing, and express it in a just and true sense.

But because he says, that the Apostle speaks here of the Natural World,
particularly in the 6th verse: and offers Reasons to prove that it perished
(Review. p. 14.) We shall lay down the Substance of these Reasons, and briefly
answer them.

First, the ground these Scoffers went upon, was taken from the permanency of
the natural World in the same state from the beginning. And therefore if the
Apostle would take away their Argument, he must show that the natural World
has been changed, or has perished.

Answ. And does he not show them a sufficient change in nature at the Deluge;
when (as he minds them) the Earth stood so deep, and the Heavens so high in
Water, that thereby the animate world perished? Only this change was a change
in the condition, not of the Constitution of the natural World.

Secondly, these Scoffers could not be ignorant that there was a Deluge, which
destroyed Mankind; and therefore it was the Constitution of those old Heavens
and Earth and the change and destruction of them at the Deluge, that they were
ignorant of.

Answ. If they were not ignorant of the destructive Deluge, they might have
forgotten it, See Disc. p. 137.
and therefore the Apostle minds them of it. Or else they were ignorant or
forgetful of the divine Cause of the Flood; Ib. p. 134, etc:
which he therefore expressly tells them was the Word of GOD. But as to the
pretended change or destruction of the Heavens and Earth, I doubt not but S.
Peter was as ignorant of them, as any of the Persons he reprehends.

Thirdly, the Apostle's design is to prove the Conflagration, which will be a
destruction of the natural World: and therefore he must use an Argument taken
from a precedent destruction of that World.

Answ. The Design of the Apostle is not to oppose reason to reason strictly, in
a just parity of Instances; but fairly to infer one judicial and calamitous
Providence or Dispensation from another. And GOD having drowned the old
Heavens, in some measure, as well as the Earth; by the word of his power
bringing in the flood upon the ungodly: he would from hence convince them, that
by the same word, the present Heavens and Earth are reserved unto fire; which
shall then be the instrument of perdition to the impious, and the whole living
World; as water was before. And so from one general destruction past, he
strenuously argues the certain futurity of another to come.

Fourthly, unless we understand here the natural World, we make the Apostle
both redundant in his Discourse, and also very obscure in an easy Argument.

Answ. His Discourse, for this, will not be redundant, but very close to his
purpose. For that is not only to mind these Scoffers, that men and other
Animals were destroyed in a Deluge caused by GOD's Power; but to represent the
greatness of that Deluge, which swelled so mightily upon the Earth, that in
some measure it invaded the Heavens. And therefore to what he said of the
flood's destroying Mankind, in the foregoing Chapter, v. 5th; he adding here a
description of the vastness of that Flood, in the drowned posture which the
Heavens and Earth then stood in; what he says, is far from being superfluous or
redundant.

Nor is his Argument thus made obscure. On the contrary rather it receives
light from hence. For he here bringing in the Heavens and Earth into his
account of the Deluge; does thereby make the Greatness, of it, he was
representing the more conspicuous.

Fifthly, the opposition carries it upon the Natural World.

Answ. The Heavens and Earth that were of old, and the Heavens and Earth that
are now, we grant are opposed. But then it is as to their Fate, not in their
Natures. And tho the Heavens and Earth that are now, shall perish more
thoroughly than they did of old; Fire being more consuming than Water: yet then
for a time they perished too. That is, in S. Austin's sense; with whose
Authority the Review makes so loud a noise to little purpose. For so far as I
can find, neither he, nor any of the Fathers, who affirm the Aereal Heavens
perished; do think that they perished any otherwise, than by the Water's rising
up into the lowest Regions of the Air. And that place of Bid which the Review
cites, seems to speak the common sense, as well as his own: which gives us to
understand that the Heavens perished, p. 25.
cunctis aeris hujus turbulenti spatiis, aquarum accrescentium altitudine
consumptis: All the spaces of this turbulent Air, being taken up by the height
of the swelling waters. According to which, the Heavens perished, just as the
Air does in a Vessel, when it fills with Water. But let out the Water, and the
Air immediately returns into it. So the lowest Heavens that perished at the
Flood, by standing in the Water; when that was dried up, presently recovered
their first Aereal Constitution again.

The Last reason is answered in the 4th of the foregoing Exceptions. And from
what has been here said, Answers may with ease be made, to those Considerations
which the Review alleges, in proof of a Diversity or Opposition made by S.
Peter, betwixt the Ancient Heavens and Earth, and the Present.

But farther yet; the Review observes, that S. Paul also implys that triple
Creation which S. Peter expresses. p. 10, 11.
For Romans 8.20, 21, he tells us of a Creation that will be redeemed from
vanity: which are the new Heavens and new Earth to come. A Creation in
subjection to vanity: which is the present State of uhe World. And a Creation
that was subjected to vanity; in hopes of being restored; which was the first
Paradisiacal Creation.

But by Creation or Creature here, to understand the Heavens and Earth; must be
improper. For first, it is (...) the whole Creation, or every Creature, that is
here spoken of, v. 22d. And where does that signify the material Heavens and
Earth, in Scripture?

Secondly, the Creature mentioned, is capable of waiting, and of earnest
expectation, and of hope, and of pain, and of groaning; as the verse cited, and
the context, show. Yea, it seems to be capable of groaning as we our selves do,
v. 23. Which is above the power of Matter, tho never so subtle or celestial.

Thirdly, the Creature here, is to be delivered from bondage into glorious
liberty, v. 21. And this again is a Character which falls not in with the
Heavens and Earth. He says indeed that the Creature that will be Redeemed from
Vanity, is the new Heavens and new Earth to come. But how will they, (supposing
them come into the Paradisiacal State) be delivered from vanity? For even then
they can be in no better condition, than the first Paradisiacal Heavens and
Earth were, (as coming but into a state of Renovation or Restitution.) And they
were so far from being freed from Vanity, that they were subject to corruption,
and perished at the Deluge, as the Theorist holds. And truly so must the last
Paradisiacal ones too, unless it be prevented. The new Earth, if it stands long
enough, must be dissolved and lose its Form: and the new Heavens must be
changed, at another Deluge, and lose their Constitution. Or if the day of
Judgment should happen first, and hinder this; yet where would be their
Redemption or Deliverance here phantsied? For still they would be vain and
corruptible in their Nature; as Enoch and Elias were both Mortal, tho neither
died.

To which add, that the Theory ( l. 4. p. 219, 220.) plants Gog, and Magog in
the New Earth, and allows them to grow numerous there, as the sand by the Sea.
And so it can no more be redeemed or delivered from Moral Vanity and Corruption
upon it; than from Natural Vanity and Corruptibility in it.

Lastly, This Creature of the Apostles is to be delivered into the glorious
liberty of the Children of God, v. 21.
now the liberty of GOD's Children is Moral, Spiritual, and Divine, which is
not completed but in the future exalted state of bliss: Where, being heirs of
GOD, and joint heirs with CHRIST, we shall be glorified with him, v. 17th. But
such a liberty as this, is no way compatible to things merely Physical; and so
the Heavens and Earth, tho never so new and paradisiacal, must not pretend to
it, cannot partake of it.

Thus we see that the Theorists Interpretation of this Place of Scripture, is
not right: and therefore of necessity we must look out for some other Creature,
as here intended. Nor need we search much to find one. Preach the Gospel to
every Creature, said the H. JESUS to his Apostles, S. Mar. 16.15. Here the word
is the same with S. Paul's to the Romans. But Heavens and Earth cannot possibly
be meant by it, because to them there must be no Preaching. But by every
Creature, the Heathen World may fitly be understood. And so this Precept or
Commission given to the Apostles, is parallel to that in the last chapter of S.
Matthew; go, and teach all Nations. And then by the Vanity to which the
Creature was Subject, and the Bondage of Corruption from which they were to be
delivered; we must understand, See Dr. Hammonds Annotations on the place.
Idolatry; to which the Gentiles were miserably inslaved. And that indeed, in
Scripture, is emphatically expressed, by Vanity, and Corruption. So the Apostles,
Act. 15th. having preached to Idolaters; declare the end of their Doctrine was
to turn them from their VANITIES. And Moses in Deuteronomy, does usually point
at Idolatry, by men's CORRUPTING themselves. And if we frame the Exposition of
S. Paul's words to this sense; it will run very smoothly through the whole
Paragraph, without any considerable check or Difficulty.

Review, p. 11.
But after S. Paul, he brings in S. John also, to countenance his Phantsie of
this triple State of Heavens and Earth. For he speaks of the new Heavens and
new Earth. with that distinguishing Character, that the Earth was without a
Sea. And as this distinguishes it from the present Earth, so, being a
Restitution or Restoration, it must be the same with some former Earth, etc.
To this we Answer. The one and twentieth Chapter of the Apocalypse, where we
meet with S. John's new Heavens and Earth; consists of two very glorious Scenes.
The New Heavens and Earth, make the first; and the holy City, or the New
Jerusalem, the latter. But this City being Allegorical; we have no reason to
think, that the new Heavens, down from which; and the new Earth, down to which
it came, should be otherwise. Also this Allegation does no more prove The
Triple State of Heavens and Earth; or that the primitive Earth was without a
Sea: than it proves there shall be a City built of pure Gold, whose twelve
Gates shall be twelve Pearls, (in a Literal sense) according to the tenor of
that chapter.

And now let us offer but Two short Exceptions, which will not fail to subvert
the chief Scripture-basis of the whole Theory of the Earth, as the Review calls
it, ( p. 13th;) by showing that S. Peter's words, as well as S. Paul's, and S.
John's, are misinterpreted and mis-apply'd.

The first is this. In case this Triple state, or successive Order of Heavens
and Earth, be rightly grounded upon the aforesaid Apostles words; then those
three most eminent Evangelical Writers, must implicitly contradict the Doctrine
of Moses. And so either what he, or what they have delivered in some points,
must be false; and all of them being inspired from above, the H. GHOST must
contradict Himself. By Moses's Doctrine it is very plain, that the first Earth
had an open Sea. For GOD, he says, gave man Dominion over the Fish of the Sea;
and his Dominion over the Fish, appears to be as full, and withal as soon
conferred upon him, as that he had over the Beasts or Fowls. And therefore if
these Apostles, warrant this threefold State of Heavens and Earth, in the first
of which there could be no open Sea; their Doctrine must necessarily clash with
Moses's, and implicitly contradict it. So again, by Moses's Doctrine, it is
undeniably plain, that there was Brass and Iron in the Praediluvian Earth. For,
as he teaches, Tubal-Cain, was an Instructor of every Artificer in those
Metals. And therefore if these three famous Apostles maintain this triple State
of Heavens and Earth; they must implicitly interfere with Moses again: because
the first of these states could not possibly produce either of those Metals;
both which, according to Moses, were extant in it.

The second Exception is this. In case such a Triple state as this be truly
founded upon the Writings of these three famous men; then as all of them must
contradict Moses implicitly, so one of them must contradict himself expressly. I
mean S. John. For speaking of the state of the new Heavens and Earth, he says,
there was no more Sea, Apoc. 21.1. Yet describing the final Judgment, which is
to be at the end of the same state; he says, the Sea gave up the dead which
were in it, Apoc. 20.13. And so in short, there is no more probability, that
there should be such a tripple state as the Theory has invented, built upon
these Foundations of the Apostles laying: than there is possibility that
inspired Writers should contradict themselves, or one another.

And therefore if what our Author says be true; that the principal parts of
this Theory, are such things as are recorded in Scripture; and so must be taken
for granted, in one sense or other (Review p. 1:) yet it is so far evident,
that he has not hit upon the Right sense of them, as it is evident the sense
that he puts upon them, is not consonant to Scripture. And that is so evident,
that in his interpreting Scriptures, and applying several of them to his
notions; Review, p. 8.
he seems to have verified his own words, where he says, it is a kind of
fatality upon us to be deceived. Ib. p. 11.
Yea, even to be deceived in the passages of those principal Apostles, of which
he thus pronounces. These three places I allege, as comprehending and
confirming the Theory in its full extent.

And that he speeds no better in dealing with Profane Writers about this
Matter; than he did in tampering with Divine ones: one Instance will evince,
which we meet with in his Review (p. 20.) where to show the true importance of
(...) vel (...), and how ill it is rendered in the English, standing out of the
water, 2 S. Pet. 3.5: he says, that he that should translate Plato 's (...),
the World stands out of fire; would be thought no Grecian. And adds, that
Thales's, (...), Cicero renders, ex aqua constare omnia. But this we except
against as nothing to the purpose. For the Authors named, by their (...), meant
that the World was made out of a thing as out of its principle. But did the
Theorist's first Heavens, (...), in that sense? was water the Principle out of
which they were made? So far from that, that they were completely made, and the
Earth too, without any water in their Composition. Yea, the Sun was fain to
dart his fiery Beams through the Earth, to rarify the water in the Abyss below,
and from thence to fetch it up by exhalation; before so much as Vapor could
spread through those Heavens. So that they were no more made out of water, than
the Air is made out of Clouds, because they fly in it; or than a County is made
out of a River, because it runs through it. (...), in Plato's or in Thales's
sense, has nothing to do here. For besides that in the primitive Heavens, there
was no formal or specific Water, save only about the Poles of the Earth where
it fell; but only Vapor: even that Vapor was but passant through those
Heavens, no Ingredient of them; no Principle of their Being, or Part of their
Essence. But this was that which, the Philosopher meant, by his, (...): and the
Orator confirms it by his reddition of the Words.

We cannot conclude, without making this plain, but true Observation. That the
Theory of the Earth is a very vain and false Hypothesis.

The Vanity of it is notorious. For notwithstanding that it pretends to be
chiefly Philosophical; yet all its Primary Phaenomenaes that we have
considered; and which make up the biggest and most Philosophical part of it;
are fain to call in the help of Miracle to support them.

Review, p. 2.
The first, is the Original of the Earth from a Chaos. But that the Formation of
this Earth might in due time be effected, it is supposed to be done by the hand
of Extraordinary or miraculous Providence.

The second, is the state of Paradise, and the Antediluvian World. And here
Miracle must come in again: for that World could never have been peopled, had
not Angels carried Mankind over the Torrid Zone.

The Third, is the Universal Deluge. But without Miracle, no Rains could have
been before the fountains of the great Deep were broken up; nor could the
falling Ark have been preserved after it.

Nor is the Falseness of the Hypothesis, inferior to its Vanity. For there is
never a one of the Phaenomenaes aforesaid, but includes too manifest
Contradiction in it, to the sacred Oracles, or else to it self.

First, the Formation of the Earth out of the Theory's Chaos, contradicts
Scripture. For that tells us the Earth was made the Third day; but the Theory
says it was increased daily. And if to take off this Contradiction to
Scripture, it be alleged that the Answerer allows it might be made in six
minutes; this throws the Contradiction upon the Theory. For how could the Earth
be made in six minutes, that was daily increased?

Secondly, the Paradisiacal state, and the Antediluvian World Contradict
Scripture. For the one gives Paradise a Situation Contrary to what Moses
assigns it; and the other, against his most plain Assertions, excludes both
Metals, and an open Sea, with Adam's Dominion over its Fish.

Thirdly, the Universal Deluge contradicts Scripture. For according to the
Theorist, See Disc. c. 8.. 5. Answ. p. 31. Reply. p. 67.
there were fourscore days Rain toward making the Flood; but the H. GHOST
mentions and allows but forty.

This is no more than a Recapitulation, or short Rehearsal of some former
Remarks. Yet they fully exhibit the nature of the Theory. And when its Primary
and Essential Phaenomenaes are such; what must its Secondarys and Collaterals
be? If the Constituent and substantial parts of an Hypothesis, be so very
faulty; impossible it is that the Coincidents or Appendants of it should be
justifiable. Yet thus our Author vouches this Hypothesis, in his Review (p.
12.) It is not only more agreeable to Reason and Philosophy, than any other yet
proposed to the World; but it is also more agreeable to Scripture. Having found
out words in Scripture, that is, somewhat like to his own; he runs directly
away with them, and right or wrong applys them to his purpose. Just as some
persons who listening unto Bells, think that they ring what runs in their minds;
so if Scripture phrases do but chime as it were, or sound to his sense, our
Author concludes that they favor his Notions, tho all be but Phantsy. But let
him make good that fair Character, and I am ready to retract what I have said
against him, and to turn my Exceptions into applause. In the mean time, I have
pursued the Theory as far as I need. For as for going through the two last
Books, which he says will not be unacceptable to the Theorist, (Answ. p. 66.) I
deem it wholly superfluous. Where the Foundations of an house are taken away,
the Superstructures can never stand. The upper Stories must needs follow the
fate of the lower ones; and both will certainly fall together.

(...). FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 14. l. 24. after Shores a full stop. l. 25. after if, r. it. p. 19. l.
11. r. aereal. p. 22. in marg. leg. Luna. p 32. l. 6. blot out, in: p. 58. l.
14. blot out, only. p. 65: l. 35. after Expedient, r. and. p. 72. l. 11. r.
incrusted: l. 16. r. account. p. 87. l. 26. blot out, English. p: 112. l. 31.
r. off. p. 119. l. 18. r. aereal. p. 134. in marg. leg. delentur: p. 151: l.
ult. r. his own. p. 195. l. 28. r. Tehom. p. 196. l. 24. r. (...) p. 205. l. 6.
after head a full stop.

Books lately Printed, and are to be Sold by J. Southby, at the Harrow in
Cornhill, 1691.
TWO Treatises. The First, concerning Reproaching and Censure: The Second, an
Answer to Mr. Sergeants Sure-footing. To which are annexed Three Sermons
Preached upon several Occasions, and very useful for these Times. By William
Falkner, D. D. in 4to.

A Letter to Father Petre, concerning his Part in the Late Kings Government.
Wherein all his Actions are Justified; and wherein also the Forgery of a Prince
of Wales is freely Confessed and Justified. in 4to

The Benefit of Early Piety, Recommended to all Young Persons, and particularly
to those of the City of London. in Twelves.

A short View of the Duty of Receiving the Sacrament. Fit to be Read in the
Time of Preparation. With Additions of several Prayers necessary to be used,
before and after Communion. in 24.

FINIS.

