A Warning for HOVSE-KEEPERS, OR, A Discovery of all sorts of Thieves and
Robbers which go under these Titles, VIZ. The Gilter, The Mill, The Glasier,
Budg and Snudg. File-Lifter, Tongue-Padder, The private Theif.
With Directions how to Prevent them.

Also an exact Description of every one of their Practices.

WRITTEN By one who was a Prisoner in NEWGATE.

WITH ALLOWANCE.

Printed for T. Newton, 1676.

The first sort is called a Gilter.
THis Gilter is one that has all sorts of Picklocks and false Keys to open any
Locks both of Doors, Chests, Trunks and the like. There are several sorts that
do creep to these sort of Thieves, as the Budge, the Lister, and the private
Thieves, as when they see any locking up of moneys and they cannot get at it,
then they go to one of these Gilters, and tell him that they know where he can
get a prize if he will be real to them, whereupon he will swear that he will be
as honest as Easter Newmans wife, and so these Gilters are seldom out of
employment, but the best Informers are the private Thieves which shall be
discovered in order.

The way to prevent these Gilters, is to be careful that you let not any see
your Chest, Trunk, or Boxes where your Treasure is, opened, nor see you put any
thing into them, for opertunity makes thieves, and in so doing you will prevent
the private Thief, who gives notice to the Gilter where he may get the prize:
the Gilter very seldom goes but where he has some notice. Secondly be sure
you keep your outward door well bolted, and then he is prevented entering into
your house, for he goes only with Picklocks.

The manner of those that go upon the Mill, which are called House-Breakers.
The second sort of theives are those that go upon the Mill, which are
house-breakers, they are the most dangerous of all sorts, they have an
instrument made about half a yard long, and almost as long over, which they
call a Betty, which being chopped under a door, with a little help, it will make
it fly off the hinges. There seldom goes less then three or four in at gang of
these, and very seldom but where they are informed by the private Thieves:
when they enter, they carry in one hand a dark Glim, and in the other a Poller,
which is a dark Lanthorn and a Pistol, so they truck up the dancers, which is
run up stairs and bind all in the house, and some they gagg, which they call
faget and storm, so having made all sure, they rifle the house for yellow-boyes
and pieces of white, which is Gold and Silver, and if they find none, they take
the best bulleroyes or Lurryes they can find and pike off with them.

To prevent those that go upon the Mill.
You must be sure to keep your door well bolted, but let your bolts be to bolte
at the topp of your door, for if it be bolted at the top, it will break the
force of the Betty, so that they cannot open the door with all the strength
they can. Secondly put a plate over your hinges and it will do much good for
the preventing of them, some may think that this is needless, but let them try
it, and they will find it the best way to prevent those that go upon the Mill.

The manner of those that are called Glasiers.
The third sort of Thieves which are called Glasiers, are the right
quarrel-pickers, they are a sort of cowardly thieves, they take out a pane of
glass, and so go in at the window, and take what stands next them, and give it
to one that stays without to give him a watchword if there be any discovery,
but if there be none, he will not stay long, for he is very fearful of the
least noise that is, so having got out, he makes all the have away to his
fencing cins, where he will brag of his bold attempt and how he had like to
been taken, which some of his concerns will seem glad that he escaped, which
pleases well the humor of this glasier.

The way to prevent these Glasiers or Window-creepers.
Is to have shutters to your windows, for he will not venture to break them for
fear of making a noise, so that if ye have shutters there is no work for these
sort of Glasiers.

The fourth and fifth sort is a Budge and Snudge.
A Budge and Snudge commonly go together, a Budge is one that goes loytering up
and down the street, till he can find somebodies door open, then he runs in
boldly, and if he be seen by any body, he craves pardon for being so bold, and
says that he is mistaken in the house, and asks for somebody that lives next
door, or somebody that did live there before, but if there be no body in the
house, then they are so bold to take what stands next them and gives it to his
Snudge, who snudges away with it to his fencing cins who buys it for a small
matter, so they sit down and never stir till they have spent it, according to
the old Proverb, easily come, easily go, so they please themselves with a Song
that suits very well with their idle life, which most of them do find in the
end, that do follow this course of life, yet no warning will serve.
which is The Budge it is a delicate trade
and a delicate trade of fame
For when that we have bit the bloe
We carry away the game
But if the cully nap us
and the Lurres from us take
O then they rub us to the Whitt
And it is hardly worth a Make
But when that we come to the Whitt
Our Darbies to behold
And for to take our Penitency
And boose the water cold,
But when that we come out again
as we walk along the street
We bite the Culley of his cole
But we are rubbed unto the Whitt.
And when that we come to the Whitt
For garnish they do cry
Mary faugh you son of a w --
Ye shall have it by and by
But when that we come to Tyburn
For going upon the Budge
There stands Jack Catch that son of a w --
That owes us all a grudge
And when that he has noosed us
and our friends tips him no Cole
O then he throws us in the cart
and tumbles us into the hole.


The sixth and seventh sort of Theives which is a File and a Bulk
A File is a Pickpocket, a Bulk is his came-Rogue, who goes always with the
File, for he can do nothing without the File, therefore he is subject to the
File, and must do what the File would have have him, so that the poor Bulk is
beaten many times, for the File does cause the Bulk to quarrel and fight, but
he is not one that's to part them, for while they are a fighting he is busy in
picking their pockets that stands to see them fight, or go about to part them:
so having got what he can away he goes and leaves the Bulk to come off as well
as he can. He seldom goes to Church, if he do, it is not to pray, but to watch
his time to pick their pockets, as commonly they make more have out of Church,
then to Church, which they find to their sorrow. To prevent the File, keep out
of a crowd, and when your josled by any in the street, be very careful of them
that are on the other side of you and mind not them that josle you for the File
will never josle you.

A Lifter.
Is one that goes from shop to shop, pretending to buy, but it is to steal,
they will cheapen several sorts of Goods as you sell till they have opportunity
to convey away some of them into their Coats, which are turned up a purpose for
their design, so they will buy several, and leave a shilling earnest for them,
but never intend to fetch them. They are most women that go upon this design,
and commonly they go two together, and when the Shopkeeper turns his back, one
of them conveys what she can get, and so goes away, so the other pretends
there is nothing that pleases her, so that if the Shopkeeper misseth any thing
she will say, do you not know the maid that stood by me, and he answers no, why
sure she is your maid, I see her carry it with her, sure you do but jest,
whereupon he will grow angry, and it may be have her before a Justice, who will
discharge her, unless he will swear against this Lifter, who being honest will
be very careful how he swears.

A Tongue-Padder.
Is one that has a fine Tongue, a quick Wit, and can speak several Languages,
he is one that seldom speaks truth but gives himself to Romancing, so that he
will tell you feigned story presently according to his desire; as if you be a
talking of going into the Country, he understands by your discourse presently
where you are a going, so he desires you to do him the favor to carry a Letter
for him if you can, which none will deny; so having got a promise, he desires
to know what time you will go, and by one means or other he will know the very
hour. You must know that this Tongue-Padder is one which is called a Setter, so
that he Pads them in Town and his Confederates upon the Road, which for his
information he receives his share as well as if he had been with them. I
remember a true Story of one of these sorts of Tongue Padds that was lame, who
went always when he had done any Feat to their Randevouze, and he would be so
just that he would not bate a Penny of his share, which when they were taken
they discovered this Tongue-Padd, and going to the place of Execution, one of
them turned back, and seeing him follow, he burst out to laughter, which the
Minister correcting, said how can you laugh when you are a going to dye, (who
said) I cannot forbear laughing to see the old Tongue-Pad come hopping after us
for his Snack, I warrant he will not bate a Penny of his due.

Therefore when you are to go let not any stranger know where you are a going
nor what charge, least you be discharged of it.

A Private Thief
Is one that has been in some Prison and escaped a Scouring, who fearing that
if they be taken again, it will cost them their Lives* therefore they do
declare the danger they go in, therefore they tell them that they will look out
for a Service, so they agree, but withal to come once a Month and see them and
tell them how it fares with them, so they lay out for a service; if it be a
Maid servant they commonly go to those that help people to Services, and
pretend that they are just come out of the Country and want a service, but
they would fain be in some Merchants house or some Gentleman's house, for they
do not care to be with every dirty Slut, and if so be they can help them, they
will not be ungrateful, so by that means they get into great Men's houses, where
they carry themselves so demurely that they quickly get into favor, who no
sooner sees where the Money is, but they go to their Comerogues and discover
where it is and how they may come by it without this Private Thiefes being
mistrusted; So they come and bind and gagg all in the house, and likewise this
Private Theif.

In the next Part you shall have a fuller Description.

FINIS.

