A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF Right Worship, AGAINST IDOLATRY AND Will Worship.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1684.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF Right Worship, Against Idolatry and Will Worship.
Worship not Instituted Unlawful.
THe word Worship in General from the Hebrew Shachah he Bowed, and the Greek
Proskuneo, signifies any bending, but in Particular, an Outward Expression of
inward Reverence of the Mind, used to God or Men.

The Question then is, What Expressions of Reverence and Honor to God, used by
us toward him, is Accepted of him, and what is not? and we say,

That whatsoever Expressions of Reverence to God he has not Required, he will
not Accept.

As for the Distinctions between Matter and Manner of Worship, it is Frivolous,
of Essential and Circumstantial parts, as time and place, by Speaking and
Writing, etc. mentioned, as the Manner or Circumstance of the Acts, for the
matter cannot be without the manner, as time and place all things do Require:
They are so Essential and Material as that Worship or Expression of Reverence
is most properly intended by it; for Reverence, which is the proper matter of
Worship, is not so fully expressed in the word Shachah, to bow down the Body,
or Worship as the Expression or manner of Reverencing, or manner of Worship;
therefore to Exclude the manner of Worship from Worship, is Ridiculous: The
matter of Worship, to Love, Fear, Reverence, Pray to, and Praise God, does not
of so much Necessity come under Positive Revealed Institution, as being
Revealed by the Light of Nature, as the Heathen Poet could say without
Scripture; Si Deus est Animus, nobis ut Carmina dicunt; hic tibi precipue sit
pura Mente Colendus; and therefore, herein the Heathen Idolaters Agree with us
by the Light of Nature, that the God who made all things should be Loved,
Reverenced, Praised, and Prayed unto above all; and not only so, but even unto
our Point in Controversy, and that by the Light of Nature; for Reason says,
and so say they, That as God only knows himself, so he alone can Declare what
pleases the Divine Being; we can tell what would please a Man, because we are
Men; but we cannot tell how to please God, unless we were Gods; So says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.11. As the Spirit of Man only knows the things of Man, so
the things of God (and his mind is the Main thing there spoken of, as is
Explained in the last Verse, We have the Mind of Christ) knows no Man but the
Spirit of God; Therefore the Heathen Priests persuaded them That their Image
fell down from Jupiter, Acts 19.35. or it had not been used by them. Our
Contest then is with Men of Grosser Opinions therein, then the Heathen, for
they own Institution necessary to the manner of Reverencing God; Now, that he
accepts not what he Requires not, he himself declares; wherefore else does he
ask who has Required this at your hands, if he would accept it, although he
did not Require it? for the meaning is, Did I ever Require such Wicked Men to
tread my Courts? Isaiah 1.12.

Again, In vain do you Worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commands of Men,
Mat. 15.8, 9, Isaiah 29.13.

Isreal's using a manner of their own Inventions, was the Devil-Worship they
were Charged with, therefore they were bidden to bring their Sacrifice to the
Door of the Tabernacle, that they Worshipped no more to Devils, Levit. 17.4, 7.
They made a Calf, and after that manner which was the Egyptian manner, they
Worshipped God, and yet said to be to Devils. Deuteronomy. 32.17. They Sacrificed to
Devils, and not to God; 2 Cor. 11.14. And no Marvel; for Satan himself is
Transformed into an Angel of Light; 1 Cor. 10.20. But I say, That the things
which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; and I
would not that you should have fellowship with Devils. Rev. 9.20. -- That they
should not Worship Devils; The like said of Jereboams Idolatry; 2 Chronicles. 11.15.
And he Ordained him Priests for the high Places, and for the Devils, and for
the Calves which he had made. Now, that this Devil-Worship Consisted in being
Devised by their own Imaginations, the Scriptures following do Declare, 1 Kings
12.33. So he offered upon the Altar which he had made in Bethel, the fifteenth
day of the eighth Month, even in the Month which he had Devised of his own
heart:

Of Israel it is said, Psalm. 106.29, and 39. Thus they Provoked him to Anger
with their Inventions: what they were, read Verse 28. in these words; They
joined themselves also unto Baal-peor, and eat the Sacrifices of the Dead.
Verse 38 says, They Sacrificed their Sons and their Daughters unto the Idols
of Canaan, Verse 39. Thus were they Defiled with their own Works, and went a
Whoring with their own Inventions. Psalm 99.8. Thou Tookest Vengeance of their
Inventions, Heb. Gnelilotham, their Doings, meaning their Idolatry, which is
elsewhere called, Walking after the Imagination of their own Heart: Jer. 9.14.
Heb. Achare Sherirut Libbam, after the Stubborn perverse Imaginations of their
Hearts, and after Baalam which their Fathers taught them: for farther
Demonstration Consult. Jer. 23.17. and 7.24. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Romans 1.21. 'Twas
Death under the Dispensation of the Law, to alter the manner of the Worship
Commanded by using their own Inventions, so as to offer in other places, or
after another manner.

And if God was so zealous of the Manner of his Worship then, as given forth by
Moses, as to slay Nadab and Abihu for offering Fire not Commanded, Lev 10.1, 2,
3, etc. and smote 50000, as 1 Samuel 6.19. And he smote the men of Bethshemesh,
because they had looked into the Ark of the Lord. Vzzah for laying hold on it,
2 Samuel 6.3, 6, 7. Because they brought it not after the manner Commanded, Numb.
4.15. 1 Chronicles. 13.7, 8. and 9, 10. See chap. 15. 11, 12, 13. How can we Imagine
God will bear with the Affront offered to his Son, by whom he has completed
the Revelation of his Will, who came out of the Bosom of God to show us fully
how we shall be Accepted with him, and how we shall Express our Reverence to
him; For persons to Reject this, and follow their own proud Inventions, they do
more than we deny the Authority of Christ. For if God had left the Manner to
our selves, having given by Nature the Knowledge of the Matter, where is the
Necessity of Christ's prophetical Office? Indeed Mr. R. B. to show his
Invention, offers many Instances of Worship about the manner and ordering Gods
Institutions, which he says man may and must choose himself, without any
particular Institution of God, page 4. Which he calls the Right Ordering of
Gods Institutions, such as is commanded by him, and a Duty. Now how a man can
Rightly Order Institutions without a Rule? How he can Order them as is
commanded, and yet there is no command about Ordering of them. How this Duty
can be performed while there is no Law to Require it, he should have showed, if
he would not be thought contradictory to himself, But that is omitted. If he
means (or it has no meaning) That there are General Laws Instituted to
direct us in Right Ordering particular Institutions, so as to declare such a
Mode, Manner or Order to be Commanded, and a Duty required in the Scripture,
although in Totidem Verbis, they were not so expressed, We are agreed, and only
desire him to do as he says.

But Mr. R. B. will needs go to Church, now Nonconformity is out of fashion,
and would have all turn with him, though it look most like Babylon, while they
are Persecuting the Saints; yet now is he Enamoured with its Beauty.

In Brief, to present him the Features of that he has forsaken, with what he
has Embraced, he may behold The True Church and Spouse has Christ for its
immediate and only Head and Governor, by the Appointment of the Father; and as
such has set in his Church, Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Endowed
with the Spirit for the Edification of the whole Body; until we come to the
Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ: Ephesians. 4. Unto a Perfect Man in
Christ, unto which Head the Church is to be Obedient in all things, and to hear
his Voice, and not a Strangers: John 10.4, 5. The False Church has a Man for
its immediate and only Head and Governor, under the Power of Satan, being not
Converted: And as such Ordains Archbishops and Bishops, and they Parsons and
Curates, Endowed with a Liturgy; Constituted by, and may be Altered at Humane
Pleasure: unto which Device and Appointment, they are to be in all points
Obedient, into what shape soever Authority shall cause it to be Molded.


Now what Communion Christ has with Belial, or Light with Darkness, The Temple
of God with Idols, 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. shows, which is none at all.

That to serve God in a manner of our own Devising is Idolatry, and the breach
of the Second Commandment, is Evidently Signified by the Word Idolatry, or the
Serving God by Images, which was a known Species of the Genus of Humane Devised
Manner of Worshipping God, and therefore the Churchmen say on the second
Command, there are two kinds of Idolatry forbidden, the worshipping a false God
in the first Command, and the worshipping the true God after a false manner, by
the second Command.

Mr. R. B. would be left at Liberty, as to the Manner of Worship, and
therefore may with the Papists leave out the second Command, and they are
agreed.

While all who desire to be Accepted with God, are warned to follow Divine
Institution, or their Service will be Rejected.

James Warner.


