A Warning-peice for Ingroosers of Corn;
BEING A true Relation how the Devil met with one Goodman (...), within six
miles of ^ in (...); as he was coming from (...) Market, and Bargained for a
great quantity of Barley for eight shillings a Bushel and gave (...); and when
he came to fetch it, brought carts and Horses to their (...)) and while 'twas
measuring the Devil vanished, and tore the Barn in pieces, and scattered all
the Corn with such Winds and Tempest, which has done (...) great harm both
by Sea and Land, the like was never heard of before, the Farmer now (...)
destracted.

Sent in a Letter to be Printed, by Christopher ^mmerson, George Dixon, and
Richard Higgins. To the Tune of, In Summer time, etc.


GOod People all pray lend an ear
to this my Song, that is strange and true,
Wherein I briefly shall Declare,
the full Relation here to you.
If any Misers you do know,
that hoards up Corn, to starve ye Pore,
If that these Lines you to them show
'twil make them sure bring out their Store
In Norfolk did this chance befall,
at Bowton where this Man did dwell,
And Goodman Inglebred they do him call,
who had great store of Corn to sell.
But he as many thousands more,
without any remorse or pity,
Was folly resolved to keep his Store,
to bring a Dearth in Town and City.
He being at Market on a day,
at Linn a place that is known full well:
And Riding home upon the way,
He had a Customer from Hell,
The Devil did him over take,
in Habbit being very brave,
Who did a bargain with him make,
and Halfe-a-crowne in earnest gave.
The price was very great they made,
and Barley that must be the Gain,
Eight shillings a Bushel must be paid,
being well contented with such gain.
And thus the devil and he agreed,
likewise the time to fetch the same:
The Miser hy'd him home with speed,
for to provide against he came.
When he came home he was full glad,
and to his Wife he did unfold
What bargin, and what price he had,
likewise what quantity he sold.
With that his Wife made this reply,
as by his Servants it was told,
None but the Devil would ^ive so high
a price (quoth she) as you ^^te sold.
The second Part, to ^ame the Tune.


To (...) straight he set his M^n,
to make it ready against the day.
And the Devil was as ready then,
against the (...) to ^etch't away.
The day being come the Devil brought
his furniture, to take these stores,
With Horse and Carte, as to their thought,
the Man he straight threw (...) ye ^oores.
To measuring straight his Barley out,
this man began with all his (...);
With that the Div^ll made a Rout,
and of the Bargain sone was freed.
The Devil vanished straight away,
such Storms and Winds nere heaard before
No People thereabouts durst stay;
the Barns in paces all he tore
His Barn and Corn it all was spo^^'d,
and all the country round likewise,
Had all their Houses then ^^tyl'd,
such Winds they nere saw from ye Skys.
This Farmer fell disstracted straight,
he cannot take no Rest nor Sleep.
And (...) the Divil does for him ^^^ight,
his Bargain he must with him keep.
All you that hoard, and buy up Corn,
and (...) it up to make it dear,
Although you long long have been forborne,
There Is Rods in (...) for you I hear.
(...) now is brought about,
(...) you will ere long,
(...) you will be made bring out,
you shall not do the Poor such wrong.
The Lord I hope will ^eare the (...),
^,
^
^.
The Lord preseve our King, and bless
him from the treacherous harms of those,
That are his Enemies, yet profess
they love Him yet prove secret Foes.
The Queen God send her safe to ^and,
and all the Progeny preserve:
Likewise for those that faithful stand
and from him yet did never swerve.
My prayers shall daily be for those,
with many thousands more beside
(...) such I take his che^^^st Foes
that is given to Covet^ousness and Pride.
For you that deals in Corn and Grain,
to whom these Lines in chh belong,
Beware of such (...) gain,
where none but Poor does bear ye wrong,
So to Conclude and make an end,
for Peace and Plenty, let us pray,
That God may st^^^ ye poore-mans friend,
for ye Poor are now the rich-mans pray.
London, printed for William Gilbertson, at the Bible in Giltspur-street,

FINIS

