The Explanation of the Frontispiece.
It Is not the Portracture that here
In Sculpture thou do sce,
But the Emblem of thy Savior dear
Presented unto thee.
The King imports his Majesty,
This calls thy heart to bow,
To his Celestial Dignity
Thou can not be too low.
The Table richly furnished
With Mysteries of Love,
Before thee does his Bounty spread;
Imparting from above.
Himself the Lamb, the Bread, the Wine
To nourish thee with Grace,
That thou that Aliment Divine
May thankefully embrace.
whilst thy ^^art that with love does burn
Devotions Spikenard does return.
When the king Sits at his tables, My Spikenarde Sends for h the smell
there of: Cant: 1.12 --..


A Box of Spikenard: or a little Manual OF Sacramental Instruction AND
Devotion: Especially, helpful to the People of God, at and about the time of
receiving the Lords Supper.

WITH Some other forms expedient for some peculiar occasions.

The third Edition, By Thomas Walmestry, Dean of Worcester.

London, Printed by T. Mabb, for William Sheares, at the Bible in Bedford
street, 166^.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady Frances Courtney, Eldest Daughter to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Cork.
Madam,
THE two great Offices of Magnificence, are to do great things where there is
no desert to merit the performance; and to accept of small returns where there
is no worth to challenge and acceptance.

There is bounty and charity in the one, and humility and meekness in the
other: you have been very free and active toward former in those many and
great favors, you have bestowed upon one that is so unworthy. And now I am
bold to offer you an occasion to exercise the nobleness of your disposition in
the latter, in the Present of this poor acknowledgment unto your Honor in the
Dedication of this small piece of devotion unto you. The love that you bear
unto the service of God, to the promotion whereof it is designed; and the
tender respect you have manifested unto the Author, gives me so good assurance
of a fair admission hereof unto your hands, that I do with confidence cast and
leave all the faults and imperfections thereof at your mercy: It has bin twice
published already, and has found so much of entertainment abroad; as has been
enough to encourage a third Edition; wherein it has received some enlargement,
and though it may yet want growth to render it serviceable to you, yet I hope
it may receive some power from the countenance of your Honorable Patronage to
be instrumental to the Good of others; which is Humbly implored by him, who is
exceedingly obliged to remain,

Madam, Your humble and faithful Servant in Christ Jesus, Tho. Walmestry.

To his Honored, loving and Christian Friends of his Congregation in the
Strand at London, and to other Christian Communicants, as they are concerned:
Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
Dear Christians,
OF all the operations of the life of man, and indeed of the whole Creation,
and of the highest and most perfect creatures that are found in the whole
extent thereof, The most Noble and Excellent, the most Profitable and truly
Delectable, and that which is the Crown and Diadem of their perfection and
being, is the operation of Religion, as that whereby the creature has
Communion with God, which is the most excellent being, and the chiefest good,
and whereby it offers homage and acknowledgement unto his Infinite greatness,
and receives again the influence and enjoyment of his Eternal and Infinite
goodness. And indeed without this the generality of mankind is not only
degraded from its dignity, but deprived of its use; and in the uselesnesse, or
unprofitablenesse of mankind, all the creatures that were made for his comfort
and preservation, are rendered useless and unprofitable: So that the end of
the whole material Creation is in a sort lost, in the want of Religion in
mankind; for if mankind be good for nothing without Religion, if he loose
that action, then all the creatures would become serviceable for the
preservation of them that are good for nothing, and so being ordered unto a
vain end, they would all be as it were vain and unprofitable creatures, which
would lay an unsufferable charge upon Gods wisdom as well as goodness, not
only that he made all men in vain, but that he made the creatures of the world
for a vain end and purpose, (...) (which God forbid.) Now there is no reason in
the world, why mankind should live, or be in the world, if man be not a
worshipper of God, whereby he is to attain the enjoyment of God.

Other Creatures indeed have their several ends inferior unto this (yet in
order unto this in man) some are made for the preservation of others, and all
for the good and preservation of man. But if man be not the servant of his God
here, what is he but fruges consumere not us, an unprofitable plunderer of the
world, and destroyer of the rest of the creatures, whom he wastes and devours
in great multitudes daily, whilst he himself lives to no considerable end,
that may be answerable for so great a ruin.

And if his end be in the Grave and in the Dust, when he has spent a few days
and hours in eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and enduring many calamities
and troubles in this world, it may put all the world to a stand, how it could
stand with the wisdom of God to make such an excellent Creature to no better
end; and as the Apostle tells us of Christians, That if in this life only we
have hope, we are of all men most miserable. So it may be said of all mankind,
that if in this life only, we have our end, we are of all creatures in the
world the most miserable and unprofitable, and the rather, because man has so
much knowledge of his infelicity, and such a stomach unto eternity, which he
cannot upon that supposition upon any terms ever attain unto.

Which is (to me I confess) one of the strongest arguments to prove the
immortality of the soul of man, and the assurance of another and better life
after this; that I know how to draw out of the quiver of humane reason, without
the clearer light of Divine Revelation.

For though it may be said that particular men are made, and are of use for the
good of Community; (which has, it may be, given the occasion unto some
Philosophers that could see no higher to place the end and final operation of
man in politic good, or advantage of humane Society,) Yet when all is done,
if man has no other end but this: that Society, Community and Generality of
mankind, for the service whereof every particular man is supposed to be made,
will prove in the end to be either of no use at all, or of none proportionable
to such a multitude of so many, so excellent beings, if that Generality of
mankind be not appointed for some end higher than it self, which what other
can it be imagined to be, than the holy worship and enjoyment of his God, which
is indeed the great end for which man was made, and for which both all and
every of them have their beings, and their lives, and all the comforts, and
either general or particular advantages in this world that they may be unto
them engagements, encouragements and helps, to promote them in the worship of
him, who is the Fountain of them all: That as they live by his Mercy, they may
live unto his Glory here, and attain unto the enjoyment of his Glory hereafter.

By all this that has been said, we may then see, that it is a very great and
intolerable mistake that has possessed too many in the world, that Religion
and the service of God is a kind of impertinent thing, or at the best but such
as is to be attended upon at our leisure, or when we have nothing else to do;
whereas in truth it is the great reason why we live, or enjoy any comfort, or
blessing here in this world; and of so great weight and concernment, dignity,
profit and advantage, that all other things ought to be ordered unto this, and
are no otherwise allowable, profitable, or advantageous than as they are
conducible hereunto.

And if Religion, and the Worship of God be the most Glorious, Honorable and
Excellent employment, and operation of the life of man, then certainly it does
most properly belong, and best become those that are of the most Honorable
condition amongst among the Children of men, since there is nothing more
decent or corresponde^t, than that the most eminent persons should be exercised
in the most eminent and excellent operations, and ought to be therein patterns
and examples unto others, looking upon every degree of advancement that God
has given them above others in point of Dignity, as an obligation laid upon
them by God, who has bestowed those preheminencies, to be before others in
Devotion and Piety, that they may advance him the more, that has advanced them
so much; according to that resolution of David, a man of the highest degree of
honor in this world, wherewith he dedicates him self and his house unto God, I
will extol thee, O Lord, because thou have lifted me up, and have not made my
foes to triumph over me. Ps. 30.1.

It is a great deformity in the eyes of God of Angels, and of good men, for
people to be high in outward honor and dignity, and to be low in Spiritual
Grace and Piety; and that they, unto whom God in his bounty has given most
leisure and conveniences to serve him, by the freedom (that they enjoy in
their abundance) from worldly necessities and distractions, and upon whom he
lath laid the greatest obligations to honor him, by those honors that he has
bestowed upon them, should take discharge from these very obligations, and turn
their Bonds into Acquitances without the payment of the Debt, whilst they of
all others are too often most negligent of his worship, and least frequent in
the holy assemblies of his people, the attendance whereupon is in a sort their
peculiar calling; and that they should look upon Religion, as a business below
their greatness, which is indeed the Crown and Dignity of their life, so that
it is become (as I have found it to my sorrow) one of the greatest difficulties
of the work of the Ministry to work upon a people that are rich and honorable
in this world, and to persuade them to a constant attendance upon Religious
Duties in the service of God. I have given some blows at this Nail, but it
would not enter as I could wish, but I must not leave it, but tell them again
and again, that they are the people of all others, whom God does expect (as to
be most exemplary in all other virtues) so to be most daily and frequent in his
public worship. The great obligations that I have received from some of them
(which I do with thankfulness acknowledge) must not be turned by me into a
bribe, to make me flatter or spare them in this miscarriage; I must rather
venture the loosing of their favor and their bounty too, than countenance the
ruin and destruction of their souls. The more liberal they have been unto
me, the more plainly and sincerely I must deal with them in this matter,
remembering that excellent expression of St. Ambrose unto his great benefactor,
Theodosius the Emperor, in case wherein he held himself engaged, in
thankfullness unto him as well as duty to God, to deal plainly with him: Tantum
debeo beneficis tuis, ut male de beam pro salute tuaetiam offensionem animi tui
non timere; Iow so much unto your bounty and benificence. That I am bound
thereby to despise your anger, that I may contribute to the salvation of your
soul. This is a sort of thankfulness, that few benefactours will accept of in
this world, because they are greater friends unto their sins, than to
themselves. And upon this account, it may be, I have lost some friends and some
Auditors, but I cannot help it; but must yet say, that I can never be satisfied
with the carriage and conversation of such eminent persons, until I se^ their
pity endeavoring to keep peace with their dignity; Because I know that God
expects it at their hands.

Now as Religion is the most eminent and excellent operation of humane life, so
of all the operations of Religion, those are of the greatest power and
concernment, most prevalent with God, and most profitable to man, which are
offered unto God in the holy consort and heavenly Harmony of the Congregation
of his people. These are they that have the special promise of Christ's
presence, and the special assurance of his blessing and approbation, Math.
18.19, 20. These are they that are graced with the attendance of Angels, 1 Cor.
11.10. Psalm. 68.18, 19.

These are the warlike forces of Gods peoples whereby they offer an holy and
acceptable violence unto God, to obtain blesings at his hands, according to
that of Tertullian in his excellent Book of Apology for the Christians against
the Gentiles, Coim. says he, in coetum, and congregationem ut in deum, quasi
manu a precationibus ambiamus orantes. We gotegether into the Congregation and
Assembly, that we may, as it were, join ourselves into an Army to assault God
with our prayers.

These Religious performances in the Congregation are the Music, wherewith
earth ravisheth heaven, an harmony that charms the very power of God.

These are the Batteries of heaven gates, and that beats down the partition
wall that sin has raised between God and us.

These are the strong and the powerful engines, that pull down mercies from
God upon us.

That repair the ruins of Churches and Nations, that Buoy up sinking States
and Kingdoms.

To conclude, Holy congregations are the Workhouses, and their Religious
operations, are the works where and whereby Fetters may be forged, that may
bind the Devil and all his instruments; nay, golden chains to bind God
himself from proceeding in judgment against his people: Pillars to support the
ruinous fabric of the tottering societies of men, and to keep the world from
ruin and destruction, according to that saying (I take it) of the Jews, Sine
stationibus non consisteret mundus. The world is held up by the Congregations
of Gods people; and if there be any charms to be had, that may raise up our dry
bones of this confused and distracted and demolished Church and Nation, they
must be had, not from Councels or Armies: but from the devout performances of
the congregations of Gods people; which may show you the reason, why I have
been so earnest with you for your presence and assistance in these assemblies,
in these times of our calamity of non conformity. Sure I am, if the Devil
trembles at any thing that can be done upon earth, it is at the gatherings of
holy Congregation, and at the work that they have in hand.

And of all the holy actions of a Congregation, the most heavenly excellent,
the most perfect glorious, and comfortable, is the Holy Solemnity of the Supper
of the Lord, which is as it were the sum and recapitulation of all other
duties.

There the Covenant of Baptism is renewed and confirmed.

There the Word is administered and sealed.

There the Laws of God are owned and subscribed, as the articles on our part in
that treaty of Peace between God and us, which is there presented and managed.

There the promises, the articles on Gods part are made sure, and established
particularly unto every faithful receiver, which are promised in general in the
Holy Book, and the Gospel is brought home unto every devout soul, with all the
blessings thereof; for look what the Gospel promises, that the Sacrament
seals, and delivers unto every faithful receiver in particular.

Their solemn praise and thanksgiving is offered unto God in the thankful
memorial of the death and passion of Christ, which is there presented unto us,
for that great redemption that he has wrought for us.

There the sweet incense of most earnest prayers and holy desires are exhaled
unto God.

And there we have our petitions granted, subscribed and sealed with the blood
of Christ.

There we offer up our selves in homage unto God and Christ, that gave his Son,
and that offered up himself for us.

There we present our Alms and Oblations to the Lord, that we may answer his
Mercy and Compassion unto us, in mercy unto others, and devotion unto him.

There we bind up our selves afresh, and more and more in the holy Communion
of Saints, with the Church triumphant in Heaven, and militant upon Earth.

There we are confirmed in our Union and Communion with Christ, and receive his
body and blood inseparably united to his Divinity, with all the benefits of his
Death and Passion, really and truly applied unto our souls, that by the merit
of his death and sufferings, our sins may be pardoned, that by the merit of
his Righteousness our persons may be justified, that we may be enlightened by
the beams of his heavenly Wisdom, sanctified by the holiness of his heavenly
Graces, refreshed with the cordials of his heavenly Comforts, that we may be
strengthened by the might of his heavenly Virtue that we may be enriched with
the riches of his heavenly Blessings, and that we may be crowned at length, and
saved by his heavenly Glory and Salvation.

And receiving Christ, we have power in him to become the Sons of God, John
1.12. And if Sons, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ: If so
be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. Romans 8.17.

Yea, we have God in him. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. Col. 2.9.

We have the Father in him. For he that acknowledges the Son has the Father
also: and truly our fellowship is with his Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ, 1 John 2.23. 1 John 1.3.

And if we have the Father and the Son, we have the Holy Ghost: For hereby we
know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has giveu us, 1 John 3.24.
So that the whole blessing of the Apostle is upon us in the use of this holy
Sacrament. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.

What shall I say, it is visibile Evangelium, a visible Gospel; and (if you use
it as you ought to do) it will be to you vivum Evangelium, a living Gospel, a
working Gospel, a Gospel in possession, not in your ears, but in your hearts.

Here all mercies are conveyed and sealed, all graces are confirmed and
exercised.

Here repentance is employed and quickened, faith is actuated and strengthened,
hope encouraged, devotion enflamed, charity kindled, peace and concord
established, and if there be a heaven upon earth it is in the holy opperation
of a congregation devoutly celebrating the holy Supper of the Lord.

This is the Holy plaster or love-charm to make us in love with God, and one
another, and to make God also in love with us.

The (...), or sovereign antidote against sin.

The food of life, the viaticum of eternity: The universal medicine for all our
diseases, and an Ark of safety against all our dangers.

And now by this you may know the reason why I have been so earnest with you of
my Congregation, not to neglect the blessed opportunities that God offers you
for your addresses unto him in the use of this holy mystery, and to prepare
your selves thereunto, and why I have offered you this help, which is presented
unto you in this ensuing Treatise.

The truth is, that I find my self under very great obligations unto you, I
have received much of the comfort of my life from you, and the great
tenderness, love, and care that you have showed unto me in my late sickness
(the recovery from which Low under God) in a great measure unto some of you,
adds unto the endearments that are upon my soul toward you, and it lies upon
me to do my endeavor to answer your love, which God in his mercy enable me,
and direct me to do in such a way as may be most for your good and spiritual
advantage, and truly I think I am in the way, for I cannot pitch upon any thing
that can be done more summarily or effectually in order to all your good and
happiness, than to assist you in that great and excellent performance of the
use of the Lords Supper, for since it is a duty of so great perfection, and so
comprehensive of the whole business of a Christian, and so entitling us to the
whole treasure and comfort of the Gospel, if I shall prevail with you to be
good Communicants, I am sure I shall have then prevailed with you to be good
Christians, and then you must needs be both a holy and a happy people.

Now there are three things that I find necessary to be done, that you may
become good Communicants, and use that holy and excellent Ordinance to Gods
honor and your own comfort and salvation.

The first is to convince you of the necessity that lies upon you to make a
frequent and a diligent use of that great means and pledge of your salvation,
and to persuade you that it is your duty to be constant therein, and that you
cannot neglect any opportunity whereby you are called thereunto in the
Congregation of which you are members, unless you have some weighty and
innocent cause to the contrary, without violating both the authority of Christ's
command, and the love of his invitation in the institution of the Lords Supper,
and if you do but consider these obligations that Christ our Lord has laid
upon us, and the great and excellent duties that we there are called to offer
unto God, and the great and manifold graces and mercies that God therein offers
unto us; and remember what I have often said unto you, touching this matter, I
cannot see how you will be excusable, if you shall wilfully without some very
weighty and warrantable impediment abstain from the use of this holy Ordinance
of God; assure your selves, neither pride, nor sloth, nor love unto any sin,
nor wilful ignorance, when the means of instruction is offered and despised;
no, nor servile fear, nor the love of this world will be accepted for
discharges of our attendance upon God in this Christian duty, for all those are
sinful, and therefore are not like to excuse us from duty.

The Second is, that you be directed and persuaded to a due preparation of your
selves unto this holy Sacrament, that we may not eat that bread and drink that
cup of the Lord unworthily, least we bring thereby both great guilt and
judgment upon our souls, and make even that Table to be asuare unto us,
whilst we approach with impenitent, unbelieving uncharitable, untha^kfull,
cold and earthly minds, not discerning the body of Christ.

The Third is, that we be rightly advised and assisted, for the due disposition
of our hearts, and employ meant of our thoughts and affections, in and about the
time of the receiving the holy Supper of the Lord.

You will I hope, find something in this little Manual, that may be
serviceable to you for all these purposes, as in the little Catechism, and some
devotions, that are added unto the former edition thereof, and I do earnestly
desire all of you from the eldest to the youngest, that are capable, to
acquaint themselves with that little Catechism, so as to be able to give an
account thereof, and if they would exercise their humility so far, as to give
me leave to receive it from them, it would be a comfort to me, and I hope no
hurt or dishonor unto them; remember that of our blessed Savior, Except ye
become as little children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18.3.
And that of St. Peter, Be ready to give an answer unto every man that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. 1 Pet. 3.15.

But the first and peculiar business of this Book, was to be helpful unto you
and others, for their more easy and orderly delivery of holy thoughts, about
the time of the receiving of the Lords supper, and after the use thereof.

The work that is done in that holy Solemnity is of that nature, that though it
aims at the greatest unity and fellowship that can be in an holy Congregation,
which are all thereby gathered up close together into Christ; yet it offers
particular and retired employment to thoughts and affections of every
particular receiver: Unto whom (being rightly quali. fied and prepared) it
offers and seals all that mercy and grace which the Gospel promises in general
unto all that are penitent Sinners and true Believers; and requires of every
one a very serious attendance unto private and secret meditation and holy
devotion. There are in the time of that sacred Celebration many pauses and
intermissions of the joint employment of the Congregation, which does, as it
were, separate them unto their several works in their Souls. Whilst some are
Receiving, it is the business of others to be in the holy preparation of
themselves to the Duty; And they that have thus passed through both these
performances, are to be exercised in the admiration of that mercy they have
received, and in the inflaming of their hearts unto the holy praises of the
Lord. Some course has been taken heretofore in some Congregations to prevent
the chasme that might be in the spiritual work, and the falling of thoughts for
want of holy suggestions, by the singing of a Psalm at the very time of the
celebration: But besides that the pattern of our Saviors practice, Mat. 26.30.
leads us to believe that to be a work more proper and fit to succeed than
accompany that holy Business: The very noise of that service, in those that are
at leisure to be employed in it, appears to be too great an Enemy unto that
severe attention and holy sequestration of spirit that is required in those
that are to be employed in Receiving, which does least of all admit of the
offers of distraction. I know no way better to prevent all inconveniences, and
to make up all gaps in that sacred celebration, than to offer some variety of
short Meditations and Devotions, into the hands, and unto the hearts of the
particular Receivers, to be used according to those several works that they
have to do, which may be as so many several notes of the Spiritual Song; which
being composed in their right order and consent, will make up an holy Harmony
in the ears of the Almighty. If any part seem too long, there is nothing
imposed, but every Communicant may satisfy the bents of their own devotions,
and answer the measure of their time and leisure, by marking out some of the
shortest forms unto themselves, especially in that which is to be done about
the time of the receiving; Or, if they have better of their own, or from any
other, they may spare their troubling of themselves with this.

God (I hope) will pardon the infirmities, and his people accept of the poor
endeavors of him

Who is a poor Sinner, and an unworthy Labourer in Gods Vineyard, Tho.
Warmstry.

A Prayer for incitement of affection to attend upon the Lord in the use of the
Lords Supper.
O Most gracious Savior, who have not only vouchsafed in the great Mystery and
work of thy Incarnation to take our humane flesh and blood together with an
humane soul into the unity of thy divine person, that God and man might be one
Christ, that so it might become possible for the immortal God to dye for us,
and for the spiritual God to be wounded and pierced, and to shed his blood for
us, nor yet only have been pleased to give up thy blessed body to be crucified,
and thy precious blood to be shed for our Redemption, but art pleased still to
revive thy death, to cause the flame of thy love to burn, and the streams of
thy blood to run into thy peoples souls, in thy holy Sacrament, at thy Supper,
and have enjoined us by the authority of thy Command, and encouraged us by the
invitation of thy Love, to make use thereof to the Glory of thy Mercy, and the
Eternal good of our Souls, grant unto us, and to all thy people, that in all
holy and awful obedience to thy command, and all thankful and dear observance
of thy Love, we may make an holy and conscionable use of that thy holy
Ordinance, upon all occasions and conveniences that thou offerest us, that we
may neither violate thy great and dreadful Authority, nor despise thy great
and wonderful mercy; let the apprehension of the greatness of thy heavenly
blessings discharge us from al worldly impediments, let us not harken unto the
occasions or pleas of dross and dung, to keep us from the pursuit of thy
heavenly treasures, let no prohibitions from earth prevail against the calls
of heaven, let no civility toward men make us commit sinful iniquity against
thee our God, in the neglect of the Celestial banquet when the King sumons,
us, let not vassalls detain us, let us not commit such Idolatry with any
relation or dignities, as to prefer our respects to them, before our duties to
thee; let us not dare to be so impudent as to bring dust and ashes in
competition with thee, nor prize the vain societies of sinners before the holy
Communion and Fellowship with thee our Savior, with thy Angels, thy heavenly
Stsand thy holy people, in that thy sacred Ordinance, much less, O Lord, let us
not once dare to think of preferring Satan and sin before Christ and heaven,
so as to keep away from those thy great Mysteries and mercies, because we are
loath to part from any beloved sin when a Savior calls; let not our greatest,
and thy vilest enemies prevail with us to keep away, but make us willing to
part with the dearest bosome-corruptions, that we may partake of thy heavenly
benediction; divorce our souls from all iniquity, that we may contract our
selves unto thee in that thy marriage Feast and Solemnity; let not any
blessings that thou have bestowed upon us in earthly things, make us to forget
the dependence we have upon thee for them, or the great need we have of thy
heavenly mercy, neither let any advancements that thou have given us, teach us
to despise thee, or to neglect the pursuit of those celestial dignities which
thou offerest us in Christ Jesus; but the more thou do bless us, the more
make us to serve thee, and the more thou have exalted us, the more make us to
exalt and honor thee, and the higher thou have made us above others in the
dignities of this world, the more let us labor to get above others in
spiritual dignities, and make us always to esteem it our greatest honor to
honor and serve thee, and to enjoy thy favor. Let not idleness or sloth, or
servile fear discourage us, or betray us to the neglect of those great and
inestimable advantage that thou offerest unto us in that thy blessed Ordinance,
for our eternal good; but make us action and diligent, lively and fervent in
our holy addresses unto thee, and to think no pains, no industry too much, to
get heaven and eternal life-Oh, let not our sins, though great and many
affright us from thee, because we are unworthy of thee, but let the humble
sense of them drive us to thee, because we have great need of thee, and the
more and the greater our diseases are, the more earnest speed let us make unto
thee, who art the great Physician of our souls, whose blood is balsome for the
most deadly wounds, who has both the skill and the will to cure and to heal
the most desperate diseases of those that with penitent hearts seek unto thee
for recovery and relief; let al our weaknesses send us unto thee for strength,
let all our wants drive us unto thee for supply, let all our sorrows dispatch
us unto thee for comfort, let all our afflictions hasten us unto thee for
redress, let all our dangers make us fly unto thee for refuge and shelter, and
let the sense of that death and hell which is due unto us for our iniquities
move us to seek life and heaven in thee, which thou offerest unto us by thy
heavenly mercies, who call not those that are perfect or righteous, but
say, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Oh God, we are heavy laden with our unsupportable load and burden of
sins, ready to press us down unto the nethermost hell, if we be not supported
by thy heavenly goodness; make us to labor under this load with a contrite and
broken spirit, that we may find eternal rest in thee. Let me not be so foolish
as to seek excuses to divert me from thee, who art the sum of all my
felicity, neither suffer me to hearken unto any, that may put me off, or delay
me from thee, But make me watchful against all impediments, and prevident
beforehand for all advantages that may promote and expedite my holy addresses
unto thee at thy heavenly Table, and active in the use of all other means of my
spiritual good, and in all offices of thy Divine Worship, whereby I may glorify
thee, or benefit my soul, or maintain and further the enjoyment of an holy
communion with thee and thy faithful people.

Make me to come unto thee, as the hungry unto food:

As the thirsty unto the waters:

As the sick unto the Physician:

As a poor drowning soul into the ark of thy mercy:

As a weather-beaten Shipwreck passenger into a far and a sase harbor:

As a poor needy wretch unto a rich treasure:

And be thou all in all unto me, let me seek thee earnestly, and receive me
graciously, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Psalm. 42.1. etc. As the Heart pants after the water Brooks, so longs my
soul after thee O God.

My Soul is a thirst for God, even for the living God; Oh, when shall I come
and appear before God.

Psalm. 63.1. etc. Oh God, thou art my God early will I seek thee.

My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee, in a barren and
dry land where no water is.

Thus have I looked for thee in holiness, that I might behold thy power and
glory, For thy loving kindness is better than the life it self, my lips shall
praise thee.

As long as I live will I magnify thee on this manner, and lift up my hands in
thy name.

My Soul shall be satisfied as with marow and fatness, when my mouth praises
thee with joyful lips.

A Prayer for the preparation to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
OH my God, thou art a great God, and I am a poor inconsiderable wretch, a
poor vile lump of dust and clay, and thou art a Glorious God, incomprehensible
in thy excellency and perfection; The Angels are amazed at the brightness of
thy glory; The Devils tremble at the dreadfulness of thy Majesty, and what am
I, that I should approach unto thee.

Oh my God, Thou art a holy God, and of purer eyes than to behold iniquity;
Thou can haveno communion with Belial; thou can have no fellowship with
unrighteousness.

And I am a base, wretched, unholy, unthankful sinner, overspread from top to
toe, soul and body, with a leprosy of sin, and my very righteousness are as
filthy rags; Thy Angels thou chargedst with folly, and the Stars are not pure
in thy sight, and how shall I then appear before thee, or draw near unto thee!

Oh my God thou art all light, and I am a cloud of darkness; Thou art a wise
God, and I am a foolish and simple creature, so blind, that I can neither bear
thy light, nor discover my own blindeness, as I ought to do, and how then shall
my darkness endure the beams of thy heavenly light, and not be confounded at
thy unsupportable brightness.

Oh my God, I am a poor, a weak, feeble worm, trodden under foot, and trampled
and bruised in the dirt and mire of corruption, by mine own sins and
wickednesses, and thou art a strong, a powerful, and an Almighty God, that
artable with a look of thine to frown me into no, thing, and into hell, that
art able with one thought of thine, to think me to destruction, and how then
dare my weakness and nothingnesse approach unto thy Grace and invisible
strength, and not expect to be crushed into nothing, and undone?

And yet, O Lord, now thou call me and I am about to come unto thee, and
what shall I say or do, O God, how am I perplexed with several sears, if I
come not when thou call, I am in danger to provoke thy wrath by dispising
thy Authority, and if I come, I may seem to be in danger to incense thine
anger, by offending against thy Majesty; I may justly he afraid to come by
reason of my sin, and yet, O Lord, if I forbear to come, this will increase my
sin: And in so great a strait that I am in, what can thy poor sinful creature
do? Oh my God, I am undone, and know not what to do, unles thou help me? To
thee therefore I come, O Lord, desiring to receive thy heavenly Council and
advice, that I may obey thy authority, that I may not fail of thy mercy Othou
that have called me unto thee; let thy compassion pity my vileness; let thy
mercy pardon my sinfulness; let thy grace cleanse my filthiness; let thy
wisdom enlighten my darkness; let thy strength support my weakness.

Pardon me by thy mercy, that I may receive thy grace, and fit me by thy grace,
that I may receive thy mercy: Let thy spirit be thy holy Harbinger to provide
entertainment for thy Son, and my heavenly Lord Christ Jesus in my soul, that
he may come and make it the Sanctuary of his holiness.

Adorn me O God, with the wedding garment of the righteousness of thy Son,
and the holiness of thy spirit, that all my nakedness may be covered, and my
great deformities may be hid from thine eyes.

Purge away all the polutions of my heart and life, that thou may not be
offended at me, nor in ty displeasure cast me out. Fill me with heavenly
desires toward my Lord Jesus; with holy meditations of the wonders of thy love;
with holy devotions to the excellency of thy glory. Send a beam of thy light
from heaven into my heart, that I may be illuminated thereby to the right
understanding of those great mercies thou offerest unto me, veiled with the
cloud of thy divine mysteries, and that I may understand my Saviors heavenly
language in the Sacrament, both in the mysterious signs what he speaks in them,
and in the mysterious words what he speaks of them; That I may know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, which is eternal life:
That I may know the power of his sufferings: And that I may be able to
comprehend what is the breadth, and the length, and the depth, and the height,
and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge: That I may know them
so as to be enflamed by them. Oh let thy heavenly beams be contracted upon my
heart, and shine upon it through the burning glass of thy love in this
Sacrament: That all the light may burn, and that all my knowledge of thee and
of thy mysteries, may be turned into love unto thee, for they only know thee
indeed that love thee; For if any man love God he knows God, or rather is
known of him.

And as thy holy Prophet, when he was exalted into a sight of thy Majesty, was
there by stricken down into an humble sense of his own vileness and iniquity,
as with a flash of thy heavenly lightening, bringing with it a thunder bolt of
humiliation, that broke his heart as it were in pieces, and made that
lamentation of his gush out at a breach of his wounded soul Woe is me for I am
undone, for I am a man of unclean lips and dwell among a people of unclean
lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts: So let the sight of
thy Glory cast me down into a sense of mine own vileness and iniquity, strike
an holy terror into my soul, and lay me in the dust, at the apprehension of my
sins: send a thunderbolt of grace from heaven, and dash my heart in pieces with
contrition for mine offenses, that I may be undone in my self, that so I may be
made up again in thee, smite the rock of my hard heart with the rod of thy holy
fear, that the water of repentance may flow out, even that precious heart wate
of penitent tears and Godly sorrow for all my transgressions: Make me to sow in
tears, that I may reap in joy, and let the apprehension of thy love to me, and
the heat of my love to thee and my Jesus, imprint he impression of his wounds
upon my soul, that they may wound me first and then heal me, and let that love
affect me with a perfect hatred against sin, and against my self for sin; for
my sin against thee, my great, my glorious, my gracious God, my Maker, my
Savior and the God of all my mercies, against those sins of mine that have
been the Traitors, and Murderers of my Dear Savior, and let the sense of thy
pardon of my great and manifold sins would me yet the more for them, make me to
mourn more for pardoned sin, than for sin as exposing unto judgment; Oh, let
thy mercy soften me more than thy wrath, and make me out of love with all
things that engage, or move me into sin; out of love with the world, with the
flesh, and with my self, with my own corrupt and sinful heart, and
inclinations that have been so often the factours and the snares of Satan to
my soul, that so I may be set free from all earthly affections, and fixed upon
thee, and upon things that are above, and give up my heart and my life wholly to
serve and glorify thee, my God, in a holy and a heavenly conversation, which is
the true state of Conversion; help me to confess my sins with sorrow and to
reform with joy, and to make restitution where I have done wrong, as thou
give opportunity and ability, and where either are wanting, let not will be
wanting, nor thy acceptance be wanting unto my sincere desires and endeavors;
Help me to accuse my self, that thou may acquit me to judge and condemn my
self, that thou may absolve me, help me to exercise an holy revenge upon my
self, that thou may spare me; help me to endeavor a redress of all scandals
that I have given and to reduce those whom I have seduced, or with whom I have
complied in any evil way; and seal unto me thy pardon, in the blood of Christ,
by the inward testimony of thy sanctifying spirit, and let the reformation of
mylife be an evidence unto me of the forgiveness of my sins, which is the
authentic seal of thy Spirit, giving the impression of thine own Image.

Grant me a lively and saving faith to believe thy Gospel and all thy Heavenly
truths that thou have revealed in thy holy Word, and to subdue and bring down
all mine own thoughts, apprehensions, imaginations and affections thereunto,
that I may trust in the Lord with all mine heart and not lean unto mine own
understanding. Convince me, O Lord, of that great article of faith, that my
Jesus is thy Christ, and the Son of the living God, which is the rock upon
which thou buildest thy Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it, that I may not believe it, by relation only from men, but by revelation
from thee, being wrought unto a full persuasion thereof, by the arguments of
thy spirit, by the holy Prophecies that went before of him in the Old
Testament, which were all fulfilled in him in the New, by the wonderful
miracles which he did by the descending of the Holy Ghost upon him in the
visible form of a Dove, by the voice from Heaven, declaring him to be thy well
beloved Son in whom thou art well pleased, which voice was sent from thy
heavenly Throne after his baptism, and at his tranfiguation, by the holiness
of his life, the excellency of his Doctrine; by the wonderful sending of his
Holy Spirit upon his Disciples, in the likeness of fiery tongues, and those
excellent and wonderful gifts that were bestowed upon them; by the dreadful
judgment that fell upon the Jews for Crucifying him, and reviling the Gospel;
by the blood of thy victorious Martyrs, who sealed thy heavenly truth by their
constancy in their sufferings and cruel deaths, which they cheerfully under
went for the Testimony thereof, and by the wonderful ways whereby thou have
carried on and maintained thy Church and Gospel against all the wisdom and
power of the world that was against it. Convince my Soul, O Lord, of that great
truth by these arguments, and by the experiment of the work of thy Grace in my
Soul, that I may firmly believe it, and rely upon it for my falvation, and that
I may believe infallibly that this my Savior by his death and passion has
satisfied for my sins, that he has justified me by his righteousness, and that
by his mediation he prevails with thee for obtaining of spiritual blessings,
and all mercies needful for me, and for the bring home of the fruit and benefit
of that redemption which he has wrought for me, unto me, bring a penitent
sinner.

Give me faith to lay hold upon the Sacramental promise, that I may come with a
full and assured expectati. on to receive thy Sons body crucified, and his
blood shed upon the Cross for my sins with all the benefits of his death and
passion, and of that great Redemption he has wrought for me, truly and really
conveyed and applied and sealed to my soul in that thy holy Ordinance; Let me
take thy heavenly mysteries, as thine earnest, to oblidge me to serve thee, and
as thy pledges to assure me of thy love unto me, and of my Interest in thy
Christ and my Jesus, unto my salvation.

And let my Faith work by Love, that in the sense of thy great goodness,
offered and given unto me in Christ Jesus-I may love thee and thy Christ above
all, and with all my heart and soul, and mind and strength. Let me think
nothing too much to do or suffer for the, who did not think it too much to
give thy son thy beloved son to suffer and die for me.

Inflame me with holy love unto all people that I may give up my self to them,
to serve them in love; make me to own them in all their concernments, to pity
them in all their miseries; to be ready to relive them in all their wants, to
comfort them in all their distresses, to counsel them in all their perplexity,
to pardon all their miscarriages toward me, to bear their infirmities to study
their good, to love brotherly fellowship, to delight in thy Sts. and holy ones,
and to walk comfortably and cheerfully together with them in thy holy worship
and service: Let not any poisoned dart of rancour, or envy, or malice, or heart
burning toward any, rankle or feaster my soul. But make us al up more and more
into the mistical body of thy Son, that we may keep the unity fo the spirit, in
the bond of peace, that we may be all one in thee, as thou and thy Son Christ
Jesus are one. And let the Peace of God, which passes all nnderstanding rule
in our hearts, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Give me a thankful sense and sweet relish of thy great mercy in that great
redemption thou have wrought for my soul, by thy blesed Son. That I may have an
high esteem of thy love, in giving thy son for me to be a sacrifice for my sins
upon the Cross; and in giving him unto me to be the nourishment and life of my
soul in the Sacrament: Oh make me to receive him from thee there with a
grateful soul; and to return thee the devout and thankful homage of my
heart: Strike me into an holy amazment at the wonders of thy great mercy toward
me in him; to pour out my soul in the praises of thy name; to embrace thee in
thy Christ and my Jesus, with all the dearest affections of my heart; and to
devote and consecrate my self unto thee to be a sacrifice of praise unto thee,
in the whole course of my life and conversation, and to rejoice in the mercy
and the loving kindness of my God.

Affect me with an awful Reverence toward the greatness of thy Majesty, with
who^ I there come to renew my Covenant, toward the excellency of thy son,
whom I come to receive into my soul.

Toward the holiness of thy spirit, by whom I come there to be established in my
union and Communion with Christ and his Church.

And enable me to discern the body of the Lord Jesus; put me into an holy
ecstasy of heavenly longing after Christ: And whilst he descends unto me in
that holy reflection, let me ascend unto him in heavenly devotion: Let not my
soul be satisfied with any thing but my Jesus: Give me thy Christ, O God, and
take what thou will from me, give me my Jesus, and do what thou will unto me,
for in him I shall be sure of thy tender love, and let that love do what it
will: Thou bidst me love thee, and do what I will; and I say unto thee love me,
and do what thou will; wound me, chasten me, kill me, so that thou love me: I
ask nothing of thee, but thy Christ and thy Love.

Oh my God, I am undone, I am lost for ever, I am a firebrand of hell, it had
been better for me that I had been a Toad, a Serpent, a Worm, a dead clod of
clay, that I had never lived, that I had never been conceived or born, if thou
should withold my Jesus from me.

But if I have him, I have thee, and heaven, and Angels, and the world, and
life, and all: Oh my God, give me my Jesus, and give thy self unto me in him,
and make me to give my self unto thee in him.

And oh make room for thy Christ in my Soul; turn out the world, and the
flesh, and sin, turn me out of my self, that there may be room for my Jesus,
that my heart may be as a large upper-room furnished for my heavenly Savior to
keep his Passover in my Soul.

Let it be a large room for my great Jesus; let my heart contain him, for whom
the whole world is too little, extend the grasp of my affections, O God, make
me unsatiable in an holy covetousness after Christ, and the more I taste of
him, the more I enjoy him, the more make meto desire him.

And let my heart be an upper-room, not an Earthly, but an Heavenly mind: For
the entertainment of my heavenly Jesus, for he can dwell no where but in an
heavenly place: Yea, let his presence in my heart, turn my heart into heaven;
for it is his presence that makes heaven; and this is the heaven of heavens it
self. Oh let all earthly things be vile unto me; now that I look for my
heavenly Jesus.

Give me an holy pride, an holy ambition and greatness of spirit, that I may
look upon all the things of this world, as unworthy of my thoughts, since my
Jesus is pleased to think upon me, to call for my heart, and to come unto me.

Oh let my soul be a well furnished room, furnished with all the furniture of
heavenly love, and of all thy heavenly Graces, for the entertainment of my
Glorious Jesus.

Yet withal, give me an humble heart, that I may put no trust at all in my
self, or in any thing that is in me, or that can be, or has been performed by
me: But cast me down into an holy despair of my self, and of all
righteousness, Wisdom, Strength, or Worthiness, or comfort in my self; that
I may trample my self as filthy sinful dung, under my feet before thee; and
cast my self down at the feet of thy mercy; relying only upon thy goodness and
thy Christ for my acceptance, and for my salvation.

Help me O God in the examination, and in the reformation of my sins.

Help me in the trial and in the exercise of thy graces, that knowledge may be
saving, and faith found, and repentance true, and love unfeigned, and
thankfulness sincere, and reverence awful, and desire enflamed, and my soul
truly humbled. That thou may exalt me in the greatness of thy mercy, and
feed my soul with the riches of thy goodness, and the delicates of thy heavenly
joys, that I may return refreshed with thy favor, and enlightened, and
beutified with thy truth and holiness like Moses out of the Mount; and
strengthened with the might of thy strength from the holy table of thy Son.
Through the same, thy dear Son and our blessed Savior, our Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer when the Bread and Wine is brought to the Table.
OH most Glorious God; we praise thee, we bless thee, we glorify thy sacred
name, and here prostrate in our souls and bodies before thee; we desire to
present unto thee the homage of our thankful hearts for thy great and
wonderful mercy, that thou have been pleased to show unto us miserable
sinners, that lay in the Jaws of hell, under the sentence of condemnation, to
eternal death for our sins; in sending thy dearly beloved, and only begotten
Son Christ Jesus, to become man for us: and to offer up his precious Body and
Blood upon the Cross to be a Sacrifice unto thee for our sins, where by he
has made an eternal (...) to practice it diligently to the benefit of my Soul,
and to the glory and honor of thy holy Name. Prepare my heart for all holy
approaches unto thy holy Table for the time to come; Make me frequent and
humble, sincere and fervent in prayer; Help we to follow and imitate all good
patterns, and holy examples which thou set before me in thy Son and in thy
Saints, and preserve me from the contagion of all evil society; Make me an
ensample of all virtue unto others, make me daily and hourly to grow in grace,
and forgetting those things that are behind, to press toward the mark, for
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; making it my great and
only business to serve thee my God, and to set forward my self and others
unto salvation. Help me to give all diligence to make my Calling and Election
sure, and to pass my so journing here in fear; Keep me within the bounds of
that Calling to which thou have called me, that I may walk quietly, obediently,
industriously, chearefully, and conscionably therein; and as much as in me
lies, live peaceably with all men; Suffer me not to give offense or scandal
unto any, by the uncharitable or imprudent use of that liberty thou have given
me; but grant unto me and all that have now received with me, and to all that
name the name of the Lord Jesus, that we may depart from iniquity, and walk in
love and meekness, in all humility and righteousness and holiness before
thee; That we may be blameless and harmless as the children of God; without
rebuke in the midst of this untoward and perverse generation. Help me and all
of us to profit under all thy dispensations, to be patient and confident in
adversity, to be humble and temperate, and thankful and merciful in prosperity;
and in whatsoever state we are, therewith to be content. Make us holy to thee,
obedient to Magistrates, and all those whom thou have set over us, regardfull
of thy Ministers, esteeming them very highly for their works sake;
conscionably respectfull to all our relations: Make us just, and loving, and
peaceable, and comfortable toward one another and all thy people, sober and
chaste, and undefiled in our selves: Make us always mindful of thy presence
with us wheresoever we are, or whatsoever we do; and to walk before thee as it
becomes us in thy sight, and as having to do with thee our God in all things:
Keep us always in the sense of our frailty, and of our uncertain condition
and continuance in this world, that we may live every day as if it were to be
our last, and to labor to make our accounts even with thee daily; Make us to
be often thinking upon the hour of death, the day of judgment, the pains of
Hell, and the joys of Heaven, and let the dread and aw of eternity be ever
upon our Souls. Teach us how to carry our selves prudently and innocently in
these dangerous times, that we may be wise as serpents, and harmless as Doves;
and direct us in all the changes that are or shall be upon us in this world, to
walk inoffensively in thy presence, and herein to exercise our selves, to have
always a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward man. Suffer us
neither through sinful fears to desert our duties, or to comply with
wickedness, or to forsake thy righteousness; or yet imprudently, rashly or
unadvisedly to cast our selves into any unnecessary dingers; and whenever
through our frailty we shall fall into any sin (as what man is he that sins
not,) Oh our God, let us not rest in sin, nor perish in our iniquities; but be
thou always ready with thy mercy and grace to raise us up again, and to give
us repentance unto Salvation. Grant all these blessings to me and all thy
people: And make us all the better for ever, for this our approach unto thee
this day; Through that thy blessed Son, whom thou have given us to be our
Savior, Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer of Intercession for the sick, to be used by those that are with him,
or that come to visit him.
OH Eternal God and our most Gracious Father in Christ Jesus; That art the God
of health, and the God of life, and the God of all mercy and compassion; in thy
hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind: thou
woundest, and thou healest, thou bring to the grave, and bring back
again, thou turnest man to destruction, and again thou say? Come again yo
children of men, thou do whatsoever pleases thee, in Heaven and Earth, and
in things under the Earth: And as for us, O Lord, we are all the works of thy
hand; and we are in thy hands at the clay in the hands of the Potter, that thou
may do with us whatsoever pleases thee.

Whilst thou preservest us we live, and when thou take away our breath we die,
and turn again unto our dust, and then all our thoughts perish, and after death
comes Judgment, wherein we must render an account unto thee our God, for the
whole course of our lives and conversation, and receive from thee, according to
that which we have done in the body, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil. Have mercy, O Lord, have mercy, we beseech thee, upon us all thy poor,
weak, frail, sinful and mortal creatures, give us not up unto utter ruin
and destruction, but grant us thy grace, that we may so walk before thee, both
in sickness and in health, that we may have comfort in our deaths, and look
down we humbly beseech thee, with the eyes of thy tender pity and compassion
upon this thy servant, that is here before thee, under the visitation of thy
heavenly hand; it is thou that have wounded him and it is thou only, that
can heal him, it is thou that have brought him down, and it is thou only
that can raise him up: and we know, Oh Lord, that thou art able to do all
things, all means will be helpless without thee and thy blessing. But thou art
able to make the weakest means to become beneficial unto thy people, and to
help them by thine own power and goodness in all they want, and in all the
failings of outward help. Thy word O God, is an al sufficient remedy. There is
no disease so desperate, but thou can Cure it, there is no wound so deadly,
but thou can heal it, thou were able to raise the Rulers Daughter from the
bed, when she was in the gripes of death: The Widows son from the beer,
when he was upon his journey to the grave: thou were able to raise Lazarus out
of the Grave when he had bin four days dead and buried. And thou art the same
God still, the same in power, and the same in mercy: thou have as open an Ear,
and as compassionate a heart, and as able a hand to hear and pity, and help
thy poor people, as ever thou had: When Physicians can do nothing, and when
medicines can do nothing, and when Angels can do nothing, and when all the
creatures are at a stand, and when the strength of nature fails; yet there is
help and comfort in thee, and thou make the extremities of thy people, the
opportunities of thy power and goodness. To thee therefore, O Lord, we come,
beseeching thee to glorify the power of thy mercy in restoring this thy servant
to his former health and strength, if it be thy blessed will, that he may live
to praise and glorify thy name; To amend his life, to increase in knowledge
and grace, to do good amongst thy people, to make his calling and election more
and more sure unto himself, against his departure out of this world, and that
he may have strength of Body; and vigorous soundness of his faculties and
powers to come before thee in the holy Assemblies of thy people, and to enjoy
the benefit of thy heavenly and public ordinance. Do it, Lord, if it be thy
blessed will, speak but the word, and thy servant shall be whole: Direct him
unto the use of those means, which thou know to be most expedient, and let
thy blessing be above all means unto him. Or if thou have otherwise determined
in thy wisdom, and if it be thy heavenly pleasure, by this sickness, to put a
period unto the days of this his earthly pilgrimage, O Lord, thy heavenly will
be done, but let it be done in great mercy and compassion: Do nothing in wrath,
nothing in indignation, for Christ Jesus his sake: Sanctify this thy visitation
unto thy servant, that it may be a means to prepare him for thy kingdom; let
the sickness of his Body, be unto the health of his soul, that whether he
live, he may live unto the Lord, and whether he dye, he may dye unto the Lord;
and whether he live or dye, he may be the Lords: Help him to improve that time
that is yet remaining unto him, in this world in the best manner, to thy glory
and to his eternal good, make him seriously to mind the things that belong
unto his everlasting peace, and so to make up his accounts with thee, that he
may stand with joy and comfort before the Tribunal of thy Son Christ Jesus,
and receive the blessed sentence of everlasting life and salvation, give him a
saving sight and sense of his sins, that he may mourn for them, from the
bottom of his heart; and offer unto thee the sacrifice of a broken and contrite
spirit, which thou O God, wilt not despise; grant him that godly sorrow, that
works Repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of, let nothing be so
grievous unto him, as that he has sinned against thee, his merciful and
gracious God; the God of his life, and of his being, and of all the blessings
and comforts that ever he has enjoyed. The God that did not spare thine own
Son, but gave him up to dye for him, enable him to confess his sins unto
thee, that he may mouth for his sins and find pardon from thee: affect him
with a perfect hatred against sin, that he may hate it above death and hell it
self. Help him to loath himself, for all those offenses, that he has committed
against thee: make him vile in his own eyes, that he may be dear and precious
in thy sight, and give him a true love unto thy Laws, and Commandments, that
it may be the joy of his heart to do thy heavenly will in all things, and let
the sense and horror of the corruptions of his nature and the wickedness of
his life, not drive him from thee, but let it drive him unto thee, that he may
fly for refuge into the bosom of that rich mercy, that thou have opened unto
him in the Lord Jesus Christ. Help him to reform every thing that is amiss;
and to give himself up wholly unto thee, to seek thy glory, and to do thy
heavenly will in all things, purge and cleanse his soul from all evil
thoughts, ungodly affections, distempered passions, from all sinful
inclinations whatsoever, and fill him full of holy thoughts, of heavenly
meditations, devour affections, and good inclinations toward thee his God; wean
him from the world, and from all the vanities thereof, and from all the sinful
pleasures of the flesh, that he may set his affections wholly upon thee, and
upon things that are above, where Christ Jesus sits at thy right hand: seal
unto him his pardon in the blood of thy Son, by the inward testimony and grace
of thy spirit, let thy spirit of adoption cry Abba father in his heart,
strengthen his faith unto an holy and comfortable assurance of his interest in
Christ crucified, and in all thy mercies toward thy people in him; make him to
know that though he is a miserable sinner in himself; yet the Death and Passion
of thy Son has satisfied thy Justice for all his iniquities: and that, though
he has no righteousness of his own to plead unto thee, yet the righteousness
of thy Son is his Justification in thy sight.

Oh Transcribe the promises of thy holy Gospel upon the Table of his heart,
that they may be unto him the sure evidence of his eternal inheritance in
heaven. Oh let the Mediation and Intercession of thy Son Christ Jesus at thy
right hand, prevail with thee for all those mercies and graces and heavenly
blessings that are needful for him. And let the sense of thy great mercies
toward him, and of thy great love unto him in the Lord Jesus his Savior,
inflame his soul with an holy and fervent love unto thee, that he may love thee
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, and with
all his strength, that he may love thee above his life, and above his soul, and
that he may be willing to part with all that is dear unto him for thee, that
nothing may be dear unto him in respect of thee.

That he may love thee in all thy perfections, in all thy mercies, and all thy
works, in all thy dispensations, in all thy corrections, that thou art pleased
to lay upon him. Help him to discover thy tender mercy and Fatherly loving
kindness unto his Soul, shining forth unto him through all the clouds of that
sickness and affliction, that is or shall be upon him from thy hand, and to
taste thy sweetness in all the bitterness of his trouble, give him some
comfortable relishes of those incomprehensible joys and delights that are in
thee, that as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so his soul may long and
thirst, and faint, and languish after thee, make him sick of love toward thee,
which is the only true health of his Soul. Blessed God, furnish thy servant
with true Christian love and charity to all thy people for thy sake. Help him
to forgive all that have wronged him, to love his enemies, to bless them that
curse him, to do good to them that hate him, to pray for them that
despightfully use him, and persecute him. Give him reconciled affections to all
with whom he has had any difference, make him desirous to do good unto all,
and as much as in him lies, to live peaceably with all men: Direct him and
incline him readily and willingly to seek reconciliation, and to make
satisfaction in case he has done wrong, or given any just cause of offense
unto any. Help him to settle his estate according to the rules of prudence,
righteousness and charity, to show mercy to the poor, as thou enablest him, and
to order all his affairs, with discretion. Bind him up in the Communion of thy
Church and in the fellowship of a spiritual love, and of a heavenly life with
thy people, give him tender affections toward thy Church, and to those that
are thine in faith and holiness, that he may be known to be thy disciple, by
his love unto thy people. Give him patience to submit unto thy chastisements,
that he may bear them with a christian mind, make him with a child like
affection to accept of thy correction, and to kiss every rod, wherewith thou
smitest him for his good: give him an heart wholly resigned up unto to thy
heavenly pleasure, that he may refer himself entirely unto thee, to choose for
him, and to deal with him, as thou know to be most expedient, that he may
entrust thee as his merciful father, reconciled to him in Christ, and as the
alwise and all sufficient God with his life and soul, and all his happiness,
and with all his relations and concernments. And deal with him in all things
tenderly and graciously, according to those bowels of compassion that thou
bear to thy people. Be thou health unto him in all his sickness, strength
unto him in all his weakness, comfort unto him in all his distress, life unto
him in death it self: stand by him in all temptations and trials, to keep him
from fainting, and to give him the victory in Christ Jesus, that he may obtain
the Crown of thy heavenly glory. Bind up Satan and all his spiritual enemies,
that they may not be able to hurt him: make thou all his bed in his sickness,
and as outward strength decays, so let spiritual strength continually
increase in him, as outward comforts fade and vanish, let spiritual comforts
appear, and be cleared up more and more unto him; and when thou shall be
pleased to call him out of this wretch'd world, make him willingly and
cheerfuly to yield him self up into thy hands, and send thine holy angels with
a commission of mercy from thy mercy-seat to translate his soul to thy heavenly
glory through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.

A Prayer to be used when we hear a Passing Bell Toll, or have any other notice
of a Soul ready to depart.
OH Merciful God, Thou Father of all pity and compassion, open the bowels of
thy Tender mercy unto this Soul, that seems now ready to depart, and to be now
entering into the Ocean of Eternity: Thou know (O Lord) the state and
condition thereof, and how it is disposed, and prepared for a dissolution. O
Lord take it not out of this world until thou have weaned it from the world,
that it may have a free passage through thy mercy unto thy eternal mansions of
Blessed nesse. If thou know it may stand with thy Glory, and may make for
his salvation, bring it back from this gate of Death, and let it continue in
the body, and restore this person, yet if it be thy blessed will, unto health
and strength; or if thou shall be pleased to take this soul hence, o Lord, wash
it clean from iniquity by the blood of Christ, and adorn it with the robe of
his perfect righteousness, and give it the benefit of the Intercession of thy
Son: Quicken repentance, strengthen Faith, raise up in it an holy flame of
heavenly love to thee, that may carry it up as a sacrifice to the throne of thy
Glory; Bind it up in the holy peace and Communion of thy Church, by the bond
of holy love and Christian charity to all thy people; Grant patience and
strength, and spiritual comfort to convey it safe through the pangs and
torments of dissolution; Let not the Enemy have any power to hurt it, but take
it into thy keeping, and into the guard of thy grace and mercy. Bind up Satan
and all spiritual adversaries, and send thine Angels with a commission of Mercy
to convey this Soul unto the habitation of thy Glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

[Or this.]

OGracious God, be with this person in the holy operations of thy grace, and in
the yearning of thy tenderest mercies, in the dreadful moment when the Soul
shall depart from the body; and conduct this thy dying creature through the
valley of the shadow of death, unto the Land of everlasting life; through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

[Or this]

IN the midst of life we be in death; of whom may we seek for succor, but of
thee O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased: Yet O Lord, most Holy, O
God most mighty, O Holy and merciful Savior, remember the work of thy hands,
and the purchase of thy blood; give not up this thy departing Creature unto the
bitter pain of eternal Death: Lord remember now thy great mercy, and thy Bloody
Sufferings and death, and let thy Bowels, melt in tender compassion toward
this person in this great extremity: Shut up Hell and open Heaven: O Lord
destroy not, Oh Lord forsake not; O Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy
and merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer not this person
at the last hour for any pains of death to fall from thee, Amen.

A Prayer for the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, proper for
all tmes.
OH most Gracious God, who do Rule and Govern all things, who increasest the
Nations and destroyest them, who enlargest them again, look down I beseech
thee, with the eye of thy tender pity and compassion, upon these poor,
miserable and sinful Kingdoms, that have now lain for these many years under
the load of thy heavy displeasure against them for their sins, and are at this
time in the mouth of so great ruin and destruction, if we be not relieved by
thy heavenly mercy.

O Lord, we must all needs confess that our iniquities have been and are still
very great against thee, and in the very midst of the flames of thine
indignation against us, we have multiplied our rebellions against thee our God,
as if we would even bid defiance unto thine anger, and dare thee to do thy
worst against us.

And that blood that bath been wickedly shed in these Nations, cries aloud for
vengeance against us, so that it were most just in thee to make the ruins of
these three Kingdoms, the standing monuments of thy displeasure against sin,
unto all the rest of the Nations of the world; But I humbly beseech thy divine
Majesty to pity a poor perishing people. Hear not, O Lord, the cry of our
sins, neither hear the cry of that blood, that cries for vengeance, but hear
the cry of that blood that cries for mercy, even of the blood of thine own dear
Son Christ Jesus, That speaks better things than the blood of Abel; and hear
the Cries and the Prayers of thy people that call upon thee for Mercy O Lord
hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord humble and convert us and these whole Nations unto
thee: O let it be thy pleasure to deliver us, make have, O God, to help us;
help us, O God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy name? Oh deliver us, and
be merciful to our sins, for thy name sake; leave us not to become a prey unto
our own iniquities, nor to the wicked interests of men. But be thou pleased so
to overruled all the public motions and consultations, and all the confusions
and distactions that are upon us, or shall befall us, that whatsoever men shall
contrive or design, that whatsoever they shall act or enterprise, all things
may be drawn in by thy wisdom, and thy providence to the advancement of thy
glory, of the Gospel and Kingdom of thy son amongst us; to the restoring of a
righteous and lawful Government in the state of an holy and orderly discipline
and ministry in the Church, and to the establishment of all these nations in
holiness and truth, in righteousness and peace, and prosperity before thee:
and help us, O God, without the shedding of any more innocent blood, and
without any more bloody confusions and distractions, if it be thy blessed will,
grant this. O Lord, though we be most unworthy, for the worthiness and merit
of thy dear son and our only Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer for the restoring of our afflicted Sovereign.
O Most Gracious and Glorious God, Thou King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who
have established and ordained Kings and Princes in the world; to be thy
substitutes in the Rule and Government of thy people. As thou have appointed
thine Ordinances of Government for the good and safety of thy people: So we
beseech thee, be thou the Protector of thine own ordinances, and therein of
thy peoples safety, and make them at length to know their own happiness, and to
acknowledge and embrace that fatherly care that thou have taken of them, that
they may no more take thy Castle for a Prison, nor the bounds of their safety
for a restraint of their liberty; vindicate, o Lord, those two great trusts
that thou have established for the good of thy people in the world, from those
high presumptions and from that Sedition and Schism, whereby they have been
violated so haniously in the world and in these Nations, make the people
sensible now at length both of the folly and iniquity of their rebellions, and
return them to obedience, that they may be received to thy favor. And open we
beseech thee, the bowels of thy compassion to our afflicted Sovereign, that
has suffered so long under the cloud of our sins, and his own miseries.
Remember O Lord, our David, and all his troubles, remember all the holy Vows
and resolutions of his soul, for the establishment of thy truth, and the
advancement of thy worship; remember his patience and humility under those
great trials, that thou have been pleased to send upon him. Remember his
constancy in adhearance unto thy truth, against all the temptations wherewith
he has been assaulted in that time of his distres, remember O God, the care
that he has taken of thy Church and of thy Gospel, and of the spiritual
concernments of thy peoples souls, and how willing he has been rather to
undergo the continuance of his own trouble and afflictions, than to purchase
his release, by betraying thy Truth, by compliance with Roman superstition, or
permitting the corruption of the true Religion in this Nation, remember him, O
Lord, we beseech thee for good, and cause thou his people to remember these
things, and the great offense that they have committed against him, and the
great obligations that are upon them toward him, by thy Laws; and the Laws and
sacred Oaths of this Nation, in point of recompense for those great injuries
they have done, and in point of thankfulness for all his love and tenderness
toward them, and his sufferings for them; subdue the hearts of his enemies unto
him, and increase the desires of his people after him. And as thou have brought
him home out of his afflictions, as Gold out of the fire, pure and precious in
thy sight, and in the eyes of his people, furnished and adorned with all those
Royal endowments and christian graces, that may make him a glorious Instrument
of thy praise, of the advancement of the Gospel, and Kingdom of thy son, of
great good unto thy Church, and of peace and happiness unto these poor Nations.
That mercy and truth may meet together, and righteousness and peace may kiss
each other. That thy people may rejoice under the shadow of his Government,
that he may be a nursing Father unto thy Church and people, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
The First Table.
A Prayer for incitement for affection to attend upon the Lord in the use of
the Lords Supper. folio 1. A Prayer for preparation to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. folio 20 A Prayer when the Bread and Wine is brought to the
Table folio 68 Employment for Thoughts in the pauses of the Congregations folio
77 Between the Sermons end, and the Communion, when the people that do not
Communicate, are going out. folio 90 The judgment and practice of the ancient
Church, concerning the frequent and constant use of the Lords Supper. folio 93
The second Table.
A Clear and short Catechism for those that are to receive the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper. folio 1 Prayers before the Sacrament to God the Father folio
21 To Christ Jesus. folio 26 A prayer to the Holy Ghost. folio 49 A prayer
after the Sacrament. folio 53 A prayer for Perseverance in grace and godlinsse,
after the receiving of the Lord Supper. folio 63 A prayer of Intercession for
the sick, to be used by those that are with him, or that come to visit him.
folio 80 A prayer to be used when we hear a Passing Bell toll, or have any
other notice of a Soul ready to depart, folio 113 A prayer for the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, proper for all times. folio 122 A
prayer for the restoring of our afflicted Sovereign folio 130
FINIS.

