A PANEGYRIC TO HIS EXCELLENCY RICHARD Earl of TIRCONNELL.
By ALBERTUS WARREN.
RIse Muse! and quickly too; for all delay
Looks like a su^len crime, Time slides away:
The Tritons smile, and Neptune has conveyed
Our Prince, for whom we passionately prayed.
Dress not thy Lines in painted florid stuff,
Stolen from the Ancients Store: Thanks are enough
For Heaven. It Is dangerous these Critic days
To steer 'twixt Flattery and deserved Praise.
He, who, between those two Points, truly knows
To S^il, securely like a Workman Rows.
(...) traverse in a Circular.
Least Tilting, and too rudely, unaware,
I step too far; W^sdom co^sists with Fear,
Which made the Gods at first, as some men say,
Whom to adore; Man'^ Reason taught the way.
So, Cathol^ck I am, I boldly d^re
Think Ireland's Angel truly Tutelar.
Did Royal JAMES inspire in giving Power
To brave TIRCONNELL in a happy hour:
The Guilty only are surprised to see
His due Reward for constant Loyalty.
Such a commanding Presence does reside
In him, '^is wholly Natural, not Pride.
Ciphers when added (tho alone appear
For Naught) advance the Sum, the Figure's here;
And so significant, that I dare say,
None will uneasy be who will obey.
It Is Virtue solely which secures the Just;
Men must suspect those whom they dare not trust.
But his brave Soul cannot at all despise
These Converts, which in season will be wise.
The bravest Men when they have greatest Might,
By Condescension often conquer Spite.
He that is above all Censure fears no thrust:
From Emulation, nor from vulgar Dust.
Trees shaken by the loud tempestuous Wind,
Surer fixation radically find!
He Is barbarously void of Christian Sense,
Who questions often Protected Innocence
Even to a Miracle, by friendly, Jove,
It Is the Heart only makes Heaven prone to Love.
Cowards are most vindictive; Frauds reside
In narrow Breasts; the Ancient Martyrs died;
As Stoicall, as Brutus; the pretense
Of dark and young passive Obedience
Was angry Calvin's Forge: Give me the pure
And willing Duty, that will Peace assure.
We Are blessed with one in this auspicious day.
Who knows as well to Govern as Obey.
Long may he live and weild the Sword, and then,
(When Canonized) enjoy a lasting Pen:
Mean time, what is here in Wit defective, I
With future awful Reverence will supply:
He who misguided fails in time to do
The like, is impious and silly too;
For sure good Subjects are obliged to bring
Respects for him, so honored by the King:
A King to whom no mortal man denies
The Character of Valiant, Good, and Wise;
The best of Friends, in whom does fully shine
The mature Glory of the Norman Line.
For him succeeding Chronicles shall raise
Worthy Memoires, and Pyramids of Praise.
DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray on Colledg-green, 1686.


