CAUSES Of the LORDS WRATH against SCOTLAND, Manifested in his sad late
dispensations. Whereunto is added a PAPER, particularly holding forth the Sins
of the MINISTRY.

Printed in the year 1653.

Some General Heads of the Causes why the LORD contends with the Land, agreed
upon (after seeking of the LORD) by the Commission of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1650. with the advice of diverse Ministers from several parts of the Kingdom,
met at Edinburgh, October 1651. so far as for the present they could attain
light therein, which they offer and advise to be made use of by all the LORDS
People in the Land, leaving place to add, as the Lord shall make further
discoveries hereafter of the guiltiness of the Land, and intending more fully
and particularly to enlarge this Paper.
1. Article. THe gross Atheism and ignorance of God and of his Word and
Works, that is in a great part of the Inhabitants of the Land, which is such,
that neither Law nor Gospel, nor the most common and necessary points of truth
are understood or known by many thousands.

2. Article. Horrible loosnesse and prophanity of Conversation in all sorts,
against the Commandments, both of the first and second table, which has so
abounded and increased, that scarce has any of the Nations exceeded us therein.

3. Article. The despising and slighting of JESUS CHRIST offered in the Gospel
(which we look on as the chief and mother sin of this Nation) and the not
valuing and improving the Gospel and precious Ordinances of CHRIST, unto the
establishing and building up of our selves in the lively faith of CHRIST and
power of godliness, but either neglecting and despising these things
altogether, or else resting upon and idolizing outward and bare forms, without
studying to know in our selves, or to promove in others the Kingdom of God,
which is righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: whereby it has
come to pass, that persons not rightly qualified, have been admitted unto, and
continued in the Work of the Ministry and Elderships, and that public
repentance and Kirk-censures have been gros^ely slighted, and the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper fearfully polluted by the promiscuous admitting of many
ignorant and scandalous persons thereto, and many wilfully ignorant, and openly
and continuedly profane, have been kept in the fellowship of this Kirk,
contrary to the Word of GOD, and Constitutions of this Kirk, and that many
other sad and fearful consequences have followed unto the profaning of all
the Ordinances of GOD, and rendering them for the most part barren and
fruitless to us:

4 Art. Not only the exercise of godliness in families much slighted, great men
being unwilling and ashamed to call on the name of the LORD in their Family
(which guilt is exceedingly heightened by the continuing of many of these in the
same after solemn Public confessing thereof, and engaging to the contrary duty
in the year 1648.) and others much neglecting the same; But also the loathing
and hating of the power and life of Religion and godliness, and bearing down
such as make conscience thereof, or aim at any perfection therein, which has
come to such an height, that the Godly are everywhere reproached, reviled,
oppressed and persecuted throughout the Land by sundry of all ranks: yea, by
sundry Magistrates and Ministers; and the ungodly and profane countenanced,
encouraged and employed.

5. Article. The base love of the world, and Covetousness, which has made not
only the Body of the People, but many Ministers, more to mind their own
things, then the things of JESUS CHRIST; and many Masters, Rulers, Magistrates,
Officers and Soldiers in Armies, exceedingly to abuse their power unto the
exercising of intolerable oppression of all kinds on the poor, to the
grinding of their faces, and making their lives bitter to them: Which fountain
of Covetousness did also produce the great insolences and oppressions in our
Armies in England and Ireland, and the fearful perjuries in the Land in the
matter of valuation and Excise.

6. Article. The abusing and prostituting the Public Faith of the Kingdom in
the way of borrowing of Money and otherwise; unto the dishonouring of GOD,
mocking of Men, and reproach of the Nation.

7. Article. In pursuing of necessary Duties of renewing the National
Covenant, and entering into and renewing the solemn League and Covenant, the way
of many men's taking these Covenants was without the knowledge of the necessary
things contained therein, and without reality and sincerity of heart, in order
to the performance thereof; some being induced thereto by example, some by
fear, and not a few by principles of policy, following their own carnal and
corrupt ends.

8. Article. The Following the work of God, and pursuing the ends of the
Covenant not in a Spiritual holy way, setting the LORD always before our
eyes, and acknowledging him in all our paths but in a carnal politic way,
abusing GODS Interest for our own interest and ends, as if it had been the Work
of men, and not the Work of GOD, which made us walk more in the counsels of our
own hearts then in the Counsel of GOD, and to trust more in the arm of flesh,
then in the Arm of the Lord.

9. Article. Backslyding and defection from the Covenant, and from our solemn
Vows and Engagements; the guilt whereof is exceedingly heightened by the
aggravating circumstances of our renewed Oaths, and of the LORDS Mercies and
Engagements, and of our frequent relapses into the same sins, whereof we once
seemed to have repented, and which we condemned in others: Of this Defection
there be these special heads and Steps.

1. Step. A soul falling from that honesty of heart, and purity of
conversation, and from the singleness and integrity of heart, and from the
fervency and zeal for GOD that appeared to be in many at the first entry to the
Covenant; and declining into loose walking, and self interest, and neutrality
and indifferency, from which have issued many sad consequences, especially the
great scandal and stumbling of many godly in the Land, at us and the Work of
God in our hand.

2 Step. The sitting up of many Professors in the Land under the Gospel, and
becoming formal and remiss, not entertaining tenderness, spiritual life and
soberness of mind, which as it has been amongst the provoking Causes of the
LORDS wrath, and has rendered some obnoxious to snares on both hands, so may
it (if it be not mourned for and amended) draw on more wrath, and expose to the
hazard of error and disaffection to the Work of GOD.

3. Step. The secret falling off of some, and open falling away of many unto
the opposite party, after their entering in Covenant, especially that defection
carried on by James Graham and his party, and that which was afterward carried
on by the Authors and Abettors of the unlawful Engagement 1648.

4. Step. The neglecting, obstructing, and condemning, the purging of the
Judicatories and Army, 1649. and afterward, from scandalous and disaffected
men; and of the constituting the same of men of known integrity and affection
to the Cause, and of a blameless and Christian C^nversation, notwithstanding of
the solemn public Confession of these sins, and Engaging unto these duties a
little before that time.

5. Step. The Authorizing of Commissioners to close a Treaty with the King, for
the investing him with the Government, upon his subscribing such Demands as
were sent to him, after he had given many clear evidences of his disaffection
and enmity to the work and people of God, and was continuing in the same: And
the admitting of him to the full exercise of his power, and Crowning him,
notwithstanding of new discoveries of his adhering to his former principles and
way, and of many warnings to the contrary.

6. Step. The Rejecting of Discoveries of guiltiness and causes of the Lords
contending with us, and of our duty in reference thereto; such as the cause of
humiliation offered by the Commission of the General Assembly, to the Committee
of Estates at Leith, before the defeat at Dumbar: The causes of humiliation
condescended on at Sterlin immediately after the defeat at Dumbar: The
Remonstrance of the Gentlemen, Ministers and Forces in the West, and many other
testimonies of Presbyteries and Synods together; neglecting the means tending
to peace, and to the preventing the effusion of more blood; from pride and
bitterness of spirit against those who had -- invaded us.

7. Step. The Public Resolutions of Kirk and State, for bringing in the
Malignant party, first to the Army, and then to the Judicatories, and to the
actual intrusting of them with the power of the Kingdom, both Military and
Civil, whereby the state of our cause is not only turned up side down, by
subordinating the interest of God to the interest of men; but the work and
people of God have been entrusted to the enemies thereof.

8. Step. The joining of many engaged in the Covenant and Cause of God, in Arms
with the Forces of the Kingdom, after that by the Public Resolutions, there
was a prevailing party of Malignants brought into the Army, who had the sway of
Counsels and Actings therein, and were carrying on a malignant interest.

9. Step. The pre-limiting and corrupting of the Genesis Assembly, in regard of
the free, lawful and right constitution thereof, excluding such as were
faithful and constant in the Cause, and making it up, for the most part, of
those who had been active and instrumental in carrying on a course of
Defection, or were consenting thereto; whereby it came to pass that that
Meeting did ratify and approve the Defection it self, and did not only censure
sundry for protesting against them, but also laid a foundation for censuring
all such Ministers, and for keeping all such out of the Ministry who did not
approve of their Constitution and Acts, and did issue Warnings and Declarations
reflecting exceedingly upon, and contradicting and condemning former pious and
warrantable proceedings, and the instruments thereof.

10. Article. Deep security, impenitency, obstinacy and incorrigibleness under
all these, and under all the dreadful strokes of God, and tokens of his
indignation against us, because of the same, so that whilst he continues to
smite, we are so far from humbling our selves, and turning to Him, that we wax
worse and worse and sin more and more.

Having at our last Meeting intended and promised to enlarge more fully and
particularly these General Heads of the LORDS Controversy with the Land, then
condescended on; We shall now prosecute and perform the same, so far as we
conceive is needful, and may be helpful to others, for the better
understanding thereof.

IT were superfluous to speak any thing to the 1. Article, which relates to the
gross ignorance of many thousands in the Land; the truth of the thing being
unquestionably acknowledged and bemoaned by all the faithful and godly
Ministers in the Land, and that a great many come to age, are grossly ignorant
of the first Principles of Christian Religion; which sin of ignorance, although
it be extenuated and slightly looked on by many, yet it is holden forth by the
Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, as the fountain of the estrangement of souls from
the life of God. Ephesians. 4. 18. through the blindness that is in them, having the
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart; of all their
disobedience, and living in their lusts, 1. Pet. 1. 14. as obedient children,
not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance; And
as that which makes them liable to the wrath of God in the day of Christ's
appearance, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven
with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them who know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord-Iesus Christ. The guilt of this sin is
much aggravated by these Circumstances; 1. It is wilful under the light of
the Gospel, and the means of knowledge. 2. In regard of long continuing
therein, many have lived under it for so many years together, even till their
old age. 3. From the grossnesse of it, being such in many, as they know almost
nothing of the very Letter of the Scriptures, either of their sin and misery,
or of the mercy and remedy that is holden forth through Jesus Christ, or of the
duty which they owe to God and their Neighbor; nothing almost either of Law
or Gospel, of the Covenant of Grace, or of the Covenant of Works, of
Commandments, Threatenings or Promises, except in such a general and confused
way as is altogether useless unto them, and fruitless in them. 4. In regard of
the multitudes of these who lie under it, which is very great in all the
corners of the Land, especially in the Highlands. 5. In regard of the quality
of persons who are not only servants and Commons, but Masters of Families, and
persons of some note in Burghs and in the Country; yea, not a few who have the
place of Magistrates and Elders. The Article does also mention ignorance of the
Works of God, by which is meant not only the Works of Creation wherein the
Eternal Power and Godhead are clearly seen, Romans ^. 20. For the invisible
things of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead;
but also the ignorance of the Works of Providence, which are great and
mavelous, Rev. 15. 3. And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and
the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints. And albeit these
should be sought out of all these that take pleasure therein, Psalm. 111. 2. and
the right understanding and observation of them, has a large promise made
thereunto, Psalm. 107. 43. Who is wise and will observe these things, even they
shall understand the loving kindness off the Lord. Yet does the ignorance
thereof exceedingly abound amongst many, especially the ignorance and not
observing, but forgetting the works of mercy and judgment, which GOD has
wrought amongst our selves; which sin as it proved an Inlet to many other
provocations, from the 7 verse of that Psalm throughout, so has it great
threatenings pronounced against it, and sore judgments inflicted on it, Psalm.
28. 5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up. Isa. 5. 11, 12. Woe to them
that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, and
continue till night, till wine inflame them, and the wine and the pipe, the
viol, the tabret and the harp are in their feasts, but they regard not the work
of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands. Psalm. 106. 7. 13. 21, 22.
Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the
multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the sea, they soon forgot his
works, they waited not for his counsel. Thy forg^t God their Savior, who had
done great things in Egypt, wondrous works in the land of Ham, and terrible
things by the redsea. In this Article also, Atheism is joined with Ignorance,
which as it is the root and fountain of all other sin, Psalm. 14. 1. The fool
has said in his heart, there is no God, they are corrupt, they have done
abominable works, there is none that does good. So it is also the root and
fountain of all misery, Ephesians. 2. 12. At that time ye were without Christ, being
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of
promise, having no hope, and being without God in the world. And yet this does
possess many, there being multitudes of that wicked sort. Psalm. 10. 4. Who
through the pride of their heart, will not seek God, God is not in all their
thoughts. These are far from acknowledging him in all their ways, and aiming
at his glory in all their actions, according to these divine rules, Proverb. 3.
6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. 1 Cor. 10.
31. Whether therefore ye eat or ye drink, or what soever ye do, in word or
deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to the Father
through him. But they do live as if there were no God, or as if he had forsaken
the earth, and did not see. Ezekiel. 9. 9. Then said he unto me, The iniquity of
the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the Land is full of blood,
and the City full of perverseness, for they say, The Lord has forsaken the
earth, and the Lord sees not; Or as if the Lord would not do good or evil,
like these who are threatened, Zeph. 1. 12. I will search Jerusalem with
candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees, that say in their
heart, the Lord will not do good, neither will be do evil.

The Second Article.
THe second Article concerning loosnesse and prophanity, is no less true and
evident then the first, it being undeniable that a flood of prophanity has
overflowed the whole Land, and that the most part of the Inhabitants thereof
have corrupted theirway before him, unto the dishonouring of his Name, reproach
of our profession, and provoking the eyes of his Glory, Isa. 1. 2, 3, 4. 5.
Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished
and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me; the ox has known
his owner, and the ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people
does not consider: Ah, sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they
have provoked the holy one of Israel to Anger, they have gone away backward;
why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more, the whole
head is sick, and the whole heart is faint. Ezekiel. 36. 21, 22, 23. But I had
pity for my holy names sake, which the house of Israel has profaned amongst
the Heathen whether they went: Therefore say to the house of Israel, thus says
the Lord God, I do not this for your sake, O house of Israel, but for my holy
Names sake, which ye have profaned amongst the Heathen whither ye went, and I
will sanctify my great name which was profaned among the Heathen which ye
have profaned in the midst of them, and the Heathen shall know that I am the
Lord, says the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you, before their eyes,
Malach. 2. 11, 12, 13. Judah has dealt trea^herously, and an abomination is
committed in Israel and Jerusalem, for Judah has profaned the holiness of
the Lord which he loved, and has married the daughter of a strange god, the
Lord will cut off the man that does this, the master and the scholar out of
the Tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offers an offering unto the Lord of
hosts; and this have ye done again, covering the Altar of the Lord with tears,
with weeping and with crying out, in so much that he regards not the offering
any more, or receives it with good will at your hands. Isa. 3. 8. For
Jerusalem is ruined and Judah is fallen; because their tongue and their doings
are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. The guilt of this
abounding loosnesse and prophanity is so much the more heightened by these
circumstances that do attend it: First, that it is under the clear light of the
Gospel, of the Word preached now for many years throughout the Land, in purity
and plenty. Secondly, that it is contrary to many solemn Vows, Engagements,
Oaths and Covenants taken on us before God, Angels and men to the contrary.
Thirdly, that it is under many blessings, mercies and deliverances from the
Lord. Fourthly that it is under many chastisements, rods and judgments,
especially the sword and pestilence, by which two, many thousands in the Land
have been taken away within these few years. Fifthly, that it is common and
universal, and has reached over all sorts of persons, Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Barons, Burgesses, Ministers and Commons. Sixthly, from the greatness of it,
shamelesnes of it, avowedness and grossness of it, which is such that many
declare their sin as Sodom, and commit all sorts of wickedness with
greedlnesse. Seventhly, from the kinds of it, some of the chief and most common
of which, especially these who are not named in some other Article of the
former Paper; we shall here touch: 1. Impatiencie, murmuring and freting against
God and his works, whichhath made many to weary of the charges and expense they
have been put to, for the Gospel, and to wish there had been no such thing as
the entering into the National Covenant, and the renewing and entering into
the solemn League and Covenant, not to an few to curse and blaspheme the
Covenants, and to look on them as the rise and original of all the evils where
with the Land has been afflicted and it is an great provocation before God, as
it appears from these and the like Scriptures, Numb. 14, 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11,
12. And all the Congregations lifted up their voice and weeped and cried, and
the people weeped that night, and all the children of Israel murmured against
Moses, and against Aaron, and the whole Congregation said to them, would to God
we had died in the land of Egypt, or would to God we had died in the
wilderness; and wherefore has the Lord brought us to this land to fall by the
sword, that our wives, and our children should be a prey, were it not better
for us to return to Egypt? And they said one to another, let us mak^ a Captain,
let us return to Egypt; then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before the
Assemblies of all the Congregation of the children of Israel but all the
Congregation bade stone them with stones, and the glory of the Lord appeared in
the Tabernacle of the Congregation before all the Children of Israel: And the
Lord said unto Moses. How long will this People provoke me? and how long will
it be ere this People believe me, for all the signs I have showed amongst them?
I will smite them with pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a
Nation, mighter and greater then they. Numbers 2. 1. 5, 6. And they journied
from Mount Hor, by the way of the Red Sea, to compass the Land of Edom; and
the soul of the People was much discouraged because of the way; and the People
spoke against GOD, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of the
Land to die in the wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is there any
water; for our soul loatheth this light bread: and the Lord sent fiery serpents
among the people, and much people of Israel died. 1 Cor. 11. 10. Neither be ye
murmurers, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.
2. Using not only of charms, though it be condemned in the Scriptures, Deuteronomy.
18. 11. A Charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a Wizard, or a
Necromancer, shall not be found amongst you; for all that do these things are
an abomination to the Lord: yet is very frequent among the Commons: But also
Sorcery and Witchcraft, which is an abomination Exodus 22. 18. Thou shall not
suffer a Witch to live. Deuteronomy. 18. 10. There shall not be found amongst you any
that uses Divination, or any Iuchanter, or any Witch; especially amongst these
who have been baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and yet does (by the
great discoveries thereof which has been of late) appear to be very frequent
in the Land. 3. Ordinary swearing by them that are no Gods, Ier. 5. 7. How
shall I pardon thee for this? thy Children have forsaken Me, and sworn by them
who are no Gods, when I have fed them to the full Zeph. 1. 4, 5. I will also
stretch out my hand against Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I
will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the
Chemarims, with the Priests: and them that worship the host of heaven upon the
house tops, and them that worship, and that swear by the Name of the LORD, and
that swear by Malcham: such as Faith, Truth, Soul, Conscience, and by the holy
and blessed Name of GOD Himself, and by His Blood and Wounds, and fearful
Execrations and Cursings, which though they be condemned, forbidden and
threatened in the Scriptures, Exodus 2^. 7. Thou shall not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in vain. Levit. 19. 12. Thou shall not swear by my Name fasly,
neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God: I am the Lord. Matthew. 5. 33,
34, 35, 36, 37. Again, ye have heard it said by them of old time, Thou shall
not forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thy God thy Oaths. But I
say unto you. Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods Throne:
neither by the Earth, for it is His Footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is
the City of the great King: neither shall thou swear by thy Head, for thou
cannot make one hair white or black. But let your communication be, Yea, yea;
Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. Jer. 23. 10. For
the Land is full of Adulteries; because of Swearing the Land mourns, and the
pleasant places in the wilderness are dried up, because their course is evil,
and their force is not right. Zech. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Then I looked, and lift up
mi^e eyes, and behold, a flying Roll: the length thereof is twenty cubits, and
the breadth thereof ten cubits. Then said he unto me, This is the curse that
goes over the face of the whole Earth: for every one that steals, shall be
cut off as on this side, according to it: and every one that swears, shall be
cut off on that side, according to it. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of
hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the Thief, and into the house of
him that swears falsely by my Name: and it shall remain in the midst of his
house, and shall consume the timber and stones thereof. Yet these are so
frequent and habitual amongst us, that in many parts of the Land it is a rare
thing to find a man or a woman, that in their ordinary speech is not addicted
to some one of these. 4. Ordinary and gross profanation of the Lords Day; not
only by slighting of, and absenting from the Public Worship with the
Congregation, which is a fault whereof many are guilty; and not attending to
the Word, or joining in Prayer and singing of Psalms, when they are present,
but also by traveling, trysting, working, speaking our own words and
otherwise: The danger and hainousness of this sin appears, from Exodus 20. 8.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Nehem. 13. 15, 16, 17, 18. In those
days, saw I in Judah, some treading Wine-presses on the Sabbath, and bringing
in Sheaves, and loading Asses, and also Wine-Grapes, and Figs, and all manner
of burdens which they brought to Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day: and I testified
against them in the day wherein they sold victuals. There dwelt men of Tire
also therein, which bought fish and all manner of ware, which they sold to the
children of Juda and Jerusalem on the Sabbath: then I contended with the Nobles
of Juda, and said unto them, What evil thing is this which ye do, and profane
the Sabbath day, did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this
evil on us, and on this city? yet ye bring more wrath on Israel, by profaning
the Sabbath, Isai 58. 13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from
doing thy own pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, and the
holy of the Lord. honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasures, nor speaking thine own words, then shall thou
delight thy self in the Lord, and thou shall ride on the high places of the
earth, and I will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it. 5. Not giving obedience to authority to their
just and lawful commands for conscience sake, Rom 13. 5. Wherefore ye must
needs be subject not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. And on the other
hand, an implicit and willing following of their unlawful commands, obeying
men rather then God, Hos. 5. 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment,
because he willingly walked after the commandment, Act. 4. 19. Whether it be
right in the fight of God to hearken to you rather then to God, judge ye. The
gross neglect of many parents in the instructing and breeding of their
Children in knowledge, virtue and piety, Ephesians. 6. 4 Ye fathers, provoke not your
children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
And the untowardnesse and ingratitude of many Children to their Parents, Ephesians.
6. 1. 2, 3. Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. Honor
thy father and mother (which is the first commandment with promise) that it
may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the earth. 6. Self
murder, unnatural murder of Children, enimity, malice, strife, contention,
especially at Law suits, revenge, and blood, which as they are ancient sins of
this Nation, and did much appear in the banding of Clans one against another,
and have been little mourned for, or repented of to this day, so do they still
continue whilst we profess the unity of the Faith in Christ, and are joined in
Covenants of love and peace one with another, Iam. 3. 14. 15, 16. But if ye
have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against
the truth. This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work, 1 Cor. 5. 8. Therefore let us keep the feast not with old Leaven, neither
with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth. Tit. 3. 3. For we our selves were sometime disobedient,
foolish, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another. Levit. 19. 18. Thou shall not avenge
nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people; but thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, I am the LORD. Prove. 1. 16. For their feet run to evil,
and they make haste to shed blood. Gal. 5. 15. For if ye bite and devour one
another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. 7. Intemperance,
gluttony and drunkenness; the last of which is become so common, that it has
overrun almost the whole Nation, so that it is hard to find many who are not
tiplers, or common drunkards, or will drink drunk on occasion and with company.
With this sin we may join the immoderate and excessive use of Tobacco, which is
such, that much money and precious time is needlessly and superflously spent
that way, by persons of all sorts. Isa. 5. 11, 12, 22. Woe to them that rise up
early in the morning to drink strong drink, and continue till night, till Wine
i^ flame them; and the harp, and the viol, and tabret, and the pipe, and wine
are in their feasts. Woe to them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of might
to mingle strong drink Prove. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32. Who has woe? Who has sorrow?
Who has contentions? Who has bablings? Who has wounds without cause? Who
has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek
(...) wine. Look not thou on the wine when it is red, when it gives its color
in the cup, when it moves it self aright; at last it byteth like a serpent,
and stingeth like an adder. Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess. 8. Vanity and excess in apparel, and in household stuff, far above that
which becomes the sobriety of the Gospel, or that the condition of such a
people can reach unto. Isa. 3. from the 16. verse. Because the daughters of
Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched out necks, and wanton eyes, and
mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their fees, therefore the LORD
will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the
LORD will discover their secret parts. And in that day the Lord will take away
the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and
their round tyres like the Moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the
musslers, and the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the head-bands,
and the tablets, and the earrings, and the nose-jewells, the changeable suits
of apparel, the mantles and the wimples, the crisping pins, the glasses and
the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails; and it shall come to pass that in
stead of a sweet smell there shall be stink, and in stead of a girdle a rent,
and in stead of well set hair, baldness, and in stead of a stomacher, a girding
of sackcloath, and burning in stead of beauty, thy men shall fall by the sword,
and thy mighty men in the war, and her gates shall lament and mourn, and she
being desolate shall sit on the ground. 1 Pet. 3. 3. Whose adorning let it not
be outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, and putting
on of apparel. Zeph. 1. 8. And it shall come to pass in the day of the LORDS
sacrifice that I will punish the Princes; and the Kings children and all such
as are clothed with strange apparel. 9. Uncleanesse and filthiness of all
sorts, rotten speeches, filthy communication, chambering and wantonness, and
fornication, adultery, incest, in some places beastiality, and sodomie,
espeacially fornications and adulteries which abound in many places; the first
whereof, viz. fornication is by many accounted no sin. For discovering the
greatness of these sins, consider, Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall not commit
adultery, 1 Cor. 6 13. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord,
and the Lord, for the body, 1 Cor. 5. 1. It is reported commonly, that there is
fornication amongst you, and such fornication as is not so much as named among
the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers wife. Romans 13. 13. Let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in chambering and wantonness. Ephesians. 5. 3. But
fornication and all uncleanness, let it not once be named among you. 4. ver.
Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient. 10. Prodigality, oppression, extortions, usury, bribery, theft,
robbery, false weights and measures, injustice and unfaithfulness in Contracts
and Bargains, with fraudulent dealing and deceiving one another; Artificial
dearthing of victuals and other things, the livelihood and maintenance of the
People. Exodus 20. 15. Thou shall not steal. Ezekiel. 22. 12. In thee have they
taken gifts to shed blood, thou have taken usury and increase, thou have
greedily gained of thy neighbor by extortion. Amos. 5. 12. They afflict the
just, they have taken abribe, they turn aside the poor from his right. Micah.
6. 10, 11. Are there yet treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked,
and the scant measure that is abominable? Shall I count them pure with the
wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? 1 Thessalonians 4. 6. That no
man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter, for the Lord is the
avenger of all such. 11. Lying, slandering, backbiting, detracting, riviling,
tale-bearing, rash censuring, and defaming and speaking ill one of another,
with false witnessing and perjury, breach of Oaths, Covenants, promises. Exodus
20. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Psalm. 50. 19,
20. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit: thou sit
and speak against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mothers son. 2 Cor.
12. 20. Left there be debates, envyings, wrath, strife, backbiting,
whisperings, swellings and tumults. Matthew. 7. 1. Judge not, that ye be not
judged. Romans 1. 31. without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural
affection, implacable, unmercifull. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. This know also, that in the
last days, perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unholy. Before
we close this Article of prophanity, we cannot but in a special way take
notice of the carriage of many beggars in the Land, amongst whom for a long
time past, abominations of all sorts has abounded; which sin lies so much
heavier on the Land, because though it has been generally known and
acknowledged by all, yet has no effectual course been taken to this day for
the helping thereof.

3. Article.
THe third Article which relates to JESUS CHRIST and the Gospel, is in a great
measure spoken to in the Causes of Humiliation, concerning the contempt of the
Gospel, condescended on by the Commission of the General Assembly at Perth,
Dec. 22. 1650. yet some particulars there be in the Article, which we shall now
speak unto: 1. The resting on out ward and bare forms, without studying to
known in our selves, or to promove in others, the Kingdom of GOD, which is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. The Work of Reformation
in the outward part of it, or external means, that do relate to Worship and
Ordinances of GOD and the purity thereof, is certainly a thing excellent and
desirable, which all the lovers of pure Religion and undefiled, ought to
endeavor to attain to and preserve, Ezra 7. 27. Blessed be the Lord God of our
fathers, who has put such a thing as this in the Kings heart; to beautify the
house of the Lord at Jerusalem. Exodus 39. 42. According to all that the Lord
commanded Moses. so the Children of Israel made all the work, 43. v. And Moses
did look on all the work, and behold they had done it, as the Lord commanded,
even so had they done, and Moses blessed them. Ezekiel. 42. 11. And the way before
them was like the appearing of the Chambers that were toward the North, as long
as they, and as broad as they, and all their goings out were both according to
their fashions, and according to their doors. Heb. 3. 2. Who was faithful to
him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house. Heb. 8. 5.
Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was
admonished of God, when he was about to make the tabernacle; for, see (says
he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the
mount. But when these things are rested upon and idolized, they do through our
corruption become snares to us, to keep us from seeking in to more excellent
and better things, to wit, communion and fellowship with GOD, and the power and
life of godliness, which are the kernel, whereof these things are but the
shell and the scrooff, and being rested upon, do provoke the Lord either to
make them barren and fruitless to us, or else to loath us in the following of
them, or to remove them wholly away from us. Isai 1. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Hear the word of the Lord ye rulers of Sodom, give ear to the Law of our God ye
people of Gomorrah; To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me,
says the Lord? I am full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed
beasts: I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats
When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at your hands, to
tread my Courts? Bring no more vain oblation, incense is an abomination to me,
the new moons and the Sabbaths, and the calling of the assembly, I cannot away
with, it is an iniquity, even the solemn meeting: your new moons and appointed
feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them: And
when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when ye
make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. Isai. 66. 1,
2, 3, 4. Thus says the Lord, The heavens is my throne, and the earth is my
footstool, where is the house ye will build me, and where is the place of my
rest? for all these things has mine hand made, and all these things have been
says the Lord But to this man will I look, even to him that is of a poor and
contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. He that kills an ox is as if he
slew a man: he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a dogsneck: he that
offers an oblation, as he that offers swines blood; he that burns
incense, as he that blesses an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways,
and their soul delights in their abominations; I also will choose their
delusions, and bring their fears on them, because when I called, none did
answer; and when I spoke, they did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes,
and chose that in which I delighted not. Jer. 7. 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, are these. Behold, ye trust in lying words that cannot profit. Will ye
steal, murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal,
and walk after other gods whom ye know not, and come and stand before me in
this house, which is called by my name, and say, we are delivered to do all
these abominations? Is this house which is called by my Name become a den of
robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, says the Lord: but go ye to
my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I
did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. And now because ye have
done all these works, says the Lord, and I spoke to you, rising up early, and
speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not: Therefore
will I do unto this house which is called by my Name, wherein ye trust, and to
the place which I gave to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. Ezekiel. 7. 20,
21, 22. As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in Majesty: but they made
the Images of their abominations, and of their derestable things therein:
therefore have I set it far from them. And I will give it to the hands of the
strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil, and they
shall pollute it; my face also will I turn from them, and they shall pollute my
secret place, for the robbers s^al enter into it and desile it. Zeph. 3. 13.
The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a
deceitful tongue be sound in their mouth, for they shall feed and ly down, and
none shall make them afraid. And this has been undoubtedly in a great measure
the fault of many in this Land, the height of whose zeal and endeavors has
been for the most part to attain the purity of Ordinances, not laboring for
the power thereof, whence has issued a great deal of boasting and confidence
in a Covenant and pure Ordinances, and a well reformed Kirk, when in the mean
while most men be strangers to that grace that brings salvation, and teaches
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world. Titus 2, 11, 12. For the grace of God that
brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live godly, righteously and soberly
in this presene world. The second is the sad Consequents that has followed on
this, whereof there be four special in the Article.

The First whereof is, The admitting of persons not rightly qualified to the
work of the Ministry, and Elderships in Congregations, and the continuing of
such in these places. For understanding of which, ye would consider, that the
Word of God, and Acts and Constitutions of our Kirk, do require of Ministers,
not only that they be men of knowledge, understanding and conscience, for
ruling in the house of God, and of a blameless conversation; but that they be
sanctified and holy, and spiritual, and have their senses exercised in
spiritual things: A Bishop (says Paul, Tit. 1. 8.) must be a lover of goodmen,
sober, just, holy, temperate. And the same Apostle: 1 Timothy 3. 6. tells us, he
must not be a novice, or one newly come in to the faith. He would not only have
him in the faith, that he may speak because he believes, and be able to comfort
others with the consolations wherewith he has been himself comforted of God, 2
Cor. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, even
the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort others who are in trouble, with the
comfort wherewith we our selves have been comforted of God. In the Acts of the
Assembly at Edinburgh 1596, March 26. it is provided, That the trial of the
persons to be admitted to the Ministry hereafter, consist not only in their
learning and ablity to preach, but also in conscience and feeling, and
spiritual wisdom; and in the same Act it is provided, that such as shall not be
found given to sanctification and prayer, that study not to be powerful and
spiritual, but be cold, and wanting spiritual Zeal, that all such persons be
censured, and continuing therein, be deprived: Which Act was revived in the
Genesis Assembly 1638. likewise in the Genesis Assembly 1646. The putting in, and
holding in of insufficient and suspected men, who savor the things of this
life; and the keeping the door straiter on these whom God has sealed, then on
these who have less evidence of Grace and holiness, is reckoned amongst the
enormities and corruptions of the Ministry in their callings; and amongst the
remedies of these corruptions, it is provided, That all Presbyteries make great
conscience to have all vacant places, within their several bounds settled with
godly and able men, wherever they be found. These Scriptures and Acts, with
sundry others of the like kind, require, not only that a Minister be negatively
holy, that is, one who is not scandalous in his life and conversation, but that
he be positively holy, acquainted with God and spiritual things, and a partaker
of the grace of the Gospel in himself, which he preaches to others; and
religious reason does require the same: How shall he be a Christian Minister,
who is not a Christian? how shall he preach to others, who does not himself
believe? how shall he know to speak a word in season, to whom the Lord has not
given the tongue of the Learned? to comfort others with the consolations of
God, who was never comforted therewith himself? How shall he pray for others,
who cannot pray for himself? How shall he reveal Christ, who never knew him?
How shall he naturally care for souls, who has not the love of Christ dwelling
in him? The Scriptures do also require of ruling Elders, not only that they be
men of understanding, knowledge, and wisdom, and such as are able to discern and
rule, but also that they be blameless and holy, as is evident in the Epistles
of Paul to Timothy and Titus. And the Discipline of our Kirk requires, That
besides abilities to govern, consult, admonish, and order all things
appertaining to the state of the Congregation, that they be men of a good life
and holy conversation, without blame, and all suspicion, careful for the Flock,
wise; and above all things fearing God: notwithstanding hereof, many litteral
and formal men, who are strangers to the mystery of godliness, and work of the
Spirit of life, which is in Jesus Christ, are admitted unto, and continued in
the Ministry and Elderships (nay, in some places, especially in Elderships, men
that are ignorant and scandalous) by which things it comes to pass that there
is a lifeless, dead, and careless Ministry, and unprofitable Elderships in many
Congregations, and that the growth of the Gospel and godliness, is exceedingly
obstructed and hindered.

The second Consequent which is mentioned, is, The gross slighting and mocking
of Kirk Censures, and of Public Repentance; whereof it would be considered,
That the Word of God, Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, do require of these
who are to make Public Profession of their Repentance for scandalous offenses,
not only a naked and bare profession of Repentance, but such a profession of
Repentance, as does hold forth a real conviction and sorrow for sin; and not
only the ceasing from the sin for the time, but the bringing forth of the
contrary good fruits of sobriety, righteousness and holiness. Numb. 5. 6, 7, 8.
Speak unto the Children of Israel, when a man or a woman shall commit any sin
that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty;
then they shall confess their sin which they have done; and he shall recompense
his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part
thereof, and give it unto him against whom he has trespassed. But if the man
have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be
recompensed unto the Lord. even unto the Priest: beside the Ram of atonement,
whereby an atonement shall be made for him. It is appointed that offenders who
have wronged others, and were to be admitted to the trespass, offering, should
not only make confession of their sins, but also make satisfaction to the party
to whom the wrong was done, which satisfaction is a fruit of righteousness; to
which agrees that of Jesus Christ. Mat. 5. 23. If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, verse. 24.
leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, and first be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. In that public penitential
confession that is mentioned, Ezra. 10 10, 11. Ye have transgressed and taken
strange wives, and increased the trespass of Israel: now therefore make
confession to the LORD GOD of your fathers, and do his pleasure, and separate
your selves from the people of the land, and from the strange wives. There it
not only a confession of the sin, but a doing of the LORDS pleasure, and a
separating of themselves from the people of the land, and from the strange
wives. Psalm. 51. which was penned to be a testimony of David's Public
Repentance, for the scandalous sins of murder and adultery committed by him;
and was therefore committed to the chief Musician, to be Published in the
Sanctuary and Temple, does contain many not able Evidences of Repentance and
Reformation: And we see the Apostle Paul 2 Cor. 2. 7. does not give charge to
the Corinthians for the receiving the Incestuous person, until he is in some
appearance of hazard to be swallowed up with too much sorrow. 7. verse Ye ought
to forgive him and comfort him, least perhaps such an one be swallowed up with
over much sorrow; which does argue that the Apostle thought a great measure of
real conviction and sorrow requisite in such an one, before he ought to be
received: According to these Scriptures, the first book of Discipline, in the
7, head thereof requires, that before scandalous persons be admitted to the
Public confession of their Repentance, that there appear in them signs of
unfeignedrepentance; and the form and order of Public repentance appointed by
the General Assembly of the Ministers and Elders, in the which they ought
sharply to be examined what fear and terror they have of Gods judgments, and
what hatred for sin, and dolor for the same, and what sense and feeling they
have of Gods mercies; in the which if they be ignorant, they ought diligently
to be instructed: For it is but a mocking to present such to Public Repentance
as neither know what sin is, what Repentance is, what Grace is, nor by whom
Gods mercy and favor is purchased, thereafter the offender shall be instructed
in the Assembly, so that he have some taste of Gods Judgments, but chiefly of
Gods Mercies through Jesus Christ, he may be presented before the Public Kirk;
And the Act of the General Assembly at Edinburgh 1596. March. 26. That none
falling in Public scandal be received in the fellowship of the Kirk, except
his Minister have some appearance and warrant in his Conscience, that he has
both a feeling of sin, and an apprehension of mercy; and for this effect, that
the Minister travail with him in Doctrine, and private instruction, to bring
him thereto; especially in the Doctrine of Public Repentance, which being
neglected, the Public place of Repentance is turned to a mocking. And the Acts
of the General Assembly at Edinburgh 1649. provids that because many
heretofore have made a show and profession of Repentance, who were not
convinced of their guiltiness, nor humbled for the same, but did thereafter
return like the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to the puddle, unto the
mocking of God, the exceeding great reproach and detriment of his Cause;
Therefore for the better discerning the truth and sincerity of the Repentance
of these who desire to be admitted to the Covenant and Communion, it is
appointed and ordained that none of the persons who are debarred from the
Covenant and Communion, shall be received and admitted thereunto, but such as
after trial shall be found for some competent time either before or after the
offer of their Repentance, according to the discretion of the respective
Judicatories, to have in their ordinary conversation given real testimony of
their dislike of the late unlawful Engagement, and of all the courses and ways
of Malignants, and of their sorrow for their accession to the same, and to live
godly, righteously, and soberly etc. And reason also proves the same point, for
whether we take Public Repentance in reference to the removing of scandal and
offense given to the Kirk, or in reference to the absolution of the party from
the guilt of the same intimated to him by the Minister as the servant of
Christ, and in the Name of Christ, on his Repentance; it must always be
understood of such a profession of Repentance, as does evidence the reality and
humility thereof in outward fruits; for a real scandal cannot be removed by a
bare and verbal profession without fruits; neither can a minister with any
persuasion of conscience make any intimation of mercy and pardon to him of the
reality and sincerity of whose profession he has no testimony in his carriage
and conversation. Yet notwithstanding of these things many scandalous persons
of all sorts, especially these who were profane Malignants disaffected to the
Work of GOD and his people this last year, have been admitted to Public
Repentance, on bare convictions of Repentance and sorrow, without any real
evidence and fruit thereof in their carriage and conversation; nay, in many of
them there was presumptions in the contrary; which as it has proven a snare to
their souls, so has it exceedingly provoked God, and stumbled the godly, and
rendered Kirk Censures and Public Repentance base and contemptible.

The third consequence is, That the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper has been
fearfully polluted and profaned, by the promiseuous admitting of many
scandalous and ignorant persons thereto: The truth whereof in the matter of
fact, as it has been the constant burden and complaint of all the godly
Ministers and people in Scotland these many years past; so it has been often
confessed in the Causes of solemn Fasts, and public Humiliation and
particularly in that public Acknowledgement of Sin that was made by the Kirk
of Scotland, in the year 1648. that it may be the better understood and taken
up; ye would consider first what persons by the Word of GOD, and doctrine of
the Kirk of Scotland, are to be debarred from, or admitted to the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; how the rule of the Word and constitutions of the Kirk are
kept in this particular. For the first, it is clear from the Word of God, and
the Doctrine of the Kirk of Scotland, that all scandalous and ignorant persons
ought to be debarred from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that none
ought to be received and admitted thereunto, but such who do not only know and
make profession of the Gospel, but walk suitable thereunto. The Apostle Paul in
the 1 Cor. 11. 28. appoints that a man must first examine himself, and so eat.
And he also says, That he who comes to that Sacrament, must be one who
discernes the Lords Body; otherwise, that he eats and drinks damnation to
himself; and he further adds, That this must be done in remembrance of JESUS
CHRIST, to show forth his death till he come again; and therefore such as by
reason of their ignorance cannot examine themselves, nor discern the Lords
Body, nor knows not what it is to show forth the Lords death, ought not to
come. This same duty of examination, discerning the Lords Body, which the
Apostle calls for, does also debar scandalous persons, and admit of none but
such who walk orderly according to the Gospel, because the examination here
required, must be according to the nature of the Ordinance of the Lords Supper,
to wit, whether they be worthy or not, that is, whether they have repentance or
not; For he that comes without it, is unclean, and so pollutes the Ordinance;
as also whether he has faith or not, without which, there can be no discerning
of the Lords Body, nor showing forth his death; and whether they have love or
no, without which, there can be no Communion with CHRIST and his Members in
that Ordinance. The Confession of Faith of the Kirk of Scotland, Entitled, To
whom Sacraments appertain, speaks thus: But the Supper of the Lord (we
confess) to appertain to such only as be of the household of Faith, and can try
and examine themselves, as well in their faith as in their duty to their
neighbor; but if such persons ought not to come, and if the Sacraments do not
appertain to them, there can be no question, but if they presume to come, they
ought to be debatred, it being a trust committed to the Officers of the Kirk,
both in the Old and New Testament to keep the charge of the holy things, and to
take heed that his Ordinances be not polluted and profaned, and to separate
the precious from the vile. Levit. 10. 10. That ye may put a difference betwixt
the holy and unholy, betwixt the clean and unclean. 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. And he set
the porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none who was unclean,
in any thing, should enter in, Ezekiel. 22. 26. They have put no difference
betwixt the holy and profane, neither have they showed difference betwixt the
clean and the unclean. Ezekiel. 44. 7. In that ye have brought into my sanctuary
strangers uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my
sanctuary to pollute it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the
blood, and they have broken my Covenant, because of all your abominations, and
ye have not kept the charge of my holy things, but ye have set keepers of my
charge in my sanctuary for your selves. Mat. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy
unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them
under their feet, and turn again and rent you. 1 Cor. 5. 13. But them that are
without God judges; therefore put away from amongst your selves that wicked
person. Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject. Rev. 2. 20. Nevertheless I have a few things against thee,
because thou suffer that woman Iezebel, which calls herself a prophetess,
to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things
sacrificed to idols. Jer. 15. 19. If thou take forth the precious from the
vile, thou shall be as my mouth: let them return unto thee, but return not thou
unto them. The Direction for the Public Worship of God throughout the three
Kingdoms, in the Head concerning the Celebration of the Lords Supper, asserts,
that the ignorant and scandalous are not to receive the Sacrament. And the
Large Catechism asserts, That such as are found to be ignorant and scandalous,
notwithstanding their profession of says and desire to come to the Lords
Supper, may and ought to be kept from that Sacrament, by the power which
Christ has left in his Kirk, until they receive instruction, and manifest
their reformation: And the Confession of Faith condescended on by the Assembly
of Divines, and approven by the Kirk of Scotland, in the Chapter of the Lords
Supper, says, That all scandalous and ignorant persons, as they are unfit to
enjoy Communion with CHRIST, so are they unworthy of the Lords Table, and so
cannot without great sin against CHRIST (whilst they remain such) partake of
the holy Mysteries, or be admitted thereto. And for proof thereof, cites these
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread,
and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord: But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup: For he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. 2 Cor.
5. 14, 15, 16. For the love of Christ constrainceth us, because we thus judge,
That if one died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that
they which live, should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died
for them, and rose again. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh;
yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet we henceforth know him no
more. 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. Know ye not, that a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump? Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are
unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. v. 13. But them
that are without, God judges: Therefore put away from among your selves that
wicked person. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14, 15. Now we command you, brethren, in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, That ye withdraw your selves from every brother that
walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us. And if
any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish
him as a brother. Mat. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither
cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and
turn again and rent you.

As to the other, how the Rule of the Word, and Constitutions of this Kirk are
keept in this particular it needs nor much be spoken, the transgression being
so palpable and common that they who runs may read, these particular faults may
be taken notice of in order to this point: 1. To say nothing, that in some
places, few or none at all are excluded for ignorance, but that persons being
once come to such an age, are admitted, and being once admitted, are never
again excluded: There is in many Congregations little or no care to examine, or
take any notice of the knowledge of all persons indifferently, something being
done in reference to servants, and these of the poorer sort, but masters of
families and those of the richer sort for the most part neglected, taking it
for granted (as it were) that they have knowledge, when indeed many of them are
grossly ignorant, and ought because of their ignorance to be debarred. 2. That
the bare repeating of the Lords Prayer, the Belief, or ten Commandments, or
answering a Question or two of the Catechism by rot-rime (as we say) when
nothing of the meaning is understood, is by many taken for knowledge
sufficient. 3. There is not sufficient care to take notice of all scandals and
scandalous persons, in which respect there is a twofold gross neglect: 1 That
the scandal of omission of Duty is not taken notice of, as well as the scandal
of commission of sin, notwithstanding that the Acts and Constitutions of the
Kirk make express provision for the one as well as for the other, as may be seen
in their Acts against these who absent themselves on the Lords day from the
Public Worship of God, and against masters of families who neglect to pray in
their family, and others of that nature. 2. The many scandals of commission are
also neglected, it being a custom in many Congregations to take notice only of
Fornicators and Adulterers, and workers on the Lords day, and such as these;
but do neglect Tiplers, Drunkards, Swearets, Liars, Deceivers of their
Neighbors, Fighters, Oppressors, Extortioners, Covetous persons, and many
others who walk contrary to the Gospel; whereas it is expressly provided by the
Discipline of this Kirk, in the year 1587. that if the Eldership perceive any
thing in the Congregation either evil in the example, or scandalous in manners,
and not beseeming their profession, whatsoever it be that may spot the
Christian Congregation, yea rather whatsoever is not to edification, ought not
to escape admonition or punishment, or higher degree of Kirk-Censure, as 2 Cor.
2. 6. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was inflicted of many.
3. That many such as have been judicially convicted of scandalous faults, are
pressed and received into a public profession of Repentance, when as indeed
there is no real evidences of Repentance, yet by a profession thereof are put in
a capacity to come to the Lords Table: By these ways it comes to pass that
many ignorant and scandalous persons are admitted who ought to be excluded;
which certainly is a fearful sin, as may appear in these and many other
respects: 1. It hinders many poor souls from searching after knowledge, and
from departing from iniquity, and hardens them in their ignorance and lewdness.
2. It causes them to prohane the precious blood of the Covenant, and to eat
and drink damnation to themselves. 3. It makes the ignorant and scandalous
promiscuously partakers of the seals of the Covenant of Grace with the truly
godly. 4. It provokes the Lord to depart from his Ordinances, and forsake his
Temple, because of such dishonor to his Name. 5. It brings on the judgment of
God on particular persons and the whole Land. Lastly, it grieves and stumbles
the godly amongst our selves, and exposes our selves and the Ordinances of
Christ therein, to contempt and reproach amongst others.

The Fourth Consequent which is named to follow on the resting upon outward and
bare forms, is the keeping in of many continually and openly profane in the
fellowship of this Kirk, by which is meant the neglect of casting out such from
the fellowship of the kirk by the sentence of excomunication; for certainly
these who do wilfully continue in their ignorance from year to year, slighting
the means of knowledge, and refusing to be instructed, or to learn the way of
the Lord: And these who do continue in an open course of prophanity, making a
profession of repentance, and still persisting in their wicked way after
sufficient pains taken on them, and their slighting other inferior Kirk
Censures, ought to be casten out as dry and withered, corrupt and rotten
branches, and not to be looked as Members of the Kirk of GOD. Number. 15. 30. But
the soul that does ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the Land, or a
stranger; the same reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from
amongst his People. Psalm. 50. 16, 17. But to the wicked God says, What have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in
thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction and casts my Words behinds thee?
Mat. 18. 18. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, shall
be bound in Heaven. And therefore it is provided in the old Acts of the Assembly
of this Kirk, that who will stubbornly remain ignorant in the principal points
of Salvation, shall be Excommunicated: And that every Master of Family shall be
commanded, either to instruct his Children and Servants, or cause them be
instructed; and if they will not, the Kirk shall proceed against them. The Genesis
Assembly at Edinburgh in the year 1648. in the Overtures for the remedy of
Grievances and common Sins of the Land, provided, That persons often guilty of
gross scandals, be Excommunicated more summarily then ordinary Process, except
there be more then ordinary signs and an eminent measure of repentance, made
known to the Sessions and Presbytery. Besides these four, the Article also
mentions many other sad and fearful consequents unto the profaning of all the
Ordinances of God, and rendering them bare, barren and fruitless to us. And
there is no question, but that formality in profession, and resting upon, and
idolizing outward and bare forms, brings out many sad consequents besides
these; such as the slighting by many, and mocking by some, the work of the
Spirit, not seeking after communion and fellowship with God in Ordinances, not
studying to know, and be humbled for the iniquity of our Holy things, not
seeing a need, and employing of JESUS CHRIST for strength, and acceptance in
all our performances; and turning the living God to a dumb Idol: and many
others that are mentioned and spoken to, in that Paper published by the
Commssion, concerning the contempt of the Gospel.

The Fourth Article.
The fourth Artcle has two parts; the first whereof relates to the neglect of
Family Worship: which though it be a grievous sin, which provokes the Lord to
pour out his wrath on a People, Ier. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury on the Heathen
that know thee not, and on the families that call not on thy Name. Yet there be
many Masters of Families amongst all ranks of persons, Noblemen, Barons,
Gentlemen, Burgesses, Commons, and even some Ministers who lie under the guilt;
nay, there be but few in which the plurality will not be found to neglect, or
never to have practiced the Duty: Instance is given in the Article of Great
men, (Nobles, Barons, Gentlemen and Burgesses of special note) because very few
are to be found amongst these who make conscience to call on the Lords Name in
their Families, some of them turning over the Duty wholly on a Chaplain, or
some other person in the Family; and others of them having no such Duty in
their Families performed at all, either by themselves, or by any other, they
being either unable, or ashamed and unwilling to do it; whereas great and
eminent persons have accounted it their duty and glory, and have followed it
with much conscience and care, as may be instanced in Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. For
I know him, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord
may bring on Abraham that which he has spoken of. And in Joshua, 24. 15. And
if it seem evil unto you to serve the LORD, choose you this day whom ye will
serve whether the gods that your fathers served who were on the other side of
the flood, or the gods of the Amorites in whose Land ye dwell: but as for me,
and my house we will serve the LORD. And in David, 2 Samuel 6. 20. Then David
returned to bless his household. This woeful neglect of so necessary and
profitable a duty, especially in the Families of great Ones, usually attended
with the neglect of catechizing and instructing of Children and Servants, in
the way of the Lord, and pressing and exercising them unto Prayer and other
religious Duties, as it is a great sin before God, the height where of is
increased by their continuing therein, after solemn public confession thereof,
and engaging to the contrary, in the year 1648. and is expressly to be seen in
the solemn, public confession of sins, and engagement to duties; so it is the
cause of much ignorance of God, Atheism and looseness, prophanity, disorder and
discontent that is in Families: and not only proves a binderance to the
spreading of piety amongst others who walks after their example, but also stops
the course of the Lords blessings on themselves and on their Families, and
brings down upon them many judgments and curses from the Lord. The other part
of the Article relates to the loathing and hating of godliness, and the
reproaching, reviling, oppressing and persecuting the godly: A sin, as it is
great in it self, Genesis 21. 9. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egytian which
she had born unto Abraham mocking. Gal. 4. 28. Now we, brethren, as Isaac was,
are the children of promise: But as then he who was born after the flesh,
persecuted him who was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. Ps. 14. 6. Ye
have s^amed the counsel of the poor; because the Lord is his refuge. Isa. 8.
18. Behold, I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs, and
for wonders in Israel, from the Lord of Hosts who dwells in Mount Sion. Act.
9. 4 And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And draws down a recompense of tribulation from the Lord.
2 Thessalonians. 1 6 Seeing it is a righteous thing with the Lord to recompense
tribulation to them which trouble you: so it seems to be a monstrous sin
amongst a People, making profession of Reformation, and who are so often
covenanted to God in so solemn a way, and yet has it prevailed and abounded
exceedingly this year by gone, in Court, in Country, in Cities, in
Judicatories, in the Army, and every where throughout the Land: A man was made
an offender for a word, and he that departed from iniquity, made himself a
prey. It was quarrel enough, not to have run with others to the same excess of
riot: They who would not be disaffected and disolute, behooved to be esteemed
enemies to their Country: they who studied to make conscience of holy Duties,
and keep their integrity, were slandered as Sectaries, and complyers with
Sectaries, and were not only exposed to the scourge of tongues, but also to the
violence and oppression of malignant, graceless and profane men: Neither were
Magistrates and Ministers free of this sin, but even sundry of these who ought
to have protected, encouraged and countenanced the godly, were as pricks in
their eyes, and thorns in their sides; not only by withdrawing their
countenance from them, giving way to others, to revile, oppress and persecute
them, but by employing their own gifts and power in Judicatories, and Pulpits,
and otherways, for keeping them down, and making them hateful and odious to
others amongst whom they live. And whilst we are speaking of these things, We
cannot but mention the great prejudice and enmity which many Ministers had
against the exercises of godliness and duties of mutual edification, together
with the great blot brought upon piety, and the great blow given to the
exercise of godliness by the Act of the Assembly at Aberdeen, not repented of
by the Kirk of Scotland, nor repealed to this day: and the great neglect of the
duties of mutual edification amongst the Lords Ministers and People, after
there was allowance given for the same by the following Assemblies, and the
suffering of many giftless and unprofitable Ministers not gifted of God to
edify his People, to continue in the Ministry; whereby it comes to pass that
many gracious People were necessitated either to want edification in the
Public Ordinances, or to fall under the censure of such Acts made against such
as did usually withdraw from the Ordinances and Ministry of their own Parish
Churches. This sin of hating and bearing down the power of godliness, and
persecuting the godly, was accompanied with another, which is mentioned also in
the Article, to wit, The countenancing and employing the ungodly and profane,
a thing that the godly man's soul abhorred, Psa. 26. 1, 2. 3, 4. Judge me, O
Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity, I have trusted also in the Lord,
therefore I shall not slide. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my heart and
my veins; For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in
thy truth. I have not sit with vain persons, neither will I go with
dissemblers, etc. And so throughout the Psalm. Psalm 101. 4, 5. A froward hear:
shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person. Whosoever privily slandereth
his neighbor, him will I cut off: Him that has a proud heart, and an high
look will I not suffer. Psalm. 139. 21, 22. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that
hate thee? And am not I grieved with these that rise up against thee? I hate
them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies. 23. v. Search me, O Lord,
and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts. And yet, has it not gotten
great footing amongst us, and made wicked men get up the head, and wickedness
to grow and abound everywhere? The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest
men are exalted, Psalm 12. last verse.

5. Article.
THe fifth Article speaks of Covetousness and Oppression, the one as the root,
the other, as the fruit and effect thereof. We need not to insist to show what
a sin the love of the World and Covetousness is, the Scriptures hold it forth
as Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is Idolatry, as the root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6. 10. For
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some men have coveted
after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows: As that which is inconsistent with the love of God. 1 Ioh. 2. 15. Love
not the World, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the
World, the love of the Father is not in him. As that which makes the Lord wroth
with men. Isai. 57. 17. For the iniquity of his covetousnes was I wroth, and
smote him: I ^id my self and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of
his heart. And to abhor them, Psalm 10. 3. The wicked boasts of his hearts
desire, and blesses the covetous whom the Lord abhors. As that which brings
the curse of God on them and on their families, Hab. 2. 9, 10, 11. Woe to him
that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on
high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have consulted
shame to thine house, by cutting off many people, and have sinned against thy
soul. For the stones shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it. And though it have in it all these and many other mischiefs
and evils, yet has it taken hold on, and does cleave closely to many of all
ranks in the Land in their carriage and actings: Do not the Body of the People
spend their time in seeking after the things of a present world; and according
as they prosper, or are crossed in these things, accordingly do they think
themselves happy or miserable. And there be Ministers not a few, that as they
entered, so do they follow the work of the Ministry for the things of a
present world, and are more for caring for these things, then for the souls
committed to their charge, and more eager in pursuing an increase and
augmentation in these things, then in pursuing the things that concern the
beating down of Satan's Kingdom, and the promoving of the Kingdom of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST. And hence also it is as from a main cause that Ministers not a
few, prove unfaithful in their duty, and unsuitable in a day of temptation,
rather choosing to forbear to reprove and censure the faults of these who may
bring prejudice to them in things worldly, rather then to offend them, and
rather choosing to become neutrall and indifferent, or comply with evil
courses, then to hazard the loss of their stipends, but especially the sad and
woeful fruit of this woeful evil appears in Masters to their servants,
Landlords to their Tenants, Magistrates and Rulers to these over whom they bear
rule, Judges to these who come before them, Advocats and Procurators to their
Clients; Clerks, Commissars and Collectors to these with whom they have to do;
Officers and Soldiers in the Country where they bear charge, yea and amongst
the Commons themselves, where they have any power one over another; The Lord
has forbidden to oppress an hired servant, and has commanded at his day to
give him his hire: Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant
that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that
are in the land within thy gates, at his day thou shall give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down upon it: for he is poor and needy, and sets
his heart upon it, lest he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto
thee. Yet behold, the hire of the labourer is by many Masters kept back
violently and fraudulently, and this cries unto Heaven, and is entered into the
ears of the Lord of hosts. Jam. 5. 4. Behold, the hire of the labourer which
have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries; and
the cries of them which have reaped, have entered into the ears of the Lord of
sabbath. The oppression of Landlords to their Tenants, are so many and so
exorbitant, that they cannot easily be reckoned, the Lands for the most part
set by them at a dearer rate then the Tenants can pay the Duty, and live in any
tolerable condition themselves; and therefore are they forced with their wives
and children to drudge continually in the earth from morning till evening; by
which it comes to pass, that their lives is but a kind of lasting bondage and
slavery, and that they have neither time nor encouragement for serving and
seeking GOD themselves in their Families, or for breeding their children in
knowledge, virtue and piety. Secondly, Beside the Rent of the Land condescended
on, they also lay on them many burdens and taxations in an arbitrary way by
their Bailiffs and Courts, and otherwise at their pleasure, such as services
of all sorts beyond paction and agreement, and quarterings; and beside the
putting out of the Foot, and the burden thereof, sometime the burden of putting
out the Horse, and the bearing of a great part, or the whole Monthly
Maintenance and Sesse. Thirdly, The giving of short Laces of Lands, and
removing them therefrom, and taking away what they have when they grow poor,
and are not able to pay, or else if they thrive, by heightening and augmenting
their Farms and Rent, by which means it has in the righteous judgment of GOD,
occasioned that Tenants in many places prove undutifull to their Masters, and
deny to them these things which in conscience and reason they are obliged to
perform. And for the Rulers, albeit we be far from joining issue with these who
from dis-affection to the Work of GOD and the Instruments thereof, did traduce
and speak evil of those whom GOD set over us in their charge, and even in the
imposing of the most necessary burdens, and in the most moderate and equal
way, yet we cannot but acknowledge and bemoan the great reproach that has been
brought on the chief Judicatories of the Land, and on the Work of GOD, by the
felfshness and particularity of some persons of note therein, who not only
contrary to the practice of good Nehemiah, who would not eat the bread of the
Governor, took large allowance for their attendance on Public Affairs: and
notwithstanding that they had sufficient estates of their own, but also abused
their power and moyen for exacting and employing sums of Money for
themselves, and for their friends and followers, while in the mean time small
regard was had to the condition of these from whom these sums were exacted,
or to the equal supplying of the condition of others, to whom as much and
possibly more in desert and justice was due, as to these to whom those Moneys
were given. We shall not insist on the bribery that has been amongst Judges,
the cunning, cozenage, and exorbitant pilferings and taking that has been
amongst Advocats, Procurators, Commissars, Clerks and Collectors: many of them
have made haste to be rich, and have by the Bench, by the Purse, by the tongue
and by the Pen, heaped up much treasure, and made conquest of Lands and
Estates, but with an evil conscience, because it has been the gain of bribery
and injustice and lying and deceit, violence and oppression; but amongst no
sort of persons has these sins of covetousness and oppression more appeared
and prevailed then amongst many of the chief Officers and Soldiers in our
Armies, insomuch that many of these who were raised for the Lands protection
and defense, have been their intolerable burden and plague, and have by their
most exorbitant^ violent, tyrannical and insatiable exactions, made the lives
of the Inhabitants bitter, and a burden to them: What interverting of Levies,
what false Musters, what exorbitant exactions above the Law for men and horse
and Arms; what Quarterings and covetous subtle oppressing devices of many
sorts for getting of Money have been amongst Officers, and what plundering of
Goods, destroying of Corns, taking and robbing of Moneys, railing upon, and
beating and wounding the poor people: what excessive eating and drinking, and
unplacablenesse in their diet, not satisfying themselves with such fare as
people could afford to them, but killing their Kine and Sheep, and what ever
came in their way: and how many other things of that kind has been amongst
Soldiers, and what exorbitancies and oppressions, whereof the negligence and
oversight of some great ones and officers in our Armies, was not the least
cause; for they not being able to shake their hands of dishonest gain
themselves, did oftentimes wink at, nay sometimes obstruct the purging out, and
punishing of others; Amongst other effects of Covetousness, instance is given
in the close of the Article of the great Insolences and oppression of many in
our Armies in England and Ireland, and the fearful perjuries of the Land in
the matter of Valuation and Excise, both of which were dreadful and horrible
provocations: The first of them as it was a grievous burden to our Brethren in
England and Ireland, and did exceedingly stumble them at this Nation and the
Work of GOD in their hands; so we make no question but it is one of the sins
that GOD is pointing at now in a special manner in the rods wherewith he now
chastises us. The other of them though little adverted to, or laid to heart,
or acknowledged to this day, yet is a fearful guilt which many in the Land ly
under: How many in the matter of Valuations, that Lands might be valued at a
low rate, did swear falsely? And how many were there who were Isntrumental to
cause others to swear falsely? And some Judges for their own advantage and
interest, did connive thereat: And many likewise did swear falsely in
exciseable goods. Before we close what relates to this Article, we desire that
these Scriptures may be considered, in reference to the sins mentioned there,
as the fruits of the love of the World and Covetousness. Job. 35. 9. By reason
of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to cry, they cry out
because of the arm of the mighty, but none saito, where is God? etc. Psalm. 62.
10. Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery: If riches increase,
set not your hearts on them. Psalm 82. 2. How long will ye judge unjustly, and
accept the person of the wicked? Proverb. 14. 31. He that oppresses the poor,
reproacheth his maker; but he that honors him, has mercy on the poor.
Proverb. 15. 27. He that is greedy of gain, he troubles his own house; but he
who hates gifts, shall hve. Prove. 22. 16. He that oppresses the poor, to
increase his riches, and he that gives to the rich, shall surely come to want.
Prove. 28. 3. A poor man that oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain that
leaves no food. Verse 8. He who by usury and unjust gain increases his
substance, he shall gather it for him that shall pity the poor. 20. Verse. A
faithful man shall abound with blessings; but he who makes haste to be rich,
shall not be innocent Eccles. 7. 7. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad,
and a gift destroys the heart. Isai. 1. 21, 22, 23, 24. How is the faithful
city become an harlot? It was full of judgment, and righteousness lodged in
it; but now murderers: Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water.
Thy princes are rebellions, and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts,
and follows after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither does the
cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of hosts,
the mighty one of Israel, Ab, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me
of mine enemies. Isai. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. As for my people, children are their
oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, they which lead thee, cause
thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. The Lord stands up to plead,
and stands to judge the people. The Lord will enter into judgment with the
ancients of his people, and the Princes thereof: For ye have eaten up the
vineyard, the spoil of the poor is in your houses. What mean ye that ye beat my
people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor, says the Lord God of hosts.
Isai. 5. 7. And he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; and for
righteousness, but behold a cry. 9. Verse. Of a truth says the Lord of Hosts,
many houses shall be desolate, even great avd fair without Inhabitant. v. 23.
Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. Isa. 10. 1, 3. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous
decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed: To turn aside
the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my People,
that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. And what
will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from
far? To whom will ye flee for help? and where will you leave your glory? Without
me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the stain:
for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
Isa. 33. 15. He that despises the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil, He shall dwell on high: his place of defense
shall be the munitions of rocks. Jer. 6. 6, 7. For thus has the Lord of Hosts
said, Hew ye down trees, and cast a mount against Jerusalem: this is the City
to be visited: she is wholly oppression in the midst of her. As a fountain
casts out her waters, so she casts out her wickedness: Violence and spoil
is heard in her: before me continually is grief and wounds. Jer. 5. 26. For
amongst my People are found wicked men, they lay wait as he that sets
snares, they set a trap they catch men. Vers^ 27. As a cage is full of birds,
so are their houses full of deceit: therefore are they become great, and waxen
rich. Verse. 28. They are waxen fat, they shine; yea, they overpass the deeds of
the wicked, they judge not the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and
the right of the needy do they not judge. Verl. 29. Shall I not visie for these
things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
Jer. 22. 13. Woe to him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his
chambers by wrong: that uses his neighbors service without wages, and gives
him not for his work. Verse. 14. That says, I will build me a wide house, and
large chambers, and cutteth him out windows, and it is cieled with cedar, and
painted with vermilion. Verse. 15. Shall thou reign because thou closest thy
self in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice,
and then it was well with him? Verse 16. He judged the cause of the poor and
needy, then it was well with him: was not this to know me, says the Lord? V.
17. But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousnes, and for to
shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it. Ezekiel. 22.
13. Behold therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou
have made, and at the blood which has been in the midst of thee. Verse. 29. The
People of the Land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed
the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully. Hos. 7.
1. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephralm was
discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood, and the
thief comes in, and the troops of robbers spoil without. Amos 3. 10. For they
know not to do right, says the Lord, who store up robbery and violence in
their palaces. ver. 11. Therefore thus says the Lord God. An adversary there
shall be, even round about the Land, and he shall bring down thy strength, from
thee and thy palaces shall be spoiled. ver. 15. And I will smite the winter
house, with the summer house, and the houses of I very shall perish, and the
great houses shall have an end, says the Lord. Mic. 3. 11. The Heads thereof
judge for reward, and the Priests thereof, teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money; yet will they lean on the Lord and say, Is not the
Lord amongst us, none evil can come upon us? ver. 12. Therefore shall Sion for
their sakes be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the
Mountain of the House as the high places of the Forest Zeph. 3. 1, Woe to her
that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing City. ver. 3. Her Princes within
her are roaring Lions, her Judges are ravenous Wolves, they gnaw not the bones
til the morrow. verse. 8. Therefore wait ye upon nie, says the Lord, til I rise
up to for the prey, my determination is to gather the Nations, that I may
assemble the Kingdoms, that I may pour out on them mine indignation, even al my
fierce anger: for all the Earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.
Zeph. 1. 9. In the same day will I punish all them who leap on the threshold,
who fill their masters houses with violence and deceit. Exodus 2 2. 21, 22, 23,
24. Ye shall neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in
the Land of Egypt. Thou shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child; if
thou afflict them in any ways, and they cry ^t al unto me, I will surely hear
their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot; I will kill you with the sword, and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

The Sixth Article.
The sixth Article relates to the abusing and prostituting the Public Faith of
the Kingdom, in the way of borrowing of Moneys and otherwise: which no question
is not one of the least provoking Public sins in the Land. As private men
ought so far to have their faith and credit in estimation, for the love of
righteousness and truth, as not to engage the same but when they do sincerely
intend, and really endeavor to perform what they promise: so much more ought
public persons, and the Judicatories of a Land have such regard to the Public
Faith of a Nation, as not to engage the same, but when there be some real
purposes, and honest endeavors to fulfill it: Because the prostituting and
breach of Publick-Faith, as it is an high provocation before God, so it is a
great deal more pernicious, reproachful, slanderous, and injurious, and of a
worse example amongst men, especially when it becomes common and is used as a
state engine, to draw in men's propriety from them, under a vail and shadow of
righteousness, and is attended with a kind of conslraint upon men, to take the
Public Faith for security, as it was in this Land. Job 15. 4. Yea, thou
castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God. Psalm 37. 21. The wicked
borrows and pays not again: but the righteous shows mercy and gives.
Isa. 59. 12, 13, 14. For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our
sins testify against us: for our transgressiont are with us, and as for our
iniquities we know them. In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and in
departing away from our God; speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and
uttering from the heart words of falsehood. And judgment is turned away
backward, and justice stands a faa off: for truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter. Yea, truth fails, and he that departs from evil
makes himself a prey. And the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there
was no judgment.

The Seventh Article.
The seventh Article mentions two sins that many of this Land are guilty of, in
their first taking of the National Covenant, and solemn League and Covenant,
and renewing thereof. The first whereof is, The ignorance that was in many, or
the want of the necessary knowledge of the things contained in the Covenants.
The Lord requires of al those that take an oath, That they do it in judgment,
Jer. 4. 2. And thou shall swear, The Lord lives in truth, in righteousness,
and in judgment, and the Nations shall bless themselves in him. That is, That
they take it with such a measure of discretion, judgment and understanding, as
is needful for men in their station, in order to the Duty which by their Oath
they tie themselves to. But it is beyond question that many in the Land do
swear these Covenants without the knowledge and understanding of the heads
thereof, so far as was needful for them in their station; who when they were
catechized on the particulars, do know little or nothing thereof: Which, no
doubt is one cause why they have so little minded and followed, and do so
little mind and follow the duties contained therein. Jer. 5. 4. And I said,
Surely these are poor, they are foolish; for they know not the way of the Lord,
nor the judgment of their God. The other is, The taking of these Covenants
without reality and sincerity, in order to the performance thereof: Which was
to swear not in truth, as the Lord requires. Jer. 4. 2. And thou shall swear,
The Lord lives, etc. not falsely. Hos. 10. 4. They have spoken words, swearing
falsely, making a Covenant: thus judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows
of the field. And with an heart that was not right, and therefore have they not
been steadfast in the Covenant. Psalm 78. 36, 37. Nevertheless, they did flutter
him with their mouth, and did lie to him with their tongues: for their heart
was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. The
judgments therefore mentioned to have been, in some, example; in others, fear;
and in not a few, principles of policy, for attaining their own ends. Other bad
principles certainly there were in sundry persons, be side these, but these are
mentioned as the most common, and which ha^^^way with most of these who were
guilty either of ignorance, or of hypocrisy in the entering into these
Covenants. Many did take the National Covenant, in example of others, it being
counted praiseworthy and commendable, after such a defection as was then in the
Land, to engage in such a duty, and to be reckoned amongst the repairers of the
breach: Many did take the solemn League and Covenant, for fear; because the
refusing to take it was attended both with Ecclesiastical and Civil Censures,
and therefore did they rather choose to hazard on the OATH of GOD, then to run
these hazards amongst Men; which does not yet condemn the injoyning the taking
of these Covenants upon a good and warrantable principle. It is lawful for the
Judicatories of a Kirk and State to enjoin to men cohabitation with their
wives; and to children, obedience to their Parents; to subjects, obedience to
their Magistrates, and suchlike under such respective relations: Yet as these
persons sin against God if they give obedience only from a principle of carnal
fear; neither does the influence that these relations have on them make the
commanding of these things under those relations to be a sin, because they are
in themselves duties which are commanded of God, the neglect whereof may in
regard of scandal be censured by the Kirk, and in regard of the prejudice that
redounds to the honor of God, and good of our neighbor, be punished by the
civil Magistrate. In taking of both Covenants though there were many whom a
principle of the fear and love of God did move, yet there were not a few, whom
afterdiscoveries have made manifest, who were acted thereto by carnal wisdom
and policy, for attaining their own base and corrupt ends, such as riches,
places of preferment, and lively hood, and ease; and hence mainly has issued
that sin which follows in the next Article.

The eighth Article.
The following of the Work of God, pursuing the ends of the Covenant not in a
holy and spiritual way, setting the Lord always before our eyes, and
acknowledging him in all our paths according to the direction given us of God,
which has the promise of the Blessing, Psalm 37. 5. Commit thy way to the
Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Prove. 3. 5, 6. Trust
in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not to thy own understanding, in all
thy ways acknowledge him and he shall direct thy paths. But in a carnal
politic way abusing Gods Interest for our own interest and ends, is a fearful
transgression, howsoever it is often palliated with specious pretenses, as Iehu
his zeal against the house of Ahab 2 Kings 10. 16. Come with me, and see my
zeal for the LORD; so they made him ride in his chariot. Yet the Lord does not
suffer it to go unpunished, Hos. 1. 4. And the LORD said unto him, Call his
Name Iesreel, for yet a little while and I will avenge the blood of Jesreel on
the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel.
v. 5. And it shall come to pass in that day that I will break the bow of
Israel in the valley of Jesreel.

1. Consequent. Two Consequents of this carnal way are mentioned, the one is
the walking in the way of our own hearts, more then in the Counsel of God: For
when men's hearts are not single and straight in reference to the glory of God,
they love not to walk according to the simplicity of the Word of God, but turns
aside to their crooked ways, to choose such carnal midses as seem most plausible
to their carnal hearts, for compassing their corrupt ends: a siu that was
confessed in the public solemn Confession of sins, in the year 1648. And yet
never have these crooked paths been more trodden in, and these counsels of flesh
and blood been more hearkened to, then since that time; which is one of the
causes, why the sword does abide in our cities, and consume our branches and
devours: For this the Prophet threatens against Israel, because of their own
counsels. The other, Trusting more in the arm of flesh, then in the arm of the
Lord; which has been a constant and continued sin in this Nation these years
past; in doting on multitudes, skill, and abilities of men, and numbers, and
strength of horses; whence have issued the corrupt mixtures in our Armies and
the employing of all ranks of persons, how malignant and profane soever: what
wonder then though our Armies have not prospered? but have oftentimes met with
a curse in stead of a blessing. Jer. 17. 5, 6. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be
the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart
departs from the Lord, for he shall be like the heath in the desert, and
shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the
wilderness in a salt Land, and not inhabited. From this same fountain has
proceeded needless alienation of mind, and estrangedness of heart, on the least
difference in judgment amongst Brethren, often attended with passion and
spleen. Which makes our affection rather to favor our own image then the Image
of Christ in others: and our zeal against malignancie and error did diverse
times break: forth into bitterness and reproach against the persons that did
turn aside, whereas it ought to have been accompanied with Christian meekness
and compassion.

The Ninth Article.
The Ninth Article specifies one of the greatest and most comprehensive and
provoking sins in this Land, viz. Backsliding and defection from the Covenants,
and our solemn Vows and Engagements. For attaining a right impression thereof,
We desire, that these and other seruples of that kind, may be seriously and
impartially thought on and applied. Prou. 14. 14v. The back sider in ^eare
shall be filled with his own ways: and a good man shall be satisfied from
himself. Ier. 3. 20. Surely ^as a wife treacherously departs from her
husband. (...) you (...) treacherously with me, O house of Israel, says the
Lord. Ier. ^. ^. Moreover thou shall say (...) them, thus says the Lord, Shall
they fall, and not arise? shall be turn away, and not return? v. 5. Why then is
this People of (...) alo^^ slidenback, by a perpetual back sliding? they hold
f^st deceit, they refuse to return. v. 6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke
not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done:
everyone turns to his course, as the (...) with into the battle. v. 7. Yea,
the stork in the Heavens knows her appointd times, and the turtle, and the
crane, and the swallow observe the times of their coming: but my People know
not the Judgment of the Lord. v. 8, How do ye say, We are wise, and the Law of
the Lord is with us: (...) certainly in vain made he it, the pen of the Scribe
is in vain. v. 9. The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken; lo,
they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Hos. 11.
7. My People are bent to backsliding from me; though they called them to the
most high, none at all would exal^ him. Ier. 5. 6. Wherefore a Lion out of the
forest shall slay them, and a Wolf of the evening shall spoil them: a Leopard
shall watch over their Cities: every one that goes out thence, shall be torn
in pieces: because their transgressions are many, and their back slidings are
increased. Levit. 26. 15. And if ye shall despise my Statutes; or if your soul
abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my Commandments, but that ye
break my Covenant: v. 16. I also will do this unto you, I will even appoint
over you terror, consumption, and the burning-ague, that shall consume the
eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your
enemies shall eat it. v. 17. And I will set my face against you, and ye shall
be slain before your enemies: and they that hate you, shall reign over you, and
ye shall flee when none pursues you. v. 35. As long as it lies desolate, it
shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.
Deuteronomy. 29. 23, 24, 25. And that the whole Land thereof is briniston, and salt,
and burning, that it is not sown, nor bears, nor any grass grows thereon,
like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, and Ze^oim, which the Lord
overthrew in his anger and in his wrath: Even all Nations shall say, Wherefore
has the Lord done this to this Land? what means the heat of this great
anger? Then men shall say, Because they have for saken the Covenant of the Lord
God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of
the Land of Egypt. 1 King. 11. 11. Wherefore the Lord said to Solomon,
Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou have not kept my Covenant and my
Statutes, which I have commanded thee. I will surely rent the Kingdom from
thee, and will give it to thy servant. 2 King. 17. 15. And they rejected his
Statutes and his Covenant which he made with their fathers, and his Testimonies
which he testified against them, and they followed vanity, and became vain, and
went after the heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had
charged them, that they should not do like them. Psalm. 78 9. The children of
Ephraim being armed and carrying Bows, turned back in the day of battle. v. 10.
They kept not the Covenant of God, and refused to walk in his Law: v. 11. and
forgot his works, and his wonders that he had showed them. v. 36. Nevertheless,
they did flatter him with their mouths, and lied to him with their tongues,
for their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant. Isa. 24. 5. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof,
because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinances, and broken the
everlasting Covenant. v. 6. Therefore has the c^^se devoured the earth, and
they that da el therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth
are burned, and few men left. Psalm 44. 17. All this is come upon us; yet have
we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant. v. 18. Our
heart is not turned back from thee; neither have our steps declined from thy
way. v. 19. Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and
covered us with the soadow of death. v. 20. If we haven forgotten the Name of
our God, or stretched our hands to a strange god; Shall not God sea^^^ this
out? for he knows the secrets of our hearts. Psalm 50. 16. But to the wicked,
says God, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my
words behind thee. Jer. 11. 9. And the Lord said to me, A conspiracy is found
among the men of Judah, and amongst the inhabitants of Jerusalem. v. 10. They
are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear
my words; and thy went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and
the house of Judah have broken my Covenant which I made with their fathers.
Ier. 22. 8. And many Nations shall pass by this City, and they shall say every
man to his neighbor, Wherefore has the Lord done this to this great City? v.
9. Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord
their God, and worshipped other gods and served them. For thus faith the Lord
God, I will even deal with thee as thou have done, which have despised the
Oath, in breaking the Covenant. Hos. 6. 7. But they like men have transgressed
the Covenant, they have dealt treacherously against me. Hos. 8. 1. Set the
Trumpet to thy mouth: he shall come as an Eagle against the house of the Lord:
because they have transgressed against my Covenant, and trespassed against my
Law. Hos. 10. 4. They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant:
thus Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of the field Rev. 2. 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works, or else I will come to thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent. This sin is aggravated by several circumstances
mentioned in the Article, which are clear in themselves, and need not to be
insisted on: therefore passing these, we come to speak of the special Heads and
Steps that are condescended on in the Paper.

1. Step. The first is, declining from that purity of conversation, that
integrity of heart, that zeal of God that seemed to be in many at their first
entry to the Covenant, and a falling off into loose walking, self-interest and
indifferency. About the time of the first renewing of the Covenant; there was
an sensible change to the better in men's carriage and conversation; most of all
these who joined in opposing the defection; not only reforming themselves from
common and gross sins, such as drunkenness, uncleanness, swearing,
profaning the LORDS Day, flighting of the Ordinances, self-seeking,
covetousness and oppression, etc. but giving themselves to the Duties of
Religion and Righteousness, such as sobriety, Edifying Discourse, Chaste
behavior, hallowing of the LORDS Day, diligent seeking of the LORD in secret
and in their Families, attending on the preaching of the Word as often as
opportunity is offered, liberality, love, charity one toward another, a
Public spirit and zeal for GOD; but all these things are now decayed in many,
and they are again grown as ill if not worse then before, which as it is an
evidence of great unsoundnesse of heart, so has it brought many sad reproaches
on the Work of GOD in our hands, and has proven a great stumbling block to
many in the neighbor Land, to make them averse therefrom, and has given them
no small advantage to speak both against us and it, though these, who do reject
and speak ill of any part of the precious truth of God be not to be justified
in so doing, yet certainly they are much to be condemned who by their untender
and loose walking minister occasion thereto: Woe to these by whom offenses come.

2. Step. The second Step is the sitting up of many Professors in the Land
under the Gospel, and becoming formal and remiss, not entertaining
tenderness and soberness of mind, a sin that relates especially to the Godly
in the Land, not a few of which have much decayed in former tenderness, and
zeal, and diligent seeking of God, and sober and exact walking, studying to
root themselves in the solid knowledge and love of the truth, and invaluing and
improving the Gospel and the means of grace unto a loathing and denying of
themselves, and a growing into and loving and employing of the Lord Jesus
Christ. By which, deadness of spirit has seized on some, and laziness of
spirit on others; whereby it has come to pass, that they have been tempted to
step out of the way, and some to turn aside to the left hand, to embrace
Malignant courses, and some to the right hand to embrace error, whose sin is
so much the greater then the sin of others, by how much their knowledge and the
LORDS loving kindness to them has been greater then to others; and this
declining of Professors, and falling off from their first love, if it be not
deeply mourned for, and if they do not timeoussy lament after the Lord, as it
may prove a snare to many more then yet it has done, so it is like to be
amongst the chief causes that may provok the Lord to remove his Candlestick
from us, Rev. 2 4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou
have left thy first love: v. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent and do the first works, or else I will come to thee quickly and
remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

3. Step. The third is, the secret falling off of some, and open falling off of
many to the opposite party, after their entering to the Covenant; especially
the defection carried on by James Graham, and his party, and that of the year,
1648. by the authors and abettors of the unlawful Engagement, which
particulars are so well known, that we shall not need to stay upon them. Only
we desire that it may be remembered, that as they were early begun and long in
ripning, that of James Graham, having begun in the year 1639. and ripned till
the year 1645. and that some of the chief Authors of the unlawful Engagement
having begun in the year, 1644. and ripned till the year 1648. and did take
hold upon, and infect very many of all ranks throughout the Land, so have they
been really and unfeinedly repented of by very few to this day: which we doubt
not is one of the reasons why so many of these who had hand in these bloody and
backsliding courses have fallen by the sword, and are gone into captivity.

4. Step. The fourth Step, is, The neglecting and condemning the purging of
Judicatories, and the Army, in the year 1649. and afterward, from scandalous
and disaffected men, and of constituting the same of men of known integrity and
affection to the Cause, and of a blameless and Christian conversation: That it
was a duty so to have constituted and purged the Judicatories and Armies, ought
in reason to be questioned by none: it being a duty holden forth in the Word of
God. That the Rulers of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and
Rulers oftens (amongst the People of God) should not only be able men, but such
also as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness. Exodus 18, 21. Moreover,
thou shall provide out of all the People able men, such as fear God, men of
truth, hating Covetousness; and place such over them to be Rulers of thousands,
Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tens. And let them judge
the People at all seasons. Deuteronomy. 1. 15. So I took the chief of your Tribes,
wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, Captains over thousands,
Captains over hundreds, Captains, over fifties, and Captains over tens, and
Officers among your Tribes. v. 16. And I charged your Judges at that time,
saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously betwixt
every man and his brother, and the stranger, that is with him. v. 17. Ye shall
not respect persons in Judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the
great; you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods: 2 Samuel 23. 3. 4. The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me: He that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; and he shall be as the
light in the morning, when the Sun rises, even a morning without clouds; as
the tender grass springs out of the earth by clear shining after ram. 2 Chr.
19. 6, 7, 8. And he said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not
for man; but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment; wherefore now, let
the fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. v. 9. And
he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully,
and with a perfect heart; and Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the host goes forth against
thyn enemies then keep thee from every wicked thing. Therefore were they unclean
by Leprosy, by an Issue, and by the Dead, to be put out of the Camp. Number. 5.
2. Command the children, of Israel, that they put out of the Camp every Leper,
and every one that has an Issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead. Deuteronomy.
22. 10. Thou shall not plow with an Ox and an Ass together. v. 11. Thou shall
not wear a garment of diver: sorts, as of woollen and linen together; because
the Lord their God did walk in the midest of the Camp of his People, to deliver
them, and to give up his enemies before them; therefore was the Camp to be
holy, that he might see no unclean thing in them, and turn away from them.
Deuteronomy. 23. 14. For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp, to deliver
thee, and give up thine enemies before thee: therefore shall thy Camp be holy,
that be may see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.

And because this Nation had exceedingly neglected the purging of Judicatories
and Armies, and constituting the same of persons rightly qualified, which was
the cause of many evils of sin and punishment; therefore was this neglect
publicly and solemnly confessed to GOD, and the contrary duty engaged unto, at
the renewing of the Covenant toward the end of the year 1648. as is to be seen
in the solemn Public Confession of sins, and engagement to duties. For
rendering of the which effectual, the Commission of the General Assembly did
present many Petitions, Remonstrances and Warnings from time to time to the
Committee of Estates, and to the Parliament, who did make sundry Laws both for
the purging of the Judicatories and Armies which then were, and for keeping
them pure for the time to come, as is to be seen in their Registers and Acts,
Anno 1649. and 1650. And accordingly somewhat was done in that great and
necessary duty by themselves and others, to whom they did commit the trust, but
not withstanding of all these things, it did appear very soon after the
Confessing of that sin, and engaging to that duty, that many did neither mind
repentance of the one, or performance of the other. Therefore as the Commission
of the General Assembly were necessitated to renew their desires in that
particular very often, and from month to month, so were not these Laws and
Committees having power to execute the same, established without some wrestling
and difficulty: not a few laboring to obstruct and retard the same, and when
it came to the execution, with what neglect and slowness, and partiality, did
they proceed therein? And what impediments did they (who were not diligent)
cast in the way of others who were more diligent and faithful, and zealous in
following of the duty? By which it came to pass, that little could be gotten
done in that matter, and what was done was not only loadned with imputations
and reproaches, but also was for most part made ineffectuall: The persons
appointed to be removed, being either kept still, or shortly thereafter being
brought again to their own or some other place, or else as evil being put in
their place. Nay, after the defeat at Dumbar, these duties came not only to be
neglected, but what formerly had been gotten done therein, was looked and cried
out upon, as the cause of the ruin of the Army; and therefore not only these
who had been formerly purged, but all others how malignant and loose soever,
were brought to the Judicatories and Army, and what had formerly been confessed
a sin, was then followed and commended as a duty.

5. Step. The fifth is, The authorizing of Commissioners to close a Treaty with
the King, for the investing him with the Government, upon his subscribing such
demands as were sent to him, after he had given many clear evidences of his
dis-affection and enmity to the Work and people of GOD, and was continuing in
the same; and the admitting of him to the full exercise of his power, and
Crowning him notwithstanding of new discoveries of his adhering to his former
Principles and way, and of many warnings to the contrary. For the better
understanding and more full and clear discovery of this sin, we would consider
these things which are set down by the General Assembly of this Kirk, in their
Declaration of the date July 27, 1649. to wit, that as Magistrates and their
power are ordained of GOD, so are they in the exercise thereof, not to walk
according to their own will, but according to the Law of equity and
righteousness, as being the Ministers of GOD for the safety of his people,
etc. Secondly, That there is a continual obligation and stipulation betwixt
the King and the People, as both of them are tied to GOD, so each of them are
tied each to other, for the performance of mutual and reciprocal duties,
according to which it is statute and ordained in the 8. Act of the Parliament
of King James the Sixth, That all Kings, Princes and Magistrates whatsomever,
holding their place, which hereafter shall happen at any time to reign and bear
rule over this Realm, at the time of their Coronation, the receipt of their
Princely Authority, make their faithful Promise by Oath, in the presence of
the Eternal GOD, That during the whole course of their lives, they shall serve
the same Eternal GOD to the utmost of their power, according as he has
required in his Holy Word, contained in the Old and New Testament, and
according to the same Word shall maintain the true Religion of JESUS CHRIST,
the Preaching of his most holy Word, and due and right Administration of the
Sacraments now received and preachd within this Realm, and shall abolish and
gainstand all false Religion contrary to the same, and shall rule the People of
GOD committed to their charge, according to the will and command of GOD
revealed in his Word, and according to the laudable Laws and Constitutions
received within this Realm, etc. Thirdly, That in the League and Covenant that
had been so solemnly and publicly sworn and renewed by this Kingdom, the duty
of defending and preserving the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, is joined
with, and subordinate to the duty of preserving and desending the true Religion
and Liberty of the Kingdoms. Fourthly. That an arbitrary Government and an
illimited Power was the fountain of most, if not of all the corruptions both of
Kirk and State: And that it was for restraint of this, and for their own just
defense against tyranny and unjust violence (which ordinarily is the fruit and
effect of such a power) that the Lords People did join in Covenant, and have
been at the expenses of so much blood, travels and pains these years past.
Fifthly, That the King being averse from the Work of Reformation, and the
Instruments thereof, and compassed about with Malignant and disaffected men
whom he hearkens to as his most faithful Counselors, and looks upon as his
most loyal and faithful Subjects, being admitted to the exercise of his power
before satisfaction given, would by these counsels, endeavor an over-turning
of these things which the Lord has wrought amongst us, and labor to draw
Public Administrations concerning Religion and the Liberty of the Subject into
that course and Channel, in which they did run under Prelacie, and before the
Work of Reformation: Which we had the more cause to fear, because his Royal
Father did often declare, That he conceived himself bound to employ all the
power that God had put in his hands to the utmost, for these ends, and that he
adhered to his Fathers principles, and walked in his way, and had made a peace
with the Irish Rebels, by which is granted to them the full liberty of Popery.
From these Principles the General Assembly did then infer, That it would be
the wisdom of every one who dwells in this Land, to take heed to such a
temptation and snare, that they be not accessory to any such designs and
endeavors of bringing or admitting the King to the exercise of his Power,
without satisfaction given concerning the security of Religion, and Liberty of
the Subjects, as they would not bring upon themselves, and on their Families,
the guilt of all the detriment that would undoubtedly follow thereupon to
Religion and the Covenant, and of all the miseries and calamities that it would
bring on his Majesty's Person and Throne, and on these Kingdoms. Such a thing
(say they) would in all appearance be the under-minding and shaking off, if not
the over-throwing and destroying the Work of Reformation, and that therefore
whosoever attempts the same, do oppose themselves to the Cause of GOD, and will
at last dash against the rock of the Lords Power, which has broken in pieces
many high and losty ones since the beginning of this Work in these Kingdoms:
From all which it dotli appear upon good grounds, that it was an high
provocation, to admit the King to the exercise of his Power, or to entrust him
with the Cause and People of GOD, whilst he was continuing in his former
disaffection to, and eninity against the same; with which sin the Lord has
been so displeased, that he Has in a great measure verified the same things on
the Land which are holden forth by the General Assembly, and which would be
the consequents thereof.

We know that it will be objected by many, That the King did desist from, and
abandon that course of enmity against the Work and People of God, before the
close of the Treaty, and that he did give satisfaction concerning the security
of Religion, and Liberty of the Subjects, by condescending to, and subscribing
these demands, which were sent to him from the Parliament of this Kingdom, and
the Commission of the General Assembly. To which we reply, First, that these
demands were desicient, at least not so plain and positive, and express in the
main and necessary thing, to wit, a real abandoning of former malignant
courses and principles, and a real and cordial cleaving to the Work and
people of God, without which there could not be a real security; it was not a
shadow of security for Religion and Liberty, or a paper and verbal security
only, but a real security which we were bound before the Lord to have
evdeavoured and obtained before the close of a Treaty with the King, for
intrusting him with the Government, and to authorize Commissioners to settle
with him upon such paper-securities, and accordingly to entrust him, was but to
mock God, and to deceive the World, and to betray and destroy our selves, by
giving up all the precious Interests of Religion and Liberty into the hands of
one who was in a course of enmity to these. Secondly, it is certain, (if men
will not deny clear and evident truths) that the King had not only (before the
authorizing of these Commissioners to close a Treaty with him upon his
condescending to these Demands) given evidence of his emnity to the Work and
people of God, but also was continuing in the same, during the time of the
Treaty, and that he had not abandoned these Principles and courses at the close
of the Treaty; And when he did swear and subscribe the National Covenant, and
the Solemn League and Covenant; Nay, the whole tenor of his carriage, did
then, and afterward convincingly enough (to intelligent men) demonstrate him to
be the same he was before. We shall not need bring many instances, therefore
passing over these things which he did, before this Kingdom began to treat
with him, such as the Declaration emitted by him when he was Prince, against
the Cause and People of God, and his Printed Declaration at Iersey, as King,
against all who had been in opposition to his Father in these troubles: We
shall mention only a few particulars that fell out thereafter, to wit, these:
first, he did not only countenance and entertain the most Capital and known
Enemies of this Kingdom, such as James Grahame, and others, who had shed much
of the blood thereof, but also did give Commission to the said James Grahame to
make war upon, and invade the Inhabitants thereof, as Traitors and Rebels.
Secondly, in the whole progres^e of the Treaty, as he did communicate and take
counsel with known disaffected and malignant men in all things relating to
the same, and not moving a step, but according to their advice, so did he
procrastinat and delay to grant what was desired, until all other means of
help had failed, and his own estate and condition was now become desperate, and
what he did grant, was not all at once, and cheerfully, as if it had been a
duty, but by little and little, and by a kind of coaction and merchandise, as
if it had been a bargain of buying and selling. Thirdly, after the Treaty was
brought to some close, he did before his coming to Sea, receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper from one of the Prelatical Chaplains, and according to the
Servi^e-Book notwithstanding the Commissioners of the Kirk did represent the
evil thereof to him, and did earnestly deal with him to the contrary.
Fourthly, he brought to Sea, and into Scotland with him almost the whole Train
of Malignant and disaffected men, who had followed him in his former evil
courses, and fled from the Justice of both Kingdoms, and these he did more
familiarly and entirely converse with, then with others. Fi^thly, he was nea^
the coast of Scotland before he would condescend to the subscribing of these
Demand which were sent from the Parliament, upon the report of the close of the
Treaty, as it was first closed in Holland, and the Commissioners were so far
out of hopes of obtaining their desire, that even when they were come near the
shore, they were preparing Papers of exoneration; and when in an instant on the
suggestion of some Malignants, he did condescend to subscribe the Demands, and
take the Covenant; it was with a reserve of a Declaration to be printed
therewith, which he did not pass from until the Commissioners of the Church
did refuse to admit thereof. Sixthly, Within a few days of his coming to
Scotland, when removing Malignants from his Family and Court was earnestly
pressed by the Commissioners both of Kirk and State, at Falkland, he showed
himself very averse from the same, and did not only at that place, but at all
places and times afterward countenance and entertain men of that stamp, who
were in his Family and Court, and came to the same. Seventhly, He did for a
long time refuse to subscribe the Declaration which was tendered to him, for
the acknowledging of his own, and his Parents guiltiness for the time past, and
according to his duty for the time to come; and after that he had, with a great
deal of reluctance, subscribed the same, he did oftentimes express, That he did
not think his Father guilty of blood, and that not withstanding he had so
declared, he had his own meaning thereof. Eighthly, As he did first by Letters
authorize sundry of the Malignant party to rise in Arms without the knowledge
of the Committee of Estates, and contrary to the standing Laws of this Kingdom;
so did he himself within a short time thereafter, desert the Public Councels
of the Kingdom, and join with the Malignants. Ninthly, During the whole time of
the Treaty, and after the close thereof, he had correspondence with all the
Malignants of the three Nations, to sundry of which he gave Commissions. These
Instances do clearly enough prove what was said concerning the Kings continuing
in a course of enmity to the Work and People of God, which made it a sin in us,
whilst he was in that condition, to entrust him with the Interests of both:
neither was our carriage here more faulty in the matter, then it was rash and
precipitant in regard of the manner. The news of the late Kings death, brought
to Edinburgh on the Lords day at night, the Parliament did the next day before
twelve of the clock, proclaim this King with all public solemnity, without
setting any time apart to seek the Lord for Counsel and direction therein;
which, as both Reason and Religion might have taught us, to have used more
deliberation amongst ourselves, and more supplication to God, before he (whose
Father and himself had been engaged so much in opposition to the Work and
People of God) had been proclaimed King, and within a short time thereafter,
solemn Address was made to him for offering him the Crown and Kingdom upon some
verbal and paper security, without any previous Address for informing his
conscience, or taking notice whether he did adhere to his former principles and
way; and when the Lord was pleased to render these Applications ineffectual,
and to bring back the Commissioners to this Kingdom and Kirk, without any
satisfaction to their desires; we did again no less precipitantly then before,
rush on a second Address, which was at one and the same day concluded and
proponed in Parliament, not only without any previous Consultation or Debate
had there anent amongst these who had been tender and faithful to the Work of
God from the beginning, but without their knowledge, and contrary to their
expectation; and afterward, in regard of the close and dispatch of
Commissioners, which was so passionatly and violently driven on, that many were
impatient, even of the most necessary delays, and of the most reasonable
contradiction in any thing that related thereto: and it is not to be past
without observation, that whilst we were treading these slippery and sinful
steps, the Lord suffered not us to want warning. We shall not insist on the sad
apprehensions that were in the hearts of many of the godly in the Land in
reference thereto: So albeit they durst not altogether deny duty to be in
making Application to the King, yet did the sense of the Lords controversy
with him and his house, together with his walking in his former way, lie heavy
on their spirits and made them rather fear a curse, then expect a blessing
thereupon. Nor shall we speak of the passionat inclination, desires and
endeavors of the Malignant party, and of their rejoicing herein, and of their
heightning of their hopes thereby. But we desire it may be remembered, That
whilst the second Address was in preparing, not only did the Lord give us
warning of presumptions, first of the King his authorizing of James Graham to
invade this Kingdom, and of his encouraging him by Letters to go on in that
Invasion, even whilst he was in terms of a Treaty with Us; but also by James
Graham his actual invasion a little thereafter by the Kings Commission, and by
bringing to our hands the authentic Commission it self, and sundry Letters
under the Kings own hand, testifying his adherence to his former principles,
and his affection to that great Enemy of this Cause and Kingdom. And what were
all these instances which we have formerly spoken of in the Kings carriage, but
warnings from the Lord to have taught us wisdom in this thing? We know that
some may think it unsuitable for us to meddle in these things which seems to
have been otherwise determined by the General Assembly of this Kirk 1650. and
that others may wonder that that Assembly should have so determined. We shall
not now stand to debate how far that Assembly did approve of these things which
concern the Treaty with the King, anent the security of Religion: but the Lord
having declared so much from Heaven against the whole Land, it concerns us and
all others impartially to search into, and to discover the causes thereof, so
far as he is pleased to convince and give light therein; and we do in charity,
and not without ground, presume, That of all the passages of procedor of the
Kings carriage in the Treaty, and from the beginning in order to this Kingdom,
and the enemies thereof, had been impartially and freely discovered and made
known to the Assembly as they have been since; they had nor gone the length
which they went.

6. Step. For understanding of the sixth Step, which relates unto the
rejecting the discovery of guiltiness and causes of the LORDS contending with
us; It will be needful to speak some what for clearing of the matter of fact
in the instances which are given in the Article: The first instance is in the
causes of humiliation, condescended on by the Commission of the General
Assembly at Leith, and offered to the Commit of Estates, by whom they were
rejected; the story whereof as to the matter of fact was thus: The next day
after the English forces came in view of our Army, which was then entrenched
betwixt Leith and Edinburgh: Some general persons in our Army (whether from
any desire to approve themselves to the King, who the night before was come to
Leith from Sterlin, or from any other principle, we know not) did draw forth a
great many of the Horse to skirmish with the Enhlish, by whom they were with
some loss, and much shame beaten back again to the trenches, which bred such a
disheartning and astonishment in the whole body of the Army, that had the
English then stormed the Trenches, they had belike gained them, and routed our
Army. Upon this occasion, the Commission of the General Assembly gave
themselves to search after the causes of this stroke and spirit of confusion
and astonishment from the LORD, and after some pains taken therein, found that
there had been a malignant design for bringing in again the malignant party of
a long time, hatching and carrying on by sundry in the Judicatories and in the
Army, and that it was far promoted and advanced: And for the more conviction
herein, they did condescend on several Instances and Particulars of moment and
consequence: This they offered to the Committee of Estates as grounds of
humiliation to be kept by them and the Army; but the Committee, as they did
refuse to take with any such guiltiness, so did they refuse to join in any
humiliation to be kept for the same Upon the which the Commission did leave
it before them with a Declaration, That they had exonered themselves, and with
a desire to the Committee of Estates to do therein, as they would be answerable
to GOD, who was contending for these things. The second is the causes of
humiliation, condescended on at Sterlin immediately after the defeat at Dumbar:
these causes which were first condescended on by the Presbytery with the Army,
and afterward approven by the Commission of the General Assembly did specify
somewhat of the crooked courses which had been taken in carrying on the Treaty
with the King, and of the obstructing the purging of the Army, and of the
Judicatories, and of the Kings Family, and of the not differencing of
Instruments employed in Public trust, and several other things relating to
the carriage of these in Public trust in Judicatories and Armies, which though
real truths in themselves, and just matter of humiliation before GOD, yet were
rejected and not so much as read or intimated by many Ministers in their
Congregations, and were refused to be taken with, or acknowledged by sundry
Statesmen and Officers of the Army, and others, who were guilty of them. The
third Instance is the Remonstrance of the Gentlemen, Ministers and Forces in
the West, which though it was a testimony given in reference to sin and Duty by
a company of men who had been straight from the beginning in the Work of GOD,
in the simplicity of their hearts, and did contain in it many sad truths, yet
was not only rejected, but condemned by the plurality of the Committee of
Estates, and Commission of the General Assembly, notwithstanding that many of
the Members of both these Judicatories did dissent from, and protest against
these voices, and as if it had not been enough, was again resumed by the
Parliament and a most harsh censure put upon it, and all such as did not
disclame it before such a day, appointed to be proceeded against with Censures
of an high nature; other testimonies of Presbyteries and Synods beside these
are also mentioned, for diverse such there was, as the Letters from the
Presbyteries of Sterlin, Aberdeen. Glasgow, Pasley, and several other
Presbyteries and Synods, which were written to the Commission as testimonies of
their dis-satisfaction with the Public Resolutions concerning the Leavy, and
were rejected, and sundry of the authors thereof sharply rebuked: nay, some of
them discharged to speak their Consciences, and confined in places far distant
from their charge for doing thereof. In the close of this Article there is
mention of the neglecting of means tending to peace, and the preventing the
effusion of more blood, from pride and biternesse of spirit, against these who
had invaded us. We know that before this Kingdom was invaded by these who has
now brought it low, there was a Letter written by the Parliament to the present
power in England, and duplicates thereof to the General, Liutenant General,
and General Major of their Army, upon the 22. of June 1650. wherein they did
show that as in their Letter of the 6. of March 1649. they did acknowledge
their obligation, and declare their resolution, to observe the rule of
Remonstrating; first the breaches of Peace for craving just reparation, of
using all fair means of giving a preceding warning of three months, before any
Engagement of these Kingdoms in war, so they do again renew the same, and
accordingly renewed the Acts of Posture and Leavy for putting this Kingd^m in
readiness in case of invasion, which were made the former year when they wrote
the foresaid Letter of the 6. of March, all which they do profess solemnly to
be done by them in the sincerity of their hearts; not out of any policy to
catch advantages, nor for any other end or design whatsoever, but merely for
their own defense, which they do account abundantly sufficient to remove all
grounds of jealousies, and misreports of their intentions, and to take away all
pretense of necessity of the marching of forces for defense of the borders of
England; and on the other part being informed of a resolution in England to
send an Army to Invade this Kingdom, they desired to know whether these who
have the present power in England do acknowledge themselves obliged, or by
their answer will obliege themselves and declare their Resolutios to observe
the foresaid way and order upon their part to us, and plainly and clearly to
declare, whether their Forces do march for offense or defense, whether with
intention for keeping only within the borders of England or coming within
ours, which way of procedour for clearing each others, and dealing plainly, is
not only agreeable to particular Treaties, and to the many Ties, Bonds and
Declarations past betwixt these Kingdoms, but also to the Law of God, and
practice of his People in his Word, and to the common law and practice, even of
heathen Nations, much more of Christian Covenanted Kingdoms, and may prevent
many evils and dangerous consequences, which may fall out, even beyond and
contrary to the intentions of the Nations, by their Armies lying near others
upon their borders, although merely upon intended defense: This did indeed
savor of a spirit of peace; but since the coming of these men into the Land
there has been such pride and bitterness of spirit, that not only were all
essays of peace neglected, but every motion tending thereto, whether made by
any amongst our selves, or hinted at by any amongst them, were slighted and
some time entertained with disdain, reproach and contempt; and albeit the
invasion was unjust, yet certainly it was our duty to have followed and
endeavored peace so far as was possible, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as
much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God. Psalm 120. 7.
I am for peace, but when I speak they are for war.

7. Step. The seventh is, the Public Resolutions of Kirk and State, for
bringing in the Malignant Party first to the Army, and then to the
Judicatories, and the actual intrusting of them with the power of the Kingdom
both Military and Civil; We conceive that these Public Resolutions in the
complex of them do (besides other sins which may be mentioned) include those:
First, a conjunction with the Enemies of God and his Cause, which is condemned
by many clear Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 19. 1, 2. And Iehoshaphat the King of Judah
returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem, and Iehu the son of Hanan^ the
seer, went out to meet him, and said to King Iehoshaphat, Should thou help
the ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath on thee from
before the Lord. Isa. 30. 1, 2, 3. Woe to the rebellious children, says the
LORD, that take council but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not
of my spirit, that they made add sin to sin: That walk to go down to Egypt
(and have not asked at my mouth) to strengthen themselves in the strength of
Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt; Therefore shall the strength of
Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion:
Isa. 31. 1, 2, 3. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on
horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many, and in horsemen, because
they are very strong, but they look not to the holy one of Israel, neither seek
the LORD; Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his
words: But will arise against the house of the evil doers, and against the
help of them that work iniquity: Now the Egyptians are men and not GOD, and
their horses flesh and not spirit; when the LORD snall stretch out his hand,
both he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and
they all shall fall together. Jer. 2. 18. And now what have thou to do in the
way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what have thou to do in the way
of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river? Jer. 13. 21. What will thou say
when he shall punish thee? (for thou have taught them to be captains, and as
chief over thee) shall not sorrows take thee as a woman in travail? 2. The
laying of a foundation of, or the establishing of a rule for employing and
intrusting men with the interest of the Cause of GOD and of the Kingdom, who
ought not to be employed nor instrusted, if respect be had to the
qualifications required in the Word, viz. That they be men fearing GOD, hating
covetousness and dealing truly, who are appointed to be rulers over thousands,
hundreds, fifties and tens, Exodus 18. 21. Moreover thou shall provide out of
all the people, able men, such as fear GOD, men of truth, hating covetousness;
and place such over them; to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds,
rulers of fifties and rulers of tens; and that they be just, ruling in the fear
of God who rules over men. 2 Samuel 23. 3. The GOD of Israel said, the Rock of
Israel spoke to me, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God. 3. That there was therein a breach and violation of the fourth Article of
the Covenant, which obliges that we be so far from giving trust to Malignants,
that they should endeavor to bring them to condign punishment. 4. That there
was therein a manifest receding from the solemn public confession of sins, and
engagement to duties, and from the constant tenor of our Declarations,
Warnings, and Remonstrances and causes of humiliation these years past. Ier. 2.
35, 36, 37. Yet thou sajest, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn
from me: Behold I will plead with thee, because thou say I have not sinned.
Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way: thou also shall be ashamed of
Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria; yea, thou shall go forth from him, and
thine hands upon thine head: for the Lord has rejected thy confidences, and
thou shall not prosper in them. 5. That there was a great deal of diffidence,
and distrust in the Arm of the LORD, and a seeking of help from, and a resting
on the arm of flesh; Ier. 17. 5, 6. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
LORD: for he shall be like the heat^ in the desert, and shall not see when good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt
land and not inhabited. 6. That there was therein a great deal of prevarication
and deceitful dealing by many, Ier. 5. 2. 3. And though they say The Lord
lives, surely they swear falsely. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth?
thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them,
but they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder
then a rock, they have refused to return: Because albeit the arguments that
were used, were taken from necessity and other things of that kind, yet the
great wheel that moved in that business, was a design to bring in that party
into places of power and trust into the Army, who had been formerly put out for
their malignant and disaffected carriage, and thereafter, albeit in the
beginning of this business so great haste was pretended, that they could not
wait for a very few days, till the Commission might conveen, but made use of a
unfrequent and occasional meeting, when not only many of the Members were
absent, but also not advertised; yet when that which was aimed at concerning
the Modelling of the Army was obtained they did move but very slowly, and Acted
nothing at all for many months thereafter; nay, not till long after the Army
was completely Leavied, and until they had gotten the Act of Classis also
resemded, and that Party brought to the Parliament as well as to the Army, and
until the General Assembly did sit down, that they might have their
approbation of these proceeding so far as was fit for them to meddle with. 7.
There was in it a real stumbling and offense to the most part of the godly in
the Land, whose hearts were much grieved, and their hands exceedingly weakened
thereby, together with the making glad and strengthening the ungodly, and
disaffected and profane in the Land, Ier. 23. 14. I have seen also in the
Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they commit adultery and walk in lies;
they strengthen also the hands of evil doers, that none does return from his
wickedness; they are all to me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as
Gommorrah Ezekiel. 13. 22. Because with lies ye have made the hearts of the
righteous sad, whom have not made sad and strengthened the hands of the wicked,
that he should not return from his wicked works by promising him life. Lastly,
the state of our Cause was thereby upon the matter turned upsidedown by
intrusting the Work and people of God to the enemies thereof, it being known
and made manifest that these men did retain the same principles, and did drive
on the same designs which could not but prove destructive to Religion and the
People of God.

8. Step. The next Step, is, The joining of many of the People (who are engaged
with God by Covenant to the contrary, no less then the Rulers) with the Forces
of the Kingdom; after that by the Resolutions there was a prevailing party of
malignants brought to the Army, who had the strength of Counsels and Actings
therein, and were carrying on a malignant interest; what ever question there
may be of the associating of subjects in war with the wicked enemies of God, on
the command of the Magistrate in a lawful cause, which seems to us to be
condemned in the People of God, Isa. 8. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. For the
Lord spoke thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me, that I should not
walk in the way of this people, saying, Say ye not a Confederacy to all these
to whom this People shall say, a Confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor
be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts Himself, and let Him be your fear, and
let him be your dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a gin,
and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and many among them shall
stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. Bind up the
Testimony, seal the Law among my Disciples. And I will wait upon the Lord that
hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. Behold, I and
the children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs, and for wonders in
Israel, from the Lord of hosts which dwells in Mount Sion. As Well as in the
Magistrates; the ground of the prohibition, to wit, learning of their works,
and the ensnaring of the People, having a more immediate connection with the
Peoples joining, then with the Magistrates commanding them to join; yet as the
thing is laid down in the Paper we think there will be no question about it,
because it includes these Particulars. 1. The joining of a People who with the
consent and approbation, nay by the commandment and authority of their
Magistrates had covenanted with the LORD, not to join with his Enemies. 2. That
it was when the rule of constituting the Army was corrupt, to wit, the Public
Resolutions, which made the case desperate and left no place or remedy for
purging of the Army. 3. That it was when a party of Malignants who had the sway
of Counsels and Actings were brought to the Army, which being added to the
former, not only made the purging of the Army in an ordinary way impossible,
but also carried the stream and current of all their Resolutions and Actings
into a malignant Channel; that they were the prevailing Party, is more
manifest, then that time needs to be spent in verifying thereof. 4. That they
were carrying on a Malignant Interest, to wit, the establishing the King in the
exercise of his Power in Scotland, and the re-investing him with the Government
in England, when he had not yet abandoned his former enmity to the Work and
people of God; and the securing of Power in their own hands under him: And
though none of these four had concurred (all which we believe will be
acknowledged by un-byassed men) yet there was a sin in the Peoples joining,
because few or none of these who did join, did give any testimony against the
Magistrates employing of the Malignant Party, but went willingly after the
commandment, Hosea 5. 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because
he willingly obeyed and want after the commandment. It is acknowledged to have
been the Peoples duty, even by these who justify their joining with them upon
the command of the Magistrate, to have bemoaned it before the Lord, and in
their stations to have testified against it before men.

9. Step. The ninth Step is, the prelimiting and corrupting of the General
Assembly, in regard of the free and right constitution thereof. General
Assemblies rightly constitute in their liberties and freedom, as they are one
of the most precious Ordinances of JESUS CHRIST, so have they been most
wholesome and profitable means in this Kirk, for the purging and preserving all
the Ordinances of CHRIST in the Land; and therefore as it has been the care of
all the faithful servants of God in the Land, to vindicat and preserve their
right constitution and due liberty and freedom; so in the promoting of any
course of defection has Satan always studied to entrench thereupon, and to
corrupt the same. That the General Assembly was prelimited this year, is
evident by the Letter written by the Commission of the General Assembly to the
Presbyteries, with an Act sent therewith, appointing, that all these who remain
unsatisfied in the Public Resolutions, after Conference, and did continue to
oppose the same, should be cited to the General Assembly; Which Letter and Act
had such influence on many Presbyteries, that though there were in them many
able and faithful men who were unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, yet
very few of these were chosen to be Commissioners; and where any such persons
were elected, there was for the most part either Protestations against it, or
else another election of other persons; by which it came to pass, that almost
all these were incapacitated to sit in the Assembly, and the Meeting was almost
wholly made uponly of these who had been isntrumental in carrying on the
former defection, or were consenting thereto, and were approving thereof. A
more gross prelimitation then this could not readily be that men entrusted by
the General Assembly with the Public Affairs, and to preserve the liberty
thereof, should first (contrary to their trust) open a door for bringing in the
Malignant Party, and then shut the door against the sitting of all these in the
Assembly, where their proceedings were to be tried, who did not before their
coming there, approve of their opening the door to the Malignants; which was
not only to make defection themselves, but to involve others therein, and to
take away the remedy thereof. Beside this gross prelimitation, there was also
diverse other particulars of importance that fell out in the Meeting it self,
in the constituent Members in the liberty and freedom of voicing, which were
set down at length in the Protestation made at St. Andrews against that
Meeting, and the Reasons afterward penned for strengthening thereof, and
therefore we shall not need in this place to repeat these things, but
recommends the reading of them to such as desire more fully to be informed in
these particulars. It were tedious to fall on the Acts of that Assembly, and
Warnings issued by them. These things we now leave, as a subject requiring a
more large and distinct consideration; desiring only this one thing to be
pondered and considered. That besides their ratifying and approving the
Proceedings of the former Commission (which were in many things the great grief
of all the godly in the Land) in such ample manner, as even (in way of
expression) is not free of some flattery and vanity; and besides the censuring
of some honest men for no other thing but only protesting against them; and
besides, the emitting of Warnings reflecting exceedingly on former pious and
warrantable proceedings, they have laid a foundation for censuring all
Ministers and Professors, and for keeping such out of the Ministry, who do not
approve of all these proceedings, which have this last year so much vexed and
grieved the godly, and so much rejoiced and made glad the Malignant Party and
wicked of the Land: And if these things shall be accordingly executed and take
effect, what persecution shall there be of many godly Ministers, Elders,
Expectants and Professors; and what a Ministry, and what a Church shall we
have in a few years?

10. Article.
The last Head of the Lords controversy that is mentioned, is deep security
and obstinacy, im enitencie and incorrigiblnesse under all these, and under
all the dreadful strokes of God, and tokens of his indignation against us,
because of the same, so that whilst he continues to smite, we are so far from
humbling our selves, that we grow worse and worse, and sin more and more: that
it is so with us, will not (we suppose) be denied by any godly man amongst us,
who knows and observes the Lands condition, and the present temper and
carriage of the Inhabitants; every man crying out almost for his affliction,
but none almost mourning for his sin; We think it may be truly said, That sin
and iniquity of all kinds, and amongst all ranks of persons has been more
multiplied and increased in Scotland since the defeat at Dumbar, then in many
years before, and that this Nation was not so dull, hard hearted, and
impenitent under any of the former rods wherewith the Lord did smite us these
years past, as under these rods wherewith he now smites us; and that this does
much highten our iniquity, and speak sad things to come, if not repented of, is
evident from Isay. 1 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more
and more the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint. Isa. 9. 13. For
the People turns not unto him that smitteth them, neither do they seek the
Lord of hosts. v. 14. Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and
tail, root and branch in one day. v. 15. The Ancient and Honorable, he is the
head; and the Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail. v. 16. For the
Leaders of this People cause them to err, and they that are led of them, are
destroyed. Ier. 5. 3. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have
stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder then a
rock, they have refused to return. Ier. 8. 4. Moreover, thou shall say unto
them, Thus says the Lord, Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away
and not return? v. 5. Why then is this People of Jerusalem sliden back by a
perpetual back sliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. v. 6. I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright; no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turns to his course as the
horse rusheth into the battle. v. 7. Yea, the Stork in the Heaven knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the
time of their coming; but my People know not the judgment of the Lord. Isa.
42. 23. Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for the
time to come? v. 24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil and Israel to the robbers? did
not the Lord, He, against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient to his Law v. 25. Therefore he has poured upon
him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and it has set him on
fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him yet he laid it not to
heart. Lev. 26. 14. But if you will not hearken to me, and will not do all these
Commandments; v. 15. And if ye shall despise my Statutes, or if your soul abhor
my Judgments, so that ye will not do all my Commandments, but that ye break my
Covenant: v. 16. I also will do this unto you, I will even appoint over you
terror, consumption, and the burning-ague; that shall consume the eyes, and
cause sorrow of heart; and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies
shall eat it. v. 17. And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain
before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee
when none pursues you. v. 18. And if you will not yet for all this hearken
unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins. v. 19. And I will
break the pride of your power; and I will make your Heaven as Iron and your
Earth as Brass: v. 20. And your strength shall be spent in vain; for your Land
shall not yield her increase, neither shall the Trees of the Land yield their
fruits. v. 21. And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me, I
will bring seven times more plagues upon you, according to your sins. v. 22. I
will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of your children,
and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number, and your high ways shall
be desolate. v. 23. And if you will not be reformed by these things, but will
walk contrary unto me: v. 24. Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will
punish you yet seven times for your sins. v. 25. And I will bring a sword upon
you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant: and when you are gathered
together within your Cities, I will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall
be delivered into the hand of the enemy. v. 26. And when I have broken the
staff of your bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they
shall deliver you your bread again by weight; and ye shall eat and not be
satisfied. v. 27. And if you will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk
contrary unto me: v. 28. Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and
I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins. v. 29. And ye shall eat
the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat. v. 30.
And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your Images, and cast your
carcases upon the carcases of your Idols, and my soul shall abbor you. v. 31.
And I will make your Cities wast, and bring your Sanctuaries unto desolation,
and I will not smell the savor of your sweet Odours. v. 32. And I will bring
the Land into desolation; and your enemies which dwell therein shall be
astonished at it. v. 33. And I will scatter you among the Heathen, and will
draw out a sword after you; and your Land shall be desolate, and your Cities
waste. v. 34. Then shall the Land enjoy her Sabbaths as long as it lies
desolate, and ye be in your enemies Land; even then shall the Land rest, and
enjoy her Sabbaths. v. 35. As long as it lies desolate, it shall rest; because
it did not rest in your Sabbaths when ye dwelt upon it. v. 36. And upon them
that are left alive of you, I will send a faintness into their hearts in the
Lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and
they shall flee, as fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall when none
pursues them. v. 37. And they shall fall one upon another as it were before a
sword, when none pursues; and ye shall have no power to stand before your
enemies. v. 38. And ye shall perish among the Heathen, and the Land of your
enemies shall eat you up. v. 39. And they that are left of you, shall pine away
in their iniquity in your enemies Lands, and also in the iniquities of their
fathers shall they pine away with them.

FINIS.
A Humble ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE SINS OF THE MINISTRY OF SCOTLAND.

Printed in the year 1653.

THE PREFACE.
ALthough we are not ignorant, that mockers of all sorts may take occasion by
this Acknowledgment of the Sins of Ministers, to strengthen themselves in their
prejudices at our persons and Callings, and turn this unto our reproach, and
that some may misconstrue our meaning therein, as if we did thereby intend to
render the Ministry of this Church base and contemptible, which is far from
our thoughts, We knowing and being persuaded in our selves, that there are many
able, godly and faithful Ministers in the Land; yet being convinced that we are
called to humble our selves, and to justify the Lord in all the contempt that
he has poured upon us: That they who shall know our sins, may not stumble at
our judgments: We have thought it our duty to publish this following Discovery
and Acknowledgment of the corruptions and sins of Ministers, That it may appear
how deep our hand is in the Transgression, and that the Ministers of Scotland
have no small accession to the drawing on of these judgments that are upon the
Land.

Only in this following Acknowledgment we desire it may be considered, That
there are here enumerated some sins, whereof there be but some few Ministers
guilty, and others whereof m^^ are guilty, and not a few, which are the sins of
these whom the Lord has kept from the more gross corruptions herein
mentioned; And that it is not to be wondered at, if the Ministry of Scotland
be yet in a great measure unpurged, Considering that there was so wide a door
opened for the entering of corrupt persons into the Ministry, for the space of
above thirty years under the tyranny of Prelat^, and that also there has been
so many diversions from, and interruptions of endeavors to have a purged
Ministry in this Land.

THE SINS OF THE MINISTRY.
First, such as are before their entry to the Ministry.
1. LIghteness and prophanity in conversation, unsuitable to that holy Calling
which they did intend, not thoroughly repented of. 2. Corrupt education of some
in the Prelaticall and Arminian way, whereby their corruptions and errors were
drunken in, and abilities improven, for strengthening and promoving the same,
not repented of. 3. Not studying to be in CHRIST, before they be in the
Ministry; nor to have the practical knowledge and experience of the Mystery
of the Gospel in themselves, before they preach it to others. 4. Neglecting to
sit themselves for the Work of the Ministry in not improving prayer and
fellowship with God, education at Schools and opportunities of a lively
Ministry, and other means, and not mourning for these neglects. 5. Not
studying self-denial, nor resolving to take up the Cross of CHRIST. 6.
Negligence to entertain sight and sense of sin and misery, not wrestling
against corruption, nor studying of mortification and subduednesse of spirit.
Secondly, in entering.
1. Carnal, corrupt and crooked ways for entering to the Ministry, such as
bribing in the time of Prelacie, soliciation of friends and the like; whereby
many have not entered by the door, but did climb up another way. 2. Entering to
the Ministry by an implicit, execrable, Canonical Oath and subscription
given to the Prelates for acknowledging them, and advancing their corruptions
introduced and to be introduced. 3. Entering to the Ministry without trials,
and receiving ordination either from the Prelat, or by a recommendation from
him to the Presbytery, and sometimes without or against the mind of the
Presbytery. 4. Entering either only by Presentations, or by purchased
Supplications from the plurality of the Parochiners, without or against the
consent of the godly in the Parioch. 5. Entering to the Ministry without
respect to a Commission from Jesus Christ, by which it has come to pass, that
many have run unsent. 6. Entering to the Ministry not from the love of Christ,
nor from a desire to honor God in gaining of souls, but for by-ends, for a
name, and for livelihood in the World, notwithstanding solemn declaration to
the contrary at admission. 7. Some offering themselves to trial without
abilities, and studying to conceal and hide their weakness, by making use of
the help and pains of some friend and acquaintance, or other men's Papers, in
several parts of the trial; and some authorized to preach, and others
admitted to the Ministry, who have little or no ability for performing the
duties thereof. 8. Too much weighed with inclination to be called to the
Ministry in a place where we have carnal relation.
Thirdly, After entering, which is first in their private condition and
conversation.
1. IGnorance of God, want of nearness with him, and taking up little of God
in reading, meditating, and speaking of him. 2. Exceeding great selfishnesse in
all that we do, acting from our selves, for our selves. 3. Not caring how
unfaithful and negligent others were, so being it might contribute a testimony
to our faithfulness and diligence: but being rather content, if not rejoicing
at their fault. 4. Least delight in these things wherein lies our nearest
communion with God, great inconstancy in our walk with God, and neglect of
acknowledging of him in all our ways. 5. In going about duties, least careful
of these which are most remote from the eyes of men. 6. Seldom in secret
prayer with God, except to sit for Public performances, and even that much
neglected, or gone about very superficially. 7. Glad to find excuses for the
neglect of duties. 8. Neglecting the reading of Scriptures in secret, for
edifying our selves as Christians, only reading them in so far as may sit us
for our duty as Ministers, and oft-times neglecting that. 9. Not given to
reflect upon our own ways, nor suffering conviction to have a through work
upon us, deceiving our selves by resting upon abstinence from, and abhorrencie
of evils, from the light of a natural conscience, and looking upon the same as
an evidence of a real change. 10. Evil guarding of, and watching over the
heart, and carelessness in self-searching, which makes much unacquaintednesse
with our selves, and estrangednesse from God. 11. Not guarding nor wrestling
against seen and known ills, especially our predominants. 12. A facilite to be
drawn away with the temptations of the time, and other particular temptations,
according to our inclinations and fellowship. 13. Instability and wavering in
the ways of God through the fears of persecution, hazard, or loss of esteem,
and declining duties, because of the fear of jealousies and reproaches. 14. Not
esteeming the Cross of Christ and sufferings for his Name honorable, but
rather shifting sufferings from self-love. 15. Deadness of spirit after all
the sore strokes of God upon the Land. 16. Little conscience made of secret
humiliation and fasting by our selves apart, and in our Families; that we might
mourn for our own and the Lands guiltiness and great backslidings, and little
applying the Causes of public humiliation to our own hearts. 17. Finding of
our own pleasures, when the Lord calls for humiliation. 18. Not laying to heart
the sad and heavy sufferings of the people of God abroad, and the not thriving
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the power of godliness among them. 19.
Refined hypocrisy, desiring to appear what indeed we are not. 20. Studying
more to learn the language of Gods people nor their exercise. 21. Artificial
confessing of sin without repentance, professing to declare iniquity, and not
resolving to be sorry for sin. 22. Confession in secret much slighted, even of
these things whereof we are convinced. 23. No Reformation after solemn
acknowledgments and private Vows, thinking our selves exonered after
Confession. 24. Readier to search out and censure faults in others, then to see
or take with them in our selves. 25. Accounting of our estate and way according
to the estimation that others have of us. 26. Estimation of men as they agree
with or disagree from us. 27. Not fearing to meet with trials, but presuming in
our own strength to go through them unshaken. 28. Not learning to fear by the
falls of gracious men, nor mourning and Praying for them. 29. Not observing
particular deliverances and rods, nor improving of them for the honor of God,
and edification of our selves and others. 30. Little or no mourning for the
corruption of our nature, and less groaning under, and longing to be delivered
from that body of death, the bitter root of all our other evils.
Secondly, in our Conversation and Walk with and before these of our Flocks and
others.
1. FRuitless conversing ordinarily with others for the worse rather then for
the better. 2. Foolish jesting away time with impertinent and useles discourse,
very unseeming the Ministers of the Gospel. 3. Spiritual purposes often dying
in our hands, when they are begun by others. 4. Carnal familiarity with
natural wicked and Malignant men; whereby they are hardened, the People of God
stumbled, and we our selves blunted. 5. Slighting fellowship with these by whom
we might profit. 6. Desiring more to converse with these that might better us
by their parts, then such as might edify us by their graces. 7. Not studying
opportunities of doing good to others. 8. Shifting of prayer and other duties
when called thereto, choosing rather to omit the same, then we should be put to
them our selves. 9. Abusing of time in frequent recreation and pastimes, and
loving our pleasures more then God. 10. Taking little or no time to Christian
Discourse with young men trained up for the Ministry. 11. Common and ordinary
discourse on the Lords Day. 12. Slighting Christian Admonition from any of our
Flocks, or others as being below us, and ashamed to take light and warning from
private Christians. 13. Dislike of, or bitterness against such as deal freely
with us by admonition or reproof, and not dealing faithfully with others who
would welcome it off our hands. 14. Not making conscience to take pains on the
ignorant and profane for their good. 15. Our not mourning for the ignorance,
unbelief, and miscarriages of the Flocks committed unto us. 16. Impatient
bearing of the infirmities of others, rashly breaking out against their
persons, more then studying to gain them from their sins. 17. Not using freedom
with these of our charge, and for most part spending our time with them in
common discourses, not tending to Edification. 18. Neglecting Admonition to
friends and others in an evil course. 19. Reservednesse in laying out our
condition to others. 20. Not praying for men of a contrary judgment, but using
reservednesse and distance from them, being more ready to speak of them then to
them, or to God for them. 21. Not weighed with the fallings and miscarriages of
others, but rather taking advantage thereof for justifying our selves. 22.
Talking of, and sporting at the faults of others, rather then compassionating
of them. 23. No pains taken in religious ordering of our families, nor studying
to be Paterns to other Families in the government of ours. 24. Hasty anger and
passion in our Families and conversation with others. 25. Covetousness,
worldly mindedness, and an inordinate desire after the things of this life,
upon which follows a neglect of the Duties of our Calling, and our being
taken up for the most part with the things of the World. 26. Want of
Hospitality and Charity to the Members of Christ. 27. Not cherishing Godliness
in the People, and some being afraid of it, and hating the people of God for
Piety, and studying to bear down and quench the work of the spirit amongst
them.
Thirdly in the discharge of Ministerial Duties. Which is first in regard of
laboring in the Word and Doctrine.
1. NOt entertaining that edge of spirit in Ministerial Duties, which we found
at the first entry to the Ministry. 2. Great neglect of reading and other
preparation, or preparation merely Literal and bookish, making an idol of a
book, which hinders Communion with God, or presuming on bygone assistance,
and praying little. 3. Trusting to gifts, parts and pains taken for
preparation, whereby God is provoked, to blaste good matter well ordered and
worded. 4. Careless in employing CHRIST, and drawing virtue out of him for
inabling us to preach in the Spirit and in power. 5. In prayer for assistance,
we pray more for assistence to the Messenger then to the Message which we
carry, not caring what become of the Word, if we be with some measure of
assistance carried on in the Duty. 6. The matter we bring forth is not
seriously recommended to God by Prayer to be quickened to his People. 7.
Neglect of Prayer after the Word is Preached, that it may receive the first and
latter rain; and that the Lord would put in the hearts of his People what we
speak to them in his Name. 8. Neglect to warn in Preaching of snares and sin in
Public affairs by some, and too much frequent and unnecessary speaking by
there is of Public business and Transactions. 9. Exceeding great neglect and
unskilfulnesse to set forth the excellencies and usefulness of Jesus Christ,
and the New Covenant which ought to be the great subject of a Ministers Study
and Preaching. 10. Speaking of CHRIST more by hearsay then from knowkedge and
experience, or any real impression of him upon the heart. 11. The way of most
Ministers Preaching too Legal. 12. Want of sobriety in Preaching the Gospel,
not ^avouring any thing but what is new, so that the Substantials of Religion
bear but little bulk. 13. Not Preaching Christ in the simplicity of the Gospel,
nor our selves the Peoples servants for Christ sake. 14. Preaching of Christ
not that the People may know Him, but that they may think we know much of him.
15. Preaching anent Christ's leaving the Land without brokennesse of heart, or
up stirring of our selves to take hold of him. 16. Not Preaching with bowels of
compassion to them who are in hazard to perish. 17. Preaching against Public
sins, neither in such a way nor for such an end as we ought for the gaining of
souls, and drawing men out of their sins, but rather because it is of our
concernment to say something of these evils. 18. Bitterness in stead of zeal,
in speaking against Malignants, Sectaries, and other scandalous persons, and
unfaithfulness therein. 19. Not studying to know the particular condition of
the souls of the people, that we may speak to them accordingly, nor keeping a
particular record thereof, though convinced of the usefulness of this. 20. Not
wealing what may be most profitable and Edifying, and want of wisdom in
application to the several conditions of souls, not so careful to bring home
the point by application as to find out the Doctrine, nor speaking the same
with that reverence which becomes his Word and Message. 21. Choosing texts
whereon we have something to say rather then suting to the condition of souls
and times, and frequent preaching of the same things that we may not be put to
the pains of new study. 22. Such a way of Reading, Preaching and Prayer as
puts us in these Duties further from GOD. 23. Too soon satisfied in the
discharge of Duties, and holding off challenges with excuses. 24. Indulging the
body, and wasting much time idly. 25. Too much eying our own credit and
applause, and being taken with it, when we get it, and unsatisfied when it is
wanting. 26. Timorousness in delivering Gods Message, letting people dye in
reigning sins without warning. 27. Voguinesse and pride of heart because the
Lord fulfilled our word in the year 1648. 28. Rash speaking in the Name of the
Lord in reference to the success of our Armies of late. 29. Studying the
discharge of Duties, rather to free our selves from censure, then to approve
our selves to God. 30. Shifting to preach in places where we were for the time
for fear of displeasing, in this time of Public backsliding and trial. 31.
Not making all the Counsel of God known to his People, and particularly not
giving testimony in times of defection. 32. Not studying to profit by our own
doctrine, nor the doctrine of others. 33. For most part preaching, as we our
selves were not concerned in the Message we carry to the People. 34. Not
rejoicing at the conversion of sinners, but content with the unthriving of the
Lords Work amongst his people as su^eing best with our minds, fearing if they
sholuld thrive better, we should be more put to it, and less esteemed of by
them. 35. Many in Preaching and practice, bearing down the power of godliness.
36. Unfaithful discharge of Ministerial Duties in attending the Armies. 37.
We Preach not as before God, but as to men, as does appear by the different
pains in our preparation to speak to our ordinary hears, and to others to whom
we would approve our selves. 38. Not making the Ministry a work in earnest as
a thing to be accounted for in every duty, which makes much laziness and
unfruitfulness, doing duties ex officio, not ex conscientia offici^, rather to
discharge our Calling nor our conscience.
Secondly, In the Administration of Sacraments. 1. In Baptism.
LIttle minding in our selves, or stirring up of others to mind the obligation
that lies on us and them, by the Covenant made with God in Baptism. 2. Not
instructing Parents in their duty, not charging them with their promise given
at the Baptizing of their Children, nor trying what pains they have taken to
perform the same. 3. Being very superficial and formal in the administration
of this Ordinance.
Thirdly, In the Administration of the Lords Supper.
ADmitting of mixed multitudes to the Lords Table, not separating betwixt the
precious and the vile. 2. Unequal dealing with poor and rich, in admitting to,
or suspending and debarring from the Lords Table. 3. Great neglect to prepare
for that action, preparing for it more as Ministers, then as Christians. 4.
Carnal and unworthy carriage of Ministers at the Communion, being more
desirous to have that action by our hands, with credit to our selves, then with
profit to the people. 5. Thinking when that action is by-hand, that we have a
vacancie from other Ministerial duties for a time. 6. Little wrestling with
God to have the People prepared for it, or the guilt of profaning of it by our
selves and others taken away.
Fourthly, in Visiting.
NEgligent, lazy and partial visiting the sick; if they be poor, we go once,
and only when sent for; If they be rich and of better note, we go oftener, and
unsent for. 2. Not knowing how to speak with the tongue of the Learned a word
in season to the weary and exercised in conscience, nor to such as are under
the loss of husband, wife, children, friends or goods, for the improving of
these trials to their spiritiall advantage, nor to dying persons. 3. In
visiting, wearying, or shunning to go to such as we esteem graceless. 4. Not
visiting the People from house to house, nor praying with them at fit
opportunities.
4. In Catechizing.
1. Lazy and negligent in Catechizing. 2. Not preparing our hearts before, nor
wrestling with God for a blessing to it, because of the ordinariness, and
apprehended easiness of it; whereby the Lords Name is much taken in vain, and
the People little profited. 3. Looking on that Exercise as a work below us, and
not condescending to study a right and profitabl way of instructing the Lords
People. 4. Partial in Catechizing, passing by these that are rich and of better
quality, though many of such stand ordinarily in great need of instruction. 5.
Not waiting upon and following the ignorant, but passionatly upbraiding of them
often.
5. In Ruling and Discipline.
1. NOt making use of this Ordinance of Church Censures for gaining of souls,
but turning it in a mere Civil punishment; and in the administration thereof
becoming either coldrife, or without a spirit of meekness, and using a way
either merely rational by wordly wisdom, or merely authoritative, more then by
motives drawn from the love of Christ; and by our carriage in Judicatories
putting a humane shape upon the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, carrying our selves
in too stately a way, like the men of this world. 2. Partiality in
administration of Censures with respect of persons, not using the like
faithful freedom toward high and low, sib and fr^md. 3. Rash taking on us to
open and shut Christ's door. 4. By our practice, teaching (as it were) formality
in Repentance to offenders, hardening them in their sins, by accepting bare
forms without any evidence of Repentance, and loosing when we were persuaded
Christ did not loose: and of late turning profession of Repentance into a State
engine for men to step unto preferment and public employments. 5. Following
scandalous persons with the highest Censures of the Kirk, with little or no
care to hold them up to God. 6. Want of compassion to these on whom Discipline
is exercised, not laboring to convince them of sin, but imperiously and with
passion instead of zeal threatening them, thinking it sufficient if we be
obeyed, though they be not gained to Christ. 7. Superficial, sinful, and slight
censuring one another, at times appointed for that end in Presbyteries and
Synods, and neglect of faithful freedom and love in performing that duty. 8.
Admitting of men to the Ministry who were not qualified with Grace as well as
Gifts, not withstanding the Word of God and Constitutions of this Kirk do
require the one, as well as the other; which has been the fountain of many
evils. 9. Great unfaithfulness in bringing in, and holding in, unworthy persons
in the Ministry, and keeping Censures off unfaithful men. 10. Unfaithfulness in
giving Testimonials and Recommendations, and receiving persons upon
Testimonials merely negative, especially Expectants and Students of Divinity.
11. Constituting Elderships of such men as are known to be ignorant profane
and disaffected to the Work of God, and being careless to have them consisting
of the most able and godly men within the Congregation, a great cause of much
ignorance, profane and scandalous carriage among the People. 12. Neglecting to
remove from the Elderships such as are ignorant and scandalous. 13. Neglecting
to hold out the necessary qualifications and duties of Ruling Elders, and to
stir them up to their duty. 14. Not carrying our selves in Judicatories and
other ways toward Ruling Elders as toward Brethren, and joint Overseers in
the work of the Lord. 15. Not making conscience of keeping Kirk Judicatories,
but wearying of the expenses and attendance, whereby diverse things has been
hastert and miscarried therein: willing deserting of them, and shunning to give
testimony in them, for fear of inconveniences. 16. Not stouping to a gaining
way in Debates, nor making application to God for knowledge of his mind in
things debated, before they pass in a conclusion. 17. Wearying to hear men
fully who represent their doubts, and to weigh all the Arguments that can be
represented for the negative, before the affirmative be concluded. 18. Too
great animosities in Judicatories, even about matters of small weight. 19.
Pride, impatience and peremptoriness of spirit, not staying on others clearness
in our debates and conclusions, through which it comes to pass that we judge
rashly of precious men; and alienatition of affections steals in and is
entertained. 20. Hasty concluding of Acts and pressing obedience thereto
without convincing grounds holden forth from Scripture for satisfying the
consciences of the Lords People. 21. Silence in Assemblies when unsatisfied,
being carried by the authority of men, and too much following other men's light
and suppressing their own. 22. Making Votes subservient to the humors of men
and humane interests. 23. Some altogether neglecting wholesome Acts and
Constitutions of Assemblies, and others, receiving their Acts too implicity.
24. Too bitter expressions against Adversaries in Public Papers and Sermons,
for eshewing reproaches, whereof there is no fruit but irritation. 25. Abusing
transportations by making them too frequent, and almost the ordinary way of
Planting places of any eminency; sometimes enacting them when there is no
pressing necessity, and without tender endeavoring the satisfaction of the
People interested and without care of providing them thereafter.
In relation to the Public.
1. NOt studying the controversies of the time, that we might be enabled to
hold forth light, and convince gain sayers of the truth. 2. Not fearing to
meddle in matters too high for us, and desiring to be taken notice of, more
then to be stedable in the Public. 3. Following of Public bussiness, with too
much neglect of our Flocks. 4. Following of Public bussiness with much pride
and passion, and loftiness of spirit upon carnel principles and desire to be
esteemed of, rather then true zeal to Jesus Christ and his matters, and with
little or no prayer. 5. Superficial admitting of all to the Covenants, and
solemn Acknowledgment, without taking sufficient pains to instruct and inform
them in the knowledge of the things contained therein. 6. Being too
instrumental for bringing disaffect persons to trust. 7. Unequal zeal against
enemies, cooling in our zeal against one enemy as it is increast against
another. 8. Much repining at the judgments of God upon the Land from carnal
respects, and transferring the causes of the wrath off our selves upon others.
9. Too easy satisfied in such things as might tend to the prejudice of Christ's
int^aest, weighing the consequences of great Revolutions more by respect to our
selves, then to his honor. 10. Agreeing to receive the King to the Covenant
bracly upon writing, without any apparent evidences of a real change of
Principles. 11. Not using freedom in showing what we were convinced, was sinful
in reference to the late Treaty with the King, but going on therein when we
were nor satisfied in our consciences for fear of reproach and of being
mistaken. 12. Silence in Public, and not giving Testimony after a discovery of
the Kings Commission given to James Graham; for invading the Kingdom. 13.
Pressing the King to make a Declaration to the world, whilst we knew by clear
evidences that he had no real conviction of the things contained therein. 14.
Too much desiring to lurk upon by ends, when called to give a Testimony. 15.
Not bearing Testimony against Public Defections in a right and spiritual way.
16. Unfaithfulness in bearing burden with them, whom the Lord raised up to be
his witnesses against the public backslidings, omitting to bear Testimony our
selves upon carnal respects and lukewarmness in adhering to public Testimonies
formerly given.
A Postscript. Which could not be gotten printed.
THe foregoing causes of Gods wrath being on several days of solemn
Humiliation laid out and confessed before the Lord, we thought fit to subjoine
here some other causes of our late Humiliation; as 1. The late declining of the
Land by consenting and engaging unto the public actings of the present Powers,
so contrary to the Covenants, and so much prejudicial to Religion and
liberties. 2. The defection of diverse, who are accounted religious, from their
former principles, unto Separation, and other Errors of the time. 3. The
Usurpation and Carriage of the present pretended Assembly. 4. The English their
great Encroachments upon the Liberties of this Church. 5. That the promised
Conversion of His Ancient people of the Jews may be hastened. 6. That the Lord
may make our present resolutions for reforming our selves, our Elderships and
people effectual, and may bless our Endeavors to this purpose.


FINIS.

