AN EXCLAMATION AGAINST POPERY: OR, A Broadside against ROME.
Occasioned by his MAIESTIE'S Last Gracious Speech, when he was pleased to
Express His Willingness to Maintain the Truly Ancient Protestant Religion.
By R. W. D. D.
LICENSED,

November the 14 th. 1678.


PLot on, Proud Rome! and lay thy damned Design
As low as Hell, we^ll find a Countermine:
Wrack thy cursed Parts! and when thy utmost Skill
Has proved unable to effect thy Will;
Call thy Black Emissaries, let 'em go
To summon Traitors from the Shades below,
Where Infant Treason dates its Monstrous Birth;
Is nursed with Care, and after sent on Earth:
To some cursed Monks; or wandering Jesuits Cell;
Where it thrives faster, than it did in Hell!
Call Bloody Brutus up, Lean Cassius too;
Let Faux, and Catesby both, be of the Crew! --
Nay, rather than want Help, let your BULLS run;
And Damn the Devil, if he do not come!
Yet after all your Plots, and Hatchings, we,
(So long as CHARLES, and's Senators agree)
Will warm our Hands at Bone-fires, Bells shall Ring;
And Traytor's Knells no longer Toll, but Sing.
We doubt not Rome, but Maugre all thy Skill,
The Glorious GOD of our Religion will,
In spite of all thy Art, preserve It still!
And his peculiar Care of It to show,
Defend in Health, Its Great DEFENDER too!
In The Interim, Do thou new Crimes invent,
And we'll contrive as Subtle Punishment.
It Is Autumn now with us; and every Tree,
Instead of Fruit, may bend with Popery.
'Twould be a Novel, tho no hated Sight,
If every Bough should bear a Jesuit!
We'll meet your Plots with Pikes, Dangers with Swords;
And stead of long Cravats, we'll lend you Cords.
Each Stab in Private, we'll with Use return:
And whilst one Hangs, the other he shall Burn;
Till Tybourn's long impoverish't Squire appear
Gay as the Idol, fills the Porph'ry Chair.
Yes, Mighty CHARLES! at thy Command we'll run
Through Seas of Rebels Blood, to save thy Crown.
Our Wives, Estates, and Children too, shall be
But Whet-stones to our Swords, when drawn for Thee.
We'll Hack and Slash, and Shoot, till Rome Condoles;
And Hell it self, is cloyed with Traitors Souls:
'Till Godfrey's wronged Ghost (which still does call
For Shoals of Rebels to attend his Fall)
Cries out, Dear Protestants, no more pursue
Their Guilty Blood, my Manes have had their Due!
This, Mighty Monarch! at thy Beck or Nod,
Shall be effected, as Thou were a God;
With so much Readiness, thy Royal Tongue
Shall hardly Speak, e're we Revenge the Wrong
On thy cursed Enemies; who whilst they state
Thy Death, shall feel themselves the intended Fate;
And by a quick Reverse, be forced to try
The Dire Effects of their own Treachery.
Poor Scarlet Harlot, could Thou stand in want
Of a Genteel, and Generous Gallant,
Whose Noble Soul to Baseness could not yield;
But would have tried thy Interest in the Field,
We had not thus thy Policies condemned;
But thought thee worthy of a Foe, or Friend:
Both which, with equal Estimate thou wilt find,
Were always valued by an English Mind.
But Thou of late, so Treacherous do grow,
That we should blush, to own thee either now.
Base, and Perfidious too, thou do appear;
Sland'rest a Pope, and spoyl'st an Emperor.
What! is the Eagle from the Mitre flown?
Is there of Caesar nothing left in Rome?
Must that Renowned City, here-to-fore
Famed for her Virtues, well as for her Power;
Instead of Consuls, Vagabonds employ?
And suborn Felons MONARCHS to Destroy?
Bribe Men (through Want made boldly desperate)
To Fire-ball Cities, to their Groveling Fate;
Whilst Hellish Iesu'ts Porters Garbs profane;
Assist the Fire, and Bless the growing Flame!
Must Romes Great Pope, whose Piety should run
As an Example, through all Christendom;
Whose Signal Virtues, Arguments should be
Of his Admired Infallability?
Does he hire Ruffains, Justices to Kill;
And send the Murd'rers Pardons at his Will?
Bids them in Heretics Blood their Hands embrue;
Tells them withal, It Is Meritorious too! --
If this thy Practice be, false Rome Fare-wel! --
Go, Teach thy Doctrine to the Damned in Hell!
Where, by Black Lucifer's Destructive Pride,
Thou may in part thy Future Fate decide:
Whilst from our City we thy Imps remove,
To shake their Heels in some cold Field or Grove.
Since both by Ours, and all Men's else, Esteem,
They Are fitter to Converse with Beasts, than Men.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for T. G. 1678.


