AN ACCOUNT OF Mr PRYN'S REFUTATION OF THE University of Oxfords Plea. Sent to
a Friend in a second Letter from OXFORD.

seal of the University of Oxford ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
SAPIENTIA ET FELICITATE

Printed in the year, 1648.

An Account of Mr. Prins Refutation of the University of Oxfords Plea.
SIR,
IN your last you seem to wonder at, and accuse our silence, in that neither
I, who am more particularly concerned, nor any one else amongst us has all
this while answered those Papers of Mr. Prin's, which he has set forth against
my Letter of the Privileges of the University, so that we may be thought,
either hitherto unjustly to have claimed those Privileges, or at least by not
vindicating them, to be guilty of the neglect of them our selves, and so to lie
under the same crime, which we charge upon others. True it is, Sir, some there
are, that may interpret it as an Argument of the badness of our Cause, (which
our friends, perhaps, will impute to the negligence of our Patrones) Such
especially, who being pre-possest with passions and interests, easily suffer
the balance of their judgments to be weighed down with Mr. Prin's Answers,
which though of themselves very light, and of no weight, yet having the
advantage of men's particular hopes and fears added to them, may turn the
scales. Yet, I shall show you that we neither want a good Cause, nor are
wanting to it, where there is any considerable opposition made against it. And
to this purpose for your and others satisfaction, I shall give you a brief
account (not troubling my self to set down, or you, to apply Answers to his
several pretensions (as being unwilling to engage my self in an unnecessary
service) I say it shall be my task to give you the reasons) why we answered him
not. And when I have done this, I make no question, but 'twill be thought
sufficiently answered, even by our not answering of him, and our silence will
seem the best Confutation.

These reasons, that you may have the less trouble, may be reduced to two
Heads, The one taken from his particular performance in this his Answer: The
second from the general reputation this man has among us.

For the first, the particularity of his performance in this his answer, I shall
be able, I think, to contrive all that is necessary to be said into few words.

1. That the whole supellex of matter out of Books and Records which he there
makes use of, came to his hands from the invaded sequestered papers of my Lord
of Canterbury, and are, with some others of Lord Cott. etc. the greatest part
of the substance on which he has lived, and wrote books without number for
these six or seven years. 2. That these are but the notes of his Lordships
Counsel, and the story of the passages of that debate at Hampton Court about
the Archiepiscopal power of Visiting the Universities. Wherein it is
acknowledged, that the King, as things were then represented, did judge on the
Archbishops side. And though I might say to that matter, 1. That the opinions
of learned men did not all agree that the Archbishops pretensions were true,
til the King, who was acknowledged to have power to endulge or restore that
privilege to him, was pleased to judge on his side, and so to instate him in
the power: And 2. That the University of Cambridge is affirmed to have been
resolved to traverse that plea, and try it again, before they would submit to
that Visitation: And 3. That even Oxford it self, which was so much obliged to
that Archbishop, did plead against it, and conceived it an invasion of their
Privileges, yet shall I not have the least need to look this way, in rendering
the reason why we did not think fit to answer Mr. Prin; but only observe from
hence, that what Mr. Prin has brought, being all gathered together on that one
design to make good the Archbishops Visitation, cannot be imagined to give a
full impartial view of the whole matter, the Kings right of Visiting (which is
now our whole matter of enquiry) being not so much as questioned, or debated in
those notes from whence all M. Prins stock is borrowed.

In the third place, I am willing to pass over M. Prins mistakes in making use
of these notes; yet can hardly choose but give you a taste, by mentioning one
of them, as Page 36. where instead of the Archbishops Visiting jure
ecclesesiae suae Metropoliticae, and non per potestatem legatinam he reads in
perfect current nonsense, and non per potestatem legitimam, wherein if a man
should take his word, he must be bound to confess, that what the Archbishop
does in this or the like Visitation, is not by any legal or legitimate power,
which to have done, shall at another time, perhaps, when it will serve M. Prins
turn, be an invasion of the fundamental laws and liberties of the Subject in
the Archbishop. A mistake about the pitch of that which I have heard mentioned
of him in his Romes Masterpiece, where he renders these words [Judicavimus
actutum favorabile sese interposuisse numen] [We judged that a safe and
favorable deity had interposed it selfe] as if actutum were cut asunder into
ac and tutum, and the copula ac construed, as if it were after, not before
tutum. And another of the same mould was long since his translation of voluntas
Dei beneplaciti in the Lambeth Articles, by the will of the well-pleased God,
or somewhat, I remember, to that purpose.

In the fourth place, I shall not need dispute the truth of any or all his
allegations, but from all together deduce this state of the business between
us: That to the right of Visiting the University, Four pretenders there have
been at several times. 1. The Bishop of the Diocese. 2. The Archbishop of
the Province. 3. The Pope and his Legates. 4. The King, and those which were
enabled thereto by Commission from him. The Bishops rights and claims are long
since laid down, all that looks that way, being so many years past, as the
times whilst this place was in the Diocese of the Bishop of Lincoln, and it is
a strange argument by which Master Prin concludes the contrary, viz. [ That his
jurisdiction continued till the 12. year of King Charles] because, says he,
in the Kings Decree at Hampton Court, there were these words, [ Declaramus quod
universitates praedictae per Episcopos and Archidiaconos in posterum non
visitentur, p. 40.] as if the writing in posterum in great letters, were
sufficient to conclude that 'twas so till that time: Whereas it is clear by the
Decree, p. 38. that that was a caution put in, in just care of the University,
that this sentence, or declaration of the Archbishops right, should not in
futuro extendi ad Episcopos, etc. and so farther prejudice the University. Then
for the Popes and his Legates that never was acknowledged since the abrogation
of all foreign jurisdiction here in the Reign of Hen. 8. and is clearly
excluded by several Statutes of the Land. As for the Archbishops Rights they
have been urged, and pleaded, and opposed, and yet perhaps prevailed sometimes
against the pretensions of the Universities exemption. And because I will not
speak of anything that may bear a Controversy, I will not examine the truth of
that, whether the Archbishop had that power or no, which he appears by some
Records sometimes to have exercised; but being content for once to take all for
granted which can possibly bear a dispute, I shall only add that it is also
clear, 1. That Archbishop Arundells visitation (which is the main pregnant
Testimony in that matter) was part of his Cancellario Universitatis Cantabrig:
Eliensis Dioecesis, nostrae. Provinciae Cant. p. 14. Nos in progressu
visitationis nostrae Metropol: in dicta Dioecesi exercenda vos and dictam
Universit: etc. ib: Custodi Coll: Trin: Cant: Eliensis Dioecesis. p. 17.
Provincial visitation, taken in as any other Parish in the Province. 2. And
by consequence that it was an Ecclesiastical visitation, and such as the
Bishops of the Diocese had also before the University was exempted from them,
and this will appear by the mentions of Facturi and recepturi quod Canonicis
convenit institutis, p. 17. and obedientiam recepit Canon: Ib: recepta
obedientia Canonica and singulis, etc. quae in visitationibus cjusmodi de jure
fuerint requisita. p. 20.
Canonica instituta, and obedientia, by the express mention of jure suo
metropolitico, and in forma juris Ecclesiastici, by which his visitation was
performed; and if against this it be objected that it extended to the visiting
the University, as an University, yet all that can be argued from thence is
only this, that the Ecclesiastical power was then farther extended, then it
has been since the restraints (as partly appears by this, that till Henry the
eights time the Founders being Laymen did generally appoint Bishops to be the
Visitors of their Colleges) not that it was a civil jurisdiction, and so this
belongs not, nor can with any color be applied to the Visitation now spoken
of, which has by the Commission power to hear and determine of breaches
against the Laws of the Land, etc. and so is perfectly civil.

4. That whatsoever jurisdiction or power of visiting was, on is in the
Archbishop of Canterbury, does in time of vacancy reside in the King, and
consequently, that since Mr. Pryn and his friends have been so succesful in
their endeavors, as to leave that Chair void so long, it is not imaginable that
any such power, pretended to belong to the Archbishop, should be any where now
but in the King. And so still all this refutation of our Plea apparently belongs
nothing to it, because supposing all to be true that is here pretended (of the
Archbishops power, when there was an Archbishop) yet when Episcopacy it self
is by him that refutes us, acknowledged to be taken away, and to us, that
acknowledge not that, yet it is visible that there is no Archbishop of
Canterbury living, nor pretense of Commission from him, but on the other side
that all his power in the vacancy is divolv'd to the King, it is then about the
pitch of one of Mr. Pryn's arguments, i.e. little less then fury to pretend
against the Kings sole Visitation (at this time asserted by the University)
only from this proof, that there was once in the Archbishop some kind of right
of some kind of Visitation.

The three former pretensions being thus plainly superseded, the Bishops and
the Popes in integrum, and confestly, and the Archbishops so also at this
time, when there is no Archbishop of this Province, nor divolution of his
power, in this matter, to any but the King, It follows 1. that the 3 first
things which Mr. Pryn undertakes to prove, [1. That the University was
anciently under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lincoln as Dioecesan, 2. That
it was till this Parliament under the jurisdiction and visitation of the
Archbishop of Canterbury as Metropolitan. 3. That the Pope by his Legate has
visited both the Universities] are directly and visibly fallen to nothing; and
for the 4 thing, That there be particular Visitors of Colleges appointed by the
Founders to whom the visitation of those belongs, and not to the King only,
that is as little to this purpose (unless it be to prove that they may not in
that other respect submit to this visitation) The debate or question being only
of the University, which is a several Corporation and Foundation distinct from
the several Colleges: and so likewise for the 5, [That the Universities
exemptions were procured from Popes, and not from Kings of England] That, if it
were granted, is as of little force to conclude against us, because the
exemptions which he means were only exemptions from the Archbishops
Metropolitical visitation, from which if we pretended no exemption at all, yet
were we in as good an estate as we would wish for our present plea, because now
in the vacancy that Archiepiscopal is swallowed up in the King, and when it was
in the rivulet, was yet always (since the Reformation) content to acknowledge
this fountain.

And then secondly, it follows as naturally as any thing can, that the Kings
pretension remains the only one imaginable at this time; and against that, (or
for any other at any time but the Archbishops) there is no appearance of plea
or proof so much as offered by Mr. Pryn. All which we that saw, could not
permit our selves to be provoked by the shallowness of that one proof (from the
pretended Archiepiscopal power) to embroyl our selves in any farther
contention, or to think his refutation worth refuting, any more then (we are
told) the Committee themselves would hearken to it, when he offered that to
their ears which here he has done to our other sense. Nor should I now have
said thus much to it, did I not submit to your judgment (who demand it of me)
blindly, and to the denying of my own.

Now for the second, the general reputation this man has among us, If we
behold him (not as a man, or as one degraded by this University, but) as a
Writer, and view him as he is drawn out by himself in his Books, we look upon
him as one from the beginning very confident and ready to undertake and manage
any Cause in any faculty, and to maintain it by what Arguments he pleases,
having a strange dexterity wherein he goes beyond all the Artificers of the
age, to prove his conclusion by medium's most directly contrary to it, and to
disguise his greatest enemies into as fair a set of correspondents and friends,
as he has any; to deal with Objections as ill habits of body do with Physic,
turn all into the nourishment of the prevalent humor. Such Topics he used,
when from my Lord of Canterburies Diary, he resolved to conclude his reproach
and infamy, and gather thence a sufficient matter for a Charge to invade his
reputation, if not his life; Whereas, in all the important and considerable
parts of that, it breaths out nothing but a most sweet favor to all that read
it, so far that an Independent long since challenged Mr. Pryn to show any
Presbyterian alive comparable to that image there naturally drawn of that
Prelate; so has he converted honey into poison, and has sought to blast, at
least to taint this garden of spices with that venom he sucked thence, and that
poison which was his own foam he drops upon the flowers, and would have the
Reader believe 'twas bred there. I shall trouble you with but one instance more
(in stead of as many in the Bullion as he has written Volumes, or in the coin
almost as there be leaves in those volumes) and that is out of a Book of his,
entitled, ROMES MASTERPIECE. And because the reputation of those, who ought to
be most precious to us, is so much concerned in it, I will give it you a little
at large. The subject of that Book is some Letters sent by Sir William
Boswell's care to the Arcbb: of Canterb: wherein he tells him of a deep Plot to
bring in Popery into this Kingdom, and mentions the principal Agitators of it;
Senior Con the Popes Legate, and diverse others, what ways they went to bring
about their design, and as matters grew on, what resolutions they had taken
up. And in brief he that shall read the Letters with his own eyes, and not
through Master Pryn's spectacles, and, laying aside his Comment, look
impartially on the Text, will clearly discern these two special truths there,
1. That the Papists were fully satisfied that there was no working upon the
King to gain His Consent, and therefore resolved that He should be taken out of
the way, presuming that they might then, through the better affections of the
Queen, and the tender age of the young Prince, with more ease compass their
purpose. 2. That the Archbishop was to be dealt with in the same manner, being
so obstinate in his way, that Senior Con could never in all his time get
liberty of any access to him, or once to enter any Discoursse with him, (which
particular is most notoriously known to be true by all that knew either the
Court or Lambeth at that time.) These two things I say (of the Kings
impregnable resolution to keep to the Protestant Religion, and my Lord of
Canterbury's obstinacy in the same so far as never to admit any Discourse with
Con) being every where visible in those Letters, and the foundation on which
the bloody designs concerning them were built. Yet has it been in Master
Pryn's power by one slight of hand to conclude the direct contrary to both
these in the midst of the whole story that affirms them. For being to translate
these words of one Letter [Subolfecit interim Cunaeus ab Domino Archiepiscopo
regi sidelissimo totum animum regium esse pendulum, etc.] he makes a comma
after sidelissimo, and then renders them after this manner. In the mean time
Cunaeus (i.e. Con) smelling from the Arch bishop most trusty to the King, that
the Kings mind was wholly pendulous (or doubtful) etc. and in the Margin
inserts his conclusion from thence, that the Archbishop and he had some
familiarity and acquaintance at first, and leaves the Reader to learn from his
Translation, that the Kings mind was wavering and pendulous, and (as he puts
in) [doubtfully] that is sure in matters of Religion. Whereas the most clear
undoubted rendering of the words is only this, that Con discerned that the Kings
mind depended wholly upon the Archbishop, which be it true or false (all that
is said is, that Con's sagacity had found it out) has nothing in the earth to
either of those senses. This particular you may think has little to do with
the busmesse we have now in hand about the Oxford privileges, and I confess
it has not, but yet very much to that which I have undertaken to prove, that
the reputation of his writings has been such, that it might excuse any man
from the pains of answering him; For certainly had it not been resolved (ever
since Master Noy promised to give John Taylor's Works to bear Master Pryn's
company in Lincolns Inn Library) that his Books went for nothing, his proofs
for no arguments, his affirmations for no testimonies, such a forgery as this
would never have been permitted thus long to have gone undiscovered. This I
confess to be none of my own observing (for truly I have not had so many howrs
to spare, as to play any of them away upon Master Pryn's works, till this last
of his came out, wherein I was obliged to think my self concerned) but have
heard it so punctually mentioned by a worthy Doctor in this town, who did
observe it, that I am confident it will be found to be a true relation, and
that my memory has not failed in this account of it: I love not longer to
insist on things that are personal to any man, and therefore shall add no
more, as to this first particular, nor indeed should I have said so much, but
that it was the prime plain reason, which I discerned really to move men to
think it unfit to answer this Book, merely because it was Master Pryn's; whom I
think no man among us ever vouchsafed to answer since the beginning of his
writing against this Church or Monarchy, but only Mr. Widows a man by the
strangeness of his parts fitted as 'twere on purpose to duel with him (as
Donquizote with the wind-mil which no man else was Knight errant enough to
encounter) about the bowing at the Name of JESUS. Ut non Compositi molius cum
Bitho Bacchius.


And now Sir that I may not seem to have designed any thing but obedience to
your commands, or to desire in you, or any other, any thing but strict ordinary
justice, whilst you pass your judgment in this matter, I have thrown down all
I had to say as rudely and slovenly as I could, and by that means delivered my
self from the danger of incurring you displeasure again for having considered
style or language in my last Letter, which yet had no other aim then to
approve my self,

Sir, Your obedient servant, Basilius Philomusus.
Oxon. Jan. 20.
The End.

