A Defense of the DOCTRINE, AND HOLY RITES OF THE Roman Catholic Church, FROM
THE Calumnies, and Cavils OF Dr. BURNET'S Mystery of Iniquity Unveiled.

Wherein is showed The Conformity of the present Catholic Church with that of
the purest Times; Pagan Idolatry truly stated; The Imputation of it clearly
confuted; And Reasons are given why Catholics avoid the Reformation.

With a Postscript to Dr. R. Cudworth.

By J. Warner of the Soc. of Jesus.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Black friars. 1688.

The Preface.
IT is now more than Ten Years since this Book was first published: and although
very few Copies of it could be then conveyed into England, by reason of the
trouble, (which gives occasion for this second Edition) yet one came to Dr.
Burnet's Hands; who having read it, said, He was resolved to have nothing to do
with its Author. These words may proceed as well from a low esteem, as
otherwise; so they did not alter my opinion of the Book it self, which I leave
to the Readers Judgment. I called it Anti-Haman, from some resemblance betwixt
Haman the Macedonian in an Eastern Court, and Dr. Burnet in this Western; yet I
could not foresee, that the Parallel would go so far, as since it has done, even
to set G. B. fair for completing the last Scene of that Factious Stranger.

I follow in my Answer Dr. B. Step by Step: and to show that I neither alter
his Sense, nor dissemble the Strength of his Reasons, I give them in his own
words. I studied to be as short as I could; (yet I hope I say enough to
satisfy an indifferent Judgment) only in some few places I have enlarged, the
thing there treated being in a new Dress, and requiring it.

Such is the Accusation of Idolatry, brought in against the Catholic Church, by
the old and new Iconoclasts, but by Dr. Edw. Stillingfleet so much changed,
that it is quite another thing. The first of our late Reformers accused us of
using Images, and giving to them a Religious Worship, not unlike that which the
Idolaters gave to their Idols: yet they owned this difference, that Images were
reverenced only for Honor due to God, or his Friends, the Saints: whereas the
Pagans in them adored Dead Men, or Living Devils, that is, False Gods. (See
Calvin, l. 1. Inst. c. 11. n. 9.) Now Dr. E. S. will have the Pagan Jupiter, to
have been the True God, the other Pagan Deities to have been either Names of
his Attributes, or Spirits Mediating berwixt the Supreme God, and Men. An Error
so new, that I scarce believe any one Christian, or Pagan, before him, ever
held it, and therefore it may be called, the Stillingfleetian Error. To confute
it, it is enough to read any of those Fathers, who wrote against Pagans,
Tertullian, or Justin, Athenagoras, or Minutius, Lactantius, S. Cyprian,
Arnobius, or Julius Firmicus: there being not one of all these, but convinces
this gross Error. But he little expected to be confuted out of any of these, by
any Priest, having assured, that none of us read more, than Bellarmin, and
Coccius. Which is not the only rash Assertion found in his Works.

Were this Doctrine true, the whole Debate betwixt the Primitive Christians, and
Pagans, were at an end, and the Cause yielded to the later. For the Pagans said
Jupiter was the True God: The Christians said he was not the True God, but was
a Man, Born, Dead, and Buried, as other Men What says Dr. E S. Jupiter was the
True God Here we see, the whole Body of Christians of the four first Ages, all
the Martyrs, the Doctors, the Confessors, and so many Apostolical Men
condemned, as denying the True God, and that by one, who professes himself a
Christian, and a Doctor of Divinity, and Champion of the Reformed Church.

Those Primitive Christians went farther yet, they not only denied him to be
God, but accused him of grievous Crimes, of Adultery, of Incest, of Rebellion
against his own Father, and of other most unnatural Sins; which are so many
horrid Blasphemies, if Jupiter be the True God. And which is yet worse, all
those Blessed Martyrs continued to their last Breath in them, and sealed them
with their Blood. What will, what can Dr. St. say to this? And what can a
Christian Reader judge of him?

In fine, this bold Assertion of E. S. and some Divines of the new Stamp, is
contrary to the Apostles, who Planted Christian Religion opposite to Jupiter,
and all Pagan Deities; contrary to the Glorious Martyrs, who watered it with
their Blood; contrary to the Holy Fathers, who defended it with their Writings;
contrary to the Primitive Church, which professed it amidst the severest
Persecutions, and Torments; contrary to God, who confirmed it with Miracles;
and contrary to that same very Jupiter himself, who owned himself to be a
filthy seducing Devil. What can the Learned World judge of so rash an
Assertion? What will he stop at, who, to oppose Popery, will contradict all the
first Ages of Christianity, and God himself? What credit can he deserve in
obscurer Points of Divinity, who, in so clear a Matter of Fact, dares
contradict all Antiquity?

I hope he will open his Eyes, acknowledge his Error, and give Glory to God, by
renouncing that Arch-Devil: otherwise it may be written on his Tomb, Here lies
E. S. who owned no other God, but the Pagan Jupiter. This Epitaph will be very
Honorable to the Church of England, in which he makes so great a Figure.

There was published lately a Treatise, in which the Idolatry, as found in
Scripture, is very Learnedly, and Solidly Explicated. Some fancied a
disagreement in our Sentiments, because that Honorable Person says, the Pagan
Deities were Stars, and I say, they were Men. Yet in this there is no
contradiction at all: for he explicates that Idolatry which is mentioned in
Scripture, and reigned in the East: and he adds, that the Greeks, to get the
reputation of Antiquity to their Nation, cut off the Heads of those Idols, and
set on them others of their Kings; that is, they retained the Gods, but called
them by the Names of such as have been famous amongst them either for Regal
Power, or for War, or for inventing some useful Arts. And it is known to all
the World, that the chiefest Gods of the Romans were taken from the Greeks. Now
that I confined my self to the Idolatry of the Greeks, and Romans, is evident:
for Chap. 7. Sect. 3. page 52. I say, Our only Dispute is about the Greeks, and
Romans, whose Idolatry was banished the World by Christian Religion. And Sect.
5. page 83. Our Dispute is not of the first Beginners, and Planters of
Idolatry; but of those who lived at, and since the time of Christ, till
Christianity prevailed. But in my Revision of D. M. his Second Letter, page
122. I distinguish these two sorts of Idolatry, and give the precedence in Time
to Star-Worship. Primum omnium Stellas and admirationi fuisse propter
pulchritudinem, and venerationi propter utilitatem. Hinc Sap. XIII. primo
refertur, and refutatur Astrorum Adoratio; deinde Idolorum.

Although it be hard to foresee when these contentious Disputes will end, (
Passion, and Interest fighting against Truth) yet I do not despair; that some
alive may be so happy as to see it: For many Objections against us are grounded
on Mistakes; others are not against Faith, (which alone we are bound to defend)
but Discipline. Such is the Free use of Scripture in the Vulgar Language,
prohibited by the Council of Trent, says Dr. E. S. in his Council of Trent
Examined, and Disproved by Catholic Tradition. And then in a long elaborate
Discourse, with many Examples of ancient Translations of the Scripture, he
endeavors to prove, there is no Catholic Tradition for that Prohibition.
Against whom is this? I acknowledge I am to seek. For, 1. We pretend Catholic
Tradition for Points of Faith, not for each Point of Discipline, of which this
is one. 2. This Point is not universally received in the Church, as may be seen
page 26. of this Edition. 3. I find no such Prohibition in the Council of
Trent. This Council did order, Sess. 18. an Index to be made of Suspected or
Pernicious Books, by a Committee of some of the Fathers, who, Sess. 25.
reported what Progress was made in it. But the Council left the Consideration
of what was by them done, to the Pope, without any other Decree: and
immediately determined. Whence I gather, 1. The Scripture in no Vulgar Language
was considered in that Congregation, or Committee, it never having been looked
on either as Pernicious, or Suspected by the Catholic Church, or any General
Council. 2. Scripture in a Vulgar Language was not prohibited by the Council,
for the Council left all that Matter to the Pope's Determination. 3. The Index
finished in Rome, was never proposed to the Council, an end being put to it
immediately after that Reference of the Index to the Pope: so the Index is no
Act of the Council. By which it appears, that the Learned Doctor in all that
Discourse, disputes against no Catholic Doctrine, nor against the Council of
Trent. Now this framing Phantoms, and then combating them, may amuse the People
for a time; but it will soon be insignificant, and therefore laid aside.

It is time we hearken to Dr. Burnet's Lamentation; which if it be real, it is
a work of Charity to comfort him.

CHAP. I. G. B. His Design and Disposition, when he writ this Book: Of the
Wickedness of the World.
MR. G. B. Page 1. He that increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow, is an
observation which holds true of no part of Knowledge, so much as of the
Knowledge of Mankind: it is some relief to him, who knows nothing of foreign
Wickedness, to hope there are other Nations wherein Virtue is honored, and
Religion is in esteem, which allays his regrets when he sees Vice, and Impiety
abound in his Country; but if by traveling or reading, he enlarge his Horizon,
and know Mankind better, his regrets will grow, when he finds the whole World
lies in Wickedness.

Answer. We need not travel, or read much, to know, that the whole World lies
in Wickedness: Seeing those are the Words of the beloved Disciple. 1 Jo. 5.19.
This is indeed an occasion of Sorrow. But in the same place the B. Apostle
comforts us, by saying, We know that we are of God. So that the World there, is
understood of Unbelievers; who are in Wickedness, by original and actual Sin,
for which they have no lawful, and efficacious Expiation, no Sacrament
instituted by Almighty God lawfully administered. But we, who are in the true
Church, are of God, unto whom we are regenerated by Baptism; and if by humane
frailty, we die to God, falling into any grievous Sin, we have the holy
Sacrament of Penance to raise us again to the Life of Grace.

Yet it is not the Apostles meaning, that in the true Members of the Catholic
Church there is nothing reprehensible; or that in those who are not in it,
there is nothing Good. In Heaven there is nothing but Virtue, those Blessed
Souls having their will so united to that of God, that they cannot offend him.
In Hell there is nothing but Sin; the Wills of those wretched Spirits being so
obstinate in the Love of themselves, that they cannot do any thing which should
please God. This present Life is a mean betwixt those Extremes: and in it there
is a mixture of Perfections atd Imperfections, of Vice and Virtue. Those, who
are most wicked have something good: and in those, who are most virtuous, there
are some remainders of Human Frailty, for their Humiliation which we ought
neither to esteem, nor imitate. 1 Kings 21.25.
There was none like unto Achab, which did sell himself to work Wickedness in
the sight of the Lord. Yet he humbled himself and put on sackcloth, and fasted.
S. Paul Act. 9.15.
The chosen vessel unto God, to bear his Name before the Gentiles, and Kings,
and the children of Israel, yet 2 Cor. 12.7.
there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him. And who can without Compassion read his Seventh Chapter to the Romans, in
which he describes the conflict he felt interiourly, betwixt the Spirit and the
Flesh? Which he concludes with these pathetick Words: O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Which renew the memory of
that torment, to which Mezentius the Tyrant Virgilius Aeneid. 8.
condemned his innonocent Subjects: And the Hetruscans Aug. l. 4. contra Jul.
c. ult.
exercised upon their Captives; binding living Bodies to rotten putrified
Carkases, and leaving them so. But the Apostle, who describes his Pain, relates
his Ease, and having explicated his Sickness, acquaints us with its Remedy, The
grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So that if the Combat affrights us,
by this Assistance we may be encouraged and comforted.

Yet tho I grant, that there is occasion enough to lament on what side soever
we cast our eyes on Mankind, in this State of corrupt nature, if we consider
how little Men use the means designed for their Improvement in Virtue, and
resisting their bad Inclinations. Yet there is little appearance of Grief in
your Book; which has more of a Satyr than of a Lamentation, your Style being
rather bitingly invective, than mourningly compassionate: you discover more of
Diogenes, or of Democritus, than of Heraclitus.

Were there no Objects of regret nearer home? Does your own Church afford you
no occasion to show your Zeal, in blaming the Faults of her Children, in order
to get them corrected? Sure it does, or the World is very much misinformed. How
comes it then, that you neglect her Cure, of whom your Character obliges you to
have a Care, and search the Sores of the Roman Church, with which you have
nothing to do? Do you not see that you give us Reason to say, your Charity is
disorderly, not beginning at home, and that Luke 6.42.
as the Hypocrit, you labor to show in, or take out of another eye, a mote,
while you neglect a beam in your own?

G. B. Page 1. It argues a cruel and inhumane Temper, to delight in beholding
Scenes of Horror and Misery.

Answer. What temper then does it argue to delight in representing them, and
that in the most horrible, tragical, and dismal colors, which Art and Study
can invent? For what can even the most inventive Imagination fancy more dismal,
that what you write Page 2. Indignities done to God, and his Son Christ: the
Enemy of Mankind triumphing over the World with absolute Authority, and enraged
Cruelty: Satan having a Seat, where Christ's Throne should be: Christendom
fallen from its first Love, and the greatest part of it made shipwreck of its
Faith: That Church, whose Faith was once spoken of throughout the World, become
Mother of the Fornications of the Earth. In fine, Falling away, Mystery of
Iniquity, Antichrist, Babilonish Rome, Bewitching Sorceries: And what not. Add
but Obstinacy in these horrid Crimes (which is a Circumstance aggravating them,
without altering their Species) and the Pains due to Sin (which are not
horrible, if compared with Sin) and we here have a Picture of Hell.

Your temper is very merciful and humane, which prompts you to make such a Map
of the far greatest part of Christianity! This will appear more clearly, when
we come to consider your Charge in retail, and examine your Proofs, when we see
you are forced to seek them in the obscure withdrawing-roomes of Man's heart,
which are inaccessible to all, but God; of which nevertheless you speak as
confidently, as if God had led you by the Hand into them, and made you Partaker
of his Knowledge. Purgatory was invented on design to enrich the Clergy:
Transubstantiation on design to make it more esteemed: The Primacy of the Pope
on design of Grandeur, etc. And although we vouch Scripture for all these Points,
yet you are pleased to say, we do not ground them on Scripture, but on Ambition
and Avarice. Nay you not only fain Proofs for our Doctrins, but fix on us
Doctrins themselves, which we disown, as that we teach to break the
Commandments. So that we may profess, that all that is ugly and dismal, in the
Scene of Horror, and Misery, which you represent, comes from your own Pencil,
and is an effect of your own Brain. See what is your Temper, and how much your
Reader is obliged to you.

CHAP. II. Of Antichrist.
G. B. Page 3. BEing warned of so much danger to the Christian Religion, it is
a necessary Enquiry to see if this Antichrist be yet come, or if we must look
for another.

Answer. Do you then think it as necessary to know Antichrist, as to know
Christ, That you express your earnestness in enquiring after Antichrist in
those Words Luke 7.19.
of S. John the Baptist's Inquest after the Messiah? Nay yours are more
pressing and urgent, than those of that great Saint: For he said only, Art thou
he that should come, or look we for another? But you say, or must we look for
another? As if it were a more pressing Duty to enquire after the Antichrist,
than the Messiah.

We are warned indeed of Antichrist, and we are also warned of the Danger
hanging over the Church, from Mar. 13.21.22.
false Prophets, and false Christ's. Who should say, Lo here is Christ, Lo he is
there. All Sectaries pretend to him. You will doubtless say, he is in your
Prelatical Church: The Presbyterian says, he is in his Assemblies: The
Independent is for his Conventicles: The Quaker claims him also. What shall a
Roman Catholic do? what choice shall he make? Our blessed Savior having
forewarned us of the Danger, arms us against it: Ne credideritis, Believe none
of them; but stick to the old Doctrine, and the Catholic Church. Which I cite,
as more against you, than any thing, you can bring against us, out of your
Contemplations on Antichrist, or the Apocalypse: to which you would never
recur, had you any clear grounds against us in Scripture. I suspect the cause
of any man, which to decide a Suit in Law, produces obscure, dubious, and (for
that reason) insignificant deeds. I should on that score, had others been
wanting, suspect the Cause of the Sectaries, Millenaries, Fifth-monarchy-men,
and the like. And that reason is sufficient to make me suspect you, who recur
to those obscure Prophecies of the Antichrist: which at best are extremely
obscure: as appears by the Errors grounded on it, as you acknowledge: For you
say,

G. B. Page 3. Some have stretched the Notion of Antichristianism so far, that
things harmless and innocent, come within its compass: and others have too much
contracted it, that they might escape free.

Answer. It seems the limits of the notion of Antichristianism are very
arbitrary, seeing they are extended, or contracted according (not to Scripture,
or Tradition, but) to the Fancy and Caprichio of every pragmatical Head. When
you consider more impartially the things harmless and innocent, which you blame
in us as Antichristian, very probably, you will find your self to be of the
number of those, who stretch its Notion beyond its nature, and those limits,
which God has designed for it.

G. B. Page 3. Antichristianism is not only a bare Contradiction to some
branches, or parts of the Gospel; but a design and entire complex, of such
Opinions and Practices, as are contradictory to, and subversive of, the Power
and Life of Christianity.

Answer. Never did Junior Sophister amongst illiterate Pesants, deliver his
Sentiments, or Apollo amongst his deluded Adorers, speak his Oracles, more
magisterially, than you deliver your Opinions in controverted Matters of Faith:
For such is this Point, seeing it is delivered in Scripture. and there are such
variety of Persuasions concerning its true meaning, as you your self said even
now. You give us a new Notion of it, and what Scripture, what Tradition, what
Decree of a Council, what Father, do you allege for it? None, not so much as
any reason offered. Is not this to Lord it over the Faith of your Reader? To
beg the thing in Question, and to expect the World should be so stupid, as to
be taken with such a Slight, that you should meet with Belief, because you
boldly assert?

To your bare Assertion, I will oppose my Negation: and why should not my
Negation be of as much weight, as your Affirmation? Especially seeing I speak
with all those, whom you blame for enlarging, or contracting too much the
Notion of Antichristianism, and you stand alone. I confirm my Negation with
Scripture 1 Jo. 4.3. where those are said to be Antichrists who deny Christ's
coming in the flesh. Which is only one article of Christianity, howsoever it be
of the most fundamental.

Yet let us grant, what you so confidently beg, that Antichristianism is a
complex of Opinions opposite to the Power and Life of Christianity. I know
none, who has a better Title to it, than your Reformation: For the Life of
Christianity, is Faith and Charity and you have destroyed the first by Heresy,
and the second by Schism, as shall be proved hereafter.

Children delight in edged Tools, which serve only to cut their fingers; and
you, and your Brethren, use weapons against us, which wound your selves. Fatal
Experience might have taught you more Discretion, than to be still moving that
stone, which has once crushed both your Church and State to pieces.

And truly the Reproach of Antichristian will fall on your Church, if proved
against ours. For say what you please of the ancient Britans, the first
Apostles of the English, who brought us the light of Faith, and planted the
Gospel amongst us, came from Rome. The Hierarchy you pretend to, came from
thence: By Authority from the Pope, my Lord of Canterbury is Primate, and my
Lord of London is his Suffragan. By the same Authority the Country is divided
into Dioceses, your Deans and Chapters settled, your Universities founded, and
several Degrees instituted in them. If the Pope be the Antichrist, both
Universities, and Hierarchy amongst you is Antichristian.

Moreover the Livings you enjoy, were for the most part, if not altogether,
given by the pious Liberality of Persons, who professed that Faith we profess,
and lived and died in the Communion of our Church. Gratitude to such
Benefactors may teach you to judge less severely, to suspend your Judgment,
till you have more convincing Arguments to ground it on, than your own bare and
bold Assertion.

CHAP. III. The true Designs of Christian Religion.
THe Design of God in establishing Religion, was that Men should serve him in
this World, and enjoy him in the next: that they Psalm. 126.5.
here sow, with tears; there reap with joy: now run 2 Timothy 4.7. and 8.
their race, and fight their battle, then receive their crown. Rivers Eccles.
1.7.
receive their waters from the Sea, and return to it again: And Religion
receives its beginning from God, runs through all Ages, to return to God again.
Each Man before his Creation, is Creatrix essentia, says S. Anselm: From which
by Creation he is separated; and by Regeneration, and the good Works which
follow it, he returns to him again, never more to be separated from him. The
first Action is of God alone, the rest are of God and Man: For God Aug. Qui te
creavit sine te, non te salvabit sine te.
will not complete the Work of our Salvation with out the Cooperation of Man.
God Subest tibi, cum volueris, posse.
can do all without Man, but will not: Man Sine me nihil potestis facere. Jo.
15.5.
can do nothing without God, from whom he must expect prevenient, concomitant,
and subsequent Graces, for all and every meritorious Action.

That Bliss, which God prepares for us in the next Life, contains God himself,
and when enjoyed, renders the thrice happy Soul like Similes ei erimus. 1 Jo.
3.2.
unto God, and we must attain to it by means proportionable, which partake of
the resemblance. Wherefore our Understanding must be like that of God,
believing him, and our Will loving him; The first is Faith, the second Charity;
to which add Hope, to keep our Soul steady amidst the Difficulties of this
Life, as an Anchor Heb. 6.19.
fixes a Ship: And you have the three Virtues, called Theological; because they
rely immediately on Almighty God: Faith on his Veracity, or Truth in affirming:
Hope on his Fidelity, in promising, and Goodness as he is our Chief Good: And
Charity on his Goodness in its self. Which Three Virtues contain what is
required of us in this Life. Whatsoever is required to a good life, is known,
as, we know what to believe, to hope, and to love, Says Aug. Ench. c. 4. Omnia
quae requiris, proculdubio scies, diligenter sciendo, quid credi, quid sperari
debeat, quid amari. Haec enim maxim, imo vero sola in Religione sequenda sunt.
S. Austin. Which are the only things, Religion regards, as being designed only
for these three Virtues.

But are we not obliged to keep the Commandments? Or do not they advance
toward Heaven, who run Psalm. 119.32.
in the paths, which God has traced out? And how come these to be omitted?
Answer. They are not ommitted; but are contained in Charity. Romans 13.8, 9.
He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law: our whole Duty to our
Neighbor, and the Commandments relating to him, being briefly comprehended in
this Saying, Love thy Neighbor as thy self. As our whole Duty to God, is
contained in that other Saying, Love God above all things. Matt. 22.40.
On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. These are the two
Roots Matt. 7.17.
of the good tree, which brings forth good fruit. As love of our selves is the
root of the bad tree, which brings forth bad fruit. The Aug. Sermon. 44. de Temp.
Radix omnium bonorum est Charitas, sicut radix omnium malorum est Cupiditas.
root of all good is Charity, as the root of all evil is Concupiscence. Again:
Aug. l. de moribus Eccl. c. 25. Nihil aliud est been vivere, quam toto cord,
tota anima, tota mente, Deum deligere.
To live well is to love God with all our Heart, with all our Soul, with all
our Mind.

I should as easily write out the whole new Testament, as endeavor to cite all
the passages which directly, or indirectly commend Charity: Seeing all tend to
extinguish in us self-Love, and to kindle Divine Love. In it Divine Love
sometimes is preferred before 1 Cor. 13.
the Tongues of Men and Angels, before Faith working Miracles, before knowledge
of the greatest Mysteries, Almsgiving, etc. It is called Col. 3.14.
The bond of perfection, the end 1 Timothy 5.
(or intent) of the Commandments, etc. I end with the Words of the beloved and
loving Disciple: Jo. 4.16.
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
Wherefore with Reason S. Austin Aug l. de laudibus Charitatis.
said, Ille tenet quicquid latet, and quicquid patet in divinis sermonibus, qui
servat Charitatem in moribus.

I should not have been so long upon a Point of which I thought none could be
ignorant, who reads the Scriptures, or knows the Rudiments of Christianity, did
not I perceive, that you either never knew it, or have forgotten it. And, When
Heb. 5.12.
for the time, and your Vocation, you should be a teacher, you have need that
one should teach you, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God. For
how happens it, that in relating the Designs of Christian Religion, there is
not one clear word of the love of God, which is the main design of it? you
speak of Purity, Ingenuity, Patience, Generosity, and something of the love of
our Neighbor, but why are you silent of the Love of God which gives Virtue to
all the rest, which without it avail us nothing, 1 Cor. 13.
how perfect soever they be in their kind? Do you intend to make that fall
under the Notion of Antichristianism, as being with you no part of the Designs
of Christianity? I shall expect a satisfactory Answer to these Doubts, and
proceed to

CHAP. IV. G. B. His Explication of the Designs of Christianity.
G. B. Page 4. THe first Design of Christian Religion, is to give us right
apprehensions of the Nature and Attributes of God.

Page The second branch is to hold forth the method of Man's Reconciliation with
his Maker. You mean, that the intent of Christian Religion is to teach us, that
there is One God, and One Mediator, which are Objects of our Faith.

Page 7. The third is to teach the perfectest, clearest and most Divine Rules,
for advancing of the Souls of Men to the highest perfections of their Natures,
it giving clearer Rules, and fuller Directions, than either moral Philosophers,
or the Old Testament. The Lessons of Purity, Chastity, Ingenuity, Humility,
Meekness, Patience, and Generosity. Not one word of Charity: but Generosity, I
know not whence, comes in to take its place.

Page 8. The fourth to unite Mankind in the closest Bonds of Peace, Friendship
and Charity, which it does tempering our Passions, forgiving Injuries, loving
our Enemies, teaching Obedience to those in Authority over us, and by
associating us into one Body, called the Church.

Answer. This is indeed a Design worthy of Christian Religion; but imperfectly
explicated by you, seeing you omit the love of God, the God 2 Cor. 1.24.
of Peace, who alone can give us perfect Peace. Humane Wills are naturally
opposite to one another, they cannot meet but in their natural center, God. And
the Love of our Neighbor is never sincere and lasting, but when it is grounded
on the Love of God. The first effect of Self-love, is to separate us from God.
The second, to divide us among our selves. Both are the effects of Sin: and
nothing can prevent them, and link us together in the Bonds of Charity but he
who can remit Sins.

That Peace then, which Christian Religion teaches, which the Church recommends
to her Children, which in her Prayers she demands of God, is not an effect of
humane industry; but of Grace. It proceeds from the Mercy of God, it is a
sequel of Purity of Conscience, and the Crown of real, and true Justice. In
fine it is the work of the unspotted Lamb, 1 Pet. 1.19.
at whose Birth Luke 2.14.
Peace was announced in his Name to the World by the Angels: who left Peace Jo.
14.27.
as a Legacy to his Disciples before his Death, and who was sacrificed on the
Altar of the Cross to reconcile us to his Heavenly Father, and restore Peace
betwixt Heaven and Earth, which the Sin and Rebellion of Men, had banished.

You see, Sir, how insufficient your Explication of Peace is for the end you
propose. You leave out the chief and most necessary Ingredient, for purging our
Dissentions, and to use a Prophets Comparison, Ezech. c. 13.10.
you build with untempered Mortar. You Jerem. 6.14
heal the hurt of the people slightly, saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no
Peace.

You hint indeed at a good humane means to Peace; Obedience to those in
Authority. It was to prevent Schism, Inter Apostolos unus eligitur, ut capite
constituto schismatis tolleretur occasio. Hieron. l. 1. adversus Vigilantium.
c. 14.
that God established one Apostle over the rest. But your endless Divisions,
and Subdivisions amongst your selves, show how inefficacious this means is in
your Reformation. And how can it be otherwise, when all your People have before
their Eyes the Example of your first Patriarchs, who began your Reformation, by
rejecting all Authority over them, and breaking the Rules of Divine Worship
settled all over the World, and till that time acknowledged by themselves? Cur
non licebit Valentiniano, quod licuit Valentino, de arbitrio suo fidem
innovare? Tert. l. de praescript. c. 40. p. 338. Why may not not a Lutheran do,
what was lawful to Luther? Your first Reformers rejected some Articles of
Faith, then universally believed, because they seemed not to be contained in
Scripture, why may not the same motive authorize their Followers, to reject
some others which you would retain, although they are as little to be found in
Scriptures? Why may not a modern Protestant retrench some unnecessary Ceremony
used by you at present, seeing you have cut off so many others? Let others live
by that law which you publish; think not so highly of your own Authority, as to
make your Dictamens not only the Rule of Actions, but of the Laws themselves.
It shall be lawful to dissent from this Article of Faith, but not from that
other, to quit this Ceremony and not that, when the same rule is applicable to
both. Is not this properly: 2 Cor. 1.24.
To lord it over the Faith of the People? What wonder you find your Laity
refractory to your Ordinances? They are in this directed by your Rule, and
encouraged by your Example.

Wherefore look no where abroad for the root of these tares: Your Reformers
planted them; they laid the Egg out of which this Cockatrice is hatched. They
eat the sower Grapes, which set all your Teeth an Edge. Neither appears there
any possibility of a Remedy, while your Reformation subsists: this Principle of
Discord and Schism being laid in its very Foundation; and consequently it
cannot be removed, without the ruin of the whole Structure, nor retained
without perpetual Danger of renting it in pieces.

I wish these troublesome Schisms, and endless Discords amongst your selves,
may make you seek a proper Remedy, by a Reunion to the Center of Union, God,
and his Church.

CHAP. V. Of the Characters of Christian Doctrine.
G. B. P. 8. I Shall add to this the main distinguishing Characters of our
Religion, which are Four. Page 8. First its Verity. Page 10. The Second its
genuine Simplicity, and Perspicuity. The Third, its Reasonableness, and the
Fourth, its easiness. Thus you.

Answer. Are these the only, or even the chief Characters of Divine Truths,
whether you take them, as they are delivered in holy Writ, or as taught in the
Church? Can you find no other quality peculiar to them, not common to others?
Then human Learning may equal, if not surpass Divine. Take for Example some
Principles naturally known, as Two and two make four: or, The whole Body is
greater than any part of it. These are true, it is impossible they should be
false: they are perspicuous and easy, no Man can doubt of them, who
understands the terms. They are reasonable: For what more reasonable than to
assent to evident Truth? Nay if we compare them with supernatural Truths, as to
their Perspicuity and Verity, in order to us, the Advantage seems greater on
the side of natural Truths. 1. For no Man ever doubted of the Truth of these,
having once understood their terms; and many have and do doubt of Faith, although
sufficiently proposed. And 2ly no Man ever dissented from those Principles,
when he had once admitted them, and many have Apostatized from their Faith.

So that all the Praises you give to Faith, belong more to natural Sciences,
then to it; such a stranger are you to its true Prerogatives.

The reason of this stupendous Blindness in searching the Scriptures, is that
you read them as a Master, not as a Disciple; you intend not to learn from them
what to believe, but to shape them to what you think: you have the Word, but
reject the Sense; which is to the Word, what the Soul is to the Body, it gives
it Life and Motion. The 1 Cor. 2.14.
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. You see, Sir, that some may read or have the Word of God, and yet
not comprehend its meaning, nay that it may seem folly unto them. The words may
be words of John 6.61.
life everlasting, and yet they cry, Durus est hic sermo: this word is hard,
and who can hear him.

The Divine Scriptures are high and majestical in the Sense; simple and without
Affectation in Word: they are plain, yet in them are high Hills, which no
natural Wit can surmount. They are perspicuous, yet full of mysterious clouds,
which baffle the most piercing eye. They are all true: Yet St. Augustine l. 2.
cont. Faust. c. 2. Pie cogitantes tantae auctoritatis eminentiam, latere ibi
aliquid crediderunt, quod petentibus daretur, oblatrantibus negaretur.
takes notice of some seeming contradictions, which cannot be reconciled
without recourse to God the Author of Scriptures. Less is learnt by Study, than
by Prayer, if Prayer be accompanied with Humility. The Psalm. 18. ( or 19.) 7.
testimony of God is faithful giving wisdom to little ones, or making wise the
simple, as the English has it. And the Author of our Faith glorifies his
Father, Matt. 11.25.
for concealing his mysteries from the learned and wise, and revealing them to
little ones. St. Gregory furnishes us with a fit comparison, Greg. ep. ad
Leandrum c. 4. Instar fluminis alti, and plani in quo Agnus ambulet, and
Elephas natet.
of a shallow and deep river, in which a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant swim.
That is, in it the simple, and humble find ground to stand upon; which the
Proud loose, and by it are lost. The words are plain and easy; but the sense
sublime and hard, not to be reached by humane Industry; but by Divine
Inspiration, which is denied to those, who rely on their own abilities, and
given to such as recur to God.

No Books of the Sybills, nor Oracles of the Devils, or other humane Writing
can equal Divine Scripture in this point.

Another Character of Divine Scriptures is, the force which accompanies them,
and works upon the heart of those who are well disposed, which insinuates it
self into the Will, and enflames it with the Love of God, breaking in pieces
the stony heart of Sinners. Are Jerem. 23.29.
not my words like fire, and like a hammer that breaks a rock.

No Precepts of Pagan Philosophers had this Energy. I will not assure, you ever
perceived either of these two qualities in reading of Scripture, in your Works
there appears little signs of either, or of the Disposition which they suppose.

CHAP. VI. Scriptures Suppressed.
G. B. P. 13. SCriptures being the Revelation of the whole Council of God, and
written by plain and simple men, and as first directed to the use of the rude
illiterate Vulgar, for teaching them the Mystery of Godliness, and the Path of
Life; It is a shrewd Indication, that if any study to hide this light under a
candlestick and to keep it in an unknown Tongue, or forbid the Body of
Christians the use of it, that those must be conscious to themselves of great
deformity to that Rule.

Answer. Here you begin your Charge of Antichristianism against your
Mother Church, and as the Charge is false, so in your managing it, you mingle
many Errors, with some few Truths. A bad Cause is not capable of a better
Defense. I will take notice of some of your most considerable slips, and leave
the Reader to judge of the rest.

That the Scriptures were written by plain and simple men, is not true; was
Moses such, who was learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians? Was David the
sweet singer of Israel, a plain and simple man? What shall we say of Solomon,
to whose wonderful knowledge the Scripture it self bears witness? Amos, it is
true was; but Esaias was not, nor Daniel, nor Samuel. And whoever was Author of
the Book of Job, he was certainly far from being plain and simple: For in him
are found in perfection, Philosophy, Astrology, and Divinity as a Queen
governing them; and if Caussinus the Jesuit may be believed, as complete
Rhetoric, as in any whosoever. And as to the Authors of the new Testament, as
long as St. Paul, St. Luke and St. John are amongst them, you will never
persuade the learned part of the World, that your Speech is not rash and
inconsiderate.

But suppose it true, that they were all plain and simple men, what then? Does
it follow that what they writ, is easy to the meanest capacity? (for that you
intend, if you intend any thing.) Do you not know, that these Men were only the
Scribes of the Holy Ghost? and that in a Scribe, Capacity of Understanding is
not necessary, but only Fidelity in writing. No great Science is necessary in a
Printer who only Prints what is given him by an Author: the same of a Scribe,
who writes what is dictated unto him. Now all Authors of Canonical books are
the Scribes of the Holy Ghost, (...), so their Doctrine is to be calculated
according to the meridian of that Divine Spirit; not of their Qualities: Take
the most plain and simple of them all, Amos. 1.1.
the herdman of Thecue, read him over, and if you say you understand him quite
through, I will say, you have cofidence to say any thing.

G. B. Page 14. The hardest parts of Scripture, are the Writings of the Old
Testament, and yet those were communicated to all.

Answer. Some parts of the New are as hard, as any of the Old, viz. The
Apocalypse, and some parts of St. Paul's Epistles, are hard to be understood. 2
Pet. 3.16.


Likewise is it not true, that all the Writings of the Old Testament were made
common to all the Israelites. The King Deuteronomy. 17.18.
was indeed commanded to write to himself a copy of the Law out of that which
was before the Priests the Levits. By which it appears that even Copies of the
Law were not so ordinary. Which may be gathered also out of 4 Kings c. 22.
there was such Astonishment at the finding, and reading of the Book of the Law
newly found in the Temple. The Ten Commandments were common, the Pharisees
Phylacteries prove it. As for the rest it was divided into Parashots, Sections,
and read unto the People, when they met on the Sabbath, as you may see, Acts
15.21. And in the Second of Esdras cap. 8. And the same Custom is still in the
Catholic Church, which in her Service does daily read some of the New and Old
Testament.

G. B. Page 14. What pains are taken by Papists to detract from the Authority
of Scriptures; how they quarrel, its Darkness, its Ambiguousness, the
Genuineness of its Originals?

Answer. This is a Calumny. We all unanimously own Scripture to be the Word of
God: that no Untruth can be found in it. Out of its Darkness and Ambiguity we
show the necessity of receiving its Sense from Tradition; and not sticking to
the bare Letter of the Scripture without the Sense; which is to the Letter,
what a Soul is to the Body.

G. B. Page 15. We complain of Scripture being two much perused.

Answer. Another Calumny: In all our Universities we have Masters of
Scriptures, who in those, I know, take place of those even of Divinity. Which
shows the esteem we make of that study.

G. B. Page 15. Let as little of it be in Vulgar Tongues, as can be.

Answer. A Third Calumny. It is all in English, translated by the Rhemish and
Doway Colleges; and in French, by the Doctors of Lovain. And as for the New
Testament, it is published in French by Rene Benoit, Brulot, Villeloin, and
Amelot. Besides other Editions less noted. And if there has been no new
Translation in English, it is not for any Decrees forbidding it, but because
that first Translation is liked in gross, and if any thing be defective (as is
unavoidable in all Works of Men) it is not considerable, and the like, or worse
may be feared in another.

G. B. Page 19. We read it publicly in an unknown Tongue, in Latin.

Answer. If this proves our Dislike of the Scriptures, it will likewise prove
our Dislike of Councils and Popes Bulls, (which you say we prefer before
Scriptures) seeing these were never extant in any Vulgar Language. Latin cannot
truly absolutely be called An unknown Tongue, in the Latin Church, seeing it is
the Language of her Schools, of her Public Service, of her Laws, of her
Tribunals, of her Councils, and in many places (as in Polony, and higher and
lower Germany) of almost every particular person, where very ordinarily even
Carters and Watermen speak it. And as for Spaniards and Italians with little
application, they understand it, by reason of the Affinity betwixt their own,
and the Latin Tongue. So English cannot absolutely be said to be an unknown
Tongue, in Wales, and Ireland, though in both there are several who understand it
not.

If this be not a sufficient Vindication of our Church, how will you excuse
your own from the same Fault, which never translated the Scripture into Irish,
but uses English in Ireland, even where there are many thousands who understand
it as little, as Latin is understood by any Catholic.

G. B. Page 15. We permit no private person the use of it, without Allowance
from his Confessor.

Answer. A Fourth Calumny. In Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, it is universally
permitted to all. In France no Body scruples at the reading of it in French,
provided the Editions be approved. Your Brethren there could have informed you
better: seeing they have had the Confusion to see their Ministers mouths stopped,
by Cutlers and Shoemakers out of their own Bible: which could not be, had they
not read it.

If the Opinion of a Confessor be demanded, it is to know the Disposition of
the person who desires it, whether it be such as good may be hoped from that
reading. All Food is designed by Almighty God for the use of Man; yet without
any Injury to the Patient, a Physician may forbid him the use of some, which
would nourish peccant Humors. So Scriptures are designed for our Instruction
unto Piety to God, and Peace to our Neighbors: If any man's mind be possessed with
Opinions contrary to both, and these Opinions control all Instruction given
him, so as all serve only to confirm him in his impiety, and turbulent Humor,
would you not advise him a Diet, from such strong Food, as Scripture? For
Example, lately a great part of the Commonalty of our Nation was so posest with
a Spirit of Rebellion against Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, that although
there be scarce any thing more recommended in holy Writ, than Obedience to
Prelate, and Prince, yet they thought the whole Drift of Scripture abetted
their Treason: not that any such thing was to be found in Scripture; but that
they fancied it there, as Men fancy, that the Bells speak articulate Words. In
that conjuncture what Advice would you give to an Ignorant Man? to be satisfied
with Books of Devotion, and Instructions drawn from Scripture which might keep
him humble and peaceable: or to continue reading the Scriptures which he
thought preached Sedition, and from which (through his bad Disposition) he was
confirmed in his Rebellions, and Antichristan Courses?

Another motive, why the Confessors Advice is demanded, is that he might
instruct Men how to Read, and reap Benefit from the Reading. To Read with the
Humility of a Scholar, not the Presumption of a Master; to make rather a
Prayer, than a Study of it: To resolve to practice what they understand, and
adore God for what they understand not. So that whether they do, or do not,
comprehend what they read, they glorify God in all, and grow in Virtue. After
such Instructions, applied to the Condition of every one, the Benefit will be
much greater, and the danger of ill using it much diminished.

CHAP. VII. A Digression touching the Idolatry of the Pagans, ill represented
by E. S. D. D.
THis matter is as clear in it self, as any antiquated Rights can be: all Men
are possessed with an Opinion, that (as the word imports) the deluded Nations did
Adore Idols, as their Gods. S. Austin l. 20. contra Faust. c. 20. having said,
that Latria was the Worship given to God alone as he is distinguished from all
his Creatures, how holy soever, he says, Ad hunc cultum pertinet oblatio
Sacrificii, unde Idololatria dicitur eorum, qui hoc (Sacrificium) etiam Idolis
offerunt. That to offer Sacrifice is an Act of Latria; whence those are called
Idolaters, who offer it to Idols. This seems clear; yet our modern Protestants
to make good the Charge of Idolatry against the present Cath. Church, raise a
great Mist before their Readers Eyes, and misrepresent Idolatry in such
colors, as may afterward be applied to make good their Charge against it. I
will endeavor to clear the Mist, and represent things in their own shape, to
the end, the difference betwixt Catholics and Idolaters may the better appear.
Something has been already said to the same intent, in the Preface, which I
desire may be here remembered.

SECTION I. That Pagans thought their Idols to be Gods.
MY first Reason is taken from several places of Scripture, Fathers and Pagans,
where they are expressly called Gods. Exodus 32.4. These are thy Gods, O Israel.
Speaking of the Calf. And Micah having newly made an Idol, prepared a place to
put it in, Judge. 17.5.
He set apart a little house to the God. Or as the English Translation has it,
Micah had a house of Gods. And the Danits having robbed him of his Idol, he
bemoans his loss with these Words, Judge. 18.24.
My Gods, which I made me, you have taken away. Dan. 14.15. Does not Bell seem
to thee a living God? And the Psalmist, Psalm. 96. (95.) 5.
All the gods of the Nations are Idols, the Latin has it otherwise, Omnes dii
Gentium daemonia: but the English Protestants cannot except against their own
Edition. Lastly, the same is expressly, though more obscurely, delivered in the
Book of Wisdom, Sap. 14.21.
Where he says, The Pagans had given the Incommunicable name to Stocks and
Stones. And what was that Incommunicable name, but that of the True God? All
other Names are communicable, as signifying things common to many: even that of
Gods by Participation, Gods by resemblance. Psalm. 81. (82.) 6.
I have said you are Gods, and children of the most high. And, 1 Car. 8.5.
There are many Gods and many Lords. Wherefore the true meaning of that place
is that the Pagans affixt the Proper Name of God, to their Idols.

This may be gathered from the Profession of Pagans themselves. Jupiter
Tragoedus.
Lucian relating an Assembly of their Gods, called by the great Jupiter, (on
occasion of Atheism, which then bare faced walked amongst the Philosophers) to
deliberate how to oppose it; he makes Jupiter give a Commission to Mercury to
entertain them, and place them orderly according to their several Dignities by
reason of their Matter or Art. On the first Rank he should place those of Gold;
on the second those of Silver; on the third those of Ivory; on the fourth those
of Brass, or Stone. And amongst these he should give the Precedence to those
which were the Masterpieces of famous Workmen, such as Phidias, Alcumenes,
Myron, Euphranor, etc. There Neptune sees with disdain and Indignation, Anubis
with his dogs face take place of him, because he was composed of more rich
matter. Then there is a Dispute, what place to assign to the Colossus of
Rhodes; which although it was only of Brass, yet for the bulk of it, surpast
the price of most of the golden Gods. In fine, the whole Discourse evidently
demonstrates, that the material Status or Idols were believed to be Gods, by
the Pagans, whom Lucian there derides.

As for Fathers, and Primitive Christians, out of their Works whole Volumes
might be composed in Confirmation of this Truth. See Justinus M. Epist. ad
Diognetum. page 492. Consider the matter and form of those things, which you
call Gods, and judge them to be such. Are not some of them Stones, like to
those we tread on? Are not others of Brass, like to that which is applied to
ordinary uses? Others of Wood, and that worm eaten? Others of Silver, which
must be watched, least they be stolen? Other of Clay? (...), these you call
Gods, you serve, you adore these, and at last become entirely like them.

Tertul. Apolog. cap. 40. Si quid adversi accidit urbibus, eaedem clades
templorum, quae and moenium fuerunt: ut jam hoc revincam, non a Deis evenire;
quia and ipsis evenit. If any Calamity befalls your Towns, their Temples, and
their Walls perish alike: whence I prove that your Gods do not inflict it,
seeing they suffer, as much as the Walls.

S. Cyprian l. ad Fortunatum de Exhortat. Martyrii cap. 1. Proves against the
Pagans, Quod Idola Dii non sunt: That Idols are not Gods. A very superfluous
Task, if what E. S. says be true, that no Body thought them so. More Fathers
shall be cited in my following Reasons. So that E. S. will have no occasion to
make himself merry, with a Covy of three Fathers, as he did with that of one
Partridge. See also S. Ambrose l. 2. de Virgin. ante finem.

Another Reason is taken from the Reproach ordinarily made in Scripture to
Idolaters, David Psalm. 105.(106).20.
says, they changed their glory into the likeness of a calf (or ox) eating
grass: because they abandoned God, to adore a Statue shaped like an Ox; that
is, they left God not for an Ox, nor for the likeness of God; but for the
likeness or resemblance of a Calf. What the Royal Prophet reproaches to his
Ancestors in the Wilderness, the blessed S. Paul Romans 1.13.
charges upon all Idolaters. They changed, says he, the glory of the
incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds,
and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. S. Hierom objects the same, l. 2.
Comment. in c. 15. Matt. Ignorantes Creaetorem, and adorantes lapidem: Being
ignorant of the Creator, and adoring a stone.

A third Reason is taken from those places of Scripture, or Fathers where Gods
are said to be made by Men. We are first forbid to make them: Exodus 20.2.
Ye shall not make Gods of silver, neither shall you make unto you Gods of
gold. And the Israelites were threatened Deuteronomy. 4.28.
in case of Disobedience to Gods Commandments, that for a Punishment, they
should serve Gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see,
nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. And in the Book of Wisdom, Sap. 13.10.
Their hope is amongst the dead, who call Gods the work of men's hands. In fine,
S. Paul Actor. 19.26.
was accused by Demetrius the Silver-smith, for teaching, that they be no Gods
which are made with hands: Wherefore it was his, and the common opinion, that
they were Gods, which were made with hands. Justinus Mar. Apol. 2. O stupidity!
you adore those as Gods, which are made by wicked men. And in St. Austin l. 8.
de Civ. Dei c. 23. and 24.
Mercurius Trismegistus avows some Gods to be made by men, to wit, those in
Temples: although he owned that this proceeded from the Ignorance of the true
Worship of God.

This receives a great light from Isaias, Isay 44. d v. 9. ad 20.
A carpenter, says he, in your English Translation, plants an Ash, and the rain
does nourish it. He burns part thereof in the fire, with part thereof be
makes a God. Again, Isa. 46.6. and 7.
They lavish gold out of a bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a
Goldsmith, and he makes it a God. And Jeremy, Jerem. 16.20.
Shall a man make Gods, unto himself, and they are no Gods? The same in
substance is said, Jer. 20.3.4.14. although more obscurely.

If Mr. Still. be not satisfied with these Testimonies of holy Writ, than which
nothing can be more clear, let him show his Art in explicating these verses of
a Pagan, owning the same.

Olim truncus eram ficulnus inutile lignum:
Cum faber incertus scamnum facererne, Priapum,
Maluit esse Deum. Deus inde ego.
Hor. l. 1. Sat. 8. St. Aug. l. de consensu Evang. c. 27. Quaerunt Pagani, ubi
Deos suos intrudant, ne a Christianis inveniantur and confringantur. The Pagans
seek out secret places where to hide their Gods; lest the Christians should
find and break them. And more fully Theodoret. Ser. 10. de cur. Graecor.
affect. p. 634. Si fateri ipsi non vultis -- If you (O Pagans) will not own it,
yet it is known to many, who have seen brought to light your Gods, which you
had hidden under ground, which some out of Devotion to them, for their
security, had buried: others discovered where they were hidden, that being
exposed to public view, Women and Children might scorn your Gods. They were
the likenesses of Serpents, and Four-footed Beasts, Bats and Mice which you
adored: and although you killed the Beasts themselves, Serpents, Scorpions, Mice
and Batts, yet you adored their Statues as Gods.

A fourth Reason is taken from the Prayers which were made to the Statues, or
Idols. In the Book Sap. 13.17.
of Wisdom. He, the Idolater, makes Prayer for his Good, for his Wife and
Children, and is not ashamed to speak to that which has no life. For Health he
calls upon that which is weak; for Life he prays to that which is Dead; for
Aid he humbly beseeches that which has least means to help; and for a good
Journey, he asks that, of that which cannot set a foot forward. And for
gaining and getting, and good Success of his hands, asks ability to do, of
him that has least ability to do any thing. Again one preparing to sail, and
about to pass through the raging waves, calls upon a piece of wood more rotten
than the wood which carries him. And in the Epistle of Hieremy. Bar. 6.41.
If they see one dumb, they bring him, and entreat Bell that he may speak, as
tho he were able to understand.

These two Books are held to be Apocryphal, by Protestants, of which I will not
treat at present, yet why they should deny them credit in a matter of fact, I
know no Reason. But because they regard not what is reasonable in their
Controversies, but what serves their turn, I will show the substance of all
this, in Books of unquestionable Authority: Isaias 44.17.
The residue of the Ash he makes a God, he falls down unto it, and adores
it, and prays unto it, and says, deliver me, for thou art my God. The sayings
of the other Books are only Ampliations of this. So they cannot be denied,
without rejecting this, nor this admitted without retaining of those.

A fifth Reason is that the Idolaters were really persuaded, that their Idols
did help them. Hieremy, Hier. 2.27.
Saying to a stock, thou art my Father, and to a stone, thou have begotten me.
Certainly those who could believe that they ought their Being, the greatest of
all Gifts, to their Statues or Idols, of Stone or Wood, would much easier
believe they owed to them other goods of an inferior nature. Certainly the Jews
Hier. 44.8.
ascribed their past Felicity in Jerusalem, to their Sacrifices offered to the
Queen of Heaven, and their then present miseries to their ceasing from those
Sacrifices. But the most public owning of singular Benefits from Idols, is
that of the Israelites. Exodus 32.4.
These are thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt.
Which words S. Cyril of Alexand. l. 9. contra Julianum p. 308. B. (...),
understands to be said to that very Calf, which Aaron had cast.

If Mr. Still. think not this Reason cleared enough out of Scripture, I shall
desire him to read what is written by the Greeks of the Palladium of Troy, and
what the Romans thought of it, and of their Ancilia, what Macrobius writes of
some Nations, who chained the Gods, Protectors of their Cities, fearing they
should forsake them. Let him at least read S. Austin l. 1. de Civit. c. 3. And
if he cannot be convinced, that the Pagans had Confidence in their Statues, or
Idols, I say he shuts the Eyes of his understanding so close, as to exclude all
light, but what pleases him, and serves his turn. Add to this, S. Cyprian l. ad
Demetrianum, Pudeat te eos colere quos ipse defendis, pudeat tutelam de iis
sperare, quos tu ipse tueris. Be ashamed to worship those, whom you defend: and
to expect Protection from those, who themselves need yours.

I have two Authorities more, to confirm this Reason: Jeremy Hier. 10.5.
affords the first. They must be carried, because they cannot go: Wherefore
fear them not, for they can neither do hurt, nor good. To what intent could
this Reason be alleag'd, unless it were to confound that Opinion that the
Statues themselves could help, or hinder? The Pagans then were possessed with
that Opinion. My other is out of David Psalm. 113.8. or Ps. 115.8.
who having said that the Idols of the Gentiles were Silver and Gold, the work
of Men's hands; that they had Eyes and could not see, Ears and could not hear,
etc. He concludes his elegant Induction, with these Words, May every one who
makes them, be like unto them, and also all who trust in them. There was then a
Trust, a Considence, a Reliance upon those Idols, which could not be grounded,
but on an Opinion that they did good. Add to this, what R. Majmonides says, as
he is rendered by Dionysius Vossius p. 8. Ab his simulacris bona and mala omnia
provenire indicabant universis, and proinde summo jure coli and metui. And
Athenagoras, in his Embassy for Christians. p. 25. owns the same, but atributes
the effects to Spirits dwelling in them.

My last Reason is taken from the several Arguments produced in Scripture
against Idolatry, that Idols were made by Men, that care must be taken they did
not fall. supra.
That they have no motion. Sap. 13.15. Bar. 6.26.
Cannot defend themselves from worms or birds, fire or thieves, or even from
the sacrileges of their own Adorers, as S. Ambrose Bar. 6. Psalm. 115.5. Jer.
16.5.
observes out of the Example of Dionysius l. 2. de Virg. ante finem.
the Tyrant.

You will say Pagans were wise men: how could they then be capable of so gross
an Error? Answer. This is that weakness of the Understanding incident to some,
who in matters of fact require Demonstrations: So a Philosopher denied local
Motion, because he could not answer the Reasons against it, and deserved no
other Confutation, But by this question, Fool, what do I now, proposed by a Man
who walked. It is clear out of what I have said, that the Pagans de facto did
believe their Idols to be Gods, why should we give ear to a speculative Reason,
against an evident historical Truth? As if Man left to himself, did nothing but
rationally, or did not many times so far darken his Understanding, as to show
little use of it in his greatest Concerns! It was the greatest folly
imaginable, I grant it, yet that is incident to Man, when he is abandoned of
God. And this the Ingratitude of Philosophers deserved. For when Romans 1.21.
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened,
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of
an incorruptible God, into an Image. Thus S. Paul. If you reply, you see who
you will dispute against, viz. the Fathers, S. Paul, Hieremy, Isaias, and the
Holy Ghost.

If you still think the Parallel just betwixt the Idolatry of Pagans, and the
worship given in the Catholic Church to Images, skew your Art in Sophistry, and
prove that we hold our Images to be Gods, that we put our Confidence in them,
expect Good or fear Evil from a Stock. How pitiful would your Discourse be,
should you dispute against us in this manner: A Cross is made by a Man, ergo,
it is not a Representation of our Saviors Death. The Statue of our B. Lady
cannot move without the help of Man, Ergo we are not to hope for any thing from
God through her Intercession.

In fine, either what Fathers, and what Scripture contains against the Idols of
the Gentiles, is to no purpose, and all their Reasons are frivolous; or our
Doctrine of Images differs from theirs of Idols: the First is Blasphemy,
therefore you must subscribe to the Second.

SECTION. II. The Beginning, and Occasions of Idolatry.
CAlvin lib. Instit. c. 11. l. 8. says Idolatry began almost with the World,
omnibus fere a mundo condito saeculis. But he neither gives any Reason for this
Assertion, nor determins its Author, nor time. R. Maimonides says it began by
Enos, the Son of Seth, and Grandson to Adam; and he grounds this Assertion on ^
Genesis 4.26. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. The Latin has it,
Iste coepit invocare nomen Domini. He began to call upon God. And the other
Translations found rather a good, than a bad Sense, only the Targum Onkelos,
expresses an abandoning of Gods Service, yet so as he charges that Fault rather
on Men living in Enos his time, than on Enos himself. Wherefore, I cannot
subscribe to that Rabby, especially seeing Enos was of the virtuous Branch, and
surely such a heinous Sin as Idolatry could not come but from cursed Cain, or
his Posterity; if there was any before they were destroyed.

I rather incline to what S. Cyril of Alex. says lib. 1. contra Julianum: That
there was no Idolatry before the Deluge; because no Author mentions any, nor
after the Deluge, till after building the Tower of Babel, and Confusion of
Tongues, for the same Reason. But shortly after those Seeds were sown, which in
process of time brought forth that bad Fruit. Suidas says that Seruch began
Politheism and Idolatry: Constantinus Manasses lays the Fault on his
Descendants, tho he gave the occasion.

Our Bodies do not in a moment shoot up to their full Growth, but leasurely,
and in a manner imperceptibly, and our Souls do neither on a sudden raise
themselves to the height of Perfection, nor fall into the Depth of heinous Sin,
according to the ordinary course of Grace and Nature. Nemo repent fit summus.
S. Bernard. (See S. Chrysostom. bom. 87. in Matthaeum) For that one of a
Persecutor should in a moment become an Apostle and a chosen Vessel; another of
an Apostle become a Devil, is very extraordinary; The First may be esteemed a
Miracle in the Order of Grace, which is all miraculous: the Second a Monster in
the Order of Sins, which is all monstrous. Now Idolatry, being the very height
of Wickedness, Men by certain degrees descended into it: First they made
Statues, Secondly gave them Civil Worship, then Religious Worship, and lastly
that Cult, or Worship, which is due to none but God.

The first Occasion of making them, was for the Solace of Parents afflicted
with the immature Death of their dearly beloved child. Sap. 14.15.
A Father afflicted with untimely mourning when he had made an Image of his
child taken away, now honored him as a God, which was then a dead Man, and
delivered to those that were under him, ceremonies and sacrifices. S. Cyril of
Alexand. l. 1. contra Julianum, delivers the same, (...). Some falling into the
greatest ignorance imaginable, were so shamefully deceived, as to make Temples,
and altars to Men, and to adore as Gods, those whom they had mourned for, as
dead Men. Sacra facta sunt, quae fuerant assumpta solatia. Minutius Felix, and
Hieron l. 1. Commen. in c. 2. Osee, Omnia idola ex mortuorum errore creverunt.

The Second was the Homage due to Kings by their Subjects. Those who were
within a certain distance from the Court, did it to the King in Person: But
those who dwelt in remote Provinces, performed that Duty to the Kings in their
Statues, (as now they do it to them in their Commissioners, or Deputies) which
Homage was at first only a Civil Worship, but soon degenerated into Divine
Adoration Sap. 14.17.
When men could not honor their Kings in presence because they dwelt far off,
they took the counterfeit of his Visage from far, and made an express image of
a King, whom they honored, to the end that by this forwardness they might
flatter him that was absent, as if he were present. Sometimes princes were not
content to be adored absent, or expect it till after their Death, their own
Ambition, seconded by the flattery of their Courtiers would assist in person at
their own Rites and Cult. Non solum mortuis Regibus aut absentibus; sed and
praesentibus sacra facta. Vide apud Vossium page 800.

-- Nihil est quod credere de se
Non possit cum laudatur Diis aequa potestas.
Thus Nabuchodonosor, thus the Roman Caesar's, thus several others came to be
adored. Alexander could not obtain it of his Macedonians, yet of his new
Persian Subjects he obtained it. Likewise Saturn, Janus, and Quirinus, (or
Romulus) in Italy, Belus in Babylon; Osiris and Isis, Serapis and Apis in
Egypt; Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, Apollo in Greece; and in particular places
several others: As in Troy Hector, in Chio Aristaeus, in Samos Lysander, in
Cicilia Niobe, and in Italy in Narnia Viridianus, in Asculum Ancaria, in
Volsinia Nertia, in Sutrino Nortia, and others in other places, came to be
Gods. See Tertul. Apolog. c. 24. and Athenagoras p. 14.

A third occasion was Gratitude to men from whose Industry they had received
great ease in their wants by Invention or Im provement of Arts. Thus Ceres for
Corn, Bacchus for Wine, Vulcan for the Forge amongst the Grecians, and Flora
amongst the Romans for the Wealth left to the Commonwealth, were adored as
Gods. Minutius Felix in Octavio Vnaquaeque Natio Conditorem suum, aut Ducem
inclitum, aut Reginam pudicam sexu suo fortiorem, aut alicujus muneris vel
artis repertorem venerabatur, ut civem bonae memoriae, sic and defunctis
praemium, and futuris dabatur Exemplum. I think their Conjecture very probable,
who guess the Egyptian Idol, the Calf or Ox to be a Symbol of Agriculture,
and that Apis, Serapis, and Osiris (three Names of one Person) Were Adored
under that Resemblance, for having invented it, whether that person was Joseph,
as E. S. pretends page 363. or the Son of Jupiter, and Niobe Daughter to
Phoroneus, is not worth the disputing. Probably Anubis got his Apotheosis by
his faithful Service done to the Public in quality of Captain of their Guards
to Osiris, and Isis, and his dogs-face, was a Symbol of his Vigilance.

If you doubt of either, of these occasions or both, Read Lactantius l. 1. c.
15. Philastrius l. de haeres. c. 27. Isidorus Hispal. lib. 8. Orig. c. 11.
Arnobius, Min. Felix above cited, and Cicero de Natura Deor. and that
Benefactors were Deified, began from and by command of Seruch, one of the
Descendants of Japhat, as you may see in Suidas, Epiphanius Epistola ad Acatium
and Paulum, and Constantinus Manasses in his short Chronicle.

Two things concurred to dispose men to this most abominable Sin, their
Ingratitude to God, within, and the complete Workmanship of the Statue without
them. Their Ingratitude to God deserved that he should withdraw his Grace, and
leave them to themselves: whence their foolish heart was darkened. Romans 1.21.
The Diligence Sap. 14.28.
of the Artificer did help to set forward the Ignorant to more Superstition
(which was the exterior Cause) for he willing to please one in Authority,
forced all his skill to make the resemblance the better: And so the multitude
allured by the grace of the Work took him now for a God, which a little before
was honorred but as a man. Aug. in Psalm. 112. Illa causa est maxima impietatis
insanae, quod plus valet in affectibus miserorum similis viventi forma, quae
sibi efficit supplicari, quam quod eam manifestum est non esse viventem, ut
debeat a vivente contemni. Plus enim valent ad curvandam infoelicem animam,
quod os habent, oculos habent, aures habent, quam ad corrigendam, quod non
loquentur, non videbunt, non audient.
Illa causa. The greatest cause of this mad (senseless) Impiety, is that the
likeness of a living man, works more strongly upon the Affections of those
Wretches, than an evident Conviction, that being dead they should be despised
by the living. For the Shape of Eyes, Ears, Mouth, Nose, Hands and Feet, are
more praevalent to bend down before them a miserable Soul, than their not
speaking, hearing, seeing, smelling, touching or walking, is to correct the
Error. Says S. Austin.

Probably this may be the Reason, wherefore although by Gods command Statues Exodus
25.18.
of Cherubins were made to be placed with the Ark in the Sanctuary, where none
but Priests came, yet in the Courts of the Temple, either those of the Jews, or
Gentiles, there were none. To leave nothing in the sight of that stiff-neckt,
rebellious, adulterous People, which might be A stumbling block to their Souls,
and a snare to their Feet. And such would those Statues have been to the Jews,
as they had been to the Gentiles.

The Protestants cannot blame the Catholic Church, for having Statues, and
exposing them to the People openly, without blaming their own Church, in which
Statues are in like manner made, and exposed, as I have heard of several of
their Cathedrals, namely that of Canterbury, where upon the Font are those of
Christ, and his twelve Apostles. We think our People secured from the danger of
Idolatry, First by being taught that the Statues are only Representations of
Saints, and not Saints themselves, much less Gods. Secondly because that
religious Respect which we give to Images, does by them end ultimate in God:
For why do we respect the Image or Statue? For the Saint it represents. And why
do we reverence the Saint? Merely because he was the Temple of God, and
Instrument of the Holy Ghost. So that all our Worship of Images ends in God,
and his Christ, with the Holy Ghost, one God blessed for evermore. Thus we
instructing the People, stop their Inclinations to the evil, Idolatry, and by
owning all we have, and all the Saint had, that is good from God, we hope we
need not fear, that dreadful Blindness and Folly, into which the Men wise
according to this World were permitted (to humble and confound them) to fall
through a penal, but a very just Judgment of God.

The last occasion of this Idolatry, was the Devil insinuating himself into the
Statues, and in a manner dwelling in them, answering to Questions proposed to
them, causing Sicknesses, and healing them, telling things which happened at a
Distance, and pretending to foretell things to come; although in this unless they
were very cautious in delivering their Oracles in obscure terms, their
Ignorance in future things was easily discovered. Of this see S. Austin. Aug.
l. 8. de Civit. c. 23.
Justinus, Justin. Mar. dialog. cum Triphone.
Origines, Origenes l. 1. contra Celsum.
Minutius Felix, Minutius Felix in Octavio.
Prudent. Prudent. in Apotheosi.
and Cyprian, Cypr. l. ad Demetrianum.
Arnobius, Lactantius, etc. I end with the convincing Testimony of Athenagoras
p. 29. The things, said he, which gave names to Idols, were men, those which
take names of them are Devils. For this Reason Tertul. l. de Testim. animae
prope finem, said, Thou O Soul, did abhor Devils and yet thou did Adore
them.

I must not omit another kind of Idolatry, of those who adored as God, several
Creatures, either, for their Beauty or the Benefit, they received by them, such
as are the Fire, and some Elements, of the Earth, or the Sun, Moon, or Stars
Vain Sap. 13.1.
are all men by nature, who are ignorant of God, and could not out of the good
things seen, know him that is; neither by considering his works, did
acknowledge the workmaster: but deemed either fire, or the circle of the stars,
or the lights of Heaven, to be Gods, which govern the World, with whose beauty,
if they being delighted, took them to be Gods, let them know how much better
the Lord of them is. But if they were astonished at their power and virtue, let
them understand by them how much mightier he is, who made them.

There is yet another Species of Idolatry of such, who Deified and Adored all
Creatures, which was grounded on that Opinion of the Stoics, that God was the
Soul of the World, which is expressed by Virgil: Spiritus intus alit, totamque
infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.


But nothing about this occurring in Scripture, and not much in Fathers, I let
it pass.

These are the several Species of Idolatry, which occur and are most
conspicuous amongst Pagans. All were absolutely inexcusable, for leaving the
Creator for the Creature. Yet amongst all, methinks the cause of those who
adored the Sun, was somewhat more excusable than the rest; for although Reason
teaches it evidently not to be a God, yet Experience shows it to have one
Property of God; for the Sun gives Light and Life to all that have Eyes and
Heart, it gives without Interest, it never appears, but as a common good, and
besides its visible effects, produces many other by hidden Influences. These
Considerations do not excuse, but they somewhat diminish the guilt of those who
adored that wonderful Instrument, the work of the most High. Ecclesiastici 43.2.

To sum up what we have said, we find that even the wisest Men have been guilty
of the greatest Folly, that can enter into man's head, how weak soever, to take
for a God, a thing so much inferior to them in nature, that they expected help
of a thing helpless, and direction from what is senseless. To this they were
disposed by the humane Shape, striking their fancy; they were moved to it by
love of a dead Master, Fear of a living Tyrant, Flattery to one, on whom their
fortune depended, and these altogether heightened by the Illusion of the Devil.
Sometimes Gratitude to beneficial Creatures, inclined Men to renounce the great
Benefactor. Yet these motives how powerful soever, could never have made Men so
prodigiously to renounce the use of Reason, had they not by former sins, so far
left God, as to deserve to be left by him; not that they received no Grace at
all from him, but that they had not such Graces as would keep them in what was
good, and prevent their fall into those senseless Errors.

SECTION III. What were the Gods of the Pagans? Or, What things were
represented by their Idols? where it is proved, that Pagan Gods had been Men.
THE Occasion I have to treat of this Quaestion, is given by G. B. and E.
Still. who pretend that Chiefly one and he the true God was adored by the
Idolaters, who used several Statues and Names, only to represent his several
Atributes. And that by Jupiter they understood the true God.

What I have cited out of Scripture, and Fathers is sufficient to convince the
contrary: seeing that it appears that dead Men, Stars, etc. were adored.
Vossius l. 1. de Idol. cap. 5. p. 30. says, Idolatry began with the Adoration
of Angels, thence past to the Souls of Men. Lactantius l. 2. c. 14. says, the
Egyptians first adored the Stars, afterward their Kings. S. Cyril. of Alex. l.
1. contra Jul. p. 17. says the same of the Chaldaeans. But the Egyptians,
whilst the Israelites lived amongst them adored either Apis or Joseph under the
shape of an Ox, or Calf. And in imitation of them, the Israelites in the
Desert, Exodus 32. and the ten Tribes at their Schism from the Temple of
Jerusalem, the third of Kings 12.28. which continued amongst them, till they
were removed quite out of the Country Although that was not the only Idolatry they
were guilty of: for they had Baal, 3. Reg. 18. and the host of Heaven toward
the end of their Kingdom, as appears 4 Reg. 17.16. which they learnt probably
of the Assyrians. After the Transmigration of the Tribe of Juda, we find those
who remained in their Country, much addicted to the Star-worship. Hieremy 44.
as to a Superstition ancient amongst them, which I guess they learnt of their
King Achaz, and that he received it from Damascus. 4 Reg. 16. where a Copy of
an Altar was sent to the High Priest to have another made like it, and placed
in the Temple. But this being a matter of no moment, I do not trouble my self
with further examining it. Our only Dispute is about the Romans and Greeks,
whose Idolatry was banished the World by Christian Religion, which our modern
Adversaries pretend that we have renewed again.

You say then, that they by Jupiter, adored the true God, Creator of Heaven and
Earth: we say that all the Gods of the Pagans were Men, and that Jupiter
himself was such; and that they were Devils who took upon themselves those
persons Names, to delude the World, I will prove this, 1st. out of Scripture,
2ly. out of such Fathers as lived with Pagans, and consequently had more
occasion to know their Theology, than we, who must gather it only out of their
Writings, 3ly. out of the Confession of Pagans, 4ly. out of the Acknowledgment
of the Gods themselves, who were adored, and lastly by the Confession of
Protestants.

My First Proof is taken out of Scripture, Psalm. 95. (96.) 5. All the Gods of
the nations are devils. Omnes Dii Gentium Daemonia. So it is in the vulgat
Edition, and was so from the beginning, while Paganism slourish'd; and yet
Pagans never accused the Christians for imposing upon them Opinions, which they
did not hold. See S. Augustine upon that place. The English Translation is
somewhat different. viz. All the Gods of the Nations are Idols. Which
notwithstanding confutes sufficiently the contrary Error: for if this be true,
All Gods of Nations are Idols, as it must, being in Scripture: E. S. his
Proposition being contradictory to it, must be false, Jupiter the chief God of
Nations, is no Idol, nor Devil.

Moreover if the Sacrifice the Idolaters offered, (which was always held to be
the Prime Act of Religion) was offered by them to the Devils, and not to God,
then it follows they did not worship the true God, but only Devils. But they
sacrificed to Devils, and not to God, Ergo they did not adore the true God, but
Devils. I prove the Minor. Denter. 32.17. They sacrificed to Devils, not to
God: to gods whom they knew not, to new gods, who came newly up, whom your
fathers feared not. Psalm. 105. (106) 37. They sacrificed their sons, and their
Daughters unto Devils. And 1 Cor. 10.20. The things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. Hence Aug. l. 20. contra
Faust. c. 18. ait. Nihil in sacrificiis Paganorum Deo displicuisse, nisi quod
fierent daemoniis. Nothing in Sacrifices of the Pagans was displeasing to God,
but those to whom they were offered. viz. the Devils.

My Second Proof is taken out of those Fathers, who living with the Pagans, and
conversing familiarly with their persons, (some of them having been Pagans
themselves) and writing against them had most reason to know their Sentiments
concerning their Gods, and durst not misrepresent them, for Fear of God, who
forbids lying, and shame of men, who would have discovered their Falsehood. What
say these Fathers of the Pagan Gods? Athenagoras legate. pro Christ. page 14.
(...). Are not the Ceremonies of the Egyptians ridiculous who mourn for those
persons, as for dead men, and adore and offer sacrifice unto them, as to Gods.
And page 16. He tells the Emperors, they knew very well, that the ancient
Poets Orpheus, Homer, and Hesiod, were either Contemporary with the Gods, or
lived very little after them. And page 17. in fine, (...). The Gods were not
from the beginning, but were begotten as we are, and in this all agree. And
page 29. (...). Out of History it is evident, that those Gods from whence Idols
have their Names, were Men: and that those Spirits, who take those Names, are
Devils is evident from their Works.

Tertullian Apolog. c. 10. page 39. Deos vestros colere definimus, ex quo illos
non esse cognovimus, sed nobis inquitis Dii sunt. Appellamus and provocamus a
vobis ad conscientiam vestram, illa nos judicet, illa nos damnet, si poterit
negare omnes istos Deos vestros homines fuisse, sed and ipsa, si inficias
ierit, de suis antiquitatum instrumentis revincetur, de quibus eos didicit
testimonium perhibentibus ad hodiernum, and civitatibus in quibus nati sunt,
and regionibus in quibus aliqui operati vestigia reliquerunt, in quibus etiam
sepulti demonstrantur. Nec ego per singulos decurram, proprios, communes,
masculos, feminas, rusticos, urbanos, nauticos and militares (otiosum est etiam
titulos per sequi) ut colligam in compendium: and hoc non quo cognoscatis; sed
recognoscatis. Certe enim oblitos agitis. Ante Saturnum Deus penes vos nemo
est: ab illo census totius, vel potioris, vel notioris Divinitatis. Itaque quod
de origin constiterit, id de posteritate conveniet. Saturnum itaque, quantum
literae docent, neque Diodorus Graecus, aut Tallus, neque Castrius Severus, aut
Cornelius Nepos, neque ullus commentator ejuscemodi antiquitatum, aliud quam
hominem promulgaverunt. Si quaeras rerum argumenta, nusquam invenio fideliora
quam ipsam Italiam, in qua Saturnus post multas expeditiones, postque Attica
hospitia consedit exceptus a Jano. Mons, quem incoluerat, Saturnius dictus,
civitas, quam depopulaverat, Saturnia usque nunc est, etc. We do not adore your
Gods, because we know they are not Gods; but say you to us they are Gods? We
appeal from you, to your own Conscience, being content to stand or fall by its
Verdict, if that can deny, that all your Gods have been Men, If it denies it,
we will convince its Error out of your own Records of Antiquity, from which it
must learn, what she knows of them, out of the cities, in which they were born,
out of the countries where they flourished, and out of the places where they
were buried. I intend not to run over each one in particular, or speak of those
who are common to all, or peculiar to some; of males, females, pesants,
citizens, watermen, and soldiers: it being superfluous, to mention even their
several Professions: not to acquaint you with any new thing, but to call to
your mind, what you knew before, although you act as if you knew it not. You have
no God antienter than Saturn. Of him were born your chiefest or most noted
Gods; if he is proved to have been a Man, all the rest must have been such. Now
if you consult Authority, all Antiquity speaks him to be a mere man; if you
seek Proofs from things, Italy will afford convincing Arguments, in which after
many Wars, and having past Greece, Saturn settled, being entertained by Janus:
he gave his name to the city he built, to the mountain where he dwelt. The
country where he was concealed was called from that Latium, etc. And c. 19.
page 49. Ipsos Deos vestros, and templa, and oracula, and sacra, unius
prophetae scrinium vincit. The Pentateuch is more ancient by some ages, than
your Religion, and your Gods themselves, and a little after, Sicut illos
homines fuisse, non audetis negare, it a post mortem Deos factos asseveratis.
Now you cannot deny them to have been men, you say they were made Gods after
their death.

Minutius Felix in Octa. page 16. Majores nostri dum Reges suos colunt
religiose, dum defunctos illos desiderant in imaginibus videre, dum gestiunt
eorum memorias in statuis detinere, sacra facta sunt, quae fuerunt assumpta
solatia. Lege Stoicorum scripta, vel scripta Sapientum, eadem mecum
recognosces, ob merita virtutis, aut muneris Deos habitos. And page 19.
Manifestum est homines illos fuisse, quos and natos legimus, and mortuos
scimus. Our Ancestors whilst they honored their Princes, during their life,
whilst they saw them in their Pictures or Statues, those things were turned to
religious uses, which were intended only for their comfort. Read the Writings
of your Stoics, or other learned Men, you will be forced to acknowledge what
we say, that Men for their Virtue or Offices were held to be Gods. Out of all
that we have said, it is evident that your Gods were Men, of whose Birth and
Death we are certain.

S. Cyp. l. de Idolorum vanitate, begins the Book with these words, Deos non
esse, quos colit vulgus, hinc notum est: Reges enim fuerunt, qui ob regalem
memoriam coli apud suos, etiam in morte coeperunt. We may be sure those cannot
be Gods, who are commonly adored as such, for they were Kings, who for their
Royal Authority obtained to be adored at their Death.

Arnobius l. 2. contra Gent. page 10. Vos hominem nullum colitis natum? non
unum, aut alium? non innumeros alios? quinimo non omnes, quos jam in templis
habetis vestris mortalium sustulistis ex numero and coelo, sideribusque
donastis? Si enim forte vos fugit sortis eos fuisse humanae, and communis
conditionis; replicate antiquissimas litteras, and eorum scripta percurrite,
qui vetustati vicini, sine ullis attestationibus cuncta veritate in liquida
prodiderunt. Jam profecto discetis quibus singuli patribus, quibus matribus
fuerint procreati, qua in nati regione, qua gente, quae fecerint, egerint,
pertulerint. You reproach to us, that we adore a man; And do you adore no one
man? do not you adore many men? were not all your Gods men, who by your favor
were raised up to Heaven, and placed among the stars? If you have forgotten
this, turn to your ancient Writers, who will without flattery tell you that
they were men, and ordinary men; thence you may learn their fathers, mothers,
country, quality, gests, etc.

S. Chrysostom. hom. 1. ad populum Antioch. The whole multitude, of the Pagan
Gods, is made up of such men.

S. Hierom. l. 1. Comment. in O see cap. 2. Omnia idola ex mortuorum errore
creverunt. All Idols were made out of dead men.

S. Austin spends a great part of his first Books De Civ. Dei. to confound the
Pagan error, who adored either dead Men or living Devils. l. 8. c. 26. The
Title of the Chapter is, Omnis Religio Paganorum circa homines mortuos fuit
impleta. The whole Religion of the Pagans was taken up with the cult of dead
men.

S. Cyril. lib. 6. contra Julianum. page 205. (...). Which are the words of
Sanconiathon; they may be thus Englished, The ancientest of the Grecians, and
particularly the Phaenicians, and the Egyptians (from whom the rest received
it) thought those to be (not Heroes, not Secundary, and Underlings, but) THE
GREATEST GODS, who had been beneficial to Mankind, and invented some useful
things. Which words are the more to be noted, because they are of one of the
most ancient of Pagan Writers, and consequently nearer to the time of the
pretended Gods. But chiefly because they are cited, and approved by S. Cyril.
l. 6. contra Jul. and by E. S. Orig. Sacrae p. 32. So that in one Authority I
give three Witnesses.

Julius Firmicus page 20. Ecce demon est quem colis. It is the Devil whom you
adore.

I conclude this proof with the words of Justin M. Apolog. 2. p. 56. where
having said, that Socrates was persecuted by the Devils, whom the Athenians
adored, for denying them to be Gods, as an Atheist; and that on that same score
the Devils practiced the like on the Christians in his time, giving them the
same odious name. He adds, If Atheist signifies a man who denies the Gods of
the Pagans, I own we are Atheists. But we do believe, says he, in the true God,
Father of Justice, etc. Would he have said this, if he had been of E. S. his
Opinion, that the Gods of the Pagans were the true God?

My Third Proof is taken from the Confession of Pagans; for Sanconiathon the
ancientest of their writers, whose words you may find in S. Cyril. l. 1. contra
Julianum page 205. And Mr. Stillingst. in his Origines Sacrae p. 32. He, I say,
taught that even the greatest Gods had been Men. Add to this the Verse of Ovid
Fastorum 4. speaking of Venus: Illa Deos omnes (longum est enumerare) creavit.

As saying all were born, as commonly men are.

Alexander in a particular book sent to his Mother, acquaints her, that he by
threats had forced out of an Egyptian Priest, this secret, that all the Gods
(which he with the rest of the Pagans adored) had been men. This is cited by
Athenagoras page 31. S. Cyp. l. de Idol. vanit. and S. Augustine. l. 8. de Civ.
Dei c. 27. who names the Priest, revealer of this Secret, Leo.

This is confirmed by all those, who name the several Countries of their Gods,
Jupiter of Crete, Mars of Thracia, Juno of Argos or Samia, Diana of Taurica
Chersonesus, Dercetus or Atergate a cruel and lascivious woman (Mother to
Semiramis) of Syria, Apollo, Venus, etc. of other Countries. What does all this
import, but that they were (in the Opinion of the Pagans) Men, born and buried
as the rest? which Argument the Fathers commonly use. More shall be cited, when
we come to speak of Jupiter in particular.

My Fourth Proof is taken from the Confessions of the Gods themselves, whom the
Pagans adored. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 23. p. 26. Aedatur hic aliquis sub
Tribunalibus vestris, quem a daemone agi constet, jussus a quolibet Christiano
loqui spiritus ille, tam se daemonem confitebitur de vero, quam alibi deum de
falso. Aeque producatur aliquis ex iis, qui de Deo pati existimabantur, nisi se
daemones confessi fuerint Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem illius
Christiani procacissimi sanguinem fundite. Bring out before your Tribunals any
Person evidently and certainly possessed by some Spirit, either habitually and
permanently (such are called Energumens) or transiently (as those, who as they
offered Sacrifice, and did their Devotions to the Gods, were by them for a time
possessed) let a Christian command that Spirit to speak the Truth, what he is,
and if he does not truly own himself to be a Devil (not being able to tell an
untruth to such an Exorcist) although in our absence he boasts of his being God,
knock out that impudent Christian's brains.

Cyp. l. ad Demetrianum page 201. O si audire eos velles, and videre, quando a
nobis adjurantur and torquentur spiritualibus flagris, and verborum tormentis
de obsessis corporibus ejiciuntur, quando ejulantes and gementes voce humana
and potestate divina flagella and verbera sentientes, venturum judicium
confitentur, Veni, and cognosce vera esse quae dicimus. Et quia sic Deos colere
te dicis, vel ipsis, quos colis creed, aut si volueris, and tibi credere, de te
ipso loquetur, audiente te, qui nunc pectus tuum obsedit, qui nunc mentem tuam
ignorantiae nocte coecavit. Videbis nos rogari ab iis, quos tu rogas, timeri ab
iis, quos tu adoras. Videbis sub manu nostrastare vinctos and tremere captivos,
quos tu suspicis ac veneraris ut Dominos. Certe vol sic confundi, in istis
erroribus tuis poteris quando conspexeris and audieris Deos tuos, quid sint,
interrogatione nostra statim prodere, and praesentibus licet vobis, praestigias
illas, and fallacias suaes, non posse celare. O that thou would but hear and
see thy Gods, when by the spiritual torments of our Exorcisms, they are cast
out of the Bodies they possessed; when they are forced to acknowledge the
judgment to come at the last day. Come to us and experience the Truth of what
we say. And seeing thou adorest thy Gods, at least believe those, thou adorest,
or if thou will believe thy self, we will force that same Spirit which obsesses
thy body, and blinds thy Soul with Ignorance of Gods Truth, to speak the Truth
to thee: thou shall see those pray to us, to whom thou offerest thy Devotions,
those to fear us, whom thou adorest. Thou shall see those tremble as captives,
chained by us, whom thou honor as Lords. Certainly thou will be ashamed of
thy Error, when thou hear thy Gods themselves (when questioned by us) own
what they are, even in your presence, as not able to conceal their cunning
wiles and illusions.

And Minutius Felix in Octavio page 23. Haec omnia sciunt plerique, pars
vestrum, ipsos daemones de semetipsis confiteri, quoties a nobis tormentis
verborum, and orationis incendiis de corporibus exiguntur. Ipse Saturnus, and
Serapis, and Jupiter, and quicquid daemonum colitis, victi dolor, quod sunt
eloquuntur. Nec utique in turpitudinem sui, nonnullis praesertim vestrum
assistentibus, mentiuntur. Ipsis testibus esse eos daemones de se verum
confitentibus credit; adjurati enim per Deum verum and solum, inviti, miseri,
etc. Most Men, and even many of your own, know they are no better, then Devils,
whom you adore. Your Gods Saturn, and Serapis, and Jupiter, have been adjur'd
by the name of the true, and only God, and have been forced out of the bodies
they possessed and confessed themselves to be foul, and seducing Devils. And
their Confession was to be supposed true, in point of Reason. For they that
were adored as Gods, would never belie themselves into Devils to their own
reproach, especially in presence of them that worshipped them, were they not
forced. Thus is that place Englished by W. L.

Julius Firmicus page 20. Ecce demon est quem colis, cum Dei and Christi ejus
nomen audierit, contremiscit. It is the Devil whom you adore, he trembles when
he hears the Name of God, and of his Christ.

In my next Section I will cite Prudentius, who says the same in his Apotheosi.
You may find in S. Austin, and other Fathers, several Reasons proving those
Gods to be Devils, chiefly for their promoting Vice, by encouraging Poets
Fables, concerning those filthy Acts related to have been committed by them.

My Fifth Pooof is taken from the Testimony of Protestants themselves. The
Author of the Whole Duty of Man, page 138. I need speak little of the Second
Commandment, as it is a forbidding of that grosser sort of Heathenish Idolatry,
the worshipping of Idols; which though it were once common in the World, yet it
is now so rare, that it is not likely any that shall read this, shall be
concerned in it. Could he have said this, had he not known the Practice of
Papists to be far different from those of Heathen Idolaters?

Vossius l. 1. de Idol. cap. 18. page 139. Omnes Gentium Dii fuerunt homines.
All the Gods of the Pagans were Men. Godwin l. 4. Antiquit. c. 1. well
deserving Men were reputed Gods.

Mr. Thomas Prat in his Epistile Dedicatory of the History of the Royal
Society, having said, that Generals of Armies, and great Conquerors were by the
Pagans esteemed Heroes, he adds, The Gods Antiquity worshipped with Temples and
Altars, were those who instructed the World to plow, to sow, to plant, to spin,
to build houses, and to find out new Countries.

M. G. B. in this very Book, p. 17. The herd (the comonalty of the Idolaters)
did formally worship the Image: And p. 23. The Souls of deceased men were
honored with divine honor.

I hope E. S. will not refuse the Testimony of his great Patriarch W. L. who in
his Relation p. 77. cites with great esteem of them, the words of Minutius
Felix, and very judiciously observes, that it is not credible the true God
should be forced out of his Possession; much less that he be constrained to
utter a lie, and own himself to be a foul and seducing Devil. Can any man
think, that God can deny himself, to such a degree? Credat Judaeus Appella,
non ego. I scarce wonder at the extravagant Opinions of the Pagans, seeing E.
S. and G. B. can believe that. Were there not some other more powerful tie then
only imaginary, or pretended Incredibility, I should hope to see both believe
Transubstantiation, seeing they can believe, that God can deny himself, tell a
lie, and profess himself a Devil. O Blasphemy!

But although in a bad humor E. S. should refuse to subscribe to his quondam
Primate, yet I can have recourse to a person very near unto him, even his own
dear self: for he, Origines Sacrae l. 1. c. 2. p. 32. speaking of Sanconiathon,
says, That which of all seems clearest in this Theology, is the open owning the
Original of Idolatry to have been from the Consecration of some eminent Persons
after their Death who had found out some useful things for the world, whilst
they were living, which the subtiller Greeks would not admit of; viz. That the
Persons they worshipped were once men, which made them turn all into
Allegories, and mystical Senses to blind that Idolatry they were guilty of the
better amongst the Ignorant. And l. 3. c. 5. he says, that Saturn, Jupiter,
Mercury, Neptune, Vulcan, Juno, Minerva, Ceres, Bacchus, and others had been
Men and Women.

He could not have given a clearer and fuller testimony of the Truth of what we
say, and the Falsehood of what he delivers, than is contained in those two
places. To what can we attribute this Change in E. S. that what was before the
certain Position of Idolatry, should now be false, but to a desire to charge
that heinous sin upon the Roman Catholic Church, which of it self falls to the
ground, if Pagan Idolatry be rightly represented? Tantae molis erat, to make
Rome seem Idolater in the eyes of his ignorant Admirers!

Philo Biblius had reason to blame those Allegories, to which the subtiller
Greeks had recourse, which made a clear new Religion, by changing the Object
adored as God, from some man eminent for Power or Virtue, to Elements, much
inferior to the least of men, or any living Creatures; for this yielded the
cause and condemned the whole Idolatrous World. So Minutius Felix in Octavio,
page 16. Zenon interpretando Junonem Era, Jovem Coelum, Neptunum mare, ignem
esse Vulcanum, and caeteros similiter vulgi Deos Elementa esse monstrando,
publicum arguit graviter, and revincit errorem.

SECTION IV. That the Jupiter O. M. of the Greeks and Romans was not the True
God.
MY first, and chief Proof, is taken from what is already said out of Holy
Scripture, Fathers, Protestants and Pagans. For those universal Propositions
contain all, and every God of Paganism. V. C. What are the Propositions of
Scripture? All the Gods of the Gentiles are Devils. And, The Pagans sacrificed
to Devils, not to God. What are the Propositions of E. S. One God of the Pagans
was the true God, and no Devil. Item, The sacrifices of the Pagans were offered
to the true God, and not to the Devil. If the Logic of E. S. can reconcile with
Truth two Contradictions, it is a rare one. Till he teach us how they can stand
together, we will stick to the common received Axiom of Sophists, that both
cannot be true: So one of those Propositions must be false, either that of
Scripture, or that of E. S. now I desire him to declare whether he takes to be
true, and whether the liar: God or himself.

Again, Gal. 4.8. the Galatians knowing not God, served those who by nature
were not Gods. Which are the words of the Apostle, and E. S. says, The
Galatians knew Jupiter, and served him, who was the true God: Wherein he
directly contradicts the Scripture.

The like Arguments might be brought from the Authority cited out of Fathers,
Protestants and Pagans, who assuring universally, that all the Pagan Deities
were raised from men, exclude all possibility of Jupiters being otherwise, he
being one of them. Indeed no body ever reproached the Catholic Roman Church,
that it did not adore the true God, although many pretended the Adoration of the
Saints, to be like to that of the Pagan Idolaters adoring of their secundary
Gods: why then should the Pagans be absolutely said not to adore the true God,
if they did adore him, although they joined others in alike degree of worship with
him? But seeing E. S. and G. B. pretend Jupiter to be the name of the true God
blessed for evermore, amongst the Pagans, I will show, that Jupiter, according
to Fathers, Poets and Protestants, was a man, as well as the rest, and I will
confirm all with E. S. his own Testimony.

My next Proof is taken from those, who confound Jupiter with the rest of the
Gods, Saturn, Neptune, Pluto, etc. as well as of the other Gods. We have heard
Tertullian assure, that Saturn was the ancientest of their Gods, and that the
rest ought their being to him, and thence inferred, that he being a man, all
the rest must have been so too. See also Lactan. Firm. who says, l. 1. c. 15.
It is evident all the Gods were men. See Tertul. c. 10. p. 39. His words are
cited above Sect. 3. note that Vossius l. 1 Idol. c. 18. p. 139. thinks this an
invincible Argument, to prove that by Saturn the Pagans understood Adam. Now if
Saturn was the ancientest of all the Pagan Gods, Jupiter who is one of them, is
not ab aeterno, eternal, and consequently not the true God. See Minutius Felix
p. 23. where Jupiter is said to be cast out of a possessed body, as well as
Saturn and Serapis: as having nothing peculiar above the rest. W. L. indeed put
an Emphasis upon his name, Jupiter himself, when he translates those words,
which is not in the Author, at least as we have him, which shows only, that the
Pagans had a greater veneration for Jupiter then for the rest; yet without
taking him out of the number of those Heathen Gods, who were subject to
Christian Exorcisms.

My Third Proof is from such Fathers who relate his Country, Birth and Death.
Minutius Felix page 17. The Birth, Countries and Sepulchers of the Gods are
shown. Dictaei Jovis. Of Jupiter on the mountain Dicte. S. Cyp. l. de Idol.
vanit. p. 204. Antrum Jovis in Creta visitur and sepulchrum ejus ostenditur,
and ab eo Saturnum fugatum esse manifestum est. You may see Jupiters cave in
Candy, his Sepulcher is there shown, and it is undeniable that he chased thence
Saturn, his Father. Lactantius Firmianus l. 1. div. instit. cap. 11. p. 39.
says this Epitaph was written on his Tomb, (...) Jupiter Saturni. S. Cyril of
Alex. l. 10. contra Julianum p. 342. speaks of Jupiter's Tomb, and says that
Pythagoras visited it, and writ upon it, this Epitaph, (...). Here lies
Jupiter. And Porphyrius boggling about the Truth of this story which ruins the
Divinity of his great God. S. Cyril adds, That Pythagoras had written the plain
truth, that the greatest of the Pagan Gods was dead, and that his Countrymen
the Cretans had built him a Tomb: (...). Julius Firmicus p. 4. says that
Jupiter was King of Candy or Crete, that Bacchus or Dyonisus was his unlawful
Son, whom in her husband's absence Juno caused to be killed by the Guards, who
devoured his Body; but Minerva preserved his heart and presented it to his
Father, at his return, etc.

Commodianus cap. 4. Saturnus rex erat in terris, in monte natus Olympo. Non
Divinus erat, sed Deum sese dicebat. Venit inops animi, lapidem pro filio
sorpsit; sic Deus evasit, dicitur modo Jupiter ille. Saturn was a king, who out
of fear of his own children, devoured them; but one of them was saved, a stone
in lieu of him being given to the Father, which he swallowed, so this infant
grew up to be a God, and is called Jupiter.

My fourth Proof is from those Fathers, who absolutely refuse to acknowledge
the Divinity of Jupiter. Origin. l. 1. contra Celsum p. 19. As Soon as we hear
the name of Jupiter, we understand the son of Saturn and Ops, Juno's husband,
Neptunes brother. And l. 5. p. 262. We will rather endure any torments, than
acknowledge Jupiter to be God. Lactantius Firmianus, called commonly by the
Fathers, The Christian Cicero, whom Photius judges to be the most learned and
eloquent of his Age, and who for his capacity was chosen by the Emperor
Constantine the great, to be Tutor to his Son Crispus. He I say, l. 1. Instit.
Divin. cap. 11. p. 38. says, Jovem illum esse, qui ex Open Saturnoque natus sit,
negari non potest; vana igitur est persuasio eorum, qui nomen Jovis summo Deo
tribuunt: solent enim quidam errores suos hac excusatione defendere, qui
convicti de uno Deo, cum id negare non possunt, ipsum se colere affirmant;
verum hoc sibi placere ut Jupiter nominetur. Quo quid absurdius? Jupiter enim
sine contubernio conjugis filiaeque coli non solet, unde quid sit apparet, nec
fas est id nomen transferri, ubi nec Minerva est ulla, nec Juno. It cannot be
denied that Jupiter was born of Ops and Saturn; wherefore it is a vain or
foolish persuasion, of those who would give the name of Jupiter to the supreme
God. (Observe this Mr. E. S.) For some are wont in that manner to excuse their
errors, when they had been convinced of one God, so as they could not
contradict it, by saying that themselves adored him, and called him Jupiter.
Than which what can be more absurd? Seeing Jupiter is not worshipped without the
partnership of his wife and daughter, whence it plainly appears, what this
Jupiter is, and that the name ought not to be transferred thither, where there
is no Minerva, nor Juno. Thus this learned Man, whose words are so clear, that
if he were now alive, and intended to reject E. S. his new error, he could not
do it more convincingly.

My Fifth Proof is taken from the Confessions of the Jupiter himself, as you
may see in Tertul. S. Cyprian, Julius Firmicus, and Minutius Fclix above cited,
add to these Prudentius in Apotheosi.

-- Torquetur Apollo
Nomine percussus Christi, nec fulmina verbi
Far potest, agitant miserum tot verbera linguae
Quod laudata Dei resonant miracula Christi,
Intonat Antistes Domini: fuge callide serpens,
Exue te membris, and spiras solve latentes.
Mancipium Christi, fur corruptissime, vexas?
Desine, Christus adest, humani corporis ultor:
Non licet ut spolium rapias, cui Christus inhaesit.
Pulsus abi, ventose liquor, Christus jubet, exi.
Has inter voces medias Cyllenius ardens
Ejulat, and notos suspirat Jupiter ignes.
Out of which Verses E. S. may learn, first the Form of our Exorcisms, which to
this day are made after that manner, trampling the proud Spirit under our feet,
with disdainful language.

E. S. may learn secondly the force of them, which by invisible stripes did
scourge those pretended Gods, till they forced them out of their possession.
Nec fulmina verbi far potest, agitant miserum tot verbera linguae, quod
laudata Dei miracula resonant.

He may learn thirdly, that not only the lesser Gods; but even Jupiter himself
was subject to the whips and torments inflicted by our Exorcists.

My Sixth Proof is draw from the Opinion of the Pagans. See Natalis Comes l. 2.
mythol. c. 1. and sequent. Where you find many cited. Lucian in Jove Tragaedo,
says that Damis an Atheist, having objected to one who defended the Divinity of
the Gods, that Jupiter the chief of them was dead, as also his sepulcher, which
was extant, and a Pillar near it, testifying the truth of that death: Jupiter
he says, grew pale, and dismayed hearing it, being conscious of the Truth, and
that Truth tended to root up the Opinion of his Divinity.

My Seventh Proof is grounded on what the Fathers write of him, viz. 1st. That
he was not a God. 2ly. But that he was a Man. 3ly. That he was a wicked man,
subject to such vices, as would make any civil man blush. Justinus M. Paraen,
page 2. shows him to have bewailed like a woman the death of Sarpedon. His
insatiable lust both after women and boys, is known to all; so is his Ambition,
which showed it self by his Rebellion against his own Father. Now how can the
Fathers be excused from horrible Blasphemy, in accusing the Pagan Jupiter of
these crimes, if he be the true God?

I conclude this Proof with an invincible Reason taken out of S. Austin l. 1.
de consensu Evangelistarum. c. 26. None of all the Gods adored by Pagans,
opposed the Adoration of any other. Diana and Minerva never expressed any
dislike of men adoring of Venus and Priapus; Saturn was willing his rebellious
Son Jupiter should be adored; Vulcan very quietly endured the company of Venus,
his wanton Wife, and of Mars, whom he had found in flagranti with her. And
Jupiter never checked his daughter Venus, for those filthy faults, which would
have made her unfit company for civil Men, or Women. Whence the Saint concludes
them all, and Jupiter too, to have been Devils, who aimed only at the
corruption of manners. This he confirms, from the Law of the true and living
God, who forbad them all to be adored, commanded all their Statues to be pulled
down, all their Rites, and Ceremonies, and Sacrifices to be abolished. By
which, Satis ostendit illos falsos atque fallaces, and se esse verum ac veracem
Deum, he convinces sufficiently that false Opinion newly broached by E. S.

My last Proof is taken from the Testimony of learned Protestants, who all
acknowledged this Truth, till the desire of accusing Popery engaged E. S. in
the contrary Opinion. We have seen W. L. naming Jupiter himself. Godwin. l. 4.
Antiquitat. c. 2. says that Jupiter and Baal semen, which signifies the Lord of
Heaven, is one and the same thing, viz. The Sun, as the Queen or Lady of
Heaven, is the Moon. Vossius is of the same Opinion with us, that Jupiter was a
Man. We have seen above that E. S. in his Origines Sacrae, says in general,
that all Heathen Gods had been Men, and approved of Philo Biblius his Judgment,
who blamed the subtiller Greeks turning all to Mythologies. Let us now see,
what he says of the several Gods, and of Jupiter himself in particular.

E. S. l. 3. Origin. Sacrar. c. 5. page 587. Jupiter who was the same with
Cham, was called (...): as Cham from Chamum, servere, incalescere, (...), says
Herodotus, him whom the Greeks call (...), the Egyptians called Cham, or Ammun
rather. So Japhet, whose memory was preserved under Neptune, to whose portion
the Islands in the Sea fell. And page 589. Vossius has taken a great deal of
pains to digest in an hystorical manner the Stories of the several Jupiters,
whereof he reckons two Argives, a third the Father of Hercules, a fourth a King
of Phrygia, and two more of Creete, to one of which without any distinction the
Actions of all the rest were ascribed and WHO WAS WORSHIPPED UNDER THE NAME OF
JUPITER. And p. 594 As the Story of Saturn and Noah do much agree, so the three
Sons of Noah, and those of Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto have their
peculiar resemblances to each other. Of which Vossius and Bochartus have
largely spoken, and we have touched on already. Besides which this latter
Author has carried the parallel, lower, and finds Canaan the Son of Cham, the
same with Mercury the Son of Jupiter. As tt was the curse of Canaan to be a
Servant of Servants; so Mercury is always described under servile Employments:
his wings seem to be ships of the Phenicians, who were derived from Canaan; his
being the God of Trade, notes the great Merchandise of the Phenicians and
Mercuries thievery notes their piracies, or at least their subtilty and craft.
He was the Father of Eloquence and Astronomy, as Letters and Astronomy came
from the Phenicians into Greece. This, and much more to the same purpose, may
be found in that Chapter, in E. S.

By what strange Apotheosis did this change happen, that that same Person, who
till the year of our Lord 1663 (when the Origines Sacrae, were printed) was a
gross body should by the Year 1676 become a pure Spirit? that the Son of Noah
should be the Creator of Heaven, and Earth, and cursed Cham, be changed into
God blessed for evermore? This Metamorphosis deserves a place in Ovids Poem, as
well as any in the Pack. By what Art Magic was it made? By what Revelation was
it made known to E. S. Here we have Dr. Stilling fleet against Dr. Stilling
fleet: He now destroying what he then built, building what he then destroyed,
making himself evidently a Transgressor. Gal. 2.18. He took it unkindly of I.
W. that accused him of contradicting himself, it may be, he will be offended
with W. E. for the like fault, if it be one. But who can hinder Truth from
offending, when it sets before a Man's eyes his own faults. Veritas odium
parit, says the Comical Poet, viz. when it reprehends us, otherwise it is
beloved, Veritatem lucentem diligunt, arguentem oderunt, says S. Aug. But let
us consider some of his grounds, and those the chief ones for Deifying the
cursed Cham, or the more accursed Devil, who took on him that name Jupiter.

E. S. page 34.35. and 36. Numa believed one supreme God, and he thought and
adored Jupiter as such, seeing he appointed a Flamen Dialis, as the chief of
all the rest, and erected a Capitol to Jove. He tells us, it was vowed by
Tarquinius Priscus, in the Sabin War, carried on by Servius Tullius: that
Tarquinius Superbus was at vast charge about it. That it stood upon 800 foot of
ground, was not finished, till after the Expulsion of Tarquin, and was then
dedicated with great Solemnity by Horatius Pulvillus, being both Consul and
Pontifex. And from that time this was accounnted the great Seat of God and
Religion amongst them, it was Seeds Jovis, in Livy, Jovis summi Arx, in Ovid,
Terrestre domicilium Jovis, in Cicero, Seeds Jovis, O. M. in Tacitus; and if
any thing more (says he) can be added, it is only what Pliny says in his
Panegyric, that God was as present there, as he was in Heaven. Thus he. Where
had he told us the names of the Architect, and subordinate Officers and
Workmen, the wages each of them received, in what money it was paid, and when,
and where, and by whose hands. How many dogs accompanied their Masters to the
Dedication, and what order was taken to prevent their playing or quarelling one
with another, lest they should disturb the Devotion, and spoil the Feast; he
had showed more reading, and added very much to the force of this Argument,
which for want of such fine erudite Observations, will be found weak and
insignificant.

For as to the Flamen Dialis, I grant that Flamines were their Chief or
Highpriests designed for the Service of particular Gods (yet so as the
Pontifex Maximus was above them which E. S. ought not to be ignorant of) as
also that Jupiter was the chief God the Pagans adored, but the Authorities of
Fathers force us to think them all no better than Men. S. Austin expressly says.
l. 2. de Civit. Dei. c. 15. there were three Flamens, Dialis, Martialis and
Quirinalis. Vives upon that place will teach us, that there were others
afterward instituted, as Pomonalis to Pomona, and another to Caesar, and to
other lesser Deities; which later were of an inferior Order to the Three first.
Now whence will E. S. draw his Assertion of Jupiter's being the true God? from
the Officer Flamen? he must then say in a like manner, that Romulus, Pomona and
Caesar were the true God, and not Men, seeing they had their Flamines too. Or
was it, because he was Dialis? this is a begging the thing in question, and
which is worst of all for E. S. S. Austin teaches us, l. 2. de Civit. Dei c.
15. that that very Jupiter, to whose Service the Flamen D^^lis was ordained,
was the Son of Saturn, and brother to Pluto and Neptune.

From the Officer of the Capitol, we will accompany E. S. to the Capitol it
self, and learn what Stories that so costly Building will tell of the God
adored in it: We will take S. Austin in our Company for a Guide. We shall find
in it Jupiters Breast Plate (Jovis Aegyda) says the Saint, l. 1 de Cons. Evang.
c. 23. we shall find the Goat Amalthea who had suckled and nursed him in his
Infancy, says S. Austin l. 6. de Civ. Dei. c. 7. Whence as well as St. Austin I
propose a Question: Quid de Jove senserunt, qui ejus nutricem in Capitolio
posuerunt? What Opinion had they of Jupiter, who placed his Nurse in the
Capitol? We shall find Juno and Minerva Wife and Daughter to Jupiter. Lastly,
(but that we come too late) we should have seen in their sacred Rites, a
Representation of the Life and Death of the God Jupiter. S. Austin, l. 1. de
Cons. Evang. c. 23. Varo dicit Deorum sacra ex cujusque eo rum vita vel morte,
qua inter homines vixerunt vel obierunt, esse composita. Had E. S. been wise,
he should rather have diverted us from the Capitol, for it was to that great
Building, that S. Austin appealed, being to confute some Philosophers, who,
(just as E. S.) said Jupiter was the true God. Numquid and Capitolia Romanorum,
opera sunt Poetarum: says he loc. cit. Quid sibi vult ista non Poetica; sed
plane Mimica varietas, Deos secundum Philosophos in libris quaerere, secundum
Poetas in templis adorare. Was the Capitol built by Poets, in which there are
so many signs of Jupiter's having been a Man? What Changlings are you Pagans,
who seek your Gods with the Philosophers, and adore them with the Poets

Now to the Titles and Attributes of this God: Optimus, Maximus, Coeli Rex,
Deum Pater atque hominum Rex, Jovis omnia plena. Which E. S. alleges page 36.
and p. 44. he adds the Authority of S. Austin l. 4. de Civ. Dei cap. 9. that
to represent his Authority, they placed a Scepter in his hand, and built his
Temple on a high hill. Answer. If E. S. had read on the following Chapter in S.
Austin (l. 4. de Civ. Dei c. 10.) he would have seen Proofs, that Jovis omnia
plena, was spoken by Virgil of the Son of Saturn, and that according to their
own Dogms, that Saying was false. He will find the like l. de Consensu Evangel.
c. 23. Arnobius l. 1. p. 9. Answers the Pagans, who alleged the Argument in
this Nature: Dissimilia copulare, atque in unam speciem cogere, inducta
confusione conamini. You endeavor to join things as distant as Heaven and
Earth, Eternity and Time; for God had no beginning, nor cause: Your Jupiter had
a Father and Mother, Grandfathers and Grand-mothers, and Brothers: Nunc nuper
in utero matris formatus, he was but lately conceived in his mothers womb. And
Lactantius Firmianus l. c. 11. p. 33, Regnare in Coelo Jovem Vulgus existimat;
id and doctis pariter and indoctis persuasum est, quod and Religio ipsa, and
Precationes, and Hymni, and Delubra, and Simulachra demonstrant; cundem tamen
Satarno and Rhea genitum confitentur. Quomodo potest Deus videri, aut (ut ait
Poeta) hominum rerumque repertor, ante cujus ortum infinita hominum millia
fuerunt? All Pagans both learned and unlearned, are persuaded, that Jupiter
reigns in Heaven. Their Religion, and Service, and Temples testify this; yet
the same persons profess, that be was the Son of Saturn and Rhea. Which two
Points of their Faith are inconsistent; for how could Jupiter be the Founder of
all men, seeing many thousands of men had been before he was born or conceived?
When E. S. shall have considered this, he will think his calling T. G. S.
Opinion wild, and absurd, very rash, ungrounded and impertinent.

Objection: How could such contradictions be admitted by wise men; for such
were the Romans and Greeks? especially considering, as E. S. says p. 39. The
Romans had an ancient law which forbad the Poetical Fables? Answer. This is to
rely on Reason in matter of fact, against clear Testimonies of Antiquity. If
there was such a Law, it was very ill kept, as many others are. No Authors more
exactly observant of Decorum, than Cicero and Virgil: to which we may add, it
may be Terence, as exceeding all Latins in Dramatical Poems. Cicero cited by S.
Austin l. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 23. in Tuscul. qq. l. 1. says, Si scrutari
vetera and ex iis, quae Scriptores Graeciae prodiderunt, eruere coner, ipsi
illi Majorum Gentium Dii qui habentur, hinc a nobis profecti in coelum
reperiuntur. Quaere quorum demonstrantur sepulchra in Graecia: reminiscere,
quoniam es initiatus, quae traduntur Mysteriis, tum denique, quam hoc late
pateat intelliges. If we look over our ancient Records, if we consult what
Greek Authors deliver, we shall find, that even the Prime Gods, from Earth past
to Heaven. Examine whose Sepulchers are shown in Greece: Call to mind, seeing
you are initiated, what our Rites express, and you will find how far this
Principle goes. Again, Qui hanc Vrbem condidit, Romulum ad Deos immortales
benevolentia famaque sustulimus. The Founder of this city Romulus, owes his
being a God to our good wills. As if it were in weak Men's power to raise Men
to Heaven, change them into stars, and place them amongst the Gods!

And Virgil l. 4. Georgicor. speaks as follows: -- Naturas apibus quas
Jupiter ipse
Addidit, expediam: pro qua mercede canoros
Curetum sonitus, crepitantiaque era seeatae
Dictaeo coeli Regem pavere sub antro.
Which are thus Englished by Ogilby.

Now I Will declare those gifts which were conferred
On Bees by Jove himself for what Reward,
They followed tinkling Brass and Curets sound
And fed the King of Heaven under ground.
As if that Jupiter had bestowed their Nature on the Bees, to whom he was
beholding for his Food during his Infancy, and who was many Ages younger than
they.

And Terence in Eunucho, charges the Rape of Danae on the true God of Heaven.
At quem Deum? qui templa caeli summa sonitu concutit. That God which shakes the
starry vault of the Heavens, with Thunder. Those who desire more Examples of
those Extravagances, may read Athenagoras page 20. Justinus M. or any of the
other Fathers, who have written against the Pagans. They will find many causes
to dread the Judgment of God executed on those Men so wise in all other things;
but struck with blindness in this main Point, very deservedly, for their
ingratitude to God, whom they knew; but did not glorify him as God, neither
were thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart
was darkened.

SECTION V. Whether all, or the greatest part of the Pagans believed the one
true God?
OUR Dispute is not of the first beginners and planters of Idolatry; but of
those who lived at, and since the time of Christ, till Christianity prevailed.

I do not doubt at all, but God, when he created Man, endowed him with all
Knowledge necessary for the end, for which he created him: and certainly that
of his Creator was as necessary as any, seeing upon it was grounded his
Obligation to serve God, by fulfilling his Will and obeying his Commands.

It is, I think no less certain, that all and every Soul, at its Creation,
receives an Idea of God and that so deeply imprinted in it, that no ignorance,
no want of Education, no bad Instruction, can wear it out, or entirely deface
it. Hence it is, that although several barbarous Nations adore, as Gods, things
which are not God, (as has been seen of the Pagans,) yet there never were any
without some Object of Adoration, which they thought to be God. Yet Reason left
to it self, and taking the freedom of Discourse about it, will cover it with
Errors, which may darken its lineaments without destroying it; as Rubbish
thrown upon an excellent Statue, will hide its Beauty from the Spectators eye,
although it never alters the situation of its parts, nor destroys their
proportion. One great Advantage we have by Faith, is that it fixes in our
Souls a right Idea of God, and excludes those Imaginations which are
inconsistent with it. The whole created World is left to the Disputations of
Men's hearts ( Eccles. 3.11.) for the Exercise of their Intellectuals, in which
they are often mistaken (for they shall not find out the work, that God makes
from the beginning to the end.) yet their Errors are without prejudice to the
main chance, their Salvation; as long as they contain themselves within their
Bounds, nor endeavor to know more of God, then they should, or have learnt of
him, nor labor to measure Immensity with a Span. Otherwise by lamentable
Experience they will find the Truth of those words, Scrutator Majestatis
opprimetur a gloria. Of which we have as many Examples, as Philosophers, who
attempted it. The wisest of them all in this was, Simonides, who said
ingenuously to Hero, that the more he studied it, the less he understood of it.
Hence S. Austin l. 8. de Trinit. c. 2. having said that God is Truth, gives us
warning to stick in the thought of that Term: Noli quaerere quid sit veritas,
statim enim se opponent caligines imaginum corporalium, and nubila
phantasmatum, and perturbabunt serenitatem, quae primo ictu illuxit tibi, cum
dicerem Veritas. Ecce in primo ictu quo velut coruscatione perstringeris, cum
dicitur veritas, mane si potes, sed non potes. Relaberis in ista solita atque
terrena. When I say, Truth, examine not what it is I mean, otherwise mists of
Phancies and clouds of corporeal Images will interpose and bereave you of the
light that appeared at first: stop, if possible in the first glimpse of the
light: but you cannot do it, for you always slide into other thoughts. And the
following Chapter he discourses in a like manner of the Thought of Good. Bonum
hoc, and bonum illud. Toll hoc and illud, and vide ipsum bonum, si potes, ita
Deum videbis, non alio bono bonum; sed bonum omnis boni. Speak not of this
good, or that good: take away this, and that and see, if possible, goodness it
self and you will see God, not good by any other goodness distinct from him;
but the goodness of all good things. Thus whither we conceive God, as the prime
Truth, or as the sovereign good, our first Thoughts are Orthodox; as coming
from God the Author of Nature, and our misery proceeds from our not stopping in
them.

This was the reason why Tertullian l. de Testim. animae c. 1. being desirous
to show, for the Satisfaction of the Pagans, that natural Image of one God,
which all Souls ever had, examins only such a Soul, as retains its native
simplicity, without any adscitious knowledge. Non eam te advoco, says he, quae
scholis formata, bibliothecis exercitata, Academicis and Porticibus partam
sapientiam ructas. Te simplicem and rudem, and impolitam, and idioticam
compello, qualem habent, qui te solam habent illam ipsam de compito, and
trivio, de textrino totam. Imperitia tua mihi opus est, quoniam aliquantulae
peritiae tuae nemo credit. Ea expostulo, quae tecum in hominem infers, quae aut
ex temetipsa, aut ex quocumque Authore tuo didicisti. I would not have thee O
Soul, framed in Schools, conversant in Libraries, filled with the Learning of
the Platonicks or Stoics, I desire thee rude, simple, impolish'd, and an
idiot, such as thou art in the poorest and meanest Artisan. I have need of thy
Ignorance, for thy learning is suspected. I would know what sentiments thou
broughtest with thee into thy body, whether thou had them of thy self, or
receivedst them of thy Creator. He says the same in substance in his
Apologetick cap. 17. p. 43. and 48. only he extends this Testimony of the
unlearned, to the learned Soul, in sudden occurrences, when acquired Learning
is useless, and nature alone works. And he gives another reason, why our
Understanding retains not as it should do, the first Idea of God: the greatness
of the object, surpassing its capacity. Deum vis magnitudinis and notum
hominibus objecit, and ignotum. Which you may likewise find in S. Cyp. de Idol.
van. p. 206.

Out of what I have said, you may see, that our question is not, whether we
have all a natural Opinion of one God? But whither the Religion of the Pagans
did teach, that there was but one God? or whether the Unity of God was a
principle of their Religion, and an Article of their Faith?

Our Answer to this Question; is negative: So that we say Polytheism was an
essential Point of Paganism, and one main Question debated betwixt Christians
and Pagans, was whither there was only one God? This I gather first out of
Scripture. Psalm. 75. (or 76.) Notus in Judea Deus, and in Israel magnum nomen
ejus. In Judah God is known, and his name is great in Israel. As if out of the
people of Israel he had not been known. S. Hierom says that is to be understood
before the Cross of Christ had lightened the world. Antequam illuminaret Crux
mundum, and antequam videretur Dominus in terra: quando autem venit Salvator,
in omnem terram exivit sonus eorum. But when our B. Savior came, the name of
God was spread to the extremities of the Earth, amongst the Believers or
Christians.

And S. Austin. Solent inimici Domini Jesu Christi omnibus noti Judaei gloriari
in isto Psalmo, quem cantavimus, dicentes: Notus in Judea Deus, and insultare
gentibus quibus non est notus Deus, and dicere quia sibi solis notus est Deus,
alibi ergo ignotus. Notus est autem revera in Judaea Deus, si intelligant quid
sit Judea. Nam vere non est notus Deus, nisi in Judaea. Ecce and hoc nos
dicimus, The known Enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ, glory in this Psalm and
insult over the Gentiles, saying, that God is known to them, the Jews,
wherefore he must be unknown to the Nations. Now we grant that God is known
only to Jews or in Jewry. And then he shows that the Christians Circumcision of
the Heart and Spirit (of which Romans 2.29.) does entitle them to the Knowledge
of God, restrained in that Psalm to Juda.

Secondly, out of Testimony of the Pagan Gods, taken out S. Cyril of Alexan.
lib. 5. contra Julianum, page 108. where he says: (...).

(...)

(...).

The Doctrine of the Hebrews is confirmed by the Testimony of Julian's Gods:
Apollo being consulted, what Nations were the wisest? The Oracle answered: The
Chaldaeans, for Philosophy, or natural Learning, but the Jews (who adore only
one God and King) for Divinity. As the Poliglot paraphrases the Oracles sense,
Prolog. 12. page 82. This Oracle is also cited by Justinus M. Paraen p. 23. and
Theodoret l. 1. de curan. Graec. Affect. page 472. where he brings Porphyrius
owning the Oracle.

Thirdly out of Fathers. We cannot desire a better witness of the Sentiments of
the Pagans, and the Point disputed betwixt them and Christians, than
Tertullian, who very probably had been one himself, at least had conversed with
their Persons, and Writings: what I cite here out of him, is the more to be
valued, because S. Cyprian uses the same Argument, lib. de Idol. vanit. page
207. Now Tertullian, lib. de testimonio animae c. 2. Non placemus, Dominum
praedicantes hoc nomine unico unicum, a quo omnia, and sub quo universa. Dic
testimonium si ita scis. Nam te quoque palam, and tota liberate, qua non licet
nobis, domi ac foris audimus ita pronunciare, quod Deus dederit, and si Deue
voluerit: ea voce, and aliquem esse significas, and omnem illi confiteris
potestatem, ad cujus spectas voluntatem, simul and caeteros negas Deos esse,
dum suis vocabulis nuncupas Saturnum Jovem. Nam solum Deum confirmas, quem
tantum Deum nominas, ut and cum illos interdum Deos appellas, and alieno and
quasi pro mutuo usa videaris. The Pagans are displeased with us, when we preach
one Lord, from whom are all things, to whom are all subject. Speak O Soul, what
thou know of this, speak boldy with that freedom which is granted to thee,
tho denied to us. Thou say, God grant it, if it please God: by which words
thou expressest some one, and acknowledgest, that he has all power, and denies
those to be Gods, whom thou designest by their Names, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
etc. For thou professest to believe one whom thou call God of thy self; and
when thou give that name to others, thou usest borrowed notions.

Again Apolog. 17. page 47. Quod colimus, Deus unus est. This is the Christian
Position against Pagans, We adore only one God. And p. 48. Vultis ex operibus
ipsius, vultis ex animae ipsius testimonio, comprobemus: quae licet carcere
corporis pressa, licet institutionibus pravis circumscripta, licet libidinibus
and concupiscentiis evigorata, licet Diis falsis exancillata, cum tamen
resipiscit, ut ex crapula, ut ex somno, ut ex aliqua valetudine, and sanitatem
suam patitur, Deum nominat hoc solo, quia proprie verus hic unus, Deus bonus
and magnus. Et quod Deus dederit, Judicem quoque illum contestatur, Deus videt,
Deo commendo, and Deus mihi reddet. Shall I prove this one God out of his
works, or out of the testimony of man's Soul? which although it be shut up in the
prison of the Body, spoiled by bad Instructions, weakened by concupiscence, and
enslaved to false Gods, yet if she come to her self, she professes one God,
great and good, she calls him to witness, saying, God knows, I leave it to God.
Then Tertullian concludes with this Exclamation, O testimonium animae
naturaliter Christianae. O testimony of a Soul, which is Christian by nature!
Now I desire to know of E. S. how he could infer the Soul naturally to be
Christian, because naturally it owned one only God, if this were not the main
point controverted? will he say, I am a Protestant because I profess to believe
one God, as Protestants do? or shall I ever think E. S. a Papist, for saying he
believes in Christ. No certainly, those being Points in which both parties
agree. Tertullian's great wit would never be so easily surpised with hopes of
a Proselyte, if what E. S. says be true, that both contending Parties agreed in
professing one God.

The same Reason might be brought out of Minutius Felix, who says page 14.
Audio vulgus cum ad coelum manus tendunt, nihil aliud quam Deum dicunt; and
Deus magnus est. Vulgi iste naturalis sermo est, an Christiani confitentis
oration? I hear the People call upon God. (naming only one) Are these words the
speech of Pagan, or the Confession of Faith of a Christian.

Here methinks, I see E. S. triumphing, as finding what destroys my Conclusion,
in the foregoing words: which show that all the people believed one God. But I
answer, that all expressed that belief in their indeliberat Actions, and
deliberately acted contrary: and for that reason were (...) condemned by their
own judgment. Let us hear Tertullian l. de testim. animae c. 6. p. 126. Merito
igitur omnis anima rea and testis est, in tantum rea erroris, in quantum testis
veritatis, and stabit ante aulas Dei in die judicii, nihil habens dicere. Deum
praedicabas, and non requirebas, damonia abominabaris, and illa adorabas.
Judicium Dei appellabas, nec esse credebas: Inferna supplicia praesumebas, and
non praecavebas: Christianum nomen sapiebas, and Christianum persequebaris.
Wherefore every Soul is deservedly guilty, and witness against herself the more
guilty of her error, because she is witness of the Truth: she will in the day
of Judgment, stand before the Tribunal of God, and have not one word to say for
her self, when it shall be reproached to her: Thou did speak of God, and
did not seek him: Thou hatedst the Devil, and did adore him: Thou did
appeal to Gods judgment, without believing it: Thou did speak of the pains of
Hell, without endeavoring to avoid it: Thou had in thy hear that great
Christian Truth, That there is but one God; yet thou did persecute
Christians, for professing it.

Commonly the Fathers labor to prove the Unity of a God, against the Pagans, so
does Justinus M. Athenagoras, Minutius Felix, S, Cyril, and others. To what
purpose that, if all believed it? Origin. l. 1. contra Cells. p. 5. reduces the
Disputes against Pagans, to two heads, Idols and Politheism.

I end with Lactantius Firmianus l. 1. divin. instit. c. 1. page 8. says to
Constantin the Great, Tu primus Romanorum Principum, repudiatis erroribus
majestatem Dei singularis ac very, and cognovisti, and honorasti. Thou art the
first of all the Roman Emperors who adored the only true God. How could
Constantin have been the first, if all other Emperors, had adored the only true
God, before him?

Yet I desire E. S. to answer one or two Questions: If all the Understanding
Men amongst the Pagans believed One God, how came Socrates to be condemned for
that Opinion by the Areopagites? Why did Plato fear the same Fate, and for that
Reason deliver his Sentiments so obscurely, about that One God?

There occurrs to me one only tolerable Objection, against what I here assert:
viz. That Faustus the Manichaean reproaches to Christians, That they received
the Opinion of Monarchy (that is the Belief of one God) from the Pagans: whence
it follows, that the Pagans believed but one God. To which I answer 1. It is
certain we received that Dogme, not from Pagans; but from God: So Faustus is
most certainly mistaken in that. And why may not we suspect his Testimony, as
to the other part of the Opinion of Pagans, concerning one God? I answer 2.
with S. Austin. l. 20. contra Faust. c. 19. That the Pagans were not to such a
degree blinded with their false Gods, and true Devils Arts, as to have entirely
lost the Image of one true God, received at their Creation: tho for their
Ingratitude to their Creator, they were permitted to fall to the Adoration of
the Creatures, Idols and Devils. Thus S. Austin. Certainly their Wise Men
through the mist of pompous Ceremonies could see the Fondness of Men, that
invented them, and the wickedness of Devils, who promoted them.

Nay I willingly grant, that all learned Pagans blamed the Poetical Fables of
their Gods. I acknowledge with Tertullian Apolog. c. 46. page 75. That the
Philosophers impugned them, and were for this applauded, and honored by the
rest. Yet after all this, what those same Philosophers taught concerning the
God, is pitiful and worse; as you may see in Tertul. Justinus M. and
Athenagoras. The Epicureans fancied him fondly, as if they designed to make him
ridiculous. Deos jocandi causa induxit Epicurus pellucidos atque perflatiles.
Cicero Tuscul. qq. 5. (See Seneca l. 4. de Beneficiis. c. 19) The Stoics
promise, to make their wise Man as happy as the Gods, ( Philosophia mihi
promittit, ut me parem Deo faciat, Seneca Epist. 49.) does not so much raise
him, as abase them. Yet in reality that Similitude, which they promised, was no
great perfection or advantage, seeing they thought the whole World to be God.
Quid est Deus? said Seneca l. 1. nature. qq. quod vides totum, and quod non
vides. All things visible and invisible are God. And Origines l. 5. contra
Celsum p. 235. says the Stoics thought the World to be the first God: The
Platonists allowed it to be the second God: and some others pulled it it down
to the third rank. The Platonicians are thought to have written the most
divinely of the Divinity: yet if we credit Tertullian Apolog. c. 47.
they gave it a Body. Aristotle the most exact in other things of all
Philosophers, nails God to the highest Heaven, l. 8. Physic. c. 10. t. 84. And
although he had the disposal of Superlunary Bodies, yet all Sublunary things were
out of his reach and jurisdiction, being subject to Fate, as Theodoret. l. 5.
de cur. Graec. Affection. p. 551. and elsewhere assures. Nay Aristotle seems to
own no knowledge in God: For l. 2. Magnor. moral. 15. p. 193. he says, God
knows nothing distinct from himself, otherwise that thing would be better than
God: Neither does he know himself; for we think those rave, or are mad, who
entertain their thoughts about themselves. What shall I say of his
Intelligences? which whilst he makes necessary Beings, self-existent, endowed
with infinite power, etc. he seems to Deifie.

Which I do not relate, with any intention to insult over those great Men, for
their Errors Hieron l. de erroribus Orig. Absit eorum insultare erroribus,
quorum miror ingenia.
whose Wits I admire, and whose Labors have been very beneficial even to me;
but only to show E. S. and the learned person, (whose works page 6. he promises
or threatens us with) what little solid Truth concerning the Divinity is to be
found in Pagans Writings: to the end we may glorify the one great God, who
with his one Divine Word made Flesh, confuted all the others long discourses
and voluminous errors: To the end we may be thankful to the Father of Lights,
for having given us his saving Truth, and freed us from those dark Wanderings
and intricate Labyrinths, of humane Wits.

SECTION. VI. Of the unknown God at Athens.
THe greatest difficulty (against what I have said, Sect. 4. about the Pagan
Jupiter, not being the true God, but first a Man, and then a Devil (is taken
from Act. 17.23. I found an Altar, says the B. Apostle, with this Inscription,
TO THE UNKNOWN GOD, whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him I declare unto
you. This E. S. pretends to be meant of Jupiter, and confirms it very
artificially out of Aratus, out of whom S. Paul cites some pieces of Verses.
And S. Paul saying he preached him, it will follow that he preached Jupiter,
and so Jupiter must be a name of the true God: for certainly S. Paul never
preached any other. Thus E. S. p. 7.

How his learned Adversary T. G. has managed this debated Point, I cannot
tell; but doubtless his works, if I had them, would give me great light. And
what I say, I shall willingly reform according to his, in case it may be
materially different.

I think it certain, that the unknown God, was not Jupiter. To prove this, I
may bring all those Authors, Pagans and Christians, who speak of the occasion
of dedicating this Altar. Again Jupiter could not be said, to be an unknown God
in Athens; for they knew his Country, his Birth, his Life and Death, his
Sepulcher, his Gests, his Parents, etc. Their Theaters, their Tribunals, their
Temples, did ring with his Name. Thirdly they had Altars erected to his honor,
in their Forum, their Corners-of-Streets, and even in their private houses;
whereas there was only one Altar erected to this unknown God. Fourthly had S.
Paul declared Jupiter to them, he would at least en passant, have rejected
those absurd Fables, which were told of him: Of his Birth and Death, of his
Rebellion and filthy Lust, etc. (which are much more unbeseeming a God, as
being more dangerous to mortality than the things the Apostle speaks of.) At
which the Apostle does not hint in the least manner.

Hence it follows, that S. Paul did not preach Jupiter; this is evident of
what I have said, and the Apostles words, Quem ignorantes colitis hunc ego
annuncio. Whom you ignorantly worship, him I declare. So that he speaks clearly
of the unknown God, who was not Jupiter.

What shall we then say to Aratus, who clearly speaks of Jupiter? Answer. What
he said of God was true, and conformable to that natural Idea, which as is
abovesaid, we all have of God; but he erroniously applied to Jupiter, the Arch
devil. Now S. Paul takes his thoughts which were true, and applies them to that
self existent Being, to whom alone they belong: as if a Crown by Rebels set
upon a Subjects Head, should be taken off it, and set on the Kings, to whom of
right it belongs.

Where, by the by, we may take notice of a gross Error of Seneca, who says, it
is as good to have no thought at all, as an erroneous one of God: Quid interest
Deum neges, an infames? God out of his goodness to Man has given him that Idea
of himself, which being preserved although defaced with Errors, yet will help to
correct them when we make a right use of our Reason. As the statue (of which I
spoke in the Fifth Sect.) laid in the dirt, may be taken up, brushed and
washed, so as to be restored to its first Beauty. Thus S. Austin convinced
himself, that the Manichaean Heresy could not be true. Thus the Philosophers
saw the Falsehood of their Pagan Religion.

I pray God many others, who at this present hold Errors in Religion, may so
use their Reason as to overcome them.

A Conclusion of this Treatise.
To conclude this whole Treatise, we will use two or three Passages of
Tertullian, to confirm, what we have hitherto said. Imprimis c. 11. p. 40.
Sicut Deus vestros homines fuisse non audetis negare, ita post mortem, Deos
factos, instituistis asseverare. Seeing you dare not deny your Gods to have
been men, you resolve to stand to their having been made Gods after their
Death. And to Jupiter in particular he applies that general Assertion, page 41.
Vani erant homines, nisi certi sint ipsum Jovem quae in manu ejus imponitis
fulmina timuisse. Men are very foolish, if they doubt of Jupiters having feared
the thunderbolts which you put into his hands. What thinks E. S. was not
Jupiter a Man in Tertullian's Opinion?

Again Tertul. l. de Idololatria c. 21. Scio quendam, cui Dominus ignoscat, cum
illi in publico per litem dictum esset, Jupiter tibi sit iratus; respondisse,
imo tibi. Quid aliter fecisset Ethnicus, qui Jovem Deum credidit? Confirmavit
Jovem Deum, per quem se maledictum indigne tulisse demonstraevit remaledicens.
At quid enim indigneris, per eum, quem scis NIHIL esse? I know one, (whom God
forgive) who when one wrangling with him had said: The wrath or curse of
Jupiter fall upon thee, answered, upon thee rather. Would a Pagan have answered
otherwise, who believed Jupiter to be God? He seemed to acknowledge his
Divinity, when he showed himself so concerned for the imprecation of his wrath.
For why should he trouble himself for his anger; whom he knows to be NOTHING?
Moreover lib. de resurrectione carnis cap. 6. page 568. Phidiae manus Jovem
Olympium ex ebore molitur, and adoratur: nec jam bestiae, and quidem
insulsissimae dens est; sed summum saeculi numen: non quia elephas, sed quia
Phidias tantus. Vt honestius homo Deum, quam Deus hominem finxerit. Phidias the
Sculptor out of pieces of Ivory makes a Statue of Jupiter Olympius; And it is
presently adored: and it is no more regarded as the tooth of a most silly
beast; but as the supreme GOD. As if Man produced a more noble work than God:
for God only made a miserable Creature, and Man makes a god.

In his Apology cap. 12. p. 42. Quantum igitur de diis vestris, nomina
solummodo video quorundam veterum mortuorum, and fabulas audio, and sacra de
fabulis recognosco. Quantum autem de simulachris ipsis, nihil aliud deprehendo,
quam materias sorores esse vasculorum communium, vel ex iisdem vasculis: Quasi
fatum consecratione mutantes, licentia artis transfigurante, in ipso opere
sacrilege, ut revera nobis maxim, qui propter deos ipsos plectimur, solatium
poenarum esse possit, quod eadem and ipsi patiantur, ut fiant. Crucibus and
stipitibus imponitis Christianos: quod simulachrum non prius argilla deformat
cruci and stipiti superstructa? In patibulo primum corpus dei vestri dedicatur.
Vngulis deraditis latera Christianorum: at in deos vestros per omnia membra
validius incumbunt asciae and runcinae and scobinae. Cervices ponimus ante
plumbum and glutinum, and gomphos: sine capite sunt dii vestri. Ad bestias
impellimur, certe quas Libero, and Cybele, and Cereri applicatis. Ignibus
urimur: hoc and illi a prima quidem massa. In metalla damnamur: inde censentur
dii vestri. In insulis relegamur: solet and in insulis aliquis deus vester aut
nasci, aut mori. Si per haec constet Divinitas aliqua, ergo qui puniuntur,
consecrantur, and numina erunt dicenda supplicia. Sed plane non sentiunt has
injurias, and contumelias suae fabricationis dii vestri, sicut nec obsequia,
etc. As for your Gods, I see nothing, but the names of some Men dead long
since: I hear many Fables, and can discern them in your sacred Rites. As for
your Idols, they are composed of the same matter, of which are our most
ordinary vessels, nay sometimes our vessels are turned into them being changed
by the sacrilegious working of a Statuary. And it might be a comfort in our
torments to us, that we undergo only the same operations, which they are
subjected too, to become Gods. Are we raised on a Cross? your Gods are set on
them, to be shaped. Do you rake our sides with iron hooks? your Gods are more
roughly carved by an ax, a chizel, a plainer. Do you cast us into the fire? In
that your Gods are melted to be cast into their mould. Are we sentenced to the
mines? Thence your Gods are drawn. Are we banished to the Islands? In those
many of your Gods are born, or dead. They are as insensible of the rough
Workman, as of your ceremonious rites. Do we not therefore rather deserve
Commendation, than punishment, for discovering and rejecting so gross an error,
as it is, to take for God, what is nothing but a liveless creature, as every
spider, and other insect does perceive?

When E. S. has considered this, I shall desire of him to know whether it be
not evident hence. 1. That the Idols of the Pagans were by them held to be
gods? 2. Whether those gods had not been men?

I must beg thy Pardon, courteous Reader, for abusing thy patience with this
long digression: I will, God willing, make amends, by being short in my
following Reflections, on my good friend, Mr. Burnet. So I take my leave of E.
S. till our next meeting.

CHAP. VIII. What G. B. says, to prove Catholics Idolaters.
G. B. p. 15. ONE Idolatry of the Gentiles was when the true God was worshipped
in a false manner.

Answer. This is not true; for the Turks and Jews worship God in a false
manner, yet are not Idolaters.

G. B. p. 16. It is Idolatry, to erect an Image to represent the Deity to our
Senses, and adore God through it.

Answer. Were all Idolaters, who have something to mind their Senses of the
Divinity, Protestants were such, who have words to signify him to the ear, and
a triangular figure, with the tetragrammaton for our eyes. And as for the
worship of him through those, no relative worship can be Idolatry. Thus we show
respect to the Bible, as being Gods word: to the Sacraments as instituted by
him to sanctify us: to holy Men, as being the living temples of the Holy
Ghost, etc. without Idolatry, because the motive is God, and the worship ends
in him.

G. B. p. 17. Our kindness to the second Commandment appears by our having
stricken it out of our Catechisms.

Answer. You might for this Reason accuse our B. Savior of the like kindness,
who Matt. 19.18, 19. left it out of that Compendium of the Commandments. And
Luke 10.27. he approves an Abridgment made by another, without that part.

G. B. p. 18. The Heathens believed that by magical ways Divine Power was
affixed to some Bodies, as the Sun, and Stars; and to Ancilia and Palladia
which they believed came down from Heaven. Act. 19.35.

Answer. I acknowledge my Ignorance in this. Show me, that ever any such Virtue
was affixed to Sun, or Stars, or Ancilia, or Palladia. And Act 19.35. which you
cite, there is no more mention of them, than of the day of your birth, or of
Tom. Thumb.

G. B. p. 18. The Israelites adored the Calf in the wilderness. Psalm. 106.30.
they changed their glory into the Similitude of an Ox, which shows, they
worshipped the true God in a false manner.

Answer. It shows they adored that Idol: or if you please, An Ox eating hay, as
the place says, which you cite. And do you think such a beast to be the true
God? I am ashamed to answer such ridiculous Discourse.

G. B. p. 21. The Trinity is painted as an old Man, with a child in his arms,
and a Dove over the Child's head.

Answer. I never in all my travels saw such a Picture. If you find such a one,
tho you break it, I will not call you Iconoclast, for that Action.

G. B. p. 22. The Worship of the Mass is Idolatry, as evidently as any piece of
Gentilism ever was.

Answer. When you shall have showed, that Christ is not really present, or that
although present, he deserves not to be adored, we will suspend our Adoration of
him there. But you will prove neither, as long as his words remains. So our
Adoration of him present there, is like to continue.

G. B. p. 23. The Worship we give to the Cross, is an adoring of God under a
Symbol, and Representation.

Answer. It is a worshipping of God, and so no Idolatry. It is a Representation
of our Redemption, and worshipped only as such.

G. B. p. 23. The parallel of Rome-Heathen, and Rome-Christian, runs but too
too just.

Answer. It runs not at all; but halts of all four: and you have neither Art
enough, to cure it by natural means, nor Faith to effect it by Miracle, you
will as soon square circles, as cure this lameness.

CHAP. IX. Of Mediating Spirits.
G. B. p. 24. COncerning these (the Souls of deceased men) the Heathens
believed that they were certain intermedial Powers, that went betwixt God and
Men, by whom also all our Services were offered to the gods.

Answer. We have here many errors in few words. The first is, That the Souls of
deceased Men were universally by all Pagans thought to act any thing in this
World. In Virgil, Lucian, and others, you may see, that many (those of wicked
Men) only suffered, being conceived to be punished for their Faults. Nay out of
the same Authors it is probable, that even the better, more innocent, and
therefore esteemed happy Souls, took their Pleasure in the Elisian fields,
without troubling themselves with things of this world. This is much confirmed
from the Pythagorean Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls from one Body to
another, which was very common amongst the Pagan learned Philosophers. None of
these could believe that the Souls of deceased Men could be mediating Spirits,
which you ascribe to all Pagans.

The second is, that deceased Men, even when deified, were by all held to be
mediating Powers. I have showed at large above, that the prime gods had been
men: and that the Jupiter had been one, I desire you to consider the grounds I
have laid for this Assertion: for which see also Julius Firmicus page 4.
Romulus was a Man, the Founder and first King of Rome, (I hope you do not
expect I should prove this) yet he had a Flamen consecrated to his Service;
which was an officer peculiar to the supreme God, says E. S. p. 34. and
consequently was thought to be him, or was ranked with him. Indeed Divinity in
the Opinion of the credulous deluded Antiquity was very easily purchased: to
disappear unexpectedly was enough. Thus Romulus whose History is known to all.
Thus Amilcar, a General of the Carthaginians in Sicily, seeing his Army
defeated, whilst he was sacrificing threw himself into the fire, where he was
consumed: thus he appeared not, and for that reason was held to be a god by his
Countrymen. Cleomedes of Astipala a Wrastler, having knocked down his
Antagonist with his fist, tore open his side, and pulled out his heart; but in
lieu of the Reward he expected, finding his Cruelty had displeased the Judges,
with indignation he departed, and finding a Schoolmaster with his Disciples
under a vault, he pulled away the pillar which upheld it, and buried them all
with its ruins. Thence he fled into a cave, or den, to avoid those who pursued
him, to bring him to condign Punishment. But that being dug open, and he not
found in it, by command of the Oracle, he was adored as a god. As you may see
in Theodoret lib. 8. de Cur. Graec. affect. p. 597. and lib. 10. p. 631. and in
Plut. and Suidas. Out of this Persuasion it was that Empedocles threw himself
into mount Aetna, that nothing of him being found, they might think him
translated to Heaven: and he probably might have obtained it, had not his brass
slippers, or soles, cast out by the force of the fire discovered that he had
mistaken his way thither.

By slight a man otherwise obscure got to be adored in Libia, as God: for
having taught many Birds to say, (...), Great God Psaphon. (which was his name)
and letting them go, they in the Woods repeated this Lesson, and the People
hearing them, adored him with Altars, Sacrifices and Temples. He owed his
Apotheosis to the Birds. Anno a Carthaginian attempted the same; but lost his
labor, the Birds forgetting their Lesson and resuming their wild notes, as soon
as they recovered their Liberty.

A third Error is, That all the Pagans believed any Mediators betwixt their
gods and them. In those remnants of their Rituals, which are extant, there is
not one word of Mediation or Intercession, demanded of the inferior Deities,
called Dii minorum Gentium. S. Austin speaking of that doctrine, l. 8. and 9. de
Civ. Dei, seems to attribute it to Plato's School, as not being an Article of
Faith of the heathens Creed; but a private Opinion of one School of
Philosophers. He seems, I say, to insinuate this: I desire you, Sir, to show
out of Plato, or Apuleius, or any of those writers, these words, or any others
equivalent; Hercules pray to thy father Jupiter for me, or us. Romulus
intercede for us. So that the greatest part of the Heathens did not dream of
this Mediation, and those who did assert it, treated nevertheless with those
Mediators, as with true gods. Wherefore, should I grant that all Pagans held
the Souls of Men to mediate, yet there would be a vast difference betwixt their
Sentiments, and those of the Roman Catholic Church, concerning our Saints. More
Errors will appear out of the following Discourse.

I think it impossible to give one Idea of what the Pagans taught of Spirits or
incorporeal Substances, as this Name does comprehend the Supreme of all, and
the subordinate, or coordinate immaterial Beings, and Souls separated from
their Bodies. Thales In Athenagor. leg. pro Chr. p. 25.
said there were of three sorts, Gods, Demons, and Heroes: and that God was the
Soul of the World: Demons Spiritual Beings: and Heroes the Souls of Men, who
were good or bad, according to the Life they led in this World. Hesiodus In
Thedor. l. 8. de Cur. Graec. affect. p. 602.
thought that the Souls of golden Men, who lived well, were turned into Demons
after this Life, and received a charge of humane affairs. Julian the Apostat
In. Cyril. Alex. l. 4. p. 115.
taught, that they were true gods, to whom the Supreme God committed the care
of the several parts of this World: that the God Ibidem, p. 141.
of the Jews and Christians, (whom Moses preached) was one of the inferior
gods. Nay he says, Ibidem l. 5. p. 155.
that Moses his God, was the worst of all the rest, as being jealous, envious,
vindicative, etc. For which Blasphemy alone he might have deserved his
reproachful Surname. Plato In S. Aug. l. 8. de Civit. Dei. c. 14.
seems to agree in Substance with Thales; for he distinguishes three sorts of
Spiritual Substances, Gods, Men, and Demons. The Gods he places in the Heavens:
Demons in the Air: Men on Earth. Apuleius S. Aug. l. 9. cap. 11.
holds all Souls of Men to be Demons, but assigns three sorts of them: Lares
are those which are certainly good: Lemures or Larvae, which are certainly
known to be bad: and when it is doubted whether they be good or bad, they are
called Dii Manes.

When you have considered these things, you will see. 1. How imperfectly, nay
how falsely, you have represented the Sentiments of the Pagans. 2. How hard a
thing you undertake, when you design a Parallel betwixt Pagan Idolatry, and our
Worshipping of Saints: for seeing all depends on their holding Men's Souls to be
mediating Spirits (which can never be proved) or that those who were good, were
used only to present Men's Requests to the Supreme God, (which is the Tenet of
the Catholic Church concerning Saints) which is also evidently untrue, we may
rank this Parallel with Squaring Circles, and the Philosophers stone, and expect
to see the World made happy with these three Rarities together.

As to the Mediation of Angels: Athenagoras Legate. pro Christ. page 11.
says indeed that the Christian Opinion was that God created several Orders of
Angels: and had committed to their care the Government of the Elements,
Heavens, and the whole World; not that any one Angel is governor of the World,
(which the Scripture seems to deny, Job. 34, 14. and Heb. 1.14.) but that
several Angels have the Administration of the several parts of it. I know no
Decree of the Catholic Church obliging us to believe this; and therefore I
should not dare to censure any Man who should say the contrary. Yet that
Opinion has so much ground in Scripture, that I do not apprehend all Mr. G. B.
can say, to disprove it. Josue 5.15. an Angel is said to be the Captain of the
Lords host. He seems the same, who Dan. 12.1. is called Michael. And Dan.
10.20. there are others mentioned, viz. the Princes of Persia and Greece. And
why may not these be the Angels, who presided over those Countries? we are sure
that all Angels are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who
shall be heirs of Salvation. Heb. 1.14. and The little ones have Angels, who in
Heaven always see the face of God. Matt. 18.10. And that several Angels
ascended and descended on Jacobs ladder. Genesis 28.12. was to show they mediated
betwixt God, who was at the top, and man, who lay at the bottom of the Ladder.
Now, if particular Angels, have a care or charge of particular persons: why may
not some others have a larger district, and a more extended Charge?

This you will say, is taken from Paganism. And I will answer, the Pagans took
it from the Israelites; not these from them. And it seems very probable, that
when the Arch-divel, who took the Name of Jupiter, had so far prevailed with
Men as to be by them advanced to the Throne of God: his next Attempt was, to
get his wicked Spirits acknowledged for Governors of the World under him, in
lieu of those Blessed Spirits, who were the lawful Governors appointed by God
himself. That Order of God was not to be abrogated with the Old Law, of which
it was no part; it being an Establishment for the more connatural Government of
the World, from the beginning to the end of it.

I know God can govern all things by himself, immediately, without the
Assistance of Men or Angels: that neither the greatness of Business can mate
him, nor its number confound him, nor its variety distract him, nor its
intricacy deceive him, nor its obscurity hide it from his all seeing Eye. That
having created the whole World with a word, he can govern it so too: yet he
uses Men, Romans 13.1.
: and he can call all to believe in him as he did Saul Act. 9.
yet he employed an Angel to convert the Centurion Act. 10.
and vouchsafes to be Fellow Labourer, Mar. 16.20.
(...) with Men, whom he honors with that Employment: and he can justify those
whom he calls, without the concourse of any creature; yet he will have us use
water. And as to the work of the first day, the Creation of all things visible
and invisible. God required the Asistance of no Creature, so the whole work of
the last day might be performed by him alone; yet he will use the voice of an
Archangel, to proclaim it 1 Thessal. 4.16.
the Angels shall gather together those who are raised again to life, Mat.
24.31.
they shall sever the wicked from the just, and cast them into the furnace of
fire Matt. 13.49.50.
. Thus the Law and Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, the Old and New
Testament, attest this Truth, that Angels concur to carrying on the work of our
Salvation, and have a Commission from God to direct us. Now for believing this
Truth, Papists are accused of Superstition and agreeing with Idolaters, and why
we, more than Jacob, or Daniel, Josue, or Jesus, who taught the same? Blame
them, if you dare; or absolve us, for their sakes, whom we follow.

G. B. page 24. This kind of Idolatry was first begun at Babylon, where Ninus
made a statue of Belus, from him all these lesser gods were called Belim, or
Baalim.

Answer. It is not true, that Baal was held to be a lesser God: he was adored
as the supreme God, as you may see, 3 Reg. 18.21.

G. B. Ibid. From this hint, we may guess why the Apostasy of Rome is shadowed
forth under the name of Babylon.

Answer. This is to enlighten one night with another, and wash a spot of dirt
out of linen with Ink. You dwell and converse much in obscure places, which is
proper to those who hate the light Joan. 3.20.
because it disco verse their deform features, or more deformed actions. We have
already showed you, that Baal or Bell was held to be the living God, which you
may see also Dan. 14.5. now we never held any man Saint to be God, except the
fountain of Sanctity Christ Jesus.

CHAP. X. Of the Intercession of Saints.
G. B. p. 25. IF we compare with this Idolatry the worship of Angels and Saints
in the Roman Church, we shall find the parity just and exact.

Answer. It is neither just nor exact, it differs in many things. For 1. the
Pagans held those men, they honored to be true gods; we believe the greatest
Saints to be our fellow servants. 2. Even those, who owned a Deity above them,
believed it to do nothing in human Affairs; Job. 22.14. we believe his
Providence reaching all things. 3. They stopped in those Spirits; we with them
make our Addresses to God. And 4. They offered Sacrifices to them; we offer
none, but to God.

This Objection is not new, it was made against the Catholic Church above 1300
years ago: to which S. Austin answered l. 20. cont. Faust. cap. 21. and l. 8.
de Civit. Dei. c. 27. in the latter place he has these words. Quis audivit
Sacerdotem stantem ad altar, etiam super sanctum corpus Martyris, dicere in
precibus: Offero tibi Sacrificium O Petre, vel Paul, vel Cypriane, cum apud
eorum memorias offeratur Deo? Ista non esse Sacrificia Martyrum, novit, qui
novit unum, quod Deo offertur, Sacrificum Christianorum. Nos itaque Martyrs
nostros divinis honoribus non colimus, nec Sacrificia illis offerimus. Who ever
heard a Priest at the Altar say, I offer Sacrifice to thee, O Peter, Paul, or
Cyprian, when upon their Sepulchers it is offered to God? Those are not
Sacrifices of Martyrs, as all know who know that one Sacrifice of Christians
which is there offered to God. Wherefore we do not worship Martyrs with divine
Adorations, nor offer Sacrifice unto them.

Out of which words you may learn 1. that Martyrs were worshipped in the
primitive Church. 2. Their Tombs were turned into Altars. 3. That the Sacrifice
of Christians was offered upon those tombs. And 4. That that Sacrifice was
offered only to the living God; and not to the Martyrs. All which things to
this day the Roman Catholic Church does very religiously observe. By which
appears the conformity of the ancient and modern Church in doctrine and
practice. As also the deformity betwixt the ancient Church, and the Protestant
Reformation, in which there are neither Martyrs worshipped, nor their tombs
regarded, nor Altars, nor Sacrifice. You still roll stones, which fall on your
own head.

G. B. page 25. There was a Saint appointed for every Nation. S. Andrew for
Scotland, S. George for England, S. Denis for France, and many more for other
Nations.

Answer. I desire to learn of you, where, when, and by what Authority this
Appointment was made? Appointing is an Act of Jurisdiction; and so universal a
decree, so religiously obeyed, must be a very solemn Act, and proceed from the
supreme Authority acknowledged on Earth. Which could not be so hushed up, as
that no memory of it should appear. Again: the whole Church on Earth never
pretended any Jurisdiction over Saints in Heaven, nor even over those in
Purgatory, whom she endeavors to ease, or release, not by judgment, but by
Prayer, non absolutione, sed solutione, say Divines. So none but God has
Jurisdiction over those blessed Souls, and by him alone that appointment could
be made. Now by what Revelation have you learnt that Act of God? what Catholic
Author authentically recorded it?

G. B. page 27. In the eleventh Century, numbering Prayers by Beads began.

Answer. They began only in the thirteenth Century.

G. B. page 28. "Ten Prayers on the Beads to the Virgin, one to God.

Answer. Beads are used several ways: some say Creeds on the great ones, and
either Pater nosters, or Gloria Patris, on the little ones. Against these your
Objection has no place. And it has no force against others, who by their
Prayers to the Virgin only pray her to pray to God for them.

G. B. page 28. How many more worship her, then do her Son?

Answer. Not one; for no body worships her, but for her Sons sake, and for the
Virtue she received from God by the merits of her Son. So that her Worship ends
in her Son, or in God. This you have been often told of by others; but are
resolved never to take notice of it, fearing to want this precious Argument,
which is as frivolous as it is common among your Brethren.

To show you the Opinion and Practice of the ancient Christians, three
Authorities will suffice; one of the Latin, the rest of the Greek Church. The
first is out of S. Austin. l. 7. de Baptismo. c. 1. Adjuvet nos B. Cyprianus
orationibus suis in istius carnis mortalitate, tanquam in caliginosa nube
laborantes. May blessed S. Cyprian with his Prayers assist us, who labor in
this corruptible body, as in a dark cloud.

And S. Gregory Nissen. Orat. de laudibus Theodori Martyris. He says: If thy
own Prayers be not efficacious enough, If greater and more powerful
Intercessions be necessary, call together the Quire of thy brethren the
Martyrs, and with them all pray for us. Admonish Peter, stir up Paul, as also
John the beloved Disciple, that they may be careful of the Churches they
founded.

S. Chrisost. hom. 1. in These. ante fin. teaches us to pray, and how we should
do it to Saints, (...). Let us neither despise the Prayers of Saints, nor quite
rely upon them: least we either become slothful and careless, or lose their
helps. But let us pray them to pray for us, and let us live virtuously, that we
may attain to that bliss which is promised to those, who love God, through the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. No Roman Catholic can explicate our doctrine
more significantly: seeing he explicates the object (Saints) the manner, not to
rely upon them solely; The design, to obtain their Prayers for us. The final
end of all: Life everlasting through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

There is also another intent in honoring Saints, to stir up men to imitate
their Virtues. Aug. Sermon. 47. de Sanctis: Solemnitates Martyrum exhortationes
sunt martyriorum: ut imitari non pigeat, quod celebrare delectat. The feasts
celebrated in the honor of Martyrs, are exhortations to Martyrdom: for we ought
willingly to imitate, what we celebrate with joy.

G. B. page 29. A black Roll of the plagues which God pours out on those
ungodly worshippers is. Romans 1.

Answer. There is not a word against the worshippers of Saints; but of Idols,
and Devils: whose wicked example was a great incentive to vice, (Terentius in
Eunucho) as the good example of Saints is to Virtue (Aug. supra) I have not
Faith enough to believe all are Saints, where the worship of Saints is
rejected: If none but the guiltless, may throw a stone, the Adulteress may
escape in London, as well as in Rome.

G. B. page 30. All Prostration for Worship is declared unlawful by the Angel,
who warned S. John not to do it. Apoc. 19.10.

Answer. Would you have all the world turn Quakers, and never worship any body?
Will you condemn the Custom of England in kneelling to our Parents? or to the
Parent of our Country, the King's Majesty? And can you seriously think that
Apostle an Idolater, even when the Holy Ghost so evidently wrought in his mind,
and so fully possessed it? or that being once warned of so foul a Crime. Apoc.
19.10. He should so soon fall again into the same? Apoc. 22.8. That the Angel
should show no great displeasure, seeing himself adored as God, as Paul and
Barnabas did on a like Occasion at Lystra? Act 14.13. But should as it were
compliment with an Idolater? That the Apostle should never repent himself of so
heinous a fault, and do Penance for it? or if he did, he should not record it,
that he might as much edify by Repentance, as he had scandalized by his fall?
all those things surpass my Faith, although (God be thanked) it contains
Transubstantiation.

Wherefore for the singular respect I bear the Apostle, I cannot surmise him
guitly of Idolatry (being confirmed in Grace) especially at the time of that
Vision. Nay I see no ground to say, he absolutely sinned in it: but that he
acted out of a Principle of Humility, thinking that Respect due from him to the
Angel, as being better in Nature, and greater in Grace and Glory, than himself.
And the Angel corrected that innocent Judgment, by minding him that they were
fellow servants, which was a telling him his own Dignity of an Apostle: which
in some considerations is even superior to that of Angels,

G. B. page 31. Speculative people may have distinct Notions of Latria and
Dulia; yet the vulgar in their practice make no difference at all.

Answer. All who have common Sense have distinct Notions of those Worships,
although they understand not those terms. All know they are to obey the King, and
their Governors, yet that their Obedience to both is not alike, seeing it is
due to the King 1 Pet. 2.13.
as supreme; to Governors, as being sent from him, or receiving Authority from
him. An Heir knows he must obey his Father and his Tutor: yet differently, his
Tutor only to comply with his Father Gal. 4.4.
. And why should men be so stupid, only in matter of Religion, as not to be
able to discern betwixt the honor due to God, as the fountain of all good, and
that due to Saints, as partaking of his Perfections. The very Prayers, which we
make in our Lyturgies import that distinction: for they are addressed to God,
beseeching him to hear the Prayers, which doubtless the Saints make for us: or
else when we pray to Saints, we desire them to join with ours their Prayers to
God: and when we have obtained our Request we desire them to join with us, in
Thanksgiving to the Divine Goodness. 2. Cor. 1.10.11.
Our trust is in God, that he will deliver us, from temporal and eternal
Misery. The Saints also helping by Prayer for us, and for the gift bestowed on
us by means of many interceding persons, thanks may be given by many on our
behalf.

But were Truth sought for, an end would easily be made of this contentious
Dispute betwixt Faith and Calumny, by only stating aright the Controversy: we
do all unanimously profess, that God alone does deserve all the Adoration, and
worship any Creature is capable of, for his own intrinsic and essential
perfection. Yet we think it is his Pleasure, that we should honor not only
those Perfections in himself; but that we should (for his sake) reverence those
Creatures whom he makes partakers of his infinite fullness of Perfection,
according to the manner of their elevations, to partake of those Perfections.
So that God is honored in them all, and all they in him. We honor Kings and
Prelates lawfully established, as being partakers of his Authority to govern
us; the word of God, as being an explication of his Will: The Sacraments as
Channels to convey his Grace into our Souls: Churches, as places designed for
Prayer to him: Saints on Earth, as living Temples of the Holy Ghost: Saints in
Heaven, as Partakers of his glory. So that we may be said to honor God in all;
and by consequence the worship given to them cannot be said to draw from God.

We likewise profess, that as God is the sole Crearor of all things, so is he
the Fountain of all Good, and that every good perfect Gift comes from him, the
Father of Lights. Jac. 1.13. That nothing in order to eternal Life can be
obtained, but of him, through our Lord Jesus Christ. That his Providence
reaches to every thing, that not a hair can either fall of its self, or be
pulled out of our head by Men, or by bad or good Angels, without the permission
of God: that all we suffer, and all we enjoy, all good, and all bad, flow from
his omnipotent hand, as effects either of his mercy, or of his justice, or of
both. So that we fear nothing, but from him, nor hope for any thing, but from
him. To him all our Prayers are directed, even those made to Saints, which stop
not in them, but in their, and our God and Father. This we believe, this we
practice, this we teach, this we defend; speak what you can against this, and
you will speak to the purpose, but if you pass this unregarded, you beat the
air.

Another thing I desire of you, is, not to build upon every little fancy, although
contrary to reason: which is childish always, but deserves a more severe
censure in matters of consequence. Now what can be more fantastical, than what
Mr. Brevint writes, in his Saul and Samuel, that it is Idolatry to pray to
Saints, unless they be within compass to hear us? And who can determine how far
they can hear? Or what Mr. Whitby says in his Discourse concerning Idolatry.
page 154. Prayer offered to an invisible being, and not corporeally present is
due only to God. So that a blind Man may not desire his Neighbor to pray for
him because all are invisible to him. And Prayers offered to the Dragon, Dan.
14.23. or any Idols, would be no Idolatry, seeing they could see, or be seen,
and were corporeally present. And certainly S. Paul was an Idolater when at a
distance he desired the Roman to pray for his good Journey, who were neither
visible to him, nor corporeally present. He follows the custom of our
Reformers, he throws stones without ever regarding where they fall. But what
Proof does he bring for his Novelty? The Authority of Dio and Martial, both
Pagans, and one of them the most filthy, or beastly Author of all Poets. And
can Mr. Whitby judge their Authority competent, to decide a Controversy betwixt
Christians, and condemn the public practice of the Catholic Church? Have we not
reason to except against their being Vmpiers, in this dispute? Yet to do Mr.
Whitby a pleasure, we will admit them as Judges Arbitrators. What say they? Dio
says, Caligula was a God, when prayed to. And Martial says, those who pray to
Idols, make them Gods. Suppose all this true: what is it to Visibility, or
Corporeal presence, of which they make no mention, and yet were brought to
prove them? How wretchedly does he plead against us, who first appeals to
incompetent Judges; and secondly to such, as pronounce nothing in his favor!
In malacausa non possunt aliter. Aug.

CHAP. XI. Pretended Charms, where of Holy Water, Wax-candles, Agnus Dei's, etc.
G B. p. 32. ALl the Enchantments used in Heathenism are nothing if compared to
those of the Roman Church.

Answer. Were your Proofs as strong as your Assertions are bold, you would be
the most formidable enemy, that ever we had. But that strength of Proofs is
wanting. Those Creatures which bark loud, seldom bite hard. In bold
affirmations none more positive than women and children, and the Ignorantest of
Scholars: Wise and Learned Men are more wary and reserved, who never are very
positive although they seem sometimes to have reason on their side, because they
are conscious of the uncertainty of their Discourses, whose fallacies they
discover in others, and in themselves too. In this place you would easily have
discovered your error, had you looked over your Proofs. For what more weak than
those?

G. B. p. 32. Can any thing look liker a charm than the worshipping of God in
an unknown Tongue.

Answer. What say you to reading your English service to such Irish, as
understand it not? Is that a Charm? For whatever you say in vindication of your
Common Prayer, will serve to answer you in this Reproach.

To whom can I compare the men of this generation Luke 7.31.
? to whom are they like? They are like unto children, pettish children, whom
neither laughing nor weeping will please. So you are resolved never to be
content with what Papists do. Is their Service kept in Latin? It resembles a
Charm. Does it appear in English, as it lately did at London? And Hanibal ad
portas, of such a fearful nature are your Brethren, that whatever dress our
Service appears in, it frightens them: as the sign of the Cross, and the name
of Jesus, did the Devils in Julian's time.

But are you so much a stranger to the World, as not to know, that no living
language continues long the same? That Men's phancies of words change, as well,
as those of fashions? That sometimes they lay aside some words, and take in
others, and sometimes retain the word, but alter its sense by use? If all this
be true; suppose a change be made in a vulgar Language, do you think the Church
obliged presently to change her Service? If you do, show me the ground of that
Obligation. If you can show no Command for such a perpetual Change in the
Liturgy; Condemn our Church no more, for not doing what you cannot show she is
bound to do.

G. B. page 30. Shall I here tell, of the charming of Water, of Salt, of
Waxcandles, of Roses, Agnus Dei's, Medals, and the like.

Answer. It is not easy to conjecture what you blame in these things, nor for
what reason; unless it be, that Papists use them, and that is enough to draw
your Censure. Do the things themselves displease you? They are the Creatures of
God: and all creatures of God are good. (1 Timothy 4.4.) and nothing ought to be
rejected, which is received with thanksgiving, as I assure you Papists use
those things. Or are you offended, that they are blessed? That is unreasonable:
seeing that gives a kind of Sanctity to them. They are sanctified by the word
of God, and by Prayer, says S. Paul in the place above cited. So that I think
the practice of blessing several things comes from Apostolical Tradition, and
that it is grounded on that Text of S. Paul. And I desire you to fix the time,
when you think they began, and I am persuaded I can show them to be ancienter
then any time since the Two first Ages determinable, if not all, yet some of
them, so as by those which can be showed from the beginning, the rest by lawful
consequence may be deduced, as not unlawful, or Enchantments. See Baronius ad
an. D. 57, 58. and 132. in which places he shows the use of them to be so
ancient, that if you pretend those Blessings to be Popery, you must own the
purest Antiquity to be Papist.

And as for Water blessed by holy men, it is so far from being a diabolical Charm
that it is an efficacious Remedy against Charms of the Devil. You will find the
virtue of it confirmed by miracles in Epiph. haer. 30. When it was used by
Josephus a Count under Constantine the great. In S. Hierome in vita Hilarionis,
that this Saint by the use of it destroyed the Charms of Marnas (or Jupiter)
adored at Gaza. In Theodoret. l. 5. Hist. c. 21. that S. Marcellus Bishop of
Apamea with it chaced away Jupiter Apamenus who hindered the burning of his
Temple. And in Bid l. 1. Hist. Angl. c. 17. that S. Jerman Bishop of Auxerre
with it allayed a Tempest. Which you may see in Baron. ad an. D. 132. what will
you say to those things? As the Pharisees: that all this was done in the Devils
name? That you cannot, for then you must own that one Devil cast out another;
and his kingdom is divided, which is by our Savior pressed against the
Pharisees, as absurd and incredible, and consequently cannot be said by a
Christian. Nay although you deny all credit to these holy and learned Men, (which
in a matter of fact is in a manner impudent) yet will you not be quit of this
Argument, for at least these Fathers thought Water so blessed, a fit instrument
to work those stupendous works, otherwise they would never have believed those
stories, neither would they have related them, without believing them. Hence
you may see how different your Faith is from theirs, who think that a Charm,
which they judged a Divine Blessing.

CHAP. XII. Of Ceremonies.
G. B. p. 34. THE Sacramental Actions are polluted by the superfetation of so
many new Rites whereby they are wholly changed from their original Simplicity.

Answer. You can allege nothing against our Rites or Ceremonies, but will
serve as well against your own, and what you can say in defense of yours
against Presbyterians, will fully satisfy your Argument against ours.

It is a great folly, to look on Ceremonies as an essential part of our
Worship: and it is as great to deny, that (when they are decent and
significant) they are great helps to it. Men are composed of Body and Soul:
with both we must serve God, and each is an help to the other, when they concur
to worship him. The Body can do nothing without the Soul, and all its Worship
is mere hypocrisy, and not worthy of acceptance and dead, unless it be
quickened by interior Faith and Charity, which flow from the Soul. And this
Devotion soon grows cold, if it be not entertained with exterior Objects, and
revived by sensible Actions; which fix the Imaginative faculty on the Acts of
Religion in hand, and move the Will both of him, who Officiates, and of the
Assistants, to dispositions proportionable to the Rite, by a certain Sympathy
betwixt our Soul and Body: the Soul, feeling an inward veneration for God, to
express it, inclines the Body to Kneeling, Prostrations, or the like, and these
increase the interior Veneration, when duly and devoutly made. This is the
sense of mankind; for there never was any People, who met to honor either God,
or Prince, but had some settled Ceremonies with which they expressed
exteriourly their Submission to them.

The French Hugonots pared off those they found in the Roman Church as
superstitious: and the most Learned and Religious of that Communion, wish their
worship were adorned with some Rites, whose want they lament, as being an
undecent nakedness, and an occasion of much Irreligion, and disrespectfulness
in giving and receiving the Sacraments themselves. I believe did you pursue the
Profaneness so common in England, to its head, you will find your want and
neglect of Religious Ceremonies to be the fountain of it.

In your Vindication of the Laws, page 170. you say the Church has power to
determine of things, that may be done in a variety of ways into one particular
Form, such as prescribing a set Form of Worship, the ordering the posture in
Sacraments, the Habits in Worship, etc. Which will hedge in, what you reject, as
well as what you retain.

G. B. page 34. In Baptism instead of washing with Water in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, they have added many adulterated Rites.

Answer. These words signify an Abrogation of Washing with Water, and a
substitution of other Rites in lien of it, which is so far from Truth, and so
black a Calumny, that I wonder you could advance it, or your Church permit it:
especially seeing the guilt falls on her, for not baptizing those who fall from
us to you, as she ought to do, if we omit washing in the Name, which is the
essential part of the Sacrament. But you speak against Popery, and that is
enough to justify all untruths, and get a license for any Calumny, as appears
by this very Passage.

G. B. page 34. The Child must be blown upon, then a Charm used, for turning
the Devil out of him.

Answer. Blowing upon the Child and exorcising it, were practiced in the purest
times. You will find them in Cyril of Hierus. Catech. 1.
, Ambrose l. 1. de Sac. c. 5.
, Leo Epist. 4. c. 6.
, Caelestin I. Epist. 1. ad Episc. Gallia cap. 12.
, and Augustine Lib. 2. de pec. orig. cap. 40. and l. 6. cont. Julian c. 5. ubi
ait.: Ecclesia filios fidelium nec exorcisaret, nec exufflaret, si non eos de
potestate tenebrarum, and a principo mortis erueret. Id tu commemorare
timuisti, tanquam ipse ab orb toto exufflandiu esses, si huic exufflationi qua
Frinceps mundi and a parvulis ejieitur for as, contradicere voluisses.
, The Church, says S. Augustine to Julian, would neither exorcise (you call this
a Charm) the children of the Faithful, nor blow upon them, did she not free
them from the power of the Devil. This thou Julian, durst not gainsay, fearing
thy self to be blown out of the Christian World, if thou had done so. So
esteemed was this Ceremony then, that even Heretics durst not speak against
it: which now is reproached to us as a Charm, a Superstition, by our Reformers.
Not a petty Minister, but thinks it a fit Object to be laughed at, and to show
his wit, by playing the Buffoon upon it. By natural Generation all are born in
sin, children of wrath, slaves of the Devil, and in the power of Darkness: By
supernatural Regeneration, which is Baptism, we are purged from Sin, freed from
the bondage of the Devil, adopted the Children of God, delivered from the power
of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of the beloved Son of God. Colos.
1.13. This Faith delivered by the Apostles, was believed by the primitive
Christians, and we believe the same: They used this Ceremony to signify this
change in the Person baptized; we use it for the same intent: It was then so
venerable, that even Heretics durst not express any disesteem of it; now you
deride it, and look upon it as profane and a Charm. Whence comes this change?
from the Ceremony? no, it is the same, it was then: from the Intention of those
who use it? no, it is employed to signify the change from Sin to Grace now, as
it was then. The Change is only in your self, and your Brethren Reformers: your
Faith is as different from that of the Primitive, as of the present Church: and
that new Faith enclines you to deride those things, which the Church animated
by Apostolical Faith, did, and does esteem.

By this you see how Impious this Lucian like spirit is. How imprudent it is,
will appear, if you consider how full your Assemblies are of Libertines, who
deride all things of Devotion, even practiced by your selves, as several
tragically complain of in their Sermons. You foster in them this Spirit, by
your Practice: you plant that Tree in their Hearts, which produces such sour
Fruit, that sets all your teeth an edge: this Serpent is bread in the bowels of
your Reformation, and serpent like it will eat the bowels of her Parent, and
kill her, if it be not stifled.

G. B. page 35. The Priest at Mass, often hows, sometimes he turns to the
People, and gives them a short barbarian Benediction, then goes on.

Answer. In all this I see nothing ridiculous, but your relating those sacred
Rites. How can he express his inward Worship of God more clearly, than by
kneeling or bowing? His Office is to be a Mediator betwixt God and Man ( Heb.
5.1.) and how can that be better represented, than by his humble applications
to God, bowing to him, and listing up his hands to the throne of Grace ( Heb.
4.16.) to receive thence Mercy; and then turn to the People, to pour it upon
them. Thus on Jacobs Ladder the Angels appeared going up and down, up, to God;
down, to Jacob, a Type of what Priests do, when they officiate.

But he gives them a short Barbarian Benediction. That Benediction which you, a
very civilized person, disdain, as Barbarous, is taken out of Scripture, the
words of an Angel to Gideon, ( Judges 6.12.) Our Lord be with you, Dominus
vobiscum. Scripture it self cannot escape your censure, if a Papist use it.
Your contempt of the language of Angels in this World, will scarce make you
worthy of their Company in the next.

G. B. page 35. After Adoration, the God is to be devoured by the Priest: which
made the Arahian say, Christians were fools, who devoured what they adored.

Answer. A worthy Authority for a King's Chaplain in ordinary, to build upon.
Sir, Christ said, Take and eat, this is my Body; because he says it is his
body, we adore it, and because he commands us, to take and eat it, we obey, and
do so. But a Turk says, it is foolish. Let it be so, no Turk's Opinion is the
Rule of my Faith. Is it of yours? Is not this prodigious, that against the
express words of Christ, and the Practice of the whole Church, the Authority of
a Turk should be brought? nay and preferred before it? and this by a Minister?

G B. page 38. Rome enjoins severer censures on the violation of those
Ceremonies than on the greatest transgressions against the moral or positive
Laws of God.

Answer. I know no motive you can have, for advancing such notorious untruths,
but that of Cicero: Cum semel limits verecundiae transieris, oportet graviter
esse impudentem. You have past those bounds, and there I leave you.

CHAP. XIII. Scripture and the Church: where, of the Resolution of Faith.
G. B. p. 41. etc. "Papists call the Scriptures a nose of Wax, the source of
all Heresies,

Answer. If any Roman Catholic compared Scripture to a Nose of Wax, it is only
because the Letter may be wrested to different senses and made to look not that
way which the Holy Ghost designed; but that which Men's Passions lead them to.
The World affords not a more convincing Instance of this flexibility of
Scriptures, then that of your own Brethren in the late troubles; who brought it
to countenance Sedition, Rebellion, Heresy, Murder, and the horriblest of all
Murders, Parricide, the killing of the Father of the Country. Did Scripture of
it self look toward (or abet) all those crying Sins? no sure, it condemns them
formally. It can then be wrested from its own natural sense, to another meaning
contrary to it, which is all that is meant by that Phrase.

As for its being a source of Heresies, it is not true, that Scriptures, do
found Heresies, or that Heresies spring out of them, but that Men draw Heresies
out of the words of Scriptures, taken in a Sense quite contrary to that of the
Holy Ghost.

G. B. page 41. Papists will have all the Authority of Scriptures to depend on
the Church. A great difference is to be made betwixt the Testimony of a
Witness, and the Authority of a Judge. The former is not denied to the Church.

Answer. Here you grant to the Church as much as we desire, provided you own in
this Witness such a Veracity, as the nature of its Testimony requires, to bring
us to a certain and undoubted belief of the Scriptures.

The Curch never took upon her the Title Of Judge of Scripture. In her
Councils, she places in the middle of the Assembly a high Throne as for Christ,
and in it sets the holy Ghospels as his word, according to which she judges of
the Doctrine tontroverted. Conc. Calced. Act. 1. So she judges by Scriptures of
the Doctrine of men; but does not judge of the Scriptures themselves.

At the first Admission of a Writing into the Canon of Scriptures, the Church
proceeding is of another nature. A Writing is brought to her, as written by a
Man Divinely assisted; of S. Paul, for example, to the Romans by Phebe, or to
Philemon, by a fugitive Servant Onesimus: neither, as a Witness, give any great
credit to the Writing they brought. The Pastors of the flock of Christ consider
the Writings, examine the Messengers, recurr to God by Prayer to demand the
Assistance of his Holy Spirit, to know whether he were truly the Author of the
Writing exhibited. If after all these means used to discover the Truth, they
remain convinced, the thing was written by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
they obey it themselves, command Obedience to it, as to the Word of God, and
use it as a Rule of Faith and Manners. So when an unknown Person brings into a
Corporation a new Patent, as of the King's Majesty, and presents it to the
Mayor: He (before he allows the Patentee to act in virtue of it,) with his
Brethren considers the Writing, the Signet, the Seal, the Style, etc. to know
whether it be counterfeit or sincere, with a Resolution to obey it himself, and
make others do the same, in case it appear to be truly the King's. The Mayor
cannot be said to judge of the Kings Patents (to which as a Subject he owes
Obedience) but only to discern whether an unknown Writing be the King's Patent,
or no.

You say, this makes the Authority of the Scriptures depend on the Church.
Which is as rational, as if you should say, the Authority of the King's Patent
depends on the Mayor of a petty Corporation, because the Patent is exhibited to
him, before it be executed. If any Man has so little common Sense, as not to
discern the difference betwixt these two Propositions: To judge of the Kings
Patent: and to judge whether an unknown Writing be the Kings Patent: I am to
seek how to help him.

This Authority of the Church, to recommend the Scriptures as an undeniable
Witness, occasioned that Saying of S. Augustine l. contra Epist. Fundam. c. 5.
Ego Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae commoveret authoritas.
I would not believe the Gospel, did not the Authority of the Catholie Church
move me to it. Which words are cited by all Catholic Controvertists, as
containing an implicit Decision of all our Controversies; they showing
evidently S. Augustins Discourse against the Manichees, to be just the same,
which we use against the modern Protestants, that as we are heirs of that
Faith, which S. Augustine, and the Church of his time defended against its
Opposers the ancient Heretics, so are we of the Titles, by which they enjoyed
it, and the Arms with which they defended it. I will put down the whole
Discourse of S. Augustine at large, that so we may the better understand his
meaning, and more convincingly show how much the most understanding of our
Adversaries are out of the way, in explicating it.

The thing sought for in that Discourse was, whether Manichaeus was an Apostle
of Jesus Christ or no? The Manichaeans said he was: the Catholics denied it,
for whose cause S. Austin disputes thus in that place, Quaero quis sit iste
Manichaeus? says he, Respondebitis, Apostolus Christi. Non Credo. Evangelium
sort mihi lecturus es, and inde Manichai personam tentabis asserere. Si ergo
invenires aliquem qui Evangelio nondum credit, quid faceres dicenti tibi, non
credo? Ego vero Evangelio non crederem nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret
authoritas. Quibus ergo obtemperavi dicentibus, credit Evangelio; cur eis non
obtemperem dicentibus mihi: Noli credere Manichaeo? Elige quid velis. Si
dixeris, creed Catholicis, ipsi me monent, ut nullam fidem accommodem vobis,
quapropter non possim illis credens, nisi tibi non credere. Si dixeris, noli
Catholicis credere, non recte facis, per Evangelium me cogere ad Manichaei
fidem, quia ipsi Evangelio Catholicis praedicantibus credidi. Si autem dixeris,
been credidisti Catholicis laudantibus Evangelium, sed non recte credidisti
illis vituper antibus Manichaeum: usque adeo me stultum putas, ut nulla reddita
ratione, quod vis credam, quod non vis non credam? quippe multo justius and
cautius facio, si Catholicis, quoniam semel credidi, ad te non transeo, nisi me
non credere jusseris, sed manifestissime and apertissime scire aliquid feceris.
Quocirca si mihi rationem redditurus es, dimitte Evangelium. Si ad Evangelium
te tenes, ego ad eos me teneam, quibus praecipientibus, Evangelio credidi: and
his jubentibus tibi omnino non credam. Quod si forte in Evangelio aliquid
manifestissimum de Manichaei Apostolatu invenire potueris, infirmabis mihi
Catholicorum auctoritatem, qui jubent ut tibi non credam. Qua infirmat a nec
Evangelio credere potero, quia per eos illi credideram, ita nihil apud me
valebit quicquid inde protuleris. Quapropter si nihil manifestum de Manichaei
Apostolatu in Evangelio reperitur, Catholicis potius credam, quam tibi. Si
autem inde aliquid manifestum pro Manichaeo legeris, nec illis, nec tibi:
illis, quia de te mihi mentiti sunt; tibi, quia eam scripturam mihi profers,
cui per illos credideram, qui mihi mentiti sunt. Sed absit ut ego Evangelio non
credam. Illi autem credens non invenio, quomodo possim etiam tihi credere. Haec
Aug. ibid. I demand, says this Saint, Who is this Manichaeus? You answer, He is
the Apostle of Christ. I will not take your word for it. What will you say,
what means will you use to persuade me? Perchance you will take the Gospel, and
thence endeavor to prove unto me the Mission of Manichaus. But what if you meet
with one who does not believe the Gospel, how would you deal with him? For my
part, I would not believe the Gospel, did not the Authority of the Catholic
Church move me. Whom therefore I obey, in saying, Believe the Gospel, should I
not obey, in saying, Believe not Manichaeus? Take your choice, whether you will
have me rely on the Catholics, or no: If you say, Believe the Catholics; they
marn me, not to believe you; wherefore believing them, I must reject you. If
you say, Do not believe Catholics, you do not well, endeavoring to bring me to
the Belief in Manichaeus, by the Gospel, which I received only upon the word of
Catholics. If you say, you do well to believe the Catholics when they commend
the Gospel, but you do not well in believing them when they blame Manioheus: do
you think me such a Fool, as without any reason I should believe what pleases
you, and not believe what you dislike? Certainly it is much more reasonable,
seeing I must believe the Catholics, that I abandon your Communion, unless you
can give me an evident Demonstration for the contrary. Wherefore, if you will
allege Reason, lay by the Gospel. If you retain the Gospel, I will stick to
those upon whose word I have admitted the Gospel: and their Authority forces me
to renounce you. Now if perchance you can show out of the Gospel any evident
proof of Manichaeus his Apostleship, you will indeed weaken in me the Authority
of Catholics, who forbid me to believe you. But that Authority being weakened, I
shall no more be able to believe the Gospel, which I received by it, and so
whatsoever you prove thence, will fall to the ground. Therefore if no clear
proof of Manichaeus his Mission is extant in the Gospel, I will rather believe
the Catholics than you. If a clear proof be found there, I will neither believe
the Catholics nor you: Not them, because they were false in the Opinion they
delivered of you; Not you, because you rely on that Scripture which I received
on the testimony of those who have deceived me. Yet God forbid I should reject
the Gospel; and believing it, I see no possibility of believing you. Thus the
great Saint; which I have cited at large, because the whole Discourse holds
against all Heresies, changing only the Name of Manichaeus or Manichean, into
that which signifies the Heresy: as, for Example, into that of Protestant or
Luther. Morcover, it contains a clear Confutation of what has hitherto by the
Learned of our Adversaries been said in Answer to it.

The first Interpretation of this Place is delivered by W. L. in his Relation
of a Conference, page 81. Some of your own, says he, will not endure it should
be understood, save of the Church in the time of the Apostles only; and then
cites Ockam Dial. p. 1. l. 1. c. 4. Where he has not one word of that. But,
says Mr. Still. in his Rational Account, p. 198. the words are in Durandus, l.
3. Insent. d. 24. q. 1. n. 9. where he says, Intelligitur solum de Ecclesia,
quae fuit tempore Apostolorum; It is understood only of the Church which was in
the time of the Apostles.

The same Author borrows another Explication of Biel, Lect. 2. in Can. Missae,
That the words are to be understood of the Church in general, as it contains
the first and later Ages, A tempore Christi and Apostolorum, etc. And to this
he sticks, for he adds, And so does S. Augustine take Eccles. contra Fund. And
Dr. Still. p. 198, 199, approves the same, and confirms it out of Gerson and
Driedo.

Neither of these two Explications can stand with the Text, as appears out of
those words: Quibus obtemperavi dicentibus, Credit Evangelio: cur eis non
obtemperem dicentibus mihi, noli credere Manichaeo; Whom I obeyed in saying,
Believe the Gospel. should I not obey in saying, Do not believe Manichaeus?
Hence I frame this Argument: St. Augustine professes he received the Gospel
upon the credit of that Church, which condemned Manichaeus. But that Church
which condemned Manichaeus, was that of his time, and not that of the Apostles,
who never mentioned Manichaeus; Ergo the Church, on whose word he received the
Gospel, was that of his time, and not that of the Apostles. When therefore E.
S. p. 220. says, It is plain St. Austin means not the Judgment of the present
Church, but of the Catholic Church, as taking in all Ages and Places, he
evidently contradicts the very Text of St. Austin: whence I conclude, that
either he speaks against his Conscience, which I am unwilling to believe; or
else (which is more excusable) that he had not read the Text which he
undertakes to Explicate.

A Third, and yet more improbable Explication, is delivered by W. L. p. 82. He
speaks it either of Novices or Doubters in the Faith, or else of such as were
in part Infidels. Mr. Fisher the Jesuit, at the Conference would needs have it,
that St. Austin spoke it even of the Faithful; which I cannot yet think: for he
speaks to the Manichees, and they had a great part of the Infidel in them. And
the words immediately before these are, If thou should find one, qui
Evangelio non credit, which did not believe the Gospel, what would thou do to
make him believe? Thus W. L.

This is likewise plainly false; for S. Austin was neither a Novice, nor a
Doubter in the Faith, nor in part an Infidel, when he writ that Book; for he
writ it after he was made Bishop, as you may see Lib. 2. Retract. c. 2. But he
speaks of himself, and describes the ground of his own Faith; Ergo he does not
speak of Novices, Doubters, or half Infidels, nor describes the ground of their
Faith, but of those who are firm Believers. I prove that S. Austin speaks of
his own Faith, and shows the ground on which it relied.: For first he says, I
would not believe the Gospels, without the Authority of Catholics commending
them. Secondly he says, If you weaken the Authority of Catholics, I will reject
the Gospel. This I believe Mr. Stillingst saw, and therefore said, page 20. If
you extend this beyond Novices and Weaklings, I shall not oppose you in it. And
I cannot think that W. L. had read that place, at least with attention, when he
writ, He could not think S. Austin spoke of the Faithful.

Stilling. page 220. Neither you, nor any Catholic Author, is able to prove
that S. Austin by these words ever dreamt of any infallible Authority in the
present Church.

Ans. Seeing S. Austin expressly says, He would renounce the Gospel, if the
Authority of Catholics were weakened in him, by discovering they had delivered
any one Lie, he must either think them exempt from all possibility of Lying, or
else he adhered very loosly to the Gospel. I hope E. S. will not assert the
later part; wherefore he must grant, that S. Austin thought the Church free
from all possibility of Error. Let us return to Mr. G. B.

G. B. page 43. Christ's Prophetic Office is invaded by the pretense of the
Churches Infallibility in Expounding Scriptures.

And why, good Sir, should the Infallibility in Expounding Scriptures be an
Invasion of the Prophetic Office of Christ, seeing Infallibility in writing
them was no such thing? Certainly it is more to compose a Writing, than to
understand it: as many can understand Cicero's Speech pro Milone, who cannot
compose such an one. And your old Women pretend to understand several parts of
Scripture, which yet, I think, will scarce undertake to Pen the like.

By this, say you, the whole Authority is devolved on the Church. No more than
it was on S. John when he writ his Gospel, or S. Paul composing his Epistles;
nor so much neither, seeing these were so assisted, as to Compose Holy
Scripture, when the Church only pretends to Expound the Word of God. How does
such an Assistance of the Divine Spirit derogate from the Infallibility of God,
from which it is derived?

But Her Exposition must be admitted, say you, though contrary to the Sense. As
if Infallibility did not exclude all possibility of such a wrested Exposition!
The Infallibility of the Church may slight your Attempts, whilst you are armed
only with such Straws. We have seen your Arguments, let us see your Answers to
ours.

G. B. page 44. The Gates of Hell not prevailing against the Church, Mat.
16.18. proves not the pretense of Infallibility.

Why not, Learned Sir? Not a word of that; but as if you had forgotten what you
were about, you fall upon the English Translation of that Text, which you say,
deserves amendment; and I will leave you to be taught better Manners by your
Fellow Ministers, or your Mother the Kirk of Scotland.

G. B. page 45. The Spirit leading into all truth, Joan. 16.13. advances not
the Cause a whit, since that Promise relates to all Believers.

Here is another Assertion without Proof, as if we were bound to take your
word. Those words are part of the Sermon after the last Supper, at which only
the Apostles were present, and which was directed immediately to them. You
should then give some Reason why they relate to all Believers, although spoken
only to the Apostles.

G. B. The Church's being built on the Rock, Peter, proves nothing for a Series
of Bishops of Rome, seeing the other Apostles were also Foundations.

Answ. If it prove all Bishops together Infallible, firm in Faith as a Rock, it
confounds your Reformation, which is condemned by them all.

G. B. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16.19. import no more, than that
Peter was to open the Gospel.

When you shall give in a Proof, we will consider it; till then I will believe
not you, but Christ, who, (...), adds the Office of the Keys, to open and shut,
not the Gospel, but Heaven, by loosing and binding Sins.

G. B. page 46. It is certain, that Vice as well as Error, is destructive of
Religion. If then there be no Authority for suppressing of Vice, but that same
of the Discipline of the Church, it is not incongruous there be no other
Authority for suppressing of Error, but that same of the Discipline of the
Church.

Answ. It is certain, that both in the old and new Law, several Persons have
been secured against Error, who were subject to Sin. S. Peter was truly
reprehensible, Gal. 2.11.
for a thing he did, not for any thing he writ or preached. The same of David,
of Solomon, etc. For this reason our Blessed Savior commanded Mat. 23.23.
all to follow the Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, because they sat on
the Chair of Moses, but not their Example. So your Question, why God should
provide more against Error in Faith, than against Vice in Manners, can find no
place amongst Catholics, who are taught to adore God's holy Will, even when
they understand it not, and to 2 Cor. 10.5.
Bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. To you, who
think it absurd to deny a Man the use of his Reason in Judging and Diseerning
all things, and submit even Divinely revealed Truths to its Tribunal, to you, I
say, we leave the search of those Depths, and discovery of those Mysteries.

G. B. page 48. I could prove from History that General Councils have erred,
that Popes have been Heretics.

Answ. By what you have done, we may guess what you can do. Your Learning
appears by your Writings, as also your Judgment in using it. We have seen many
Proofs of it, and shall see more in this small Tract. I will add to them one
Instance out of another Work of yours, Observations on the First Canon of the
Apostles, page 66. You prove, that anciently Priests could Administer the
Sacrament of Confirmation, out of the First Canon of the First Council of
Orange. When it is evident, that That Canon does not give Priests power to
Administer the Sacrament of Confirmation, but commands them to use Chrism in
Baptism: since when every Divine of the First Year knows, that Vertical
Chrismation has been a Ceremony of that First and mysterious Sacrament. Such
Mistakes as these, are incident to such as are bred in a Congregation where
Ceremonies are abrogated.

G. B. page 49. We are not the Servants of Men, nor bound to their Authority;
for none can be a Judge, but where he has Power to Try and to Coerce. Now none
but God can search our Hearts, so none but he can be Judge.

Answ. The Independent and Quaker, and all who endure with regret Prince and
Prelate, Canon and Civil Law, under pretense of Evangelical Liberty, will thank
you for this.

CHAP. XIV. Of Merits.
G. B. p. 50. IF any have derogated from the value of the Satisfaction of that
Lamb of God, they have offered the utmost Indignity to the highest Love, and
committed the Crime of the greatest Ingratitude imaginable.

Answ. Transeat totum, what then?

G. B. Who would requite the most unconceivable Love with such a sacrilegious
Attempt?

Answ. None that I know of. But, say you, how guilty are they of this, who
would set the Merits and Works of Men, in an equality with the Blood of God?

Answ. I know none such; if you do, point them out for Punishment; no Catholic
is concerned in them.

G. B. page 51. It is true, this Doctrine of Merit is so explained by some of
that Church, that there remains no ground of quarrelling it; except for the
Terms sake, which is indeed odious and improper, tho early used by the Ancients
in an innocent Sense. But many of that Church acknowledge there can be no
Obligation on God by our Works, but that which his own Promise binds upon him.

Answ. Here is one of the malicious Sleights of you and your Brethren, when you
cannot with any color accuse the Doctrine of our Church, to pretend it is only
the Doctrine of some few Persons, that you may persuade your Disciples the
generality of Catholics hold the contrary. The Council of Trent contains what
all Catholics Subscribe to? and this is the Doctrine of that Council in this
Point. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 16. Been operantibus usque in finem, and in
Deo sperantibus proponenda est vita aeterna, and tanquam gratia filiis Dei per
Christum Jesum misericorditer promissa; and tanquem merces ex ipsius Dei
promissione bonis ipsorum operibus, and meritis fideliter reddenda. To those
who persevere in good Works even to the end of this Life, and who hope in God,
Life everlasting is proposed, both as Grace mercifully promised to the adopted
Children of God through Jesus Christ our Lord; as also as a Reward due, in
virtue of the Promise of God, to their good Works and Merits. What can you say
against this Doctrine? Is it not that very Doctrine which you say is Innocent,
and that there is no ground of quarrelling it? We do not believe the greatest
Good we can produce, can bind God, without, 1. His own Promise; 2. The Merits
of Christ. Why may not this suffice you?

But the Term is odious, say you. Why so? Seeing by ancient Fathers, and modern
Divines, by the Primitive and present Church, it is used in an innocent Sense,
why may not the Catholic Church using that word in a good Sense, qualify the
Odium, and correct it? What if not only in Fathers or Councils, but in
Scripture it self, that Term be found (at least equivalently?) will not that
reconcile you to this Term? Now so it is: for Merit and Reward are Correlatives
Romans 11.6.
which cannot be separated, according to Philosophy. Now a Reward is promised
in Scripture Mat. 5.12.
to those who are reviled, and persecuted, and calumniated, (as we are by you
and your Brethren, in such sly malignant Hints) wherefore we do merit in
suffering such Calumnies. And S. Paul assures a Reward 1 Cor. 9.17.
was due to himself for Preaching willingly. His willingly Preaching was then
meritorious.

When the Reader saw those Tragical Declamations, no doubt but he expected no
less than some Doctrine destructive of Christianity, and that Religion lay
gasping. Parturiunt montes, natus est ridiculus mus. All the fright you were
in, was raised from one word, which you your self say has an innocent Sense.
And we say, that That very Sense is what the R. Catholic Church intends by it.
So you have a Remedy for your groundless Apprehension.

CHAP. XV. Of temporal Punishment due to Sin forgiven.
G. B. p. 54. ADD the Distinction of the temporal and eternal Punishment Sin
deserves: the later is removed by the Blood of Christ, the former must be
expiated by our selves, either by Sufferings in this Life, or in Purgatory.

Answ. We hold indeed a temporal Pain due to Sin after it is remitted,
sometimes, not always. For when Sin is remitted by Baptism, or by a perfect Act
of Contrition, we believe all Pain to be remitted with the Sin; but not
ordinarily. And for this reason the Church at all times made a difference
betwixt those whose Sins were expiated by the Sacrament of Baptism and of
Penance; for she never imposed any Penal Works on Baptized Persons: and never
omitted imposing them on Penitents. Which short hint points out such a cloud of
Witnesses testifying this Truth, that it covers the whole Face of the Primitive
Church, and so covers it, as to discover its Doctrine to be the same with ours.

Nothing can be more clear to confirm this Catholic Doctrine, then that a
temporal Penalty was inflicted on David 2. Reg. 12.14.
for that Sin, which upon his crying Peccavi, had been removed, put away, or
forgiven. A Penalty therefore or Penance may be inflicted for a Sin forgiven,
and consequently a Pain is due sometimes to it.

Indeed were it not so, why did our Forefathers impose large Penances, after by
virtue of the Keys the Sins were remitted? why do you blame us for imposing
small Penances, when there is, as you say here, none at all due?

G. B. page 54. This is contrary to the value we set on the Blood of Christ.
Ephesians. 2.15, 16. By Christ Peace is made, we are reconciled to God, he presents
us to the Father without spot, wrinkle, etc. which declare how plenary his
Satisfaction was, nothing being left undone by him for removing the guilt of
sin. Thus you. As if nothing could be required on Man's side, in order to apply
the Satisfaction of Christ, without derogating from its plenitude! Christ's
Satisfaction was plenary: so was his Prayer, his Grief, his Suffering. Yet we
must pray for our selves Matt. 6.12.
, and for one another, Jac. 5.16
although he prayed for us all. And we must be sorry for our Sins, the whole
course of the Gospel requires it of us; and we must suffer for and with him.
For as in order of Nature that Action of the prime Cause, by which it concurs
with Creatures, is sufficient of it self to produce the whole Effect, yet
nothing is done without the concourse of secondary Causes, which apply the
Action of the first: so the Satisfaction of Christ is sufficient for all, yet
does not remit our sins actually, without it be applied to us, either by
Baptism, or Penitential Works. And the necessity of this Application by Faith,
is owned by all your Reformers: And if this is consistent with that Fullness,
why not Application by Faith and Charity?

You say, This is a comfortless Doctrine.

Answ. It is our Duty to take the Doctrine of Christ as we find it in holy Writ,
and to teach others what we take thence, being assured, that whether it he, or
be not comfortable, it is wholesome unto everlasting Life. And such is that
Doctrine, which makes us punish in our selves our offenses, and by that means
prevent those punishments which God would otherwise inflict upon us: it makes
us work our salvation with Phil. 2.12.
fear and trembling; it causes sorrow according to God, which brings forth
Penance unto 2 Cor. 7.10.
salvation which is stable. It is a Doctrine proportioned to the present state
of Man, this being a state of Banishment and Penance, where fear, and
trembling, and sighs, and tears, and fasting, and prayer, and watches, are his
lot, and must ground his security as to the main chance, which is the only
thing can give him real and substantial comfort, in this vale of miseries. He
must conform to his pattern Jesus suffering, and 1 S. Pet. 2.21.
follow his footsteps. He carried his cross, and invites us to take up ours,
and follow him Mat. 16.24.
; but does not advise us to leave it, as if carrying his own were sufficient
for both him and us. In fine; notwithstanding all the suffering of Christ for
us, we must here sow with tears, Psalm. 125.6.
if we will there reap with joy. Christ himself was to suffer Luc. 24.26.
, and so to enter into his Glory. And we must suffer with him 2 Timothy 2.12.
, if we expect to reign with him. This, this is the Doctrine of Christ, and the
Spirit of the Gospel; which teaches us to hope in the Merits of Christ, but not
to neglect good works: It shows us, not to presume on his Satisfaction, nor
despair of his Mercy; to walk in hope of his goodness, and fear of our own
faults and frailties; to be thankful for the Merits of Christ, which give all
their value to ours, which of themselves are nothing. In fine, so to honor the
fullness of our Redemption, as (not to foster negligence in our selves, but) to
stir up our selves to imitate our Redeemer in doing and suffering; that so we
might be steadfast and immovable in good, 1 Cor. 15.58.
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that our labor is not in vain

CHAP. XVI. Of Purgatory.
G.B. page 55. begins to treat of Purgatory, and does it so lightly, as if he
feared to burn his Fingers. Yet if he shows less Reading, he shows more Cunning
than his Brethren, E. S. or W. L. who give great advantages to an Adversary, by
fixing a time for the kindling of that purging Fire, which was lighted long
before any determinate time they can fix upon. Mr. Stillingfl. page 654. Not
one of the Fathers affirmed your Doctrine of Purgatory before Gregory the First.
Yet W. L. allows it a much greater Antiquity, page 353. We can find, says he, a
beginning of this Doctrine, and a Beginner too, namely Origin. Thus they differ
among themselves, and as little agree each with himself: for page 348. W. L.
had said, Scarce any Father within the first Three hundred years, ever thought
of it. Which Assertion is contradictory to what he says of Origen's being the
Beginner of it: and it is moreover very rash; for does he think that all the
Fathers of the first three Ages writ down all their thoughts? or that all they
writ is preserved till our days? or that he has seen all that is so preserved?
or remembers all that he has ever seen? But let us leave these Men to
reconcile together their own thoughts, which will be no small nor short labor,
and examine the thing it self: And to come to it, I pass over several slips of
our Adversaries, v.g. W. Laud, page 348. says, that The first Definition of
Purgatory to be believed as a Divine Truth, was made by the Council of
Florence. In which he is mistaken: for Benedict XII. long before that, had
Defined the same.

I prove, that the Primitive Church believed a Purgatory in the most pure
Times, out of the Testimony of three Fathers, S. Hilary, S. Gregory Nyssen, and
S. Austin.

S. Hilary, Hill. in Ps. 118.20.
Ille indefessus ignis obeundus est, subeunda sunt illa expianda a peccatis
animae supplicia. That restress Fire is to be endured; and those Punishments to
be born, which may purge our Souls from Sins.

S. Gregory Nyssen, Greg. orat. de mortuis.
as cited by W. L. page 351. Men must be purged either by Prayers, or by the
Furnace of Purgatory Fire after this Life. Again. A Man cannot be partaker of
the Divine Nature, unless the Purging Fire does take away the Stains that are
in his Soul. Again. After this Life, a Purgatory Fire takes away the Blots, and
Propensity to Evil. W. L. considering these words, ingenuously confesses, they
seem plain. Yet he holds out one Buckler against these two Arrows drawn out of
the Quivers of those Fathers, That they speak of a Purgation of sins; and in
the Roman Church we are taught to believe only a Purgation of the pain due to
sins already forgiven. Now this avails little. 1. Because the Debt of pain may
be, and often is taken for sin, (on which it is grounded) metonimice. 2. He
seems not to understand our Doctrine; for there is no Definition of our Church
obliging us to believe, that there remain no venial sins in Purgatory. Hence
Dr. Kellison, Kellis. in 3, p. tom. 2. p. 611.
late President of the English College of Doway, proves Purgatory to be
prepared First, for those who die with only venial sins. Secondly, for those
who die without any sin, but only without having fully satisfied for the pains
due to sins forgiven. The same reasons are alleged by Dr. Sylvius, Sylvius in
3. p. Suppl. q. 100. p. 356.
where he treats the same Question. And before these, Benedictus XII. in his
Decree Benedictus Deus, has these words: Decernimus animas decedentes cum
veniali aliquo peccato, purgari post mortem, and post purgationem, ante
resumptionem suorum corporum, and judicium generale, post Ascensionem Christi
Domini, fuisse, esse, and futur as esse in coelo. We do declare, that Souls
dying in venial Sin, being purged after their Death, before the general
Resurrection are translated to Heaven. Which Decree you may find in Magno
Bullario, and in Alphons. de Castro verbo Beatitudo. You see, Sir, that there
is nothing in the Purgatory described by those Saints incosistent with what we
are taught to believe of ours. So W. L. or his Squire E. S. must study for
another Evasion.

W. L. cites indeed the Council of Florence to confirm his Answer. But that
place helps only to convince the World how perfunctoriously he read, and
inconsiderately framed his Judgment upon reading: for in the place cited by
him, the Council speaks of Souls dying in the state of Grace, or Charity, Si in
Charitate decesserint: But of their not having any venial sins, not one word,
unless he thinks that all Souls in Grace are free from venial sins, which will
be another proof of his Abilities in Divinity.

My next Proof is taken from St. Angustin, in Enchir. cap. 110. Neque negandum
est, defunctorum ^^imas pietate suorum viventium relevari, cum pro illis
sacrificium mediatoris offertur, vel Eleemosynae in Ecclesia fiunt, sed iis
haec prosunt, qui cum viverent, ut haec sibi postea prodesse possent,
meruerunt. Est enim quidam vivendi modus nec tam bonus, ut non requirat ista
post mortem, nec tam malus, ut ei non prosint ista post mortem. Est vero talis
in bono, ut ista non requirat, and est rursus talis in malo, ut nec his valeat,
cum ex hac vita transierit, adjuvari. Similia habentur l. 21. de Civ. Dei c.
24. It ought not to be denied, that Souls departed are cased by the Piety of
their surviving Friends, when the Sacrifice of our Mediator is offered for
them, or Alms given in the Church. But those are relieved by these helps, who
lived so as to deserve the benefit of them after their death: for there is a
kind of Life neither so good, as not to need them, nor so bad, as not to
receive ease by them. There is another so good, as not to want them, and a
third so bad, as to be incapable of help, even from them. Thus S. Austin.

Where you see, he distinguishes three Places for the Souls departed, as
clearly as Bellarmin or the Council of Trent. One of those so good, as not to
need help by the Suffrages of the Church, such are the Blessed Souls in Heaven.
Another so bad, as to be incapable or unworthy of relief by the Suffrages, such
are the wretched Souls in Hell. A third needing them, and capable of ease from
them, such are Souls in Purgatory.

You see Secondly, clear mention of the Sacrifice of our Mediator, offered by
the Church in his days. What is this, but our Mass? which you may find again
Lib. 10. de Civitat. Dei. cap. 20.

You see Thirdly, this Sacrifice offered for the Dead. And Lastly, you see Alms
given in the Church, for the relief and ease of deceased Friends: How many
Points of our Reformers Catechism does this one place confute! Truly one may
think, either that they invented these Doctrins to spite S. Austin, or that
this great Saint writ that Chapter with a Prophetic Spirit, to convince the
World that your Sentiments are no less opposite to the ancient than to the
modern Church, which both agree in holding out the same Tenets in Faith.

E. Still. page 642. S. Austin delivers his Judgment with such fear and
hesitancy, that any one may easily see, that he was far from making it an
Article of Faith. He may as well say, that the Council of Trent spoke with
hesitancy. He adds: That in S, Austin 's time, many favored Origin 's Opinion,
of the final Salvation of all, at least who died in the Communion of the
Church. But what is this to S. Austin, who condemns that Heretical Opinion, as
he says, and may be seen lib. 21. de Civ. Dei cap. 24. and in the whole Book De
fide and operibus.

But says E.S. St. Austin speaks doubtfully, lib. de fide and operibus cap. 16.
and Enchir. cap. 69. But he should have taken notice, that he speaks in those
places not of Purgatory in it self, but of a particular pain, which we, no less
than he, doubt of. The matter he treats, Enchir. c. 68. is the Grief which Men
feel for the loss of such things which they loved inordinately, and by that
means offended God, although their love to Creatures were not so great as to
withdraw them from the Foundation, Christ. Vrit eum rerum dolor, quas dilexerat
amissarum; sed non subvertit fundamenti stabilitate munitum. Such a Man is
burnt, and tormented with the loss of those things which he loved; yet he is
not quite consumed, because the Foundation stands fast, viz. his Love to
Christ, whom he would stick to, although with loss of other things. Then follows
cap. 69. where he doubts whether such a purging Fire, or Pain as this is, shall
accompany them in the next World; that is, whether Souls departed retain any
disorderly affection to their Possessions in this World, by reason of which the
want of them may be a torment to them, and as it were, burn them. In a like
manner lib. de fide operibus cap. 16. Sive ergo in hac vita tantum, homines
ista patiuntur, says he, sive post hanc vitam talia quaedam judicia
subsequuntur. Whether Men suffer such things only in this Life, or the same
Torments accompany them into the next World. Which is a thing modern Catholics
as much doubt of as S. Austin; yet he, as well as we, might believe most
certainly, what he so positively affirmed in his Manual, Chap. CX.

In vain therefore does E. S. allege, p. 653. the blotting out of those words,
Constat animas post hanc vitam purgari; It is evident that Souls are purged
after this Life. There is enough left in S. Austin's undoubted works to confute
his Error. So the success of that Reformer was like that of Marcion with his
Sponge, who blotted out some parts of Scripture, yet what remained confuted his
Heresy.

As for Holy Scripture, I think the Argument which S. Austin uses, lib. 21. de
Civ. Dei cap. 23. very convincing for Purgatory. It is taken out of the words
of our Savior, Matt. 12.32. It shall be forgiven neither in this world nor in
the next. Whence it follows, that some sins are forgiven in the next world.
Neque enim de quibusdam veraciter diceretur, quod non eis remittatur, neque in
hoc saeculo, neque in futuro saeculo, nisi essent, quibus etsi non in isto,
tamen remittetur in futuro. Aug. l. 21. de Civit. Dei, cap. 24. Now to Mr. G. B.

G. B. page 55. For Purgatory, the Proof from Scripture was only drawn from one
wrested place of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.

Answ. How can you say this, when amongst the Ancients S. Austin uses another
Text, as we have just now seen. And Bellarmin has Nineteen Texts of Scripture,
as your Patriarch W. L. will tell you, page 353.

G. B. The Apostles words contain only a Proverbial form of Speech, to express
the risque they run.

Ans. The Apostle speaks not only of a risque, or hazard, but of an effectual
loss; He shall suffer loss, says he, Verse. 15.

G. B. pap. 55. Many Visions and Apparitions were vouched for the proof of
Purgatory.

Answ. I never saw any vouched for that intent: I am sure neither the Council
of Trent, nor that of Florence, nor Benedict. XII. vouched any such thing for
that intent.

I think not our Divine Faith much concerned in asserting the truth of any
purely Human History; and I think most Apparitions to be such. Yet because
several Protestants, as well as all Atheists, utterly reject all such
Relations, I desire them to read S. Austin, lib. de Cura pro mortuis, cap. 10.
where he says it would be an Impudence to deny them all. Impudenter venire
videbimur, si haec falsa esse rensponderimus. And in his 16. Chap. he says, he
had learnt Non incertis rumoribus, sed testibus certis; Not from uncertain
Rumors, but from undoubted Witnesses, that S. Felix had appeared both to
Citizens and Strangers, during the Siege of Nola.

Had you the same Faith which was then in the Church, you would believe these
things; your denying them, which the Primitive Church and S. Austin believed,
shows you to be animated with a different Faith.

CHAP. XVII. Priestly Absolution.
G. B. p. 60. ANother Art for detracting from the value of Christ's Death, is
the Priestly Absolution.

Answ. This Objection is no Product of your own Wit, you may find it and the
Authors of it together, with an Answer to it, in S. Ambrose, lib. 1. de Poen.
cap. 2. Aiunt Novatiani se Domino defer reverentiam, cui soli remittendorum
criminum potestatem reservant. Imo nulli majorem injuriam faciunt quam qui
volunt ejus mandata rescindere. Nam cum ipse in Evangelio dixerit, quaecunque
ligaveritis: quis est qui eum magis honorat, utrum qui mandatis ejus
obtemperat, an qui resistit? Ecclesia in utroque servat obedientiam, ut
peccatum and alliget, and relaxet. The Novatians (says this Saint) pretend to
honor God, by reserving to him alone the power of forgiving sins. But really
none are more injurious to him, (or wrong him more) than those who break his
Orders. For whereas he in the Gospel said, Whose sins soever you bind; who
honors God more, he who obeys his Commands, by using that Power, or he who
resists them? Now the Church obeys both the Commands, to bind and loose sins,
effectually binding and loosing them. Thus S. Ambrose.

You see, Sir, that our Doctrine now was that of the Church in S. Ambrose's
time; That the Novatians held your Doctrine, and made use of the same pretext as
you do, to defend their Doctrine. The Church, for which S. Ambrose pleads, was
Catholic: so must we be in this, seeing our Doctrine is the same with theirs.
The Novatians in this were Heretics; what are you?

Indeed the words with which our Blessed Savior. Mat. 16.18.
first promised, secondly, Joan. 20.22, 23.
actually communicated that power to forgive, or retain sins, are so express,
that it is the greatest disrespect imaginable so to wrest them, as they must,
to draw them from their natural sense, I desire you to show your Art, and
invent some Speech, which in so few words shall more clearly express this sense
the Catholic Church understands them in.

And as for Fathers, see S. Cyprian in many places, S. Basil. qq. brev. q. 288.
S. Leo Epist. 91. ad Theodorum, Greg. Hom 26. in Evang. Cyril. Alex. lib. 12.
in Joan. But above all, S. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacerd. c. 5. Tom. 3. Edit.
Savell. p. 16. (...). Those who dwell on Earth, says he, are enabled to
dispense the things in Heaven. To them a Power is given, which neither Angels,
nor Archangels enjoy: for to these it was never said, What you shall bind.
Earthly Princes have power to cast into Prison, but their Power is restrained
to Bodies only. Whereas the Bond we speak of, reaches the Soul, and Heaven it
self, insomuch as what Priests do below, God ratifies above: and the Lord
confirms the Sentence of the Servant. And what is this, but to have put into
their hands all Power to dispose of Heaven? whose sins you forgive, are
forgiven: and whose sins you retain, are retained, What Power can be greater
than this? God the Father has given all Power to Judge to the Son, and the Son
has communicated all that same Power to Priests. Thus the glorious Saint.

You see, Sir, the Grounds of our Belief in this Point, the clear words of our
Lord, Joan. 20.23.
Whose soever sins you remit, they are remitted unto them; You see the Fathers
and the Primitive Church Explicating those words as we do; You see Novatians
were held for Heretics for understanding those words otherwise; What ground
have you to deny a Truth delivered by Christ to the Apostles, and from them
handed down to us?

G. B. page 62. It was counted a Blasphemy in Christ, when he said, Thy sins
are forgiven thee, which shows it to be Blasphemy in all others, it being an
invasion of his Prerogative.

Answ. Here we have a blasphemous Accusation of the Scribes against Jesus
Christ, opposed against the clear words of Christ, and the meaning of the whole
Church; Nay, their words, although full of malice, and convinced of Falsehood by a
Miracle, are preferred before those of Christ, as being made a Rule by which
his must be interpreted. Thus under pretense of asserting the Authority of
Christ, you overthrow it, as your Brethren ruined their Sovereign, under
pretense of making him a glorious King.

But, say you, Christ cleared himself from the Power was committed to the Son
of Man to forgive sins.

Answ. That same Power given by the Son of Man to the Apostles and their
Successors, does clear us.

G. B. page 61. After a Sinner has gone over his Sins without any sign of
remorse, and told them to a Priest, he enjoins a Penance, and without waiting
that they obey it, he says, I absolve thee; and after this they judge them
selves fully cleansed from Sins.

Answ. Were there Benefices or Preferments established for such as invent
Stories without any ground, I know none in a fairer way to them than your self.
You cannot but know, that we hold Contrition to be an essential part of the
Sacrament, and that he who Confesses without Sorrow, is so far from obtaining
Pardon for the sins past, that we judge him guilty of a new Sacrilege. Consider
a little what you say, if not for Conscience, and the Fear of God, (which you
seem not to regard) at least for your Credit.

G. B. page 61, 62. What can take off more from the value of the Death of
Christ, than to believe it in the power of a Priest to absolve from sin?

Answ. That cannot take from the value of that Sacred Passion, upon which it is
built. By Baptism sins are remitted, without derogating from the value of the
Death of Christ. The same of Absolution. Because in both these Sacraments the
Merits of the Passion are applied, to cleanse our Souls in such a manner as
Christ has ordained, and by Authority derived from him. In Civil Matters, as
no Man can lawfully take upon himself the Authority, and exercise the Function
of a Judge, without a Commission from the King; So it is no less unlawful to
refuse due Obedience to Judges lawfully Commissionated. We have a lawful
Commission in the Gospel, and we stick to that, till we see better Grounds to
vacate it, than such frivolous Reasons as you bring.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Penances, Fasting, Prayer, and Pilgrimages.
G. B. p. 62. ADD the Scorn put on Religion, by the Penances enjoined for sin:
abstaining from Flesh, pattering over Prayers, repeating the Penitential
Psalms, going to such Churches and Altars, with other ridiculous Observances
like these, which cannot but kill the Vitals of true Religion. And who can have
any sad apprehensions of sin, who is taught such an easy way of punishment?

Answ. Experience shows us whether Practice preserves more the Vitals of
Religion, yours, or ours: And I am persaaded, I shall have occasion before we
part, to give you a Prospect not very pleasing, of the Piety of your
Proselytes; who, as S. Paul said, 2 Timothy 3.13. Proficiunt in pejus, have waxed
worse and worse, ever since your Brethren have had the Direction of them. But
what are these Observances which move you to Laughter? Fastings, Prayers, and
Pilgrimages; so much recommended, and even commanded in both old and new Law,
sometimes in Scripture, often in Councils and Fathers, and confirmed by the
Practice of the Church through all Ages. These things seem ridiculous to this
Democritus, a new Man, as much a Stranger to true Piety, as his Education has
been to Prayers, Fasting, and Pilgrimages, as far as appears by his Works. That
he should thus deride all Penitential Works, designed either to punish our past
offenses, or prevent those to come: to reconcile us to our Creator, or to rivet
us to him: when St. Paul, the chosen Vessel, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the
Doctor of the Gentiles separated from his mothers womb, and called unto Grace,
Gal. 1.15.
when he, I say, chastized his Body, and brought it under subjection, 1 Cor.
9.27.
lest Preaching to others, he became himself a Reprobate. What means did he use
for his security to mortify his Body, but those this good Man counts
Ridiculous Observances, viz. Fasting and Prayer, and the like; We are sure he
was animated with the Spirit of God; what Spirit animates you?

SECTION I. Fasting.
AS for Fasting, our Blessed Savior Fasted Mat. 4.2.
forty days and forty nights. He foretells his Disciples Mar. 2, 20.
fasting when the Bridegroom should be taken from them.; that is, after his
Ascension. He directs us how to Fast, and promises a Reward Mat. 6.17
to our Fastings, when duly performed. He teaches that Fasting Mat. 17.20 and
Mar. 9.29.
gives us a power over the Devils.

When any Work of great moment was to be done, Fasting was used Acts 13.2.
. As the Disciples, or Apostles ministered to the Lord, and Fasted, the Holy
Ghost said. With Fasting Acts 14.23.
and Prayer S. Paul and S. Barnabas were Consecrated A postles: These, with
Fasting and Prayers 2 Cor. 6.5.
ordained Bishops in every Church. And S. Paul several times speaks of his
Fastings; 2 Cor. 11.27.
In watchings, in fastings. Again, In hunger and thirst, in fastings often.

What was the Practice of the Christians of the Second Age, Tertllian will
teach us, Apolog. page 40. cap. 71, where having reproached the Pagans with
their Feastings in Times of Public Calamities, he represents the contrary Life
of Christians. Nos vero jejuniis aridi, and omni continentia expressi, ab omni
vitae fruge delati, in sacco and cinere volutantes, invidia coelum tundimus,
Deum tangimus, and cum misericordiam extorserimus, Jupiter honoratur. You
Feast, says he, but we dried up with Fasting, living in perfect Continency,
abstaining from all Contents of this Life, prostrate in Sackcloth and Ashes,
charge Heaven with the Odium of afflicting Persons so much afflicted; and when
we have by these Penitential Works forced God to take pity of the World,
Jupiter is honored by you.

For the third Age, see what Moses Maximus and other Confessors required of
Penitents; Jejunio extenuari, that they should grow lean with Fasting.

All the subsequent Ages give as many Testimonies to the Duty and Advantages of
Fasting, as there are are of any Work of Piety. This the Fathers teach in their
Sermons, the Bishops commanded in their Canons, the faithful Practice in their
Lives, and all recommend by their Example. Nay, Protestants themselves own this
Truth. The Author of the Duty of Man, Sunday 5. n. 34. To this Duty of
Repentance, says he, Fasting is very proper to be annexed; the Scripture
usually joins them together. If you desire to know the Fruits of Fasting, S.
Thom. 2.2. q. 147. a. 1. names three. 1. To mortify and curb our Bodies. 2. To
raise our Mind to Heavenly things. 3. To punish in our selves the ill use of
some Creatures, by depriving our selves of the use of others. A fourth Reason
is, to increase Merit, Grace and Glory. Virtutem largiris, and praemia, says
the Church, in Praef. Quad.

SECTION II. Prayer.
PRayer being a raising of our Souls to God, it exposes our Understanding to
the Divine Light, and places our Will in the warmth of Divine Love: Wherefore
nothing can be more efficacious to clear our Mind from its Ignorance and
Darkness, nor to purge our Will from its depraved Affections and Passions. It
is a Key which opens the Treasure of God's Mercy, and opens our Heart to
receive its Effects. It is a River of Benediction, whose Waters cleanse our
Soul from its Imperfections, moisten our Heart, make our good Purposes bud
forth and flourish, and fill our Will with the Fruits of Virtue.

It is often recommended in Scripture, See, Mar. 13.33.
watch, and pray. Pray Mat. 26.41.
that you enter not into tentation. Luc. 16.8.
You must always pray, and never faint.

All Places and all Times are fit for Prayer: God limits neither, but promises
to hear us always. Ask, and you shall receive. Whatsoever you shall ask my
Father in my name, he will grant it you.

Particularly Remission of Sins is annexed to it. Hear S. Austin, Enchir. c.
71. De quotidianis, brevibus, levibusque peccatis sine quibus haec vita non
ducitur, quotidiana oration fidelium satisfacit: Eorum est enim dicere, Pater
noster qui es in coelis, qui jam Patri tali regenerati sunt ex aqua and Spiritu
sancto. Delet omnino haec Oration minima, and quotidiana peccata. Delet and
illa, a quibus vita fidelium scelerate etiam gesta, sed poenitentia in melius
mutata discedit; si quemadmodum veraciter dicitur: Dimitte nobis debita nostra,
Ita veraciter dicatur, sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris: Id est si
fiat quod dicitur. The daily Prayers of the Faithful satisfy for those daily,
light, and small sins, which are incident to all in this Life, (these we call
Venial Sins); for it belongs properly to those to say, Our Father, which art in
Heaven, who are regenerated by Water and the Holy Ghost to such a Father. This
Prayer blots out little sins. It has a virtue also to carry away the guilt of
greater sins, (in those who are repentant of them) provided they as truly
forgive, as they ask to be forgiven; that is, they do what they say.

Sir, how different was S. Austin's Judgment from yours? He thought those
Prayers efficacious to blot out venial, and even mortal sins; and you think the
prescribing them Ridiculous.

Saying the Penitential Psalms is an Object of Laughter to you. Were there any
Church Discipline among you, or had your Prelates any true Zeal for any part of
Devotion, you would be forced to change your note, the saying the Psalms being
the only part of Devotion which you retain. But it seems, Writing against
Popery has a Virtue to sanctify all Impiety, as acting against it did excuse
all Sacrilege. I never heard any Man moved to Laughter with reading the Psalms,
and I have known many moved by them to Compunction, to a new Life, and to the
Love of God. Let S. Austin (who experienced it himself) speak, lib. 9. Confess.
cap. 4. Dulce mihi sit, o Domine, confiteri tibi, quibus internis me stimulis
perdomueris, and quemadmodum me complanaveris humiliatis montibus, and collibus
cogitationum mearum, and tortuosa mea direxeris, and aspera lenieris, quas
tibi, Deus meus, voces dedi, cum legerem Psalmos David, cantica fidelia and
sonos pietatis, excludentes turgidum spiritum. Quas tibi voces dabam in Psalmis
illis, and quomodo in te inflammabar ex eis, and accendebar eos recitare, si
possem toto orb terrarum adversus typhum generis humani. I take a delight, O
my Lord, to confess to thee, with what inward Goads thou did subdue me, and
by what Means thou did bring me down, levelling the greater and lesser
Mountains of my Thoughts! How thou did streighten my crookedness, and smooth
my roughness! Into what Exclamations did I break out, O my God, when I read the
Psalms of David, those faithful Canticles, those pious Sounds, which banish all
proud Spirits! How I cried out in reading them! How I was inflamed in the love
of thee, and how I was stirred up to read them, if possible, to the whole
World, as a sovereign Antidote against the Pride of Mankind! Thus S. Austin.

See what a difference there is betwixt the Sentiments of this great Saint, and
yours. Reading the Psalms moved the Saint to Compunction; it moves you to
Laughter. It stirred up in the Saint the Love of God; you are not moved to any
good by it. The Saint would read them to all the World; you are displeased they
are recommended to any. He thought reading them a great Antidote against the
Pride of Mankind, which is the root of all Evil; and you say it is Ridiculous.
You have reason to suspect your spirit, which is found so often contrary to the
Spirit of God.

SECTION III. Pilgrimages.
THIS is a third Instance of our ridiculous Penances, going to such Churches,
say you. Which discovers your Ignorance or Impiety: For if you know not on what
ground Pilgrimages are founded, you are very Ignorant; If you know it, and yet
blame them, you are very Impious.

The two first great sins committed after the Creation of the World by Adam, in
eating the forbidden Fruit, and Cain, in killing his Brother, were Judged by
their Creator, and a great part of their Penance prescribed by that Great
Penitentier, was a Pilgrimage, or Banishment, from the Place where the sin was
committed. Of Adam it is said, Genesis 3.23.
He sent Adam out of the Garden of Eden. And to Cain, Genesis 4.12.
A fugitive and vagabond shall thou be on the Earth. Now Rhabanus Maurus
Poenitentialis cap. 11.
assures, that this is the ground why such a Penance was enjoined. And methinks
the Example of God himself may be a sufficient Warrant for his Delegates,
Priests, in following such a Precedent, and secure them against your Censure;
especially seeing in the most ancient Collections of Penitential Canons made by
Bid, Theodorus, Burchardus, Ivo, and Gratian, we find Pilgrimages prescribed
amongst other Penances. Which shows the unanimous Consent of Antiquity. And you
may much easilier discover your own Weakness, or lack of Virtue, than convince
the Makers or Collectors of those Canons of Folly.

The Reasons for this Penance are chiefly three. First, It is a kind of
Banishment, which separates a Man (for a time) from Friends, Acquaintance, Home
and Country: which cannot but be painful, laying aside the Incommodities of
Traveling. And it seems just, that he who abused those things, should be
deprived of the comfort of them; and having scandalized his Neighbors by bad
Example, might edify them by undergoing this public Penance.

The Second, It is a connatural Remedy for such sins, (to which two or more
concur, and which proceed many times from the Person we converse with, or
present Occasion) to remove the Sinner from such Occasions and Conversations;
as all know, who deal with Consciences. Now this is done by Pilgrimages.

The third Reason is, That although God be in all Places, and sees and hears us
wheresoever we are; yet he does not alike in all Places disclose his Power by
Miracles, nor his Justice by discovering secret Sins, nor his Goodness by
Conversion of Sinners, as S. Austin observed long since, and daily experience
confirms. S. Austin notes such to have been in his time the Tomb of S. Felix at
Nola in Campania, and that of the glorious Martyrs at Milan. He refers this to
the secret Judgment of God, humbly acknowledging his own Ignorance. Aug. Epist.
137. Vbique quidem Deus est, and nullo continetur vel includitur loco, qui
omnia condidit. Verum tamen ad ista quae hominibus nota sunt, quis potest ejus
consilium perscrutari, quare in aliis locis haec miracula fiant, in aliis non
fiant? And I am content to acknowledge my ignorance in imitation of him, when
nothing appears in the place it self, as sometimes there does. For if any Man,
who has any lively Faith within him, should enter Jerusalem, and see the
Place where the Lamb of God was Sacrificed, and the Price of our Redemption
paid; Innocence condemned, the Divine Wisdom derided for Folly, the King of
Glory crowned with Thorns, the Creator scoffed, scorned by his Creatures, God
dying, and dying that painful and ignominious Death of the Cross. When he
should think, Here his Flesh was torn with Stripes; Here his Head was crowned
with Thorns; Here those Hands, which wrought so many Miracles, were pierced
with Nails; here those Feet, so often wearied in seeking the lost Sheep, were
fixed to the Cross; Here that Tongue, which had command over the Elements, and
Death and Hell, was imbued with Vinegar and Gall; Here his Side was opened, the
last drop of Blood spilt, the Life of the World died, to raise to Life the
World. When he considers this, and withal, that his own sins had so great a
share in requiring this most abundant Redemption, will not the very Place
suggesting these and more thoughts, fix his Imagination, quicken his Fancy,
detain his Understanding, and stir up his Will, to a hatred of Sin, the cause
of all this severe Judgment upon the unspotted Lamb; to confusion, for having
contributed so much to it by his own Offenses; and to love God above all
things, who has loved us so much.

Hereafter, before yot throw such hard Stones at our Heads, consider whether
there be not with us mingled, by a communion of Sentiments, some Persons to
whom you must own great Respect to be due.

I have brought you here into an Assembly of the chiefest Preachers and
Prelates of all Ages, all teaching, commanding, or practicing these Works which
you deride. The Apostles take up the first rank, and over all Jesus Christ, God
blessed for evermore, Presiding, and giving Example. Suppose in the name of all
these S. Basil, S. Austin, or S. Paul the Apostle should thus speak unto you:

How comes it to pass, that you presume to censure in those of your Days, that
which they practice only in Imitation of us? How dare you say, that our
Exercises should kill the Vitals of Religion, and dull the Apprehensions of
Sin? That what Christ did himself, and what is done by others following his
footsteps, should lead from Christ, and hinder the earnest Application to him?

What Answer can you make to these true Reproaches? Think a little sadly on
this, and it will bring you to a Temper more beseeming your Coat, than when you
writ what I have here Answered.

SECTION IV. Two Objections Answered.
G. B. p. 63. THIS is an easy way of escaping Punishment.

Answer. Can you never settle your Judgment? will you let it ever be moved
round with every blast of Wind? Here our way to expiate Sins is too easy. Page
144. it is a heavy yoke to Souls. When you have experienced them, fasting with
Bread and Water for many Days a Week, said devoutly every Day some Prayers,
gone long Pilgrimages on foot, taken Disciplines, worn Hair-Shirts and Chains,
served the Sick in Hospitals, and the Prisoners in Goals, given Alms to the
Poor, watched, etc. When, I say, you have tried these for some Months, if you
continue in your Opinion, that our way of expiating Sins, is Easier then yours,
I shall think your common Sense equal to your Piety, and admire both alike.

G. B. ibid. The Papists endeavor to give a pleasant taste to their Penances:
wherefore to the Grave and Melancholy we give of one sort; to the Fiery and
Sullen, of another; to the Jovial, a third, etc.

Answ. Here you deliver a Dream as a certain Truth: Cite the Council, name the
Author, of such a Practice? If you can name none, as I am sure you cannot, own
your self the Inventer of this, which is to say, a Calumniator.

CHAP. XIX. Sacrifice of the Mass.
G. B. p. 64. ANother opposition made to the Priestly Office of Christ, is
their conceit of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which they believe is a Formal
Expiation of Sins both for the Living and Dead, who are in Purgatory.

Answ. You fall so often, that it would tire any Man to take you up always. It
is not true, that Catholics hold Mass to be a Formal Expiation of Sins. Vnica
causa formalis; The only Formal Cause of our Justification, says the Council of
Trent, Sess. 6. cap. 7. is the Justice of God, by which he makes us just. That
is, it is habitual Grace or Charity. But let that pass.

We say with the Fathers, that Mass is an Expiatory Sacrifice. S. Austin,
Enchir. cap. 110. following his Distinction of Souls deceased, into three
Classes, those in Heaven, those in Purgatory, and those in Hell, he says, that
Masses for the first are Thanksgivings; for the second, Expiations,
Propitiationes sunt; for the third, not ease to the Dead, but some comfort to
their living Friends. Pro valde bonis, gratiarum actiones sunt; pro non valde
malis, propitiatione sunt: pro valde malis, etsi nulla adjumenta mortuorum,
qualescunque vivorum consolationes sunt. Enchir. cap. 110.

To clear yet more this Point of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and of Christ
offered, and offering himself in it, hear S. Austin, lib. 10. de Civit. Dei,
cap. 20. Verus ille Mediator in quantum formam servi accipiens, mediator
effectus est Dei and hominum, homo Christus Jesus, cum in forma Dei sacrificium
cum Patre sumat, cum quo and unus Deus est, tamen in forma servi sacrificium
maluit esse, quam sumere, ne vel hac occasion quisquam existimaret cuilibet
sacrificandum esse creaturae. Per hoc and Sacerdos est, ipse offerens, ipse and
oblatio. Cujus rei Sacramentum quotidianum esse voluit Ecclesiae sacrificium.
The true Mediator, by taking upon himself the shape of a Servant, being made
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who together with his
Father (with whom he is one God) as God receives Sacrifice, but as a Man will
have no Sacrifice offered to himself, to cut off all pretense of Sacrificing to
any but God. In this Sacrifice he is the Priest, he is the Sacrificer, and he
is himself the Sacrifice. (Or he is the Person who offers, and he is the
Oblation.) And he has ordered the Sacrifice of the Church, as a daily
Commemoration or Sacrament of that Sacrifice of the Cross. Thus he.

Where you see a Sacrifice of the Church, as a daily Commemoration of that of
the Cross; That Christ offers it; That he himself is offered in it, and all this
to God, no Sacrifice being offered to any else.

If you are so hard to please, as to be satisfied with none but those of your
Communion, see W. L. page 305. where he owns a Commemorative Sacrifice to be
instituted by Christ. And Montague, in his Appeal 2. p. c. 29. acknowledges a
Representative, Commemorative, and Spiritual Sacrifice. And your Bishop of Ely,
Resp. ad Apolog. Bellar. p. 184. admits likewise a Commemorative Sacrifice.

G. B. page d. 6. and 65. To imagine that the Priests going through the Office
of the Mass, and his receiving the Consecrated Elements, can have a virtue to
expiate the Sins of others, especially of the Dead, is a thing so contrary to
most common Impressions, that it will puzzle a Man's Belief to think any can
credit it.

Answ. Your common Impressions differ very much from those of other Men; so you
have much reason to suspect, that they are only common in name, but in reality
they are only private Conceits of your own Head. The Catholic Church believes
what you think none believes; S. Austin believed it, all Catholics profess it,
our Councils define it, our Catechisms teach it, our Pulpits preach it, and our
Pastors proclaim it. Yet you would fain persuade the World no body believes it,
that the thing is incredible. As if you knew better what passes in our Hearts
than we our selves. But if this be not an honest way, it is at least, cunning,
to take for granted what you cannot prove; and it is easier to find a Slight
to steal into your weak Readers Opinions, than to gain it by any substantial
Reason.

G. B. ibid. The Priests receiving the Consecrated Elements cannot avail
another.

Answ. We do not believe the Passion of Christ to be applied by the Priests
taking the Host, but by the essential part of the Sacrifice, which consists in
another Action.

G. B. page 65. It is absurd to think one Man's Action can be derived to
another.

Answ. An Article of our Faith must then be absurd, viz. The Communion of
Saints; which imports a mutual communication of good works amongst the Members
of the Church, the mystical Body of Christ. See Pearson in Exposit. Symboli p.
714. where he proves it out of 1 Jo. l. 7. If we walk in the light, we have
fellowship with one another. The Greek say, (...), Communication with one
another. And out of Col. 2.19. Holding the head, from which all the body by
joints and bands having nourishmeut ministered and knit together, increases
with the increase of God. So that, as in a natural Body all parts do
communicate to one another their nourishment, in the Philosophy of the Apostle;
so in his Divinity all parts of the mystical Body, the Church, communicate
their good works. What say you, Sir? how like you your Censure, which involves
an Article of the Apostles Creed, and two Apostles? Have I not reason to
admonish you, to regard where you shoot your Bolts, and throw your Stones, for
that they can scarce light on any place of our Doctrine, or on us, without
hitting the Apostles and the Holy Ghost, and many times those Points of Faith
which you your self admit.

G. B. page 65. It clearly appears from the Institution of the Lord's Supper,
that its End was the joint Communicating of Believers.

Answ. It clearly appears, that you little regard what you say. The Primary End
of its Institution, and indeed that which only is specified by our Savior, is
to be a Commemoration of his Passion, and the Sacrifice of the Cross, Do this
in memory of me. As for the joint Communion, it can only be a secondary
Intention of the Institution, the first and chief being our union with Christ,
out of which flows the second, our union amongst our selves. As Lines in a
Circle meet in the Center, and so knit together.

CHAP. XX. Regal Office of Christ; where, of Transubstantiation, Dispensing in
Vows, ande.
G. B. p. 66. I Advance to the opposition made to the Regal Office of Christ.
And first, How far is it from his Glory in Heaven to believe, that five words
muttered by a Priest, should put him under the Elements? This is a new kind of
Humiliation.

Answ. You are very much mistaken, if you think Humiliations inconsistent with
the Regal Office of Christ. Heb. 1.7.
When God brought his first-begotten into the world, he said, And let all the
Angels of God worship him. Yet he was then humbled to the condition of a Man, a
private obscure Man, and even below it, ( Psalm. 21.7.) Opprobrium hominum and
abjectio plebis. Certainly there is more show of Majesty, as he is placed on
our Altars, enrironed with Lights, adored by the People, Prelates and Princes,
the greatest Monarchs laying their Crowns, and the greatest Bishops their
Crosiers and Miters at his Feet, than as he was in the little Cottage of his
reputed Father a Carpenter, picking Chips at his Mothers command, or following
his Father's Trade to get a Subsistence, known to none, regarded by none,
slighted by all, as is ordinary to Men of that humble Calling. And what shall I
say of the Death of the Cross, when his very Disciples disowned him?

G. B. page 67. What low thoughts of his Person must it breed in such Minds as
are capable of believing this Contrivance?

Answ. You speak like a Pagan, to whom the Cross of Christ is folly, (1 Cor.
1.23.) rather than like a Christian, to whom Christ crucified (that is, under
the greatest Humiliation) is the virtue and wisdom of God. We who have learnt
to look on him as God blessed for evermore, even when on the Cross and dying,
we can take out of all his Humiliations occasion to admire his Love, and adore
his Goodness to us; but not to disesteem his Person, or diminish our thoughts
of his Majesty. And let me tell you, you are the first Christian, I know of,
who ever made such Unchristian Reflections on the Humiliations of the Son of
God.

G. B. page 67, 68, 69, and 70. In these you charge us with three Crimes. 1.
With adding to the Laws of Christ. 2. Dispensing with the Laws of God. And 3.
Commanding things indifferent, contrary to Christian Liberty. I answer to the
First and Third, the Apostles did the same, ( Acts 15.29.) forbidding strangled
Meat and Blood, which were things indifferent, and not forbidden by the Law of
Christ. And as to your Objection, that this intrenches upon Christian Liberty,
I Answer out of a Person very dear to you, even your self, in your Vindication,
Confer. 2. p. 172. Christian Liberty is stated in an Exemption from the Laws of
Moses. Show that we impose the Law of Moses, and you will say something to the
purpose, to our entrenching upon Christian Liberty.

As for Dispensing in Divine Laws, when you prove what you object, I will
consider what to answer. Your Instances are not sufficient. For first, as for
Dispensing of Vows, there is an (...) in them, as in Laws, which is an
Interpretation of some Circumstances, in which they do not oblige. For Example,
a Man vows to fast next Lent with Bread and Water, and before that time falls
sick, and continues so, why may not the Church declare his Vow not to oblige,
or change it into something else? Item he vows a Pilgrimage, and his Wife,
Family and Affairs require his presence at home. If this does not satisfy you,
call to mind the Proceedings of your first Reformers, who opened all Cloisters,
and dispensed with so many Vows at one time. Is it not strange, that you should
charge us with Dispensing with some Vows, when you annul all.

Secondly, Dissolving Wedlock Bond. I know none who practice dissolving
consummated Marriages. If you do, accuse them; if you do not, ask pardon for
this false Accusation.

Thirdly, Allowing Marriages in forbidden Degrees. The Degrees hindering
Marriage were contained in the Ceremonial Law, which expired with Christ, the
end of that Law. Those which now bind, are established by Canon Law, which was
made, and does depend on the Church.

Fourthly, The Communion under one Kind, or, The Chalice taken from the People
contrary to the Command of Christ. You can never prove that Command to all, to
drink of the Cup.

G. B. page 71. Another Invasion of the Regal Power, is the Pope's pretense to
be universal Bishop, which is termed by S. Gregory the Great to be
Antichristian.

Answ. I know no Pope who pretends to it, I know none who give it them: If
there be any such, let them answer for themselves. The Popes are so far from
pretending to that Title, that to this day in our Canon Law it is expressly
condemned. C. Nullus, and C. Ecce, D. 99. And I challenge you, or any Man else,
to show me any one Pope, who ever required it of others, or took it to himself.
Du-Val, a Learned Doctor of Sorbon, censures that Title as severely as any
Protestant can do, who yet is esteemed as great a Favorer of the Papal
Grandeur, as any of the Faculty of Paris.

Now I desire you to make good Sense of something you say. First, page 67.
Christ has delivered us from the bondage of corruption. How is this done
already, when the Apostle, (whose words those are, Romans 8.21.) promises it only
after the Resurrection.

Secondly, page 68. Anathema is the mildest of the Spiritual Censures we
thunder against such as comply not with our tyranny. What Spiritual Censure is
more severe? I think that the severest of all, as we believe after Tertul.
Apolog. cap. 39. page 68.

Thirdly, p. 69. No Authority besides Christ can reach the Conscience. S. Paul
was of a different opinion, when he enjoins Obedience to the Commands of
Princes, not only for wrath, but for Conscience.

CHAP. XXI. Of Love, and its two Species. Repentance. Mortal and Venial Sins,
Attrition and Contrition.
G. B. p. 75. I Proceed to the Third Part of my Enquiry which is the opposition
made to the great Design of Christian Religion, for elevating the Souls of Men
into a participation of the Divine Nature.

Answ. I never knew a Man promise more, and perform less than you. Your Words
and Phrases are great and high, your Reason and Sense low and little; yet that
delivered with so much Confidence as may persuade your ignorant and credulous
Reader you have Reason on your side, when you are to seek in the first
Principles of the Matter you Discourse on. You may with a homely, yet a very
proper Metaphor, be compared to a Flying Ox, whose Wings stretched out, promise
a Flight, but his heavy Body keeps him on the Ground, and his dull Spirits
serve only for a slow Motion there. For let a Man read your Book, observe your
disesteem of others, and your insulting over them, and he shall think you,
Eagle-like, to be towering above the Clouds, whence you with disdain look down
on us poor Ignoramus's. Yet your height is discernible without the help of a
Telescope: For after all your striving, and straining Endeavors, we still find
you on the Ground, equal, nay inferior to many whom you insult over, without
any thing extraordinary, but your boldness to Print in so Learned an Age as
this is, of things you understand not. If what I have written already, and what
I shall write, does not make this clear, I will give you leave to apply that
Comparison to me.

I have already spoken (Chap. 3. and 4.) of the Designs of God in delivering
Christian Religion, that it was to teach Men to serve God in this Life, and
enjoy him in the next. That this Service consisted chiefly in Faith, Hope, and
Charity, yet so as Charity gives a value to the other. In fine, that the End of
the Gospel was to unite us to God by Charity in this World, and by Glory (which
is the last perfection of Charity) in the other,

Love is the root of all our Actions: As Weight Aug. l. 13. Confess. c. 9. Amor
meus, pondus meum, eo feror, quocumque feror. Aug. l. 11. de Civit. Dei, c. 28.
Sicut corpus pondere, ita animus amore fertur quocumque fertur.
in Bodies gives them their Motion toward their Center, so Love in Men; but
with this difference, that Weight is restrained to local Motion, an Action of
one species; but Love (as partaking of the nature of the Soul, whose it is,)
reaches to several, and those of an opposite nature: for all we do, proceeds
from some Love.

All our Passions are only Love in a several disguise Aug. l. 14. de Civ. Dei,
cap. 7.
. Is the thing we love, absent, the love of it is called Desire; is it in
danger to be lost, it is Fear; are we in a probability of attaining it, it is
Hope; is it looked on as irrevocable, it is Despair; are we stirred up to
overcome the Difficulties opposing us, it is Anger; do we possess it, it is
Joy; do we lose it, Love is changed into Grief or Sadness, etc. The same Love
putting on several Dresses, and transforming it self, Proteus like, conformable
to the nature and condition of its Object. So that it would be impossible to
reckon all its Species, which are reduced to some Heads both by Philosophers
and Divines: Philosophers draw it to three Species, according to three sorts of
Good, Honor, Profit, and Pleasure.

But much more to our purpose, is the Distinction of Love used by Divines,
which (in order to a Mortal Life in this World, and Eternal Life in the next)
divides all Mankind, viz. The love of God, and the love of our selves, commonly
called Self-love. We received the love of our selves from Adam, the love of God
from Christ; that is an effect of corrupt Nature, this of repairing Grace; from
that spring out the works of the Flesh, from this grow those of the Spirit;
that ends in Death, this is the Seed of Life. By these two Loves two Cities are
built, Aug. l. 14. de Civit. Dei c. 28. Fecerunt Civitates duas, amores duo,
terrenam scilicet amor sui, usque ad contemptum Dei: coelestem vero amor Dei
usque adcontemptum sui.
Jerusalem and Babylon, Heaven and Hell. In the next World these Loves are
pure: for in Heaven reigns the Love of God without any Self-love; in Hell
Self-love rages without any curb from the Love of God. In this Life they are
commonly mingled, neither so absolutely possessing the Heart of Man, as to
suppress all motion of its Corrival: For even the greatest Sinners feel some
motions to Good, and the greatest Saints must say, Dimitte nobis, Forgive us
our Sins, as we forgive.

And as betwixt the two Brothers in Rebecca's Womb, so betwixt these two Loves
there is a combat within our Breast: For the spirit covets Gal. 1.17.
against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit: and these are contrary to
one another. And this is that perpetual combat which we undergo, by reason of
which this Life is termed Job 7.1. Militia est vita hominis super terram.
a warfare. And Aug. l. 11. de Civit. Dei c. 28. Bonum est homini, ut illo
proficiente quo been vivimus, ille deficiat, quo male vivimus, donec ad
perfectum sanetur, and in bonum commutetur omne quod vivimus.
we are conquered when Self-love prevails over the Love of God; but we conquer,
wuen the Love of God gets the better.

Wherein then does consist the perfection of a Christian? In a Heart pure from
bad Love, not yielding consent to the Motions of Self-love, but resisting them;
and a Heart filled with the Love of God, following in all things the motions of
Divine Grace, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit. And Aug. in Psalm. 64.
Interroget si quisque, quid amet, and inveniet unde sit civis.
could we certainly discover which of the two Loves rules in our Heart, we
should certainly know the state of our Soul. Supposing these Principles, let us
attend to Mr. G. B.

G. B. page 76. Religion elevates the Souls of Men to a participation of Divine
Nature, whereby they being inwardly purified, and the outward Conversations
regulated, the World may be restored to its primitive Innocence, and Men
admitted to an inward, intimate fellowship with their Maker.

Answ. What you say of participation of Divine Nature (2 Pet. 1.4.) is out of
Scripture: likewise our souls being inwardly purified, and our inward
fellowship with God. All which is true, although you neither tell what they mean,
nor understand it your self. But that by Christianity the outward Conversation
should be regulated, or primitive Innocence restored, is alien, or untrue. That
by Christianity outward Conversation is regulated, is alien; orderly
Conversation being a mere external Quality, many times as excellent in Infidels
as Christians. Certainly the perfection of Christianity may be found in
Anchorets, and preserved in a Desert. Whence a good Conversation appears not to
be a very material Ingredient of Perfection. And that Christianity should aim
at restoring the World to its primitive Innocence, is absolutely false: for
that Innocence cannot be attained unto, neither in this Life, nor the next; not
in this, in which the greatest Saints have their Romans 7.
Combats, from which Man in the State of primitive Innocence was free; not in
the next, the State of Glory being above that of Innocence. So neither of these
is the End of Christianity.

G. B. page 76. What Devices are found out to enervate Repentance? Sins must be
divided into mortal and venial.

Answ. From the beginning there has always been observed an inequality of
Sins. I will omit modern Divines which you do not understand, and Councils,
which you regard not. Bid in cap. 5. Jac. distinguishes them, and the manner
to expiate them; which in the Greek Church is still in use. That same is
observed by S. Austin, Enchir. cap. 71. cited above Chap. 18. Sect. 2. The
beloved Disciple (1 John 5.16, 17. speaks of sin unto death, and others not
such. S. Paul (1 Cor. 6.9, 10.) gives a Catalogue of several Sins, which
exclude from Heaven. Did all these concur to devise a way to enervate
Repentance, and that none till Lib. 2. Inst. c. 8. n. 59.
John Calvin should discover the Plot? What, was Christ concerned in this
Device, who distinguishes Sins against the Holy Ghost from others? Whither will
these Men lead us, or go themselves? or what can be secure from those Tongues,
which spare no more the Doctrine delivered by Christ, by the Apostles, or the
Primitive Fathers, than that of Modern Divines? I know all Sins are Offenses
against God; yet I do not, with the Stoics, think all Sins equal, or him as
great a Sinner who speaks an idle Word, as him who kills his own Father. The
contrary Paradoxes may find place, and be admired in Calvin by his deluded
Followers; but certainly no sober Man can approve them.

G. B. page 77. Their asserting, that simple Attrition qualifies Men for the
Sacrament.

Answ. You do more, for you think Attrition sufficient to Justify without the
Sacrament. Page 76. having said, that Repentance and Remission were always
united, you explicate Repentance to be a horror of sin upon the sense of its
native deformity, and contrariety to the Law of God, which makes the Soul
apprehend the hazard it has incurred by it; so as to study by all means
possible to avoid it in all time coming. This is all you say, which any Divine
knows to be only Attrition, as not expressing clearly the only Motive of true
Contrition, Love of God above all things for his only Goodness. Give glory to
God; Is it not true, that you had heard of a Dispute beyond Seas between the
Jansenists and their Enemies, about the sufficiency of Attrition to Justify
with out the Sacrament; And you never would take the pains to examine the
Sentiments of either part, or their Motives, but relied upon the first
apprehension which occurred to you? Your Writings give a probable ground for
this Conjecture.

G. B. page 76. All the Severities enjoined by Papists for Penances, do but
tend to nourish the Life of Sin.

Answ. You may as well say the severity of the Laws against Robbers and
Murderers, the Ax and Halter, tend only to nourish Inclinatinations to rob and
kill. Sure your common Sense is far different from that of others, else you
would never advance these Paradoxes. Neither will it serve your turn, if you
recur to the pecuniary Mulcts enjoined to some: For first, you cannot blame
those without blaming Scripture, which recommends Almsgiving (Dan. 4.24.) as a
means to redeem Sins; Secondly, Because worldly Men are not so willing to part
with their Money; and how generous soever you are, were you to give a Crown for
every Untruth you Print, you would by that pecuniary Mulct not be encouraged to
write as you do.

CHAP. XXII. Theological Virtues.
G. B. p. 78. THAT which is next pressed in the Gospel for uniting the Souls of
Mankind to God, is that noble Ternary of Graces, Faith, Hope, and Love.

Answ. You can never speak so much in commendation of the Theological Virtues
as they deserve; for their Merits surpass all we can say. And if you compare
the least of them with those called Moral Virtues, it will outshine, Velut
inter stellas Luna minores: Yet Faith and Hope must do Homage to Charity, (or
Love) as to their Sovereign, as to the End to which they are designed, to the
Fountain of their Life, and Cause of their Value. This I have said above, yet I
again repeat it for their sakes, who so set up the Merits of Faith, as to
neglect Good-works, without which Faith is dead, (Jac. 2.17.) and place it
before Charity, without which Faith avails nothing, (1 Cor. 13.) I could wish
our Adversaries would vouchsafe to read with attention that Chapter last cited;
in it they would see the Seat due to Charity, the Queen of Virtues, which seems
at present hidden from the Eyes of those wise and prudent Men, yet is revealed
to little ones.

It is with great difficulty that I undertake a Comparison betwixt the Practice
of these Virtues amongst Catholics and amongst Protestants, because all
Comparisons seem to be grounded at least on an appearance of equality in the
Objects, which in this Matter cannot be; yet something must be said, to make
these presumptuous Men know their wants and weakness, that they may seek to
have them supplied; and that I may proceed more clearly, I will begin with the
Definition of Faith and Heresy.

SECTION I. Of Faith.
DIvine Faith is a firm assent to an obscure Truth revealed by Almighty God,
because it is revealed by him. I say, an obscure Truth, because S. Paul ( Heb.
11.1.) says the same, Argumentum non apparentium; A declaration of things not
seen, or known by natural Reason. This is the Material Object, as Divines
speak; the only Formal Object is the Veracity of God, quia Deus est verax: that
is, can neither be deceived or mistaken, as being Omniscient; nor deceive us,
as being all Good. To this the Testimony of the Church concurs as a Witness,
assuring that God delivered such a System of Truths. So that is a Condition
necessary to apply the Revelation to us, who have not heard God speak or reveal.

S. Athanasius in his Symbol delivers as a Condition of Faith, that it be
retained Entire, and Undefiled, Integra, Inviolataque: For seeing all is
delivered by the same Authority, those who believe not all S. Thom. 2.2. q. 5.
art. 3.
, oppose that Authority delivering it, and by consequence even what they
believe, they receive not purely upon their submission to that Authority
speaking, but for their own Caprichio, or Reason, or Pleasure.

That is properly called Heresy; which word is deduced from the word (...), to
choose. And it signifies a choice of any thing whatsoever; but by common use it
is appropriated to that Choice Tertul. l. de Praescript. c. 6. Haereses dictae
Graec^ voce ex Electionis interpretatione, qua quis sive ad instituendas, sive
ad suscipiendas eas utitur. Hier. in Tit. 3. Haeresis Graece ab Electione
dicitur, quod scilicet unusquisque id sibi eligat, quod ei melius esse
videatur. Vide c. Haeresis, 24. q. 4. Vide etiam August. Epist. 162.
which is made of Points delivered as of Faith.

We Catholics have Faith, because we believe firmly those Truths that God has
revealed, because he revealed them to the Church, which as a faithful Witness,
gives hitherto, and will give to the end of the World, Testimony to that
Revelation. And we cannot be Heretics, because Tertul. supra. Nobis nihil ex
arbitrio nostro inducere licet, sed nec eligere, quod aliquis ex arbitrio suo
induxerit.
we never take the liberty to choose our selves, or to admit, what others
choose; but we take bona fide what is delivered as revealed by the greatest
Authority imaginable on Earth, which is that of the Catholic Church. Let an
Angel teach us any thing contrary to what is delivered, and we will pronounce
Anathema to him, in imitation of the Apostle, Gal. 1.18.

Here is then the Tenure of our Faith. The Father sent his only begotten Son,
consubstantial to himself, into the World: And what he heard of his Father,
that he made known to us, ( Joan. 15.15.) The Father and Son sent the Holy
Ghost; And he did not speak of himself, but what he heard, that he spoke, (
Joan. 16.13.) The Holy Ghost sent the Apostles; And they declared unto us what
they had seen and heard, (1 Joan. 1.3.) The Apostles sent the Highest and lower
Prelates in the Church, and the Rule by which they framed their Decrees, was,
Let nothing be altered in the Depositum; let no Innovation be admitted in what
is delivered: Quod traditum est non innovetur. Steph. PP. apud Cypr. Epist. 74.
ad Pompeium.

By this we are assured, that our Faith is that which the Councils received
from the Apostles, the Apostles from the Holy Ghost, and so by the Son to God
the Father, where it rests.

Now to Protestants. Their Proceeding is far different; they hear the whole
System of Faith commended by the Church as revealed by God, and take it into
Examination: And some things displeasing them in it, they fall to reforming it,
and cut off at one Blow all things not expressy contained in Scripture: Here is
one Choice. Then Scripture is called to the Bar, and near a third part of it
condemned, and lopt off; which is a second Choice. Thirdly, there being still
several things in the remnant, which displease them, (as understood by the
Church) they reject that Interpretation, and fix on it such a one as pleases
them most. So that even what Sense they retain, they do it upon this their
Haeresis, or Choice. What Evidence can convince a Man to be a Chooser in Faith,
that is, a Heretic, if these Men be not by this Proceeding sufficiently proved
such?

For a farther confirmation of this, consider the several ways of Catholics and
Protestants in entertaining Propositions of Faith. A Catholic hearing from the
Church our Savior's Words with the Sense; that is, the complete Scripture,
(for the bare Word without the Sense, is no more Scripture, than a Body without
a Soul, or Life, is a Man) presently believes them, and what Reason soever may
appear to the contrary, he silences it, and submits his Understanding to Faith;
and let the Words seem harsh, and the Sense unconceivable, yet the Truth of God
triumphs over all those petty Oppositions. A Protestant hears the same, and
presently consults his Reason, and till he has its Verdict, suspends his
Judgment. If that say with the Pharisce, (Joh. 3.9.) How can these things be?
or with the Capharnaits, (Joh. 4.) This is a hard saying, who can hear it? the
Protestant immediately renounces it. So we submit our Reason to Faith, you set
yours above it; We frame our Reason according to the Dictamens of Revelation,
you shape Revelation by your Reason. In fine, you set your Reason on a Throne,
to Judge of that Word by which one day you are to be Judged. You may as easily
prove the Pharisees and Capharnaits to be better Christians than the Apostles,
as that your Procedure in receiving Faith, is better than that of the Catholic
Church.

SECTION II. Of Hope.
HOPE is an expectation of future Bliss, promised by our Blessed Savior to
those who love him, and keep his Commandments. It is built on a Promise of God,
which cannot fail. And had that Promise been absolute, we might have been more
assuredly certain of our future Happiness, than we can be of the truth of any
Mathematical Demonstration; but it is only Conditional, requiring on our parts
a concurrence with his Divine Grace: and this is always uncertain, by reason of
the mutability of our Will to Evil, notwithstanding our strongest Resolutions
to Good. Hence our Hope is mixed with Fear, Sperando timemus. Tertul. l. de
cultu faeminarum c. 2. p. 265.

We have a full assurance (...), on God's side: Who, to show unto the Heirs of
promise the immatability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two
things immutable, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the Hope set
before us; which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Souls, both sure and
steadfast. Heb. 6.17, 18, 19.

On our side we have always reason to apprehend the mutability of our own Will,
notwithstanding all present Grace from God, and the strength of his Counsel.
Hence the Apostle admonishes us, (2 Cor. 6.1.) not to receive in vain the Grace
of God. He sets before our Eyes his own Example, (1 Cor. 9.27.) keeping under
his Body, chastising it, and bringing it into subjection; lest having preached
to others, he might become himself a reprobate, a castaway. And consequently
warns us, (Phil. 2.12.) to work out our salvation with fear and trembling. When
this Apostle fears, who can presume? We may resolve well, pray hard, and act
well to day, but what assurance have we that to morrow will find us so well
disposed, or even not doing the quite contrary? and that being so ill prepared,
Death will not surprise us? S. Paul, the Vessel of Election, who had been taken
up to the Third Heaven, feared lest he should become a reprobate; and S. Peter,
bred up in our Blessed Savior's School, resolved to die with him, yet shortly
after denied him. If these great Pillars of the Church shake, and bend, and
fear breaking, or actually break, what may not such Reeds as G. B. and I. W.
fear? You see what Grounds we have to fear, from Reason, from the Example of
the Apostles, and from their Doctrine.

This is comfortless Doctrine to G. B. ( p. 54.) and therefore he had rather
throw all on Christ, and persuade himself that Christ's Prayer was sufficient,
his Satisfaction sufficient, his Merits sufficient. We need neither Pray, nor
Suffer, nor Merit; Believe in him, and he will do all. Creed firmiter, and
pecca fortiter.

Compare now this Disposition of modern Catholics (which is the same with that
of the Apostles) with that of a Protestant; their Fear with his Confidence,
their Trembling with his Assurance, their Apprehensions with his Boldness, and
you shall find in Catholics true Hope mingled with Fear, as you may see in
Divines, and I have showed out of the Apostles: and in the Protestant no Fear,
and consequently no Hope, which is accompanied always by Fear; but in lieu of
Hope, that Vice which is called Presumption, which is a sin against the H.
Ghost. Timor fundamentum salutis est, (says Tertul. lib. de cultu foeminarum c.
2. p. 265.) Sperando enim timebimus, timendo cavebimus, cavendo salvi erimus:
contra, si praesumamus, neque timendo, neque cavendo, difficile salvi erimus.
Fear is the groundwork and foundation of our Salvation. Our Hope is mingled
with Fear; this makes us take heed: whence proceeds our security of Salvation.
On the contrary, when we presume, we grow careless, and run great hazard of
being lost for ever.

SECTION III. Of Charity, or Love.
CHarity, or the Love of God above all things, is much more esteemed, and
honored amongst us, than amongst you. You rank it (contrary to the Apostle)
even with Faith, or seat it on a lower Bench; whereas we with the Apostle (1
Cor. 13.13.) believe it to be the Commandment of Christ, (Joh. 15.12.) The
fullness of the Law, (Romans 13.10.) The bond of perfection, (Col. 3.14.) which
divides betwixt the Children of the Kingdom, and those of Perdition, (S. Aug.)
The nuptial Garment, with which we must enter into the Wedding, (Mat. 22.11,
12.) That is, the form of Virtues (Council. Trid.) That without it all other
Virtues, gift of tongues, power of working miracles, knowledge of mysteries,
nay even Faith and Hope, are nothing, avail nothing, are no more to be regarded
than sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal, etc. (1 Cor. 13.)

In fine, although, with Divines, we are persuaded, that these two great Virtues
may be separated, yet we hold their separation to be their ruin; that as
Charity is but superficial, and not real, without the light of Faith; so Faith
is cold without the warmth of Charity. He who knows God without loving him, is
impious; and he who loves him without knowing him aright, is blind. A Believer
without Love, is ungrateful; a Lover without Knowledge, is fensless; so these
two Virtues must assist one another. We must aim to have a living Faith, which
works by Love, Gal. 5.6. and Love is the proper work of Faith. Opus fidei
dilectio, Aug. tr. 10. in Epist. Jo. Love both gives to, and receives strength
from Faith. Charitas robur Fidei; Fides fortitudo Charitatis. S. I eo Sermon. 7.
in Quadrag. In Heaven there is Love without Faith, (1 Cor. 13.8.10.) In Hell,
Faith without Love, (Jac. 2.19.) Christians in this Life must have both; for
Love without Faith is the Love of Pagans, and Faith without Love is the Faith
of Devils, but Faith with Charity is the Faith of the Children of God in this
Life. Fides quae per dilectionem operatur, ipsa est Fides quae fideles Dei
separat ab immundis daemonibus, Aug. de gratia, and lib. Artib. cap. 7.

Thus we join together those two great Virtues; this we believe, this we teach
of Charity: whilst you, out of an ill-grounded opinion of your Fac-totum-Faith
(relying on it for Remission of Sins, Justification, Perseverance, and
Salvation) exhaust your Rhetoric so much in commendation of that your Darling,
that you have no room to commend Charity, or Good-works.

Our Practice as much surpasses yours, as to nourishing Charity, as our Doctrine
does: For, seeing the Love of God, and Love of our selves, are opposite, and the
one withers as the other thrives, their practice must be most proper to nourish
Charity, which aims most at mortifying Self-love; and on the contrary, those
who foster Self-love, must annihilate Charity.

Now what Practice can you show for the mortification of the Body, the quelling
our Passions, the renouncing of our Will? What Documents do you give for these?
What Examples can you show since your reformation of them? You have never been
able to find in the three Kingdoms a dozen Persons of either Sex, who for so
many years would sequester themselves from the Enjoyments of the World, to
serve God in voluntary Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. Whence comes this, but
from Self-love, which abounds in them; and the lack of the Love of God, which
might cement their Hearts together?

Whence comes that insupportable Pride, which makes your Proselytes so
refractory to God, and his Vicars, their Spiritual and Temporal Superiors; That
they are so tenacious of their extravagant Fancies, so stubborn in their
uncouth Resolutions, so intractable in their Manners, so humorsom in all their
Actions and Conversations, but a latent Pride, the proper Offspring of
Self-love, and the Bane of Charity? Look into 1 Cor. 13. you shall there find a
description of Charity and its Qualities. Charity suffers long, and is kind;
Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not
behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks
no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth; bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. Should I
now examine the Life of generally all who deliver themselves to your Direction,
upon these Heads, and show how little of this appears in your Manners, and how
much there is quite contrary to it: the Picture, if sincere, would fright you,
or confound you, how great soever your Confidence be.

In fine, the words of our Savior to the Angel of Laodicea, (Apoc. 3.17.) may
be very well applied to you. Thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods,
and have need of nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. God open the eyes of your Heart, to
see this; that so you may be moved to seek for Gold tried, (Spiritual Riches)
where it is to be found, in the true Church.

SECTION IV. An Answer to what G. B. objects.
G. B. p. 78. ARE Papists not taught to confide more in the Virgin, or their
Tutelar Saints, than in the Holiest of all.

Answ. No, we are taught no such thing.

G. B. ibid. Does not the fear of Purgatory damp the hopes of future
Blessedness?

Answ. It does not.

G. B. page 79. What impious Doctrine has been Printed in that Church, of the
Degree of Love we owe to God?

Answ. I know of no such Doctrine of the Degrees of Love due to God. I know that
all Catholics applaud the Saying of S. Bernard, Modus amandi Deum, est amare
sine modo. I know that Divines require as well as S. Thomas, a mediocrity in
all Virtues except Charity; That all Virtues are betwixt two Vices, whereof one
offends by exceeding, the other by not reaching its due measure. And this they
assure even of Hope, which is betwixt Presumption and Despair; and of Faith,
which is betwixt a lightness of Heart, believing all things; and a hardness to
believe any thing. Love cannot be too great, and so has only one Vice contrary
to it, by defect, loving too little. Is this Doctrine Impious?

Hence what you say, Some mincing it so, as if they were afraid of his being
too much beloved. This I say is an Untruth; and I challenge you to produce your
Authors, or to be held a Calumniator.

G. B. ibid. Some blasphemously teach, that we are not at all bound to love him.

Answ. This is also untrue. All acknowledge a Precept to Love God; but this
being a positive Precept, which obliges only for some determinate time, some
Authors have enquired when that time is? And in resolving this obscure
undecided Question there have been some variety of Sentiments, without any
difference as to the substance of the Precept. If God has revealed to you a
Decision of this intricate Question, bless the World with that Information, and
prove well what you say, and I assure you we will not blame you for it.

G. B. ibid. There is an Impiety in the Morals of some of that Church,
particularly amongst the Disciples of Loyola, beyond whatever was taught
amongst the worst of Heathen Philosophers.

Answ. 1. You are no competent Judge in matter of Piety, as being acquainted
neither with the Practice, nor Theory of it.

Answ. 2. You are not sufficiently informed of the Cause in which you presume
to Judge, having no knowledge at all of one side, and but a very superficial
knowledge of the other. By shooting your Bolt so lightly, you will easier
convince the World that you are Inconsiderate and Rash, than that those you
call the Disciples of Loyola are Impious.

CHAP. XXIII. Efficacy of Sacraments.
G. B. p. 80. THE Doctrine of the Efficacy of the Sacraments, for conveying of
Grace by the work wrought, looks like a Design against all serious preparation
for the worthy receiving of them.

Answ. Many alive still remember, when the Godly could find out Plots,
dangerous Plots, Popish Plots, in every innocent Recreation of the Persons whom
they misliked. You imitate exactly those Factious Sectaries, in fancying the
like dangerous Contrivances. Is Attrition with the Sacrament said to suffice
for Justification? It is on a Design to destroy Piety. Are Prayers said in
Latin? It is on a Design against Piety. Are probable Opinions allowed of? There
lies a Design against Piety. Are we taught to do our Works with a good
Intention? A Popish Design against Piety. Are Sacraments connected with Grace,
and said to be efficacious signs of it? It looks like a Design against Piety.
And whatsoever we do, these People suspect a Design against Piety. As of the
Jews Isaias said, ( Isa. 8.12.) What the People speaks of, is confederacy;
Omnia quae loqnitur populus iste, conjuratio est. So much were they frighted
then, with the apprehension of the Union betwixt the two Kings of Israel and
Syria, and so struck are you likewise with the apprehensions of Popery.

The Jews surmized a Confederacy out of a real Fear; the Factious old
Parliamentarians out of a pretended Fear. What moves you, a real, or only
pretended Fear? Or do you speak out of ignorance of our Tenets? Or ill will to
our Persons? Either may easilier be suspected, than any real fear or concern
for Piety.

We have been taught to acknowledge some virtue in the Sacrament of the new
Law, (in virtue of Christ's Institution, and because they are the Instruments
to apply the Merits of his Passion to our Soul) which was not in the Sacraments
of the old Law, nor in any Ceremony of Human Institution; for S. Paul (Gal.
4.9.) calls the the Sacraments of the old Law, Weak and beggarly Elements, in
comparison doubtless of those of the new. These then are more efficacious,
stronger and richer. Yet the others could stir up the Receiver to an inward
disposition for Grace, nay a Ceremony of mere Human Institution may have that
force. Wherefore the Sacraments of the new Law must, by the work wrought, do
more than to stir up the Receiver to good Works.

G. B. page 81. By this Doctrine, be a Man never so ill prepared, yet he is sure
of the Efficacy of the Sacrament.

Answ. Here you discover your wilful Ignorance of our Doctrine, that you might
with some color calumniato it. We unanimously teach. that a bad Disposition of
the Receiver puts a stop, (ponit obicem) to the Effect of the Sacrament, and is
it self a Sacrilege; and that the Sacrament so received unworthily, serves for
the damnation of the Receiver, as those who receive the Body and Blood of
Christ unworthily, receive Judgment against themselves. 1 Cor. 11.29.

CHAP. XIV. Probable Opinions, and Good Intentions
G. B. p. 81. CHRIST came to fulfill the Moral Law. Matt. 5.7.

Answ. Whence do you learn, that these words of Christ are restrained to the
Moral Law? Did not Christ fulfill the Ceremonial Law also? sure he did, both as
Antitype, and as never trespassing against it.

G. B. page 82. Two general Doctrins they have, which at two strokes dissolve
all the Bonds of Virtue. The one is the Doctrine of Probability, the other of
Good Intention. By the first they teach, that with a safe Conscience a Man may
follow what any Doctor teaches: And some representing the worst Actions as
good, there is scarce any Sin, but may be ventured on. By the second he may act
any Sin, provided he intend some good Design. And then you send us to the
Provincial Letters.

Answ. What if the Author of those Letters, being no Divine, was mistaken in
relating those Opinions? What if he renounced the whole Party which had engaged
him to write in that scurrilous manner? What if he was sorry before his Death,
to have dealt so much with them? What if this can be proved under his Curat's
Hand? Now this is the plain truth, as appears by this following Declaration
given by the Curat of S. Stephen-upon-the-Hill, to the then Archbishop of
Paris. Here is the substance.

Aujourd'huy 7. Janvier 1665. Nous Hardouin de Perefixe Archevesque de Paris,
sur ce que nous aurions apris, que Mr. Pascal, lequel avoit la reputation
d'avoir este fort attache au party des Jansenistes, estoit decede dans la
Paroisse de S. Estienne, and qu'il y estoit mort sans recevoir les Sacremens,
avons desire scavoir de Mr. Paul Beurrier Religieux de S. Genivieve, and Cure
de S. Estienne, si ce qu'on nous avoit raporte etoit vray, qu'il fut mort
attache au party des Jansenistes. Sur quoy ayant interroge ledit Sieur Cure de
S. Estienne, and sum de dire la verite, apres l'avoir promis, a repondu,
qu'il avoit connu ledit Sieur Pascal six semaines avaunt son deces, qu'il
l'avoir confess plusieurs fois, and administre le S. Viatique, and le
Sacrement d'Extreme Onction, and que dans toutes les conversations qu'il a eu
avec luy pendant sa malady, il a remarque que ses sentimens etoyent toujours
fort Orthodoxes, and soumis parfaitement a l'Eglise, and a N. S. P. le Pape. De
plus il luy a temoigne dans une conversation familiere, qu'on l'avoit autrefois
embarasse dans la party de ces Messieurs, mais que depuis deux ans il s'en
etoit retire, parce qu'il avoit remarque, qu'ils alloyent trop avaunt dans les
matieres de la Grace, and qu'ils paroissoyent avoir moins de soumission, qu'ils
ne devoyent, par N. S. P. le Pape. -- Et que depuis deux ans, il s'etoit tout a
fait attache aux affairs de son salut, and a un dessein qu'il avoit contre les
Athees, and les Politiques de ce temps en matiere de Religion. --

F. P. BEVRRIER.


You see here in his Declaration Signed by the Curate, who assisted the Author
of the Provincial Letters at his Death, that he had been engaged, or entangled
in the Party of the Jansenists, that he found their Sentiments were not
tolerable or Orthodox in those two capital Points, of Grace, and Submission to
the Sea Apostolic; That upon that score he had withdrawn from them, and
abandoned them; yet you will have us go to him. Well, I will comply with you,
and from him I learn two things: One, that he blames some Cases of private Men;
Another, that those cannot be charged on the Roman Catholic Church. Thus if I
stand to his Verdict, your Accusation will be cast out of the Court, as lying
against the whole, not against a part only. If you say, Believe him when he
accuses some, but not when he absolves others; do you think us so weak, as to
give credit to him when you please, and when you please, to recall it? What is
this but to give, and a^ the same time take away his Judicial Authority; to
name him Judge Arbiter, and tie him to speak only what you please? But I will
leave him, and speak to the thing.

That you may conceive what are probable Opinions, you are to take notice, that
Moral Actions may be reduced to four Classes: To such as are evidently good,
evidently bad, uncertain, and indifferent, according as they are related to the
Law, (whether Divine, Ecclefiastical, or Civil) which is their proper Rule.
Those are evidently good, which are conformable to the Law: As to Love God, or
Deal with others as we would be dealt by. Those are evidently bad, which are
contrary to the Law: As to Blaspheme God, or to Wrong our Neighbor. Those are
indifferent, which are neither commanded nor forbidden: As to wash our Hands
before Eating, used by the Pharisees, ( Matt. 15.) Those are uncertain, when a
Law is known, but it is unknown whether it obliges in some Circumstances. For
Example: The resisting an Enemy that attacks you on the Sabbath Day, and
repairing the Breaches which he makes. 1 Macch. 2.38.

As to the first Class, Actions evidently good, Probability does not look on
them as its Object.

The same for those which are evidently bad: They can never be committed
without offending God. If any hold the contrary, stone him; the Stones will not
hit me, nor any Jesuit, unless by such an Accident as befell Jupiter in Lucian,
when directing his Thunderbolt at a Blasphemer, he mist him, and hit, and fired
Pallas her Temple. And what you say of committing any Sin with directing
Intention, is so great a Calumny, that no good Intention of opposing Popery
will excuse it.

The third Class, of Actions uncertain in themselves, are properly the Object
of probable Opinions; whilst it is not certain whether the Law oblige, hic and
nunc, or no, in these Circumstances, which are not specified in the Law, yet
alter very much the nature of the Action: There being no evident Principle to
show it to be lawful or unlawful, the Judgment we frame of it, must be an
Opinion only; and if the Reason be strong, it is called a probable Opinion. For
Example; the Jews, (1 Macch. 2.40, 41.) hearing that their Brethren had been
assaulted on a Sabbath, and not resisting, for fear of breaking the Sabbath by
working on it, were all killed, resolved notwithstanding that Command, to make
what resistance they could on that Day. Which Resolution was grounded on a
probable Opinion: for on the one side was the Letter of the Law prohibiting all
Labor on that Day: then, they might think God would protect them, whilst they
kept his Law, as he conserved their Goods, whilst they went thrice a year to
the Temple, ( Exodus 34.24.) and if he did not please to defend them
miraculously, they might think it was his will, that they should glorify him
by giving their Lives, rather than break his Commandment; which Persuasion
possessed the greatest part of Christians near the Apostles Times, as may be
seen in Tertull. Apologetick. On the other side, they considered the Law of
Nature obliging to seek Self-preservation; and that to expect a Miracle, was to
tempt God, etc. Hence they concluded, that it was lawful to labor for
Self-defence even on the Sabbath.

To make an Opinion probable, Suarez ( Dis. 12. de bonit. and malit.) requires
that it be neither contrary to the Sense of the Church, nor to any Opinions
commonly received, and that it be grounded on Authority and Reason great above
exception. All Divines, even the largest, require a weighty Motive, a strong
Reason, and that even comparing it with the contrary Motives; otherwise they
agree, that the Opinion will not be probable, but dangerous, rash, and
improbable. See two large Treatises composed by R. F. Antony Teril, (a great
Ornament of the Society, and an Honor to our Nation) in defense of this Rule of
Conscience. You will find in him a solid Discourse, well grounded, and gravely
handled, as Truth should be delivered, without any of that Buffoonry which
accompanies some Authors of these Times, which may be tolerable in a Comedy,
but not in a Treatise of Divinity.

This, I think, cannot be doubted of in Thesi, or in general. I will not deny,
but in Hypothesi, in particular Doubts or Questions, some Men have not stuck so
close to the Letter of the Law as they should, as Fr. Teril does deplore. But
those Men's Assertions do not take away what we have said: for their private
Sentiments, not well grounded, deserve not the name of probable Opinions.

The last Class of Actions, are those called indifferent, as not being
mentioned in any Law. These must draw all the Morality they have Ex intention,
sive voluntate operantis. In those a good intention of the Man who produces
them, or his will to do them for the love of God, gives them a good Morality,
which of themselves they have not; as on the contrary, a bad Intention gives
them the nature of Sin.

Hence what you say, that our Doctrine is, Any Sin may be committed innocently,
by directing our Intention, is a great Untruth, and as great a Calumny. No
Intention can justify a bad Action, but a bad Intention may vitiate the best
Action: As to give an Alms for vanity, Mat. 6.2. Bonum ex integra causa, malum
ex quocunque defectu, is a Maxim never more true, than in Moral Actions. We are
taught in the Catholic Church, not only to do good things, but to do them well;
not only to do just things, but to do them justly; nor pious things, but
piously, non tantum bona, justa, pia; verum etiam been, just, pie. Nay, a
pious modern Author says, that God regards more the Adverbs, than the Nouns, or
Verbs. For Example; A Judge hears attentively a Cause pleaded before him in
order to give Sentence, secundum allegata and probata: the Action it self is
good, yet his Intention may mend or mar it. Does he that, for his lawful
allowance, it is of small merit. Regards he his Duty to his Prince and Country,
it is better; If for God, it is best of all. But does he intend by it to
pleasure a Friend, or practice Revenge on an Enemy, although his Sentence be just,
yet he is unjust in pronouncing it, to satisfy his own Passions of Love or
Hatred. This is our Doctrine, this we teach, this we practice, which you
understand not; and your perpetual fault is, to speak evil of things which you
know not, (Jude Ver. 10.) If you desire farther information of our Doctrine in
this Point, see S. Fran. de Sales lib. 11. de Amore Dei cap. 13.

CHAP. XXV. Whether Papists allow to break the Commandments?
FRom 'pag. 83. Tit. 91. you charge Catholics with teaching to break the
Commandments, and produce several Cases, for proof of it. To which, what I have
already said may be a sufficient Return, and satisfactory Answer.

For if the Resolutions of those Persons be not well grounded on solid Reason,
I renounce them; so does the Church. If they be justifiable, why should you, or
we, condemn them? Woe be unto them who call evil good, and good evil; that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Isai 5.20. So that those are to blame,
who call good evil, as well as those who call evil good. The Lawgiver may make
what Laws he please, our Duty is to Judge according to the Law he gives us,
when the Case is clear; when it is obscure, to guess at it as near as we can.
And amongst the clear Laws I reckon that, not to Judge other Men, who are God's
Servants, and who by his Judgment alone must stand or fall. Romans 14.4.

This general Answer might suffice, considering I write not here a Treatise of
Moral Divinity; yet I will run over some of the particular Cases specified by
you, and consequently, which may seem to be with you of greater force.

G. B. page 84. Against the First Commandment, they worship Angels and Saints,
with Acts due only to God. The Second is violated by Image Worship.

Answ. Here are your boiled Cabbage over and over again. Both parts are false,
as is abovesaid.

G. B. ibid. The Third is made void by tht Popes dispensing with Oaths.

Answ. I have spoken to this already, Chapter 20. I suppose you will not deny, that
when the Oath is unlawful, (v. c. the Covenant) it may be dispensed with. Item,
if it become impossible, as of a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem on foot, and the Man
becomes Lame. Item, if the thing become dangerous or inconvenient, as to lend a
Sword, when you hear for certain the Man designs to kill his Enemy with it. Or
if you promised to keep another company, and after discover he would carry you
to fight a Duel, take a Purse, or to a naughty House. What think you? are you,
or any other bound to keep dangerous, inconvenient, impossible, unlawful Oaths?
If not, why may there not be a Power in the Church to declare for the ease of
timorous Consciences, when those Oaths cease to oblige? And why may not this
Power be acknowledged in the Pope as well as in others?

But is the dispensing with Oaths a Prerogative of God? Sure it is not, seeing
God, who declared their force, Exodus 20.
leaves to Number. 30.
some a Power to dispense with them, as to Fathers and Husbands, over those of
their Children and Wives.

G. B. ibid. The Breach of the Fourth (keeping the Sabbath) is not denied, it
being usually amongst them a Day of Mercating, Dancing, and foolish Jollity.

Answ. What you charge on us here (not keeping the Sabbath) was charged on our
Savior and his Apostles by the Scribes and Pharisees, and is reproached to
Protestants by the Puritans. I do not deny, but many are defective in this
Observance, and that as other Commands, so this has suffered; yet I think I
could as easily find Instances for the very things you reproach to us, amongst
you, as you amongst us. I will not excuse all that is done amongst Catholics,
and believe you would find it hard enough to justify all that is done by your:
Yet I will tell you, that unless you will condemn Christ and his Disciples, and
justify the Slanders of the Scribes and Pharisees, against them, you must
acknowledge that there is a Preciseness of Duty not intended by Almighty God.
And it is very remarkable, that several Accusations of the Breach of the
Sabbath having been brought to our Savior by the Scribes and Pharisees, Christ
always blamed their blind indiscreet Zeal, and retorted the Accusations,
alleging several of their Customs undefensible, but never seconded the
Accusation; quite contrary, either confounded the Accusers, by minding them of
their own Faults, or excused the Fact from Guilt. Which is a sufficient Proof,
that the Law of God does not require that superstitious Observance which the
Scribes, the Puritans, and you require; for want of which you blame us, and are
your self blamed by others.

Yet I will not excuse all that is done by Catholics in this matter, which
cannot be charged on the Church, because she condemns and censures it.

I must take notice here of a Craft you use in this place, to mingle true and
false things together. For Example, page 85. That Children may lawfully intend
killing their Parents, is false; That they may Marry without their Consent, is
doubted by none, I think, as to the validity of the Marriage, unless there be
some Municipal Laws providing against it. Item page 86. They bar the Clergy the
use of Marriage, is true; That they allow Concubinage, is false. By which petty
Art you surprise your Reader, and puzzle one who undertakes an Answer.

Were I minded to imitate you, in giving a prospect of your Garden, and that
without offending Truth, as you have done, I could show Matter enough for your
Confusion, or for your Zeal, if it be real. I never was within it, I thank God;
and the greatest part of my Life I have past at a distance almost out of sight
of it; yet Fame has brought enough to make a woeful description of it. It is
not needful to pierce your walls to discover wicked abominations, ( Ezech. 8.8,
9.) only looking over them with a Perspective Glass, a Man may discover Weeds,
and Thorns, and Cockle, and what not? They are unclean Creatures, who delight
to wallow in Dirt, or stir about Filth, which of it self yields an ungrateful
smell, much more when moved. An ancient Heretic Tertul. lib. contra
Hermogenem, cap. 1, page 411.
thought it a sign of a good Conscience to speak ill of every body. You may
with the ignorant Multitude much easier obtain the esteem of Piety and Zeal by
speaking ill of others, than doing well your self, and by blaming others Lives,
than correcting your own. A secret malignity in Nature prompts some to detract
from the Good-name of their Neighbors, and disposes the Hearers to receive with
pleasure the Detractions. Both Calumniator and his Hearers follow in this the
vicious Inclinations of corrupt Nature. But these must be overcome, when true
Virtue is aimed at; and that is hard. You follow the easier course, and the
most taking with Men, whom you affect to please. But how your Conscience at
present, and God hereafter, will approve of this, I leave to your more serious
consideration. Maledicimur and benedicimus, says the Apostle, (1 Cor. 4.12.) We
are spoken ill of, and we speak well, or being reviled, we bless. Truly I had
rather find matter for a Panegyric, than for a Satyr, and should be more
willing to write some good of you than otherwise, if there were any such
belonging to you as Protestants. But knowing no such thing, I will supply that
part by Prayers, that God will put you into a way of being so, by bringing you
to his Faith, which now you impugn. I wish it were Ignorans in incredulitate,
(1 Timothy 1.13.) through Ignorance, or mere want of Instruction, your sin would
be less, and your Conversion not so desperate.

CHAP. XXVI. Riches, and Pride of Churchmen.
FROM page 91. till 100. we have a long enumeration of the Riches and Pride,
and Ambition of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, and all Churchmen, You blame
the sumptuousness of our Church Ornaments, the Solemnity of our Processions,
the Majesty of our Ceremomonies, etc. which things being not of Faith, I think
my self not obliged to Answer farther, than by showing a good use may be made
of them.

I grant that Christ founded his Church in real Poverty; he sent his Apostles (
Luc. 10.8.) to Preach, with order to live upon what they found in the Places
whither they went, and be content with what was given them. He gave them a
Right to a Subsistence, declaring, ( Mat. 10.10.) that a Workman deserves his
Diet. And that he who serves the Altar, ought to live of it. (1 Cor. 9.13.) And
although S. Paul was pleased not to make use of this Right commonly, for a very
good Reason; yet the rest did, and he might lawfully have done every where, and
actually did it at Philippi, (Phil. 4.15.) Yet I do not find that ever our B.
Savior stinted the Apostles, so as if any thing were freely given, beyond what
was merely necessary, they should be obliged to refuse it, or restore the
overplus to the Donors. Neither do I find your Brethren in the Ministry,
commend very much your first Reformers for retrenching some of your Bishops
Lands, although they left enough for not only a competent, but a noble
Subsistence: nay, your modern Writers, W. L. and Heylin, accuse them of
Sacrilege. And I do not hear that your other Bishops do break their Shins with
haste, to restore the surplus of their Revenues to the Heirs of the Donors,
which they were bound to restore, if it were not lawful for Churchmen to enjoy
more than what is necessary. Since the fall of Religion, indeed the Protestant
Church has not much increased her Revenues; which rather proceeds from lack of
Charity in your Laity, who give you nothing, (or because the Wife and Children
sweep away what remains by each Incumbent at his Death) than to your love of
Poverty, for which Virtue you have refused it, when offered. I have heard at
least of none who would refuse a Manor, (or other considerable Boon) when
freely given; and the hard usage, which some of your Tenants complain of, from
their Ecclesiastical Landlords, proves sufficiently, that you are not
insensible to the Allurements of the attractive Metal.

Were Churchmen such as they ought to be, the Laity would have little reason to
repine at their Riches, although much greater than they are. If they were
Treasurers of the Poor, Fathers to the Orphans, Helps to Widows, Hosts to
Strangers, Protectors to the Oppressed, and common Sanctuaries to all
necessitous Persons, such as some are in the Catholic Church, whom I know, and
many of whom we read. To such as these Riches are no hindrance to their
Function; they give them only occasion of doing much good, and practicing their
Charity. If you think this to be blameworthy, although Riches be so employed,
prove what you say out of Scripture, and excuse your own Bishops from that
Crime, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.

Voluntary real Poverty is much commended in the Gospel, ( Mat. 19.21.) and we
have thousands in our Church who profess it, and live in it; and you could
never get ten of your Communion to embrace it. There is another Poverty called
of Spirit, commended ( Mat. 5.3.) nay and commanded in Scripture, ( Mat.
19.24.) and how great soever a stranger you are to Spiritual things, yet you
will not say that this Poverty of Heart is inconsistent with effectual Riches;
otherwise it would be impossible for a rich Man to be saved. A Man may be a
Beggar, and yet be far from that Poverty of Spirit which gives a right to the
Kingdom of Heaven, because his Heart is fixed upon things he has not. And on
the contrary, another Man may be Master of a great part of the World, and yet
have his Heart as free from it, as if he was not in the World; and to use the
Apostles Phrase, (1 Cor. 7.31.) use the World as tho he used it not. Of this
sort of poor of spirit there are many in the Church, and always have been. Hear
S. Austin lib. de moribus Ecclesiae cap. 35. Sunt in Ecclesia Catholica
innumerabiles fideles, qui hoc mundo non utuntur; sunt qui utuntur, tanquam non
utentes. There are innumerable Faithful in the Church, who make no use of the
World; there are others, who use it as if they used it not. What has the
Protestant Church to say here?

Pride and Ambition are personal Vices, so belong not to this Treatise: Yet I
will say, that there have been both ancient and modern Popes, who have given
greater Examples of Humility, than any your Church can show, and who have made
appear, that their Title, Servant of the Servants of God, is no Complement.
Sixtus V. would not own his Mother, when she was brought to him in rich
Clothes, saying, His Mother was a poor Woman, who never wore Silks in her life,
she was a Shepherds Wife. The next day she being brought to him in Rags, he
presently acknowledged her. Some of them have asserted the Privileges of their
Chair, against such as entrenched on their Rights; which may be done without
any Pride at all, seeing they require it as due, not to their own Persons, but
to their Chair, to its Founders, S. Peter, and to his Superior, Christ Jesus. I
never heard S. Ambrose suspected of Pride, for refusing to admit Theodosius the
Great into the Church, before his Penance for the Slaughter at Thessalonica, or
for excluding him the Cancels after it: It was a Zeal of the Glory of God, and
the good of the Church, which moved him; the Emperor himself understood it so.

As for precious Ornaments of the Church, I will own ours to be too costly,
when you shall have proved, that any thing is too good for God's Service; not
till then. The infinite Majesty of God is ground sufficient to oblige us to bear
him the greatest Respect interiorly, and express our Duty to our Creator, and
our Gratitude to so great a Benefactor, by returning to him in the best manner
we can, an Acknowledgment of his most bountiful Gifts. This serves also to stir
up in the Auditory Submission, Respect and Adoration, which otherwise would
fail.

CHAP. XXVII. Unity of the Church in Faith and Sacraments. G. B. owns that
Protestants are Schismatics. Of Severity against Dissenters; And of Hugo
Grotius.
G. B. p. 100. A Fourth Design of Christian Religion, was to unite Mankind
under one Head into one Body, not by Love, and pardoning Injuries only; but
also by associating the Faithful into one Body, the Church, which was to be
united by Bonds of Love, governed by Pastors and Teachers, and cemented with
the Ligaments of the Sacraments.

Answ. You say something (tho disorderly) but not all. For, 1. You omit Faith,
by which we are inserted into the Body of Christ. 2. You put Charity, which
does not make us parts, but living parts of that Body, whose parts we are by
Faith. 3. You add Sacraments, which are only exterior Signs of interior
Communication. 4. You confound Charity and Sacraments, as equally concurring to
the Unity of the Church: yet there is a vast difference betwixt them; the one
formally quickening the Members of the Church interiorly, the other only
effecting it interiorly, and testifying it exteriorly. 5. Betwixt the
Sacraments there is a vast difference, as to this, (and you confound them); for
Baptism being our Regeneration in Christ, is an esficient Cause of our Union
with him, and makes us his Members; the others are designed only to nourish
those who are already united to, and in him. When you speak of being Governed
by Pastors, I hope the Pope may find place amongst them, he being the prime
Pastor.

G. B. page 101. The Gospel pronounces us free, and no more Servants of Men,
but of God.

Answ. Free from the Ceremonial Law of Moses, not from that of the Gospel, and
Obedience to the Governors of the Church. How changeable are your Sentiments?
In the foregoing Page 100, the Church was to be Governed by Pastors and
Teachers; now she is to obey none but God: and if any Man pretend to Command,
he changes the Authority of the Church into a tyranical Yoke. So we must have
Governors, without Authority to Command; and Subjects, without any Duty to
Obey. A new Model of Government!

G. B. ibid. Those things for which we withdrew from the Church, are Additions
to our Faith. She added to Scriptures, Tradition; to God, Images, to Christ,
Saints; to Heaven and Hell, Purgatory; to two Sacraments, five more; to the
Spiritual Presence of Christ, his Corporal Presence.

Ans. Never Man spoke more, and proved less than you, who offer not one word in
proof of these disputed Points, which we declare to be evident untruths. Is not
this a poor begging of the thing in question? But they are, say you, Additions
to your Faith. Did we add to your Faith, or you cut off from ours, and that of
the whole Christian World, before your Deformation? How could we add those
things to your Faith, when they were in peaceable possession all over the
Christian World, as you own your selves, many Ages before Protestancy was
thought on?

You have here only one Truth, viz. That you withdrew from the Church. Which
convincingly proves the Guilt of Schism to lie at your Door.

G. B. page 105. If a Society of Christians visibly swerve from Christ, so that
Communion cannot be retained with it, without departing from Christ, then the
departing from the Corruptions brought in, can be no departing from the Church.
If then it appear that the Roman Church has departed from the Truth of the
Gospel, those who separated from her, cannot be said to separate from the true
Church.

Answ. Here we have a Paralogism, which might better become a Junior Sophister,
than a Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. You will see it in these Instances:
The Communion of that Church ought to be renounced, which obliges her Children
to Mahometism. If then the English Protestant Church oblige hers to that, her
Communion ought to be renounced. Another: That Man deserves the greatest
Contempt, who writes Controversy, and has nothing to write but Calumnies and
Sophisms. If then Mr. G. B. has nothing else but such stuff to fill his Books
with, he knows his Deserts. What think you, Sir, of such Arguments; which serve
only to delude an unwary Reader into an assent of what you would, but cannot
prove?

There is no Logician but knows, that Conditional Propositions signify only
the Connection betwixt two things under such a Condition; but they assert
nothing absolutely, unless the Condition be proved. For Example: If a Man
flies, he has Wings; If the Heavens fall, we shall catch Larks. These, I say,
are granted to be true. although the Condition be impossible. Yet those who grant
them, do not expect those Wings to go a Journey, nor rely on those Larks for a
Supper. In like manner, suppose we should grant your Conditional Illation, yet
the Guilt of Schism would lie on your Consciences, because you neither do, nor
can prove the Condition upon which your Excuse relies.

G. B. page 106. The Cruelty of Papists extends to as much bloody and
barbarous Rage, as ever sprung from Hell.

Answ. You mean the Laws made against Heretics; which being made by the Secular
Power, and not by Churchmen, I think my self not obliged to vindicate them. Yet
seeing the most severe of them all, the Faggot, was till of late (as I am
informed) in force in England, and has been actually executed upon some since
the Reformation, I leave you to answer to our Honorable Judges, for your
pragmatical Boldness, in censuring them so severely. Another would take notice
of the Laws in force against Papists, but I let that pass; it is enough to
vindicate our Churchmen, that they never made those Laws, they never condemned
any Man by them: all they do, is to judge of the matter of Fact, whether a
Person be guilty of Heresy; and if they find him so, to leave him to the
Secular Power. This is the most that ever the Inquisition did, as far as ever I
heard.

G. B. page 108. Grotius says, that in Charles the Fifth's time, more than One
hundred thousand, were butchered on the accout of Religion. And in his Son
Philip 's time the Duke d'Alva did in a short time cut down Thirty six thousand.

Answ. Grotius was an eminent Man for several things, but not renowned for his
Skill in Arithmetic: I have heard from one well acquainted with him, that he
could not count Ten; that he knew not the ordinary current Money of his Country;
that when he escaped out of Prison, he had like to have been discovered by a
Ferry-man by that ignorance; he was so noted for it. So I should not wonder
that he were mistaken in his Calculation of so many thousands. Secondly, It is
probable he reckons into the number of those butchered, such as perished in the
Boors War in Germany, and Wars of the Low Countries, whose Death must be put to
the Account of their Rebellion, not to that of Religion. Thirdly, he writ in
favor, and defense of the States Cause; to whose vindication it was necessary,
that the Motives of their taking Arms against their Sovereign should be
aggravated to the utmost. We all remember the infamous Inscription put over the
Niche where the Statue of the late King of Happy Memory stood. All the World
knows, that without any disparagement to the rest, There never before had been
a King, who less deserved such a Title; yet no doubt, had that usurped
Government continued, Stories would have been invented to prove it, and those
concerned in the Rebellion would have believed them, as you do Grotius. Lastly,
Suppose all Grotius says true, it follows only, that it was the Misfortune of
those great Princes to have many Offenders in that kind in their time, provoke
the Sword of Justice. As if in England a Spirit of Thieving should spread it
self amongst the People, for which in the time of the best of Kings many
suffer, yet without reflecting on the Honor of the King, or Equity of the Laws.
These are not Crimes of the Government, but Misfortunes, for which Princes are
to be pitied, not reproched with them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Zeal of Souls in our Bishops. And concerning Reformers. Where of
S. Cyran, Arnaud, and Jansenius.
G. B. p. 111. WHAT do Popes about Feeding of Souls? When do they Preach the
Gospel, or Dispense the Sacraments?

Answ. They do it daily, by all those Persons, who by Authority derived from
them do it: As our Kings Administer Justice by their Judges. And did you
enquire of those who have been at Rome, you would hear, that Popes do
Administer Sacraments in Person.

Ibidem. Cardinals, Bishops, and Abbots, imitate their Holy Father, abandoning
wholly the Work of the Gospel.

Answ. You cannot discover better who is your Master, and what a Proficient you
are in his School, than by venting such palpable Untruths. Cardinal Barbarin,
Dean of the Sacred College, has been known to accompany many times
Malefactors to the Gallows, heard their Confessions, moved them to a
detestation of the Sins which brought them to that Punishment, raised them up
to hopes of pardon through the Merits of our Blessed Savior, and comfort them
with hopes of a happy Life, after that tragical end of this. I name him in
particular, because he is known to many of our Nation, who have and do
acknowledge his Civility to them, although of a different Persuasion. In time of
the great Plague, under Alexander VII. he visited in Person Places Infected,
enquired after the Wants, informed of the Diligence of the Officers appointed
for the Relief of the Sick, and provided according as Occasions required both
for Soul and Body. S. Charles Borromeus, a Cardinal and Archbishop, gave so
great Examples of Pastoral Vigilance, and Apostolical Zeal, that none of our
Reformed Prelates ever will imitate them. Your Confidence is admirable in
relating such evident Untruths, which all who have seen France or Flanders can
contradict. Enquire of the Life of the present Lord Bishop of Gant, of several
in France, and if you have one ounce of good Blood in your Body, some of it
will appear on your Face.

G. B. page 112. I deny not, but even these last Ages have produced great Men
amongst the Papists, who seem to have designed the reviving of the ancient
Discipline, both among the Clergy and the People. But as these Instances are
rare, so they were hated and persecuted, witness Arnaud 's Book of the frequent
Communion, Jansenius and S. Cyran.

Answ. There is no Pretense more dangerous, or even fatal, both to Church and
State, than that of Reforming Abuses, and Reviving antiquated Laws, which
serves every Pragmatical Head, as soon as he has read the ancient Statutes or
Canons (tho he understands the Sense of neither) to detract from the present
Government, and (if by meeting others as rash as himself, he is enabled for
such a Work) to endeavor the change of it, under the specious Pretext of
Reformation. You must own the truth of this, unless you will justify the late
Rebellion in England, which was begun, carried on, and finished, under that
Color.

The Opinions Men are as different as their Faces, scarce ever two alike:
Education, Diet, Company, Friends, Business, and other extrinsick Occasions,
alter our Judgment of things: many more have influence on our Judgment of
Governments; but most of all, Love and Hatred have an imperceptible, yet
unresistible force over our Understanding: so that one and the same Action will
to one seem to deserve a Panegyric, which to another shall be the Subject of a
Satyr, merely because they are variously affected to the Person who acts. Some,
in fine, are so wayward, humorsom and peevish, as to be displeased with
whatever is done by others; who can agree with no body, not because every body
gives, but because they take from every body, occasions of offenses.

It is a great error, to think that every one who blames another, has reason
for it. No Man ever was so holy, so persect, so wise, as to satisfy every
body, and find no Momus who blamed him. S. Paul was held a Blasphemer and an
Enemy, not only to the Ephesian Diana, Act. 9. but also to the Temple of
Jerusalem, Act. 24. What less guilty than the Apostles? yet some thought to do
God good service in killing them. Joh. 16.2. What more innocent, than Jesus
newly born? yet he was forced to a Flight to save his Life, Mat. 2.13. What
less reprehensible than his Doctrine, his Manners, his Miracles, his Person? yet
his Doctrine has been accused of Blasphemy, Mat. 26.65. his Manners of
Gluttony, Mat. 11.19. his Miracles of Magic, Luc. 11.15. and his Person of
being beside himself, Mar. 3.31. None ever had a Mission from Heaven with more
convincing Proofs of Miracles, than Moses and Christ; yet both had their
Schismatics: Moses not only Core and his Fellows, but also Aaron and Mary; and
Christ had the Capharnaits, Scribes and Pharisees, and one of his Apostles. And
if we do not shut our Ears, we shall hear God himself by horrid Blasphemies,
censured for bad Governing the World, and even for not Creating it well; Man,
by a presumptuous Folly, preferring his own dim Lights before the inaccessible
Light of God, 1 Timothy 6.16. before whom even Man's greatest wisdom is folly. 1
Cor. 3.19.

It is therefore a great folly for any one to hope to give satisfaction to all,
or even to avoid Censure of some; that is a good Fortune not granted to Saints,
Martyrs, Apostles, or even Christ himself, God blessed for ever more, Romans 9.5
and with what probability can any Man hope for it? Our Endeavors must be, to
give no ground for Detraction, and so to behave our selves, as nothing may be
reproacht us with truth.

Governments are more obnoxious to Censures, as including greater variety of
Actions and Designs, in which more Persons are concerned as acting in, or
suffering by them. This makes a vast diversity of Judgments in several Persons,
according as they fancy themselves regarded or neglected, advanced or kept
back, benefited or prejudiced by them; and according as they hope or fear from
them. A private Man possessed with an opinion of his own Ability, (which no
body sees but himself, nor he neither, but through self-love) shall think himself
as fit to sit at the Helm, as those who do; and finding his Preferment not to
answer the opinion he has of his own Capacity, thinks himself wronged by those
who are advanced before him. To revenge this imaginary Wrong, he commits a real
one, by blaspheming higher and lower Powers, calumniating their Actions,
censuring their Commands, and judging their Judgments: Erecting within himself
(through a criminal Rashness, and ridiculous Ambition) a Tribunal over those, to
whom by Public Authority he is subject. This Man by some weaker than himself,
shall be looked on as a wise Man, a Zealot of the Public Good, and a good
Patriot; when in reality, not Prudence but Passion governs his Tongue, which
only vents some indigested Choler.

I grant, that in all Governments there are some Inconveniences, which we may
wish were corrected. The Passions of some, the Weakness of others, cause
Disorders, which may be punished, but not prevented. Those who Govern, are not
always at their own disposal; sometimes to pleasure their Friends, sometimes to
avoid displeasing others, they are in a manner forced to some things, which
were they left to themselves they would not do. They must sometimes give way to
a lesser Evil, to avoid a greater; in which they deserve compassion, rather
than blame. Moreover, they are indeed greater than others, yet not Gods, but
Men; not omniscient, but ignorant of many things which pass in their
Government, and it may be are acted in their Name, and by their Authority, yet
contrary to their Intentions, which are (supposed to be) always for the Public
Good. It may be they know the thing, and dislike it; but know not how to remedy
it, without some other Inconvenience; (the avoiding of all Faults, is reserved
for Heaven.) Amongst Men, he is best, who has fewest Faults, not he who has
none, (such an one is a Chymera) and small ones may be connived at, in
consideration of great Virtues. Thus every private Man ought to suppose, that
the supreme Magistrate either does not know the Faults of those he Employs, or
thinks them not considerable, or knows not how to remedy them, without
incurring others as great or greater.

What is the Duty then of a private Man, who sees these Miscarriages? 1. To
pray God to mend all, or at least to prevent bad Consequences. 2. If he have
occasion and abilities, to acquaint those who may redress things, with what he
thinks amiss, and suggest, if he can, a proper Remedy; yet to leave the
applying that Remedy to those who are charged with the Public Concern. 3. In
case he be involved in common, or private Sufferings, he ought to bear it
patiently, and expect the turn of the Tide. 4. He may reform his own Life and
Actions according to the severest Laws of State, and Canons of the Church,
provided he become not by that troublesome to his Neighbors, (over whom he has
no Authority) or dangerous to Superiors (whose Authority over him is
established by God) or disturb the public Peace, which is to be preferred
before all Advantages which can be hoped from those petty Reformers, or their
Reformations. 5. Having done that, he ought to content himself, and press his
lawful Superiors no farther, assuring himself he has fully complied with the
utmost of his Duty, by acquainting his Rulers with what he thinks is for the
public Good, and by correcting himself. And he may suppose, that if these do
not follow his Advice, either they see the thing not feasible, or foresee other
Inconveniences, or expect some fitter Conjuncture; whereas by farther urging he
cannot but offend: For, to communicate his Dislikes to others, to draw them
first to join in Petitioning, with a seeming Submission, then by a real
Violence to force Superiors to what they pretend, to unsettle the present
Government, and to aim at setting up a new one, under pretense of Reforming the
old, is in the State Sedition, and in the Church Schism; as great Crimes
against both as any, except Rebellion and Heresy, to which they dispose.

So that this Reforming Humor in Particulars, is the Daughter of Pride, and
Mother of Heresy and Rebellion; which makes it be suspected by all lawful
Superiors, in all Established Governments, till they know all the Particulars
of which it consists. Absalon alleged plausible Reasons for altering the
Government of Israel, 2 Reg. 15. and Oza for upholding the Ark with his Hand, 2
Reg. 6. The first, that the State was abandoned, no body looking to the
Administration of Justice. The second, that the Ark was in danger of being
overturned Both grievously offended, exceeding the Bounds assigned them by God,
notwithstanding their specious Pretenses.

Now to the Subject of your Complaint. The Roman Catholic Church holding her
Faith by Tradition of all Ages from the Apostles, and never admitting the least
alteration in it; from which she is preserved by the help of the Holy Ghost,
promised to her by the Author and Finisher of it, Heb. 12.2. In this she knows
there can be no occasion for it by any Error. As to her Discipline, she
acknowledges some Alterations, and has no difficulty to admit of a
Reformation, provided things be done according to order. This appears first by
her Councils, even that of Trent, and several celebrated in France and Germany
in this last Age. Secondly, by the Practice of several Prelates, S. Charles
Borromeus in Italy, S. Francis de Sales in France, and others elsewhere.
Thirdly, by those of a lower Rank, as of S. Philip Nerius, who established the
Congregation of the Oratory in Italy. Pere Berule, (afterward Cardinal) who
established that in France. Pere Vincent de Paul, who founded the Priests of
the Mission: All Congregations of Clergy living in common, under the Obedience
of their several Superiors. Lastly, did you regard what they are, not what they
are said to be, and as much consult the Rules and Lives of the Jesuits in
themselves, as you do in the Writings of their professed Enemies, (whose
Testimony for that reason you ought to suspect) you would be forced to own,
that S. Ignatius de Loyola has reformed the Clergy, establishing a
Congregation of Clergymen, who live more conformably to the most ancient
Canons, and the Ecclesiastics of the Primitive Church, than any your whole
Reformation has, or shall be ever able to show. Which you would perceive, did
you reflect, that the numerous and bitter Enemies which they have had, never do
allege any thing against their Lives or Rules: which is a convincing Proof
they are irreprochable.

Now a word to those whom you commend, for endeavoring a Reformation of the R.
C.

Jean du Verger, Abbot of S. Cyran, was only a private Priest, not a Doctor of
Divinity, nor recommended by any other Degree, which might distinguish him from
the meanest; having no Jurisdiction even over the Abbey of which he bore the
Title. But his Personal Endowments, either to good or evil, were exceeding
great: A Large and comprehensive Fancy, a tenacious Memory, and a Judgment to
use all his Learning seasonably: Deep Melancholy, abounding with adust Choler,
was his Temper. The first fitted him for the Labor of hard Studies, the second
emboldned him to write whatsoever he fancied, without any regard to Persons,
how great soever. Those who particularly knew him, say, that no History shows a
Man of a more intriguing Wit, and fitter to Head a Faction: For, using too much
this Faculty, he was by the King's Authority cast into Prison, being accused by
a Bishop (whom he had before inveigled) who discovered his Designs through horror
of them. Cardinal de Richelieu being solicited to release him, by R. S. late
Bishop of Chalcedon, answered, Your Lordship does not know the Man you speak
for. Had our Fathers dealt so with Calvin, France had enjoyed Peace. Now I
would know of Mr. B. whether it be tolerable for a private Man to Cabal in his
own Church, to frame a Party in it besides, and contrary to the Orders of its
lawful Superiors, oppose all established Order, to unsettle old Customs and
introduce new ones, to make way for a new Government? If you approve this in S.
Cyran, how can you blame it in your Phanatics?

Antony Arnaud was once a Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, but was cast out of
it, and Degraded by the other Doctors, for his odd Sentiments in matters of
Grace, which he obstinately defended, even after they were Censured by Rome,
France, and his own Faculty. And why might not that Faculty retrench from its
Body, Members who refuse to submit to the major part, as by the Law of Nature
all are bound to do, where there appears no Sin? I know of no other Persecution
he ever endured. As to his Book of the Frequent Communion, it tended not to the
reforming, but to the destroying the Sacrament of Penance, as is seen by its
effects, where it prevails. I will not say he designed so much, I leave
Intentions to God, the Searcher of Hearts, Jerem. 17.10. Many times a Buck is
shot at, and a Man is killed. However it was inexcusable in him to endeavor to
change the Customs and Laws established by the Church, and in force. His Title
of Doctor could entitle him only to explicate the Laws received, and conform to
them, not to abrogate and reform them: for a Doctor, as such, has no
Jurisdiction, without which no Laws can be made, or unmade. The least Bishop,
nay the meanest Curate of a Parish has greater Power as to Laws, than the
greatest Doctor, as such; seeing those have some Jurisdiction, and this has
none at all.

Cornelius Jansenius was a Bishop, so his Case is different from the rest; for
he had Jurisdiction. Yet why he should be cited amongst the Reformers, I know
not: He has written several Works, Mars Gallicus, Annotations on the
Pentateuch and the Gospels, Alexipharmacum, and his Augustinus. His Mars
Gallicus is an Invective against the French Designs. His Annotations, and
Augustinus, do not touch the Discipline of the Church. He contradicts in them
some Points of the Doctrine of the Church Defined in the Council of Trent, which
drew the Censure of Rome on the later Work of his, yet without touching his
Person, who by his Will submitted his Augustinus to the Censure of Rome, in
whose Communion he always lived, and did then die, as an obedient Son of it. To
know the opinion he had of your Faction, read his Alexipharmacum, (which he
writ against your Brethren at Boysleduc) and you will see it. What reason have
you to complain of Severity used toward him? I know of none; his Person was
never touched by any Censure.

As for the Disciples of S. Cyran and Jansenius, I grant there is amongst them
a Spirit of Independantism; (and what Assembly of Men is entirely free from
such?) Yet you cannot glory in them, if what Mr. Brevint says in his Preface to
Saul and Samuel at Endor, be true, that they are more dangerous to a
Protestant, than even Missionaries and Jesuits; and therefore warns all to
avoid their Company. So that even those who dislike something in us, condemn
you.

CHAP. XXIX. Other small Objections.
G. B. p. 112. PApists make Children Bishops, allow of Pluralities,
Non-residences, Commendams, etc which are every day granted at Rome.

Answ. Here are a company of hard words to fright your Reader from Rome, as
Birds are frighted from Corn with a Rattle; and there is likewise more noise
than substance in both.

I have lived in the greatest Catholic Princes Dominions, and never saw, nor
heard of what you say is daily done. Our Canons require Thirty years for a
Bishop; few are made so young, most are promoted to that Dignity very ancient.
Yet this Age being determined only by Ecclesiastical Law, I will not deny, but
that on some extraordinary Motive some have been dispensed with. If you blame
this, see how you will excuse S. Paul, who made S. Timothy Bishop of Ephesus in
his Youth, 1. Tim. 4.12.

If you condemn Pluralities in our Church, how will you excuse your own, in
which they are practiced? Must the Canon Law be a Cablerope to us, and a Cobweb
to you? If you dislike Pluralities, begin with reforming your own Brethren, his
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, who can find a Conscience to keep two
Benefices, if they meet with a Prince who will bestow them.

As for Non-residences, Vide Aug. Epist. 138.
I dedemand, Whether it be not lawful for a Bishop to be absent from his
Diocese in the Circumstances following? 1. For the good of the Church, as in
General or Particular Councils. 2. For the good of the Nation, as in our
Parliaments. 3. For the good of their Dioceses, as when Flavianus, Patriarch of
Antioch, went to Constantinople, to preserve his Episcopal Seat from being
ruined, by appeasing Theodosius the Great, offended for the throwing down of
his Statues. 4. For any other Reason so weighty, that evidently it may be
equivalent to the good which his Residence might bring. No Papist thinks them
lawful, but only on such Occasions: for as for such who do absent themselves
either for Ambition, or Envy, or Pleasure, or Friendship, or any other unlawful
Design; or for some good, but so little, as not to countervail that of their
Duty to their Flock, we no less blame them than you: our Canons for Residence
are as severs as can be, and those often executed with the utmost rigor. What
do you more?

Commendams? offend you; that is, the recommending the Means of Abbeys to those
who are not Monks. Yet we give them only to Clergy, you to mere Laymen.
Secondly, we give them only for their Lives, you give them to their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns. Thirdly, we leave the Abbey, and its
legal Superiors, a competent Subsistence for the Monks; you turn them a
begging, out of God's Blessing into the warm Sun. When you have proved, that it
is more lawful for your Church to steal a Goose, than for ours to pluck a
Quill, I shall believe your Procedure legal, and ours illegal.

G. B. ibid. They strugled hard against the honest Attempt of those who labored
to have had Residence declared to be of Divine Right, in the Council of Trent.

Answ. What might the Catholic Church do to please you? Had she passed that
Declaration, you would have clamored at your ordinary rate, against new
Definitions of Faith; now she rejected that Definition, she opposed the honest
Attempt to promote it; and she must be in the wrong, and those who oppose her,
in the right, whatever she, or they do, because she is the Church, and they a
discontented Party in her. In fine, as the Jews proceeded with our Savior the
Bridegroom, so do you with the Bride, the Catholic Church; her Actions,
whatever they are, are blamed. To what are the men of this genertion like? They
are like unto children sitting in the marketplace, and saying, We have piped
unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and you have not
wept. Luc. 7.32. For, does the Church make a Decree, you blame her for it; does
she not make it, you blame her for that too. But Wisdom is justified by all her
children.

A Conclusion of the First, and Beginning of the Second Part.
G. B. p. 116. I Have run around the great Circle I proposed to my self, and
have examined the Designs of Christian Religion, and have found great
contradiction given to them by the Doctrins of that Church.

Answ. You have indeed run a Round, and that so long, that you are giddy with
it, as appears by your frequent and great Falls, so evidently against common
Sense, as I have all along observed, and yet I have not observed all; for that
would have been too tedious to the Reader, and have taken up more time, than I
can bestow upon Trifles. You have shown no Contradiction betwixt the Doctrine of
the Catholic Church, and the Designs of Christianity: I have shown their
Conformity. But your Book discovers a Design against Charity, which is the
Heart of Religion, it being a heap of rash Judgments, evident Calumnies, or
uncharitable Surmises. I say nothing of your Faults against Reason, your
incoherent Notions, groundless Judgments, and perpetual Sophisms; because although
these are great Faults in themselves, yet not considerable, in presence of
those others against Charity.

And these Faults are the greater, for being brought to uphold a Schism, a
Design contrary to Christianity; it being a most certain Truth, that No Man can
have the Love of God, who withstands the Union of all Men in one Church. Non
habet Dei Charitatem, qui Ecclesiae non diligit unitatem. Aug. l. 3. de Baptis.
cont. Donat. c. 16. And all your Pretenses of Causes given of your Separation,
are but frivolous; this tearing in pieces the my stical Body of Christ, is so
great a Sacrilege, that no Pretext can excuse it. Apparet (says S. Austin, l.
2. contra Epist. Parmen. c. 11.) non esse quicquam gravius sacrilegio
schismatis, quia praecidendae unitatis nulla est justa necessitas.

When I saw you reflect on your running so long round in a Circle, I hoped you
would come out of it; and was in hopes, that either I might have been a
Spectator of your following Course, or else that you would have led me a more
pleasing Walk. The Design of S. Austin ( Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 7.) came to my
Mind, who represented the Piety of Catholics, and the vicious Lives of the
Manichees, in his two Books De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae, and De moribus
Manichaeorum; and I imagined you might design the like in the two Parts of this
Book. I expected you would have given us a Panegyric of your own Church, after
you had spent your Satirical Vein in your Invective against ours. I thought we
should have seen described the Beauty of the Protestant Church, the Advantages
of Communion with it, the Perfection of its Faith, the Decency of its
Ceremonies, the Majesty of its Hierarchy, the Reasonableness of its Canons, the
Fullness of its Conducency to Piety in this Life, and Bliss in the next; and all
these confirmed with Examples of the virtuous Lives of its Devotes.

But how much have I been mistaken! for casting an Eye a little farther, after
some few words in commendation of your Faith, I find you throwing Dirt again as
fast as before, or rather faster; as if in the First Part you had only essayed,
what in the Second you act in earnest.

Does your Garden (the Church, Cant. 4.12. is compared to one) afford only that
one Flower? Is the Soil so barren, or so ill cultivated, as none else should be
found in it? Or if there be any other, do they thrive so ill, as not to be
worth being pointed to? Or does it come from a morosity of Nature, which
inclines you to blame, and reprehend? Or from a propensity to entertain
thoughts only of Faults and Imperfections, as Flies pitch upon Ulcers, and some
other Creatures wallow in Mire? Or from another Quality worse than that, which
turns all to bad, as a foul Stomach turns all Food into peccant Humors, and a
Spider draws Poison from that Flower, whence a Be draws Honey? Something of
this must be: for I will neither say there is nothing reprehensible in the
Lives of Catholics, (it is a Propriety of the Triumphant Church to be free from
any Spot or Wrinkle) nor that all is bad in Protestants besides their Faith,
that being the Condition of the Damned Spirits in Hell. But I supersede these
Personal Reflections, and follow (tho with little comfort) you in the new Maze
you lead me into.

CHAP. XXX. Catholic Faith delivered by Men Divinely Inspired. Rules to know
true Tradition. Faith never changed.
G. B. p. 116. THE first Character of our Faith is, that it was delivered to
the World by Men sent of God, and Divinely Inspired, who proved their Mission
by Miracles.

Answ. All Divine Faith is built on the Veracity of God; the Men who delivered
it at first, were but the Organs by which God spoke, and their Words were his
Words. When you received the word of God (says S. Paul 1 These. 2.15.) which
when you received of us, you received it not as the word of men, but (as it is
in truth) the word of God. Hence those Men frequently use that Phrase, Haec
dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord. And Faith is no farther a Theological
Virtue, than it relies solely, and only, on the Truth (Veracity) of God, as on
its Formal Object; as with our Divines, and out of them, Dr. Pearson, in his
Learned Explication on the Creed teaches. And in this even those Men (...),
Divinely Inspired, proceeded as we do, resolving their Faith into the Veracity
of God as well as we: for their Faith was univoca, of the same nature with
ours, with this only difference, that the Formal Object was applied to them
clearly, and to us only obscurely. The assent to such a Mystery in Christ, was
Science, or Vision; not so in any others. He might say, Quod scimus loquimur,
and quod vidimus testamur, Jo. 3.11. We know what we speak, and we testify
what we have seen. The rest must say, Credimus, propter quod and loquimur, 2
Cor. 4.13. We believe, and therefore we speak.

In this manner Faith was first spread in the World. I say the Catholic Faith,
not your Protestant Faith; which as it contains your positive and negative
Articles, (otherwise it is not Protestant) was never delivered by any Man
Divinely Inspired, but invented by your first Reformers, who (as I have said
Chap. 22. Sect. 1.) taking the whole Sum of Faith revealed, topt, and lopt off
it as much as they pleased; and from them you have not the Christian, but the
Protestant Faith; Fides temporum, non Evangeliorum; A Faith of the Times, not
of the Gospels, says Tertul. Were these the Men of God Divinely Inspired and
assisted by Miracles?

G. B. ibid. The Doctrins about which we differ, can pretend to no such Divine
Original.

Answ. You know we hold this not to be true, we received all by the same
Authority, from the same Hand.

G. B. page 117. What Man sent of God was the first Author of the Belief of the
Corporeal Presence, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, of the Pope's Supremacy, of
Purgatory, of Indulgences, and of all those innumerable Superstitions, of which
Scripture is absolutely silent.

Answ. Christ was a Man sent of God, and he was the first Author of them.

G. B. ibid. If these Doctrins were not the Offspring of Revelations, we cannot
be obliged to believe them as such.

Answ. Your former Legerdemain comes again, another conviction of your
disingenuous Proceeding. This appears by these Propositions: If the Bible were
not the Offspring of Revelation, we should not be bound to believe it. If
Christ were not true God, we should not be bound to adore him as such. Could
you with patience hear a Pagan with such a Slight undermine the Authority of
the Bible, or the Honor due to Christ? Prove what you odiously suggest, that
the things, you wrongfully call Superstitions, are not revealed, and you will
do something to the purpose. But you are too cunning to attempt any such Proof,
which you know surpasses your Strength. And therefore you had rather suppose
than prove it, that being more proportioned to your Capacity and Religion.

G. B. ibid. They vouch Scriptures for Proof to some of these, but these are so
far stretched, that their sure Retreat is in the Sanctuary of Traditions.

Answ. You speak as Dogmatically, as if it were ex Tripode. Here is an
Assertion without any Proof, and so is a convincing Proof, that you have none.
Tradition is indeed our Sanctuary, to which you have no Claim. By it we
received 1. Scriptures, 2. The Sense of Scriptures, which is their Soul.

Now when Scriptures are doubtful in any Point, or as you phrase it, seem not
to reach home without Stretching, can we have better assurance of their true
meaning, than by the Authority of the Church, which is clearly commended to us
in Scriptures themselves. And in following her Sense, we are certain we follow
Scriptures: which is the Discourse of S. Aug. lib. 1. contra Crescon. cap.
penult. Quamvis hujus rei de Scripturis Canonicis non proferatur exemplum,
Scripturarum etiam in hac re a nobis tenetur veritas, cum hoc facimus, quod
universa jam placuit Ecclesiae, quam ipsarum Scripturarum commendat auctoritas,
ut quoniam Sacra Scriptura fallere non potest, quisquis falli metuit hujus
obscuritate quaestionis, Ecclesiam de illa consulat, quam sine ulla ambiguitate
Sancta Scriptura demonstrat.

G. B. ibid. Till it be proved, that an Error could not creep into the World
that way, we must be excused from Believing.

Answ. Unless you prove, that Errors have crept in that way, you are
inexcusable. You actually rejected those things as Errors, which were in
possession all over the World: unless you prove them to be such, your Fact is
criminal.

G. B. ibid. It is not possible to know what Traditions came from the Apostles.

Answ. Habemus hic confitentem reum. For if it be impossible to know what
Traditions were Apostolical, your Reformers Act, in rejecting so many, was rash
and inconsiderate: They had been better advised to retain all, as they found
them in the Church, than to cut them off. But your Procedure is as different in
this, as in the rest, from S. Austin. For was any thing doubted of, this
Saint's Method was to consult the Church, and adhere to what she believed, or
practiced; (as you see in his Discourse above) you consult the Church too, but
it is only to reject her Practice, and condemn her Sentiments.

The weight of the Authority of the Church may be sufficient to convince, which
are Apostolical Traditions, as it convinces which are Apostolical Writings. Yet
we have other Signs: I will instance in two, one taken from S. Aug. l. 4. de
Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 24. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, neec a Conciliis
institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi Apostolica traditum auctoritate
rectissime creditur. We ought to believe those things to have come from the
Apostles, which the whole Church holds, and were not introduced by Councils,
but were always in use. To prove this, it is enough, that the first Persons who
mention them, speak of them, not as of things newly begun, but which were of
ancient Practice.

The second Rule is taken out of Tertullian, l. de Praescript. c. 28. Age nunc,
omnes erraverint, deceptus sit and Apostolus de testimonio reddendo quibusdam,
nullam respexerit Spiritus Sanctus, uti eam in veritatem induceret, ad hoc
missus est a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de Patre, ut esset Doctor veritatis,
neglexerit officium Dei villicus, Christi vicarius, sinens Ecclesias aliter in
terris intelligere, aliter credere, quam ipse per Apostolos praedicabat. Ecquid
verisimile est, ut tot, ac tantae Ecclesiae in unam fidem erraverint? Nullus
inter multos eventus est unus exitus, variasse debuerat error doctrinae
Ecclesiarum. Caeterum quod apud multos unum invenitur non est erratum, sed
traditum. Suppose, says he, that all Churches have erred, that the Apostle was
deceived in the Testimony he gave to some, the Holy Ghost looked to none, to
lead it into Truth, to which intent he was sent by the Son, and demanded of the
Father, to be the Doctor of Truth; Let the Steward of God, the Vicar of Christ,
neglect his Duty, and permit the Churches to understand, and believe otherwise,
than he had taught by his Apostles; Is it probable, that all Churches should by
Error fall into one and the same Opinion? When there are so many By-ways, those
who lose the Highway would scarce wander into the same Error. So that
certainly what is found one, and the same, in many Churches, is no Error newly
invented, but it is Faith of old delivered. Thus Tertullian. Answer you to his
Discourse, if you can.

G. B. page 108. A late ingenious Writer, whose sincere Zeal had drawn Censures
on himself and his Book, took a way to repair his Reputation by a new Method of
proving Popish Doctrins, that they had them from their Ancestors, they from
theirs. But this pretense has been baffled by Mr. Claud, as all know, who have
been so happy as to read his Works.

Answ. I am persuaded, that your Prelates will scarce think it sincere zeal in
Mr. Arnaud, (of him you speak) that he stood out so long against his Spiritual
and Temporal Superiors. But let that pass. You discover your Ignorance in
saying that Method was new, or that Arnaud invented it. Mr. Tho. White had it
before Arnaud, Mr. Fisher a Jesuit before T. W. Bellarmin before him, and S.
Austin, S. Stephen Pope, and Tertullian, before them all. I have read Mr.
Claud's Works, and was far from finding so much Satisfaction, as you promise
your Reader, I believe rather upon Hearsay, than on your own Experience: Nay,
I have from one of the eminentest Wits of the French Hugenots, that Claud was
not much esteemed amongst his own for those Works, which would have been
neglected, had not Arnaud's Enemies commended them. You say Claud Baffled him;
others are of a different opinion. I confess Mr. Arnaud, tho very Learned, yet
seemed not qualified to manage a Controversy in defense of Church Authority
and Tradition, having (as much as lay in him) weakened both, by his Writings,
and Practice, during the time he stood out against the Censure and the Formula:
which gave such advantage to Mr. Claud, who industriously gathered together,
and cunningly returned upon him his own Arguments, that some thought he had
foiled his Adversary; yet without any prejudice to the Catholic Cause, which is
not concerned in Mr. Arnaud's Personal Failings.

Let us now hear what you can allege against the Authority of Tradition, to
prove a Change unobserved in our Faith.

G. B. page 121. We know the Chalice was taken from the People 250 Years ago.

Answ. 1. You are mistaken in your Epoch: S. Thom. 3. p. q, 80. a. 12.
assures, it was in his time taken away in many Places; and he lived 400 Years
ago: and from the beginning some Persons, and on some Occasions, received but
one Species. 2. This is an Argument that Changes cannot happen, without some
notice taken of them; as in this, We know when it begun, (with the Schools) who
opposed it, (the Hussits) what Council commended it, and condemned its
Opposers, that of Constance. Which confirms our Rule, That when none of this
appears, there has been no Change.

G. B. ibid. All once Worshipped in their Mother Tongue, but after (by the
overthrow of the Empire) the Latin Tongue decayed, the barbarous Worship was
obtruded on the World.

Answ. This proves a Change in the People, whose Language was spoiled with the
mixture of barbarous Terms, not in the Service, which continued the same; it
continuing in Latin, as it was before that Inundation of Barbarians.

G. B. page 122. We know that for the first seven Centuries the Christian World
abhorred Images.

Answ. In what Age did S. Gregory the Great live? Sure within the first seven
Centuries. And he ( Lib. 7. Epist. 109. and Lib. 9. Epist. 8.) rebuked Serenus
Bishop of Marseilles for casting them out of the Church. Was not S. Austin
within the first seven Centuries? He ( Lib. 1. Consens. Evang. cap. 10.) speaks
of the Pictures of Christ, and the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Thus I
have passed your three Instances to prove a Change in the Faith of the Church:
which you usher in with that emphatical Term, We KNOW. If you have many other
such Points of KNOWLEDGE, for the Divertisement of the Learned World, I wish
you to publish them. I am persuaded few besides your self know such things;
most know them to be false.

CHAP. XXXI. Revelations and Miracles.
G. B. p. 123. THE Papist Church pretends to Revelations for some of her most
doubtful Opinions; which are the Visions and extraordinary Inspirations of some
of their Saints, from which they vouch a Divine Confirmation to their Doctrine.

Answ. If you know of any Decree made in matter of Faith, upon a private
Revelation, show it. Till you do so, I will not believe it. S. Tho. 1. p. q. 1.
a. 8. ad. 2. absolutely excludes all private Revelations from grounding Faith.
Innititur Fides nostra revelationi factae Apostolis and Prophetis; non autem
revelationi, si qua fuit aliis Doctoribus facta. Our Faith relies on
Revelations made to the Apostles, and Prophets; and not on such as are made to
other Doctors.

G. B. page 124. S. Paul being put to glory of Visions and Revelationt, was to
run back fourteen Years for one.

Ans. S. Paul says, that he had fourteen Years before that great Revelation;
but he never said he had no others, either before, or after. And that
Revelations were not so extraordinary in his Days, as you think, not only
amongst the Apostles, but even amongst ordinary Christians, you may learn out
of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.30, 32. If any thing be revealed to another that sits
by, let the first hold his peace, for you may all Prophecy one by one, that
you may all learn, and all be comforted. And the Spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets. And can you think the Apostle should have no
Revelation for so many years, when the meanest Christians had them, even in the
middle of their public Assemblies, where they met with so many Distractions?
What will you say to excuse your Ignorance, if other Revelations made to S.
Paul, be recorded in Scripture? Now so it is: For, 1. A Macedonian ( Act.
16.9.) appeared to him. 2. Our Lord spoke to Paul in a Vision, ( Act. 18.9.)
Nay, the very place you cite to prove your Error, confutes it: for he says,
Lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of Revelations,
there was given. 1 Cor. 12.7. He had then REVELATIONS, nay, abundance of
Revelations. See how carelessly you read, how ill you understand, and how
negligently you write out of Scriptures! for you are certainly convinced, that
when S. Paul spoke of that one, he did it, not because he had been favored with
no other, but because that was a singular favor, and as such esteemed. But I
dispute seriously against a Man, who regards not what he writes.

G. B. page 124. Are they not credible Stories, of Christ's appearing to some
of their She Saints, and kissing them, being married to them, etc.

Answ. I doubt not but you, and your Brethren, think this Folly. S. Paul says
as much of such as you, 1 Cor. 2.14. Animalis homo non percipit ea, quae sunt
spiritus Dei; stultitia est enim illi, and non potest intelligere, quia
spiritualiter examinatur. The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. Of such, as the English Ministers, S.
Paul speaks, who are by him declared incapable to judge, yet will be still
judging of the secret workings of the Holy Ghost in those Souls, which he makes
his Temples, in whom he lives, and they in him: which things seem folly to you,
because you have no experience of them, and probably never made an hour of
Mental Prayer in all your Life, nor know how to make it. Hence you speak evil
of things you know not, Jude v. 10. It would be more to your Credit to omit
those things, than by speaking of them, discover so shameful an Ignorance. The
best Advice I can give you, is that of Job to his Friends, To be silent, that
you may seem wise, Job 13.5.

But Christ kissed them, and married them. This scandalizes your chaste
Brethren, who cannot hear of Marriage! and Mr. Brevint surmised God knows what
unclean Spirits. I cannot appeal to the Conscience and Experience of any of the
whole Ministry, for the reality of what you deride; for I think there never was
granted to any of you such Favors. Yet to free you from fear of Illusions (in
those Visits) from bad Spirits, know, (and I wonder any one, who reads the
Scripture, can be ignorant of it) that there is a Spiritual Contract betwixt
Christ and the Church; Item, betwixt him and every pious Soul; That this
Contract is called a Marriage; That on this score the Sins of such Souls
against their Spouse are called Adulteries, and themselves Adulteresses. If you
have any Remembrance, these Hints will bring to mind a number of Texts of
Scripture, which deliver what you scoff at. The whole Book of Canticles (or
Solomon's Song) celebrates that adorable Nuptial Solemnity. The very first words
of it are, Osculetur me osculo oris sui, Cant. 1.1. Let him (or may he) kiss me
with a kiss of his mouth. The Church, and every pious Soul, demanding as a
singular Favor of her Spouse that Blessing; which when granted to some,
scandalizes you, modest Man, so different are your Sentiments in Spiritual
things, from those of the Holy Ghost, who says, ( Cant. 1.3.) that the Soul
should receive that favor, she at first demanded, and yet not be despised. You
despise them all as Forgeries, Dreams, Effects of Melancholy, or Hysterical
Distempers. What is Blasphemy, if this be not? Our Lord for give you, for you
know not what you say.

G. B page 124. The Inspirations of Holy Writers, on whom we found our Faith,
was proved by Miracles.

Ans. We build not our Faith on any of these Revelations you speak of; so this
Hint is nothing to the purpose. If we did, Miracles are not here wanting, viz.
The change of Men's Lives either from good to better, or at least from bad to
good: which sufficiently proves the goodness of the Spirit appearing, above all
your frivolous Exceptions. And if other Miracles are necessary, those are many
times granted too.

G. B. page 126. Was it not a worthy piece of the Angelical Ministration, for
Angels to go trotting over Sea and Land, with a Load of Timber and Stone of the
Virginal House to Loretto.

Answ. Whether they trotted, or ambled, I doubt not, but that piece of
Ministration was more pleasing to those Blessed Spirits, than to attend the
protection of Men, who spend their Strength of Body and Mind in offending God,
by impugning known Truth. Sin I know they abhor; other things are indifferent
to them; and all are welcome, when commanded.

G. B. page 128. The Miracles of Rome are not heard of till some Ages, at least
Years, be past.

Answ. This is not true. They are all very strictly immediately examined by
Authority from the Ordinary, and then published. See that done at Gant upon D.
Mary Minshall, approved by the Bishop shortly after it past.

G. B. ibid. It is the Interest of Rome to have them all believed, without once
questioning them.

Answ. Rome has no Interest, but that Truth find place, and God be glorified.
If you consider how strictly those of the Portuguese Nun were examined, and how
sincerely the Cheat was published, you will acknowledge, that our Church does
not countenance any Deceit in this, nor think it her Interest, that all should
be believed.

G. B. ibid. How comes it, that in Heretical Countries, where there is more
need of those Miracles, and where they might be more irrefragably proved, if
true, none of those mighty Works do show themselves forth?

Answ. How comes it, that when the Scribes and Pharisees demanded a Sign from
Heaven, our Savior refused it? An evil and adulterous generation seeks after
a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it. Mat. 12.39. It is presumptuous
for you, or any other, to prescribe Rules to God Almighty's Providence, which
is never wanting in what is necessary, and we ought not to expect things
unnecessary, to pleasure our Curiosity either in Nature, or Grace; which he
grants when he pleases, but not always. Now Miracles are very efficacious
Means, but not the only Motives to bring us to Faith, and by consequence not
absolutely necessary. The Apostle had a Power to work Miracles, and had a great
proportion of Learning, yet he used neither for Conversion of the World, when
worldly Men demanded it. Judaei signa petunt, Graeci sapientiam quaerunt. Nos
autem praedicamus Christum Crucifixum, Judaeis quidem scandalum, Gentibus autem
stultitiam. 1 Cor. 1.22. The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after
wisdom. And did he work Miracles to satisfy the one, or use Human Wisdom to
work on the other? No, But we preach Christ crucified, a scandal to the Jews,
and folly to the Greeks. Both tempted God, as the Scribes did, and you do: and
neither obtained what they demanded. Indeed, those that will shut their Eyes to
all other Motives, would easily baffle the conviction of Miracles, either
saying they are natural Works, or attributing them to Magic. You see how the
Cure of the blind Man, born so, was tossed, ( Joh. 9.) and how casting out
Devils ( Luc. 11.15.) was attributed to their Prince, Beelzebub.

G. B. page 133. My greatest Quarrel at these Forgeries of Miracles, is, that
the People are taught to believe them and the Miracles of the Gospel, with
equal certainty.

Answ. If this be the only ground of your Quarrel, we shall quickly agree; for
I do not believe them with equal certainty. We are bound to believe with Divine
Faith each Miracle related in the Gospel, but not so those contained in
Ecclesiastical History, how authentical soever.

CHAP. XXXII. Whether all Mysteries of Faith ought to be common?
G. B. p. 121. THERE are no secret Doctrins in our Faith, which must be kept
from the Vulgar, whereby the Pastors of Christendom may have possession of
their Souls.

Answ. Here you smell another Popish Design, of which none, but your Party,
ever dreamed, of which we cannot be accused (suppose it were true) without
reproach to the Apostles, whose Example we follow in this, if we practice it:
which in some sort seems unavoidable, considering the weakness of Men, with
which we must comply as much as we can, without withdrawing any Saving Truth.

Our Body by certain degrees grows up from the Dimensions it is born with, to
its full Stature: and our Mind, from its native Ignorance successively passes
to Knowledge. Give Archimedes his Works to a Novice in Mathematics, he will
not be the better for them. He must be first prepared to receive benefit by
them, by passing Euclid's Elements. The same of other Sciences: and one may
learn to read Hebrew without Points, without learning his Aleph, Beth, as well
as he may learn the abstruser Conclusions of any Science, without learning its
Rudiments.

Faith differs from all other Sciences in its Object, that is, God's Veracity,
but agrees with them, that it requires some time to be brought to its full
perfection. It contains many Assents to several Mysteries, or Articles, to
whose understanding we cannot attain at one hearing.

Nay, each Article requires some time; so that as the material Sun chases away
the obscurity of the Night by degrees, rising on our Horizon: so does the Sun
of Justice successively enlighten our Soul. This increase of Faith the Apostle
demanded of our Savior, Luc. 17.5. To this the Prince of the Apostles exhorts,
Desire the sincere Milk, that in it you may grow. 1 Pet. 2. (...). not as your
English Translation has it, that you may grow thereby; as if our Growth were
only by Faith in other things, when it is in Faith it self.

Milk is frequently taken in Scripture by a natural, and very proper Metaphor,
for the first Rudiments, or necessary Principles of Faith, communicated to
Catechumens, or Beginners, who being young, and as it were Infants in Christ,
were not capable of more abstruse Mysteries, which are called solid Meat. So to
Babes Milk is given, till by use of it they get strength to digest solid Meat.
This Method the Apostles used, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. I, brethren, could not speak unto
you, as unto Spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as babes in Christ; I have fed
you with Milk, and not with Meat, for you were not able to bear it, neither yet
now are ye able: for you are yet carnal. Here you see, Sir, a whole Church, a
noble Church, kept for a long time to her Milk, because her progress in
Spirituality, did not answer to the time of her Conversion.

A like Conclusion may be drawn from a reproach made to the ancient converted
Jews, Heb. 5.12. When for the time ye ought to be teachers, you have need that
one teach you again, which be the first principles of the oracles of God, and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. For every one
that uses milk, is unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe.
But strong meat belongs to those that are of full age, those, who by reason of
use, have their Senses exercised to discern good, and evil. Thus the Apostle
dealt with Babes in Christ, but to Proficients he discovered greater Mysteries;
We speak wisdom amongst the perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6. And because he thought the
Thessalonians were such, he prayed hard daily, that he might see them again,
that he might complete what was lacking in their Faith, 1 These. 3.10. Now
whether this completing was intensive or extensive, by adding new Mysteries of
Faith, or a more ample Explication of what they knew before, is not material.

This will help us to understand the meaning of another place of the Apostle, (
Romans 12.) I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is amongst
you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think
soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the MEASVRE of Faith. For as
we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office; so
we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members of another. Having
then gifts according to the grace which is given us, whether prophecy,
ministry, etc. Faith is distributed, you see, to all the Church, yet not to
each Member alike; but to each one HIS ME ASVRE, proportionable to his
Capacity, and the Place, or Function he is called to. Which Similitude he uses
in a like Sense, 1 Cor. 12. and Ephesians. 4.7. And had you taught your Disciples
as the Apostles did theirs, to be content with their measure of Faith, there
had not been so many Sects in the World; who pretending to the fullness of
Faith, of which they are not capable, have lost both Faith and Charity.

You see, Sir, whose Example we follow in this, viz. that of the Apostles. So
if there be any design of Ambition to ground it, the Apostles are guilty of it,
not we. Orig. contr. Cells. l. 1. p. 7. says, all Christians were not acquainted
with all revealed Truths, only the most necessary Points were communicated to
all. And l. 3. p. 122. he confirms that Practice with the Example of Christ,
who spoke in Parables to the Multitude, and explicated them to his Disciples,
Mat. 13.11. S. Basil, lib. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 27. Discoursing of the
Institutions of Christianity, divides them into two Parts, (...), and (...).
The first might be familiarly Preached to all (...): the others were (...), not
commonly to be divulged. Tertullian, lib. de Praescript, cap. 25. page 335.
blames some Heretics, who pretended to ground their Errors on Traditions
obscurely delivered by the Apostles; and on that occasion seems to disown any
Doctrine taught in private. But in the following c. 26. p. 336. he explicates
his meaning, which was to reject only such clancular Traditions, as should be
contrary to the Word, or Doctrine publicly Preached. And we say the same.

G. B. page 132. These are Practices far different from the Method of the
Apostles in Preaching the Gospel, who withheld nothing of the Counsel of God
from the People.

Answ. Those words are taken out of that Speech of S. Paul to the Elders of the
Church of lesser Asia, Act. 20.27. which you by a gross Mistake say were the
People; as if the Holy Ghost had made the People Bishops to Govern the Church
of God. Now if the People Govern, who are Governed? You are hard put to it, to
find Reasons against us, when you are forced to such wretched Shifts. Know
then, (which I wonder any one who reads with attention that place can be
ignorant of) that those to whom S. Paul spoke there, were Bishops, to whom by
reason of their Office, a larger measure of Faith was due: to them the whole
counsel of God was made known, to be communicated to others, not promiscuously
to all; but to faithful men, who might be able to teach others. 2 Timothy 2.2.

Now tho according to the Practice of the Apostles, the People amongst us are
not made Teachers, Pastors, Prophets, and Apostles, yet all, even to the
meanest Artisan, have Instructions necessary to Salvation: What they are bound
to believe, what they are to hope for, and what to do; And what need of more?

If any amongst us will undergo the labor of Studies, the greatest Mysteries of
our Faith are obvious to him: Our Scriptures, our Councils, our Decretals, our
Fathers, our Ecclesiastical, and Profane Histories, our Divines, and our
Philosophers, are extant in our Stationers Shops; as well for the use of the
meanest Christian, as of the Pope, Cardinals, or Bishops. What is then
concealed from them, which may ground your Accusation?

Our Procedure in this is so connatural, that I am persuaded it cannot but be
your own Practice. The English Church has drawn to some few Heads those Points
of Faith which she thinks necessary to Salvation, and delivers them to all in
her Catechism. As for the others contained either in the Bible, or in the
Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, or in the four first General Councils, she leaves
it to her Children to seek them out themselves, if they have will and
convenience, or to receive them from their Ministers: and I do not see how any
Governors of a Church can proceed otherwise. Dare you blame this in your Mother
Church? Why then should you condemn us for it?

G. B. page 133. Matters of Interest are the constant Subject of their Studies
and Sermons; whereas others, of the greatest Laws of God are seldom minded.

Answ. If you could write this Untruth without blushing, you have no Blood in
your Body. To confute you, it will be enough to open any one Book of Devotion,
and hear, or read a Sermon. In mala causa non possunt aliter. August. Your
Cause must be very bad, which requires such Untruths to uphold it; and ours
very good, seeing you have no Truth to allege against it.

CHAP. XXXIII. Faith not dependant on Senses.
G. B. p. 133. GOD has fitted Faith, and framed our Souls so harmoniously,
that they are congenial one to another.

Answ. I find you in this Point very much to seek, how to own a great Truth,
and yet to establish a contrary Falsehood, which is very dear to your whole
Party. That Faith is above Natural Reason, and much more above Sense, is
unquestionable. This you own, and so place Faith on a Throne. Yet something
must be had against Transubstantiation, and nothing occurs but from Sense. Then
you pull down Faith, and set up Sense in her place. Tantae molis erat sanctum
subvertere dogma. The Mysteries about God and Christ, say you, are exalted
above the reach of our Faculties: But Reason it self teaches that it must be
so. Here Faith is above Reason. But afterward, page 134. Our Faith rests on
the Evidences our Senses give. Here Faith does Homage to Sense.

Faith is an argument of things which appear not, Heb. 11.1. So that it relies
not on Senses, for its Object does not appear; nor on Reason, otherwise it
would be Science, if the Reason be evident, or Opinion, if it be uncertain. So
it relies only on God's Veracity, which consists of two Qualities. One, that He
cannot be deceived, being Omniscient; The other, that he cannot deceive, being
Good. Neither is possible to God: for to be deceived, is an Error in the
Understanding; and to deceive, argues Malice in the Will. So the Assurance we
have by Faith, is greater than that of our Senses, which may be baffled;
greater than that of Reason, which sometimes is mistaken in its Principles,
oftener deceived in its Deductions from them. Thus God is true, (Romans 3.4.) and
every man a liar: which later part imports a possibility of Error in our
clearest Operations, whether of Sense or of Reason.

To say, that Faith rests on the Evidence of Senses, (as you do p. 134.) is so
contrary to the nature of Faith, that both Divines and Philosophers doubt
whether the same Object can S. Thom. 2.2. q. 1. art. 4. and 5.
be seen and believed; and generally speaking, deny the possibility of it. And
to what our Blessed Savior said, Because thou have seen me, thou have
believed, Joh. 20.29. They answer with S. Gregory, Aliud vidit, aliud credidit;
He saw a Man, and believed him to be God.

To what purpose then are Miracles, if Faith does not rely on them? Ans. To
dispose our Understanding to receive with attention and submission the Word of
God, by showing it was God who spoke. And when Christ appeals to his Works: (
If I do not the Works of my Father, do not believe me; but if I do them, if you
will not believe me, believe the Works, Joh. 10.38.) he assigns only the
outward Motive of Belief; by which his Hearers were either drawn to Believe, or
made inexcusable, if they persisted in their Incredulity. Now it is the
grossest Error imaginable, to think that Faith rests on all those things which
dispose to it; otherwise it would rest on the skill in Tongues, which is
necessary to understand the original Scriptures; Item, on the Masters, who
Teach them; on the Stationer, who Prints them, etc.

But what if the Man, who confirms his Mission by evident Miracles, teach
things contrary to Sense or Reason? Ans. Our Duty is to silence both these, and
hearken to him. The Arms of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God,
to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought. 2 Cor. 10. Who says, every thought, comprehended both
those grounded on Sense, and others more Speculative. But to say as you do,
that Reason must be subject to Faith, but not Senses, is very preposterously to
put Reason the Mistress, under Faith; and Sense the Servant, above it. You
declaim against Catholics, for acknowledging in the whole Church an Authority
in order to the Word of God, much less than that which you give to the Senses
of every particular Man. What an occasion do you give us, to return upon you
all your Declamations?

G. B. page 134. We cannot really doubt, but things are as they appear to us:
for we cannot believe it Midnight when we see clearly the Sun in our Meridian.

Answ. We should not doubt of what God says, who (we are sure) cannot tell a
Lie. We perceive daily the Hallucinations of our Understanding. I am sure
sometimes my Senses are mistaken, and my Reason corrects them. All Man is a
Liar, every knowing Faculty in him is subject to Deceit. God cannot tell me it
is Midnight when it is Noonday, because he cannot tell a Lie: But if God
should tell me it is Midnight, and my Eyes should represent to me a luminous
Body in the Meridian perfectly like the Sun; I should suspect my Eyes, or guess
I saw a Meteor, or that I Dreamed, or Raved, or were yet in a worse Condition.
The least, and last of my thoughts would be, that God told a Lie; which is the
first thought you suggest.

G. B. page 135. Senses unvitiated, fixing on a proper Object, through a due
Mean, are infallible.

Answ. Are they more infallible than God? Are we infallibly certain all those
Conditions concur? May there not be more ways to delude our Senses, than are
discovered? May there not be some latent defect in the Organ unperceived by us?
Or some want in the Mean? Answer to these Questions; and withal tell me,
whether you have as great certainty of your Answer to these Queries, as you
have of the Veracity of God.

With more color another may say, that Faith cannot be against Reason; and
with Socinus, refuse to believe any thing contrary to Discourse; and so turn
Antitrinitarian. I think my self as assuredly certain of that Metaphysical
Principle, Eadem uni tertio sunt idem inter se, as of any thing I know by
Senses; yet knowing what Christ has taught concerning the Blessed Trinity, I
believe that, and explicate that Principle as I can. Why should we not proceed
in like manner with our Senses, when they seem to contradict what Christ has
taught? We are commanded to put out an Eye, cut off a Hand, or foot, (Mat.
18.8, 9.) if it draws us to sin. What shall we do, if they draw us to
Infidelity? Or do you think it unlawful to keep them, yet lawful to follow
their suggestions, and deny our Faith in obedience to their Depositions?

Heap up then your Absurdities, your Impossibilities, your Incredibilities,
your Sophisms against Transubstantiation to as great a bulk, as your little
Studies, and less Discretion will permit, you will only multiply Proofs of the
Insolency and Folly of the Reason of Man, which dares enter the Lists against
the Truth of God.

G. B. page 136. It is little less unconceivable, to imagine, that a Man of no
eximious Sanctity, nor extraordinary skill in Divinity, should have the Holy
Ghost at his command, that his Decrees must be the Dictates of the Spirit.

Answ. I pass that disrespectful Expression, Having the Holy Ghost at his
command; no Catholic ever spoke so. Do you think the Assistance of the Holy
Ghost (whence flows all Jurisdiction both Spiritual and Temporal) is restrained
to only Saints, and Learned Clerks? Does Prelate and Prince lose their
Jurisdiction by every mortal Sin? Was Amos the Shepherd a great Divine? Were
Solomon and Caiaphas great Saints? Were the Scribes and Pharisees such, whose
words all ( Mat. 23.2.) were commanded to obey at the same time that they were
warned to avoid their Actions? And that I may give you an Instance
proportionable to your Objection, of an irrational Creature to an unreasonable
Doubt, what say you to Balaam's Ass? Was he either Saint or Divine? He rebuked
his Master for his iniquity, speaking with man's voice, and forbad the madness
of the Prophet. 2 Pet. 2.16. God grant he cure all amiss in you.

Know, Sir, that Jurisdiction, Gift of Miracles, Tongues, Prophecy, and all
those Graces, which are called Gratis datae, and regard the sanctification of
others, not of the Person to whom they are given, have no connection with any
Personal Sanctity in their Subject. S. Thom. 1.2. q. 111. a. 1.

CHAP. XXXIV. Mr. G. B. his Intention in his Books, and his Meekness to
Catholics.
G. B. p. 140. THVS far I have pursued my Design, in the Tract whereof I have
not been void of a great deal of Pain and Sorrow: for what Pleasure can any
find by discovering so much Wickedness. God is my witness, how these thoughts
have entertained me with horror and regret, all the while I have considered
them: And it is not without the greatest antipathy to my Nature imaginable,
that I have paid this Duty to Truth.

Answ. Here you give a very artificial Confirmation of all you had said before:
That you undertook this Task with great Reluctance, and carried it on with
Grief and Sorrow; Vouch God as Witness of the truth of this, suspecting, I
suppose, as you had reason, your bare Word would scarce be received, whilst so
many pregnant Proofs stand for the contrary.

For First, Your Religion does not inspire such a Spirit of Mortification, as
to engage her Children in painful and sorrowful Actions, for any time at all,
much less for so long a time as is necessary for composing a Book of so various
Matter. And for your Person, I do not hear that you seek so much occasions of
Grief.

Secondly, Those who with sorrow and unwillingness think of others Faults,
avoid those usually, and entertain others of their Virtues. Content is the
thing all Men commonly seek, even in their Grief. They decline contristating
Objects, and sometime seek a freedom from them by a cessation from all rational
Operations, preferring the sottish, stupid, senseless Condition of a Beast,
before the rational, but irksom thoughts of displeasing Objects; as is too
common in England, if I am not mistaken: But that a Man, who may divertise
himself, or find Employments pleasing, should trouble himself with what passes
in Jamaica, or China, or Rome, which concerns him not, is very unusual, and
almost incredible.

Thirdly, Those who are truly sorry for their Neighbors Faults, do not easily
entertain false Reports of them; Are unwilling without pregnant Proofs, to
harbor any bad Opinion of them, or give credit to bad Reports concerning them;
In fine, show in their Actions the truth of that saying, Charitas non cogitat
malum, 1 Cor. 13.5. Charty thinks no evil. You on the contrary take all
malicious Reports against us, as true, although you either knew already, or with a
little labor might have known the wrong done us, in them; for as for the
greatest part of your Difficulties, they are such as have been Answered over
and over.

Fourthly, You feign things your self, which no body ever dreamt of, and are in
themselves most untrue. As what you say page 133. The Subject of our Sermons
and Studies are Matters of Interest, and not the Laws of God. Nay, when the
things themselves are not blameworthy, you calumniate our Intentions, seeking
into our Hearts for matter to fix a Calumny on. And can any body persuade
himself, our Errors and Faults afflict you, when you labor so hard to find
them? And feign them your self rather than miss of them? I cannot tell to what
better to compare this Proceeding (if your Grief were real) than to Children,
who having dressed up a Puppet, fancy it sick, then dead, and then fall a crying,
as if it really were so.

Fifthly, Your manner of Writing is too artificial for Grief: it is not so
serious and grave as those are which that Passion dictates. It is sarcastical,
insulting, sharp, biting, in a word, satirical, no sign of mercy, compassion,
bemoanings, bewailings, etc. but only when you call to mind your Text, or
strive to get your Readers Favor, by pretending to grieve for our Faults: So
that, did you not tell us of it, we should rather guess any other Passion
predominant in you, than that of Grief. We find many clear Signs of Pride,
Emulation, Hatred, Contempt, Anger, Disdain, Jealousy, Fear, etc. and but few
of Sorrow.

Lastly, This very Protestation gives an occasion to suspect your Innocence,
according to the Rule of the Law, Excusatio non petita, accusatio manifesta; An
Excuse not demanded, is an evident Accusation. An Apology is always an Answer
to some Reproach of a Crime; and when no Witness appears abroad, who made that
Reproach, it is certainly suspected to be objected by the best Witness, the
Man's own Conscience.

Hence, I fear, most indifferent Readers will think, that you never gave
greater ground to suspect your Ingenuity, than now. It is a weakness to attend
to good Words, when we see bad Actions; to regard Jacob's Voice, when we feel
Esau's Hands. You very religiously call God to witness, but I believe he will
scarce confirm your Deposition with a Miracle.

But Intentions are secret, known only to the Searcher of Hearts, it is a
rashness for any to pretend to know them even by Conjectures. And although you
presume to discover the Designs of Men dead many Ages ago, yet I will not
imitate you in that Rashness, by pretending an Insight into your Heart, how
great soever may the ground be for a guess. I will not return evil for evil; I
will be as civil, and favorable to you, as I can: I admit you thought you said
True when you writ this, and that if you deceive us, it is after being deceived
your self: for although you spoke an Untruth, (as these alleged Reasons do prove)
yet you did not tell a Lie, which consists in a will to deceive others. As for
Untruths, the honestest Man in the World may tell them, no Honesty exempting
him from mistaking things of himself, or being misinformed from others; and so
he may tell an Untruth, without prejudice to his Reputation.

Now this possibility of Mistakes, and Error, reaches to our Hearts, which are
hidden not only from our Neighbors, but even from our selves, whilst we take
Thoughts for Resolutions, and transitory Purposes for settled Designs. S. Greg.
l. 1. Pastor. c. 9. Saepe sibi de se men's ipsa mentitur, fitque ut aliud in
imis intentio supprimat, aliud tractantis animo superficies cogitationis
ostendat: and fingit de bono opere amare quod non amat, de mundi autem gloria
non amare quod amat. Our Soul is often deceived by her self, says S. Gregory.
What swims on the surface of the Mind, is far different from what lies at the
bottom of the Heart, (which has the main part in our Actions) some are
entirely possessed with the love of the Vanity of this World, who think they love
God. So that God alone knows amongst all those Affections we have in our Wills,
which is predominant; and as for our selves, we are often mistaken, and, as
Thomas a Kempis says, think we are moved with Zeal, and it is only Passion
which transports us. Saepe passione movemur, and zelum putamus.

You had then two Passions in your Soul, when you writ this Book, the one
swimming on the surface of your Mind, (as S. Gregory speaks) of Grief for the
supposed Errors of the Catholic Church. The other hidden at the bottom of your
Heart, of Hatred of Papists. The first enabled you to make your Protestation;
The second (except in some very few places) governed your Intention. Now to
your Meekness.

G. B. page 141. I am none of those who justify rage or bitterness against
those in Errors. And page 155. We abhor the Doctrine of cruel persecuting of any
for their Consciences: The utmost that we allow of, or desire of that nature,
being the driving from us those who do so disturb us.

Answ. Wonderful meek, sweet, and charitable! As if Banishment from our native
Country England, of such a number, as embrace the Communion of the Catholic
Religion of all Conditions, were an inconsiderable Punishment! If you deal so
with those, whom you pity, what will you do with those, for whom you have some
Bitterness?

But why must all, who profess the Catholic Religion, be banished? Because say
you, they disturb you. It seems a dangerous business, to disturb a Scottish
Minister, which deserves Banishment of all Yeomen, Gentlemen, Squires, Knights,
Baronets, Barons, Vicounts, Earls, and others, who are Catholics. What will be
your Verdict against me, in case you think this Book disturb you? What torments
will be sharp enough, and what Gibbet high enough, to satisfy for this Crime,
on an obscure Man, when for the like so many illustrious Persons are Sentenced
to Banishment?

G. B. page 142. My design is to provoke Pity, rather than Wrath, and Tears
more than Flames, toward those deceived Multitudes, that we may Pray for them,
rather than Rail at them.

Answ. If so, never was Design worse handled.

G. B. page 143. I shall not search into the depths of the Mercies of God, how
far they may reach any of that Communion. None alive is more willing to stretch
his Invention for finding out Grounds to fix his Charity on, than my self: But
all I can devise falls short.

Answ. Your Meekness discovers it self more and more. Before you proposed our
Banishment from the Country, which God appointed us for this Life, by ordering
in it our Birth; now you banish us from Heaven, our true Country: So that in
the midst of your Kindness, you design us the Punishment of Cain in this World,
and that of the Devils in the next. Is this all the effect of your stretched
Invention to find Grounds for your Charity? What Destiny would you have read
us, if you had not stretched it out?

Seeing you give this occasion (if your Protestation be sincere) you cannot be
offended, that I help your Invention, by showing a Ground for your Charity to
fix on, by alleging those very probable Reasons, why Catholics do not embrace
your Communion.

CHAP. XXXV. Reasons, why Catholics do not embrace the Communion of the
Protestant Church.
OUR Blessed Savior ( Mat. 7.15.) watns us to beware of those who come to us
in sheeps-clothing, but are interiorly ravenous wolves; and gives us a sign to
know them by, their works. Catholics considered the Works of the first
Reformers, and by them judged of their Persons, whether they were Sheep, or
Wolves.

Imprimis, They had a great Motive to suspect the whole Reformation, because
the occasion of it was evidently reproachful. In Germany, Luther's Motive was
Emulation betwixt his Order, and the Dominicans, and Envy, that these later
should have the Preaching of the Jubilee. In England, Lust began it under Henry
VIII. and Avarice, and Pride completed it under Edward VI.

By whom was it most hotly embraced, and promoted? By Apostates, in whom the
Flesh prevailed over the Spirit: and the first Step they made, was shaking off
the Yoke of Obedience to their lawful Superiors, to become Independent. This is
one Sacrilege, which was accompanied with two others, breaking their Vows of
Chastity and Poverty.

What Motives did they use, to draw People to join with them? Propose Liberty
from all Ecclesiastical Laws, that were any way burdensome, or contrary to
Sensuality, as Fasting, Praying on certain Days, Penances, etc. freeing Men
from the Obligation of Divine Laws, by teaching they were impossible, and
rejecting some of them in particular, as that for Confession. Indulging
Sensualities, trampling on all that seemed burdensome, under pretense of
Christian Liberty.

What Effects followed the Reformation? A neglect of God's Counsels, an
insensibility of his Inspirations, a contempt of Religion, an unwillingness to
be Ruled, Rebellion in Church and State, a losing of the Spirit of Prayer, a
slighting of all good Works, and an entire abandoning themselves to bad ones;
The Light of the Gospel promised, and that darkened with irreligious
Interpretations; The Word of God held forth, and a great part of it cut off; A
Reformation pretended in the Church, and the Church robbed of its Revenues; The
Church-Worship purged, and the chief Action of it, Sacrifice, abolished; The
Glory of God promised, and his Sacred Name by Blasphemy profaned; Faith so
commended, as by it Hope was destroyed by Presumption, and Charity by Schism.
In fine, if any thing like Zeal appeared in the first Times of Reformation, it
showed it self by Avarice, Rapine, Sacrilege, Pride, Dissensions, Schisms,
Rebellions, Incontinences, Drunkenness; in a word, Libertinism. Which the
sincerer part of your Communion deplore with true Tears; not with such as you
shed for our Errors. If these are works of sheep, what are the works of wolves?
And if by works we must judge of men, what could they say of these Reformers?

Let us lay aside what is past, and look on what is present. Is it not true,
that tho you talk much of Christianity, yet all Marks of it seem blotted out of
the Lives of your Flock? That there never was more Impurity in Marriages, more
Corruption in Families, more Debauchery in Youth, more Ambition amongst the
Rich, more Pride amongst the Gentry, more Dishonesty in Commerce, more
Sophistication in Merchandises, more Deceit amongst Tradesmen, more
Intemperance amongst all? That Fornication is thought a Peccadillo; Adultery,
good Fortune; Chastity, a Reproach to the Sex; Cheating and Treachery, Court
Virtue; Impiety and Libertinism, Strength of Wit; Oaths and Blasphemies,
Ornaments of our Language; Perpetual Gaming, a lawful Divertisement for Men;
Contempt of their Husbands, Neglect of the Education of their Children, and of
the Care of their Families, a Privilege of Women who have some advantage of
Birth, and Fortune; And Drunkenness, for all who have Time and Money to cast
away? The prodigious numbers of Houses designed for Tippling, is a sufficient
convicton of the greatness of this Vice: there be more in London alone, than in
any ten Catholic Towns in Europe, and probably more than served the whole
Kingdom in Catholic Times; which are so many Nurseries of Idleness, whence all
Vices flow; and the thriving Condition they all live in, shows which way the
Riches of the Nation go, and on what their Hearts are settled.

You will say these are Faults of the Reformers, but not of the Reformation.
But in this you are mistaken; for it comes from the very substantial Parts of
your Reformation: so that if any do well, it is to be attributed to the
goodness of their Nature; if ill, it is to be charged upon your Religion, which
has retrenched, on several Pretenses, almost all Helps of Devotion.

Christ, to apply to us the Merits of his Passion, instituted seven Sacraments,
which are Administered in the Catholic Church. To regenerate us, Baptism; To
strengthen us in Faith, Confirmation; To nourish our Souls, Eucharist; To
restore us to God's Grace, if by frailty we have lost it, Penance; To prepare
us for a Passage to the other World, Extreme Unction; To confer Grace necessary
for a Churchman or a Married Man, Order, and Matrimony. Of those you have cut
off five; and of the two remaining, that of the Eucharist, which Christ said
was his Body and Blood, you make only a bit of Bread, and a Spoon-ful of Wine.

The Catholics have every day the unbloody Sacrifice of the Altar offered, at
which they can assist; they are taught that Mass is composed out of the Law,
and Prophets, the Gospel, and Canonical Epistles; That it is a Summary of the
Life of Christ, and Commemoration of his Death; That when they see the Sacred
Host elevated, they must call to mind his Elevation on the Cross for their
sakes; and that they must offer him, and themselves with him, to God the
Father, as S. Austin teaches us, lib. 10. de Civit. Dei, cap. 20. This daily
Sacrifice you have cut off, having something in Cathedrals on Sundays, in other
Churches seldom. So the whole Week in all Places, and a great part of the Year
in most Places, passes with out that great Exercise for your Devotion.

Ceremonies in Divine Service are necessary to fix our Fancy on the things in
hand, and to help to raise our Soul to God. This they do first by their
Signification, as knocking our Breast is a sign of Grief, and Contrition;
Kneeling and Bowing, of our Adoration of God; Lifting up our Hands and Eyes to
Heaven, of raising our Wills to God, etc. They likewise increase within us
those Dispositions they signify, by a sympathy betwixt the Soul, and Body.
These you have retrenched, as Superstitious, which has opened a Door to the
Contempt of your Holy Service, and Places, where it is celebrated, to which
many of you show little more Respect, than at other Civil Actions; nay, many
would not enter into a Friend's House with so little Respect as they show,
entering into the House of God.

G. B. page 135. Religion consists in few things.

Ans. It Is true, nay it consists in one thing, (as to its perfection) The Love
of God above all things. But what then? Are helps to stir up that Love of God
to be neglected? It is Pharisaical to place our Confidence in the Ceremonies,
or consider them as the Substance of Religion; but to look on them as its
Ornaments and Means to stir up, and strike good Purposes deeper into our
Hearts, why should it be misliked? The wiser of your Brethren in France
acknowledge, and bewail the want of them; so will you, if you consider it well.

Catholics have an unquestionable Ordination: for if we have none, yours must
fall to the ground, you having received yours from us. Yours is not only
questionable, but questioned actually, and with seeming probability denied by
Catholics. 1. For want of a due Minister, a Bishop. 2. For want of due Matter
and Form. 3. For want of due Intention; for your Bishops owning no Sacrifice of
the new Law, could not intend to confer a Power to offer Sacrifice, which is
essential to Priesthood. They were confirmed in their opinions of your want of
Ordination, by your owning Communion with those Reformed Churches in France and
Holland, which have no lawful Ordination according to your Principles; your
directing yours to their Churches, advising them to receive the Sacraments from
them; and admitting those Ministers to the Ministry among you, without any new
Ordination. This is confirmed by the constant Practice of the Church of Rome,
to Ordain all such Ministers of the Church of England, as being admitted to the
Communion of the Catholic Church, desire to enter into Holy Orders. She (the
Church of Rome) condemns Reordination, as a Sacrilege, and never practiced it.
Hence the Priests of the Greek, Armenian, and Cophtic Communion, renouncing
their several Errors, are admitted to Officiate, without any new Imposition of
Hands in the Church of Rome, because Orders are validly conferred in those
several Churches. The Protestants would be in a like manner admitted, had there
not been a certainty from the beginning of the invalidity, or nullity of their
Orders.

To conclude, they had those same Motives to continue in the Communion of the
Catholic Church, which S. Austin had; which he relates lib. contra Epist.
Fundam. cap. 4. Tenet consensio populorum and gentium, tenet auctoritas
miraculis inchoata, spe nutrita, charitate aucta, vetustate firmata: tenet ab
ipsa Sede Petri cui pascendas oves post Resurrectionem Dominus commendavit,
usque ad praesentem Episcopatum successio Sacerdotum. Tenet postremo ipsum
Catholicae nomen, quod non sine causa inter tam multas haereses sic ista
Ecclesia sola obtinuit, ut -- Apud vos autem, ubi nihil horum est, sola
personat veritatis pollicitatio. I am retained in the Catholic Church, by the
Consent of Nations, by an Authority begun with Miracles, nourished with Hope,
increased by Charity, established by Antiquity. I am retained by a Succession
of Priests, beginning from S. Peter (to whom our Lord, after his Resurrection,
commended the Feeding of his Sheep) until this present Pope Innocent XI.
Lastly, I am retained by the very Name of Catholic, which with great reason,
amongst so many Sects, this Church alone obtains.

What have you to oppose against such strong Motives, Scripture, and the
Gospel? which if clear for you, ought without doubt, to be preferred before all
those other Motives. But they found this very Gospel, this Scripture, pronounce
in their favor, and against you. This is my Body, says the Scripture; It is not
Christ's Body, say you. The Commandments of God are not heavy, says the
Scripture; The Commandments of God are impossible, say you. A reward is due to
our good works, says the Scripture; No works of ours are meritorious; nay the
best are sins, say you. Faith without works is dead, says the Scripture, and
you commend Faith, so as to make all good works be neglected. I grant some
amongst you of late, do not so crudely teach some of these Doctrins, being
ashamed of their deformity. But you cannot deny, but that they were taught by
the first Reformers. Which was sufficient to convince the World, that Scripture
gave no evident Verdict for them; and make all afraid of their Reformation, who
had a care of their Souls.

CHAP. XXXVI. Greater Exercise of Piety amongst Catholics, than Protestants.
BAptism is given validly in both Churches, but with this difference, that we
retain the ancient significant Ceremonies instituted by the Apostles, or at
least in Apostolical Times, which may be proved out of Tertullian, S. Cyprian,
S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, S. Austin, and S. Denis: you have retrenched all, save
only the Sign of the Cross. And ( O judicium! This is the Finger of God, Exodus
8.19.) the peevish, refractory, stubborn Children of your Church, have wrangled
with her about that, and with the same Reasons, as she had done with her Mother
the Roman Catholic Church: so visibly has God meted unto you your measure,
Mat. 7.2. and punished you by your sin. Sap. 11.17.

As ours come to the use of Reason, a new Sacrament expects them, Confirmation,
which is the same mentioned so frequently in the Acts, of giving the Holy Ghost
by Imposition of the Apostles Hands, (Acts 8.17.) which arms them against
visible, and invisible Enemies, with the Spirit of Fortitude to profess their
Faith. Of this Protestants. --

We find in every Church Malachy's Prophecy fulfilled, ( Mal. 1.11.) a pure
Offering made to God, Mass said. And in Catholic Countries, Rich and Poor, even
the meanest Artisans, and Laborers, as Porters, Water-carriers, etc. will steal
so much time from their (almost) necessary Rest, as to give half an hour to
adore God, and his Son Jesus in the Morning, hoping they will bless their
Labors all the Day the better for it. O that you did but see with what
Attention and Respect they assist at those Divine Mysteries; how with their
Knees on the Ground, their Eyes on the Altar, their Heart in Heaven, they
accompany the Priest, and with him jointly make that Oblation to God, with
what. Sentiments they adore Christ present, and desire him to appease his
Father's Wrath, for their Sins, by the Merits of his Passion; and preserve them
from offending anew that Day, and to bless that Days Actions! What do
Protestants? As soon as they are up, they have their Hand in the Cupbord, and
in the Cup their Nose.

Have any by mortal Sins shut against themselves the Gates of Heaven, which the
Passion of Christ opened; they stir up a real Sorrow for that Offense of God,
purpose Amendment, and with these Dispositions address themselves to a Priest,
with a Resolution to follow his Advice, and perform what he shall enjoin. They
discover to him all the wounds of their Soul, their most secret and most
reproachful Sins, as to God himself, whose Vicegerent he is, being assured of
an inviolable Secret, (and it is doubtless a perpetual Miracle, that amongst so
many thousands of Priests, not one should be found faulty in this Point): They
hearken to his Advice, accept his Penance, to Fast, Pray, give Alms, visit
Prisoners, serve Poor in Hospitals, or the like, according as the Condition of
the Penitent permits: Then receive Absolution in virtue of the Power given by
our Savior to Priests, Joh. 20.23. The Effects of this Sacrament are Remission
of Sins past, avoiding others, making Restitution, if any thing has been taken
(as some English in France have experienced.) In fine, a newness of Life. Of
all this, what is in use among Protestants? Nothing.

Are they judged fit to approach the Divine Table, they do it with a lively
Faith, believing it is the true, real, and substantial Body of Christ, with his
Blood, and Divinity, per concomitantiam (Council. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 13.) by
reason of the inseparable Union betwixt them. With a profound Humility;
professing with the Centurion, ( Luc. 7.6.) their unworthiness to receive their
Lord, and desiring him to make them worthy. And with a Love proportionable to
that Christ showed by instituting this Sacrament. What do Protestants?
Sometimes, something: for their Ministers distribute a Morsel of Bread, and a
Sup of Wine, and they may expect to meet only with Dispositions proportionable
to those Beggarly Elements.

Amongst us, Is any sick? He calls for the the Priests of the Church, they pray
over him, anointing him with oil in the Name of the Lord, that the Prayer of
Faith may save the Sick, and God may raise him up, (in case it be for the Glory
of God, and the good of the Patient) and if he have committed Sins, they may be
forgiven him. Jac. 5.14, 15. Thus in an Apostles words I have delivered our
Practice in Administering the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. Of which Protestants
nothing.

Besides Mass, which all hear every Day commonly, three times a day a Bell
rings, to mind us of the Incarnation of the Son of God, and move all with an
Act of Faith, to acknowledge it, and return God thanks for it. Of which amongst
Protestants nothing.

I may conclude this Comparison betwixt you and us, as to the Practice of
Piety, with S. Austin's words, ( Lib. de moribus Eccles c. 34.) very pat to our
purpose: Istis, Manichaei, (Protestants) si potestis, obsistite, istos
intuemini, isto's sine mendacio, si audetis, and cum contumelia nominate.
Istorum jejuniis vestra jejunia, castitati castitatem, vestitum vestitui,
epulas epulis, modestiam modestiae, charitatem charitati, and quod res maxim
postulat, praeceptis praecepta conferte. Jam videbitis, quid inter
ostentationem and sinceritatem, inter viam rectam and errorem intersit. Nunc
vos illud admoneo, ut aliquando Ecclesiae Catholicae maledicere desinatis,
vituperando mores hominum, quos and ipsa condemnat, and quos quotidie tanquam
malos filios corrigere studet. Sed quisquis illorum bona voluntate, Deique
auxilio corriguntur, quod amiserunt peccando, poenitendo recuperant. Qui autem
voluntate mala in pristinis vitiis perseverant, aut addunt graviora prioribus,
in agro quidem Domini sinuntur esse, and cum bonis seminibus crescere, sed
veniet tempus, quo zizania separentur. Considering them well, see whether,
without offending against Truth, you can reproach any thing. Compare your
Fasts, with ours: your Chastity, your Modesty, and chiefly your Doctrine, with
ours; you will presently perceive what difference there is, betwixt vain
boasting, and sincerity; going the straight way, and wandering. At present I
advise you, to cease from detracting from the Catholic Church, blaming the
Lives of Men whom she condemns, and whom she daily endeavors to correct, as
naughty Children. If any of them with the help of God's Grace are converted,
they recover in the Catholic Church by Repentance, what they lost by Sin. If
any notwithstanding all these helps to Piety, continue obstinate in their
Wickedness, or add more grievous Sins to those they have committed, they are
indeed tolerated in the Field of God, the Church, until the time come designed
for the separation of the Cockle from the good Corn. Thus S. Austin.

Glory then as much as you please with the lukewarm Laodicean Angel, That you
are rich, and increased in Goods, and want nothing; yet assure your self, that
as he, so you are poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked. Your
boasting of the Advantages of your Instructions, and Discipline amongst your
deluded Admirers, is like those Nurses, who wanting Milk, entertain their
Children with Rattles and Bibs, and some insignificant Nourriture. In reality
there seems to be as much difference betwixt the Spiritual Food Souls receive
in the Catholic Church and that of Protestants, as there is betwixt the
Nourriture a Child receives sucking a Breast stretched with Milk. and that he
gets by sucking a moistened Finger. Which shall be further shown in the

CHAP. XXXVII. No Houses of Devotion, nor Spiritual Books amongst Protestants.
G. B. p. 145. A Temptation to become Papists, is the solitary and retired
Houses among them for leading a devout, and strict Life, and the many excellent
Books of Devotion have been published by many of that Communion. And page 147.
I deny not that is the greatest defect of the Reformation, that there are not
in it such Encouragements to a devout Life. And page 148. It is not to be
denied to be a great Defect, that we want Recluse Houses: But it fixes no
Imputation on our Church, her Doctrine, or Worship, that she is so poor, as not
to be able to maintain such Seminaries.

Answ. This is as pretty a Sophism of non causa pro causa, as I have seen. As
if the small number of English Catholics, were richer than the whole Body of
Protestants; for we have founded many great Families of Religious, and you with
all your Industry could never settle one. There are Reasons for your Church's
being so unsuccessful in these Attempts, without doubt, as real, and true, as
that which you give is false: and it shall be my work to lay them out before
you.

The First, and chiefest Reason, is a Judgment of God Almighty upon you, for
breaking up, and dispersing so many Houses of Piety. God was served in those
Houses, he was offended with that Sacrilege, and therefore denies you that
Blessing of which you are unworthy.

A Second, Each one had rather keep his Means to himself, than see them pass
against his will to another Lay-Family, for whom he has no kindness. If any
give it to God, and Religion, they design it should continue there, which
cannot be expected in England, as long as the Memory is fresh of Henry VIII.
and Elizabeth.

A Third, The Foundation of your Reformation is inconsistent with a
Superstructure of Religion, or living in Community together. Men cannot live
together without a settled Rule, or Order, established, peculiar to that manner
of Life, and proper for it. Your Reformation is inconsistent with this, it
teaching to reject all Human Injunctions, as contrary to Christian Liberty.
When out of that Principle you have taught Men to despise all Decrees, even of
General Councils, received by the whole Church, and confirmed by the Practice
of many Ages, how can you hope they should esteem Rules given by modern new Men?

A Fourth, Your Doctrine denying all Merits, or Reward, due to our Actions.
Hopes of Advantage encourages us to Labor: our Industry is dulled as soon as
those vanish. S. Ambr. thinks the Novatians unreasonable, who preached Penance,
and denied the Fruit of it, lib. 1. de Poenit. c. 16. Frustra dicitis vos
praedicare Poenitentiam, qui tollitis, etc. And lib. 2. cap. 3. Merendi gratia
Sacramenti, ad precandum impellimur: and hoc auferre vultis, propter quod
agitur Poenitentia? Toll gubernatori perveniendi spem, and in mediis fluctibus
incertus errabit. Toll luctatori coronam, and lentus jacebit in stadio: Toll
piscatori capiendi efficaciam, desinet jactare retia. In hopes of arriving at
his Haven, the Pilot steers his Ship; The Wrestler strives, in hope to throw
his Adversary; The Fisher casts his Nets, in hope of catching some Fish. All
these would relent, were they persuaded the thing they aimed at were
impossible. How then do you expect, that Men should practice good Works, when
you teach them to hope for no good from them? It were indeed to be wished, that
Men would serve God, for God, without regarding any Reward: But that is a
Perfection all do not arrive to; and even the best are fain to use some other
Motives.

A Fifth, Your Clergy is utterly unfit to Direct, and Instruct such Houses: our
Works have a greater influence on our Neighbors, than our Words. S. Jerome
thought it incongruous, that a Man, with a full Belly should Preach Fasting.
And how can a Man Preach Chastity to others, who comes himself from the
Embraces of his Wife, if he has one, or has his Head full of Amourettes, and
Designs to get one, if he be a Bachelor?

It is in vain therefore that you seek the advantage of those withdrawing
Places, from the noise, and trouble of the World, to those devout Solitudes:
your Lives are not fit for them, your Doctrine is inconsistent with them, and
your past Actions have shut that Door of Mercy unto you.

As for Books of Devotion, the Author of the Fiat Lux says, you have Printed
several such, composed by ours, under your own Names: So you hang us, and
cherish our Writings, as the Jews stoned the Prophets, and canonized their
Books. You own we have many excellent Books; all the World sees you have scarce
any, nor can rationally hope for any. For, he who writes a Spiritual Book,
ought to aim at two things. The First, to instruct the Understanding with
Divine and Eternal Truths. The Second, to move the Will to a Hatred of Sin, a
Contempt of the World, and to the Love of God above all things. The first may
be an Effect of Study; but the second cannot be attained unto, unless the
Author be such himself. He must, as S. John, be A burning and shining Light,
Joh. 5.35. Burn to God, by a true and unfeigned Love of him; Shine to Men, by
the clear Truths, which he delivers. He must feel within himself those Motions,
which he endeavors to communicate to his Reader. Si vi^s me flere, dolendum est
primum ipsi tibi. A Soul possessed with Hope, with Fear, with Joy, with Grief,
with Love, with Hatred, in fine, with any Passion, does express not only the
Thoughts, but the Passion it self with Tropes proper: by which means it not
only informs the Understanding, but also stirs the Will of the Hearer, or
Reader, to like Inclinations.

Read Seneca's Epistles, or other Moral Works, or Cicero's, you shall find a
great many excellent Truths; yet I never knew any Man the better in his
Morality for them: As they themselves, notwithstanding those Lights, were far
from being Good Men, as you may see in Lactantius, lib. 3. Divin. Instit. from
Chap. 13. On the contrary, the reading of Saints Works has a great force to
move us to Good. S. Austin, l. 8. Confess. c. 6. says some were Converted by
reading the Life of S. Antony. Several have taken serious Resolutions of
leading a Christian Life by reading those Confessions. And I have known several
moved to love Mental Prayer, by reading S. Teresa's Works: and to the Love of
God, by using those of S. Francis de Sales.

This is a great defect in all our Protestant Writers. I will instance in two,
who seem each in his kind to overtop his Confreres, quantum lenta solent inter
viburna Cupressi. The one Bishop Andrews, who by Divisions and Subdivisions
instructs well, only sometimes verborum minutiis rerum pondera frangit. The
other is the Author of The whole Duty of Man; who has many excellent Truths,
and very practical, as well as the first: yet seem not to move the Will,
because of their cold way of treating their Doctrins. They shine, but they do
not Burn.

This Heat is not to be attained unto but by Prayer. Which enflames our Heart
with the Love of God, ( In meditatione mea exardescet ignis, Psalm. 38.4.) It is
this Love, which unites us to God: and this Union makes us capable of doing
great things. For an Instrument must be in the Hand of the Workman, to do
completely what is intended: if it be distant from him, and not held, but by a
small Thread, the Work will be difficult and imperfect, if there can be any. We
are all the Instruments of God in order to all good Works, especially in
writing Spiritual Books, in which, if there be any thing good, it must come
from God, the Fountain of all Good.

The Apostles after the Ascension expecting the coming of the Holy Ghost, (
Act. 1.14.) continued with one accord in Prayer. S. John Baptist, although
sanctified in his Mothers Womb, and designed for the Office of Praecursor, and
by consequence fitted from above for that Office, yet he was in the Desert till
the days of his showing unto Israel, (Luc. 1.80.) sequestring himself from the
company of Men, and conversing only with God and his Angels, the far greatest
part of his Life. And the Word Incarnate, not for any need of his own, but to
give us Example, passed Forty days in Fasting and Prayer in a Desert before he
began to Preach, Mat. 4.2. And when he had begun, he passed the Days with Men,
and the Nights in Prayer with his Heavenly Father, ( Luc. 6.12. Erat pernoctans
in oratione Dei.) Species tibi datur, forma tibi praescribitur, quam debeas
amulari, says S. Ambr. l. 6. in Luc. This was the Practice of S. Greg. Naz. S.
Basil, S. Chrysostom. And in later Times, Ignatius de Loyola, before he began
the Society, past a Retreat in a Cave at Manresa. God alone is in peculiar
manner the Father of Lights, all is darkness, but what is received from him.
The greatest Spiritualists that ever held a Pen, even the Writers of Scripture,
at the same time they taught us, received their Lesson from the Holy Ghost. And
first the Ears of their Heart were open to hear what God spoke to them, Psalm.
84.9. Then they opened their Mouth, to speak out of the abundance of their
Heart, to us. Mat. 12.34.

Now what Years, what Months, what Weeks, or at least Days, do you of the
Ministry pass in Solitude in Prayer? I find little footsteps of it in any of
your Works: and when you fall upon those things, you discover you are strangers
to them, for you advance like one, who gropes to find his way in the dark. You
have some Terms of Scripture, of Communication with the Lord, Walking with God,
and the like, which you use on all occasions: which are in themselves very
significant, but very insignificant to you, because not understood by you. I
never found any, who could practically explicate them, so as to be tolerably
understood. Indeed there are in Scripture many things not to be understood, but
by Prayer. Such is that Saying of our Savior, ( Joh. 12.25.) He that hates
his Soul: which S. Francis Xaverius used to say, was dark in Study, but clear
as noonday in Prayer.

Humility is necessary in a Spiritual Man, God being pleased to reveal his
Mysteries to the little ones, when he conceals them from the proud and wise,
Mat. 11.15. They are those Instruments, which God chiefly uses: For God chooses
the weak things, to confound the strong; and the foolish things, to confound
the wise; the base, and contemptible things, to confound the proud, and
presumptuous, that no flesh should glory in his presence. 1 Cor. 1. Now this
Virtue is a Flower scarce to be found in your Garden.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Protestant Doctrins contrary to Piety.
FROM your page 149. to the end, making a Panegyric of the pretended Reformed
Church, you describe rather an Vtopian Congregation, than it, or if it, rather
what it should be, than what it is. You own some ill Men amongst you; yet say,
page 153. Their bad Practices are no ground to quarrel the Doctrins. Which is
very true, (provided your Doctrins do not foster those bad Practices); for I
readily own, it is no reproach to any Congregation, to have some ill Men
discovered in it, (there having never been any without some) provided neither
its Established Laws do abet the Evil, nor its Doctrins dispose to it. I know (
August. Epist. 137.) that in the Ark of Noe one, Cham, was accursed; That out of
Abraham's Family Ismael was cast; That in Isaac's Family Esau was hated; In
Jacob's Reuben defiled his Father's Bed; In David's one Son committed Incest,
another turned Rebel; That amongst the Apostles there was Judas a Traitor; That
in Paradise Adam fell, and in Heaven that some Angels sinned. Our Blessed
Savior teaches us, that in the Church there are foolish, as well as wise
Virgins; In the Field, Cockle with good Corn; In the Barn-floor, Chaff with
Wheat; In the Net, bad with good Fishes. This being agreed to on both sides,
our only Question must be, The Doctrins of which Church do foster Impiety, or
ill Lives? You say ours; and I have proved the contrary. We say yours; and thus
I prove it.

First, Our Will cannot seriously love, or endeavor to attain to, a thing
represented as impossible. Hence no Man in his Wits will undertake to make a
Ladder, to reach the Moon, nor Boots to wade with, hence to Jamaica; because by
reason of the distance of the Moon, and the depth and breadth of those Seas,
both are looked on as impossible. Now in the Protestant Doctrins, the keeping
of God's Commandments is esteemed impossible. Wherefore these Doctrins damp all
Endeavors to keep the Commandments of God, or to live piously.

Two things may be answered to this. 1. That some of ours have taught that
Doctrine. 2. That some of yours do not teach it.

To the First, I answer, That Jansenius indeed seems to hold it; but it was
condemned in his Writings, by two Popes; and this Condemnation received by the
whole Church. To the Second, There never was any Decree of those of your
Communion against that Doctrine; nay, you to this day own Communion with those,
who teach it: So the discouragement to Virtue and Piety seems invincible
amongst you.

How contrary is this to the Discourse of Moses to the Israelites, (Deuteronomy.
30.11.) when he told them, the Commands he had imposed on them, were not of
things in Heaven, or in remote Countries; that is to say, were neither so high,
nor so remote, as to be out of their reach; but that they were in their Heart
and Mouth; or, as easy, as to Speak, or Love. To the same intent (1 John 5.3.)
the Commandments of God are said to be light. Conformably to which, the
Catholic Church teaches, that it is easy to keep God's Commandments, and by
this encourage all to endeavor it.

The two Principles on which we labor, the two Springs of all our rational
Actions, are Hope and Fear. Hope of a Reward stirs us up to good Actions; Fear
of Punishment diverts us from forbidden or bad Actions. These Rewards and
Punishments are commonly proposed to us for that intent, in the Law and
Prophets, in the Old and New Testament. Now in the Catholic Church all are
taught, that Heaven, or an Estate of Eternal Bliss, is due to good Actions, by
the Merits of Christ, and in virtue of the Promise of God; and that good and
virtuous Actions are meritorious of it through Christ our Savior. And that
Hell is the Lot of such, as offend God mortally, and die in such a State.

In Protestants these two Considerations are ineffectual: for they teach, no
Reward is to be hoped for, for any good Works, the very name of Merit being
scandalous to their tender Consciences: And no Punishment due to bad Works,
(except Infidelity) Faith assuring to them an Act of Oblivion, their General
Pardon, whatever their Life may have been.

Who will seriously combat his Passions, break his own sinful Will, deny
himself all satisfaction, even in forbidden things, who is persuaded, that he
shall never be the better for living fully up to the strictest Doctrine of the
Gospel, nor the worse for living contrary to it?

Thirdly, Humility is an essential Ingredient of Piety, or a virtuous Life. By
Pride we fell, (and so did the Angels) by Humility we must be restored. Hence
our Blessed Savior commending himself, as a Master to teach us, and a Pattern
set to us, of a virtuous Life, particularly mentions this Virtue: Learn of me,
says he, for I am meek and humble of heart. Now what sign of this Virtue
amongst the Reformed? I hear say, never any of their Ministers composed any
Treatise of this so great, so necessary, so excellent a Virtue. That one was
published indeed, but it was only a Translation out of Rodriguez a Jesuit; a
thing not unusual, to Print the Works of ours in their own Names, as Fiat Lux
observes. What esteem have you for this Virtue, of which you never treat?

Indeed the Foundation, or Basis of your Reformation, is Presumption, or Pride,
it being grounded on a preference of their Judgment, in understanding, and
explicating Scriptures, (a thing of as great difficulty, as concern) before
that of lower and higher Pastors of the Church, whether taken severally, or
assembled in Particular, or even General Councils: Before those Bishops, whom
the Holy Ghost has placed to Govern the Church which he purchased with his own
Blood, Acts 20.28. Before those Pastors and Doctors whom Christ gave to
consummate the Saints, that we might not be like children carried hither and
thither, with every blast of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4.11, and 14. Before those to whom
Christ said, He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises
me. Luke 10.16. Before those, in fine, whom Christ sent to instruct all People,
promising he would be with them to the end of the world. Mat. 28.19. What
Pride, what Presumption, bating that of Lucifer, greater than this? What room
for Humility, in a Soul so full of it self, so puffed up with vain Conceits of
its own Capacity? And what hopes of any real Virtue without it; seeing it is
the surest, and only foundation of a pious Life?

This last Reason shows, that in your Souls there is no Foundation for a
Structure of Piety: and the others show, you can hope for no Structure upon any
Foundation.

Another Doctrine of yours, as pernicious as any of the rest, is, That the best
of our Actions are Sins, even our Endeavors to serve God, keep his
Commandments, and give to every one his due, viz. paying a Debt, or relieving
the Poor. Nay, it seems a greater Sin to do it, than not to do it; Sins of
Commission being more grievous, and offensive, than those of Omission.

G. B. page 154. We cannot be charged, for having taught our People to break
any one Commandment.

Answ. You seem charged for teaching them indirectly, to break them all:
saying, the keeping them is impossible in it self, fruitless if they should be
kept, aad their breach not prejudicial.

G. B. page 260. Bad Practices may furnish matter for Regret, but not for
Separation.

Answ. It is true, when and where Principles of Religion are contrary to such
Practices: But when these bad Customs are natural Sequels of the Doctin, and
necessarily flow from it, not only the Practices are to be detested, but
likewise the Doctrine, whence they flow, is to be abhorred as pernicious to
Souls, and the Church which teaches them as Doctrins either necessary to be
believed, or even probable in practice, whatsoever Church it be, is to be
forsaken as the Chair of Pestilence.

Si quid de Tuo, Deus meus, dictum est, agnoscant Tui: Si quid de Meo, and tu
ignosce, and tui. Aug.

POSTSCRIPT TO Mr. CUDWORTH D. D.
I Had ended the whole Answer to Dr. Burnet before I had the sight of your
Learned great Book against Atheism; which gives me occasion to clear and
confirm some Points, which I thought then, and think still clear and strong
enough, notwithstanding all the Mist you, and others have raised, to hide them,
and their Endeavors to shake them. But as the Apostle was, so I am a debtor not
only to the wise, but to the unwise too. Which Debt I hope to discharge in few
Lines.

You own, that some few Philosophers, as Epicurus, Strato, etc. thought God to
be Corporeal; but that the major part believed him to be a pure Spirit, and
adored the Only true God under the Names of Jupiter, Minerva, Osyrie, Neith, or
Venus. I said, with the ancient Fathers, and Primitive Christians, that although
Pagans, and indeed all Men, had a natural knowledge of One God; yet those, the
Pagans adored, had been Men. The Proofs then produced, I reduce to four Heads.
The First taken from the Diversity of their Sexes. The Second, from their
Generation. The Third, from their Death. The Fourth, from their Sacred Rites.

1. The different Sexes of the Pagan Gods, is a convincing Proof, that they
were not Spirits, but Men, and Women, at least Males, and Females, and by
consequence Corporeal. This Reason takes up a great part of Arnobius's Third
Book, from page 46. which he begins with these words: Adduci primum hoc ut
credamus, non possumus, immortalem illam, praestantissimamque Naturam, divisam
esse per sexus. He acquaints us there, that Cicero having ingenuously professed
his dislike of this, the Pagans endeavored to get his Works abolished by the
Senate, because they implied a dislike of Ancient Paganism, and an approbation
of Christian Doctrine. Oportere statui per Senatum aboleantur ut haec scripta,
quibus Christiana Religlo comprobetur; and vetustatis opprimatur Auctoritas. So
essential were these Sexes to the Pagan Deities. Which being designed only for
carnal Propagation, brings on my

2. Reason. Those Gods received their Beings from Parents, as Men do. This is
sufficiently evidenced out of Ovid. l. 4. Fast. Illa (Venus) Deos omnes, longum
est numerare, creavit. You page 488. distinguish Venus Aphrodite, from the
Vulgar: and page 489. you say, that That Venus to whom all the Gods owed their
Being, was the One Supreme Deity. Our Question is, which Venus Ovid speaks of
in that Verse? You say, it is the Divine, or the true God: I say it is the
Vulgar, and thus I prove it: That Venus, who makes Males Fight with one
another, and sport with the Females of their Kind; for whom young Men break
their Sleeps, to give Serenades to their Misses: who by Adultery with Anchises
brought forth Aeneas; who contended with Pallas and Juno for a Golden Apple,
and submitted to the Judgment of Paris; who Fought in defense of Troy, and was
wounded; She, I say, was the Vulgar Venus, and not the True God; which, I
suppose, needs no Proof. But of this Venus Ovid speaks: for he says, Quid genus
omne creat volucrum, nisi blanda voluptas:
Convenient pecudes, si levis adsit amor.
Cum Mare trux Aries cornu decertat, and idem
Frontem dilectae laedere parcit ovis,
Primus amans carmen vigilatum nocte negata,
Dicitur ad clausas concinuisse fores.
Pro Troja, Roman, tua Venus arma ferebat,
Cum gemuit teneram cuspide laesa manum.
Coelestesque duas Trojano Judice vicit;
(Ah nolim victas hoc meminisse Deas.)
Assaracique Nurus dicta est, ut scilicet olin
Magnus Julaeos Caesar haberet Avos.


Thus Ovid. Against all this, for your Interpretation you bring Euripides in
Stobaeus, and Boethius, who speak of the Celestial Love. What then? The Divines,
the Fathers, the Scripture, speak of it too; for they speak of the Holy Ghost.
But what is that to Ovid's Verse, which they do not mention, and of which alone
is our Dispute? Whence it is evident, that all Pagan Deities were born as
others. As also that

3. They died as other Men. This is also urged by Fathers against Pagans, To
those cited elsewhere, add S. August. l. 1. de Cons. Evang. cap. 23. who having
proved out of Cicero, that all Pagan Gods had been Men, and alleged that later
Fiction of Caesar's being changed into a Star; of which Virgil: Ecce Dionaei
procedit Cesaris Astrum. He says, Videatur ne forte hystorica Veritas sepulchra
falsorum Deorum ostendat in terra; vanit as autem Poetica stellas eorum non
figat, sed fingat in coelo. Neque enim revera stella illa Jovis est, aut illa
Saturni; sed post eorum MORTEM syderibus ab initio mundi conditis haec nomina
imposuerunt bomines, qui illos quasi DEOS habere voluerunt. You see, Sir, S.
Austin's Opinion of the Pagan Gods, that even Jupiter himself had been a Man,
was dead and buried; and that although Poets feigned them Stars in Heaven, yet
real True History, showed their Sepulchers on Earth.

4. Their Rites confirm the same. Baruch 6. they are thus described: Sacerdotes
sedent habentes tunicas scissas, and capita, and barbam rasam, quorum capita
nuda sunt. Rugiunt clamantes contra Deos suos, tanquam in coena mortui. Which
probably may be the reason wherefore some of these things were forbidden to
Priests of the old Law, Levit. 10.6. and to all Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4.1. Hence
the Poet very judiciously inferred, that Osyris had been a Man: Quem tu
plangens hominem testaris Osyrim. And your self applaud the common Check of
Pagans, used by Christians, but taken out of Yenophanes the Colophonian: If
they are Gods, why do you lament them? If they are Men, why do you adore them?

Osyris is by you taken for the True God; yet Histories say he was a Man,
Brother to Isis, killed by her Husband Typho, for Incest with her, his Body cut
in pieces, and scattered about. That she, with the help of Anubis, either the
Captain of her Guards, or chief Huntsman, found them all again, excepting one
part, which Modesty should have hindered her from seeking, as it does me from
naming. Yet she grieved so much for that loss, that to comfort her in her
Sacred Rites, her Priests showed her a Resemblance of it, as if they had found
it. Osyris then was a Man; so was Jupiter, and Venus, as well as Quirinus, and
Flora.

You make Neith another Name of the True God: Arnobius, lib. 4. page 60. will
teach you another Lesson, that she was a Woman, born at Sais, Ex coeno, and
gurgitibus coagulata, proditaque limosis, composed of the filthy Mud of Nylus,
on whose Banks Sais, her native Town, stood. You may see there, with what
Disdain, and Indignation, the other Minerva's (for several bore that Name)
explode the Pretentions of this Dirty Saitick Slut, to be the Daughter of
Jupiter.

But if you will have Jupiter to be the True God, tell us, which of them?
Arnobius tells us, there have been several. Vossius, and Stilling fleet reckon
six: Varro counts up 300, as Tertullian assures us, Apolog. cap. 14. page 44.
It would be a pleasant Subject for Dr. Stilling fl. to handle a Dispute betwixt
all these, which is the true Jupiter, as it is to read that betwixt the
Minerva's, about which is his true Daughter, in Arnobius, lib. 4. page 59, and
60. who reckons also three Diana's, and Aesculapiu's, four Vulcan's, and
Venus's, five Bacchus's, six Hercules's, etc.

You say, page 256. that some Christians called God, Jupiter: and that Origin
expresses great Zeal against them for it, lib. 5. contra Celsum. Which is an
unexcusable Untruth: for Origin expressly says, Christians would rather endure
any Torments, than call God by that Name: (...).

The Name Jupiter you will not have to come from Juvans Pater, but Jovis Pater,
page 451. Which Jovis is the very Hebrew Tetragrammaton, only altered ( viz.
from Jova) by a Latin Termination. And for not knowing this, you send to School
to learn it, the two best Latinists the Pagans, and Christians, ever had,
Cicero, and Lactantius. I cannot subscribe to you. 1. Because it is warranted
by no Latin Author. 2. The Tetragrammaton is not known, as the Polyglot says,
Prolog. 8. n. 19. Josephus lib. 6. de Bello Jud. c. 15. page 919. says it
contained (...), Four Vowels, (so says Eusebius, lib. 11. de Praep. Evang. cap.
4. and 8.) but what they were, or how pronounced, neither he, nor any other
say. By what Revelation came you to so certain a knowledge of this Name? But 3.
Had it been Jova, it had been more Latin, than Jovis. Not one Latin Name occurs
to me, ending in Is, (for Thais is of Greek descent) but in A there are very
many, viz. Numa, Scaevola, Nassica, Seneca, Galba, Caligula, etc. judge a
little more favorably of Cicero, as to the Latin Tongue. Yet as you think him
and Lactantius, Ignoramus's in Latin, so you do Plato in Greek, for not knowing
the Etymology of Athena, (Minerva) from Neith. Much in the same manner Mr
Hooper brought his own Name from King Pippin, and Manetho brought Moses from
Asarsyph, Joseph. lib. 1. contra Appionem page 1056. Besides these, I find none
can equal your Talent of finding Etymologies, I wish you to practice it more.

To prove Jupiter to be the True God, you have two Reasons, which I have not
Answered. First, page 452. that Jupiter is called Omnipotent. Answ. It is true,
the Pagans took him for the Ether, which by the Poet is called Omnipotent.

Tum Pater Omnipotens foecundis imbribus Ether
Conjugis in gremium loetae descendit --
The Second, page 453. When Christians had obtained, by their Prayers, Rain,
Populus acclamans Jovi, in Jovis nomine Deo nostro testimonium reddidit.
Tertul. lib. ad Scapulam c. 4. p. 131. Answ. You might as well fay, that Man
was Virgil, who owned his Verses, and was rewarded for them. But let Tertullian
explicate himself, Apol. cap. 40. page 71. Cum misericordiam extorserimus,
Jupiter honoratur. We Christians obtain by our Prayers, and Penitential Works,
of the true God Mercy, and you Pagans ascribe it to Jupiter's Goodness, and
your Sacrifices to Idols. In which you are mistaken; for you draw nothing but
Miseries on your Countries, by despising God, and adoring Statues. Vos malorum
ilices semper, apud quos Deus spernitur, and statuae adorantur.

In your whole Book you seem to suppose, that the Unity of God was a prime
Article of the Pagans Creed: which cap. 7 Sect. 5. I have showed to be false.
To what I said there, I add out of Origin these following Proofs. Lib. 1. cont.
Cells. page 5. he speaks of Laws for Idols, and Polytheism; (...). And p. 28. he
says, Prophets were given to the Jews, to hinder their falling into Pagans
Polytheism. And l. 3. p. 155. he says, that the Wise Men, or Philosophers, fell
from the Cult of One God, into Impious, or Atheistical Polytheism. He told us
in his First Book, page 51. that Aristotle fled from Athens to Chalcis, to
avoid the Fate of Socrates, who had been condemned, for teaching there was but
One God. And it is as evident out of Athenagoras, and others, that Christans
were deemed Impious, and Atheists, for denying Polytheism.

When you intend to pleasure the Learned part of the World, with any more
Learned Works, I advise you in the first place, to consider, whether a thing be
true; and then how that Truth may be useful to some farther discovery of a new,
or confirmation of an old Truth. Veritas fulciri non quaerit auxilio
Falsitatis. Greg. lib. 11. Moral. cap. 15. which is no where more certain, than
in Revealed Truths: Non indiget Deus nostro mendacio, ut pro illo loquamur
dolos, Job 13.7. You thought, doubtless, that to represent, that all Religions,
and all public Laws, had owned One God, would be a Choak-Pear to Atheism, and
confound the Atheists: whereas this being not true, it has a contrary effect.
The other part is much more cogent, drawn from Fathers, that all Men have a
natural Knowledge of One God, and that so deeply imprinted in their Soul, that
maugre all the pleasant Fables of the Poets, the Pomp of Ceremonies and
Religious Rites, the Force of bad Education, the Sophisms of Philosophers, the
Blasphemies of wicked Men, the Strength of Laws, the Rigor of Torments, the
Terror of Death, and the Wiles of the Devil, it persevered, and so possessed
the Heart, as in some Occasions to force its Profession out of the Mouth.
Certainly this Voice of Nature, triumphing over all the Force and Art of Men
and Devils, is a clearer Testimony of One God, preserving his Possession in,
and over his Rational Creatures, and controlling all adjectitious Notions, than
any Demonstration Man's Wit can invent: Especially some Atheists laboring to
weaken this Argument, from the Notion of a Deity, by saying that Idea is not of
Nature, but raised by Education, and Human Laws. Which Plea is evidently
defeated by that Truth, that Laws, Religion, and Custom were once against it,
and all concurring to promote the Opinion of Many Gods, tho all in vain.

Secondly, I advise you, not so easily to draw from a resemblance in Name, or
Number, Pagan Errors to the Mysteries of Christian Faith. With what little
ground you drew from Jupiter the Name of God, has been seen page 451. You say
the Roman Capitol was Dedicated to the Blessed Trinity, because a Poet said,
Trina in Torpaeo fulgent consortia Templo, viz. Jupiter, Minerva, and Juno. And
page 454. (so it should be, tho it be marked 414.) you find the Trinity in
Agypt, viz. Eicton, Memphta, and Osyris. You might as well find the same
Mystery in the Three Graces, Three Parks, Three Gorgons, Three Furies, Three
Judges, Three Rivers, Three-headed Cerberus, Three-bodied Geryon, if that
number be sufficient for it. I doubt not, but the Mystery was revealed in the
Old Testament, nor that some Platonicks knew it; S. Austin assures they did,
tho he does not acquaint us in what Age these lived; so they may have learnt it
from the Christians. Yet I think it most certain, that there never was any
Temple Dedicated, or Sacrifice Offered by Pagans to the Three Divine Persons;
for out of the Scripture I have learned, that What they sacrificed, they
sacrificed to Devils, and not to God.

I am Yours, as much as I can be, Salva Veritate, J. W.

An INDEX of the Chapters.
CHAP. 1. Mr. G. B. his Design and Disposition, when he writ this Book. Of the
Wickedness of the World. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of Antichrist. Page 6. Chap. 3. The
true Designs of Christian Religion. Page 10. Chap. 4. G. B. his Explication of
the Designs of Christianity. Page 15. Chap. 5. Of the Characters of Christian
Doctrine. Page 19. Chap. 6. Scriptures suppressed. Page 22. Chap. 7. A Digression
touching the Idolatry of the Pagans, ill represented by E. S. D. D. Page 29.
Section 1. That Pagans thought their Idols to be Gods. Page 30. Section 2. The
Beginning, and Occasions of Idolatry. Page 41. Section 3. What were the Gods of
the Pagans? Or, What things were represented by their Idols? Where it is
proved, that Pagan Gods had been Men. Page 51. Section 4. That the Jupiter O.
M. of the Greeks and Romans, was not the True God. Page 67. Section 5. Whether
all, or the greatest part of the Pagans believed the one True God? Page 83.
Section 6. Of the unknown God at Athens. Page 96. A Conclusion of this
Treatise. Page 98.
Chap. 8. What G. B. says, to prove Catholics Idolaters. Page 102. Chap. 9. Of
Mediating Spirits. Page 105. Chap. 10. Of the Intercession of Saints. Page 113.
Chap. 11. Pretended Charms: Where, of Holy Water, Wax-Candles, Agnus Dei's,
etc. Page 124. Chap. 12. Of Ceremonies. Page 128. Chap. 13. Scripture and the
Church: Where, of the Resolution of Faith. Page 134. Chap. 14. Of Merits. Page
148. Chap. 15. Of Temporal Punishment due to Sin forgiven. Page 150. Chap. 16.
Of Purgatory. Page 154. Chap. 17. Priestly Absolution. Page 162. Chap. 18. Of
Penances, Fasting, Prayer, and Pilgrimages. Page 167 Section 1. Fasting. Page
169. Section 2. Prayer. Page 171. Section 3. Pilgrimages. Page 174. Section 4.
Two Objections Answered. Page 179.
Chap. 19. Sacrifice of the Mass. Page 180. Chap. 20. Regal Office of Christ:
Where, of Transubstantiation, Dispensing in Vows, etc. Page 184. Chap. 21. Of
Love, and its two Species. Repentance, Mortal and Venial Sins, Attrition and
Contrition. Page 188. Chap. 22. Theological Virtues. Page 196. Section 1. Of
Faith. Page 197. Section 2. Of Hope. Page 201. Section 3. Of Charity, or Love.
Page 204. Section 4. An Answer to what G. B. objects. Page 207.
Chap. 23. Efficacy of Sacraments. Page 210. Chap. 24. Probable Opinions, and
Good Intentions. Page 212. Chap. 25. Whether Papists allow to break the
Commandments? Page 219. Chap. 26. Riches, and Pride of Churchmen. Page 225.
Chap. 27. Unity of the Church in Faith and Sacraments. G. B. owns that
Protestants are Schismatics. Of Severity against Dissenters; And of Hugo
Grotius. Page 229. Chap. 28. Zeal of Souls in our Bishops. And concerning
Reformers: Where, of S. Cyran, Arnaud, and Jansenius. Page 235. Chap. 29. Other
small Objections. Page 247. A Conclusion of the First, and Beginning of the
Second Part. Page 250. Chap. 30. Catholic Faith delivered by Men Divinely
Inspired. Rules to know true Tradition. Faith never changed. Page 353. Chap.
31. Revelations and Miracles. Page 262. Chap. 32. Whether all Mysteries of
Faith ought to be common? Page 268. Chap. 33. Faith not dependant on Senses.
Page 275. Chap. 34. Mr. G. B. his Intention in his Books, and his Meekness to
Catholics. Page 281. Chap. 35. Reasons why Catholics do not embrace the
Communion of the Protestant Church. Page 287. Chap. 36. Greater Exercise of
Piety amongst Catholics, than Protestants. Page 295. Chap. 37. No Houses of
Devotion, nor Spiritual Books amongst Protestants. Page 301. Chap. 38.
Protestant Doctrins contrary to Piety. Page 308. Postscript to Mr. Cudworth, D.
D. Page 315.
FINIS.

