coat of arms of the City of London surrounded by angelic and female figures
London



Mr. Parkhurst,

I Order you to Print this Sermon, Preached before me by Mr. Warner, the last
of September.

Grocers-Hall, October. 2. 1688. John Eyles Mayor.

OR THE Surest Way to the Safest Peace, in Troublous Times: Delivered in a
SERMON, Preached before The Right Honorable Sr. John Eyles, Knight. Then Lord
Mayor of the City of London, On SEPTEMBER 30. 1688.

By JAMES WARNER, a Protestant.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the Three Crowns and
Bible in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1688.

TO THE Right HONORABLE Sr. John Eyles, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
I Here present Your Lordship with the Sermon, which I Preached before You,
being Requested by Your Lordship to Print the same.

And that I might choose the most suitable Subject that I could, in so short a
time allowed me; I considered the great Consternation and Amasement that is
fallen upon all People, at the Appearance of the sore Troubles and Impending
Judgments that seem near approaching, and are taking hold of us.

I knew all would be for avoiding of them, because it is natural to us to shun
whatever we apprehend may do us hurt.

But herein, I saw, would be our Misery, That we should be too prone to
struggle against God, as the Prophet says Israel did, Isa. 51.20. Like a wild
Bull in a Net: The more we strive to avoid Trouble, the more we are encompassed
with it, until we repent: This has been a practice fatal to all ages. The
Israelites, when besieged, repaired the Breach when made by the Enemy, but
looked not to the Maker of it, the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 22.8, 9, 10, 11. who was
the Hand that moved those Instruments of Trouble. Instances of this indiscreet
acting we have given of Ahaz and others; and indeed the Scripture History
abounds with many of them; for upon surprising trouble we start from dangers
approaching, faster oft-times than the well informed Judgment can move: From
hence arise the many Rash and Precipitate Actions in a fright, many whereof are
Ridiculous; some fatal to People in their Direful Effects.

Now to inform the Judgments, and Convince the Consciences of all Men in such a
Juncture as this present Season is, of these two things.

First, What the Efficient and First Moving Cause of all their Trouble is,
which if but removed, the Effect must needs cease. And,

Secondly, What are the Effectual Means, Efficaciously to remove the Cause of
our Trouble to all intents and purposes, so as not to hurt us, hic labor, hoc
opus est.

This is our present and Principal Work and Business: I beseech God to give us
all Grace, that we may successfully attend thereunto.

And according to my Ability and Opportunity, I have demonstrated in the
following Discourse; these two things among others, in Answer to those before
mentioned.

First, That the Reins of all Trouble, and all the Instruments of it, are
entirely held in the Hands of the Great and Holy God, who orders and
disposes of them for his own Glory; and that they go at his bidding, for the
punishing of Evil Doers, and the praise of them that do well. And,

Secondly, That an Unfeigned Repentance, attended with a thorough Reformation,
and fervent Supplication for Pardon and Forgiveness, are effectual means for
the complete Removal of all the Troubles we feel, or fear will befall us.

If this be first well done, then we may on good grounds expect a blessing from
God on all our Endeavors, and on those prudent and likely Measures, which, as
Christians, and as Reasonable Creatures, we may be guided unto as lawful,
useful, and necessary Mediums to remove what we seek to avoid.

But if this work of Repentance, Reformation, and Uncessant Seeking of God and
his Favor, at whose disposal we stand or fall, be not speedily and resolvedly
set about in the strength of the Grace of God, we are undone; and all other
attempts will prove abortive and fruitless; and all our hopes and expectations
from any other Counsels or Designs, will come to nothing.

Nothing less than the Infinite Unaccountable Free and Sovereign Grace of God,
can save an Impenitent and Unreformed People; I pray God to Pity, Pardon, Spare
and Save this sinful City and Nation, for his own Name and Glory sake, and for
his Word and Promise sake, that the set time to favor Sion may now come, and
then we shall certainly be delivered, Psalm. 102.13, 14, 15.

But sure I am, nothing else can help us, without Repentance, Luke 13.3.

And if God should for his own Name sake save us, as he did Israel; yet the
Impenitent and Unreformed are not like to be the better for it, unless the
goodness of God lead them to Repentance by it, Romans 2.4. and to fear him for
it, Jer. 33.9. Hos. 3.9. For there is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord;
and when he saves the Righteous out of Trouble, then he brings the wicked in
their stead, 2 Pet. 2.9. When the one rejoice, the other shall mourn, Isa.
65.13. So that we must repent and reform first or last; we ought to begin, it is
best so to do, God grant we may accordingly.

And to prevail on this City and Nation to Consider their ways, to Repent and
Reform, and and seek the Favor of God alone, is the design and endeavor of
this Undertaking, and the Purport and Intent of the following Discourse.

And therefore it is dressed in a plain and homely style, to reach the meanest
capacity, not to please the overcurious and nice Palates of too dainty
Hearers, but to reach the Heart, Inform the Judgment, and convince the
Conscience, as most suitable to such a subject, rather than to humor the fancy.

In a Storm none desires the Pilot to give his directions in a gilded Oration,
but to tell quickly, and speak plainly, what is most necessary to be done: And
what Ovid says of his Book de Tristibus, Vade sed incultus, qualem decet
exsulis esse,
Infelix habitum, temporis hujus habe.
The same may be said of the present Season: Nor indeed would the time allotted
me, admit; it being so very short, that constrained me to thrust it forth
courser than I desire to present the Public withal.

I shall not further detain you Lordship, but with a Tender of my Thankful
Acknowledgment of your former Favors to me, which though I cannot requite, yet
do not forget.

And also, humbly to manifest my Grateful Sense of the kind Acceptance my poor
Labors found with your Worthy Brethren the Aldermen, who were pleased to
vouchsafe the hearing the following Discourse. And,

Lastly, To express my joy at the News of the Restoration of the Rights and
Privileges of the City; things which I have publicly expressed the high value
I had for them formerly to my cost, which I do not repent of; it being the Duty
of an English Man, and a Christian, on all occasions to own and esteem them:
And I am satisfied your Lordship does so, as well as any other person.

I pray God give this City and Nation Repentance and Reformation, and then we
may hope for a Blessing on all Endeavors for its welfare; which that God of
his Infinite Mercy will yet be pleased to afford them, is, and shall be the
Prayers of,

Your Lordships Most Humble Servant, James Warner.

Job 34. ver. 29. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? And when
he hides his Face, who then can behold him? Whether it be done against a
Nation, or against a Man only.


THIS Chapter contains the Second Discourse of Elihu with Job, beginning at
the first verse, Furthermore Elihu answered, etc. wherein he reproves him for
saying, first, That God had took away his Judgment; verse 5. and Secondly, That
it profits a man nothing, that he should delight himself with God, verse 9.
In Answer whereunto he says, verse 10. Far be it from God, that he should do
wickedness; and from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity: For says
he, verse 11. The work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man
to find according to his ways: Yea, verse 12. Surely God will not do
wickedness, nor will the Almighty pervert Judgment; for it is below him so to
do, and he is the Supreme Judge of the whole World. Verse 13. Who has given
him a charge over the Earth? Or who has disposed the whole World? Verse 14,
15. If he set his heart upon man, and if he gather unto himself his Spirit, all
Flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again to dust. Again, he
shows wherefore he will not pervert Judgment: First, Because he is impartial,
is no respecter of persons: This he not only affirms of him, but gives
instances of his sore and sudden Judgments on many mighty men for their sins.
Secondly, Because he is Omnipresent, Omniscient, and no Cause or Person can be
hid from him. Verse 19, 20, 21. He accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor
regards the Rich more than the Poor, for they all are the work of his hands.
In a moment shall they die, and the mighty be taken away without hand. For his
Eyes are upon the ways of man, and be sees all his goings. Verse 22. There is
no darkness nor shadow of Death, where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves. Verse 24. He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and
set others in their stead. Verse 25, 26, 27, 28. He strikes them as wicked
men, in the open sight of others; because they turned back from him, and would
not consider any of his ways: So that they cause the cry of the Poor to come
unto him, and he hears the cry of the afflicted. Thus far he proves that God
does not take away any man's Judgment; and this he further demonstrates in the
next verse, which contains the Words of our Text, and does therein assume
likewise the proof of the second point which he had undertaken to Answer Job
in, viz. That there is profit in delighting in God, because he holds the
distribution both of all Tranquillity, and all Trouble in his own hands, to
dispose of it unto men as he is pleased or displeased with them, and their
ways, as our Text declares; and therefore all men may expect Right Judgment
from him, and great profit by delighting in him. The words in the Original are
thus expressed, umi (...) ve hu Jashkit umi jarshjah, etc. the word jashkit
from (...) he was quiet, has relation here to outward tranquillity and peace,
which being put in opposition to (...), determines the sense of that word
which signifies either wickedness, or to condemn for it; in other places, to
refer to trouble here in this, and is so translated in this place; and they may
be thus read, When he, (viz. God) causes Quiet, who then can cause Trouble,
etc.

The Text compriseth a double Question, which have a double Reference.

The first Question is this, When he causes Quiet, who then can cause Trouble?

The Second is this, And when he hides his Face, who then can behold him? And
both of them being Affirmative, imply an Universal Negation.

Who can cause Trouble? Is as much as if he should say, None can.

And the other Question, Who can behold him? Is as much as to say, None can
behold him.

The Reference likewise is twofold, viz. whether it be done, 1st. Against a
Nation: or 2ly. A Man only. A Nation is not too great for his Care, Unto whom
all Nations are but as the small dust of the Balance, Isai. 40.15. Nor is a
Man only too small for his Providence, Who numbreth all the Hairs of our Heads,
without whose will a Sparrow falls not to the ground, Matt. 10.29, 30.

From the two Questions in our Text, as thus explained, arise these two
Propositions.

First, That when, and where God gives Quiet, then, and there none can cause
Trouble.

Secondly, That When God hides his Face, then none can behold him. The
explication of the Nature and Manner of Gods hiding his Face, shall be attended
unto in its proper place.

First, Then, When God gives Quietness, then none can cause Trouble.

We have here, 1st. Something Implied: 2ly. The Proposition Expressed.

1. There is implied in the first Question, viz. When God causes quietness,
who then can cause trouble? That all other quiet, besides that only which God
gives, may, and shall be disturbed; this the Context gives a relation of, to
wit, of Great and Mighty Men, whose quiet was turned into great and sudden
trouble by the Lord for their sins: So that it is the peculiar Mark and
Property of the Quiet which God gives, that none can remove it; and therefore
when God is removing our Quiet, it is high time for us to fearch our hearts and
ways, to examine our quiet, to see whether it be of God or no; and it is much to
be seared, that we, who are sinners, have offended God, when we see him who
delights in Mercy, and waits to be Gracious, coming forth in the way of his
Judgments, to do his strange work; for he is no respecter of Persons; but says
of his People, Tou only have I known of all People that dwell upon the face of
the Earth; therefore I will punish you for all your sins.

Now that we may the better see the Excellency of the Quiet God gives in the
peculiar stability thereof, as proper only unto it, we must first demonstrate
the Instability of all other Peace or Quiet that is not of God, and how
suddenly it is removed by the Lord, in his displeasure. Instances hereof are
many, our Lord tells us, That in the days of Noah, they were eating, drinking,
etc. till the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not until the Flood
came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be,
Matt. 24.37, 38, 39 Therefore bids them take heed of surfeiting, etc. Least
that day overtake them unawares, for as a Snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole Earth, Luke 21.34, 35, 36, etc. And as it was in
the days of Lot, they did eat, and drink, and plant, etc. but the same day that
Lot went out of Sodom, it rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, even thus
shall it be in the day when the Son of Man is Revealed, Luke 17.28, 29, 30.

Such peace and carnal security is but a Fools Paradise, a preludium to War,
and does but help to aggravate our Misery, by reason of the surprise of sudden
trouble coming upon great quiet.

And to demonstrate further the uncertainty of all other Peace, besides that
which God gives, we must consider the uncertainty and unconstancy of the
Instruments of it; and also that it is but a partial Peace; while we avoid one
trouble, we fall into many.

1st. The uncertainty of the Instruments of it, all men are mortal, and when
they die, all that depends upon them falls to the ground; their Love and
their Hatred, and all their Thoughts perish with them; Therefore cease ye from
man whose breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of,
Isai. 2.22, ult.

2ly. As man's being, and abode here is uncertain, so is his Mind while he is
here: First, The Intentions and Mind of Man, only God who searches the hearts
knows; and truth is Gods property, not man's, Romans 3. and 4. Let God be true,
and every man a liar; we are bound to be true, but he only to be trusted and
depended upon with all the heart.

3ly. Also when men's Intentions, which God only knows, are right for us, yet
forasmuch as that they are moved by various Principles of Self-interest, etc.
as the apprehensions of Interest does vary, so does our Intentions and
Affections, as the Wind; and this is one great piece of Humane Frailty.

4ly. As the Uncertainty and Unconstancy of the Instruments, so likewise the
defective shortness of the Peace its self does discover its uncertainty; when
to avoid one trouble we fall into a greater, as was seen in the case of Ahaz, 2
Kings 16.7. compared with 2 Chronicles. 28. from 1, to 20, etc. The Kings of Stria
and Israel came against him, the King of Israel slew 120000 in one day, and
took 200000 Women and Children captive: Upon this disafter he sends much Gold,
etc. which he could ill spare, to the King of Assyria, and he came, but
distressed, and strengthened him not. Thus when under Gods displeasure we fly
from the Lion, and fall into the Paw of the Bear, such Quiet says, Safety, is
not in me.

So that it appears plainly, that all quietness is uncertain, except that only
which God causes.

Hence we may infer, that it is our Great and Important Duty to look well to
the quiet on which we lean, and not deceive our own Souls, by sinful trusting
in Creatures, Jer. 17 5. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts
in man, and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. And
having discovered the Uncertainty that is in Creatures, we are led thereby to
seek for it only in God, where alone it is to be found; and this leads to that
which is expressed in the first Proposition, which is, That when God causes
Quietness, none can cause Trouble.

In the orderly Prosecution of which Proposition, we are to consider,

First, The Subject, Gods giving Quietness.

Secondly, The Predicate, that then none can cause Trouble.

First, The Subject concerning the Quietness which God gives, we are to
consider three things: 1. The Qualifications of the Subjects of it, the People
whom God does favor with this Quietness. 2. The manner of giving of it, and
the Instruments of it. 3. The Nature and Properties of the Quiet which is the
Gift of God.


1. Then for the Qualifications of the People that are the Subjects of this
Quiet, they are these among others, which do in especial manner concern us to
Examine our selves, whether we are endowed with them or not: As First.

When past trouble has been so Sanctified to us, as that we have been humbled
before the Lord in the sight of our Sins; all the world does know, that God
has had a Controversy with his People, and they know likewise, that we have
deserved it at his hands all men have seen our Covetousness, Lukewarmness,
Indifferency in the things of God, Formality, etc. And it is fit they should see
our Humiliation and Repentance, for unless ye Repent, ye shall likewise Perish,
Luke 13.

Now where a People have been Humbled under their Afflictions, the Peace then
which they enjoy, is the effect of Gods Promise, and therefore a mark of his
Favor, Levit. 26. v. 40, 41, 42, 43. If they shall confess their Iniquity,
etc. v. 41. If then their Uncircumcised hearts be Humbled, and they then accept
of the Punishment of their Iniquity. v. 42. Then will I Remember my Covenant
with Abraham, etc. and I will remember the Land. But it is greatly to be
lamented, that there is no appearance of this Repentance and Humiliation to be
seen publicly amongst us, as the matter calls for, because He that being often
Reproved, hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
Remedy, Prove. 29.1. as shall be more demonstrated in its proper place. again

2. As Quiet is promised to Repentance, so likewise to servent Prayer for it,
and this he requires of us, if we would have it in his way. Ezekiel. 36.37. Thus
says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel
to do it for them. He has declared himself to be a God hearing Prayer, and
according unto this duty, Solomon (1 King 8.33.) says, When thy People Israel
be smitten down before the Enemy, because they have Sinned against thee, and
shall turn again to thee and confess thy name, and Pray and make Supplication
unto thee in this House: Then hear thou in Heaven, and forgive, and bring them
again unto the Land which thou gave unto their Fathers. This the Lord
promised to do accordingly; now when our Quiet is come in answer to Fervent
Prayer, it is a sign it is God's Gift, so says Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.27. For this
Child I Prayed, and the Lord has given me my Petition, etc. But where is the
Spirit of Prayer? Nothing of this kind has been visible amongst us, which is
greatly to be lamented; we are not like to have quiet from God, until from a
sense of the value and worth of it, we go to him alone for it; nor are we
likely to use it for him, when we do not seek it from him: Hannah says, The
Lord has given me my Petition, therefore I have lent him to the Lord: Which
leads to the third Qualification.

Thirdly, Another Qalification of the People whose Peace God is the Author of,
is this, That they do thankfully Use, and diligently Improve the mercy
vouchsased to them in the Quiet they enjoy. This God designs it for, and
requires and expects a due Improvement of Mercies at our hands as a suitable and
proper expression of gratitude unto him. When God sent Moses to Phoroah; King
of Egypt, to send Israel forth, it was always for this work, to servo him. God
says, Exodus 3.12. This shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee, when
thou have brought forth the People out of Egypt, ye shall serve God in this
Mountain. This was his errand, verse 18. Let us go that we may Sacrifice to the
Lord our God. Exodus 4.23. God says Let my son go that he may serve me; and at
all times when Moses goes to Pharaoh this was his business; as Chap. 5.1, 2,
3, etc. Chap. 7.16. Chap. 8. 1, 8, 20, 25, 26, 27, 28. Chap. 9.1 13. Chap.
10.3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 24, 25.26. Cap. 12.31, etc. So when God gave the Law,
Exodus 20. (he says) Hear O Israel, I am the Lord that brought thee out of the
House of Servants, thou shall have no other Gods before me, etc. He makes the
Deliverance which he had wrought, the Motive to their Obedience. Solomon's
Rest, 1 King 5.4. was that he might build the Temple. We are Delivered by
Christ, that we might serve God; Luke 1.74, 75. That he would grant unto us,
that we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness, etc. In nothing more does the
Holiness of God appear against Sin, then in the way of our Deliverance and
Redemption; by his pouring forth his Wrath to the uttermost on his only
begotten Son. when made a Propitiation for us; and therefore requires that
every one that names the name of Christ, do depart from Iniquity; and this
improvement of the Quiet which God gives, we have an instance of Acts 9 31.
Then had the Churches Rest throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria, and
were Edifyed, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and comfort of the Holy
Ghost were multiplied. So that this God designeth the Quiet for, which he
gives, that it may be thus used; and when it is so Improved, it is a sign that
it was given of God; for such have a right to it. But it is too apparent, that
we have not duly Improved the Liberty we have Enjoyed, and have cause to fear
and suspect our selves, that we have not the Qualifications of a People to whom
God's Quiet is given, in a way of Promise; but are obliged to seek after them
as we value the Quiet which God gives.

Secondly, The Second thing we are to Enquire into about the Subject of this
Quiet, is the manner of its being Produced, which is of God. and

1st. It is by his Own Presence in and with a People: ( Exodus 33.14.) God
says, My Presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee Rest. So it is said
in Joshuah, God gave them Rest which was by his Presence among them, Fighting
for them, Guiding of them, etc. And this Presence of God with a People, is the
greatest Dignity and Benefit a People can Enjoy.

The Beatyfical Vision consists in being ever with the Lord in his Presence:
God says, the Nations shall say, What People is there like to this Nation,
that has God so nigh to them as the Lord is in all you call upon him for,
Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7.

Again, The Lord does often give Quiet by mean and contemptable means, as by
Gideon, Jeptath, Samuel etc. that the Power of God may appear thereby, when out
of the Months of Babes he ordains Strength; yet always by Righteous Ways, for
He is a Holy God; he is Almighty, therefore needs no base means; Infinitely
Holy, therefore abhors all Unjust Ways; some he excludes from his Service.
Again,

Thirdly, The Peace which God gives, may be seen by a view of its Nature and
Properties, as

1st. It Is Noble, Liberal, Free and Full, and in all respects a none such,
James 1.5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all
men Liberally and upbraideth not. It Is Liberally Free and Noble, no Base
Conditions, but is upon honorable terms: And upbraideth not; does not twit
them of it, as some often Repeat one Favor; but he gives Innumerable that pass
by us unthought of. Prove. 10.22. The Blessing of the Lord it makes Rich, and
he adds no Sorrow with it, and Peace is his Blessing. Psalm. 29.11. He will
Bless his People with Peace. So that it is Unmixed, more Pure and Universal then
other Quiet; it is Peace round about on every side, as Solomon says, 1 King
5.4. The Lord has given me rest on every side, there is neither Adversary, nor
Evil Occurrent. And thus it continued till he left God, and so then he raised
him an Adversary: So in Joshuah's time, there was not a man left to stand
against them, but when they turned to Idolatry, the Book of Judges gives a
large account of the Lords Selling them into the hands of their Enemies, Judge
2.12.13.14. However till they Sinned, they had a complete quiet. So of the
Deliverance by Moses, Exodus 10.26. Our Cattle also shall go with us, there
shall not an hoof be left behind; the like to David, 2 Samuel 7.1. To Israel,
Josh. 21.44. To Asa. 2 Chronicles. 14.6.7. Peace on every side, as he makes Sinners
a Magor Misabib, a Terror round about; so he gives Peace round about, is a
wall of Fire round about, for Defense to them whose quiet he gives.

Lastly. It Is durable, none can remove it, but he that gave it; as it was in
Joshua's time, till God sent them trouble for their sins, none could trouble
them. And this leads us to the Predicate of the first Question, to wit, That
none can cause Trouble.

First, Wherein none can cause Trouble, is evident, to wit, in that kind, that
the quiet is of, When God gives Quiet from War, none can raise War till he
sends it: And therefore, 2ly. We shall enquire, Wherefore none can cause
trouble to such whom God gives quiet unto; and this is for two Reasons.

First, Because all trouble is God's Creature, he is the Author of it, but not
of Sin, for he is holy: When the Creation was finished, all things were good,
and there was no trouble till Sin entered, then death entered by sin; in the day
thou catest, etc. thou shall die: And when Cain slew his Brother, the Ground
was cursed for his sake: When the World sinned, the Flood overflowed it; and
though God has promised he will not again drown the World, and given his Bow
in the Cloud for a Sign of his Covenant; yet he is the same Holy Sin-Avenging
God that ever he was. So when Sodom sinned through Pride, Idleness, and Fullness
of Bread, which is too visibly our Frame, then Fire came from Heaven, and
destroyed them; So that God has the Distribution and Ordering of it in his own
hands; and it is Infinite Wisdom so to do, whereby godliness has the Promise of
this Life, as well as that to come, and Sinners a Punishment here, that they
may know there is a Judgment.

Now this disposal of trouble God has assumed to himself, Isa. 45.7. I Form
Light, I Create Darkness; I make Peace, I Create, Evil (viz.) of trouble; I the
Lord do all these things. Job 5.6. Although Affliction comes not forth of the
dust, neither does Trouble spring out of the ground, etc. Amos 3.6. Shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? So that God orders trouble
by his own hand; and therefore where he gives Quiet, none can cause Trouble,
because none has the disposal of it but himself. Again,

Secondly, As he has all trouble it self in his own hands; so he has all the
Instruments of Trouble at his own ordering: nothing can move without him,
without his Power and Permission. All Instruments of Trouble may be reduced to
these Heads, either, 1st. Persons; or, 2ly. Things.

1st. Persons, and these are either, 1st. Evil Angels. 2ly. Evil Men.

First, Evil Angels; Satan is called, ho Ecthros, the Enemy; Apollion and
Abaddon, the Destroyer, who goes about as a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. 1 Pet. 5.8.

Now the Malice and Motion of Satan to hurt us, is under the Special Restraint
of God; hence it is said in Job, Satan says, Thou have set an Hedge about him,
Job 1.10. And in seducing Ahab to go to Ramoth Gilead, the Evil Spirit does
first get leave to seduce him, 1 Kings 22.22, 23. The Devils could not enter
into the herd of Swine, until that Christ gave them leave so to do, Mat. 8.31,
32. Christ says unto Peter, Simon, Satan has desired to have thee, that he
might winnow thee as Wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail
not, Luke 22.31.

And that God orders these things, does further appear, if we consider what
God permits Satan to Assault us for; if we are Proud, to Humble us; if Secure,
to Awaken us to Prayer and Watchings; he is Conquered by Christ, and reserved
in Chains to the Judgment of the Great Day, Jude 6.

Now if God speak Peace, Satan cannot cause trouble; because much of the
trouble he is permitted to cause, is upon God's Controversy with us; for God
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with the
Temptation also make way to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. God knows how to deliver
the godly out of temptations, etc. 2 Pet. 2.9.

And as Satan himself cannot hurt us without permission: So 2ly. The worst of
wicked men, those who give themselves to the Devil, that they may do mischief,
viz. Wizards and Witches cannot harm us; as we see in the instance of Balaam,
Number. 23.23. There is no enchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against
Israel: Balaam loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, and would have cursed
Israel, but God made him say, I have not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, nor seen
Perverseness in Israel; the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King
is among them, Number. 23.21. This God bids them remember, what Balack King of
Mohab consulted, and Balam answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that they
might know the righteousness of God, Mica. 6.5.

Again, as men are Instruments of Trouble, they are so, either, 1st. By their
Heads and Counsels; or, 2ly. By their Hands and Power; or, 3ly. By their Hearts
Inclinations and Affections: Now all these are ordered and disposed by the
Lord, and cannot move against him.

First. The Heads and Counsels of Men; it is certain that much of the safety of
a Nation depends upon the Consultation for its good; and much of its Trouble
depends upon the Conspiracies of Men for its hurt.

Now There is no Wisdom, nor Counsel, nor Device against the Lord, Prove. 21.30.
He brings the Devises of the Heathen to naught; the Counsel of the Lord
stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations, Psalm. 33.10,
11. His Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure, Isa. 46.10. He
over-ruleth all the Counsels that are in the World, and has brought to nothing
the devices of the Crafty, Job 5.12.

When Absalom rebelled against David, and Achitopel was with him, who was
esteemed an Oracle of God for Counsel; David prays to God to turn his Counsel
back, to defeat it, which he did accordingly answer him in, by the Counterpoise
of Hushi, 2 Samuel 15.31. Chap. 17.14. So of the Enemies of the Jews, Neh. 4.15.
Of the Wicked, Job 5.13. Chap. 10.3. The Heathen, Psalm. 33.10. Of Syria,
Aephraim, Isa. 7, 5, 7. Chap. 8.10. Of Egypt, Isa. 19.3, 11.

Now God has many ways to bring the Counsels of men to naught, as he did
Hamans against Mordecai, Esther 6. Chap. 7.9, 10, ult. The King of Syria
against the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 6.12, 13, to 20. The Jews against Paul,
Acts 23.12, 16. Jacobs Sons against Joseph, Genesis 37.20. Pharaobs against
Israel, when he said, let us deal wisely, Exodus 1.10. and that was to destroy
them; but he was destroyed thereby: So Haman, the Gallows built for Mordecai,
he first hanselled, Ester 7.9, 10, ult. The Pit they dig for others takes their
own feet, and they fall therein: So God defeated the Philistines Plot against
Sampson: Saul defeated in his designs again David; sometimes by strife, as
Jehosaphats Enemies, 2 Chronicles. 20. Cross Interests arise, Great Men, who are as
wheels in the Work die, and all their Thoughts and Designs perish with them.

Secondly. As their Heads, so their Hands and Power is ordered by the Lord. So
that when he gives Quiet, there is no Hand can cause Trouble; For the Sword is
at the disposal of the Lord, Job 5.12. He disappointeth the devices of the
Crafty, so that their hands cannot find their Enterprise. Isa. 54.17, ult. No
weapon that is formen against Sion shall prosper, and every tongue that rises
up in Judgment against her, God will condemn. Psalm. 46.9, 10. He makes Wars to
cease unto the ends of the Earth; he breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in
sunder, and burns the Chariots with Fire, and says, Be still, and know that I
am God; For it is he that bends the Bow, the Sword is his Weapon, and goes at
his bidding. Job 19.29, ult. Be afraid of the Sword, for wrath brings the
punishment of the Sword, that ye may know there is a Judgment. Judge. 5.8. They
chose new Gods, then was War in the Gates. Dout. 32.41. If I whet my Glittering
Sword, and my hand take hold on Judgment. Isai. 34.5, 6. The Sword of the Lord
is bathed in Heaven, and it shall come down upon Idumea, and the People of his
curse to Judgment. Isa. 66.16. By Fire and Sword will the Lord plead with all
Flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many. Jer. 12.12. The Spoilers are
come upon all high places through the Wilderness, for the Sword of the Lord
shall devour from one end of the Land, even to the other end of the Land; no
Flesh shall have peace. Jer. 47.6, 7, ult. O thou Sword of the Lord, How long
will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy Self into thy Scabbard, rest and be
still. How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has givin it a charge against.
Ashkelon, and against the Sea shore? There has he appointed it.

So that the Sword is his Servant, he hisseth for the Fly, and the Be of
Assyria and Egypt; he is Jehovah of Hosts, he stirs up the Spirits, and
strengthens the hands of those that do his Work. Again, When he gives quiet,
then he says, Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, nor learn war any
more, Isa. 2.4. And when he will discomfit power, he has various ways to bring
it to pass: He sets the Philistines against one another before Jonathan, 1 Samuel
14.20. The Egyptians against the Egyptians, Isa. 19.2. Jehosaphats Enemies
against each other, 2 Chronicles. 20.27. Judas slays himself, so does Ahitophel,
Abimeleck, Saul, etc. rather than want an Executioner, when God is displeased.

Thirdly. As he has the Hands, so he has the Hearts of all in his Hands,
Prove. 21.1. The Kings Heart is in the Hand of the Lord; as the Rivers of Water
he turns it whithersoever he will. Isa. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, etc. Thus was Esaus
heart turned to Jacob, Genesis 27 41. compared with Chap. 33. 4. Saul among the
Prophets, when he came to destroy David, 1 Samuel 19.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. so Prove.
16.7. When a man's ways please God, he makes his Enemies at Peace with him.

Fourthly. And as he has all Persons at his Disposal; so likewise has he all
Things at his Ordering: Job 5.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. He shall deliver thee in six
troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee; verse 20. In Famine he
shall redeem thee from Death; and in War, from the Power of the Sward. verse
21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the Tongue; neither shall thou be
afraid of Destruction when it comes. Verse 22. At Destruction and Famine thou
shall laugh; neither shall thou be afraid of the Beasts of the Earth. Verse 23.
For thou shall be in League with the Stones of the Field, and the Beasts of the
Field shall be at Peace with thee, etc. See more Psalm. 91.

Thus have we demonstrated the truth of the first Proposition, When he causes
Peace, none can cause Trouble; because all trouble is ordered by the all wise
disposal of a Holy God, and all the Instruments of it are under his Government,
both as to Persons or Things. The Malice of Satan, and men given up to him; the
Craft and Cruelty, the Policy and Power of Wicked Men is overruled by the
Lord; their Hearts are turned as he pleases, and all things are at his
Command, and under his Power: So that we may Conclude this first Position, and
infer from the Premises, if When God causes Quiet, none can cause Trouble:
Then.

First, It Is our great concern for our Selves and the Nation, to make Peace
with God, in the first place, above all things. Job. 22.21. Acquaint thy self
now with him, and be at Peace, so shall good come unto thee; and this can only
be done by Faith in Jesus Christ, he that believes shall be saved: It Is Life
Eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent,
John 17.2, 3. For he will come in Flaming Fire, taking vengeance on all that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1.8. And as Faith in Christ
for Justification gives peace with God, so the Grace of God in sanctifying of
us, enjoys the blessing of Quiet and Peace from God: And this Quiet of God,
we may be induced to seek above any thing else, by a view of its Value, and
Excellent Properties; it is Free, Noble, Holy and Righteous; we need not be
ashamed of it, it has no dishonorable Terms, it is full and firm, we may
safely lean upon it, though on nothing else. Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. Verse 8. For he shall be as a
Tree planted by the River of Waters, whose Leaf shall be green, and he shall
not bease from yielding Fruit, etc. But be sure try our Peace first, that it be
indeed of God, for Jer. 17.9. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? And we are too prone to flatter and
deceive our selves, through too much self-love: But God will not be mocked,
therefore let us be faithful in searching our ways, as we love our Souls, and
their safety; and then we shall find to our Comfort, that when he causes
Quietness, none can cause Trouble.

The second Question in the Text is this, When he hides his Face, who can
behold him? From whence we take our second General Observation, That when God
hides his Face, none can behold him: Wherein we have,

First, The Subject, concerning God's hiding his Face.

Secondly, The Predicate, that then none can behold him.

First, The Subject, concerning God's hiding his Face, about which we have
these three Enquiries:

First, Into those special Sins and Provocations against God, which do engage
him to hide his Face from a People; that wherever they are found, God does,
or will hide his Face from such a People.

Secondly, The manner of God's hiding his Face from a People. And,

Thirdly, The Nature of it.

First, Then there are these Provocations among many others, which when found
among any People, do provoke the Holy God to hide his Face from a People; which
being too visible among us, must be reformed, or we shall be destroyed.

The one is this, When a People leave God and turn to Idolatry, let such have
Peace from God never so firm, this Sin will provoke God to remove it: So
Joshuah told Israel, Joshua 24.19, 20. He is a Holy God, he is a Jealous God;
if ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then he will turn and do you
hurt, and consume you, after that he has done you good. And the whole Book of
Judges is but an Historical Relation of God's constant punishing of an
Idolatrous People for their Idolatry; as you may see there at large, Judge.
2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. etc. The Children of Israel forsook the Lord, and served
other Gods; Baalim and Ashtaroth, etc. and provoked the Lord to Anger; and he
delivered them into the Hands of the Spoilers. that spoiled them; and sold them
into the hands of their Enemies round about: So that they could not any longer
stand before their Enemies: Whithersoever they went, the Hand of the Lord was
against them for Evil. Judges 5.8. They chose New Gods, then was War in the
Gates. And indeed, this God will never bear withal, for he has said, I am
Jehovah, that is my Name; and my Glory will I not give to another, nor, my
Praise to Graven Images, Isa. 42.8. and 48.11.

Secondly, Open Profaneness is a Provocation that will remove God's Favor;
There is no Peace, says the Lord, to the Wicked, Isai. 48. ult. and chap. 57.
ult. God is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; and has evidently displayed
his Holiness, even in the only way of Redemption it self; which is by nothing
less then the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, which he shed to purchase a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works; And without Holiness no Man shall see
the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Therefore, while the Land has so great Profaneness as
there is visibly in it, we are in great Danger of those Miseries, that always
attends such Impieties.

Thirdly, Apostasy, and Backsliding from God, does provoke him to hide his
Face; if we leave him, he will forsake us: 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off for ever. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If ye forsake him, he will
forsake you. If any man draw back, says God, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in
him, Heb. 10.38, 39. But we are not of them that draw back unto Perdition,
says the Apostle. The Backslider in Heart shall be filled with his own Ways,
Pro. 14.14. And says God, Woe unto you when I depart from you, Hos. 9.12. Now
the Just shall live by Faith, says the Apostle, Heb. 10.38. which must be by a
constant view of God; and therefore, the nature of Unbelief is set forth, by a
departing from the living God. Heb. 3.12. Take heed Brethren, lest there be in
any of you, an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God: And
indeed, what Quiet and Peace can we expect, when we leave the God of Peace, the
Pountain of all Good? For every good and perfect Gift, comes from him, James
1.17.

Fourthly, Unfruitfulness under the means of Grace; God has afforded the
Gospel, the Ministration of the Word, which is able to save our Souls, Acts
20.32. Jam. 1.21. and build us up, by which we must be judged. Now, where God
is at this cost, he expects Fruit, or will destroy the Unfruitful; so says the
Apostle, Heb. 6.7, 8, 9. For the Earth which being often watered, brings
forth Herbs meet for him by whom it is dressed, receives Blessing from God:
But that which bears nothing but Briars and Thorns, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. The like our Lord Jesus says of the
Barren Tree, These three years have I come seeking Fruit, and finding none; Cut
it down, why cumbreth it the Ground? Luke 13.7. and by the Parable of the
Unfruitful Vineyard: Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. God displayeth the
Equity of his Judgments against them; He says, I Planted and Hedged it, and
what more could have been done, that I did not do unto it? And yet, when I
looked for Grapes, behold it brought forth wild Grapes. Therefore says he, I
will take away the Hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and I will lay it
waste, and it shall be trodden under foot. Now says he, The Vineyard of the
Lord of Hosts, is the House of Israel, and the Men of Judah: And for this he
denounces Destruction against them. So says our Lord to the Fig Tree that had
Leaves only; Never man gather Fruit on thee more, and it immediately withered,
Mat. 21.20. So that whereas we have had Liberty and Ordinances, for our
Edification, and the promoting of Holiness, which our Holy Profession calls
for; and yet there is no Fruitfulness in a growing Holiness, any ways
proportionable to the means of Grace afforded us: We cannot groundedly expect
any continuance of Quiet, but sudden Destruction, unless a speedy Repentance
prevent it, and that it be attended with a due and diligent Improvement of the
present Opportunities we do yet enjoy, for our Reformation.

Fifthly, An Unreformed People, an impenitent and stubborn People that will not
hear. Isai. 9.13. verse 12. The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind,
devour Israel with open Mouth; for all this his Anger is not turned away, but
his Hand is stretched out still. Verse 13. For the People turns not unto him
that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts; Therefore the Lord
will cut off from Israel, Head and Tail, Branch and Rush in one Day. Here
observe former Judgments on a People, if they are not followed with Repentance,
are then but Warnings of greater Judgments Approaching. Prove. 29 1. He that
being often reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without Remedy. It Is high time that God's Strokes should smite us, when his
Word is not heard by us; and when Persons refuse to hear, and receive
Instructions, they are on the Brink of Destruction. Jer. 6.8. Be thou
Instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee, lest I make thee
desolate, a Land not Inhabited. Jer. 44.4. I sent, says God, my Servants the
Prophets, saying, Do not this thing which I hate; but they harkned not, where
fore my Fury and mine Anger was poured forth on the Cities of Judah and on
Jerusalem, and they were desolate, as at this day, v. 5, 6, 7, etc. Genesis 6.3.
God says, My Spirit shall not always strive with man. And likewise before the
Captivity of Judah, God sent his Prophets, (2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17.) early to
them, because he had compassion on them; but they mocked the Messengers of God,
and despised his Words, and Misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord
arose against his People, till there was no Remedy: therefore he brought upon
them, the King of the Chaldeans who slew their young men with the Sword, in the
house of their Sanctuary, etc. So likewise Ezekiel 20.6, 7, etc. This Sin is set
forth by the scum that goes not out of the Pot by boiling, and says, Woe to
the Bloody City, to the Pot whose Scum is therein, and whose Scum is not gone
out of it.

First, He bids them pour water into the Pot, but when that did not do, to set
it on a greater fire, in the Empty Pot, that the Brass might melt it; if less
Judgments will not do, greater must ensue unto utter destruction on an
Impenitent People: And this Sin likewise is too manifest among us: Few regard
what they hear to do it, which is for a Lamentation, because remediless Misery
attends it, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

Thus far we have enquired into those Sins which provoke God to hide his Face
from a People; and these Provocations are all too plain among us; our first
work is to beg of God to turn our hearts, and give us Repentance, least
Judgments break forth against us without Remedy, Prove. 29.1.

Secondly, As to the manner of God's withdrawing or hiding his Face from a
People, it is generally gradual.

1. He is long a going; the long suffering of God waited long in the days of
Noah: God says, How shall I give thee up Ephraim, and make thee as Admah, and
set thee as Zeboim? 2. And long gone when departed; the Ark was in the
Phylistines Country Twenty Years, 1 Samuel 7.2. 3. It Is long in Returning often;
so the Spouse found it.
Now this Gradual hiding of Gods Face is often Imperceptable to most: Gray Hairs,
says God, are here and there on Ephraim, ( Hos. 7.9.) and yet he considers
it not: So that God often is insensibly gone from us hereby, ere we are aware.
But the dismal Effects of of his departure, evidence his being gone: As, 1st.
He leaves his Care over them, his Fence about them, and is as a Waifairing
man, as one that tarryeth but for a night, Isa. 5. Jer. 14 8. 2ly. Has no
regard to their Prayers, Jer. 14 12. Chap. 15.1. 3ly. Refuses to give them
Counsel, as Saul found when he went to the VVitch at Endor, 1 Samuel 28.6, 15.
Psalm. 74.9. 4ly. Gives them up to their own Counsels, Psalm 81.12. 5ly. Will
ease himself of them, and cast them out of his Sight, Isa. 1.24. Jer. 15.1, 2,
3, 4. 6ly. Removes their Enjoyments, Isa. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 19.11, 14. and
the like. Thus far for the manner of God's hiding his Face from a People.


The Third thing, is the Nature of it: And this will be best declared under the
Consideration of the Predicate, of this second Proposition; which is, that None
can behold him: And herein is Two Parts: First, Something Employed. Secondly,
Something Expressed.


That which is Employed in the second Question, Who can behold him? Is this,
That all others may be be. held, when they hide their Faces: But as is
Expressed, He only cannot be beheld, when he hides His. And in Order to the
Demonstration of both these Propositions, Employed and Expressed, we must first
Explain.

First, How God hides his Face? Secondly, And wherein none can behold him.
And then prove, First, That in those respects, men may be beheld, but that God
cannot be so beheld; and shall conclude with a brief Application of the whole.

First then, to enquire wherein, or in what Respects God may be said to hide
his Face? And in those respects he cannot be beheld: And these are Three.

First, When God with holds the light of his Countenance, the Evidence of his
Favor, then none can see his face, or enjoy his favor; and in that respect
cannot behold him.

Secondly, When God keeps his Anger, he may be said, To hide his Face; and
then none can Atone him; and in that respect cannot behold him.

Thirdly, When God Executes Judgments in Anger, he may then likewise be said,
To hide his Face; and then none can bear his Indignation; and so in this
respect also, none can behold him.

Nextly, We are to prove, First, that which is employed in the Question, which
is, That when Men hide their Faces, they may be beheld in all the aforesald
respects: And this is needful to consider, that we may not for fear of Man's
Anger, fall under the Wrath of God, when there is no Proportion between them.

First then, in the first Respect, the favor of Man may be obtained when it is
withdrawn, because the natural Temper and Inclinations of all men, may be known
and accommodated, so as effectually to Influence their Love and Delight. The
most morose and sour Tempers, have been, and may be sweetened, though often
difficult to do it without Sin.

Secondly, The most implacable may be Attoned, whom we may, or need Atone: The
Devils we neither may, nor need; Esau was Attoned to Jacob, though he had born
him deadly Hatred: David toward Nabal's House, by Abigal; Naaman the Syrian,
by his Servants; Saul toward David: A Gift often does it, Prove. 17.8.18.16.
Chap. 21.14.

Thirdly, The Execution of the uttermost humane Anger is tolerable; the
Martyrs bore it Triumphantly, because the Heads, Hearts, and Hands of Men and
Devils, are in the Hands of that God. Who will not suffer us to be Tempted
above what we are able; Who steyeth his Rough Wind, in the day of his
East Wind, Isai. 27.8. 1 Cor. 10.13.

Secondly, Because we are both mortal, the one puts a Period to their
Oppressing us, Isai. 51.12. And the other to our Suffering; Job. 3.17.

Now the Inferences and Use from what is Employed, are these Two:

The first Use is this, If men may be beheld in every Respect, and that without
the need of sinning to do is; then let us not sin to obtain the Favor, or to
avoid the Displeasure of Men.

And Secondly, Then be not too much Transported at their Favor, nor Dejected
at their Displeasure.

But the matter is otherwise with us, when we come under God's Displeasure, as
is Expressed; When he hides his Face, none can behold him, in any of the three
aforesaid Respects.

As first, When God withdraws the light of his Countenance, none can obtain
it; because it is the free Gift of God which he disposes of arbitrarily; and
that which is so, cannot be obtained by humane Power. Romans 9.15, 16. For he
says to Moses, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy, etc. So then it is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs; but of God that shows
Mercy. We are unworthy the least Mercy, and hin Favor is the greatest;
therefore cannot be purchased by us who have no Property in any thing, nor are
able to render proportionably to the least Blessing.

Secondly, Because all those conditional Promises of the free favor of God,
such as these to the Pure who shall see God, the Upright shall behold his Face,
etc. They all he at an equal Distance from us, as the favor of God its self
does: How abominable and filthy is Man, and also perverse and deceitful,
Without Divine Help we can do nothing, John 15.5.

Secondly, When God keeps his Anger in his Bosom, then none can atone him by
Creature Power, no other than the Eternal Son of God can do this; no Gift can
do it; Psalm. 49 6, 7, 8, 9. They that tract in their Wealth, and boast
themselves in the multitude of their Riches: none of them can by any means
redeem his Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for him (for the redemption of his
Soul is precious, and it cease for ever) etc. 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious
Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish. Job 9.33. Neither is there any
days-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both. 1 Samuel 2.25. If one
man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him? So that we may conclude, that There is but
one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. who alone
is qualified for it, being both God and Man.

Thirdly, God's hiding his Face, is sometimes taken for the execution of his
Anger; when he passes Sentance on the Wicked, he says, depart from me.

Now not to behold him in this respect is, that none is able to stand before
his Indignation, it is intolerable. Psalm. 76.7. Thou, even thou art to be
feared; and who may stand in thy sight, when thou art once angry. Psalm. 90.11.
Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy Fear so is thy
Wrath. Nahum. 1.6. Who can stand before his Indignation? Prove. 18.14. A wounded
Spirit, who can bear! Job 6.2, 3. Oh that my Grief were weighed, it would be
heavier than the Sand of the Sea. Psalm. 88.15. While I suffer thy Terrors, I am
distracted; It is intolerable, because all strength and ability to bear any
burden or difficulty, comes only from that God, who in judgment witholds it
from us, when he comes forth against us. Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thine Heart endure,
or can thine Hands be strong in the days that I shall deal with thee, says the
Lord; for God has said it, that strength belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11. How
then can we be able to stand before his Indignation?

Again, It is Intolerable, because it is Eternal; For God who executes Anger,
ever lives so to do; and also continues us in our being for ever to abide
under it. Deuteronomy. 32.39, 40, 41. I am he, says God, and there is no God with me:
I kill and I make alive, neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand;
for I lift up my hand to Heaven; and say I live for ever: He ever lives a Holy
Sin-Avenging God, and our Worm never dies, nor is the fire ever quenched, Mark
9.48. Then who can dwell with Everlasting Burnings, Isa. 33.14. So that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God; for our God is a
Consuming Fire, even the Lord, to whom vengeance does belong, Heb. 10.30, 31.
Chap. 12.29, ult. And this the very Heathen, by the conviction of a Natural
Conscience, have dreadful Apprehonsions of; my Name says God is dreadful among
the Heathen, Mal. 1.11, 14, ult. And the Apostle says, Romans 2.15. Their
Consciences Excusing, and Accusing one another. For Conscience is the Judgment
that Reasonable Creatures do make, and cannot but make of their Moral Actions,
with respect to the future Judgment of God; for we cannot but know we did not
make our selves, and could not be by Accident or Chance, but must have one
First Cause, who is God, and then must be accountable unto him alone for our
Being, and all we Enjoy; Every one of us must give account of himself to God,
Romans 14.12. Chap. 2.6. 2 Cor. 5.10. according to that Rule by which we must be
judged, the Word of God: The Word, says Christ, that I have spoke, the same
shall judge you in the last day, John 12.48. Which alone by its
self-evidencing-power and purity, Jer. 23.28, 29. Manifests it self to be of
God, a Rule of Obedience to us, Isa. 8.20. And seeing God has therein
appointed Jesus Christ, in whom alone his Favor for ever is to be revealed,
Act. 4.12. and set him to be the Great Master of the House, Luke 13.23, 24, 25,
26, 27. Into whose hands he has put the Eternal Doom of all mankind; for by
him He will judge the World, Acts 17.31. We must to day hear his voice, Heb.
3.7, 15. For when the Door is shut, and the prefent day of Salvation and Grace;
which now by the Gospel is offered us from God, is once over, we are
remedilesly miserable for ever; Luke 13.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. There
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversary, Heb. 10.26,
27. Woe unto us when God counts us for his Enemies; in this respect also it may
well be said, When he hides his Face, who can behold him; None can.

Thus we have fully Demonstrated these two Propositions:

First, When God causes Quietness, then none can cause Trouble.

Secondly, When God hides his Face, then none can behold him.

The Conclusion from the Premises for Application, is this.

Then let us not lose the Favor, or Incur the Displeasure of God, to obtain
the Favor, or to avoid the Displeasure of any, or all the Creatures in the
World. Fix this Persuasion in your minds from the Premises, that God's favor
is the greatest good; His Loving Kindness is better than Life, Psalm. 63.3.
Therefore, first to be sought, and most to be valued; Psalm. 4.6, 7. and that
his Displeasure is most dreadful, and worse than Death, the greatest Disaster
that can befall us; Mat. 10.28. and therefore, first to be avoided and most to
be shunned.

And I shall conclude this Exercise, with this Exhortation:

First, That we seek God and his Favor, by Faith in Jesus Christ, in a
constant Holy Conformity of of Heart and Life unto his Holy Will, all the days
of our Lives. And,

Secondly, That we fly from the Wrath to come, that we hide our selves, Isa.
26.20. From the Impending Judgments, ever it be too late, by Unfeigned
Repentance, Reformation and a speedy seeking of God for Pardon and Forgiveness,
that his displeasure being removed, then the effects of his Anger, viz. the
approaching troubles may be removed also thereby; Because,

When he gives Quietness, who then can cause Trouble? And when be hides his
Face, who then can behold him, whether it be done against a Nation or a man
only? FINIS.

