ANTI-HAMAN OR an ANSWER to M.G. BURNET'S MYSTERY of INIQUITY UNVAILED.

Where in is showed the CONFORMITY of the Doctrine, worship, and Practice of
the ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH with those of the Purest times.

The IDOLATRY of the PAGANS is truly stated and the Imputation of PAGAN
IDOLATRY clearly confuted.

And REASONS are given why CATHOLICS avoyde the Communion of the PROTESTANT
CHURCH.

By W. E. Student in Divinity.

With Leave of Superiors. 1678.

PREFACE.
IN the Infancy of the world nothing was thought Painful, or Afflicting to man
but Sickness, and Death: now he is Greived, if he wants any thing, he affects:
the Riches of nature are Scarce able to content his Desires, and even whem he
has all things necessary, he thinks himself Poor, if he wants any thing
superfluous. Crassus was the Richest of the Romans, yet thought himself Poor
because there were some riches, not his own: so he past terrible Deserts to
make war to Nations, whose only crime was their Wealth. To Alexander the whole
Earth seemed little, and having conquered it, he wept, hearing there were other
worlds undiscovered. Achab, King of a great Kingdom, was so heavy, and
greived, that he could not eat, because one refused, to sell him a small plot
of ground, to plant herbs in. Thus man finds a torment, in his felicity, and
when he is most Fortunate, he becomes so tender, that although his Attempts are
successful, yet even in them he finds pretexts to complain, and his greatest
successes are accompanied with some circumstances which afflict him. He is not
content with a victory: because the Commander of the Enemies saved himself by
flight, and did not Loose his life, or liberty, with his Honor. The enemy's
navy is beaten: yet that satisfyes him not, because some of their ships
recovered their Haven. A town is taken: yet he is troubled, that the whole
Province, with it, did not receive the yoke. Yet suppose his satisfaction
entire in one enterprise, that will only stir him up to new Projects. The
death of one Desire, is the birth of another: He uses his Reason only to invent
new Tortures to his Heart, by proposing new Objects to his Will, which deprive
him of all contentment in what he has, whilst he prosecutes his designs, to
obtain what he has not.

His Desire of Honor is no less insatiable. A scholar thinks the time, he
spends in studys lost, unless he be pointed at in the streets, and saluted as
a Rabby. His virtue it self seems not satisfied with the testimony of a good
Conscience: and unless with the Approbation of Heaven, he has the applause of
the Earth, he thinks himself wronged. Nay should all generally applaude him,
if only one detract, it spoils all the Satisfaction he takes in the
commendations of the rest. To Haman all knees were bent in the whole Empire of
Persia, except those of Mardochai: and the trouble of this banished all the
content he found in the submission of the rest. He considered the greatenesse
of his Riches, the Glory of his Authority, the number of his children, the
Queene's kindness; and the King's favor, who had raised him a bove all the
rest of the Princes: Yet all avayled him nothing, as long, as he saw Mardochai
sitting at the King's gate, Hester. 5.13. Hence he took a Resolution, to rid
the country of him, and all his kindred, the whole Jewish Nation, the only
faithful people, and visible church of that time.

The Proceedings of Protestant Ministers in order to Roman Catholics are not
unlike to those of Haman with the Jews, and discover as great, as insatiable
an Ambition. They have turned us out of the churchs we had built, and founded,
shut us out of their Courts, excluded us out of their Armies, barred against us
all entry into their Navys, by getting us declared incapable of Civil, and
Military employment, of all offices honorable, or beneficial. By which
means, no Papist appearing in their ordinary public meetings, all knees are
bent to them. Yet all this auayles not these meek men, as long as a Papist is
seen to walk in the streets, or known to breath Inglish air. So the
country must be rid of us. Thus far the Parallel runs just betwixt Haman, and
the Ministers on the one side, and the Israelits, and Catholics, on the other.
Yet there occur two differences: one that I never Read that Haman had bin
enriched with the spoils of the Jews; and the Benefices our Ministers enjoy
were founded by Catholycks. The other, that Haman contented himself, with
punishing the bodies of the Jews, and our Ministers do more over persecute our
souls. So that the Proceedings of these our friends are more unjust in their
cause, and more Inhumane in their effects.

Mr. Gilbert Burnet gives this verdict, for Banishing us in this World, and
Damning us in the next. But our Comfort is, that there lies an Appeal from his
Sentence to the Tribunal of God, as to what concerns the next world: and to
the mercy of the King, and Equity of the Parliament, and Judges, as to what
concerns this. We hope, they will not by banishing so many Peers of the
Realm, and worthy Gentlemen avoyde the disturbance of Mr. Burnet, who gives no
other motive why we should be banished, then that we disturb them. Let those,
to whom of Right it belongs, consider what reward this man's presumption
deserves, who being borne out of the Kingdom, (as Haman was, Hester 16.10.)
and lately by favor admitted in to it, should have the Confidence to pronounce
so severe a sentence upon so considerable a part of it. What may not be
expected from his boldness, when he is deeper rooted in England, and has
gotten more Credit?

Haman alleged against the Jews two points 1. That their Religion was
different from that of the State (which thing was true; but it was also
Innocent) 2. Their disobedience to the King's laws: which was a Calumny. But
his maine motive, was the stiffness of Mardochai's knees; which he concealed;
but God revealed. And M.B. alleadges two faults against us points of our
Religion (which are true, but harmless) and Calumnyes, as by this Treatise
will appear. And there is great reason to suspect some other motive, which in
the treatise will show it self. No doubt, but Haman pretended grief to find
so much disloyalty amongst the Jews, as Mr. G.B. pretends for the wickedness
of the Papists. The Holy Ghost has revealed in scripture the hypocrisy of the
one; and I will leave to the same Divine Spirit the Judgment of the other.

The parallel running so just, betwixt Haman, and Mr. Burnet, the reader sees
the reason why I give the name of Anti-Haman, to this Pamphlet. I declare, that
I have no intention to offend his person, by that name, or any thing else in
the whole, further then the matter I speak of after him forces me.

In my answer I follow G.B. step by step: and to show I do not alter his
sense, nor dissemble the strength of his arguments, I put them down in his
own words. I divide my work into chapters, that I might be the better
understood: and to avoyde tedious Repetitions of the same things, which S.
Cyril reproached to Julian the Apostata, l. 2. initio, and may with as much
reason be reproached to Mr. B. seeing he objects our saying Prayers in Latin
page 32. 35. 80. 115. 121. and 131. The like of Attrition, Prayers to Saints,
Idolatry, Mass, Indulgences, etc. which are always at hand to fill up a
Period, and increase the bulk of his book, which would dwindle to an
inconsiderable bigness, if that repetition were avoided.

The Book has very little new, it renews commonly the old objections, which
have bin often baffled by our controvertists. Trita haereticorum arma colligit.
S. Prosper: which proceeds not from want of wit, or Study (in both he abounds)
but from the nature of his cause, which is capable of no better Defense. For
this reason I may be excused, if I am short in my replies. Yet sometimes I
shall enlarge, where either the difficulty it self, or the manner of urging it,
is singular.

Such is the reproach of Idolatry, which is old, having bin objected to the
Cat. Church, by the ancient Iconoclasts, and by the first of our late
Reformers: yet it appears of late in such adresse, as it may seem quite new.
Heretofore all acknoledged the Pagan Idolatry to have consisted in the worship
of Idols, or Divils. Calvin said, Calvinus l. 1. Instit c. 11. n. 9. Deum
aeternum Iudaei unum, verumque caeli and terra Dominu^ sub simulachris suis
persuast erant se colere: and Gentel, suos licet falsos Deos, quos tamen in
coelo habitare fingerent.
the Pagans were persuaded that in their Idols they adored their false Gods,
which they thought resided in Heaven. He thought then, they were false Gods.
The same was the opinion of those, who followed, till of late that some new men
pretend that the Jupiter of the Pagans, was the true God: and all others were
only names of his Attributes, or Mediating Spirits. I find none of this
opinion, before Mr. Stillingfleete, nether has he long bin of it, for an.
1663. when he printed his Origenes Sacrae, he held the contrary, as I will show
hereafter. Till he shows his Author, we may call this the Stillingfleetian
error. Magnum Stillingfleeti Incrementum. And I Desire him to show any
Christian, who ever said: I adore the Pagan Jupiter, Did ever any Martyr
profess that he believed in, and adored Jupiter, as well, as his Judges, or
the Emperors did; but refused only to adore his statues, because he himfelf by
his law, Exodi 20.4. had forbidden it? Or said, the reason why they refused to
Sacrifice Beasts or offer incense to Jupiter, was because he, ( Jupiter
himself,) required of them other sorts of Adoration? No certainly. Yet those
are the thoughts which would naturally have occurred had both parties agreed in
professing the same one true God; and had only differred about the manner of
worshipping him.

This is my first reason against E.S. his Paradox. A Second is that the
Controversy betwixt Christians and Pagans had bin quite altered, had what he
says bin true. We sind them disputing about the pretended Divinity of Jupiter,
(the like of their other Gods) the Pagans affirming him to be the true God; the
Christians proving him to have bin a man, son of Saturn and Rhea, borne in
Crete^, and buried there: and to be personated by a foul and seducing Divil,
as W.L. renders their words. Now this Point could never have bin disputed, had
both parties agreed, that the thing signified by the Name Jupiter, had bin the
one true God, and all the difference had bin about that name. As de facto no
Christian ever disputed with the Turks, about the Being of one only God,
because they call him not, as we do, Deus, or God, but Alla. This hint gives
us a fair prospect into the sentiments of Christian Antiquity: for all
Disputants both Christians, and Pagans must have spoken nothing to the purpose,
if what E. S. says be true.

A third reason, and the strongest of all, is, that as E. S. States the
Controverly, Pagans were in the right and Christians in the wrong. For, what
said the Christians? Jupiter was a vicious man, and is a filthy Divil. What
said the Pagans? Jupiter is the true God. Now what is the real truth, according
to E. S.? Jupiter in the true God, blessed for evermore. By which words he
gives-in Evidence for the Pagans, against the Apostles, who in oposition to
Jupiter, and the whole rabble of such like fictitious Divinitys, planted the
Christian Faith: against the Glorious Martyrs, who watered it with their blood:
against the ancient Fathers, who defended it with their writings: against the
Primitive Church, which professed it, amidst the greatest Persecutions: against
God himself, who by invisible Graces, and visible Miracles confirmed it, and
lastly against that very Jupiter, (for whom he pleades) who owned himself to
be a filthy Divil. What censure can be toe severe, for so rash a verdict? Seeing
by it, the Pagans are absolved, and the Christians condemned, and this by a
pretended Professor of Christianity, and an Assertor of its primitive Purity.

Imagine your self (to E. S. I speak) to be brought into agreate Assembly,
where all the Faithful souls of the three firstages were met, where, on the
oneside were placed the glorious Martyrs, in scarlet robes, deyed in their own
blood: on the other Renowned Doctors and Fathers in white shining garments,
symbols of the light of their Doctrine, which directs the Ignorant to Heaven:
at the upper end, the Apostles, and Evangelists, and near them the 72.
Disciples: and all the rest stood in the middle. Think that all fix their eyes
on you (and doubtless from Heaven they do so) as on the first man, who
retaining the name of a Christian, asserted the Error they overthrew, and
opposed the Truth, they upheld, viz, that Jupiter was not God, but either a
wicked man, or a filthy Divil. Imagine they say unto you: How happens it, that
our cause, which for so many ages triumphed over Impiety, should now fall under
it, being arraigned at the Bar, of your Judgment, and there found Guilty? How
chances it, that we, the Martyrs, should have spilt our blood: we, the Doctors,
have employed our wit, studyes, and utmost industry: we, the Apostles and
Disciples, have spent our labors, and whole lives: we, the faithful, exposed
our selves to the greatest torments, to destroy the Kingdom of Jupiter, who
you say, was the true God? What excuse can you allege for this fact, of which
you find us guilty, viz, first, of denying the true God: secondly of accusing
him, of Incest, Adultery, Rapes, Sodomy, Rebellion, Parricide, and what not?
all which we charged on Jupiter, by an unparallelled Blasphemy, if he be God.
And (which aggravates our crime) we all continued obstinate in asserting these
Blasphemys, even to our last gasp, and breathed out our souls, in final
Impenitency. To what place will you sentence us, after our death whom you find
quilty of such foul crimes during our life? To Heaven? Blasphemy, accompanied
with final Impenitency cannot enter it. To the Air? our sins would defile it.
To the Earth? we are un worthy to tread upon it. Hell, Hell is the only fit
place for us, if yet Hell it self has any torments proportioned to so heinous
offenses. What reply can you make to this? with what eyes can you look on them?

Should he thence pass into an Assembly of Pagan Idolaters, Jupiter the
Arch-Divil, (or Lucifer) presiding over them; with what Acclamations would he
be received! How would they rejoice for so noted a Proselite! How would the
President renew his hopes of recovering that throne, by the help of so able a
man, which he affected from the beginning, in the sides of the north (Isay
14.13.) whence he was beaten by the Spirit of God, working in, and with the
Primitive Christians! That Satan was for a time to be bound, and after Loosed
again, we read Apoc. 20.3. Such Doctrine, as this, (that he is the true God)
gives a great blow to his chain. And what dispositions there are at present
to entertain him, all know, Libertinisme, Blasphemy, and all Impiety walking
barefaced, men glorying in them, seem to provoke our Just God to punish these
sins, by that other, Paganism: and the multitudes flocking to such
Conventicles, as have little of Christianity more then the name, discover how
loosely many of the people are united to Christ, and that there are great
dispositions to a general Apostasy: which I am persuaded E.S. would be as
sorry to see happen in his days, as any other. Yet least (although against his
will) he should promote see great a mischeife,

I wish he renounce this Paradox otherwise that it be writ upon his Tomb:
Here Lies a Champion of the Reformed Church of Ingland, who Believed in, and
Adored no other God, but the Pagan Jupiter.

I design no formal answer to his Defense of the Discourse of Idolatry, His
able Antagonist needs no help from my Weakness: so I let him end the
dispute, he has so happily managed hitherto. Yet if I am not mistaken, I shall
lay such principles, as may serve for an answer to that book: For seeing the
manner of handling the matter is new, I have taken the liberty to be Longer in
it, then elsewhere. It may be he will (having read what I say) find a reason
to change his Judgment of us, that we can say nothing, but out of Bellarmin, or
Coccius. It is no hard matter, to satisfy any indifferent man, in that point,
it being so clear in Antiquity, that if we read Justinius, M. or Athenagoras,
Tertullian, or S. Cyprian, Minutius Felix, or Arnobius, S. Austin, or S.
Hierome, we shall every where find convincing proofs of the falsehood of that
Error. It may be, some may take the pains to publish some of those Great
men's treatises, in Inglish, for the public good: to show the World, Mr. Still.
's Ingenuity in handling Controversy. Now if he has the Confidence to falsify
so clear a matter of fact, testified by Scripture, by Fathers, by History, by
Pagans, by the Divils them selves, and acknowledged by those of his own
Communion, how can he be relied on in Points of Doctrine, which are more
disputable, as being more obnoxious to mistakes, and not capable of so clear
disproofes? He could not possibly have given greater cause, to suspect all he
writes, then by such a Paradox, so evidently false, and so confidently asserted.

One thing I desire of our adversaryes, for their own sakes that they regard a
little what write, and not fill their books with every thing that occurres,
true, or false. I shall take notice of Mr. B. in the tract. Mr. Whithy in the
title Page of his book cites as Scotus his Opinion, an Objection which he
makes, and answers. He might with like reason have cited him, and all Divines
for Atheism seeing all put some Objections against the Being of a God: and all
Protestant writers of controversy, for Popery, seeing out of them, Papist
objections may be taken. Again page 242. he says no ancient Father takes notice
of any Heathen objecting to Christians their Prayers to Saints: which is an
assurance, says he, there was no such practice. Yet S. Augustine twice takes
notice of that objection, l. 8. de Civit. Dei c. 27. and l. 20. contra Faust.
c. 21. As also S. Hierome ep. 53. ad Riparium, and lib. cont. Jovinian. c. 2.
Again in the same page he assures there was no mention of canonizing Saints,
till the 7. century. Yet the schism of the Donatists was in the beginning of
the 4. century, and a great cause of this schism was the malice, and spyght
of Lucilla, a factious, proud, and exceeding rich woman, who was reprehended by
Caecilianus, then a Deacon, for honoring the bone of a Martyr before he was
Canonized, Os Martyris nondum vindicati, says Optatus Milevit. l. 1. and may be
seen in S. Aug. l. 1. cont. Parmenian. cap. 3. and epist. 162. Moreover out of
the Iliberitan Council can. 60. and S. Austin. Brevic. collat. die 3. c. 13. is
gathered that the African, and Spanish Churchs would not admit into the number
of Martyrs (which was their Canonizing them) such as lost their lives, having
provoked the Persecutors to kill them. So in the third age there was the
custom of Canonizing: for the Council of Eliberis, or Elvira and Optatus
speak of it, as of a custom established. This being so clear, and so
obvious, I cannot guess what should ground Mr. Whitby's mistake of no custom
to Canonize before the 7. century, unless it was that he found in Bellar. l.
1. de Sanct. Beatit. or in Surius his life of S. Swithbert, that this Saint was
the first of whose solemn Canonization any records are extant. Which yet is
far, from what Mr. Whitby affirms, of no mention of the custom of Canonizing
till the 7. Century. Such gross errors bear the character of a Minister
fryghted with Popery, and writing against it: none else are capable of them. I
have read very little in that work: for opening it accidentally in that
place, where those two great untruths are so confidently advanced, that
brought to my mind the words of the wise man, Prove. 29.20. So I thought I might
spend my time better, then on him.

One word to prevent misinterpretations. In the following treatise, I put W. L.
for Will. Lawd late Lord Primate of Ingland (as also E. S. for D.
Stillingfleete, and G.B. for Mr. Burnet) not out of any disesteeme of his
personal Endowments, or want of Respect for his public character; but only
for brevity's sake. Which none can be offended with, who knows, we cite in
alike manner Bellarmin, Baronius, Perron, Cayetan, without their titles,
notwithstanding their Ecclesiastical dignity.

Self defense is of the law of nature, and is never less obnoxious to
Censure, then when least personal: And such is my case; whose only endeavor
is, to plead for the Cat. Church, of which I have the happiness to be an
Inconsiderable Member: so my undertaking Cannot be blamed. In the handling it,
I have avoided, as much as possible all personal Reflections, which are not
forced on me by the book, I answer. Some are unavoydable: for it is impossible
to confute a sophisme, without discovering a fault either natural, or (which is
worse) voluntary in the Author; nor answer a calumny, with out calling it so,
If I find the Church wrongfully accused, and prove it, and call a boat, a
boat, and a spade a spade, he must be very partial, who blames me.

What end may be expected of these Disputes I know not, seeing Passion and
Interest fyghts against Truth: whilst we cannot (without renouncing our Faith
recived from Christ, and his Apostles) and our Adversaryes will not, alter
their sentiments. It is our duty, to pray that Truth may prevayle, and the God
of Truth be glorified.

Let us give ear to Mr. Burnet's Deposition against Papists, which he begins
with a real or affected lamentation: If real, it will be an an act of Charity
to comfort him: which is the thing I aim at in this Tract.

CHAPTER I. G. B. his design, and disposition when he writ this Book: of the
wickedness of the world.
MR. G.B. page 1. He that increases knowledge, incraseth sorrow, is an
observation which holds true of no part of knowledge, so much as of the
knowledge of mankind: it is some relief to him, who knows nothing of foreigne
wickedness, to hope there are other nations where in virtue is honored, and
Religion is in esteem, which allays his regrates when he sees Vice, and
Impiety abound in his country; but if by traveling or reading, he enlarge his
Horizon, and know mankind better, his regrates will grow, when he finds the
whole world lies in wickedness.

ANSWER. We need not travel, or read much, to know, that the whole world lies
in wickedness: Seeing those are the words of the beloyed disciple, 1. Jo. 5.19.
This is indeed an occasion of sorrow. But in the same place the B. Apostle
comforts us, by saying we know that we are of God. So that the world there is
understood of unbeleivers: who are in wickedness, by original and actual
sin, for which they have no lawful, and efficacious expiation, no Sacrament
instituted by Almighty God lawfully administered. But we, who are in the true
Church, are of God, unto whom we are regenerated by Baptism; and if by humane
frailly we dye to God falling into any grievous sin, we have the Holy Sacrament
of Penance to raise us again to the life of Grace.

Yet it is not the Apostles meaning, that in the true members of the Catholic
Church there is nothing reprehensible; or that in those, who are not in it
there is nothing Good. In Heaven there is nothing but Virtue, those Blessed
souls having their will so united to that of God, that they cannot offend him.
In Hell there is nothing but sin: the wills of those wretched Spirits being so
obstinate in the love of themselves, that they cannot do any thing which
should please God. This present life is a mean betwixt those extremes: and in
it there is a mixture of Perfections and imperfections, of vice and virtue.
Those, who are most wicked have something good: and in those, who are most
virtuous, there are some remainders of Humane frailty, for their Humiliation,
which we ought nether to esteem, nor imitate. 1. Kings 21.25.
There was none like unto Achab, which did sell him self to work wickedness in
the sight of the Lord. Yet he humbled himself and put on sackcloth, and
fasted. S. Paul Act. 9.15.
The chosen vessel unto God to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings,
and the children of Israel, yet 2. Cor. 12.7.
there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan, to
buffet him. And who can without compassion read his seventh chapter to the
Romans, in which he describes the conflict he felt interiourly, betwixt the
Spirit, and the flesh? Which he concludes with these pathetick words: O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? which
renew the memory of that torment, to which Mezentius the tyrant Virgilius
Aeneid. 8.
condemned his innocent subjects: and the Hetruscans Aug. l. 4. contra Iul. c.
ult.
exercised upon their captives: binding living bodies to rotten putrifyed
carcasses, and leaving them so. But the Apostle, who describes his pain,
relates his ease, and having explicated his sickness acquaints us with its
Remedy, the grace of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So that if the combat
affryghts us, by this assistance we may be encouraged, and comforted.

Yet though I grant that there is occasion enough, to lament on what side
soever we cast our eyes on mankind, in this state of corrupt nature, if we
consider how little men use the means designed for their improvement in virtue,
and resisting their bad inclinations. Yet there is little appearance of grief
in your book: which has more of a Satyr them of a Lamentation, your style
being rather bitingly invective, then mourningly compassionate: you discover
more of Diogenes, or of Democritus, then of Heraclitus.

Were there no objects of regrate nearer home? Does your own Church afford you
no occasion to show your Zeal, in blaming the faults of her children, in order
to get them corrected? Sure it does, or the world is very much misinformed. How
comes it then, that you neglect her cure, of whom your character oblidges you
to have a care; and Search the sores of the Roman Church, with which you have
nothing to do? Do you not see that you give us reason, to say, your Charity
is disorderly, not beginning at home: and that Luke 6.42.
as the Hypocrit, you labor to show in, or take out of another eye, a mote,
while you neglect a beam in your own?

G. B. page 1. It argues a cruel, and inhumane temper, to delyght in beholding
Scenes of Horror and misery.

ANSWER. What temper then does it argue to delyght in representing them, and
that in the most horrible, tragical, and dismal colors, which art, and
study, can invent? for what can even the most inventive Imagination fancy more
dismal, then what you write page 2. Indignityes done to God, and his Son
Christ, the enemy of mankind triumphing over the world with absolute authority;
and enraged cruelty: Satan have a seat, when Christ's throne should be:
Christendom fallen from its first love, and the greatest part of it made
shipwreck of its Faith: that Church, whose Faith was once spoken of throughout
the world, become Mother of the Fornications of the Earth. In fine, Falling
away, mystery of iniquity, AntiChrist, Babilonish Rome, Bewitchings, sorceryes,
and what not. Add but obstinacy in these horrid crimes (which is a
circumstance aggravating them, without altring their species) and the Pains
due to sin (which are not horrible, if compared with sin) and we here have a
picture of Hell.

Your temper is very merciful, and humane, which ptompts you to make such a
map of the fargreatest part of Christianity! This will appear more clearly,
when we come to consider your charge in retayle, and examine your proofs, when
we see you are forced to seek them in the obscure withdrawing rooms of man's
heart, which are inaccessible to all, but God, of which nevertheless you speak
as confidently, as if God had lead you by the hand into them; and made you
partaker of his knowledge. Purgatory was invented on design to enrich the
clergy: Transubstantiation, on design to make it more esteemed: The primacy of
the Pope on design of Grandeur, etc. And although we vouch Scripture for all
these points, yet you are pleased to say, we do not ground them on Scripture,
but on Ambition and Avarice, Nay you not only feign proofs for our Doctrines,
but fix on us Doctrines themselves, which we disowne, as that we teach to
break the Commandments. So that we may profess, that all that is ugly, and
dismal, in the Scene of Horror, and Misery, which you represent, comes from
your own pincell, and is an effect of your own brain. See what is your
temper: and how much your Reader is oblidged to you.

CHAPTER II. Of Antichrist.
G. B. page 3. Being warned of so much danger to the Christian Religion, it is
a necessary enquiry to see if this AntiChrist be yet come, or if we must look
for another.

ANSWER. Do you then think it as necessary to know AntiChrist, as to know
Christ? That you express your earnestness in enquiring after AntiChrist in
those words Luke 7.19.
of S. John the Baptist's inquest after the Messiah? Nay yours are more
pressing, and urgent, then those of that great Saint: for he said only: Art
thou he that should come, or Look we for another? But you say: or must we
Look for another? As if it were a more pressing duty to enquire after the
AntiChrist, then the Messiah.

We are warned indeed of Antichrist: and we are also warned, of the danger
hanging over the Church, from Mar. 13.21.22.
false Prophets, and false Christ's. Who should say: Lo here is Christ: Lo he
is there. All Sectarys pretend to him. You will doubtless say, he is in your
Prelaticall Church: the Presbyterian says he is in his Assemblyes: The
independent is for his conventicles: the Quaker Claims him also. What shall a
Roman Catholic do? what choice shall he make? Our Blessed Savior having
forewarned us of the danger, arms us against it: Ne credideritis: believe none
of them; but stick to the old Doctrine, and the Catholic Church. Which I
cite, as more against you, then any thing, you can bring against us, out of
your contemplations on Antichrist, or the Apocalypse: to which you would never
recurre, had you any clear grounds against us in Scripture. I suspect the
cause of any man, which to decide a suite-in-law, produces obscure, dubious,
and (for that reason) insignificant deeds. I should on that score, had others
been wanting, suspect the cause of the sectaryes, millenarians,
fift-monarky-men, and the like. And that reason is sufficient to make me
suspect you, who recurre to those obscure Prophecyes of the AntiChrist: which
at best are extremely obscure: as appears by the errors, grounded on it as
you acknowledge: For you say:

G.B. page 3. Some have stretched the notion of AntiChristiamisme so far, that
things harmless, and innocent, come with in its compass: and others have too
much contracted it, that they might escape free.

ANSWER. It seems the limits of the notion of AntiChristianisme are very
arbitrary, soing they are extn ded, or contracted according (not to Scripture,
or Tradition, but) to the fancy, and caprichio of every pragmaticall Head.
When you consider more impartially the things harmless and Innocent, which
you blame in us as AntiChristian, very probably, you will find your self to be
of the number of those, who stretch its notion beyond its nature, and those
limits, which God has designed for it.

G. B. page 3. AntiChristianisme is not only a bare contradiction to some
branches, or parts, of the Ghospel; but a design and entire complex, of such
opinions, and practices, as are contradictory to, and subversive of, the power
and life of Christianity.

ANSWER. Never did Junior Sophister amongst illiterate Pesants, deliver his
sentiments, or Apollo amongst his deluded Adorers, speak his Oracles, more
magisterially, then you deliver your Opinions in controverted matters, of
Faith: for such is this point, seeing it is delivered in Scripture, and there
are such variety of persuasions concerning it is true meaning, as you your self
said even now. You give us a new notion of it and what Scripture, what
Tradition, what decree of a Council, what father, do you allege for it?
None. Not so much as any reason offered. Is not this to Lord it over the faith
of your Reader? To beg the thing in question? and to expect the world should be
so stupid, as to be taken with such a slyght? That you should meet with
belief, because you boldly assert?

To your bare assertion, I will oppose my negation: and why should not my
negation be be of as much weight, as your affirmation? Especially seeing I
speak with all those, whom you blame for enlarging, or contracting too much
the notion of AntiChristianisme; and you stand alone. I confirm my negation
with Scripture 1. Jo. 4.3. where those are said to be AntiChrist, who deny
Christ's coming in the flesh. Which is only one article of Christianity, how
soever it be of the most fundamental.

Yet let us grant, what you so confidently beg, that Anti-Christianisme is
acomplex of opinions opposed to the power, and life of Christianity. I know
none, who has better title to it, then your Reformation: for the life of
Christianity, is Faith, and Charity: and you have destroyed the first by
Heresy, and the second by Schism, as shall be proved hereafter.

Children delyght in Edged tools, which serve only to cut their fingers: and
you, and your brethren, use weapons against us, which wound your selves. Fatal
Experience might have taught you more discretion, then to be still moving that
stone, which has once crushed both your Church, and state to pieces.

And truly the reproach of Antichristian will fall on your Church, if proved
against ours. For say what you please of the ancient Britans, the first
Apostles of the Inglish who brought us the light of Faith, and planted the
Ghospel amongst us, came from Rome. The Hierarchy you pretend to, came from
thence: By authority from the Pope my Lord of Canterbury is Primate, and my
Lord of London is his Suffragan. By the same authority the Country is divided
into Dioceses: your Deanes and Chapters settled: your universityes founded, and
several degrees instituted in them. If the Pope be the AntiChrist, both
universitys, and Hierarchy amongst you is AntiChristian.

More over the Livings, you enjoy, were for the most part, if not altogether,
given by the pious liberality of Persons, who professed that Faith, we profess,
and lived, and dyed in the Communion of our Church. Gratitude to such
Benefactors may teach you to Judge less severely, to suspend your Judgment,
til you have more convincing arguments to ground it on, then your own bare and
bold Assertion.

CHAPTER III. True the Designs of Christian Religion.
THe Design of God in establishing Religion, was that Men should serve him in
this world, and enjoy him in the next: that they Psalm. 12^.3.
here sow, with tears; there reap with Joy: now run 2. Tim. 4.7. and 8.
their race, and fight their battle, then receive their Crown. Rivers Eccles.
1.7.
receive their waters from the sea, and return to it again: and Religion
receives its beginning from God, runs through all ages, to return to God
again. Each man before his creation, is Creatrix essentia, says S. Anselme:
from which by creation he is separated: and by Regeneration, and the good
works which follow it, he returns to him again, never more to be separated
from him. The first Action is of God alone; the rest are of God and man, for
God Aug. Quite creavit, sine te, non te salvabit sine te.
will not complete the work of our salvation with out the cooperation of man.
God Subest tibi, cum volueris, posse.
can do all, with out man but will not: man Sine me nihil potestis facere.
10.15.5.
can do nothing without God, from whom he must expect prevenient,
concomitant, and subsequent Graces, for all, and every meritorious action.

That bliss, which God prepares for us in the next life, contains God
himself, and when enjoyed renders the thrice happy soul, like Similes ei
erimus, 1.10.3.^.
unto God: and we must attain to it by means proportionable, which partake of
the resemblance. Wherefore our understanding must be like that of God,
beleiving him: and our will, Loving him: the first is Faith, the second,
Charity. To which add Hope to keep our soul steedy amidst the difficultyes of
this life, as an anchor Heb. 6.19.
fixes a ship: and you have the three virtues, called Theological; because
they rely immediately on Almighty God: Faith on his Veracity, or Truth in
affirming. Hope on his Fidelity in promising, and Goodness as he is our Chief
Good: and Charity on his Goodness in its self. Which three Virtues contain
what is required of us in this life. Whatsoever is required to a good life, is
known, is we know what to believe, to hope, and to love, Says Aug. Ench. c. 4.
Omnia. quae requiris, proculdubio scies, diligenter sciendo, quid credi, quid
sperari debeat, quid amari. Haec enim maxim, imo vero sola in Religione
sequenda sunt.
S. Austin. Which are the only things, Religion regards: as being designed only
for these three virtues.

But are we not oblidged to keep the commandments? Or do not they advauce
toward Heaven, who run Psalm. 119.32.
in the paths, which God has traced out? And how come these to be omitted?
ANSWER: They are not omitted; but are contained in Charity. Romans 13.8.9.
He that loves an other, bath fullfilled the law, our whole duty to our
neighbor, and the commandments relating to him, being briefly comprehended in
this saying: Love thy neighbor as thy self. As our whole duty, to God is
contained in that other saying. Love God above all things. Mat. 22.40.
On these two commandments hang all the law, and the Prophets. These are the
two roots Mat. 7.17.
of the good tree, which brings forth good fruit. As love of our selves is the
root of the bad tree, which brings forth bad fruit. The Aug. sermon. 44. de
temp. Radix omnium bonorum est Charitas, sicut radix omnium malorum est
cupiditas.
root of all good is Charity, as the root of all evil is concupiscence.
Again: Aug. l. de moribus Eccl. c. 25. Nihil aliud est been vivere, quam toto
cord, tota anima, tota mente, Deum diligere.
To live well, is to love God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all
our mind.

I should as easily write out the whole new testament, as endeavor, to cite
all the passages which directly, or indirectly commend Charity: seeing all tend
to extinguish in us self love, and to kindle Divine love. In it Divine love
sometimes is preferred before 1. Cor. 13.
the tongues of men, and Angels: before Faith working miracles, before
knowledge of the greatest mysteryes. Alms giving, etc. It is called Col. 3.14.
the bond of perfection, the end 1. Tim. 5.
(or intent) of the commandments, etc. I end with the words of the beloved, and
loving disciple: 10.4.16.
God is love: and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
Wherefore with reason S. Austin Aug. l. de laudibus Charitatis.
said, Ille tenet quicquid latet, and quicquid patet in divinis sermonibus, qui
servat Charitatem in moribus.

I should not have been so long upon a point of which I thought none could be
ignorant, who reads the Scriptures, or knows the Rudiments of Christianity,
did I not perceive, that you either never knew it, or have forgotten. And When
Heb. 5.12.
for the time, and your vocation, you should be a teacher, you have need that
one should teach you, which be the first principles af the Oracles of God. For
how happens it, that in relating the designs of Christian Religion, there is
not one clear word of the love of God, which is the maine design of it? you
speak of Purity, Ingenuity, Patience, Generosity, and some thing of the love
of our neighbor. But why are you silent of the love of God, which gives virtue
to all the rest, which without it avayle us nothing, 1. Cor. 13.
how perfect soever they be in their kind? Do you intend to make that fall
under the notion of AntiChristianisme, as being with you no part of the
Designs of Christianity? I shall expect a satisfactory answer to these doubts,
and proceed to

CHAPTER IV. G. B. His explication of the Designs of Christianity.
G. B. page 4. The first design of Christian Religion is to give us right
apprehensions of the Nature, and Attributes of God.

Page 5. The second branch is to hold forth the method of man's reconciliation
with his Maker. You mean, that the intent of Christian Religion is to teach
us, that there is One God, and One Mediator: which are objects of our Faith.

Page 7. The third is to teach the perfectest, cleerest, and most divine rules,
for advancing of the souls of men to the highest perfection of their natures:
it giving cleerer rules, and fuller directions, then either moral Philosophers,
or the old teflament. The lessons of Purity, chastity, ingenuity, humility,
meekness, patience, and generosity. No^ one word of charity: but Generosity,
I know not whence, comes in to take its place.

Page 8. The fourth is to unite Mankind (...) the closest bonds of Peace,
freindship and charity which it does tempering our Passions, forgiving
injuries, loving our enemies, teaching obedienc^ to those in authority over us,
and by associating (...) into one body, called the Church.

ANSWER. This is in deed a design worthy of Christian Religion; but
imperfectly explicated by you, seeing you omite the love of God, the God ^. Cor.
13.11.
of Peace, who alone can give us perfect Peace. Humane wills are naturally
oppo^^ to one another, they cannot meet, but i^^ their natural center, God.
And the love (...) our neighbor is never sincere, and lasting, bu^ when it is
grounded on the love of God. The first effect of self love, is to separate us
from God. The second, to divide us amongst o^^ selves. Both are the effects of
sin: and nothing can prevent them, and linck us together in the bonds of
charity, but he who can remit sins.

That Peace then, which Christian Religion teaches, which the Church recomend
to her children, which in her Prayers she demands of God, is not an effect of
human industry; but of Grace. It proceeds from the mercy of God, it is a
sequel of Purity of conscience, and the Crown of real, and true Justice. In
fine it is the work of the unspotted Lamb, 1. Petr. 1.19.
at whose birth Peace Luke 2.14.
was announced in his name to the world by the Angels: who left Peace 10.14.27.
as a legacy to his disciples before his Death: and who was sacrificed on the
Altar of the Cross to reconcile us to his Heavenly father, and restore Peace
betwixt Heaven and Earth, which the sin, and Rebellion of Men had banished.

You see, sir, how insufficient your explication of Peace is for the ends you
propose. You leave out the Chief, and most necessary ingredient, for purging
our dissensions, and to use a Prophets comparison, Ezeh. c. 13.10.
you build with untempered Mortar. You Ierem. 6.14.
heal the hurt, of the people slyghtly, saying: Peace, Peace, when there is no
Peace.

You hint indeed at a good humane means to Peace; Obedience to those in
Authority. It was to prevent schism, Inter Apostolos unus eligitur, ut capite
cons^ituto schismatis toll retur occasio. Hieron. l. 1. adversus Vigilantium,
c. 54.
that God established one Apostle over the rest. But your endless Divisions,
and subdivisions amongst your selves, Show how inefficacious this means is in
your Reformation. And how can it be otherwise when all your People have before
their eyes the example of your first Patriarchs, who began your Reformation, by
rejecting all Authority over them, and breaking the rules of divine worship
settled al over the world and till that time acknowledged by themselves? Cur non
licebit Valentiniano, quod licuit Valentino de arbitrio suo fidem innovare?
Tert. l. de praescript. Why may not a Lutheran do, what was lawful to Luther?
your first Reformers rejected some articles of Faith, then universally
believed, because they seemed not to be contained in Scripture: why may not the
same motive authorize their followers, to reject some others which you would
retain, although they are as little to be found in Scriptures? Why may not a
modern Protestant retrench some unnecessary ceremony used by you at present,
seeing you have cut off so many others? Let others live by that law which you
publish; think not so hyghly, of your onne authority, as to make your
dictamens not only the Rule of Actions; but of the laws themselves. It shall be
lawful to dissent from this article of Faith, but not from that other: to quit
this ceremony; and not that: when the same rule is applicable to both. Is not
this properly 2. Cor. 1.24.
to Lord it over the Faith of the People? What wonder you find your layty
refractory to your ordinances? they are in this directed by your rule, and
encouraged by your example.

Wherefore Look no where abroad for the root of these tares: your Reformers
planted them: they laid the Egg, out of which this cockatrice is hatched. They
eat the sower grapes, which set all your Teeth an Edge. Nether appears there
any possibility of a remedy, while your reformation subsists: this principle of
Discord, and Schism being said in its very foundation: and consequently it
cannot be removed, with out the ruin of the whole structure: nor retained
without perpetual danger of renting it in Pieces.

I wish these troublesome schisms, and endless discordes amongst your selves,
may make you seek a proper Remedy, by a Reunion to the center of union, God,
and his Church.

CHAPTER V. Of the Characters of Christian Doctrine.
G.B. p. 8. I shall add to this the main distinguishing Characters of our
Religion, which are four. Page 8. First its verity. Page 10. The second its
genuine simplicity, and perspicuity. The third, its Reasonableness: and the
fourth its easiness. Thus you.

ANSWER. Are these the only, or even the Chief Characters of Divine Truths,
whither you take them, as they are delivered in holy writ, or as taught in the
Church? Can you find no other quality peculiar to them, not common to others?
Then humane learning may equal, if not surpass Divine. Take, for example,
some principles naturally known: as Two and two make four: or, The whole body
is greater then any part of it. These are True: it is impossible they should be
false. They are Perspicuous, and Easy: no man can doubt of them, who
understands the terms. They are Reasonable: for what more reasonable, then to
assent to Evident Truth? Nay of we compare then with supernatural Truths, as
to their Perspicuity, and Verity, in order to us, the advantage seems greater
on the side of natural Truths: 1.o For no man ever doubted of the Truth of
these, having once understood their terms; and many have, and do doubt of
faith, although sufficiently proposed. And 2.o no man ever dissented from those
Principles, when he had once admitted them; and many have Apostatized from
their Faith.

So that all the Praises you give to Faith, belong more to natural Sciences,
then to it. Such a stranger are you to its true Prerogatives.

The reason of this stupendous blindness in searching the scriptures, is that
you read them as a master; not as a disciple: you intend not to learn from
them what to believe, but to shape them to what you think: you have the word
but reject the sense, which is to the word, what the soul is to the body, it
gives it life, and motion. The 1. Cor. 2.14.
natural man receives not the things, of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, nether can be know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. You see, fir, that some may read, or have the word of God, and yet
not comprehend its meaning: nay that it may seem folly unto them. The words
may be words of John. 6.61.
lise everlasting, and yet they cry: Durus est hic sermo: this word is hard,
and who can hear him?

The Divine Scriptures are high and majesticall in the sense; simple and
without affectation in word: they are plain; yet in them are high Hills, which
no natural wit can surmount. They are perspicuous, yet full of mysterious
clouds, which baffle the most peircing eye. They are all True: yet S. Austin l.
3. cont. Faust. c. 2. Pie cogitantes tantae auctoritatis eminentiam, latere ibi
aliquid crediderunt, quod petentibus daretur, oblatrantibus negaretur.
takes notice of some seeming contradictions, which cannot be reconciled with
our recourse to God the Author of scriptures. Less is learnt by study, then
by Prayer, if Prayer be accompanied with humility. The Psalm. 18. (or 19.) 7.
testimony of God is faithful, giving wisdom to the little ones, or making
wise the simple, as the Inglish has it. And the Author of our faith glorifyes
his Father, Mat. 11.25.
for concealing his mysteryes from the learned, and wise, and revealing them to
little ones. S. Gregory furnishes us with a fit comparison, Greg. ep. ad
Leandrum c. 4. Instar fluminis alti, and plani in quo Agnus ambulet, and
Elephas natet.
of a shallow and deape river: in which a lamb may wade, and an Elephant
swim. That is, in it the simple, and humble find ground to stand upon; which
the Proud loose, and by it, are lost. The words are plain, and easy; but the
sense sublime, and hard, not to be reached by humane industry; but by Divine
inspiration, which is denied to those, who rely on their own abilityes, and
given, to such as recurre to God.

No books of the Sybills, nor oracles of the Divills, or other humane writing
can equal Divine Scripture in this point.

Another character, of Divine Scriptures is the force which accompanyes them,
and works upon the heart of those who are well disposed which insinuates its
self into the will, and enflames it with the love of God breakeing in pieces
the stony heart of sinners. Art Ierem. 23.29.
not my words like fire, and like a hammer that breaks a Rock.

No precepts of Pagan Philosophers had this energy. I will not assure, you ever
perceived either of these two qualityes in reading of Scripture, in your works
there appears little signs of either, or of the disposition, which they
suppose.

CHAPTER VI. Scriptures Suppressed.
G. B. Page 13. Scriptures being the Revelation of the whole counsel of God,
and written by plain and simple men, and as first directed to the use of the
rude illitterate vulgar, for teaching them the mysterye of Godliness, and the
path of life, it is a shrewd indication, that if any study to kide this light
under a candlestick and to keep it in an unknown tongue, or forbid the body
of Christians the use of it, that those must be conscious to themselves of
great deformity to that rule.

ANSWER. Here you begin your charge of AntiChristianisme against your
Mother Church and as the charge is false, so in your managing it, you mingle
many Errors, with some few truths. A bad cause is not capable of a better
defense. I will take notice of some of your most considerable slips, and leave
the reader to Judge of the rest.

That Scriptures were written by plain and simple men, is not true. Was Moses
such, who was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians? Was David the
swette singer of Israel, a plain and simple man? What shall we say of Solomon,
to whose wonderful knowledge the Scripture it self bears witness? Amos, it
is true, was; but Esayas was not, nor Daniel, nor Samuel. And who ever was
Author of the Book of Job, he was certainly far from being plain and simple:
for in him are found in perfection, Philosophy, Astrology and Divinity, as a
queen gouverning them, and if Caussinus the Jesuit may be believed, as
complete Rhetoric, as in any whosoever. And as to the Authors of the new
Testament, as long as S. Paul, S. Luke, and S. John are amongst them, you will
never persuade the learned part of the world, that your speech is not rash and
inconsiderate.

But suppose it true, that they were all plain and simple men: what then? Does
it follow that what they writ, is easy to the meanest capacity? (for that you
intend if you intend any thing.) Do you not know, that these men, were only
the Scribes, of the Holy Ghost? and that in a scribe capacity of understanding
is not necessary, but only fidelity in writing. No great science is necessary
in a Printer who only Prints what is given him, by an Author: the Same of a
Scribe, who writes what is dictated unto him. Now all Authors of Canonical
books are the Scribes of the Holy Ghost, (...), so their doctrine is to be
calculated according to the Meridian of that Divine Spirit; not of their
qualitys. Take the most plain, and simple of them all, Amos 1.1.
the herd man of Thecue: read him over: and if you say you understand him
quite thorough, I will say, you have confidence to say any thing.

G. B. page 14. The hardests part of Scripture, are the writings of the old
Testament, and yet those were communicated to all.

ANSWER. Some parts, of the new are as hard, at any of the old, viz. the
Apocalypse, and some parts of S. Paul's Epistle, are hard to be understood. 2.
Pet 3.16.


Likewise, Is it not true, that all the writings of the old Testament were made
common to all the Israelits. The King Deuteronomy. 17.18.
was indeed commanded to write to himself a copy of the law out of that which
was before the Priests the Levits. By which it appears that even Copyes of the
law were not so ordinary. Which may be gatheted also out of the 4. of Kings c.
22. there was such astonishment at the finding, and reading of the book of the
law newly found in the Temple. The tencommandments were common, the Pharisys
Phylacteryes prove it. As for the rest, it was divided into Parashots,
sections, and read unto the People, when they met on the Sabbath, as you may
see, Acts 15.21. And in the second of Esdras cap. 8. And the Same custom is
still in the Cat. Church: which in her service does daily read some of the
new, and old Testament.

G. B. page 14. What pains are taken by Papists to detract from the Authority
of Scriptures how they quarrel, its darkness, its ambiguousnesse, the
genuinesse of its Originalls?

ANSWER. This is a calumny. We all unanimously own Scripture to be the word of
God: that no untruth can be found in it. Out of its darkness, and Ambiguity,
we show the necessity of receiving its sense from Tradition; and not sticking
to the bare letter of the Scripture without the sense; which is to the letter,
what a soul is to the body.

G. B. page 15. We complain of Scripture being too much perused.

ANSWER. Another calumny: In all our universitys we have masters of Scriptures,
who in those, I know, take place of those even of Divinity. Which shows the
esteem we make of that study.

G. B. page 15. Let as little of it be in vulgar tongues, as can be.

ANSWER. Athird Calumny. It is all in Inglish, translated by the Rhemish, and
Doway Colleges: and in french, by the Doctors of Lovain. And as for the new
testament, is it published in french by Rene Benoit, Brulot, Villcloin, and
Amelot. Besides other editions less noted. And if there has been no new
translation into Inglish, it is not for any decrees forbidding it, but because
that first translation is liked in gross, and if any thing, be defective (as
is unavoyable in all works of men) it is not considerable, and the like, or
worse, might be feared in another.

G. B. page 19. We read it publicly in an unknown tongue, in Latin.

ANSWER. If this proves our dislike of the Scriptures, it will likewise prove
our dislike of Councills and Popes Bulls, (which you say we prefer before
Scriptures) seeing these were never extant in any vulgar language. Latin cannot
truly absolutely be called an unknown tongue, in the Latin Church, seeing it is
the language of her schools, of her publiske service, of her laws, of her
Tribunalls, of her Councills, and in many places (as in Polony, and higher and
lower Germany) of almost every particular person, where very ordinarily even
carters, and watermen speak it. And as for Spaniards, and Italians with little
application, they understand it, by reason of the assinity betwixt their own,
and the Latintongue. So Inglish cannot absolutely besayd to be an unknown
tongue in Wales, and Ireland, though in both there are several who understand
it not.

If this be not a sufficient vindication of our Church, how will you excuse
your own from the same fault, which never translated the Scripture, into
Irish, but uses Inglish in Ireland even where there are many thousands, who
understand it as little, as Latin is understoode by any Catholic.

G. B. page 15. We permit no private person the use of it, with out allowance
from his Confessor.

ANSWER. A fourth Calumny. In Latin Greek or Hebrew, it is universally
permitted to all. In France no body scruples at the reading it in french,
provided the Editions be approved. Your Brethren there could have informed you
better: seeing they have had the confusion to see their Ministers mouths stopped,
by Cutlers, and Schoomakers out of their own Bible: which could not be, had
they not read it.

If the opinion of a Confessor be demanded, it is to know the Disposition of
the Person, who desires it, whither it be such, as good may behoped from that
reading. All food is designed by Almighty God for the use of man. Yet without
any injury to the Patient, a Physician may forbid him the use of some, which
would nourish peccant humors. So Scripture are designed for our instruction
unto Piety to God, and Peace to our Neighbors: If any man's mind be possessed
with opinions contrary to both, and these opinions controuble all Instruction
given him so as all serve only to confirm him in his Impiety, and turbulent
humor, would you not advise him a diet, from such strong food, as Scripture?
For example lately a great part of the commonalty of our nation was so possessed
with a spirit of Rebellion against Ecclesiastical, and Civil Government, that
although there be scarce any thing more recommended in Holy writ, then obedience
to Prelate, and Prince, yet they thought the whole drift of Scripture abetted
their Treason: not that any such thing was to be found in Scriptures; but that
they fancyed it there, as men fancy, that the Bells speak articulate words. In
that co^juncture what advice would you give to an ignorant man, to be satisfied
with books of Devotion, and Instructions drawn from Scripture which might
keep him humble, and Peaccable: or to continu reading the Scriptures which he
thought preached sedition, and from which (throught his bad disposition) he was
confirmed in his Rebellions, and AntiChristian Courses.

Another motive, why the Confessors advice is demanded, is that he might
instruct men how to read, and reap benefit from the Reading. To read with
the Humility of a Scholar, not the presumption of a master, to make rather a
Prayer, then a study, of it: To resolve to practice what they understand: and
adore God for what they understand not. So that whither they do, or do not
comprehend, what they read, they Glorify God in all, and grow in virtue. After
such instructions applied to the condition of every one, the benefit will be
much greater, and the danger of ill using it much diminished.

CHAPTER VII. Idolatry of the Pagans.
THis matter is as clear in it self, as any antiquated rites can be: all men
are posses with an opinion, that (as the word imports) the deluded nations did
Adore Idols, as their Gods. S. Austin l. 20. contra Faustum c. 20 having said,
that latria was the worship given to God alone as he is distinguished from all
his creatures, how holy soever, he says: Ad hunc cultum pertinet oblatio
sacrificii, unde Idololatria dicitur little, qui lioc ( sacrificium) etiam
Idolis offerunt. That to offer Sacrifice is an act of latria: whence those are
called Idolaters, who offer it to Idols. This seems clear: yet our modern
Protestants to make good the charge of Idolatry against the present Catholic
Church, raise agreate mist before their Readers eyes, and misrepresent Idolatry
in such colors, as may afterward be applied to make good their charge against
it. I will endeavor to cleerethe mist, and represent things in their own
skape, to the end, the difference betwixt Catholics, and Idolaters may the
better appear. Something has bin already said to the same intent in the
preface, which I desire may be here remembered.

SECTION I. That Pagans thought their Idols to be Gods.
MY first reason is taken from several places of Scripture, fathers, and
Pagans, where they are expressly called Gods. Exo. 32.4. These are thy Gods, o
Israel. Speaking of the calfe. and Micah having newly made an Idol, prepared a
place to put it in, Iud. 17.5.
He set a part alittle house to the God. Or as the Inglish translation has it
Micah had a house of Gods. And the Danits having robbed him of his Idol, he
bemoanes his loss with these words: Iud. 18.24.
My Gods, which I made me, you have taken away. Dan. 14.15. Does not Bell seem
to thee aliving God? And the Psalmist: Psalm. 96. (93.) 5.
all the Gods of the Nations are Idols, the Latin has it otherwise, Omnes Dii
Grentium daemonia: but the Inglish Protestants cannot except against their own
edition. Lastly the same is as expressly, though more obscurely delivered in
book of wisdom. Sap. 14.21.
Where he says, the Pagans had given the Incommunicable name to Stocks, and
Stones. And what is that Incommunicable name but, that of the true God? All
othernames are communicable, as signifying things common to many: even that of
Gods by participation, Gods by ressemblance. Psalm. 81. (82.) 6.
I have said you are Gods, and children of the most high. And: 1. Car. 8.5.
There are many Gods, and many Lords. Wherefore the true meaning of that place
is that the Pagans affixt the Proper Name of God, to their Idols.

This may be gathered from the profession of Pagans themselves. Jupiter
Tragaedus.
Lucian relating an assembly of their Gods, called by the great Jupiter (on
occasion of Atheism, which the^ bare faced walked amongst the Philosophers, to
deliberate how to oppose it, he makes Jupiter give a commission to Mercury to
entertain them, and place them orderly according to their several dignitys by
reason of their matter, or Art. On the first rank he should place those of
Gold: on the second those of silver: on the third those of Jvory; on the fourth
those of Brass, or stone. And amongst these he should give the precedence to
those who where the master pieces of famous workmen such, as Phidias,
Alcumenes, Myron, Euphranor, etc. There Neptune sees with disdain and
indignation, Anubis, with his dog's face take place of him, because he was
composed of more rich matter. Then there is a dispute, what place to assign to
the Colossus of Rhodes; which although it was only of Brass, yet for the bulk
of it surpast the price of most of the golden Gods. In sine the whole discourse
evidently demonstrates, that the material Status, or Idols were believed to be
Gods, by the Pagans, whom Lucian there derides.

As for fathers, and Primitive Christians, out of their works whole volumes
might be composed in confirmation of this Truth. See Justinus M. epist. ad
Diognetum, page 492. Consisider the matter and form, of those things, which
you call Gods, and judge them to be such. Are not some of them stones, like to
those we tread on? Are not others of Brass, like to that which is applied to
ordinary uses? Others of wood, and that worm eaten? Others of silver, which
must be watched, least they be stolen? Others of clay? (...). These you call
Gods, you serve, you adore these, and at last become entirely like them.

Tertul. Apolog. cap. 40. Si quid adversi accidit urbibus, eaedem clades
templorum, quae and moenium fuerunt: ut jam hoc revincam, non a Deis evenire;
quia and ipsis evenit. If any calamity befalls your towns, their Temples, and
their walls perish alike: whence I prove, that your Gods do not inflict it,
seeing they suffer, as much as the walls.

S. Cyprian. l. ad Fortunatum de Exhortat. Martyrii cap. 1. Proves against the
Pagans, quod Idola Dii non sunt: That Idols are not Gods. A very superfluous
task, if what E.S. says be true, that no body thought them so. More Fathers
shall be cited in my following reasons. So that E. S. will have no occasion to
make himself merry, with a covy of three Fathers, as he did with that of one
Patridge. See also s. Ambrosel. 2. de Virgin. ante finem.

Another reason is taken from the reprod ordinaryly made in Scripture to
Idolarers. David Psalm. 105. (106) 20.
says they changed their Glory into the like nesse of a Calfe (or cxe) eating
grass: because they abandoned God, to adore a statu shaped like an ox: that
is they left God not for at ox, nor for the likeness, of God; but for the
likeness, or ressemblance of a calfe. What the Royal Prophet reproaches to his
Ancesters it the wilderness, the Blessed S. Paul Romans 1.23.
charge upon all Idolaters. They changed says he, the Glory of t he
incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds,
and four footed Beasts, and creeping things. S. Hierom objects the same: l. 2.
Comment in c. 1 Matt. Ignorantes Creatorem, and adorantes lapdem. Being
ignorant of the Creator, and adoring stone.

Athird reason is taken from those places o^ Scripture, or fathers where Gods
are said to be made by men. We are first forbidden to make them: Exodus 20.23.
Yeshall not make Gods of silver, nethershall you make unto you Gods of Gold.
And the Israelits were threatened Deuteronomy. 4.28.
in case of disobedience to God's Commandments, that for a punishment, they
should serve Gods, the work of men's hads, wood and stone, which nether see,
nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. And in the book of wisdom. Sap. 13.10.
Their hope is amongst thedead, who call Gods the work of men's hands. In fine
S. Paul Actor. 19.26.
was accused by Demetrius the silver-smith, for teaching, That they be no Gods
which are made with hands: wherefore it was his, and the common opinion, that
they were Gods, which were made with hands. Justinus Mar. Apol. 2. O stupidity!
you adore those as Gods, which are made by wicked men. And in S. Austin l. 8.
de Civ. Dei. c. 23. and 24.
Mercurius Trismegistus avows some Gods to be made by men, to wit, those in
temples: although he owned that this proceeded from the ignorance of the true
worship of God.

This receives a great light from Isayas Isay. 44. a v. 9. ad 20.
A carpenter, says he in your Inglish translation, plants an Ash, and the rain
does nourish ii. He burns part thereof in the fire, with part thereof he
makes a God. Again Isa. 46.6. and 7.
They lavish Gold out of a bag, and weygh silver in the balance: and hire a
Gold smith, and he makes it a God. And Jeremy Ierem. 16.20.
Shall a man make Gods, unto himself, and they are no Gods? the same in
substance is said Jere. 10.3.4.14. although more obscurely.

If M. Still. be not satisfied with these testimonies of holy writ (then which
nothing can be more clear, let him show his Art in explicating these verses of
a Pagan, owning the same Horat. l. 1. Sat. 8.


Olim truncus eram ficulnus inutile lignum:
Cum faber incertus, scamnu^ faceretne, Priapum,
Maluit esse Deum. Deus inde ego.
A fourth reason is taken from the prayers which were made to the statues, or
Idols. In the book Sap. 13.17.
of wisdom. He (the Idolater) makes Prayer for his good, for his wife and
children, and is not as hamd to speak to that which has no life. For Health
he calls upon that which is weak; for life he prays to that which is
dead: for aid he humbly beseeches that which has least means to help: and
for a good journey he as keth that, of that, which cannot set a foot forward.
And for gaining, and getting, and good success of his hands, as keth ability
to do, of him that has least ability, to do any thing. Again one preparing
to sail, and about to pass through the raging waves, calls upon a piece of
wood more rotten then the wood which carries him. And in the Epistle of
Hieremy. Bar. 6.41.
If they see one dumb they bring him, and entreat Bell that he may speak: as
though he were able to under stand.

These two Books are held to be Apocrypha, by Protestants, (of which I will
not treat at present) yet why they should deny them credit in a matter offact,
I know no reason. But because they regard not what is reasonable in their
controversys; but what serves their turn, I will show the substance of all
this, in books of unquestionable authority: Isayas 44.17.
The residue of the Ash, be makes a God he falls down unto it, and adores
it and prays unto it, and says, deliver me, for thou art my God The sayings,
of the other Books are only ampliations of this. So they cannot be denied,
without rejecting this; nor this admitted, without retaining of those.

A fifth reason is that the Idolaters were really persuaded, that their Idols
did helpethem. Hieremy Hier. 2.27.
Saying to a stock thou art my father: and to astone thou have begotten me.
Certainly those who could believe that they ought their Being (the greatest of
all gifts) to their statues, or Idols, of stone, or wood, would much easier
believe they owed to them other goods of an inferior nature. Certainly the
Jews Hier. 44.8.
ascribed their past felicity in Jerusalem to their sacrifices offered to the
queen of Heaven, and their then present miseryes to their ceasing from those
sacrifices. But the most public owning of singular benefits from Idols, is
that of the Israelits. Exo. 32.4.
These are thy Gods o Israel, which brought thee our of the land of Egypt.
Which words S. Cyril of Alex. l. 9. contra Julianum p. 308. B. ((...),)
understands to be said to that very calfe, which Aaron had cast.

If Mr. Still. think not this reason cleared enough out of Scripture, I shall
desire him to read what is written by the Greeks of the Palladium of Troy;
and what the Romans thought of it, and of their Ancilia, what Macroblus writes
of some Nations, who chained the Gods, Protectors of their Cittys, fearing they
should forsake them. Let him at least read S. Austin l. 1. de Civit. c. 3. And
if he be not convinced, that the Pagans had confidence in their statues, or
Idols, I say he shuts the eyes of his understanding so close, as to exclude al
light, but what pleases him, and serves his turn. Add to his, Saint Cyprian
l. ad Demetrianum. Pudeat te eos colere quos ipse defendis, pudeat tutelam de
iis sperare, quos tu ipse tueris. Be ashamed to worship those, whom you
defend: and to expect protection from those, who themselves need yours.

I have two authorityes more, to confirm this reason: Jeremy Hier. 10.5.
affords the first. They must be carried, because they cannot go. Wherefore
Fear them not for they can nether do hurt, nor good. To what intent could
this reason be alleged, unless it were to confound that opinion that the
statues themselves could help, or hinder? The Pagans then were possessed with
that opinion. My other is out of David Psalm. 113.8. or Ps. 115.8.
who having said that the Idols of the Gentiles were silver and gold, the work
of men's hands: that they had eyes, and could not see: ears, and could not
heare-etc. He concludes his elegant induction, with these words: May every one
who makes them be like unto them, and also all who trust in them. There was
then a Trust, a confidence, a relyance on those Idols, which could not be
grounded, but on an opinion that they did Good. Add to this, what R.
Majmonides says, as he is rendered by Dionysius Vossius, p. 8. Ab his simulacris
bona and mala omnia provenire indicabant universis: and proinde summo jure coli
and metui. And Athenagoras in his Embasly for Christians, p. 25. Ownes the
same, but attributes the effects to spirits dwelling in them.

My last reason is taken from the several arguments produced in scripture
against Idolatry, that they were made by men, that care must be taken they did
not fall. supra.
that they have no motion. Sap. 13.15. Bar. 6.26.
Cannot defend themselves, from worms, or birds, fire, or theives, or even
from the sacriledges of their own Adorers: as S. Ambrose Bar. 6. Psalm. 115.5.
Ier. 10.5.
observes out of the example of Dionysius the Tyrant. lib 2. de Virginibus ante
finem.


You will say Pagans were wise men: how could they then be capable of so
gross an Error? ANSWER. This is that weakness of the understanding incident
to some: who in matters of fact require demonstrations: so a Philosopher
denied local Motion because he could not answer the reasons against it, and
deserved no other confutation, but by this question: Fool what do I now.
proposed by a man who walked. It is clear out of what I have said, that the
Pagans de facto did believe their Idols to be Gods, why should we give ear to
a speculative reason, against an evident hystoricall Truth? As if man left to
himself did nothing but rationally, or did not many times so far darken his
understanding, as to show little use of it in his greatest concerns! It was
the greatest folly imaginable, I grant it: yet that is incident to man when he
is abandoned of God. And this the Ingratitude of Philosophers deserved. For
whem Romans 1.21.
they knew God they glorified him not as God nether were thank full, but became
vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened professing them
selves to be wise, they became Fools. And changed the glory, of an In
curruptible God, into an Image. Thus S. Paul. If you reply, you see, who you
will dispute against: viz, the Fathers, S. Paul, Hieremy, Isayas, and the Holy
Ghost.

If you still think the Parallel just betwixt the Idolatry of Pagans, and the
worship given in the Catholic Church to Images, skew your Art in sophistry,
and prove that we hold our Images to be Gods: that we put our Confidence in
them; expect good, or fear Evil from a stock. How pitiful, would your
discourse be, should you dispute against us in this manner: a Cross is made by
a man: ergo it is not a representation of our Saviors death. The statu of our
B. Lady cannot move, without the help of man: ergo, we are not to hope for any
thing from God, though her intercession.

In fine either what Fathers, and what Scripture contains against the Idols of
the Gentills, is to no purpose, and all their Reasons are frivolous: or our
doctrine of Images differs from theirs of Idols: the first is blasphemy:
therefore you must subscribe to the second.

SECTION II. The Beginning, and Occasions of Idolatry.
CAlvinus lib. 1. Instit. c. 11. l. 8. says Idolatry began almost with the
world. Omnibus fere a mundo condito saeculis. But he nether gives any reason
for this assertion, nor determins its Author, nor time. R. Majmonides says it
began by Enos, the son of Seth, and Grandson to Adam. And he grounds this
Assertion on Genesis 4.26. Then began men to call upon the name of the lord. The
Latin has it: Iste coepit invocare nomen Domini. He began to call upon God.
and the other translations found rather a good, then a had sense: only the
Targum Onkelos expresses an aboundoning of Gods service, yet so as it charges
that fault rather on men living in Enos his time, then on Enos himself.
Wherefore, I cannot subcribe to that Rabby: especially seeing Enos wa^ of the
virtuous branch, and surely such a heinous sin, as Idolatry could not come but
from cursed Cain, or his posterity; if there was any before they were destroyed

I rather incline to what Saint Cyril of Alex. says lib. 1. contra Julianum.
That there was no Idalatry before the Deluge ^ because no Author mentions any.
Nor after the Deluge, till after building the tower of Babel, and confusion of
tongues: for the same reason. But shortly after those seeds were sown, which
in process of time brought forth that bad fruit. Suidas says that seruch began
Politheisme, and Idolatry, Constantinus Manasses lays the fault on his
descendants: though he gave the occasion.

Our bodies do not in a moment shoot up to their full grouth; but leasurely,
and in a manner imperceptibly: and our souls do nether on asudden raise
themselves to the heyght of Perfection, nor fall into the depth of heinous sin,
according to the ordinary course of Grace and nature. Nemo repent fit summus.
S. Bernard (see S. Chrysostom. hom. 87. in Matthaeum) For that one of a
Persecutor should in a moment become an Apostle and achosen vessel: another of
an Apostle become a Divill, is very extraordinary, the first may be esteemed a
miracle in the order of Grace, which is all miraculous: the second a monster in
the order of sins, which is all monstrous. Now Idolatry, being the very heygth
of wickedness men by certain degrees, descended unto it: first they made
statues: secondly gave them civil worship: then Religious worship, and lastly
that cult, or worship, which is due to none but God.

The first occasion of making them, was for the solace of Parents afflicted
with the immature Death of their dearly beloved child. Sap. 14.15.
A Father afflicted with untimely mourning when he had made an Image of his
child taken away, now honored him as a God, which was then a dead man, and
delivered to those that were under him, ceremonies and sacrifices. S. Cyrill of
Alex. l. 1. contra Julianum, delivers the same, (...). Some falling into the
greatest ignorance imaginable, were so shamefully deceived, as to make
Temples, and altars to men, and to adore a Gods, those whom they had mourned
for, a^ dead men. Sacrafacta sunt, quae fuerant assump^^ solatia. Minutius
Felix and Hieron. l. 1. Comment in c. 2. Osee: Omniaidola exmortuorum errou
creverunt.

The second was the homage due to Kings by their subjects. Those who were
within a certain distance from the court, did it to the King in person. But
those who dwelt in remote Provinces, performed that duty to the Kings in their
statues, (as now they do it to them in their commissioners, or deputyes) which
Homage was at first only a Civil worship, which soon degenerated into Divine
Adoration Sap. 14.17.
When men could not honor their Kings in presence because they dwelt far of,
they took the counterfeite of his visage from far, and make an express
image of a King, whom they honored, to the end that by this forwardness they
might flatter him that was absent, as if he were present. Sometimes Princes
were not content to be adored absent, or expect it till after their death:
their own Ambition, seconded by the flattery of their Courtiers would assist
in person at their own Rites and cult. Non solum mortuis Regibus aut
absentibus; sed and praesentibus sacra facta. Vide apud Vossium page 800.

-- Nihil est quod credere de se
Non possit cum laudatur Diis aequa potestas.
Thus Nabucodonosor, thus the Roman Caesar's thus several others came to be
adored. Alexander could not obtain it of his Macedonians, yet of his new
Persian subjects he obtained it. Likewise Saturn, Ianus, and Quirinus (or
Romulus) in Italy, Belus in Babylon; Osiris, and Isis, Serapis and Apis in
Egypt; Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, Apollo in Greece. And in particular places
several others: as in Troy Hector, in Chio Aristaeus, in Samos Lysander, in
Cicilia Niobe; and in Italy, in Narnia Viridianus, in Asculum Ancaria, in
Volsinia, Nertia, in Sutrino Nortia, and others in other places, came to be
Gods. See Tertull. Apolog. c. 24. and Athenagoras page 14.

A third occasion was gratitude to men from whose industry they had received
great ease in their wants by invention, ot improvement of Arts. Thus Ceres for
corn, Bacchus for wine, Vulcan for the forge, amongst the Grecians, and Flora
amongst the Romans for the wealth left to the cammon wealth, were adored as
Gods. Minutius Felix in Octavio: Vnaquaeque Natio Conditore^ suum, aut
Duceminclitum, aut Reginam pudicam sexusuo fortiorem, aut alicujus muneris vel
artis repertorem venerabatur, ut civem bonae memoriae, sic and defunctis
praemium, and futuris dabatur exemplum. I think their conjecture very probable,
who guess the Egyptian Idol, the calfe, or ox, to be a symbol of
Agriculture, and that Apis, Serapis, and Osiris (three Names of one person)
were Adoredunder that ressemblance, for having invented it, whither that person
were Joseph, as E.S. pretends page 363. or the son of Jupiter, and Niobe
danghter to Phoroneus is not worth the disputing. Probably Anubi^ got his
Apotheosis by his faithful service done to the public in quality of captain
of their gards to Osiris, and Isis, and hisdogs face, was a symbol of his
vigilance.

If you doubt of either, of these occasions o^ both, Read Lactantius l. 1. c.
15. Philastrius l. de haeres. c, 27. Isidorus Hispal. lib. 8. orig. c. 11.
Arnobius, Min. Felix a boue cited, and Cicero de Natura Deorum, and that
Benefacto^^ were Deifyed, began from and by command of Seruch one of the
descendants of Japhat, as you may see in Suidas, Epiphanius epistola ad Acatium
and Paulum, and Constantinus Manasses in his short Chronicle.

Two things concurred to dispose men to this most abominable sin: their
Ingratitude to God, within, and the complete workmanhip of the statue without
them. Their Ingratitude to God deserved that he should withdraw his Grace, and
Leave them to themselves: whence their foolish heart was darkened. Romans 1.21.
The diligence Sap. 14.28.
of the artificer did help to set forward the ignorant to more superstition,
(which was the exterior cause) for hewilling to please one in Authority,
forced all his shill to make the resemblan^^ the better: Andsoe the multitude
allured by the Grace of the work took him now for a God, which a little before
was honored but as a man. Aug. in pl. 113. Illa causa est maxima impietatis
insame, quod plus valet in affectibus miserorum similis viventi forma, quae
sibi efficit supplicari, quam quod came mamfestum est, nonesse viventem, ut
debeat a vivente contemni. Plus enim valent ad curvandam infaelicem animam,
quod os habent, oculos habent, aures habent; quam ad corrigendam, quod non
loquentur, non videbunt, non audient.
Illa causa. The greatest cause of this mad (senseless) impiety, is that the
likeness, of a living man works more strongly upon the affection of those
wretches then an evident conviction, that being dead, they should be despised
by the living. For the shape of eyes, ears, mouth, nose, hands, and feet are
more prevalent to bend down before them a miserable soul, then their not
speaking, hearing, seeing, smelling, touching, or walking, is to correct the
error. Says S. Austin.

Probably this may be the reason, wherefore although by God's command statues
Exodi 25.18.
of Cherubins were made to be placed with the Ark in the Sanctuary, where none
but Priests came, yet in the courts of the temple, either those of the Jews, or
Gentills, there were none. To leave norhing in the sight of that stiff neckt
Rebellious, Adulterous people, which might be Exodi 25.18.
Astumbling block to their souls, and a snare to their feet. And such would
those statues have been to the Jews, as they had been to the Gentills.

The Protestants cannot blame the Catholic Church, for having statues, and
exposing them to the people openly, without blaming their own Church, in which
statues are in like manner made, and exposed, as I have heard of several of
their Cathedralls, namely that of Canterbury, where upon the font are those of
Christ, and his twleve Apostles. We think our people secured from the danger of
Idolatry, first by being taught that the statues are only representations of
saints, and not saints themselves, much less Gods. Secondly because that
Religious respect which we give to Images does by them end ultimate in God: for
why do we respect the Image, or Statue? For the Saint, it represents. And why
do we reverence the Saint? Merely because he was the Temple of God, and
instrument of the Holy Ghost. So that all our worship of Images ends in God,
and his Christ with the Holy Ghost, one God Blesse^ for ever more. Thus we
instructing the people, stop their inclinations to the evil, Idolatry, and by
owning all we have, and all the Saint had, that is good, from God we hope we
need not fear, that dreadful Blindness and Folly, in to which the men wise
according to this world were permitted (to humble, and confound them) to fall
through a penal, but a very Just Iugdment of God.

The last occasion of this Idolatry, was the Devil insinuating himself into
the statues, and in amanner dwelling in them answering to questions proposed to
them, causing sicknesses, and healing them: telling things, which happened at a
distance, and pretending to foretell things to come: although in this unless they
were very cautions in delivering their oracles in obscure terms, their
Ignorance in future things was easily discovered. Of this see S. Austin Aug. l.
8. de Civit. c. 23.
Justinus Justin. Mart. dialog. cum Triphone.
Origenes Origenes l. 1. contra Celsum.
Minutius Felix Minutius Felix in Octavio.
Prudent. Prudent. in Apotheosi.
and Cyprian Cypr. l. ad Demetrianum.
Arrobius, Lactantius, etc. I. end with the convinting testimony of Athenagoras
p. 29. The things said he, which gave names to Idols, were men: those which
take names of them are Divils. For this reason Tertull. l. de testim. Animae
prope finem, said: Thou, o soul, did abhor Divils, and yet thondidst Adore
them.

I must not omit another kind of Idolatry, of those who adored as God several
creatures, either for their beauty, or the benefit, they received by them: such
as are the fire, and some elements, of the Earth, or the sun, moon, or stars.
Vain Sap. 13.1.
are all men by nature, who are ignorant of God, and could not out of the good
things seen know him that is: nether by considering his works, did
acknowledge the workemaster. But deemed either fire, or the circle of the
stars, or the lygks of Heaven to be Gods, which govern the world with whose
beauty, if they being delyghted took them to be Gods, let them know how much
better the lord of them is. But if they were astonished a their power, and
virtue, let them understand by them how much myghtyerhe is, who made them.

There is yet a another species of Idolatry of such, who Deifyed and adored all
creature^ Which was grounded on that opinion of the stoics, that God was the
soul of the word which is expressed by Virgil: Spiritus intus alit, totamque
infusaper artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscer


But nothing about this occurring in Scripture, and not much in Fathers, I let
in pass.

These are the several species of Idolatry which do occur, and are most
conspicuous amongst Pagans. All were absolutely in excusable, for leaving the
Creator for the Creature. Yet amongst all, me thinks, the cause of those who
adored the sun was some what less in excusable then the rest, for although Reason
teaches it evidently not to be a God, yet experience shows it to have one
Propertye of God, for the sun gives light, and life to all that have eye and
heart: it gives without interest: it never appears, but as a common good, and
besides its visible effects, produces many other by hidden influences. These
considerations do not excuse, but they somewhat diminish the guilt of those
who adored that wonderful instrument, the work of the most high.
Ecclesiastici 43.2.

To sum up what we have said: we find that even the wisest men have been
guilty of the greatest folly, that can enter into any man's head, how weak
soever, to take for a God, a thing so much inferior to them in nature. That
they expected help of a thing helpelesse, and direction from what is
sentelesse. To this they were disposed by the humane shape, striking their
fancy; they were moved to it by love of a dead master, fear of a living
Tyrant, flattery to one, on whom their fortune depended: and these altogether
heygthned by the Illusion of the Divill. Sometimes Gratitude to beneficial
creatures, inclined men to renounce the great Benefactor. Yet these motives
how powerful soever, could never have made men so prodigiously to renounce
the use of Reason, had they not, by former sins, so far left God, as to
deserve to beleft by him: not that they received no grace at all from him; but
that they had not such graces as would keep them in what was good, and prevent
their fall, into those senseless errors.

SECTION III. What were the Gods of the Pagans or What things were represented
by their Idols? Where it is proved, that Pagan Gods had bin men.
THe occasion I have, to treat this question is given by G.B. and E. Still.
who pretent that Cheifely one and he the true God was adore by the Idolaters,
who used several Statues, and names only to represent his several attributes.
And that by Jupiter they understood the in God.

What I have cited out of scripture, and fathers, is sufficient to convince the
contrary seeing by that it appears that dead men, Stars etc. were adored.
Vossius l. 1. de Idol. cap. 5 p. 30. says, Idolatry began with the adoration of
Angels, thence past to the souls of men Lactantius l. 2. c. 14. says, the
Egyptians first adored the Stars, afterward their Kings. S. Cyril of Alex. l.
1. cont. Jul. p. 17. says the same of the Chaldaeans. But the Egyptians,
whilst the Israelits lived amongst them adored either Apis or Joseph under the
shape of an ox, or calfe. And in imitation of them the Israelits in the
desert, Exodus 32. and the ten Tribes at their schism from the Temple of
Jerusalem, the third of Kings 12.28. which continued amongst them, till they
were removed quite out of the country. Although that was not the only Idolatry,
they were guilly of: for they had Baal, 3. Reg. 18. and the host of Heaven
toward the end, of their kingdom as appears 4. Reg. 17.16. which they learnt
probably of the Assyrians. After the transmigration of the Tribe of Juda, we
find those who remaind in their country much addicted the to the Star worship,
Hieremy 44. as to a superstition ancient amongst them: which I guess they
learnt of their King Achaz, and that he received it from Damascus. 4. Reg. 16.
where a copy of an Altar was sent to the high Priest to have another made like
it, and placed in the Temple. But this being a matter of no moment, I do not
trouble myself with further examining it. Our only dispute is about the
Romans, and Greeks: whose Idolatry was banished the world by Christian
Religion, which our modern adversarys pretend that we have renewed again.

You say the, that they, by Jupiter, adored thetru God Creator of Heaven and
Earth: we say, that all the Gods of the Pagans, were men, and that Jupiter
himself was such. And that they were Divills who took upon themselves those
persons names, to delude the word. I will prove this 1.o out of Scripture, 2.o
out of such fathers as lived with the Pagans and consequently had more occasion
to know their Theology then we, who must gather it only out of their writings
3.o out of the Confession of Pagans, 4.o out of the acknowledgment of the Gods
themselves, who were adored, and lastly by the Confession of Protestants.

My first proof is taken out of Scripture, psalm. 95. (96) 5. All the Gods of
the nations are Divills. Omnes Dil gentium Daemonia. So it is in the vulgate
Edition, and was so from the beginning, while Paganism flourisht: and yet
Pagans never accused the Christians for imposing upon them opinions, which
they did not hold. See S. Aug. upon that place. The Inglish translation is
some what different. viz. All the Gods of the nations are Idols. Which
notwithstanding confutes sufficiently the contrary error: for if this be true:
All Gods of nations are Idols, as it must, being in Scripture: E. S. his
proposition being contradictory to it, must be false, Jupiter, the chief God
nations, is no Idol, nor Divil.

Moreover if the sacrifice the Idolaters offered, (which was always held to be
the Prime act of Religion) was offered by them to the Divills, and not to God,
then it follows they did not worship the true God but only Divills. But they
sacrificed to Divills, and not to God, Ergo they did not adore the true God; but
Divills. I prove the minor: Deuter. 32.17. They sacrificed to Divills; not to
God: to Gods whom they knew not, to new Gods, who came newly up, whom your
fathers feared not. Psalm. 105. (106.) 37. They sacrificed their sons, and their
daughters unto Divills. And 1. Cor. 10.20. The things which the Gentills
sacrifice, they sacrifice to Divills, and not to God. Hence Aug l. 20. cont.
Faust. c. 18. ait: Nihil in sacrificiis Paganorum Deo displicuisse, nisi quod
fierent daemoniis. Nothing in sacrifices of the Pagans was displeasing to God,
but those to whom they were offered. viz, the Divils.

My second proof is taken out of those Fathers, who living with theh Pagans,
and conversing familiarly with their persons, (some of them having bin Pagans
themselves) and writing against them, had most reason to know their sentiments
concerning their Gods: and durst not misrepresent them, for Fear of God, who
forbids lying, and shame of men, who would have discovered their falsehood. What
say these Fathers of the Pagans Gods? Athenagoras legate. pro Christ. page 14.
(...) Are not the ceremonys of the Egyptians ridiculous who mourn for those
persons, as for dead men, and adore, and offer sacrifice unto them, as to Gods.
and page 16. He tells the Emperors, they knew very well, that the ancient
Poets, Orpheus, Homer, and Hesiod. were either co^temporaneous with the Gods or
lived very little after them. And p. 17. in sin (...). The Gods were not from
the beginning but were begotten, as we are. And in this, alliagre^ And p. 29.
(...). Out of hystory it evident, that those Gods from whom Idols ha^ their
names, were men: and that those spirits, who take those names, are Divils, is
evident from then works.

Tertullian Apolog. c. 10. page 39. Deos vestros colere desinimus, ex quo illos
non esse cognovimus: sed nobis inquitis Dii sunt. Appellamus ^ provocamus a
vobis ad conscientiam vestram, illa no^ judicet, illa nos damnet, si poterit
negare omne istos Deos vestros homines fuisse, sed and ipsa, si infici^ jerit,
de suis antiquitatum instrumnentis revincetun de quibus eos didicit testimonium
perhibentibus ^^ hodiernum, and civitatibus in quibus nati sunt, ^^ regionibus
in quibus aliqui operati vestigia reliquerunt, in quibus etiam sepulti
demonstrantur. N^^ ego per singulos decurram, proprios, communes, masculos,
feminas, rusticos, urbanos, nauticos, and militan (otiosum est etiam titulos
persequi) ut colligami^ compendium: and hoc non quo cognoscatis; sed
recognoscatis, Certe enimoblitos agitis. Ante Saturn^ Deus penes vos nemo est:
ab illo census totius, vel potioris, vel notioris Divinitatis. Itaque quod de
origin constiterit, id de posteritate conveniet. Saturnum itaque, quantum
litterae docent, neque Diodorus Graecus, aut Tallus, neque Castrius Severus,
aut Cornelius Nepos, neque ullus commentator ejuscemodi antiquitatum, aliud
quam hominem promulgaverunt. Si quaeras rerum argumenta, nusquam invenio
fideliora quam ipsam Italiam, in qua Saturnus post multas expeditiones, postque
Attica hospitiae consedit exceptus a Iano. Mons, quem incoluerat, Saturnius
dictus, Civitas, quam depopulaverat, Saturnia usque nunc est, etc. We do not
adore your Gods, because weknow they are not Gods. But say you: to us they are
Gods? We appeal, from you, to your own conscience being content to stand or
fall by its verdict: if that can deny, that all your Gods have bin men. If she
denis it, We will convince her error out of your own Records of Antiquity,
from which she must learn, what she knows of them: out of the cittys, in which
they were borne: Out of the countries where they flourisht: and out of the
places where they were buried. I intend not to run over each one in
particular, or speak of those who are common to all, orpeculiar to some, of
males, females, Pesants, Citizens, watermen, and soldiers: it being
superfluous, to mention even their several Professions: not to acquaint you
with any new thing: but to call to your mind, what you knew before, although you
act, as if you knew it not. You have no God ancienter then Saturn. Of him were
borne your chiefest, or most noted Gods. If he is proved to have bin a man all
the rest must have bin such. Now if you consult Authority, all Antiquity
speaks him to be a mere man: If you seek proofs from things, Italy will
afford convincing arguments, in which after many wars, and having post Greece,
Saturn settled, being entertained by Ianus. He gave his name to the City
hebuilt, to the mountain where he dwelt. The Country where he was concealed
was called from that Latium, etc. And c. 19. page 49. Ipsos Deos vestros, and
templa and oracula, and sacra, unius Prophetae scrinium vincit. The Pentateuch
is more ancient by some ages, then your Religion, and your Gods themselves. and
a little after: Sicut illos homines fuisse non audetis negare, itapost mortem
Deos factos asseveratis. Now you cannot deny them, to have bin men; you say
they were made Gods after their death.

Minutius Felix in Octa. page 16. Majores nostri dum Reges suos colunt
religiose, dum defunctos illos desiderant in imaginibus videre, dum gestiunt
eorum memorias in statuis detinere, sacra facta sunt, quae fuerant assumpta
solatia. Lege Stoicorum scripta, vel scripta Sapientum, eadem mecum
recognosces, ob merita virtutis, aut muneris Deos habitos. Et p. 19. Manifestum
est homines illos fuisse, quos and natos legimus, and mortuos scimus. Our
Ancesters whilst they honor their Princes, during their life, whilst they see
them in their pictures, or statues, those things were turned to Religious uses,
which were intended only for their comfort. Read the writings of your Stoics,
or other liarned men, you will be forced to acknowledge what we say, that men,
for their virtue, or offices were held to be Gods. Out of all, that we have
said, it is evident, that your Gods were men, of whose birth, and Death we are
certain.

S. Cyp. l. de Idolorum vanitate, begins the book with these words: Deos non
esse, quos colit vulgus, hinc notum est. Reges enim fuerunt, qui ob regalem
memoriam coli apud suos, etiam in morte coeperunt. We may be sure those cannot
the Gods, who are commonly adored as such, for they were kings, who for their
Royal authority obtained to be adored, at their death.

Arnobiusl. 2. contra Gent. page 10. Vos hominem nullum colitis natum? non unum
aut alium? non innumeros alios? quinimo non omnes, quos jam in templis habetis
vestris mortaliu^ sustulistis ex numero, and coelo, sideribusque donastis? Si
enim forte vos fugit sortis eos fuisse humanae, and communis conditionis;
replicate antiquissimas litteras, and eorum scriptapercurrite, qui vestutati
vicini, sine ullis attestationibus cuncta veritate in liquida prodiderunt. Iam
profecto discetis quibus singulis Patribus, quibus matribus fuerint procreati,
qua in nati regione, qua gente, quae fecerint, egerint, pertulerint. You
reproach to us, that we adore a man. And do you adore no one man? do not you
adore many men? were not all your Gods men, who by your favor were raised up
to Heaven, and placed amongst the stars? If you have forgotten this, turn to
your ancient writers, who will without flattery tell you that they were men,
and ordinary men: thence you may learn their fathers, mothers, country,
quality, gestes, etc.

S. Chrysostom. hom. 1. ad populum Antioch. The whole multitude, of the Pagan
Gods, is made up of such men.

S. Hier. l. 1. Comment. in Osee cap. 2. Omnia Idola ex mortuorum errore
creverunt. All Idols were made out of dead men.

S. Austin spends agreate part of his first Books de Civ. D. to confound the
Pagan error, who adored either dead men, or living Divils, l. 8. c. 26. the
title of the Chapter it: Omnis Religio Paganorum circa homines mortuos fuit
impleta. The whole Religion of the Pagans was taken up with the cult of dead
men.

S. Cyril lib. 6. contra Julianum p. 205. (...). Which are the words, of
Sanconiathon: they may be thus Inglished: The Antientest of the Grecians, and
Particularly the Phenitians, and the Egyptians, (from whom the rest received
it) thought those to be (not Heroes not secundary, and underlings, but) THE
GREATEST GODS, who had bin Beneficial to mankind, and invented some useful
things. Which words are the more to be noted, because they are of one of the
most ancient of Pagan writers, and consequently nearer to the time of the
pretended Gods. But cheifely because they are cited, and approved by S. Cyril
l. 6. cont. Jul. and by E.S. Orig. Sacrae p. 32. so that in one Authority I
give three witnesses.

Julius Firmicus page 20. Ecce Demonest quen^ colis. It is the Devil, whom you
adore.

I conclude this proof with the words of Justin M. Apolog. 2. p. 56. where
having said, that Socrates was persecuted by the Divils, whom the Athenians
adored, for denying them to be Gods; as an Atheist: and that on that same score
the Divils practiced the like on the Christians in his time, giving them the
same odious name. He adds: If Atheist signifyes a man who denies the Gods of
the Pagans, I own we are Atheists. But we do believe, says he, in thetru God,
father of Justice, etc. Would he have said this, if he had bin of E. S. his
opinion, that the Gods of the Pagans were thetru God?

My third proof is taken from the Confession of Pagans, for sanconiathon the
ancientest of their writers, whose words you may find in S. Cyrill. 1. contra
Julianum page 205. and Mr. Stillinghfl. in his Origenes Sacrae page 32. He, I
say, taught that even the greatest Gods had been men. And what other sense can
begiven to this verse of Ovid, Fastorum 4. speaking of Venus:

Illa Deosomnes (longum est enumerare) creavit. As saying all were borne, as
commonly men are.

Alexander in a particular book sent to his mother, acquaints her, that he by
threats had forced out of an Egyptian Priest, this secret, that all the Gods
(which he with the rest of the Pagans adored) had been men. This is cited by
Athenagoras page 31. S. Cyp. l. de Idol. vanit. and S. Austin lib. 8. de Civit.
Deic. 27. who names the Priest, revealer of this secret, Leo.

This is confirmed by all those, who name the several countries of their Gods.
Jupiter of Crete, Mars of Thracia, Juno of Argos, or Samia, Diana of Taurica
Chersonesus, Dercetus, or Atergate a cruel, and lascivious woman (mother to
Semiramis) of Syria, Apollo, Venus, etc. of others Countries. What does all
this import, but that they were (in the opinion of the Pagans) men, borne, and
buried, as the rest? which argument the Fathers do commonly use. More shall
becited, when we to speak of Jupiter in particular.

My fourth proof, is taken from the coufessions, of the Gods themselves, whom
the Pagansadored. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 23. p 56. Aedatur hic aliquis sub
tribunalibus vestris, quem a daemone agiconstet, jussus a quolibet Christiano
loqui spiritus ille, tam se daemonem consitebitur de vero, quam alibi Deum de
salso. Aeque prodncatur aliquis, ex iis, qui de Deo pati existimantur, nisse
daemones confessi fuerint Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem illius
Christiani procacissimi sanguinem fundite. Bring out before your tribunalls any
person evidently, and certainly, possessed by some spirit, either habitually, and
permanently (such as are called energumens) or transiently (as those, who as
they offered sacrifice, and did their devotions to the Gods, were by them for a
time possessed) let a Christian command that spirit to speak the Truth, what he
is: and if he does not truly own himself to be a Divil (not being able to tell
an untruth to such an exorcist) although in our absence he boasts of his being
God, knock out that impudent Christian's brains.

Cypr. l. ad Demetrianum page 201 O si audire eos velles, and videre, quando a
nobis adjurantur, and torquentur spiritualibus flagris, and verboru^ tormentis
de obsessis corporibus ejiciuntur, quando ejulantes and gementes voce humana
and potestate divinastagella and verbera sentientes, venturum judicium
confitentur. Veni and cognosceveraesse, quae dicimus. Et quiasic Deos colere te
dicis, vel ipsis, quos colis creed, aut si volueris, and tibi credere, de
teipso loquetur, audiente te, qninuncpectus tuum obsedit, qui nunc mentem tuam
ignorantiae nocte coecavit. Videbis nos rogari ab iis, quos tu rogas, timeri ab
iis, quos tu adoras. Videbis submanu nostra stare vinctos and tremere captivos,
quos tu suspicis ac veneraris ut Dominos. Certe vel sic confundi in istis
erroribus tuls poteris quando conspexeris and audieris Deos tuos, quidsint,
interrogatione nostra^ statim proden and praesentibus licet vobis, praestigias
illas, and fallaciassuas, non posse celare. O that thou would bu^ hear and
see thy Gods, when by the Spiritual torments of our exorcismes, they are cast
out of the Bodies, they possessed: when they are forced to acknow^^ ledge the
Iugdment to come at the last day. Come t^^ us, and experience the Truth of what
we say. A^^ seeing thou adorest thy Gods, at least believe those^ thou adorest:
or if thou will believe thy self we will force that same spirit which obsesses
t^^ body, and blindest they soul with ignorance of Geetruth, to speak the
Truth to thee. Thou shall see the^ pray to us, to whom thou offrest thy
devotious those to fear us, whom thou adorest. Thou sh^^ see these tremble as
Captives chained by us, whom thou bonourest as Lords. Certainly thou will be ^^
hamed of thy error when thou hear they Ge^^ themselves (when questioned by
us) own wh^^ they are, even in your presence, as not able to co^^ceale their
kunning wiles, and illusions.

And Minutius Felix in Octavio page 2^. Haec omnia sciunt plerique, pars
vestrum, ipsod^ mones de semeptipsis consiteri, quoties a nobis to^^ mentis
verborum, and orationis incendiis de corpon^ bus exiguntur. Ipse Saturnus, and
Serapis, and Iupite^ and quicquid daemonum colitis, victi dolor, qu^sunt
eloquuntur. Nec utique in turpitudinem sui^nonnullis praesertim vestrum
affistentibus mentiu^tur. Ipsis testibw esse cos daemones de se verum cony^^
tentibus credit: adjurati enim per Deum perum^^ solum inviti, miseri, etc.
Most men, and even many of yur own know they are nobetter, then Devils, whom
you adore. Your Gods, Saturn, and Serapis, and Jupiter, have been adjured by
the name of the true, and only God, and have bin forced out of the bodies they
possessed and confessed themselves to be foul, and seducing divils. And their
Confession was to be supposed true, in point of reason. For they that were
adored as Gods, would Never belie themselves into Devils to their own reproach
especially in presence of them that worshipped them, were they not forced. Thus
is that place Inglishedby W.L.

Julius Firmicus page 20. Ecce demon est quem colis, cum Dei and Christiejus
nomen audierit, contremiscit. It is the Devil, whom you adore: he trembles,
when he hears the Name of God, and of his Christ.

In my next section I will cite Prudentius, who says the same in his Apotheosi.
You may find in S. Austin, and other fathers several reasons proving those
Gods to be Devils, cheifely for there promoting vice, by encouraging Poets
Fables, concerning those filthy Acts related to have been committed by them.

My fifth proof is taken from the testimony of Protestants them selves. The
Author of the whole duty of man, page 138. I need seake little of the second
Commandment, as it is a forbidding of that grosser sort of Heathenish Idolatry,
the worshipping of Idols; which though it were once common in the world, yet it
is now so rare, that it is not likoly any that shall read this, shall be
concerned in it. Could he have said this, had h^ not known the practice of
Papists to be s^ different from those of Heathen Idolaters?

Vossius l. 1. de Idolol. cap. 18. page 139. Omnes Gentium Dii fuerunt homines.
All the Go^ of the Pagans were men. Godwin l. 4. Antiquity c. 1. Well deserving
men were reputed Gods.

M. Thomas Prat in his Epistle Dedicator of the Hystory of the Royal Society,
havi^^ fayd, that generals of Armies, and great Conquerors, wereby the Pagans
esteemed Hero^ he adds: The Gods Antiquity worship; d wi^^ Temples, and Altars
were those Who instructed th^^ world to plow, to sow, to plant, to bughouses,
and to find out now countries.

Mr. G.B. in this very book p. 16. The he^ (the commonalty of the Idolaters)
did formal worship the Image. and p. 23. The souls of decease men were honored
with divine honor.

I hope E.S. will not refuse the testimony of his great Patriark W.L. who in
his Relati^^ page 77. cites with great esteem of them, the words of Minutius
Felix; and very judicious^ observes, that it is not credible the true Go^ should
be forced out of his possession. Mud less that he be constrained to utter
alye, and own himself to be a foul and seducing Dive. Can any man think, that
God can deny himself, to such a degree? Credat Iudaeus Appelld non ego. I
scarce wonder at the extravag^^ opinions of the Pagans, seeing E. S. and G. B.
can believe that. Were there not some other more powerful tie, then only
imaginary, or pretended incredibility, I should hope to see both believe
Transubstantiation, seeing they can believe, that God can deny himself, tell a
lie, and profess himself a Devil. O Blasphemy!

But although in a bad humor E. S. should refuse to subscribe to his quondam
Primate, yet I can have recourse to a person very near unto him, even his own
dear self: for he, Orig. Sac. l. 1. c. 2. p. 32. speaking of Sa^coniathon,
says: That which of all seems the clearest in this Theology, is the open
owning the Original of Idolatry to have been from the consecration of some
eminent persons after their Death who had found out some use full things for
the world, whilst they were living, which the subtiller Greeks would not admit
of, viz, that the Persons they worshipped were once men, which made them turn
all into Allegoryes, and mystical senses to blind that Idolatry they were
quilty of the better amongst the Ignorant, And l. 3. c. 5. he says; that
Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, Neptune, Vulcan, Juno, Minerva, Ceres, Bacchus, and
others had been men, and women.

He could not have given a cleerer, and fuller testimony of the truth, of what
we say, and the false hood, of what he delivers, then is contained in those two
places. To what can we attribute this change in E.S. that what was before the
certain position of Idolatry should now be falls, but to a desire to charge
that hainou^sin upon the Roman Cat. Church, which falls of it self to the
ground, if Pagans Idolatry be ryghtly represented? Tantae molis erat^^ to make
Rome seem Idolater in the eyes of his ignorant admirers!

Philo Biblius had reason to blame those Allegoryes, to which the subtiller
Greeks had recourse, which made a clear new Religion by changing the object
Adored as God, from some man eminent for power, or virtue to Elements, much
inferior to the least ost men, or any living Creatures: for this yielded the
cause, and condemned the whole Idolatrous world. So Minutius Felix in Octavio,
page 16. Zenon interpretando Iunonem Area, Iovem Coelum, Neptunum mare, ignem
esse Vulcanum, and coeteros similiter vulgi Deos Elementaesse monstrando,
publicum arguit, graviter, and revincit arrorem.

SECTION IV. That the Jupiter O.M. of the Greeks and Romans, was not the true
God.
MY first, and chief proof, is taken from what is already said out of H.
Scripture, Fathers, Protestants, and Pagans. For those universal Propositions
contain all, and every God of Paganism. v.C. What are the Propositions of
Scripture? All the Gods of the Gentiles are Devils. And. The Pagans sacrificed
to Devils; not to God. What are the Propositions of E.S. One God of the Pagans,
was the true God, and no Devil. Item: The sacrifices of the Pagans were offered
to the true God, and not to the Devil. If the Logic of E. S. can reconcile
with truth two contradictions, it is a rare one. Till he teach us how they can
stand together, we will stick to the common received Axiom of Sophistes, that
both cannot be true. So one of these propositions must befalls, either that of
Scripture, or that of E. S. now I desire him to declare whither he takes to be
true, and whither the Liar: God, or himself.

Again Gal. 4.8. the Galatians knowing not God, served those who by nature
were not Gods. Which are the words of the Apostle. And E.S. says: The Galatians
knew Jupiter, and served him, who was the true God. Wherein he directly
contradicts the Scripture.

The like arguments might be brought from the authoritys cited out of Fathers,
Protestants, and Pagans; who assuring universally, that all the Pagan Deityes
were raised from men, exclude all possibility of Jupiter's being otherwise, he
being one of them. Indeed no body ever reproached the Catholic Roman Church,
that it did not adore the true God, although many pretended the adoration of the
Saints, to be like to that of the Pagan Idolaters adoring of their secundary
Gods: why then should the Pagans be absolutely said not to adore the true God,
if they did adore him, although they joined others in alike degree of worship with
him? But seeing E. S. and G.B. pretend Jupiter to be the name of the true God
Blessed for ever more, amongst the Pagans, I will show, that Jupiter, according
to Fathers, Poets, and Protestants, was a man, as well as the rest: and I will
confirm all with E.S. his own testimony.

My next proof is taken from those, who confound jupiter with the rest of the
Gods, Saturn, Neptune, Pluto, etc. as well as of the other Gods. We have heard
Tertullian assure, that Saturn was the ancientest of their Gods: and that the
rest ought their being to him, and thence inferred, that he being a man, all
the rest must have beenesoe too. See also Lactan. Firm. who says l. 1. c. 15.
It is evident all the gods were men, See Tertul. c. 10. p. 39. His words are
cited above sec. 3. note that Vossiusl. 1. Idol. c. 18 p. 139 thinks this an
invincible argument, to prove that by Saturn the Pagans understond Adam. Now
if Saturn was the ancientest of all the Pagans Gods, Jupiter, who is on of
them, is not ab aeterno, eternal: and consequently not the true God. See
Minutius Felix p 23. where Jupiter is said to be cast out of possessed body, as
well as Saturn, and Serapis: as having nothing peculiar above the rest. W.L.
indeed puts an emphasis upon his name, Jupiter himself, when he translates
those words: which is not in the Author, at least as we have him: which shows
only, that the Pagans had a greater veneration for Jupiter then for the rest:
yet without taking him out of the number of those Heathen Gods, who were
subject to Christians exorcismes.

My third proof is from such fathers who relate his country, birth, and death.
Minutius Felix page 17. The birth Countries and sepulchers of the Gods are
shown. Dictaei Iovis. Of Jupiter on the mountain Dicte. S. Cyp. l. de Idol.
vanit. p. 204. Antrum Iovis in Creta visitur and sepulchrum ejus ostenditur,
and ab eo Saturnum fugatum esse emanifestum est. You many see Jupiter's cave in
Candy, his sepulcher is there shown: and it is undeniable that he chaced
thence Saturn, his father. Lactantius Firmianus l. 1. div. instit. cap. 11. p.
39. says this Epitaph was written on his tomb (...) Jupiter Saturni. S. Cyril
of Alex. l. 10. contra Julianum, p. 342. speaks of Jupiter's tomb, and says
that Pythagoras visited it, and writ upon it, this Epitapht: (...). Here lies
Jupiter. And Porphyrius boggling about the truth of this story which ruins the
Divinity of his great God, S. Cyril adds: That Pythagoras had written the
plain truth: that the greatest of the Pagan Gods was dead: and that his
countrymen the Cretans had built him a tomb: (...). Julius Firmicus p. 4. says
that Jupiter was King of Candy, or Creete: that Bacchus, or Dyonisus was his
unlawful son: whom in her husband's absence Juno caused to be killed by the
gards, who devoured his body; but Minerva preserved his heart and presented it
to her Father, as his return, etc.

Commodianus cap. 4. Saturnus Rex erat in terris, in monte natus Olympo. Non
Divinus erat, sed Deum sese dicebat. Venit inops animi, lapidem pro filio
sorpsit, Sic Deus evasit: dicitur modo Jupiter ille. Saturn was a King, who
out of fear, of his own children, devoured them. But one of them was saved, a
stone in lieu of him being given to the father, which he swallowed. So this
infant grew up to be a God, and is called Jupiter.

My fourth proof is from those fathers, who absolutely refuse to acknowledge
the Divinity of Jupiter. Origin. l. 1. cont. Celsum, p. 19. As Soon as we hear
the name of Jupiter, we understand the son of Saturn, and Ops, Juno's husband,
Neptune's brother. and l. 5. p. 262. We will rather endure any torments, then
acknowledge Jupiter to be God. Lactantius Firmianus, called commonly by the
Fathers, the Christian Cicero, whom Photius judges to be the most learned, and
eloquent of his age, and who for his capacity was chosen by the Emperor
Constantin the greare, to be Tutour to his son, Crispus. He, I say, l. 1.
Instit. Divin. cap. 11. p. 38. says. Iovem illum esse, qui ex Open, Saturnoque
natus sit, negari non potest. Vana igitur est persuasio eorum, qui nomen Iovis
summo Deo tribuunt. Solent enim quidant errores suos hac excusatione defendere,
qui convicti de unto Deo, cum id negare non possunt, ipsum se colere affirmant;
verum hoc sibi placere ut Jupiter nominetur. Quo quid absurdius! Jupiter enim
sine contubernio conjugis, siliaeque coli non solet. Vnde quid sit apparet, nec
fas est id nomen eo transferri, ubi nec Minerva est ulla, nec Juno. It cannot
be denied that Jupiter was borne of Ops and Saturn wherefore it is a vain, or
foolish persuasion, of those who would give the name of Jupiter to the supreme
God. (Observe this Mr. E. S.) For some are wont in that manner to excuse their
Errors, when they had been convinced of one God, so as they could not
contradict it, by saying that themselves adored him, and called him Jupiter.
Then which, what can be more absurd? Seeing Jupiter is not worshipped without the
partnership of his wife, and daughter. Whence it plainly appears, when this
Jupiter is, and that the name ought not to be transferred thither, where there
is no Minerva, nor Juno. Thus this learned man. Whose words are so clear, that
if he were now alive, and intended, to reject E. S. his new error, he could not
do it more convincingly.

My fifth proof is taken from the confessions of the Jupiter himself, as you
may see in Tertul. S. Cyprian, Julius Firmious, and Minutius Felix above cited.
Add to these Prudentius i^ Apotheosi.

-- Torquetur Apollo
Nomine percussus Christi, nec fulmina verbi
Far potest, agitant miserum tot verbera lingu^
Quot laudata Deiresonant miracula Christi,
Intonat Antistes Domini: fuge callide serpens,
Exue te membris, and spiras solve latentes.
Mancipium Christi fur corruptissime vexas?
Desine Christus adest, humani corporis ultor:
Non licet ut spolium rapias, cui Christus inhaesitexi^
Pulsus abi, ventose liquor, christus jubet,
Has inter voces medias Cyllenius ardens
Ejulat, and notos suspirat Jupiter ignes.
Out of which verses E. S may learn, first the form of our Exorcismes, which
to this day are made after that manner, trampling the Proud spirit under our
feet, with disdainful language.

E. S. may learn secondly the force of them which by invisible stripes did
scourge those pretended Gods, till they forced them out o^ their possession.
Nec fulmina verbi far potest, agitant miserum tot verberalinguae, quot
laudate Dei miracula resonant.

He may learn thirdly, that not only the lesser Gods; but even Jupiter himself
was subject to the whips, and torments inflicted byour exorcists.

My sixth proof is drawn from the opinion of the Pagans. See Natalis Comes l.
2. mithol. c. 1. and sequent: Where you find many cited. Lucian in Jove
Tragaedo, says that Damis an Atheist, having objected to one, who defended the
Divinity of the Gods, that Jupiter the chief of them was dead, as also his
sepulcher, which was extant, and a Pillerneere it, testifying the truth of that
death: Jupiter he says, grew Pale, and dismayed hearing it, being conscious of
the truth, and that truth tended to root up the opinion of his Divinity.

My seventh proof is grounded on what the Fathers write of him, viz 1. o that
he was not a God. 2o But that he was a man. 3. o That we as a wicked man,
subject to such vices, as would make any civil man blush. Justinus M. Paraen.
page 2. shows him to have bewailed like a woman the death of Sarpedon. His
insatiable lust both after women, and boys is noted by all: so is his Ambition,
which showed it self by his Rebellion against his own Father. Now how can the
Fathers be excused from horrible Blasphemy, in accusing the Pagan Jupiter of
these crimes, if he be the true God?

I conclude this proof with an invincible reason taken from S. Austin l. 1. de
consensu Evangelistarum, c. 26. None of all the Gods, adored by Pagans, opposed
the adoration of any other. Diana, and Minerva never expressed any dislike of men
adoring of Venus and Priapus, Saturn was willing his rebellious son Jupiter
should be adored: Vulcan very quietly endured the company of Venus his wanton
Wise, and of Mars, whom he had found in flagranti with her. And Jupiter never
checked his daughter Venus, for those filthy faults, which would have made her
unfit company for civil men, or women. Whence the saint concludes them all,
and Iupitu too, to have been Devils, who aimed only at the courruption of
manners. This be confirms, from the law of the true and living God, who for bad
them all to be adored, commanded all their statues to be pulled down, all
their rites, and ceremonies, and sacrifices to be abolished. By which Satis
ostendit illos falsos, atque fallaces, and se esse verum ac verace^ Deums he
convinces sufficiently that false opinion newly broached by E. S.

My last proof is taken from the testimony of learned Protestants, who all
acknowledged this truth, till the desire of accusing Popery engaged E. S. in
the contrary opinion. We have seen W.L. naming Jupiter himself Godwin l. 4.
Antiquitat. c. 2. says that Jupiter and Baal semen, which signifyes the Lored
of Heaven, is one and the same thing, viz, the sun: as the Queen or lady of
Heaven, is the Moon. Vossius is of the same opinion with us, that Jupiter was
a man. We have seen a bove that E. s. in his Origenes sacrae, says in general
that all Heathen Cods had been Men: and approved of Philo Biblicus his
Judgment, who blamed the subtiller Greeks turning all to Mythologyes. Let us
now see, what he says of the several Gods, and of Jupiter himself in
parcicular.

E. S. l. 3. Origin Sacrar. c. 5. page 587, Jupiter who was the same with Cham,
was called (...): as Cham from Chamum, fervere, incalescere. (...), says
Herodotus: Him whom the Greeks call Z^^^ the Egyptians called Cham or Ammun
rather. So Iaphet, Whose memory was preserved under Neptune, to those portion
the Islands in the sea fell. And page 589. Vossius has taken agreate deal of
pains to digest in an hystoricall manner the stories of the several Jupiters:
Where of he reckons two Argives, a third the father of Hercules, a fourth a
King of Phrygia, and two more of Creete, to one of which without any
distinction, the actions of all the rest were ascribed, and WHO WAS WORSHIPPED
UNDER THE NAME OF JUPITER. And p. 594. As the story of Saturn and Noah do
much agree, so the three sons of Noah, and those of Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune,
and Pluto have their peculiar ressemblances to each other. Of which Vossius and
Bochartus have largely spoken, and We have touched on already. Besides Which
this later Author has carried the parallel lower, and finds Canaan, the son
of Cham, the same with Mercury the son of Jupiter. As it was the curse of
Canaan to be a servant of servants, so Mercury is always described under
servile employments: his wings seem to be ships of the Phenicians, who were
derived from Canaan: his being the God of trade, notes the great merchandise
of the Phenicians, and Mercurys theevery notes their piracys, or at least their
subtlety and craft. He was the Father of Eloquence and Astronomy, as letters,
and astronomy came from the Phenicians into Greece. This, and much more to the
same purpose, may be found in that Chapter, in E.S.

By what strange Apotheosis did this change happen, that that same Person, who
till the year of our Lord 1663. (when the Origenes Sacr^^ were printed) was a
gross body should by the year 1676. become a Pure Spirit? that the son of
Noah should be the Creator of Heaven and Earth? and cursed Cham, be changed
into God Blessed for evermore? This Metamorphosis deserves a place Ovid's Poem,
as well as any in the pack. By what art Magic was it made? By what Revelation
was it mode known to E.S.? Here we have Dr. Stilling fleet against Dr.
Stilling fleet: he now destroying, what he then built, building what he then
destroyed: making himself evidently a Transgressor. Gal 2. 18. He tookeit,
unkindly of I.W. that accused him of contradicting himseif: it may be, he will
be offended with W.E. for the like fault, if it be one. But who Can hinder
Truth fromoffending, when it sets before a man's eyes his own faults. Veritas
odium parit, says the comicall Poet: viz, whem it reprehends us, other wise it
is beloved: Veritatem lucentem diligunt arguentem oderunt. says S. Aug. But let
us consider some of his grounds, and those the chief ones for Deifying the
accursed Cham, or the more accursed Devil, who took on him that name Jupiter.

E.S. page 34.35. and 36. Numa believed one supreme God: and he thought, and
adored Jupiter as such, seeing he appointed a Flamen Dialis. as the chief of
all the rest and erected a Capitol to Jove. He tells us, it was vowed by
Tarquinius Priscus in the Sabine war, carried on by Servius Tullius: that
Tarquinius superbus Was at vast charge upon it. That it stood upon 800. foot
of ground, was not finished, till after the expulsion of Tarquin, and was then
dedicated with great solemnity by Horatius Puivillus, being both Consul, and
Pontifex. And from that time this was accounted the great seat of God, and
Religion amongst them: it was Seeds Jovis, in Livy, Jovis summi Arx, in Ovid,
Terrestre domicilium Jovis, in Cicero: Seeds Jovis O.M. in Tacitus and if any
thing more (says he) can be added, it is only what Phiny says in his
Panegyric that God was as present there as he was in Heaven: Thus he. Where
had he told us the names, of the Architect, and subordinate officers and
workmen, the wages each of then received, in what money, it was paid, and when,
and where, and by whose hands. How many dogsaccompagnyed their masters to the
Dedication, and what order was taken to prevent their playing, or quarrelling
with one another, least they should disturb the Devotion, and spoil very much
to the force of this Argument. Which for want of such fine Erudite observations
will be found weak, and insignificant.

For as for the Flamen Dialis I grant that Fl^mines were their chief, or high
Priests designed for the service of particular Gods (yet so^ the Pontifex
Maximus was above them which E. S. ought not to be ignorant of) as also tha^
Jupiter was the chief God, the Pagans ador^^ but the authorityes of Fathers
force us to thin^ them all no better then men. S. Austin expressly says l. 2.
de Civit. Dei c. 15. there were thre^ Flamens, Dialis, Martialis and
Quirinalis. Vives u^pon thar place, will teach us, that there we^ others after
wards instituted, as Pomonalis, t^ Pomona, and another to Caesar, and to other
less^ Deitys: which later were of an inferior ord^^ to the three first. NHow
whence will E.S. dra^ his assertion of Jupiter's being the true God? from the
officer, Flamen? He must then say, in alike manner, that romulus, Pomona, and
Caesar we^ the true god, and not men: seeing they had their Flamines, too. Or was
it, because he was Dial^ this is a begging the thing in question. A^^ which is
worst of all for E.S. S. Austin teacher us l. 2. de Civit. Dei c. 15. that that
very Iup^ter, to whose service the Flamen Dialis was ordained, was the son of
Saturn, and brother to plu^ and Neptune.

From the officer of the Capitol, we will a^ company E. S. to the Capitol it
self, and leam^ what stories that so costly building will tell^ the God adored
in it: we will take S. Austin^ our compagny, for a Guide. We shall find, in it,
Jupiter's breast plate. (Jovis Aegyda) says the Saint l. 1. de Cons. Evang. c.
23. we shall find the Goat Amalthea who had suckled and nursed him in his
Infancy, says S. Austin l. 6. de Civir. Dei c. 7 Whence as well as S. Austin I
propose a question: Quid de Jove senserunt, qui ejus nutricem in Capitolio
posuerunt? What opinion had they of Jupiter, who placed his nurse in the
Capitol? We shall find Juno, and Minerva, wife, and daughter to Jupiter. Lastly
(but that we come too late) we should have seen in their sacred rites, a
representation of the life and death of the God Jupiter. S. Austin l. 1. de
cons. Evang. c. 23. Varro dicit Deorum sacraex cujusque eorum vita vel morte,
qua inter homines vixerunt vel obierunt, esse composita. Had E.S. been Wise,
he should rather have diverted us from the Capitol: for it was to that Great
building, that S. Austin appealed, being to confute some Philosophers, who,
(just as E. S.) said Jupiter was the true God. Numquid and Capitolia Romanorum,
operasunt Poetarum? says he loc. cit. Quid sihi vult is it a non Poetiea; sed
plane Mimica varietas, Deos secundum Philosophos in libris quaerere, secundum
Poetas in templis adorari. Was the Capitol built by Poets, in which there are
so many signs of Jupiter's having been a man? What changlings are you Pagans,
who seek your gods with the Philosophers, and adore them with the Poets?

Now to the Titles and Attributes of this God. Optimus, Maximus, Caeli Rex,
Deum Pater, atque hominum Rex, Iovis omnia plena. Which E.S. alleges p. 36.
and page 44. he adds the authority of S. Austin l. 4. de Civ. Dei cap (...)
that to represent his authority, they placed a seep^^ in his hand, and built
his Temple on a high hi^^ ANSWER. if E.S. had read on the following chapter in
S Austin (l. 4. de Civ. D. c. 10.) (...) would have seen proofs, that
Iovisomnia plen^^ was spoken by Virgil, of the son of Saturn, (...) that
according to their own dogmes, th^^ saying was false. He will find the like l.
de cons^^ Evang. c. 23. Arnobius l. 1. p. 9. Answers th^^ Pagans, who alleged
the argument in this (...) ture: Dissimilia copulare, atque in unam speciemu^^
gere, induct a confusione conamini. You end avour^^ join things as distant as
Heaven and Edrth, eternity and time; for God had no beginning, nor cause; yo^^
Jupiter had a Father, and Mother, grandfathers, (...) grand-mothers, and
brothers: Nunc nuper in ut^^^ matris formatus, he was but lately conceived in
(...) mother's womb. And Lactantius Firminaus l. (...) c. 11. p. 33. Regnare in
coelo Iovem vulg us exist^^ mat: id and doctis pariter and indoctis persuasum
les^ quod and Religio ipsa, and precationes, and hymni, (...) delubra, and
simulachra demonstrant eundem t^^ men Saturno and Rhea genitum confitentur.
Quomedo p^test Deus videri, aut (ut ait Poeta) hominum rerumque repertor, ante
cujus ortum infinita hominum millia fuerunt? All Pagans both learned, and (...)
learned are persuaded, that Jupiter reigns i^^ Heaven. Their Religion, and
service, and Temples, testify this: yet the same persons profess, that he was
the son of Saturn and Rhea. Which two points of their Faith are inconsistent,
for how conld Jupiter be the founder of all men, seeing many thousands of men
had been before he was borne, or conceived? When E. S. shall have considered
this, he will think his calling T.G.S. opinion, wild, and absurd, very rash,
ungrounded, and impertinent.

Objection: How could such contradictions be admitted by wise men: for such
were the Romans, and Greeks? Especially considering, as E. S. says p. 39. The
Romans had an ancient law, which forbad the Poetical Fables? ANSWER. This is
to rely on Reason in matter of fact, against cleeretestimonys of Antiquity. If
there was such a law, it was very ill kept, as many others are. No Authors more
exact observant of Decorum, then Cicero and Virgil: to which, we may add, it
may by Terence, as exceeding all Latinsin Dramaticall Poems. Cicero, cited by
S. Austin l. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 23. in Tuscul qq. l. 1. says: Si
scrutarivetera and ex iis, quae Scriptores Graeciae prodiderant, eruere coner,
ipsi illi Majorum Gentium Dii qui habentur, hinc a nobis profecti in coelum
reperiuntur. Quaere quorum demonstrentur sepulchra in Graecia: reminiscere,
quoniam es initiatus, quae tradantur mysteriis, tum denique quam hoc late
pateat intelliges. If we look over our ancient Records, if we consult what
Greek Authors deliver we shall find, that even the prime Gods, from Earth past
to Heaven. Examine whose sepulchers are shew^^^^ in Greece: Call to mind, seeing
you are initiated, what our Rites express: and you will find how for this
principle goes. Again: Qui hanc urbem condidit, Romulum ad Deos immortales
benevolenti^^ famaque sustulimus. The founder of this city, Romu^us, owes his
being a God to our good wills. As if i^ it were in weak men's power to raise
men to Heaven, change them into stars, and place them amongst the Gods!

And Virgil l. 4. Georgicor. speaks of the Bees, as follows: -- Naturas Apib
us quas Jupiter ipse
Addidit, expediam: pro qua mercede canoros
Curetum sonitus, crepitantiaque Aerasecutae
Dictaeo coeli Regem pavere sub antro.


Which are thus Inglished by Ogilby.

Now I le declare those gifts which were conferred
On Bees by Jove himself for what reward,
They followed tinkling brass and Curets sound
And fed the King of Heaven under ground.
As if that Jupiter had bestowed their Nature on the Bees, to whom he was
beholding for his food during his infancy, and who was many ages younger then
they.

And Terence in Ennucho, charges the rape of Danae on the true God of Heaven. At
quem Deum? qui templa coeli summa sonitu concutit. That God, which shakes the
starry vault of the heavens, with thunder. Those, who desire more examples of
such extravagancyes, may read Athenagoras Page 20. Justinus M. or any of the
other fathers, who have written against Pagans. They will find many causes to
dread the Judgment of God executed on those men so wise in all other things;
but struck with blindness in this maine point, very deservedly, for their
Ingratitude to God, whom they knew; but did not glorify him, as God, nether
were thankful, but become vain in their Imaginatious, and their foolish heart
was darkened.

SECTION V. Whither all, or the greatest part of the Pagans believed the one
true God?
OUr dispute here is not of the first beginners, and planters of Idolatry; but
of those who lived at and since the time of Christ, till Christianity prevayled.

I do not doubt at all, but God, when he created Man, endowed him with all
knowledge necessary, for the end, fot which he created him: and certainly that
of his Creator was as necessary, as any, seeing upon it was grounded his
obligation to serve God, by fullfilling his Will, and obeying his commands.

It is, I think no less certain, that all, and every soul, at its creation,
receives an Idea of God and that so deeply imprinted in it, that no ignorance,
no want of education, no bad instruction, can wear it out, or entirely deface
it. Hence it is, that altno several barbarous nations adore as Gods, things,
which are not God, (as has been e seen of the Pagans) yet there never were
any without some object of Adoration, which they thought to be God. Yet Reason
left to its self and taking the freedom of discourse about it, will cover it
with Errors, which may darken its lineaments, without destroying it; as
Rubbidge thrown on an excellent Statu, will bide its beaty from the
spectator's eye although it nether alters the situation of its parts, nor destroys
their proportion. One great advantage, we have by Faith, is that it fixes in
our souls a right Idea of God, and excludes those imaginations, which are
inconsistent with it. The whole created world is left to the disputations of
men's barts (Eccles. 3.11.) for the exercise of their intellectualls: in which
they are often mistaken (for they shall not find out the work, that God makes
from the beginning to theend) yet their errors are without prejudice to the
maine chance, their salvation, as long as they contain themselves within their
bounds, nor endeavor to know more of God, them they should, or have learnr of
him, nor labor to mesure Immensity with a span. Otherwise by lamentable
experience they will find the truth of those words: Scrutator Majestatis
opprimetur a gloria. Of which we have as many examples, as Philosophers, who
attempted it. The wisest of them all in this, was Simonides, who said
ingenuously to Hiero, that the more he studied it, the less he understood of
it. Hence S. Austin l. 8. de Trinit. c. 2. having savd, that God is Truth,
gives us a warning to stick in the thought of that term: Noli quaerere
quidsit veritas, statim enim se oppoent caligines imaginum corporalium, and
nubila phantasmatum and pertubabunt serenitatem, quae primo ictu quo velut
coruscatione perstringeris, cum dicitur veritas, mane si potes, sed non potes.
Relaberis in istasolita atque terrena. When I say, Truth, examine not what it is
I mean, otherwise mists of Phancys and cloud of corporeal Images will
interpose, and bereave you of the light which appeared at first: stop, if
possible in the first limpse of the light: but you cannot do it, for you will
always slide into other thoughts. And in the following chapter he discourses in
alike manner of the thought of Good: Bonum hoc, and bonum illud. Toll hoc and
illud, and vide ipsum bonum, si potes, ita Deum videbis, non alio bono bonum;
sed bonum omnis boni. Speak not of this good, or that good: take away this,
and that, and see, if possible, goodness it self and you will see God, not
good by any other goodness distinct from him; but the goodness of all good
things. Thus whither we conceive God, as the prime Truth, or as the sovereign
good, our first Thoughts are Orthodox; as coming from God the Auth or of
nature, and our misery proceeds from our not stopping in them.

This was the reason, why Tertullian l. de Testim. animae c. 1. being desirous
to show, for the confusion of Pagans, that natural Image of one God, which all
souls ever had, examins only such a soul, as retains its native simplicity,
without any adscititious knowledge. Non eam te advoco, says he, quae scholis
formata, bibliothecis exercitata, academicis and porticibus partam sapientiam
ructas. Te simplicem, and rudem, and impolitam, and idioticam compello, qualem
habent, qui te solam habent illam impsam de compito, and trivio, de textrino
totam. Imperitia tua mihi opus est, quoniam aliquantulae peritiae tuae nemo
credit. Ea expostulo, quae tecum in hominem infers, quae aut ex temetipsa, aut
ex quocunque authore tuo didicisti, I would not have thee o soul, framed in
schools, conversant in librarys, filled, with the learning of Platonicks, or
Stoics. I desire thee rude, simple, impolisht, and an idiot. Such as thou art
in the poorest, and meanest Artisam. I have need of thy Ignorance, for thy
learning is suspected. I would know what sentiment thou broughtest with thee
into thy body, whither thou had it of thy self, or receivedst it of thy
Creator. He says, the same in substance in his Apologetick cap. 17. p. 43. and
48. only he extends this testimony of the unlearned, to the learned soul, in
sudden occurrences, when acquired learning is useless, and nature alone
works. And he gives another reason, why our understanding retains not as it
should do, the first Idea of God: the greatenesse of the object, surpassing its
capacity. Deum vis magnitudinis and notum hominibus, objecit, and ignotum.
Which you may find likewise in S. Cyp. de Idol. van. p. 206

Out of what I have said, you may see, that our question is not whither we have
all a natural opinion of one God? But whither the Religion of the Pagans did
teach, that there was but one God? or whither the unity of God was a principle
of their Religion, and an article of their Faith?

Our Answer to this question; is negative: so that we say, Politheisme was an
essential point of Paganism: and one maine question debated betwint
Christians and Pagans, was whither there was only one God? This I gather first
out of Scripture: Psalm. 75. (or 76.) Notus in Iudaea Deus, and in Israel magnum
nomen ejus. In Judah God is known, and his name is great in Israel. As if out
of the people of Israel he had not been known. S. Hierome says that is to be
understood before the Cross of Christ had enlyght ned the world. Antequam
illuminaret Crux mundum, and antequam viderctur Dominus in terra, quando autem
venit Salvator in omnem terram exivit sonus eorum. But when our B. Savior came
the name of God was spread to the extremity's of the earth, amongst the
beleivers or Christians.

And S. Austin: Solent inimici Domini Iesu-Christi omnibus noti Iudaei gloriari
in isto Psalmo, quem cantavimus, dicentes: Notus in Iudaea Deus: and insult are
gentibus quibus non est notus Deus, and dicere, quia sibi solis not us est
Deus, alibi ergo ignotus. Not us est autem revera in Iudaea Deus, si
intelligant quid sit Iudaea. Name vere non est notus Deus, nisi in Iudaea. Ecce
and nos hoc dicimus. The known ennemys of our Lord Iesus-Christus, glory in
this Psalm and insult over the Gentiles, saying that God is known to them, the
Jews, wherefore he must be unknown to the Nations. Now we grant, that God is
known only to Jews, or in Iewry, and then he shows that the Christians
circuncision ofthe heart, and spirit (of which Romans 2.29.) does entirle them to
the knowledge of God, restrained in that Psalm to Judah.

Secondly, out of Testimony of the Pagan Gods taken out of S. Cyril of Alex.
lib. 5. contra Julianum, page 180. where he says: (...) (...)
(...).


The doctrine of the Hebrews is confirmed by the testimony of Iulian's Gods,
Apollo being consulted, what nations were the Wisest? The Oracle answered: The
Chaldaeans, for Philosophy, or natural learning, but the Jews (who adore only
one God, and King) for Divinity. As the Poliglot paraphrases the oracles sense,
prolog. 12. page 82. This oracle is also cited by Justinus M. Paraen. p. 23.
and Theodoret l. 1. de curan. Graec. Affect. page 472. where he brings
Porphyrius owning the Oracle.

Thirdly out of Fathers. We cannot desire abetter witness of the sentiments,
of the Pagans, and the point disputed betwint them, and Christians, them
Tertullian, who very probably had been one himself, at least had converst with
their persons, and writings, what I cite here out of him is the more to be
valued, because S. Cyprian uses the same argument, lib. de Idol. vanit. page
207. Now Tertullian lib. de testimonio animae c. 2. Non placemus, Dominum
praedicantes hoc nomine unico unicum, a quo omnia, and sub quo universa. Dic
testimonium si ita scis. Nam te quoque palam, and tota liberate, qua non licet
nobis, domi ac foris audimus it a pronunciare, quod Deus dederit, and si Deus
voluerit: ea voce, and aliqueme esse significas, and omnem illi confiteris
potestatem, ad cujus spectas voluntatem, simul and coeteros negas Deos esse,
dum suis vocabulis nuncupas Saturnum, Iovem. Nam solum Deum confirmas, quem
tantum Deum nominas, ut and cum illos interdum Deos appellas, and alieno and
quasi pro mutuo usu videaris. The Pagans are displeased with us, when we preach
one Lord, from whom are all things, to whom all are subject, Speak osoul,
what thou know of this: Speak boldy with that freedom which is granted to
thee though denied to us. Thou say. God grant it, if it please God: by which
words thou expressest some one, and acknowledgest, that he has all prower, and
denies those to be Gods, whom thou designest by their names: Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, etc. For thou professest to believe one, whom thou call God, of thy
self; and when thou give that name to others, thou usest borrowed notions.

Again Apolog. 17. page 47. Quod colimus, Deus unus est. This is the
Christians position against Pagans, Weadore only one God. And. p. 48. Vultis ex
operibus ipsius, vultis ex animae ipsius testimonio, comprobemus: quae licet
carcere corporis pressa, licet institutionibus pravis circumscripta, licet
libidinibus and concupiscentiis evigorata, licet Diis falsis exancillata, cum
tamen resipiscit, ut ex crapula, ut ex somno, ut ex aliqua valetudine, and
sanitatem suam patitur, Deum nominat hoc solo, quiaproprie verus hic unus, Deus
honus and magnus. Et quod Deus dederit. Iudicem quoque illum contestatur, Deus
videt, Deo commendo, and Deus mihi reddet. Shall I prove this one God out of
his works, or our of the testimony of man's souls? which although it be shut up
in the prison of the body, spoiled by bad instructions, weakened by
concupiscence, and enslaved to false Gods, yet if she come, toher self, she
professes, one God, great, and good, she calls his to witness, saying God
knows. I leave it to God. Then Tertullian concludes with this exclamation. O
testimonium animae naturaliter Christianae! O testimony of a soul, which is
Christian by nature! Now I desire to know of E. S. how he could infer the
soul naturally to be Christian, because naturally it owned one only God, if
this were not the maine point controverted? will he say, I am a Protestant
because I profess to believe in one God, as Protestants do? or shall I ever
think E. S. a Papist, forsaying he believes in Christ. No certainly, those
being points in which both parties agree. Tertullian's great wit could never
be so easily suprized with hopes of a Proselit, if what E. S. says be true, that
both contending parties agreed in professing one God.

The same reason might be brought out of Minutius Felix, who says page 14. Audio
vulgus cum ad coelum manus tendunt, nihil aliud quam Deum dicunt: and Deus
magnus est. Vulgi iste naturalis sermo est, an Christiani confitentis oration? I
hear the people call upon God. (naming only one) Are these words the speech
of Pagan, or the confession of faith of a Christian?

Here me thinks, I see E. S. triumphing, as finding what destroys my
conclusion, in the forgoing words: which show that all the people believed one
God. But I answer, that all expressed that belief int heir indeliberate Actions,
and deliberately acted contrary: and for that reason were (...) condemned by
their own judgment. Let us hear Tertullian l. de testim. animae c. 6. p. 126.
Merito igitur omnis anima rea and testis est, in tantum rea erroris, in quantum
testis veritatis: and stabit ante aulas Dei in die judicii, nihil habens
dicere. Deum praedicabas, and non requirebas, daemonia abominabaris, and illa
adorabas. Iudicium Dei appellabas, necesse credbas: Inferna supplicia
praesumebas, and non praecavebas: Christianum nomen sapiebas, and Christianum
persequebaris. Wherefore every soul is deservedly guilfy, and witness against
her self the more guilty of her error, beeause she is witness of the Truth:
she will in the day of Judgment stand before the tribunal of God, and have not
one word to say for her self, when it shall be reproached to her: Trou
didstspeake of God, and did not seek him: Thou hatedst the Divil, and did
adore him: Thou did appeal to Gods, Judgment, without beleiving it: Thou
did speak of the pains of Hell, (...) ithout endeavoring to avoyde them:
thou had in thy heart that great Christian truth, that there is but one God;
yet thou did persecute Christias, for professing it.

Commonly the Fathers labor to prove the unity of a God, against the Pagans.
So does Justinus M. Athenagoras, Minut. Felix, S. Cyril and others. To what
purpose that, if all believed it? Origin l. 1. cont. Cells. p. 5. reduces the
disputes against Paga^s, to two heads: Idols, and Politheisme.

I end with Lactantius Firmianus l. 1. divin. instit. c. 1. page 8. says to
Constantin the Great: Tu primus Romanorum Principum, repudiatis erroribus
majestatem Dei singularis ac very and cegnovisti, and honorasti. Thou art the
first of all the Roman Emperors who adored the only true God. How could
Constantin have been the first, if all other Emperors, had adored the only
true god, before him?

Yet I desire E. S. to Answer one or two questions: If all the understanding
men amongst the Pagans believed One God, how came Socrates to be condemned for
that opinion by the Areopagits? Why did Plato fear the same fate, and for that
reason deliver his sentiments so obscurely, about that one God?

There occurres to me only one tolerable objection against what I here assert:
viz, that

Faustus the Manichaean reproaches to Christians, that they teceived the Opinion
of Monarchy, (that is the Belief of one God) from the Pagans: whence it
follows, that the Pagans believed but one God. To which I answer 1. It is
certain we received that dogme not from Pagans; but from God: So Faustus is
most certainly mistaken in that. And why may we not suspect his testimony as to
the other part, of the opinion of Pagans, concerning one God? I answer 2. with
S. Austin l. 20. contra Faust. c. 19. that the Pagans were not to such a degree
blinded with their false Gods, and true Devils Arts, as to have entirely lost
the Image of one true God received at their creation: though for their
Ingratitude to their Creator, they were permitted to fall to the Adoration of
the Creature, Idols, and Devils. Thus S. Austin. Certainly their Wise men
through the mist of pompous ceremonys could see the fondness of men who
invented them, and the wickedness of Devils, who promoted the.

Nay I willingly grant that all learned Pagans blamed the Poetical Fables of
their Gods. (...) acknowledge with Tertullian Apol. c. 46. p. 75. that the
Philosophers impugned them, and were for this applauded, and honored by the
rest. Yet after all this, what those same Philosophers taught concerning the
God, is pitiful, and worse: as you may see in Tertul. Justinius M. and
Athenagoras. The Epicureans fancyed him so odly, as if they designed to make
him ridiculous. Dees jocandi causa induxit Epicurus pellucidos at que
perflatiles: Cicero Tuscul. qq. 5. (see Seneca l. 4. de beneficiis c. 19.) The
Stoics promise, to make their wiseman as happy as the Gods, ( Philosophia mihi
promittit, ut me parem Du faciat, Seneca epist. 49.) does not so much raise
him, as abase them. Yet in reality that similitude, which they promised, was no
great perfection, or advantage, seeing they thought the whole world to be God.
Quid est Deus? said Seneca l. 1. nature. qq. quod vides totum, and quod non
vides. All things visible and invisible are God. And Origenes l. 5. cont.
Celsum, p. 235. says, the stoics thought the world to be the first God: the
Platonists allowed it to be the second God: and some others pulled it down to
the third rank, The Platonicians are thought to have written the most divinely
of the Divinity: yet if we credit Tertullian, Apolog. c. 47.
they gave it a body. Aristotle the most exact in other things, of all
Philosophers. nails God to the highest Heaven l. 8. Phys. c. 10. t. 84. and
although he had the disposal of superlunary bodies, yet all sublunary things
were out of his reach, and jurisdiction, being subject to fate, as Theodoret l.
5. de cur. Graec. affection. p. 551. and else where assures. Nay Aristotle
seems to own no kn owledge in God: For l. 2. Magnor. moral. 15. p. 193. he
says: God knows nothing distinct from himself, otherwise that thing would be
better then God: Nether does he know himself: for we think those rave, or are
mad, who entertain their thoughts about themselves. What shall I say of his
Intelligences? which, whilst he makes necessary Beings, selfe-existent,
endowed with infinite Power, etc. he seems to Deify.

Which I do not relate, with any intention to insult over those great men,
for their Errors Hieron. l. de erroribus Orig. Absit eorum insultare erroribus,
quorum miror ingenia.
whose wits I admire, and whose labors have been very beneficial even to me;
but only to show E. S and the learned person, (whose works, page 6. he
promises, or threatens us with) what little solid Truth concerning the Divinity
is to be found in Pagans writings: to the end we may glorify the one great
God, who with his one Divine Word made flesh, confuted all the others long
discourses and voluminous errors: To the end we many be thankful to the
Father of lyghts, for having given us his saving truth, and freed us from those
dark wanderings, and intricate labyrinths, of Humane wits.

SECTION VI. Of the unknown God, at Athens.
THe greatest difficulty (against what I have said sect. 4. about the Pagan
Jupiter, not being the true God, but first a man, and then a Devil) is taken
from Act. 17.23. I found an Altar, says the B. Apostle, with this inscription:
TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. whom therefore yet ignorantly worship, him I declare unto
you. This E. S. pretends to be meant of Jupiter, and confirms it very
artificially, out of Aratus, out of whom S. Paul cites some peieos of verses.
And S. Paul saying he preached him, it will follow, that he preached Jupiter, and
so Jupiter must be a name of the true God: for certainly S. Paul never preached
any other. Thus E. S. p. 7.

How his learned adversary T. G. has managed this debated point, I cannot
tell: but doubtless his works, if I had them, would give me great light. And
what I say, I shall willingly reform according to his, in case it be
materially different.

I think it certain, that the unknown God, was not Jupiter. To prove this, I
may bring all those Authors Pagans and Christians, who speak of the occasion
of dedicating this Altar. Again Jupiter could not be said, to be an unknown
God in Athens; for they knew his country, his birth, his life, and death, his
sepulcher, his gests, his parents, etc. Their Theaters, their Tribunalls, their
Temples, didring with his name. Thirdly they had Altars erected to his honor,
in their Forum, their Corners-of-Streetes, and even in their private houses;
whereas there was only one Altar erected to this unknown God. Fourthly had S.
Paul declared Jupiter to them, he would at least en passant, have rejected
those absurd fables, which were told of him: of his birth, and death, of his
Rebellion, and filthy lust, etc. (which are much more unbeseeming a god, as
being more dangerous to morality then the things the Apostle speaks of.) At
which the Apostle does not hint in the least manner.

Hence it follows, that S. Paul did not preach Jupiter. This is evident out
of what I have said, and the Apostles words: Quem ignorantes colitis, hunc ego
annuncio: Whom you ignorantly worship, him I declare. Soc that he speaks
clearly of the unknown God, who was not Jupiter.

What shall we then say to Aratus, who clearly speaks of Iuptier. ANSWER.
What he said of god, was true, and conformable to that natural Idaea, which, as
is abovesayd, we all have of God; but he erroneously applied to Jupiter, the
Arch-Divel. Now S. Paultakes his thoughts which were true, and applies them to
that self existent Being, to whom alone they belong: as if a crown by Rebels
set upon a subjects head, should be taken off it, and set on the Kings, to
whom of right it belongs.

Where, by the by, we may take notice of a gross error of Seneca, who says it
is as good to have no thought at all, as an erroneous one, of God: Quid
interest Deum neges, an infames? God out of his goodness to man has given him
that Idea, of himself, which being preserved, although defaced with errors, yet
will help to correct then when we make aryght use of our reason. As the statue
(of which I spoke in the fifth Sect.) Laid in the dirt, may be taken up, brusht
and washed, so as to be restored to its: first beauty. Thus S. Austin convinced
himself, that the Manichaean haeresy could not be true. Thus the Philosophers,
saw the falsehood of their Pagan Religion.

I pray God many others, who at this present hold errors in Religion, may so
use their Reason, as to overcome them.

A Conclusion of this treatise.
To conclude this whole treatise, we will use two, or three passages of
Tertullian, to confirm, what he have hitherto said. Imprimis c. 11. p. 40.
Sicut Deos vestros homines fuisse nonaudetis negare, ita post mortem Deos
factos, instituistis asseverare. Seeing you dare not deny you Gods, to have
been men, you resolve to stand to their having been made Gods after their
death. And to jupiter n particular he applies that general assertion page 41.
Vani erunt homines, nisi certi sint ipsum Iovem quae in manu ejus imponitis
fulmina timuisse. Men are very foolish, if they doubt of Jupiter's having
feared the thunderbolts, which you put into his hands. What thinks E.S. was not
Jupiter aman, in Tertullian's opinion?

Again Tertul. l. de Idololatria c. 21. Scia quendam, cui Dominus ignoscat,
cum illi im publico per litem dictum esset, Jupiter tibi sit iratus;
respondisse, imo tibi. Quid aliter fecisset Ethnicus, qui Iovem Decum credidit?
Confirmavit Iovem Deum per quem se maledictum indigne tulisse demonstravit
remaledicens. At quidenim indigneris, per eum, quem scis NIHIL esse? I know
one, (whom God for give) who when one wrangling with him had said: the wrath,
or curse, of Jupiter fall upon thee: answered upon thee rather. Would a Pagan
have answered otherwise, who believed Jupiter to be God? He seemed to
acknowledge his Divinity, when he showed himself so concerned for the
imprecation of his wrath. For why should he trouble himself, for his Anger;
whom he knows to be NOTHING? Moreover l. de Resur. carnis cap. 6. page 568.
Phidiae manus Iovem Olympiun^ ex ebore molitur, and adoratur: nec jam bestiae,
and quidem insulsissimae dens est; sed summum soeculi numen: non quia elephas,
sed quia Phidias tantus. Vt honestius homo Deum, quam Deus hominem finxerit.
Phidias the Sculptor out of Pieces of Ivory makes a Statue of Jupiter Olympius;
and it is presently adored: and it is no more regarded, as the tooth of a most
silly Beast; but as THE SVPREAME GOD. As if MAN produced a more Noble work,
then God: for God only made a miserable Creature, and MAN makes a GOD.

In his Apolog. chapter 12 p. 42. Quantum igitur de Di is vestris, nominasolummodo
video quorundam veterum mortuorum, and fabulas audio, and sacra defabulis
recognosco. Quantum autem de simulachris ipsis, nihil aliud deprehendo, quam
materias forores esse vasculorum communium, vel ex iisdem vasculis: Quasifatum
consecratione mutantes, licentia art is transfigurante, in ipso opere
sacrilege, ut revera nobis maxim, qui propter Deos ipsos plectimur, solatium
poenarum esse possit, quod eadem and ipsi patiantnr, ut fiant. Crucibus and
stipitibus imponitis Christianos: quod simulacrum non prius argilla deformat
cruci and stipiti superstructa? In patibulo primum corpus Dei vestri dedicatur.
Vngulis deraditis latera Christianorum: at in Deos vestros per omnia membra
validius incumbu^t asciae, and runcinae, and scobinae. Cervices ponimus ante
plumbum and glutinum, and gomphos: sine capite sunt Diivestri. Ad bestias
impellimur, certe quas Libero, and Cybele, and Cereri applicatis. Ignibus
urimur: hoc and illi a prima quidem massa. In metalla damnamur: inde censentur
Dii vestri. In insulis relegamur: solet and in insulis aliquis Deus vester aut
nasci, aut mori. Si per haec constet Divinitas aliqua, ergo qui puniuntur,
consecrantur, and numina erunt dicenda supplicia. Sed plane non sentiunt has
injurias, and contumelias suae fabricationis Dii vestri, sicut nec obsequia,
etc. As for your Gods, I see nothing, but the names of some men dead long
since: I hear many fables; and can discern them in your sacred rites. As for
your Idols, they are composed of the same matter, of which are our most
ordinary vessels, nay sometimes our vessels are turned into them being
changed, by the sacrilegious working of a statuary. And it might be a comfort
in our tourments to us, that we undergo only the same operations, which they
are subjected to, to become Gods. Are we raised on a cross? your Gods are set
on them, to be shaped. Do you rake our sides with Iron hooks? your Gods are
more roughtly carved by an axe, a chizil, a plainer, Do you cast us into the
fire? In that your Gods are melted to be cast into their moulde. Are we
sentenced to the mines? Thence your Gods are drawn. Are we banished to the
Islands? In those many of your Gods are borne, or dead. They are as insensible
of the rough workman, as of your ceremonious rites. Do we not therefore rather
deserve Commendation, then punishment, for discovering, and rejecting so
gross an error, as it is, to take for God, what is nothing but a livelesse
creature, as every spider, and other insect does perceive?

When E.S. has considered this, I shall desire of him to know whither it be
not evident hence 1.o that the Idols of the Pagans were by them held to be
Gods? 2.o whithet those Gods had not been men?

I must beg thy pardon, courteous Reader, for abusing thy patience with this
long digression: I will, God willing, make amends, by being short in my
following Reflections, on my good friend, Mr. Burnet. So I take my leave of
E.S. till our next meeting.

CHAPTER VIII. What G. B. says, to prove Catholics Idolaters.
G. B. page 15. One Idolatry of the Gentiles was When the true God was worshipped
in a false manner.

ANSWER. This is not true; for the Turks and Jews worship God in a false
manner: yet are not Idolaters.

G. B. p. 16. If is Idolatry, to erect an Image to represent the Deity to our
senses: and adore God through it.

ANS. Were all Idolaters, who have something to mind their senses, of the
Divinity: Protestants were such, who have words to signify him by the Ear, and
a triangular figure, with the tetragrammaton for our eyes. And as for the
worship of him through those, no relative worship can be Idolatry. Thus we show
respect to the Bible, as being God's word: to the Sacraments as instituted by
him to sanctify us: to holy men, as being the living temples of the Holy Ghost,
etc. without Idolatry, because the motive is God, and the worship ends in him.

G. B. page 17. Our kindness to the second Commandment appears by our having
stricken it out of our Catechismes.

ANS. You might for this reason accuse our B. Savior of the like kindness:
who Mat. 19.18.19. left it out of that Compendium of the Commandments. And Luke
10.27. he approves an abridgement made by another, without that part.

G. B. Page 18. The Hethens belevied that by magical ways Divine Power was
affixed to some bodies, as the sun, and stars; and to Ancilia and Palladia,
which they believed came down from Heaven. Act. 19.35.

ANS. I acknowledge my ignorance in this. Show me, that ever any such virtue was
affixt, to sun, or stars, or Ancilia, or Palladia. And Act. 19.35. which you
cite, there is no more mention of them, then of the day of your birth, or of Tom
Thomb.

G. B. page 18. The Israelits adored the Calfe in the wilderness. Psalm.
106.30. they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox: which shows,
they worshipped the true God in a false manner.

ANS. It shows, they adored that Idol: or if you please, An ox eating hay, as
the place says, which you cite. And do you think such a beast to be the true
God? I am ashamed to answer such ridiculous discourse.

G. B. page 21. The Trinity is painted as an old man, with achild in his arms,
and a Dove over the Childs head.

ANS. I never in all my travells saw such a picture. If you find any such,
though you break it, I will not call you Iconoclast, for that action.

G. B. page 22. The worship of the mass is Idolatry, as evidently as any piece
of Gentilisme ever was.

ANS. When you shall have showed, that Christ is not really present, or that
although present, he deserves not to be adored, we will suspend our Adoration of
him there. But you will prove nether, as long, as his words remains. So our
Adoration of him present there, is like to continu.

G. B. page 23. The worship we give to the Cross, is an Adoring, of God under
a Symbol, and Representation.

ANS. It is a worshipping of God: and so no Idolatry. It is a representation
of our Redemption, and worshipped only as such.

G. B. page 23. The parallel of Rome-Heathen, and Rome-Christian, runs but too
too just.

ANS. It runs not at all; but halts of all four: and you have nether Art
enough, to cure it by natural means, nor Faith to effect it by miracle, you
will as soon square circles, as cure this lamenesse.

CHAPTER IX. Of mediating Spirits.
G. B. Page 24. Concerning these (the souls of deceased men) the Heathens
belevied that they were certain intermediall powers, that went betwixt God, and
men: by whom also all our services were offered to the Gods.

ANSWER. We have here many errors in few words. The first is, that the souls
of deceased men were universally by all Pagans thought to act any thing in this
world. In Virgil, Lucian, and others, you may see, that many (those of wicked
men) only suffered, being conceived to be punished for their faults. Nay out of
the same Authors it is probable, that even the better, more innocent, and
therefore esteemed happy souls, took their pleasure in the Elisian feilds,
without troubling themselves with things of this world. This is much confirmed
from the Pythagorean doctrine of the transmigration of souls from one body to
another, which was very common amongst the Pagan learned Philosophers. None of
these, could believe that the souls of Deceased men could be mediating spirits,
which you ascribe to all Pagans.

The second is, that Deceased men even when deifyed, were by all held to be
mediating powers. I have showed at large above, that the Prime Gods had been
men: and that the Jupiter had been one: I desire you to consider the grounds I
have laid for this Assertion: for which see also Julius Firmicus page 4.
Romulus was a man, the founder and first King of Rome, (I hope you do not
expect I should prove this) yet he had a Flamen consecrated to his service:
which was an officer peculiar to the supreme God, says E. S. p. 34. and
consequently was thought to be him, or was ranked with him. Indeed Divinity in
the opinion of the credulous deluded Antiquity was very easily purchaced: to
disappeare unexpectedly was enough. Thus Romulus whose hystory is known to
all. Thus Amilcar, a general of the Carthaginians in Sicily, seeing his army
defeated, whilst he was sacrificing, threw himself into the fire, where he was
consumed: thus he appeared not, and for that reason was held to be a God, by
his countrymen. Cleomedes of Astypala, a wrastler, having knocked down his
Antagonist with his fist, tore open his side, and pulled out his heart: but in
lieu of the reward he expected, finding his cruelty had displeased the Judges,
with indignation he departed, and finding a school master with his disciples
under a vault, he pulled away the pillar, which up held it, and buried them all
with its ruins, Thence he fled into a cave, or Den, to avoyde those who pursued
him, to bring him to condign punishment. But that being dug open, and he
not found in it, by command of the oracle, he was adored as a God. As you may
see in Theodoret lib. 8. de Cur. Graec. affect. p. 597. and l. 10. p. 631. and
in Plut. and Suidas. Out of this persuasion it was that Empedocles threw
himself into mount Aetna, that nothing of him being found they might think him
translated to Heaven: and he probably might hae obtained it, ahd not his brass
slippers, or soles, cast out by the force of the fire, discoverd that he had
mistaken his way thither.

By slyght a man otherwise obscure got to be adored in Libia, as God: for
having taught many birds to say: (...) Great God Psaphon (which was his name)
and letting them go, they in the woods repeated this lesson: and the poople
hearing them, adored him with Altars, Sacrifices and Temples. He owed his
Apotheosis to the Birds. Anno a Carthaginian attempted the same; but lost his
labor, the Birds forgetting their lesson and resuming their wild notes,
as soon as they recovered their liberty.

A 3. error is, that all the Pagans belevied any Mediators, betwixt their
Gods, and them. In those remnants of their Rituals, which are extant, there is
not one word of mediation or intercession, demanded of the inferior Deityes,
called Dii minorum Gentium. S. Austin speaking of that doctrine l. 8. and 9. de
Civit. Dei, seems to attribute it to Plato's school: as not being an article
of Faith of the Heathen's creed; but a private opinion of one school of
Philosophers. He seems, I say, to insinuate this: I desire you, sir, to show
out of Plato, or Apuleius, or any of those writers, these words, or any others
equivalent: Hercules pray to thy father, Jupiter, for me, or us. Romulus
intercede for us. So that the greatest part of the Heathens did not dream of
this Mediation: and those who did assert it, treated nevertheless with those
Mediators, as with true Gods. Wherefore, should I grant that all Pagans held the
souls of men to mediate, yet there would be a vast difference betwixt their
sentiments, and those of the Roman Catholic Church, concerning our saints.
More errors will appear out of the following discourse.

I think it impossible to give one Idea of what the Pagans taught of spirits or
incorporeall substances, as this name does comprehend the supreme of all, and
the subordinate, or coordinate immateriall Beings, and souls separated from
their Bodies. Thales In Athenogor. leg. pro Christ. p. 25.
said there were of three sorts, Gods, Demons, and Heroes: and that God was
the soul of the world: Demons spiritual Beings: and Heroes the souls of men,
who were good, or bad, according to the life they led in this word. Hesiodus
In Theodoret. l. 8. de Cur. Graec. Affect. p. 602.
thought that the souls of golden men, who lived well, were turned into Demons
after his life, and received a charge of humane affairs. Julian the Apostata
In S. Cyril. Alex.l. 4. p. 115.
taught, that they were true Gods, to whom the Supreme God committed the care
of the several parts of this World: that the God Ibidem, p. 141.
of the Jews and Christians, (whom Moses preached) was one of the inferior
gods. Nay he says, Ibidem l. 5. p. 155.
that Moses his God, was the worst of all the rest, as being Jealous, Envious,
Vindicative, etc. For which Blasphemy alone, he might have deserved his
reproachful surname. Plato in S. Austin l. 8. de Civit. Dei, c. 14.
seems to agree in substance with Thales for he distinguishes three sorts of
spiritual substances, Gods, Men, and Demons. The Gods he places in the
Heavens. Demons in the Air: Men on Earth. Apuleius S. Austin l. 9. cap. 11.
holds all souls of men to be Demons, but assigns three sorts of them:
Lares, are those which are certainly good: Lemures, or Larvae, which are
certainly known to be bad: and when it is doubted whither they begood, of bad
they are called Dii Manes.

When you have considered these things, you will see 1. how imperfectly, nay
how falsely, you have represented the sentiments of the Pagans. 2. How hard a
thing you undertake, when you design a Parallel betwixt Pagan Idolatry, and
our Worshipping of Saints: for seeing all depends on their holding men's souls
to be mediating spirits (which can never be proved) or that those who were
good, were used only to present men's requests to the Supreme God, (which is
the Tenet of the Catholic Church concerning Saints) which is also evidently
untru, we may rank this Parallel with Squaring Circles, and the Philosophers
stone: and expect to see the World made happy with these three rarityes
together.

As to the mediation of Angels: Athenagoras Legate. pro Christ. page 11.
says indeed that the Christian opinion was that God created several orders of
Angels: and had committed to their care the government of the Elements,
Heavens, and the whole world; not that any one Angel is Governor of the world,
(which the scripture seems to deny, Job. 34, 14. and Heb. 1.14.) but that
several Angels have the administration of the several parts of it. I know no
Decree of the Catholic Church oblidging us to believe this; and therefore I
should not dare to censure any man, who should say the contrary. Yet that
opinion has so much ground in Scripture, that I do not apprehend all Mr. G. B.
can say, to disprove it. Josue 5.15. an Angel is said to be the Captain of the
Lord's host. He seems the same, who Dan. 12.1. is called Michael. And Dan.
10.20. there are others mentioned, viz the Princes of Persia, and Greece. And
why may not these be the Angels, who presided over those Countries? we are sure
that all Angels are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who
shall be beyres of salvation. Heb. 1.14. and The little ones have Angels, who
in Heaven always see the face of God. Mat. 18.10. And that several Angels
ascended, and descended on Jacobs Ladder, Genesis 28.12. was to show they mediated
betwixt God, who was at the top, and man, who lay at the botton of the Ladder.
Now, if particular Angels, have a care, or charge of particular persons: why
may not some others have a larger district, and a more extended charge?

This you will say, is taken from Paganism. And I will answer, the Pagans
took it from the Israelits; not these from them. And it seems very probable,
that when the Arch-Devil, who took the name of Jupiter, had so far prevayled
with men, as to be by them advanced to the throne of God: his next attempt was,
to get his wicked spirits acknowlged for Gouvernours of the World under him,
inlieu of those Blessed spirits, who were the lawful Gouvernours appointed by
God himself. That order of God was not to be abrogated with the old law, of
which it was no part; it being an establishment for the more connaturall
Government of the world, from the beginning, to the end of it.

I know God can govern all things by himself, immediately, without the
assistance, of men, or Angels: that nether the Greatenesse of Business can
mate him, not its number confound him, nor its variety distract him, nor its
intricacy deceive him, nor its obscurity hide it, from his all seeing Eye. That
having Created the whole World with a word, he can govern it so too: yet he
uses Men Romans 13.1.
: and he can call all to belevie in him as he did Saul Act. 9.
yet he employed an Angel to convert the Centurion, Act. 10.
and vouchsafes to be Fellow Laborer, Mat. 16.20.
(...) with Men, whom he honors with that employment: and he can justify
those, whom he calls, with out the concourse of any creature; yet he will have
us use water. and, as to the work of the first day, the creation of all things
visible and invisible, God required the assistance of no creature, so the
whole work of the last day might be performed by him alone; yet he will use the
voice of an Archangel, to proclaim it 1. Thessal. 4.16.
the Angels shall gather together those who are raised again to life Mat.
24.31.
, they shall sever the wicked from the just, and cast them in to the furnac eof
fire Mat. 13.49.50.
. Thus the Law, and Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, the old, and new
Testament, attest this Truth that Angels concur to carrying on the work of
our salvation, and have a commission from God to direct us. Now for beleiving
this Truth. Papists are accused of superstition, and agreeing with Idolaters:
and why we, more then Jacob, or Daniel, Iosue, or Jesus, who taught the same?
Blame them, if you dare; or ablolue us, for their sakes, Whom we follow.

G. B. page 24. This kind of Idolatry was first begun at Babylon, where Ninus
made a statu of Belus: from him all these lesser Gods were called Belim, or
Baalim.

ANSWER. It is not true, that Baal was held to be alesser God: he was adored as
the Supreme God, as you may see, 3. Reg. 18.21.

G. B. ibidem. From this hint, we may guess why the Apostasy of Rome is
shadowed forth under the name of Babylon.

ANS. This is to enlyghten one ^nyght with another: and wash a spot of dirt out
of linen with Ink. You dwell and converse much in obscure places, which is
proper to these who hate the light Iean. 3.20.
because it discovers their deforme features, or more deformed actions. We have
already showed you, that Baal or Bell was held to be the living God, which you
may see also Dan. 14.5. now we never held any man saint to be God, except the
fountain of Sanctity, Christ-Iesus.

CHAPTER X. Of the Intercession of Saints.
G. B. page 25 If we compare with this idolatry the worship of Angels, and
Saints in the Roman Church, we shall find the parity just, and exact.

ANSWER. It is nether just, nor exact, it differs in many things. For. 1. the
Pagans held those men, they honored, to be true Gods; we believe the greatest
Saints to be our follow servants. 2. Even those, who owned a Deity above them,
believed it to do nothing in Humane affairs; Job. 22.14. we believe his
Providence reaching all things. 3. They stopped in those Spirits; we with them
make our addresses to God. And 4. They offered sacrifices to them; we offer
none, but to God.

This objection is not new, it was made against the Catholic Church above
1300. years a go: to which S. Austin answered l. 20. cont. Faustum cap. 21.
and l. 8. de Civit. D. c. 27. in the later place he has these words. Quis
audivit Sacerdotem stantem ad altar, etiam super sanctum Corpus Martyris,
dicere in precibus: Offero tibi sacrificum o Petre, vel Paul, vel Cypriane,
cum apud eorum memorias offeratur Deo. Ista non esse sacrificia Martyrum,
novit, qui novit unum, quod Deo offertur sacrificium Christianorum. Nos itaque
Martyrs nostros divinis honoribus non colimus, nec sacrificia illis offerimus.
Who ever heard a Priest at the Altar say, I offer sacrifice to thee, O Peter,
Paul, or Cyprian, when upon their sepulchers it is offered to God? Those are
not sacrifices of Martyrs as all know who bnow that one sacrifice of Christians
which is there offered to God. Wherefore we do not worship Martyrs with divine
Adorations, nor offer sactifice unto them.

Out of which words you may learn 1. that Martyrs were worshipped in the
primitive Church. 2. their Tombs were turned into Altars. 3. that the
Sacrifice of Christians was offered upon those tombs. and 4. that that
sacrifice was offered only to the living God; and not to the Martyrs. All which
things to this day the Roman Catholic Church does very religiously observe. By
which appears the conformity of the ancient and modern Church in doctrine and
practice. As also the difformity betwixt the ancient Church, and the Protestant
Reformation, in which there is nether Martyrs worshipped, nor their tombs
regarded, nor Altars, nor sacrifice. You still roll stones, which fall on your
own head.

G. B. page 25. There was a Saint appointed for every nation. S. Andrew for
Scotland, S. Geerge for Ingland. S. Denis for France, and many more for other
nations.

ANS. I desire to learn of you, where, when and by what authority this
Appointment was made? Appointing is an Act of Jurisdiction; and so universal a
decree, so religiously obeyed, must be a very solemn Act, and proceed from
the supreme Authority acknowledged on Earth. Which could not be so hushed up,
as that no memory of it should appear. Again: the whole Church on Earth never
pretended any Jurisdiction over Saints in Heaven, nor even over those in
Purgatory, whom she endeavors to ease, or release, not by Judgment; but by
prayer, non absolutione, sed solutione, say divines. So none but God has
Jurisdiction over those Blessed souls: and by him alone that appointement could
be made. Now by what Revelation have you learnt that Act of God? what Catholic
Author authentically recorded it?

G. B. page 27. In the eleventh century, numbering Prayers by Beads began.

ANS. They began only in the thirteenth century.

G. B. page 28. Ten Prayers on the Beads to the virgin; one to God.

ANS. Beads are used several ways: some say Creedes or the great ones, and
either Pater nosters, or Gloria Patris, on the ltitle ones. Against these your
objection has no place. And it has no force against others, who by their
Prayers to the virgin only pray her to pray to God for them.

G. B. page 28. How many more worship her, then do her son?

ANS. Not one: for no body worships her, but for her son's sake, and for the
virtue she received from God by the merit's of her son. So that her worship
ends in her son, or in God. This you have been often told of by others; but
are resolved never to take notice of it, fearing to want this precious
argument. Which is as frivolous, as it is common among your brethren.

To show you the opinion and practice of the ancient Christians, three
authoritys will suffice, one of the Latin, the rest of the Greek Church. The
first is out of S. Austin l. 7. de Baptismo c. 1. Adjuvet nos B. Cyprianus
orationibus suis in istius carnis mortalitate tanquam in caliginosa nube
laborantes. May Blessed S. Cyprian with his prayers assist us, who labor in
this corruptible body, as in a dark cloud.

And S. Gregory Nissen Orat. de laudibus Theodori Martyris. He says: If thy
own Prayers be not efficacions enough, If greater and more powerful
intercession be necessary, call together the quire of thy brethren the Martyrs,
and with them all pray for us. Ad monish Peter, stir up Paul, as also John the
beloved Disciple, that they may be careful of the Churches, they sounded.

S. Chrisost. hom. 1. in These. ante fin. teaches us to pray, and how we should
do it, to Saint (...). Let us nether despise the prayers of Saints, nor quite
rely upon them: least we either become slothful, and careless, or loose
their helps. But let us pray them to pray for us, and let us live virtuously,
that we may attain to that bliss which is promised to those, who love God,
through the grace of our lord I. Christ. No R. Catholic can explicate our
doctrine more fignificantly: seeing he explicates the object ( Saints) the
manner, not to rely upon them solely; The design, to obtain their Prayers
for us. The final end of all: Life everlasting through the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

There is also another intent in honoring Saints to stir up men to imitate
their virtues. Aug. sermon. 47. de Sanctis: Solemnitates Martyrum exhortationes
sunt martyriorum: ut imitari non pigeat, quod celebrare delectat. The Feasts
celebrated in the honor of Martyrs, are exhortations to Martyrdom: for we
ought willingly to imitate, what we celebrate with Joy.

G. B. page 29. A black Roll of the Plagues which Gods powers out on those
ungodly worshippers is. Romans 1.

ANS. There is not a word against the worshippers of Saints; but of Idols, and
Divils: whose wicked example was agreate incentive to vice, (Terentius in
Eunucho) as the good example of Saints is to virtue (Aug. supra) I have not
faith enough to believe all are Saints, where the worship of Saints is
rejected: If none, but the guiltless, may thtow astone, the Adulteress may
escape in London, as well as in Rome.

G. B. page 30. All prostration for worship is declared unlawful by the Angel,
who warned S. John not to do it. Apoc. 19.10.

ANS. Would you have all the world turn Quakers, and never worship any body?
Will you condemn the custom of Ingland in kneeling to our Parents? or to the
Parent of our Country, the King's Majesty? And can you seriously think that
Apostle an Idolater, even when the Holy Ghost so evidently wrought in his
mind, and so fully possessed it? or that being once warned of so foul a crime,
Apoc. 19.10. He should so soon fall again into the same? Apoc. 22 8. That
the Angel should show no great displeature, seeing himself adored as God, as
Paul, and Barnabas did on a like occasion at Lystra? Act. 14.13. But should as
it were compliment with an Idolater? That the Apostle should neverrepent
himself of so heinous a fault, and do Penance for it? or if he did, he
should not record it, that he might as much edify by his Repentance, as he had
scandalized by his fall? all those things surpass my Faith, although (God be
thanked) it contains Transubstantiation.

Wherefore for the singular respect I bear the Apostle, I cannot surmise him
guilty of Idolatry (being confirmed in Grace) especially at the time of that
vision. Nay I see no ground to say, he absolutely sinned in it: but that he
acted out of a principle of Humility, thinking that Respect due from him to the
Angel, as being better in nature, and greater in Grace and Glory, then
himself. And the Angel corrected, that innocent Judgment, byminding him that
they were follow servants, which was a telling him his own dignity, of an
Apostle: which is some considerations is even superior to the of Angels.

G.B. page 31. Speculative people may have distinct Notions of Latria and
Dulia; yet the vulgar in their practice make no difference at all.

Ans. All who have common sense have distinct notions of those worships, although
they understand not those terms, All know they are to obey the Kings: and
their Gouvernours, yet that their obedience to both is not alike, seeing it is
due to the King, 1. Pet. 2.13.
as Supreme; to Governors, as being sent from him, or receiving authority from
him. An Heir knows he must obey his Father, and his Tutour: yet differently,
his Tutous only to comply with his father. Gal. 4.4.
And why should men be so stupid, only in matter of Religion, as not to beable
to discern betwixt the Honor due to God, as the fountain of all good, and
that due to Saints, as partaking of his Perfections. The very prayers, which we
make in our lyturgyes import that distinction: for they are addressed to God,
beseeching him to hear the Prayers, which doubtless the Saints make for us:
or else When we pray to Saints, we desire them to join with ours their Prayers
to God: and when we have obtained our request we desire them to join with us,
in thanks giving to the divine Goodness. 1 Cor. 1.10, 11.
Our trust is in God, that he will deliver us, from temporal and eternal
misery. The Saints also helping by Prayer for us: and for the gift bestowed
upon us by means of many interceding persons, thanks may be given by many on
our behalf.

But were Truth sought for, an end would easily be made of this contentious
dispute betwixt Faith, and Calumny, hy only stating aryght the controversy: we
do all unanimously profess, that God alone does deserve all the adoration,
and worship any creature is capable of, for his own intrinseck, and essential
persection. Yet we think it is his Pleasure, that we should honor not only
those perfections in himself; but that we should (for his sake) reverence those
creatures, whom he makes partakers, of his infinite fulness of Perfection,
according to the manner of their elevations, to partake of those Perfections.
So that God is honored in them all, and all they in him. We honor Kings and
Prelates lawfully establishe as being Partakers of his authority to govern us;
the word of God, as being an explication of his will: The Sacraments as
Channells to conveygh his grace into our souls: Churches, as places designed
for Prayer, to him: Saintson Earth, as living Temples of the Holy Ghost: Saints
in Heaven, as Partakers of his glory. Sot that we may be said to honor God in
all: and by consequence the worship given to them cannot be said to draw from
God.

We likewise profess, that as God is the sole Creator, of all things, so is
he the fountain of all good: and that every Good perfect Gift comes from him
the Father of Lyghts. Jac. 1.13. That nothing in order to eternal life can be
obtained, but of him, through our Lord Jesus Christ. That his Providence
reaches to every thing, that not a hair can etherfall of its self, or be
pulled our of our head by men, or by bad, or good Angels, with out the
permission of God: that all we suffer, and all we enjoy, all good, and all bad,
flow from his omnipotant hand, as effects either of his mercy, or of his
Justice, or of both. So that we fear nothing, but from him, nor hope for any
thing, but from him. To him all our Prayers are directed, even those made to
Saints, which stop not in them, but in their, and our God, and father. This we
believe this we practice this we teach, this we defend. Speak what you can
against this, and you will speak to the purpose, but if you pass this
ungarded, you beat the Air.

Another thing I desire of you, is, not to build upon every little fancy,
although contrary to reason: which is childish always, but deserves amore severe
censure in matters of consequence. Now what can be more fantastical, then
what Mr. Brevint writes, in his Saul and Samuel, that it is Idolatry to pray to
Saints, unless they be within compass to hear us? And who can determine how
far they can hear? Or what Mr. Whitby says in his Discourse concerning
Idolatry page 154. Prayer offered to an invisible being, and not corporcally
present is due only to God. Soc that ablind man may not desire hisneygh bour to
pray for him because all are invisible to him. And Prayers offered to the
Dragon, Dan 14.23. or any Idols, would be no Idolatry, seeing they could see, or
be seen, and were corporeally present. And certainly S. Paul was an Idolater
when as a distance be desired the Romans, to pray for his good Jourey, who were
nether visible to him, nor corporeally present. He follows the custume of our
Reformers, hethrows stones, with out ever regarding where they fall. But what
proof does he bring for his Novelty? The authority of Dio and Martial, both
Pagans, and one of them the most filthy, or beastly rather of all Poets. And
can Mr. Whitby judge their authority competent, to decide a controversy betwixt
Christians, and condemn the public practice of the Catholic Church? Have we
not reason, to except against their being Vmpieres, in this dispute? Yet to do
Mr. Whitby a pleasure, we will admit them, as Judges Arbitrators. What say
them? Dio says Caligula was a God, when prayed to. And Martial says, those, who
pray to Idols, make them Gods. Suppose all this true: what is it to Visibility,
or corpore all present, of which they make no mention, and yet were brought to
prove them? How wretchedly does he plead against us, who first appeals to
incompetent Judges, and secondly to such, as pronounce nothing in his favor!
In mala causa non possunt aliter. Aug.

CHAPTER XI. Pretended Charms, where Of Holy Water, Waxcandles, Agnus Deis,
etc.
G.B. page 32. All the Euchantements used in Heathenisine are nothing if
compared to those of the Roman Church.

ANSWER. Were your Proofs as strong as your Assertions are bold, you would be
the most formidable enemy, that ever we had. But that strength of proofs is
wanting. Those Creatures, which bark Loud, seldom bite hard. In bold
affirmations none more positive then women, and children, and the ignorantest
of scholars: Wise and Learned Man are more wary and reserved: who never are
very positive although they seem sometimes to have reason on their side, because
they are conscious of the uncertainty of their discourses, whose fallacys they
discover in others, and in themselves too. In this place you would easily have
discovered your error, had you looked over your proofs. For what more weak
then those?

G.B. page 32. Can any thing look liker a tharme then the worshipping of God
in an unknown tongue.

ANS. What say you to reading your Inglish service to such Irish, as understand
it not? Is that a charm? for what ever you say in vindication of your common
Prayer, will serve to answer you, in this reproach.

To whom can I compare the men of this generation Iuke 7.31.
? to whom are they like? They are like unto children, pettish children, whom
nether laughing, nor weeping will please. So you are resolved never to be
content with what Papists do. Is their service kept in Latin? It resembles a
Charm. Does it appear in Inglish, as it lately did at London? And Hannibal ad
port as of such a fearful Nature are your brethren, that what everdresse our
service appears in, it fryghtens them: As the sign of the Cross, and the
name of Jesus, did the Divils in Iulian's time.

But are you so much astranger to the world, as not to know, that no living
language co^tinues long the same? that men's phansys of words change, as well,
as those of fashions? That sometimes they lay aside some words, and take in
others, and sometimes retain the word, but alter its sense, by use? If all
this be true: supposea change be made in a vulgar language, do you think the
Church oblidged presently to change her service? If you do? show me the ground
of that obligation. If you can show no command for such a perpetual change in
the Lyturgy: condemn our Church no more, for not doing what you cannot show
she is bound to do.

G.B. page 33. Shall I here tell, of the charming of water, of salt, of
waxcandles, of Roses, Agnus Deis, medalls, and the like.

ANS. It is not easy to conjecture what you blame in these things, nor for what
reason, unless it be, that Papists use them, and that is enough to draw your
censure. Do the things themselves displease you? They are the creatures of
God: and all creatures of God are good, (1. Tim. 4.4.) and nothing ought to be
rejected, which is received with thanks giving: as I assure you Papists use
those things. Or are you offended, that they are blessed? That is unreasonable:
seeing that gives a kind of Sanctity to them. They are sanctified by the word of
God and Prayer, says S. Paul in the place above cited. So that I think the
practice of Blessing several things comes from Apostolical Tradition, and
that it is grounded on that text of S. Paul. And I desire you to fix the time,
when you think they began, and I am persuaded I can show them to be ancienter
then any time since the two firstages determinable, if not all, yet some of
them, so as by those which can be showed from the beginning, the rest by
lawful consequence may be deduced, as not unlawful, or Enchantments. See
Baronius ad an. D. 57.58. and 132. in which places he shows the use of them to
be so ancient, that if you pretend those Blessings to be Popery, you must own
the purest Antiquity to be Papist.

And as for water-Blest by holy men, it is so for from being a diabolical
charm that it is an efficacious remedy against charms of the Divill. You will
find the virtue of it confirmed by miracles in Epiph. ber. 30. When it was used
by Josephus a Count under Constantin the great. In S. Hierome in vita
Hilarionis, that this Saint by use of it destroyed the charms of Marnas (or
Jupiter) adored at Gaza. In Theodoret 1.5. hyst. c. 21. that S. Marcellus
Bishop of Apamea withit chaced, away Jupiter Apamenus who hindered the burning
of his Temple. And in Bid l. 1. hyst. Angl. c. 17. that S. German bishop of
Auxerre with it allayed a Tempest. Which you may see in Baron ad An. D. 132.
what will you say to those things? As the Pharysyes: that all this was done in
the Divills name? That you cannot, for then you must own that one Divill cast
out another, and his Kingdom is divided: which is by our Sayiour pressed against
the Pharisyes as absurd, and incredible: and consequently cannot be said by a
Christian. Nay although you deny all credit to these holy, and learned Men, (which
in a matter of fact is in a manner impudent) yet will you not be quit of this
argument, for at least these fathers thought water, so blessed, a fit instrument
to work those stupendous works: otherwise they would never have believed
those stories, nether would they have related them, without beleiving them.
Hence you may see how different, your Faith is from theirs, who think that a
Charm, which they Judged a Divine Blessing.

CHAPTER XII. Of Ceremonies.
G.B. page 34. The Sacrament all actions are polluted by the superfetation of
so many new whereby they are wholly changed from their original simplicity.

ANSWER. You can allege nothing against our rites, or ceremonies, but will
serve as well against your own: and what you can say in defense of yours
against Presbyterians, will fully satisfy your arguments against ours.

It is agreate folly, to look on Ceremonys as an essential part of our
worship: and it is as great to deny, that (when they are decent, and
significant) they are great helps to it. Men are composed of Body, and soul:
with both we must serve God, and each is a help to the other, when they
concur to worship him. The Body can do nothing without the soul, and all its
worship is mere hypocrisy, and not worthy of acceptance and dead, unless it
be quikned by interior Faith and Charity, which flow from the soul. And this
devotion soon grows cold, if it be not entertained with exterior objects, and
revived by sensible actions; Which fix the Imaginative faculty on the acts of
Religion in hand, and move the Will both of him, who Officiates, and of the
Assistants, to dispositions proportionable to the Rite, by a certain sympathy
betwixt our soul, and body: the soul feeling an inward veneration for God, to
express it, inclines the body to kneeling, prostrations, or the like: and
these increase the interior veneration, when duly, and devoutly made. This is
the sense of mankind: for there never was any People, who met to honor either
God, or Prince, but had some settled ceremonys, with which they expressed
exteriourly their submission to them.

The french Hugonots pared of those they found in the Roman Church, as
superstitions: and the most learned and Religious of that communion, wish their
worship were adorned with some rites, whose want they lament, as being an
undecent nakedness, and an occasion of much Irreligion, and
disrespectfullnesse in giving and receiving the Sacraments themselves. I
believe did you pursue the Profaneness so common in Ingland, to its head,
you will find your want, and neglect of Religious ceremonys, to be the
fountain of it.

In your vindication of the laws, page 170. you say the Church has Power to
determine of things, that may bedone in a variety of ways into one particular
form, such as ptescribing a set form of worship, the ordering the posture in
Sacraments, the habits in worship, etc. which will hedge in, what you reject as
well as what you retain.

G. B. page 34. In Baptism insteade of washing with water in the name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, they have added many adulterated rites.

ANS. These words signify an Abrogation of washing with water, and a
substitution of other rites in lieu of it, which is so far from Truth, and
so black a Calumnye, that I wonder you could advance it, or your Church
permit it: especially seeing the guilt falls on her, for not baptising those who
fall from us to you, as she ought to do, if we omit washing in the name, which
is the essential part of the Sacrament. But you speak against Popery: and
that is enough to justify all untruths, and get alicense for any calumny. As
appears by this very passage.

G. B. page 34. The child must be blown upon then a charm used, for turning
the Divil out of him.

ANS. Blowing upon the child, and exorcising it, were practiced in the purest
times. You will find them in Cyril of Hierus. Catech. 1.
Ambrose l. 1. de Sac. c.s.
, Leo Epist. 4. c. 6.
, Caelestin 1. Epist. 1. ad Episc. Gallia, c. 12.
, and Augustine l. 2. dc pec. orig. cap. 40. and l. 6. cont. Julian. c. s. ubi
ait: Ecclesia filios fidelium nec exorcisaret, nec exufflaret, si non eos de
potestate tenebrarum, and a Principe mortis crueret. Id tu commemor are
timuisti, tanquam ipse ab orb toto exufflandus esses, si huic exufflationi qua
Princeps mundi and a parvulis ejicitur for as, contradicere voluisses.
, The Church, says S. Austin to Julian, would nether exorcise (you call this a
charm) the children of the faithful, nor blow upon them, did she not free
them from the power of the Divil, This thou, Julian, durst not gainsay, fearing
thy self to blown out of the Christian world, if thou had done so. So
esteemed was this Ceremony then, that even heretics durst not speak against
it: which now is reprocht to us as a charm, a superstition by our Reformers.
Not a petty minister, but thinks it a fit object to be laughed at, and to show
his wit, by playing the Bouffoone upon it. By natural Generation all are
borne in sin, children of wrath, slaves of the Devil, and in the Power of
darkness: By supernatural Regeneration, which is Baptism, we are purged
from sin, freed from the bondage of the Devil, adopted children of God,
delivered from the power of darkness and translated into the kingdoe of the
beloved son of God. Coloss. 1, 13. This Faith delivered by the a postles, was
believed by the primitive Chrisstians: and we believe the same: They used this
ceremony to signify this change in the person Baptized; we use it for the same
intent: It was then so venerable, that even Heretics durst not express any
disesteeme of it; now you deride it, and look upon it, as profane, and a
charm. Whence comes this change? from the Ceremony? no, it is the same, it was
then: from the intention of those who use it? no, it is employed to signify the
change from sin to Grace now, as it was then. The change is only in your self,
and your Brethen in Reformation: your Faith is as different from that of the
Primitive, as of the present Church: and that new Faith enclines you to deride
those things, which the Church animated by Apostolical faith, did, and does
esteem.

By this you see how Impious this Lucian like spirit is. How Imprudent it is,
will appear, if you consider how full your Assemblyes are of Libertins, who
deride all things of devotion, even practiced by yourselves, as several
tragically complain of in their sermons. You foster in them this spirit, by
your practice: you plant that tree in their hearts, which produces such sower
fruit, that sets all your teeth an Edge: this serpent is bredde in the bowels
of your reformation, and serpent like it will eat the bowels of her Parent
and kill her, if he not stifled.

G.B. page 35. The Priest at mass, often bows, sometimes he turns to the
People, and gives them a short Barbarian Benediction, then goes on.

ANS. In all this I see nothing ridiculous, but your relating those sacred
rites. How can he express his inward worship of God more clearly, then by
kneeling or Bowing? His office is to be a mediator betwixt God and Man (Heb.
5.1.) and how can that be better represented, then by his humble applications
to God, bowing to him, and lifting up his hands to the throne of Grace (Heb.
4.16.) to receive thence Mercy; and then turn to the People, to power it upon
them. Thus on Jacobs Ladder the Angels appeared going up, and down, up, to
God; down, to Jacob: a type of what Priests do when they officiate.

But he gives them a short Barbariais Benedidiction. That Benediction, which
you, a very civilized person, disdain, as Barbarous, is taken out of
Scripture, the words of an Angel to Gedeon (Judges 6.12) Our Lord be with you,
Dominus vobiscum. Scripture it self cannot escape your censure, if a Papist
use it. Your contempt of the language of Angels in this world, will scarce make
you worthy of their company in the next.

G. B. page. 35. After Adoration, the God is to be devoured by the Priest:
which made the Arabian say Christians were fools, who devoured what they
adored.

ANS. Aworthy authority for a King's chaplain in ordinary, to build upon. Sir:
Christ said: Take and eat: this is my body. Because he says, it is his body,
we adore it: and because he commands us, to take and eat it, we obey, and do
so. But a Turk says: it is foolish. Let it be so: no Turk's opinion is the
rule of my faith. Is it of yours? Is not this Prodigious, that against the
express words of Christ, and the practice of the whole Church, the authority
of a Turk should be brought? nay and preferred before it? and this by a
minister?

G. B. page 38. Rome enioines severer censures on the violation of these
ceremonies then on the greatest transgressions against either the moral, or
positive Laws of God.

ANSWER. I know no motive you can have, for advancing such notorious untruths,
but that of Cicero: Cum semel limits verecundiae transieris, oportet gnaviter
esse impudentem. You have past those bounds: and there I leave you.

CHAPTER XIII. Scripture and the Church. where Of the Resolution. of Faith.
G.B. page 41. Papists call the Scriptures a nose of wax, the sourse of all
Heresies, etc.

ANS. If any Roman Catholic compared Scripture to a nose of wax, it is only
because the letter may be wrested to different senses and made to lookenot that
way which the Holy Ghost designed; but that which men's Passions lead them to.
The world affords not amore convincing instance of this flexibility of
Scriptures, then that of your own Brethren in the late troubles: who brought
it to countenance Sedition, Rebellion, Heresy, Murder, and the horriblest of
all Murders, Parricide, the killing of the father of the Country. Did
Scripture of it self Look toward (or abet) all those crying sins? nosure, it
condemns them formally. It can then be wrested from its own natural sense,
to another meaning contrary to it, which is all that is meant by that phrase.

As for its being a sourse of Heresies, it is not true, that Scriptures, do
found heresies, or that heresyesspring out of them; but that men draw heresies
out of the words of Scriptures, taken in a sense quite contrary to that of the
holy Ghost.

G. B. page 41. Papists will have all the authority of the Scriptures to depend
on the Church. A great difference is to be made betwixt the testimony, of a
witness, and the authority of a Judge. The former is not denied to the Church.

ANS. Here you grant to the Church as much as we desire, provided you own in
this witness such a veracity, as the nature of its Testimony requires, to
bring us to a certain, and undoubted belief of the Scriptures.

The Church never took upon her the title of Judge of Scripture. In her
Councils she places in the middle of the assembly a high Throne as for Christ,
and in it sets the holy Ghospels as his word, according to which she Judges of
the Doctrine controverted. Conc. Calced. Act. 1. So she judges by Scriptures
of the Doctrine of men; but does not Judge of the Scriptures themselves.

At the first admission of a writing into the Canon of Scriptures, the Church
proceeding is of another nature. A writing is brought to her, as written by a man
Divinely assisted, of S. Paul for example to the Romans by Phebe, or to
Philemon, by a fugitive servant Onesimus: nether as a witness give any great
credit to the writing they brought. The Pastors of the flock of Christ
consider the writings examine, the messengers recurre to God by Prayer to demand
the assistance of his Holy Spirit, to know whither he were truly the Author of
the writing exhibited. If after all these means used to discover the Truth,
they remain convinced, the thing was written by inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
they obey it themselve, command obedience to it, as to the word of God, and use
it as a Rule of Faith, and manners. So when an unknown person brings into a
corporation a new Patent, as of the King's Majesty, and presents it to the
Major: He (before he allows the Patentee to act in virtue of it) with his
Brethen considers the writing, the signet, the seal, the style, etc. to know
whither it be counterfitte, or sincere, with a Resolution to obey it himself,
and make others do the same, in case it appear to be truly the Kings. The
Major cannot be said to Judge of the Kings Patents, (to which as a subject he
owes obedience) but only to discern whither an unknown writing be the Kings
Patent, or no.

You say: this makes the authority of Scriptures depend on the Church. Which is
as rational, as if you should say, the authority of the King's Patent depends
on the Major of a petty corporation, because the Patent is exhibited to him,
before it be executed. If any man has so little common sense, as not to
discern the difference betwixt these two Propositions: to Judge of the Kings
Patent: and to Judge whither an unknown writing be the Kings Patent: I am to
seek how to help him.

This authority of the Church, to recommend the Scriptures as an undeniable
witness, occasioned that saying of S. Augustine 1. contu Epist. Fundam. c. 5.
Ego Evangelio non crederem nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae commoveret authoritas,
I would not believe the Ghospel, did not the authority of the Catholic Church
move me to it. Which words are cited by all Catholic controvertists, as
containing an implicit decision of all one controversys: they showing evidently
S. Autstin's discourse against the Manichees, to be just the same, which we use
against the modern Protestants, that as we are heirs of that Faith, which S.
Austin, and the Church of his time defended against its Opposers the Ancient
Heretics, so are we of the titles, by which they enjoyed it, and the arms,
with which they defended it. I will put down the whole discourse of S. Austin
atlarge that so we may the better understand his meaning, and more
convincingly show how much the most understanding of our Adversarys are out of
the way in explicating it.

The thing sought for in that discourse was whither Manichoeus was an Apostle
of Jesus Christ, or no? The Manicheans said he was: the Catholics denied it:
for whose cause S. Austin disputes thus in that place. Quaero quis sit iste
Manichoeus? says he, Respondebitis, Apostolus Christi. Non credo. Evangelium
forte mihi lecturus es, and inde Manichoei personam tentabis asserere. Si ergo
invenires aliquem qui Evangelio nondum credit, quid faceres dicenti tibi, non
credo? Ego vero Evangelio non crederem nisi me Catholicoe Ecclesioe commoveret
authoritas. Quibus ergo obtemperavi dicentibus, credit Evangelio; cur eis non
obtemperem dicentibus mihi: Noli credere Manichoeo? Elige quid velis. Si
dixeris, creed Catholicis, ipsi me monent, ut nullam fidem accommodem vobis,
quapropter non possum illis credens, nisi tibi non credere. Si dixeris, noli
Catholicis credere, non recte facis, per Evangelium me cogere ad Manichoei
fide^, quiaipsi Evangelio Catholicis proedicantibus credidi. Siautem dixeris,
been credidisti Catholicis laudantibus Evangelium, sed non recte credisti
illisvituperantibus Manichoeum: usque adeo me stultum put as, ut nulla reddita
ratione, quod vis credam, quod non vis non credam? quippe multo justius and
cautius facio, si Catholicis, quoniam semel credidi, ad te non transeo, nisi me
non credere jusseris, sed manifestissime and apertissime scire aliquid feceris.
Quocirca si mihirationem redditurus es, dimitte Evangelium. Si ad Evangelium te
tenes, ego ad eos me teneam, quibus proecipientibus, Evangelio credidi: and his
jubentibus tibi omnino non credam. Quod si forte in Evangelio aliquid
manifestissimum de Manichoei Apostolatu invenire potueris, infirmabis mibi
Catholicorum auctoritatem, qui jubent ut tibi non credam. Qua infirmata, nec
Evangelio credere potero, quia per eos illi credideram, ita nihil apud me
valebit quic quid inde protuleris. Quapropter si nihil manifestum de Manichaei
Apostolatu in Evangelio reperitur, Catholicis potius credam, quam tibi. Si aute
inde aliquid manifestum pro Manichaeo legeris, nee illis, nec tibi: illis, quia
de te mihi mentiti sunt, tibi quia eam scriptura^ mihi profers, cui per illos
credidaram qui mihi mentiti sunt, Sed absit ut ego Evangelio non credam. Illi
autem credens non invenio, quomodo possim etiam tibi credere. Haec Aug. ibi. I
demand, says this Saint, who is this Manichaeus? You answer: he is the Apostle
of Christ. I will not take your word for it. What will you say, what means
will you use to persuade me? Perchance you will take the Ghospel, and thence
endeavor to prove unto me the mission of Manichaeus. But what if you meet
with one who does not believe the Ghospel: how would you deal with him? For my
part I would not believe the Ghospel, did not the Authority of the Cat. Church
move me. Whom therefore I obey, in saying believe the Ghospel, should I not
obey in saying believe not Manichaeus? Take your choice, whither you will have
me ely on the Catholics, or not If you say, Belive the Catholics: they warn
me, not to believe you: wherefore beleiving them I must reject you. If you say,
do not believe Catholics! you do not well, endeavoring to bring me to the
Belief in Manichaeus, by the Ghospel, which I received only upon the word of
Catholics, If you say, you do well to believe the Catholics, when they
commend the Ghospel, but you do not well in beleiving them, when they blame
Manichaeus: do you think me such a fool, as without any reason, I should
believe what pleases you, and not believe, what you dislike? Certainly it is
much more reasonable, seeing I must believe the Catholics, that I abandon your
communion, unless you can give me an evident demonstration for the contrary.
Wherefore, if you will allege Reason: lay by the Ghospel. If you retain the
Ghospel, I will stick to those upon whose word I have admitted the Ghospel:
and their authority forces me, to renounce you. Now if perchance you can show
out of the Ghospel any evident proof of Manichaeus his Apostleship, you will
indeed weaken in me the Authority of Catholics, who forbid me to believe you.
But that authority being weakened, I shall no more be able to believe the
Ghospel, which I received by it, and so what soever you prove thence, will
fall to the ground. Therefore, if no clear proof of Manichaeus his mission is
extant in the Ghospel I will rather believe the Catholics, then you. If a
clear proof be found there, I will nether believe the Catholics, nor you:
not them, because they were falls in the opinion they delivered of you; nor you
because you rely on that scripture, which I received on the testimony of those
who have deceived me. Yet god forbid, I should reject the Ghospel. And
beleiving it, I see no possibility of beleiving you. Thus the great Saint.
Which I have cited at large, because the whole discourse, holds against all
heresies, changing only the name of Manichaeus or Manichean, into that which
signifyes the Heresy: as for example into that of Protestant, or Luther.
Moreover it contains a clear confutation, of what has hitherto by the
learnedest of our adversarys been said in answer to it.

The first interpretation of this place, is delivered by W.L. in his relation
of a conference, page 81. some of your o^ne, says he, will not endure it should
be understoode, save of the Church in the time of the Apostles only. And then
cites Ockam Dial. p. 1. l, 1. c. 4. Where he has not one word of that. But
says Mr. Stillingf. in his rational account page 198. the words are in
Durandus l. 3. insent. d. 24. q. 1. q 9. where he says: Intelligitur solum de
Ecclesia, quae fuit tempore Apostolorum. It is understood only of the Church
which was in time of the Apostles.

The same Author borrows another explication of Biel lect. 2. in Can. Missae,
that the words are to be understood of the Church in general, as it contains
the first, and later ages, A tempore Christi and Apostolorum, etc. And to this
he, sticks for he adds: And so does S. August. take Eccles. contra Fund. And
D. Stillingf. p. 198. 199. approves the same, and confirms it, out of Gerson,
and Driedo.

Nether of these two explications can stand with the text: as appears out of
those words: Quibus obtemperavi dicentibus, Credit Evangelio: cur eis non
obtemperem dicentibus mihi, noli credere Manichaeo. Whom I obeyed in saying,
Believe the Ghospel, should I not obey in saying, do not believe Manichaeus?
Hence I frame this argument: S. Austin professes he received the Ghospel upon
the credit of that Church, which condemned Manichaeus: but that Church, which
condemned Manichaeus, was that of his time, and not that of the Apostles, who
never mentioned Manichaeus: ergo the Church, on whose word he received the
Ghospel, was that of his time, and not that of the Apostles. When therefore E.
S. page 220. says: It is plain, S. Austin means not the Judgment of the
present Church; but of the Catholic Church, as taking in all ages, and places,
he evidently contradicts the very text of S. Ausstin: whence I conclude that
either he speaks against his conscience, which I am unwilling to believe; or
else (which is more excusable) that he had not read the text, which he
understakes to explicate.

A third, and yet more improbable, explication is delivered by W.L. page 82. He
speaks it either of Novices, or doubters in the Faith, or else of such as were
in part Infidels, Mr. Fisher the Jesuit, at the conference would needs have it,
that S. Austinspake it even of the faithful: which I cannot yet think: For he
speaks to the Manichees, and they had a great part of the Infidel in them.
And the words immediately before these, are: If thou should find one, qui
Evangelio non credit, which did not believe the Ghospel, what would thou do
to make him believe? Thus W. L.

This is like wise plainly falls: for S. Austin was nether a Novice, nor a
doubter in the faith, nor in part an infidel, when he writ that Book; for he
writ it after he was made Bishop, as you may see l. 2. retract. c. 2. But he
speaks of himself, and describes the ground of his own faith: ergo he does
not speak of Novices, Doubters, or half Infidels: nor describes the ground of
their fath; but of those who are firm beleivers. I prove that S. Austin
speaks of his own, Faith and shows the ground, on which it relied. For first,
he says, I would not believe the Ghospel, without the authority of Catholics
commending them. Secondly he says: If you weaken the authority of Catholics I
will reject the Ghospel. This I believe Mr. Stillingf, saw, and therefore said
page 220. If you extend this beyond Novices, and weaklings, I shall not oppose
you in it. And I cannot think, that W.L. had read that place, at least with
attention, when he writ, he could not think, S. Austin spoke of the faithful,

Stillingf. page 220. Nether you, nor any Catholic Author is able to prove
that S. Austin by these words ever dreamt of any infallible authority in the
present Church. Answer: seeing S. Austin expressly says, he would renounce the
Ghospel, if the authority of Catholics were weakened in him by discovering
they had delivered any one lie, he must either think them exempt from all
possibility of lying, or else he adhered very loosely to the Ghospel. I hope
E.S. will not assert the later part: wherefore he must grant, that S. Austin
thought the Church free from all possibility of error. Let us return to Mr.
G. B.

G. B. page 43. Christ's prophetic office is invaded by the pretense of the
Churches Infallibility in expounding Scriptures. And why, Good Sir, should the
infallibility in expounding Scriptures be an invasion of the prophetic office
of Christ, seeing infallibility in writing them, was no such thing? Certainly it
is more to compose a writing them to understand it: as many can understand
Cicero's speech pro Milone, who cannot compose such an one. And your old women
pretend to understand several parts of Scripture, which yet I think will
scarce undertake to pen the like.

By this, Say you, the whole anthority is devolved on the Church. No more, then
it was on S. John, when he writ his Ghospel, or S. Paul composing his Epistles.
Nor so much nether seeing these were so assisted, as to compose Holy Scripture;
when the Church only pretends to expound the word of God. How does such an
assistance of the divine Spirit derogate from the infallibility of God, from
which it is derived?

But her exposition must be admitted, say you, though contrary to the sense. As
if Infallibility did not exclude all possibility of such a wrested exposition!
The infallibility of the Church may slyght your attempts, whilst you are armed
only with such straws. We have seen you arguments: Let us see your Answers to
ours.

G. B. page 44. The Gates of Hell not prevailing against the Church, Mat.
16.18. Proves not the pretense of infallibility. Why not, learned Sir? Not a
word for that: but as if you had forgotten what you were about, your fall upon
the Inglish Translation of that text, which you say, deserres amendment, And I
will leave you, to be taught better manners by your? fellow Ministers: or your
mother the kirk of Scotland.

G. B. page 45 The spirit leading into all truth, Joan. 16.13. advances not the
cause a whit, since that promise relates to all beleivers. Here is another
assertion without proof, as if we were bound to take your word. Those words
are part of the sermon after the last supper, at which only the Apostles were
present: and which was directed immediately to them. You should then give some
reason why they relate to all beleivers, although spoken to only the Apostles.

G. B. The Church's being built on the Rock, Peter, proves nothing for a
series of Bishops of Rome: seeing the other Apostles were also foundations.

ANS. If it proves all Bishops together Infallible, firm in faith, as a Rock,
it confounds your Reformation, which is condemned by them all.

G. B. The keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16.19. import no more, then
that Peter was to open the Ghospel. When you shall give in a proof, we will
consider it. Till then I will believe not you; but Christ, who (...) adds the
office of the Keys, to open, and shut, not the Ghospel; but Heaven, by loosing,
and binding sins.

G. B. page 46. It is certain, that vice, as well as errpr os destrictove of
Religion. If then there be no authority for repressing of vice, but that same
of the discipline of the Church, it is not incongruous there be no other
authority, for suppressing of error but that same of the discipline of the
Church.

ANS. It is certain, that both in the old and new law several persons have
been secured against Error who were subject to sin. S. Peter was truly
reprehensible Gal. 2.11.
, for a thing he did; not for any thing he writ, or preached. The same of David,
of Solomon, etc. For this reason our Blessed Savior commanded Mat. 23.23.
all to follow the Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisys, because they sat on
the chair of Moses; but not their example. So your question why God should
provide more against error in faith, then against vice in manners, can find no
place amongst Catholics, who are taught to adore God's holy will, even when
they understand it not, and to Bring 2. Cor. 10.5.
into captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ. To you, who think it
absurd to deny a man the use of his Reason in judging and discerning all
things, and submit even Divinely revealed Truths to its Tribunal, to you, I
say we leave the search of those depths, and discovery of those mysterys.

G. B. page 48. I could prove from history that general Councills have erred,
that Popes have been heretics.

ANSWER. By what you have done, we may guess what you can do. Your learning
appears by your writings, as also your Judgment in using it. We have seen
many proofs of it, and shall see more, in this small tract. I will add to
them one instance out of another work of yours, observations on the 1. Canon of
the Apostles page 66. you prove, that anciently Priests could administer the
Sacrament of Confirmation, out of the first Canon of the first Council of
Orange When it is evident that that canon does not give Priests Power to
administer the Sacrament of Confirmation; but commands them, to use Chrisme in
Baptism: since when every Divine of the first year knows that vertical
Chrismation has been a ceremony of that first, and myterious Sacrament. Such
mistakes, as these, are incident to such as are bredde in a congregation, where
Ceremonies are abrogated.

G. B. page 49. We are not the servants of men, nor bound to their Authority,
for none can be a Judge, but where he has power totry and to coerse. Now none
but God can search our hearts, so none, but he, can be Judge.

ANS. The Independent, and Quaker, and all who endure with regrate Prince and
Prelate, canon, and civil law, under pretense of Evangelicall Liberty, will
thank you for this.

CHAPTER XIV. Of Merits.
G. B. page 50. If any have derogated from the value of the satisfaction of
that Lamb of God, they have offered the utmost indignity to the highest love,
and committed the crime of the greatest ingratitude imaginable.

ANSWER. Transeat totum, what then?

G. B. Who would requite the most unconcevable love, with such a sacrilegious
attempt?

ANS. None that I know of. But, say you, how guilty are they of this, who would
set the ments, and works of men, in an equality with the Blood of God? ANS. I
know none such. If you do, point them out, for Punishment. No Catholic is
concerned in them.

G. B. page 51. It is true, this doctrine of merit is so explained by some of
that Church, that there remains no ground of quarelling it; except for the
Term's sake, which is indeed odious, and improper though early used by the
ancients in an innocent sense. But many of that Church acknowledge there can be
no obligation on God, by our works, but that which his own promise binds upon
him.

ANS. Here is one of the malicious slyghts, of you and your Brethren, when you
cannot with any color accuse the doctrine of our Church, to pretend it is only
the doctrine of some few persons; that you may persuade your Disciples, the
Generality of Catholics hold the contrary. The Council of Trent contains what
all Catholics subscribe to: and this is the doctrine of that Council in this
point. Council. Trid s. 6. c. 16. Been operantibus usque in finem, and in Deo
sperantibus proponenda est vita aeterna, and tanquam gratia filiis Dei per
Christum Iesum misericorditer promissa; and tanquam merces ex ipsius Dei
promissione bonis ipsorum operibus, and meritis fideliter reddenda. To those,
who persever in good works even to the end of this life, and who hope in God,
life everlasting is proposed, both as Grace mercyfully promised to the adopted
children of God through Jesus Christ our Lord: as als as a Reward due, in virtue
of the promise of God, to their good works, and merits. What can you say
against this doctrine? Is it not that very doctrine, which you say is Innocent,
and that there is no ground of quarrelling it? we do not believe the greatest
good we can produce, can bind God. Without, 1. his own Promise, 2. the merits
of Christ: why may not this suffice you?

But the term is odious, say you. Why so? seeing by ancient Fathers, and
modern Divines, by the primitive, and present Church, it is used in an
innocent sense why may not the Catholic Church using that word in a good
sense, qualify the odium, and correct it? what if not only in fathers, or
Councills, but inscripture it self that term be found (at least equivalently?)
will not that reconcile you to this term? Now so it is: for Merit, and Reward
are correlatives Romans 11.6.
: which cannot be separated, according to Philosophy. Now a Reward is promised
in Scripture Mat. 5.12.
to those, who are reviled, and persecuted, and calumniated (as we are by you,
and your Brethren, in such sly malignant hints) wherefore we do merit in
suffering such calumnies. And S. Paul (c) assures a Reward was due to him self
for preaching willingly. His willingly preaching was then meritorious.

When the Reader saw those Tragical Declamations, no doubt but he expected
nolesse then some doctrine destructive of Christianity, and that Religion lay
gasping. Parturiunt montes, natus est ridiculus mus. All the fryght you were in
was raised from one word: which you your self say has an Innocent sense. And
we say that that very sense is what the R. Caholick Church intends by it. So
you have a remedy for your groundless apprehension.

CHAPTER XV. Of temporal Punishment due to sin forgiven.
G.B. page 54. Add the distinction of the temporary and eternal punishment
sin deserves: the later is removed by the Blood of Christ, the former must be
expiated by our selves, either by sufferings in this life, or in Purgatory.

ANSWER. We hold indeed a temporal pain due to sin, after it is remitted,
sometimes; not always. For when sin is remitted by Baptism, or by a perfect
Act of Contrition, we believe all pain to be remitted with the sin. But not
ordinarily. And for this reason the Church at all times made a difference
betwixt those, whose sins were expiated by the Sacrament of Baptism, and of
Penance: for she never imposed any Penal works on baptized persons: and
never omitted imposing them on Penitents. Which short bint, points out such a
cloud of witnesses testifying this Truth, that it covers the whole face of the
primitive Church, and so covers it, as to discover its doctrine to be the same
with ours.

Nothing can be more clear to confirm this Catholic doctrine, then that a
temporal penalty was inflicted on David 2. Reg. 12.14.
for that sin, which upon his crying Peccavi, had been removed, putaway, or
forgiven. A Penalty therefore or Penance may be inflicted for a sin forgiven,
and consequently a pain is due sometimes to it.

Indeed were it not so, why did our fore fathers impose large Pennances, after
by virtue of the keys the sins were remitted? why do you blame us, for
imposing small Pennances, when there is, as you say here, none at all due?

G. B. page 54. This is contrary to the value we set on the blood of Christ.
Ephesians. 2.15.16. By Christ Peace is made, we are reconciled to God, he presents
us to the Father without spot, wrinkle, etc which declare how plenary his
satisfaction was, nothing being left undone by him, for removing the guilt of
sin. Thus you. As if nothing could be required on man's side, in order to apply
the satisfaction of Christ, without derogating from its plenitude! Christ
satisfaction was plenary: so was his Prayer, his Grief, his suffering. Yet we
must pray for our selves Mat. 6.12.
, and for one another Iac. 5.16.
although he prayed for us all. And we must be sorry for our sins, the whole
course of the Gospel requires it, of us: and we must suffer for, and with
him. For as in order of nature that action of the Prime cause, by which it
concurs with creatures, is sufficient of it self to produce the whole effect,
yet nothing is done, without the concourse of secondary causes, which apply the
action of the first: so the satisfaction of Christ is sufficient for all, yet
does not remit our sins actually, without it be applied to us, either by
Baptism, or Penitential works. And the necessity of this application by
faith, is owned by all your Reformers: And if this is consistent with that
fulness, why not application by Faith, and Charity?

You say: This is a comfortless Doctrine. ANS. It is our duty to take the
doctrine of Christ as we find it in holy writ, and to teach others what we take
thence, being assured, that whither it be, or be not confortable, it is
wholesome unto everlasting life. And such is that Doctrine, which makes us
punish in our selves our offenses, and by that means prevent those punishments
which God would otherwise inflict upon us: it makes us work our salvation
Philip. 2.12.
with fear, and trembling: it causes sorrow according to God, which brings
forth Penance unto 2. cor. 7.10.
salvation, which is stable. It is a Doctrine proportioned to the present state
of man, this being a state of Bannishment, and Penance, where fear, and
trembling, and sighs, and tears, and fasting, and Prayer, and watches, are
his lot, and must ground his security as to the maine chance, which is the only
thing can give him real, and substanciall comfort, in this vale of miseryes.
He must conform to his pattern Jesus suffering, and follow his 1. Pet. 2.21.
foot steps. He carried his Cross, and invite us to take up ours, and follow
him Mat. 16.24.
; but does not advise us to leave it, as if his carrying his own, were
sufficient for both him, and us. In fine: not withstanding all the suffering, of
Christ for us, we must here sow with tears Psalm. 125.6.
if we will there reap with Joy. Christ him self was to suffer Luc. 24.26.
, and so to enter into his Glory. And We must suffer with him 2. Tim. 2.12.
if we expect to raygne with him 2. Tim. 2.12.
. This, this is the doctrine of Christ, and the spirit of the Ghospel: which
teachs us to hope in the merits of Christ; but not to neglect good works: it
shows us, not to presume on his Satisfaction, nor despair of his Mercy: to
walk in hope of his goodness, and fear of our own faults, and frailtyes: to
be thanckfull, for the merits of Christ, which give all their value to ours,
which of themselves are nothing. In fine, so to honor the fulness of our
Redemption, as (not to foster negligence in our selves, but) to stir up our
selves to imitate our Redeemer in doing, and suffering: that so we might be
steadfast, and immovable in good 1. Cor. 25.58.
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing, that our labor is not in vain.

CHAPTER XVI. Of Purgatory.
G. B. p. 55. begins to treat of Purgatory, and does it so lightly, as if he
feared to burn his fingers. Yet if he shows less Reading, he shows more
Cunning, then his Brethren, E.S. or W.L. who give greater advantages to an
Adversary, by fixing a time for the kindling of that Purging fire, which was
lyghted long before any determinate time they can fix upon Mr. Stillingf. page
654. Not one of the fathers affirmed your doctrine of Purgatory, before Gregory
I. Yet W. L. allows it a much greater antiquity, page 353. We can find, says
he, a beginning of this doctrine, and a Beginner too, namely Origin. Thus they
differ amongt themselves and as little agree each with himself: for. p. 348. W.
L. had said Scarce any father within the first three hundred years, ever
thought of it. Which assertion is contradiction, to what he says, of Origen's
being the Beginner of it, and it is moreover very rash: for does he think, that
all the fathers of the first three ages writ down all their thoughts? or that
all they writ is preserved till our days? or that he has seen all that is so
preserved? or remembers all that he has ever seen? But let us leave these men
to reconcile together their own thoughts which will be no small, nor short
labor: And examine the thing it self. and to come to it, I pass over several
slips of our adversarys, v.c. Will Lawd page 348. says, that the first
Definition of Purgatory to believed as a divine truth, was made by the Council
of Florence. In which he is mistaken: for Benedict XII. long before that, had
defined the same.

I prove, that the primitive Church believed a Purgatory in the most pure
times, out of the testimony of three Fathers, S. Hilary, S. Gregory Nissen, and
S. Austin.

S. Hilary Hill. in ps. 118.20.
Ille indefessus ignis obeundus est, subeunda sunt illa expia^da a peccatis
animae supplicia. That restless fire is to be endured: and those punishments
to be borne, which may purge our soul from sins.

S. Greg. Nissen. Greg. orat. de mortliis.
as cited by W. L. p. 351, Men must be purged either by Prayers, or by the
furnace of Purgatory fire after this life. Again. A man cannot be partaker of
the divine nature unless the purging fire does take a way the stains, that
are in his soul. Again. After this life, a Purgatory fire takes away the
blots, and propensity to evil. W. L. considering these words, ingenuously
confesses, they seem plain.

Yet he holds out one buckler against these two Arrows drawn out of the
quivers of those fathers: that they speak of a Purgation of sins: and in the
Roman Church we are taught to believe only a Purgation of the pain due to sins
already forgiven. Now this avayles little, 1. because the debt of pain may be,
and often is taken for sin, (on which it is grounded) metonimice. 2. He seems
not to understand our doctrine: for there is no definition of our church
oblidging us to believe that there remain no venial sins in Purgatory. Hence
Dr. Kellison Kellis. in 3. p. tom. 2. p. 611.
late President of the Inglish College of Doway, proves Purgatory to be
prepared first for those who dye with only venial sins. Secondly for those who
dye without any sin but only without having satisfied fully for the pains due
to sins forgive^. The same reasons are alleged by D. Silvius Sylvius in 3. p.
Suppl. q. 100. p. 350.
where he treates the same question. And before these Benedict us XII. in his
Decree. Benedict us Deus, has these words: Decernimus animas decedentes cum
veniali aliquo peccato, purgari post mortem, and post purgationem, ante
resumptionem suorum corporum, and judicium generale, post Ascensionem Christi
Domini, fuisse, esse, and futuras esse in caelo. We do declare, that souls
dying in venial sin beind purged after their death, before the general
Resurrection are translated to Heaven. Which Decree you many find in magno
Bullario, and in Alphons. de Castro verbo Beatitudo. You see fir, that there is
nothing in the Purgatory described by those Saints inconsistent, with what we
are tought to believe of ours. So W. L. or his squire E. S. must study for
another evasion.

W. L. cites indeed the Council of Florence to confirm his answer. But that
place helps only to convince the world how perfunctoriously he read, and
inconsiderately framed his Judgment, upon reading: for in the place cited by
him, the Council speaks of souls dying in the state of Grace, or Charity, si
in Charitate decesserint: But of their not having any venial sins, not one
word, unless he thinks that all souls in Grace are free from venial sins,
which will be another proof of his abilityes in Divinity.

My next proof is taken from S. Augustine in Enchir. cap. 110. Neque negandum
est, defunctorum animas pietate suorum viventium relevari, cum pro illis
sacrificium mediatoris offertur, vel Eleemosynae in Ecclesia fiunt, sed iis
haec prosunt, qui cum viverent, ut haec sibi postea prodesse possent,
meruerunt. Est enim quidam vivendi modus nec tam bonus, ut non requirat ista
post mortem, nec tam malus, ut ei non prosint ista post mortem. Est vero talis
in bono, ut ista non requirat, and est rursus talis in malo, ut nec his valeat,
cum ex hac vita transierit, adjuvari. Similia habentur l. 21. de Civ. Dei c.
24. It ought not to be denied, that souls departed are eased by the Piety of
their surviving friends, When the Sacrifice of our Mediator is offered, for
them, or alms given in the Church. But those are releived by these helps,
wholived so as to deserve the benefit of them after their death: for there is
a kind of life nether so good, as not to need them, nor so bad, as not to
receive ease by them. There is another so good, as not to want them, and a
third so bad as to be incapable of help, even from them. Thus S. Austin.

Where you see, he distinguishes three places for the souls departed, as
clearly, as Bellarmin, or the Council of Trent. One of those so good, as not
to need help by the suffrages of the Church (such are the Blessed souls in
Heaven) Another so bad, as to be incapable or unworthy of releife by the
suffrages, (such are the wretched souls in Hell) A third needing them, and
incapable of Ease from them (such are souls in Purgatory.)

You see secondly clear mention of the Sacrifice of our Mediator, offered by
the Church in his days. What is this, but our mass? which you may find again
l. 10. de Civ. Dei c. 20.

You see thirdly, this sacrifice offered for the Dead. And lastly you see,
Alms given in the Church for the releife, and ease of deceased friends: How
many points of our Reformers Catechism does this one place confute! Truly one
may think, either that they invented these doctrines to spite S. Austin, or that
this great Saint writ that Chapter with a Prophetic spirit to convince the
world that your sentiments are no less opposite to the ancient, then to the
modern Church, which both agree in holding out the same tenets in Faith.

E. Still. page 642. S. Austin delivers his Judgment with such fear, and
hisitancy, that any me may easily see, that he was far from making it an
article of Faith. He may as well say, that the Council of Trent spoke with
hesitancy. He adds: That in S. Austin's time, many favored Origenes his
opinion, of the final salvation of all, at least who dyed in the Communion of
the Church. But what is this to S. Austin who condemns that heretical opinion
as he says, and may be seen l. 21. de Civ. Dei c. 24. and in the whole book,
de fide and operibus.

But says E. S. Augustine speaks doubtfully l. de fide and operibus cap. 16.
and Enchir. cap. 69. But he should have taken notice, that he speaks in those
places not of Purgatory in it self; but of a particular pain, which we, no
less then he, doubt of. The matter he treates Enchir. c. 68. is the Grief,
which men feel fer the loss of such things, which they Loved inordinately,
and by that means offended God although their love to creatures, were not so
great as to withdraw them from the foundation, Christ. Vrit eum rerum dolor,
quas dilexcrat amissarum; sed non subvertit fundamenti stabilitate munitum.
Such a man is burnt, and tormented with the loss of those things, which he
loved: yet he is not quite consumed because the foundation stands fast. viz his
love to Christ, whom he would stick to, although with loss of other things.
Then follows, c. 69. where he doubts whither such a purging fire, or pain as
this is, shall accompagny them in the next world, that is, whither souls
departed retain any disorderly affection to their possessions in this world,
by reason of which, the want of them may be a torment to them, and, as it were,
burn them. In alike manner l. de fide and operibus, cap. 16. Sive ergo in hac
vita tantum, homines ista patiuntur, says he, sive post hanc vitam talia quadam
judicia subsequuntur. Whither men suffer such things only in this life, or the
same rorments accompagny them into the next world. Which is a thing modern
Catholics as much doubt of, as S. Austin: yet he, as well as we might believe
most certainly, what he so positively affirmed in his Manual, chap. CX.

In vain therefore, does E. Still. allege p. 653. the blotting out of those
words. Constat animas post hanc vitam purgari, It is evident that souls are
purged after this life. There is enough left in S. Austin's undoubted works to
confute his error. So the success of that reformer was like that of Marcion
with his sponge, who blotted out some parts of Scripture, yet what remained
confuted his heresy.

As for holy Scripture, I think the argument which S. Austin uses l. 21. de
Civ. Dei cap. 23. very convincing for Purgatory. It is taken out of the words
of our Savior Mathaei 12.32. It shall be forgive^ nether in this world nor in
the next. Whence it follows, that some sins are forgiin the next world. Neque
enim de quibusdam veraciter diceretur, quod non eis remittatur, neque in hoc
saeculo, neque in futuro saeculo, nisi essent, quibus etsi non in isto, tamen
remittetur in futuro, Aug. l. 21. de Civit. Dei, cap. 24. Now to Mr. G. B.

G.B. p. 55. For Purgatory the proof from Scripture was only drawn from one
wrested place of the Apostle Paul 1. Cor. 3.12.13.14.15.

ANS. How can you say this, when amongst the ancients, S. Austin uses another
text, as we have just now seen. And Bellarmin has nineteen texts of
Scripture, as your Patriark W.L. will tell you, p. 353.?

G. B. The Apostles words contain only a Proverbiall form of speech, to
express the risque they run. The Apostle speaks not only of arisque, or
hazard; but of an effectual loss. He shall fuffer loss, Says he verse 15.

G. B. p. 55. Many visions, and apparitions were vouched for the proof of
Purgatory

ANS. I never saw any vouched for that intent: I am sure nether the Council of
Trent, nor that of Florence, nor Benedict. XII. vouched any such thing for that
intent.

I think not our divine Faith much concerned in asserting the Truth of any
purely humane hystory: and I think most apparitions to be such. Yet because
several Protestants, as well as all Atheists, utterly reject all such
relations, I desire them to read S. Austin l. de Cura pro mortuis, cap. 10.
where he says it would be an Impudence to deny them all. Impudenter venire
videbimur, si haec falsa esse responderimus. And in his 16. chap. he says, he
had learnt non incertis rumoribus, sed testibus certis: not from uncertain
rumors; but from undoubted withnesses, that S. Faelix had appeared both to
Citizens, and strangers, during the siege of Nola.

Had you the same Faith, which was then in the Church, you would believe these
things: your denying them, which the Primitive Church, and S. Austin believed,
shows you to be anitmted with a different Faith.

CHAPTER XVII. Priestly Absolution.
G.B. page 60. Another Art. for detracting from the value of Christ death, is
the Preistly Absolution.

ANSWER. This objection is no product of your own wit, you may find it, and
the Authors of it together with an Answer to, in S. Ambrose l. 1. de Poen. c.
2. Aiunt Novatianise Domino defer reverentiam, cui soli remittendorum
criminum potestatem reservant. Imo melli majorem injuriam faciunt quam qui
volunt ejus mandata rescindere. Nam cum ipse in Evangelio dixerit, quaecumque
ligaveritis: quis est qui enm magis honorat, utrum qui mandatis ejus
obtemperat, an qui resistit? Ecclesia in utroque servat obedientiam, ut
peccatum and alliget, and relaxet. The Novatians, says this Saint, pretend to
honor God, by reserving to him alone the power of forgiving sins. But really
none are more injurious to him, (or wrong him more) then those who break his
orders. For whereas he in the Ghospel said whose sins soever you bind. Who
honors God more, he who obeys his commands, by using that power; or he who
resists them? Now the Church obeys both the commands, to bind, and loose sins,
effectually binding, and loosing them. Thus S. Ambrose. You see, Sir, that our
Doctrine now was that of the Church in S. Ambrose's time: that the Novatians
held your doctrine, and made use of the same pretext as you do, to defend
their doctrine. The Church, for which S. Ambrose pleades, was Catholic: so
must we be in this, seeing our doctrine is the same with theirs. The Novatians
in this were Heretics: what are you?

Indeed the words, with which our B. Savior Mat. 16.18.
first promised, secondly Joan. 20.22.23.
actually communicated that power to forgive, or retain sins, are so
express, that it is the greatest disrespect imaginable so to wrest them, as
they must, to draw them from their natural sense. I desire you, to show your
art and invent us some speech which in so few words, shall more clearly
express this sense, the Catholic Church understands them in.

And as for Fathers, see S. Cyprian in many places, S. Basil. qq. brev. q. 288.
S Leo epist. 91. ad Theodorum, Greg. hom. 26. in Evang. Cyr. Alex. lib. 12. in
Joan. but above all S. Chrysostom l. 3. de Sacerd. c. 5. tom. 3. edit. Savell.
page 16. (...) (...). Those who dwell on earth, says he, are enabled to
dispense the things in Heaven. To them a Power is given, which nether Angels,
nor Archangels enjoy: for to these it was never said, what you shall bind.
Earthly Princes have power to cast into prison, but their Power is restrained
to Bodies only. Where as the bond, we speak of, reaches the soul, and Heaven
it self, In so much as what Priests do below, God ratifyes above: and the lord
confirms the sentence of the servant. And what is this, but to have put into
their hands all Power to dispose of Heaven? whose sins you forgive, are
forgiven: and whose sins you retain, are retained. What Power can be greater
then this? God the Father has given all Power to Judge to the son: and the son
has communicated all that same Power to Priests. Thus this Glorious Saint.

You see, sir, the grounds of our belief in this point: the clear words of
our Lord Joan. 20.23.
whose soever sins you remit, they are remitted unto them. You see the Fathers,
and the Primitive Church explicating those words, as we do: you see Novatians
were held for Heretics for understanding those words otherwise. What ground
have you to deny a Truth delivered by Christ to the Apostles, and from them
handed down to us?

G. B. page 62. It was counted a Blasphemy in Christ, when he said, thy sins
are forgiven thee, which shows it to be blasphemy in all others, it being an
invasion of his Prerogative.

ANS. Here we have a blasphemous accusation of the Scribes against
Jesus Christ, opposed against the clear words of Christ, and the meaning of
the whole Church? Nay their words although full of malice, and convinced of
falsehood by a miracle, are preferred before those of Christ as being made a Rule
by which his must be interpreted? Thus under-pretence of asserting the
authority of Christ, you overthro wit, as your Brethren ruined their
souveraigne, under pretense of making him a glorious King

But, say you, Christ cleared himself from the Power was committed to the son
of man to forgive sins. ANS. That same Power given by the son of man to the
Apostles, and their successors, does clear us.

G. B. page 61. After a sinner has gone over his sins without any sign of
remorse, and told them to a Priest, he enjoins a Penance, and without waiting
that they obey it, he says, I absolve thee and after this they judge them
selves fully cleansed from sins.

ANS. Were there Benefices, or perferments established for such as invent
stories without any ground, I know none in a fayrer way to them, then your
self. You cannot but know, that we hold Contrition to be an essential part of
the Sacrament and that he who confesses without sorrow, is so far from
obtaining Pardon for the the sins past, that we judge him guilty of a new
sacrilege. Consider a little what you say, if not for conscience, and the
fear of God, (which you seem not to regard) as least for your credit.

G. B. page 61.62. What can take off more from the value of the Death of
Christ, then to believe it in the power of a Priest to absolve from sin?

ANS. That cannot take from the value of that sacred Passion, upon which it is
built. By Baptism sins are remitted, without derogating from the value of the
death of Christ. The same of Absolution. Because in both these Sacraments, the
merits of the Passion, are applied to cleanse our souls in such a manner, as
Christ, has ordained and by authority derived from him. In civil matters, as
no man can lawfully take upon himself the authority and exercise the function
of a Judge, without a commission from the King. So it is no less unlawful to
refuse due obedience to Judges Lawfully commissionated. We have a lawful
commission in the Ghospel: and we stick to that, till wet see better grounds,
to vacate it, then such frivolous reasons, as you bring.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of Pennances, Fasting, Prayer, and Pilgrimages.
G. B. page 62. Add the soorne put on Religion, by the Pennances enjoined for
sin: abstaining from flesh, Pattering over Prayers, repeating the Penitential
Psalms, going to such Churchs and Altars, with other ridiculous observances
like these, which cannot but kill the vitalls of true Religion. And who can have
any sad apprehensions of sin, who is taught such an easy way of escaping
punishment.

ANSWER. Experience shows us whither practice preserves more the vitals of
Religion, yours, or ours: and I am persuaded, I shall have occasion before we
part, to give you a prospect not very pleasing of the piety of your Proselits:
who, as S. Paul said 2. Tim. 3.13. Proficiunt in pejus, have waxed worse and
worse, ever since your Brethren have had the direction of them. But what are
these Observances, which move you to laughter? Fastings, Prayers, and
Pilgrimages: so much recommended, and even commanded in both old, and new law,
sometimes in scripture, often in Councils, and Fathers: and confirmed by the
practice of the Church through all ages. These things seem ridiculous to this
Democritus, a new man, as much a stranger to true Piety, as his Education has
been to Prayers, Fasting, and Pilgrimages, as far as appears by his works.
That he should thus deride all Penitential works designed either to punish our
past offenses, or prevent those to come: to reconcile us to our Creator, or
rivette us to him: when S. Paul, the chosen vessel, the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, the Doctor of the Gentiles separated from his mothers womb, and called
unto Grace, Galat. 1.15.
when he I say, chastised his Body, and brought it under subjection 1. Cor.
9.27.
least preaching to others, he became himself a Reprobate. What means did he
use for his security to mortify his body, but those, this good man Counts
Ridiculous Observa^ces, viz, Fasting and Prayer, and the like? we are sure he
was animated with the Spirit of God: what Spirit animates you?

SECTION I. Fasting.
AS for Fasting, our B. Savior Mat. 4.1.
Fasted forty days, and forty nights. He foretells his Disciples, Mar. 2.20.
fasting when the Bridegroom should be taken from them, That is, after his
Ascension. He directs us how to fast, and promises a Reward Mat. 6.17.
to our fastings, when duly performed. He teaches that Fasting Mat. 17.20. and
Marc. 9.29.
gives us a Power over the Divils.

When any work of great moment was to be done, Fasting was used Act. 13.2.
. As the Disciples, or Apostles ministered to the Lord, and Fasted, the Holy
Ghost said: with fasting Act. 14.23.
and Prayer S. Paul and S. Barnabas were consecrated Apostles: These, with
Fasting and Prayers 2. Cor. 6.5.
ordained Bishops in every Church. And S. Paul several time speaks of his
Fastings. Act. 14.23.
In Watchings, in Fastings. 2. Cor. 11.27.
Again: In hunger and thrist, in fastings often.

What was the practice of the Christians of the second age, Tertullian will
teach us Apolog. c. 40. page 71. where having reproached the Pagans with their
Feastings in times of public calamitys, he represents the contrary life of
Christians. Nos vero jejuniis aridi, and omni continentia expressi, ab omni
vitae fruge delati, in sacco and cinere volutantes, invidia coelum tundimus,
Deum tangimus, and cum misericordiam extorserimus, Jupiter honoratur. You
Feast, says he, but we dried up with fasting, living in perfect continency,
abstainning from all contents of this life prostrate in sackcloth and ashes,
charge Heaven with the odium of afflicting Persons already so much afflicted,
and when we have by these Penitential works forced God to take pity of the
world, Jupiter is honored by you.

For the third age see what Moses (a) Maximus and other Confessors required of
Penitents; Iejunio extenuari. That they should grow lean with fasting.

All the subsequent ages give as many testimonies to the duty, and advantages
of Fasting, as there are of any work of Piety. This the Fathers teach in their
sermons, the Bishops command in their Canons, the faithful practice in their
lives, and all recommend by their example.

Nay Protestants themselves own this Truth. The Author of the Duty of man
Sunday 5. n. 34. To this duty of Repentance, Says he, Fasting is very proper to
be annexed. The Scripture usually joins them together. If you desire to know
the fruits of fasting? S. Thom. 2.2. q. 147. a. 1. names three 1. to mortifye,
and curb our bodies. 2. To raise our mind to Heavenly things. 3. To punish in
our selves the ill use of some creatures, by depriving our selves of the use of
others. A fourth reason is, to increase merit, Grace and Glory. Virtutem
largi^is, and praemia, says the Church, in Praef. Quad.

SECTION II. Prayer.
PRayer being a raising of our souls to God, it exposes our understanding to
the Divine light, and places our will in the warmth of Divine love: Wherefore
nothing can be more efficacious to clear our mind from its ignorance, and
darkness, nor to purge our will from its depraved affections, and passions. It
is a key which opens the Treasure of God's Mercy and opens our heart to receive
its effets. It is a River of Benediction, whose waters cleanse our soul from
its imperfections, moisten our heart, make our good put poses budde forth, and
flourish, and fill our will with the fruits of virtues.

It is often recommended in scripture, See mar. 13.33.
watch, and Pray. Pray Mat. 26.45.
that you enter not into tentation. You Lu^ 18, 1.
must always pray, and never faint.

All places, and all times are fit for Prayer: God limits nether; but promises
to hear us always. Ask, and you shall receive: What soever you shall ask my
father, in my name, he will grant it to you.

Particularly Remission of sins is annexed to it. Hear S. Austin Enchir. c.
71. Dequotidianis, brevibus, levibusque peccatis sine quibus haec vita non
ducitur, quotidiana oration fidelium fatisfacit: Eorum est enim dicere, Pater
noster qui es in coelis, qui jam patri tali regenerati sunt ex aqua and Spiritu
sancto. Delet omnino haec Oration minima, and quotidiana peccata. Delet and
illa, a quibns vita fidelium scelerate etiam gesta, sed poenitentia in melius
mutata discedit; si quemadmodnm veraciter dicitur: Dimitte nobis debita nostra,
Ita veraciter dicatur, sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris: Idest si
fiat quod dicitur. The daily Prayers of the faithful satisfye for those daily,
light, and small sins, which are incident to all in this life (these we call
venial sins for it belongs properly to those to say, Our father, which art in
Heaven, who are regenerated by water, and the Holy Ghost to such a father. This
Prayer blots out little sins. It has a virtue also to carry away the guilt of
greater sins, (in those who are repentant of them) provided they as truly
forgive, as they ask to be forgiven: that is, they do what they say. Sir, How
different was S. Austin's judgment from yours? He thought those Prayers
efficacious to blot out venial, and even mortal sins; and you think the
prescribing them Ridiculous.

Saying the Poenitentiall Psalms, is an object of laughter to you. Were there
any Church discipline amongst you, or had your Prelates any true zeal for any
part of devotion, you would be forced to change your note: the saying the
Psalms being the only part of devotion, which you retain. But it seems,
writing against Popery has a virtue to sanctify all Impiety: as acting against
it did excuse all sacrilege. I never heard any man Moved to laughter with
reading the Psalms and I have known many by them moved to compunction, to a
new life, and to the love of God. Let S. Austin, (who experienced it in
himself) speak: l. 9. Confess. c. 4. Dulce mihi sit, o Domine, confiteritibi,
quibus internis me stimulis perdomueris, and quemadmodum me complanaveris
humiliatis montibus, and collibus cogitationum mearum, and tortuosa mea
direxeris, and aspera lenieris, quas tibi, Deus meus, voces dedi, cum legerem
Psalmos David, cantica fidelia and sonos pietatis, excludentes turgidum
spiritum. Quas tibi voces dabam in Psalmis illis, and quomodo in te inflammabar
ex eis, and accendebar eos recitare, si possem toto orb terrarum adversus
typhum generis humani. I take adelyght, o my Lord, to confess to thee, with
what inward goades, thou did subdue me, and by what means thou did bring
me down, levelling the greater, and lesser mountains of my thoughts: How thou
did streyghten my crookedness, and smooth my roughness. Into what
exclamations did I break out, O my God, when I read the Psalms of David,
those faithful canticles, those pious sounds, which banish all proud spirits.
How I cried out in reading them: how I was inflamed in the love of thee, and
how. I was stirred up to read them if possible to the whole world, as a
sovereign antidote against the Pride of mankind. Thus S. Austin.

See what a difference there is betwixt the sentiments of this great Saint,
and yours. Reading the Psalms moved the Saint to compunction; it moves you to
laughter. It stirred up in the Saint the love of God, you are not moved to any
good by it. The Saint would read them to all the world; you are displeased,
they are recommended to any. He thought, Reading them a great antidote against
the Pride of mankind, which is the root of all Evil, and you say it is
ridiculous. You have reason to suspect your spirit, which is found so often
contrary to the Spirit of God.

SECTION III. Pilgrimages.
THis is a third instance of our ridiculous Pennances going to such Churchs,
say you. Which discovers your Ignorance or Impiety. For if you know not on what
ground Pilgrimages are founded, you are very Ignorant. If you know it, and yet
blame them, you are very Impious.

The two first geate sins committed after the creation of the world by Adam, in
eating the forbidden fruit, and Cain, in killing his Brother, were Judged by
their Creator, and a great part of their Penance prescribed by that Great
Peniteutier, was a Pilgrimage, or bannishment, from the place where the sin was
committed. Of Adam it is said, Genesis 3.23.
he sent Adam out of the garden of Eden. And to Cain Genesis 4.12.
: A fugitif and vagabond shall thou be on the Earth. Now Rhabanus Maurus
Poenitentialis c. 11.
assures, that this is the ground why such a Penance was enjoined. And me
thinks the example of God himself may be a sufficient warrant for his
Delegates, Priests, in following such a precedent: and secure them against your
censure. Especially seeing in the most ancient collections of Penitential
Canons made by Bid, Theodorus, Burchardus, Ivo, and Gratian, we find
Pilgrimages prescribed amongst other Pennances. Which shows the unanimous
consent of Antiquity. And you may much ^^silier discover you own weakness,
or lack of virtue; then convince the makers, or collectors of those Canons of
Folly.

The reasons for this Penance, are cheisely three first, it is a kind of
banishment, which separates a man (for a time) from friends, acquaintance, home
and country: which cannot but be painful, laying, a side the incommoditys of
traveling. And it seems Just, that he who abused those things, should be
deprived of the comfort of them: and having scandalized his neighbors by bad
example, might adify them, them, by undergoing this public penance.

The second: it is a connaturall remedy for such sins, (to which two or more
concur, and which proceed many times from the person, we converse with or
present occasion) to remove the sinner from such occasions, and conversations:
as all know, who deal with consciences. Now this is done by Pilgrimages.

The third reason is: that although God be in all places, and sees and hears us,
wheresoever wear yet he does not alike in all places disclose his Power by
miracles, nor his Justice by discovering secret sins, nor his Goodness by
co^version of sinners. As S. Austin observed long since, and daily experience
confirms. S. Austin notes such to have been in his time the tomb of S. Felix
at Nola in Campania, and that of the glorious Martyrs at Milan. He refers this
to the secret Judgment of God, humbly acknowledging his own Ignorance. Aug.
epist. 137. Vbique quidem Deus est, and nullo continetur vel includitur loco,
qui omnia condidt. Verum tamen adista quae hominibus nota sunt, quis potest
ejus consilium perscrutari, quare in aliis locis haec miracula siant, in aliis
non siant? And I am content to acknowledge my ignorance in imitation of him,
when nothing appears in the place it self, as sometimes there does. For if any
man, who has any lively Faith within him, should enter Jerusalem, and see the
place, where the Lamb of God was sacrificed, and the price of our Redemption
Paid: Innocence condemned, the Divine wisdom derided for folly, the King of
Glory crowned with thorns, the Creator scoft, scorned by his creatures, God
dying, and dying that painful, and ignominious death of the Cross. When he
should think, here his flesh was torn with stripes; here his head was crowned
with thorns: here those hands, which wrought so many miracles, were perced
with nails: here those feet so often wearyed in see king the lost sheep,
were fixed to the Cross: Here that tongue which had command over the Elements,
and death, and Hell, was imbued with vinager, and Gall: here his side was
opened, the last drop of Blood spilt, the life of the world dyed, to raise to
life the world. When he considers this and with all, that his own sins had so
great a share, in requiring this most abundant Redemption, will not the very
place suggesting these, and more thoughts fix his Imagination, quicken his
fancy, detain his understanding, and stir up his will, to a hatred of sin,
the cause of all this severe Judgment upon the unspotted Lamb: to confusion
for having contributed so much to it by his own offenses: and to love God
above all things, who has loved us so much?

Hereafter before you throw such hard stones at our heads, consider whither
there be not with us mingled, by a communion of sentiments, some persons to
whom, you must own great respect to be due.

I have brought you here into an Assembly of the chiefest Preachers, and
Prelates of all ages, all teaching commanding, or practicing these works,
which you deride. The Apostles take up the first rank, and over all
Jesus Christ, God Blessed for evermore, presiding, and giving Example: suppase
in the name of all these S. Basil, S. Austin, or S. Paul the Apostle, should
thus speak unto you: How comes it to pass, that you presume to censure, in
those of your days, that which they practice only in Imitation of us? How dare
you say, that our exercises should kill the vitalls of Religion, and dull the
apprehensions of sin? That what Christ did himself, and what is done by others
following his footsteps, should lead from Christ, and hinder the earnest
applications to him? What answer can you make to these true Reproaches? Think a
little sadly on this: and it will bring you to a temper more be seeming your
coat, then when you writ what I have here answered.

SECTION IV. Two objections answered.
G. B. page 63. This is an easy way of escaping punishment.

ANSWER. Can you never settle your Judgment? will you let it ever be moved
round with every blast of wind? Here our way to expiate sins is too easy. Page
144. it is a heavy yoke and a rack to souls. When you have experienced them,
fasting with bread and water foe many days a week, said devoutly every day
some prayers, gone long Pilgrimages on foot, taken disciplines, worn
hayreshirts, and chains, served the sick in Hospitalls, and the Prisoners in
Goales, given Alms to the Poor, watched, etc. When I say, you have tried
these for some months, if you continu in your opinion, that our way of
expiating sins, is Easyer then yours, I shall think your common sense equal to
your Piety, and admire both alike.

G. B. Ibidem. The Papists endeavor to give a pleasant taste to their
Pennances: wherefore to the grave, and melancholy, we give of one sort: to the
fiety, and sullen, of another: to the Ioviall, a third. etc.

ANSWER. Here you deliver a dream, as a certain Truth. Cite the Council, name
the Author, of such a practice? If you can name none, as I am sure you cannot,
own your self the inventer of this, which is to say, a Calumniator.

CHAPTER XIX. Sacrifice of the Mass.
G. B. p. 64. Another opposition made to the Preistly office of Christ, is
their conceit of the sacrifice of the Mass, which they believe is a formal
expiation of sins, both for the living, and dead, who are in Purgatory.

ANSWER. You fall so often, that it would tire any man to take you up always.
It is not true that Catholics hold mass to be a formal expiation of sins,
unica causa formalis, the only formal cause of our justification, says the
Council of Trent sess. 6. c. 7. is the justice of God, by which he makes us
just. That is, it is habitual grace, or Charity. But let that pass.

We say with the fathers, that Mass is an Expiatory Sacrifice. S. Austin
Enchir. c. 110. following his distinction of souls deceased, into three
classes, those in Heaven those in Purgatory, and those in Hell, he says, that
Masses for for the first are thanks givings: for the second, Expiations,
Propitiationes sunt: for the third, not ease to the dead; but some comfort to
their living friends. Pro valde bonis, gratiarum actiones sunt; pro non valde
malis, propitiationes sunt: pro valde malis, etsi nulla adjumenta mortuorum,
qualescumque vivorum consolationes sunt. Enchir. cap. 110.

To clear yet more this point of the Sacrifice of Mass, and of Christ offered,
and offering himself in it, hear S. Austin l. 10. de Civit. Dei, cap. 20. Verus
ille Mediator in quantum forman servi accipiens, mediator effectus est Dei and
hominum, homo Christus Jesus, cum informa Deisacrificium cum Patre sumat, cum
quo and unus Deus est, tamen in forma servi sacrificium maluit esse, quam
sumere, ne vel hac occasion quisqua^ existimaret cuilibet sacrificandum esse
creaturae. Per hoc and Sacerdos est, ipse offerens, ipse and oblatio. Cujus rei
Sacramentum quotidianum esse voluit Ecclesiae sacrificium. The true Mediator by
taking upon himself the shape of a servant being made Mediator betwixt God and
men the man Christ Jesus, who together with his father (with whom he is one
God) as God receives sacrifice, but as man will have no sacrifice offered to
himself, to cut off all pretense of sacrificing to any, but God. In this
sacrifice, he is the Priest, he is the Sacrificer, and he is himself the
sacrifice. (Or he is the person who offers, and he is the oblation.) And he
has ordered the sacrifice of the Church, as a daily commemoration, or Sacrament
of that sacrifice of the Cross. Thus he.

Where you see a sacrifice of the Church, as a daily commemoration of that of
the Cross. That Christ offers it; that he himself is offered in it, and all
this to God, no sacrifice being offered to any else.

If you are so hard to please, as to be satisfied with none, but those of your
communion. See W. L. page 305. where he ownes a commemorative sacrifice to be
instituted by Christ, and Montagu, in his Appeal 2. p. c. 29. acknowledges
Representative, Commemorative, and Spiritual Sacrifice. And your Bishop of Ely
Resp. ad Apolog. Bellar. p. 184. admits likewise a Commemorative sacrifice.

G. B. d. 6. and 65. To imagine, that the Priests going through the Office, of
the Mass, and his receiving the consecrated elements can have a virtue to
expiate the sins of others, especialy of the dead, is a thing so contrary to
most common impressions, that it will puzzle a man's belief to think any can
credit it.

ANSWER. Your common impressions differ very much from those of other men: so
you have much reason to suspect, that they are only common in name; but in
reality, they are only private conceits of your own head. The Catholic
Church beleives, what you think none beleives, S. Austin believed it, all
Catholics profess it, our Councils define it, our Catechismes teach it, our
pulpits preach it, and our Pastors proclaim it. Yet you would feign persuade
the world no body beleives it, that the thing is incredibile. As if you knew
better whas passes in our hearts, then we our selves. But if this be not an
honest way, it is at least, cunning, to take for granted, what you cannot
prove; and it is casyer, to find a slyght to steal into your weak readers
opinions, then to gain it by a substantial reason.

G. B. Ibidem. The Priests receiving the consecrated Elements, cannot avayle
another

ANSWER. We do not believe the Passion of Christ to be applied by the Priests
taking the Host, but by the essential part of the sacrifice, which consists in
another action.

G. B. page 65. It is absurd to think, one man's action can be derived to
another.

ANS. An article of our Faith must then be absurd, viz the Communion of Saints,
which imports a mutual communication of good works amongst the members of the
Church, the the mystical body of Christ. See Pearson in exposit. Symboli p.
714. where he proves it out of 1. Jo. l. 7. If we walk in the light, we have
fellowship with one another. The Greek says, (...), Communication with one
another. And out of col. 2.19. Holding the head, from which all the body by
joints, and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases
with the increase of God. So that, as in a natural body all parts do
communicate to one another their nourishment, in the Philosophy of the Apostle,
so in his Divinity all parts of the mystical body, the Church, communicate
their good works. What say you sir? how like you your censure, which involves
an article of the Apostles creed, and two Apostles? Have I not reason to
admonish you, to regard where you shoot your bolts, and throw your stones, for
that they can scarce light on any place of our doctrine, or on us, without
hitting the Apostles, and the Holy ghost, and many times those points of faith,
which you your self admit.

G. B. page 65. It clearly appears from the Institution of the Lords supper,
that its end was the joint communicating of Beleivers.

ANS. It clearly appears, that you little regard what you say, The Primary end
of its institution, and indeed that which only is specifyed by our Savior is
to be a commemoration of his Passion, and the Sacrifice of the Cross. Do this
in memory of me. As for the joint communion, it can only be a secondary
intention of the institution, the first, and chief being our union with Christ
out of which flows the second, our union amongst our selves. As lines in a
circle meet in the center, and so knit together.

CHAPTER XX. Regal Office of Christ. Where, Of Transubstantiation, Dispensing
in vows, etc.
G. B. page 66. I advance to the opposition made to the Regal office of
Christ, and first how far is it from his Glory in Heaven, to believe that five
words muttred by a Priest should put him under the Elements. This is a new kind
of humiliation.

ANSWER. You are very much mistaken, if you think Humiliations in consistent
with the the Regal office of Christ. Heb. 1.7.
When God brought his first begotten into the world, he said: And let all the
Angels of God worship him. Yet he was then humbled to the condition, of a man,
a private obscure man, and even below it, (Ps. 21.7.) Opprobrium hominum and
abjectio plebis. Certainly there is more show of Majesty, as he is placed on
our Altars, envitoned with lyghts, adored by the People, Prelates, and Princes,
the greatest Monarks laying their crowns, and the greatest Bishops, their
Croziers and Miters at his feet, then as he was in the little cottage of his
reputed father a Carpenter, picking Chips at his mothers command, or following
his fathers trade to get a subsista^ce, known to none, regarded by none,
slyghted by all, as is ordinary to men of that humble calling. And what shall I
say of the death of the cross, when his very disciples disowned him?

G. B. p, 67. What low thoughts of his person must it bread in such minds, as
are capble of beleiving this contrivance.

ANS. You speak like a Pagan, to whom the Cross of Christ is folly, (1. Cor.
1.23.) rather then like a Christian, to whom Christ crucified (that is, under
the greatest Humiliation) is the virtue and wisdom of God. We who have learnt
to look or him as God Blessed for evermore, even when on the Cross, and dying
we can take out of all his Humiliations occasion to admire his love, and adore
his goodness to us: but not to disesteeme his person, or diminish our thoughts
of his Majesty. And let me tell you, you are the first Christian, I know of,
who ever made such unchristian reflections on the Humiliations of the son of
God.

G. B. p. 67.68.69. and 70. In these you charge us, with three crimes. 1. With
adding to the laws of Christ. 2. Dispensing with the laws of God. and 3.
Commanding things indifferent contrary to Christian liberty. I Answer to the
first, and third: the Apostles did the same (a) forbidding strangled meat, and
Blood, which were things indifferent, and not forbidden by the law of Christ,
And as to your objection, that this entrenches upon Christian liberty, I
answer out a person very dear to you, even your self, in your vindication,
confer. 2. p. 172. Christian liberty is stated in an exemption from the laws of
Moses. Show that we impose the law of Moses, and you will say something to
the purpose, fo our entrenching upon Christian liberty.

As for Dispensing in Divine laws, when you prove what you object, I will
consider what to answer. Your instances are not sufficient. For first as for
dispensing of vows, there is an Epirkia in them, as in laws, which is an
interpretation of some circumstances, in which they do not oblidge: for
example. A man vows to fast, next, lent with bread and water: and before that
time falls sick and continues so: why may not the Church declare his vow not
to oblidge, or change it into something else? Item he vows a Pilgrimage: and
his wife, family and affairs require his presence at home? If this does not
satisfy you, call to mind the procedings of your first Reformers, who opened
all Cloisters, and dispensed with so many vows, at one time. Is it not
strange, that you should charge us with dispensing with some vows, when you
annull all?

Secondly disolving wedlock bond. I know none who practice dissolving
consummated marriages. If you do, accuse them: if you do not, ask pardon for
this false accusation.

Thirdly allowing marriages in for fidden degrees. The degrees hindering
marriage were contained in the ceremonial law, which expired with Christ, the
end of that law. Those which now bind, are established by canon law, which was
made, and does depend on the Church.

Fourthly the communion under one kind, or the Chalice taken from the people
contrary to the command of Christ. You can never prove that command to all, to
drink of the Cup.

G. B. page 71. Another invasion of the Regal Power, is the Popes pretense to
be universal Bishop, which is termed by S. Gregory the great to be
Antichristian.

ANS. I know no Pope, who pretends to it; I know none, who give it them. If
there be any such, let them answer for themselves.

Now I desire you, to make good sense of something, you say: first p. 67.
Christ has delivered us from the bondage of corruption, How is this done
already, when the Apostle, (whose words those are, Romans 8.21.) promises it only
after the Resurrection.

Secondly page 68. Anathema is the mildest of the spiritual censures, we
thunder against such as comply not with our tyranny. What spiritual censure Is
more severe? I think that the severest of all, as we believe after Tertul.
Apolog. cap. 39. p. 68.

Thirdly page 69. No authority besides Christ can reach the conscience. S. Paul
was of a different opinion, when he enjoines obedience to the commands of
Princes, not only, for wrath, but for Conscience.

CHAPTER XXI. Of love, and its two species: Repentance, mortal and venial
sins; Attrition and Contrition.
G. B. p. 75. I proceed to the third part of my Inquiry: which is the
opposition made to the great design of Christian Religion, for elevating
souls of men into a participation of the Divine nature.

ANSWER. I never knew a man promise more, and perform less, then you. Your
words and phrases are great, and high, your Reason, and sense low, and little,
yet that delivered with so much considence as may persuade your Ignorant, and
Credulous Reader, you have reason on your side, when you are to seek in the
first principles of the matter, you discourse on. You may with a homely, yet a
very proper metaphore be compared to a flying Ox, whose wings stretched out
promise a flight, but his heavy body keeps him on the ground, and his dull
spirits serve only for a slow motion there. For let a man read your book,
observe your disesteeme of others, and your insulting over them, and he shall
think you, Eagle like, to be to wring above the clouds, whence you with
disdain look down on us poor Ignoramuses. Yet your heygth is discernable
without the help of a Telescope: for after all your striving, and straining
endeavors, we still find you on the ground, equal, nay inferior to many,
whom you insult over without any thing extraordinary, but your boldness to
print in so learned an Age, as this is, of things you understand not. If what
I have written already, and what I shall write, does not make this clear, I
will give you leave to apply that comarison to me.

I have already spoken (Chap. 3. and 4.) of the designs of God in delivering
Christian Religion, that it was to teach men to serve God in this life, and
enjoy him in the next. That this service consisted cheifely in Faith, Hope, and
Charity, yet so as Charity gives a value to the other. In sine, that the end
of the Ghospel, was to unite us to God by Charity in this world, and by Glory
(which is the last perfection of Charity) in the other.

Love is the root of all our Actions: As weight Aug. l. 13. confess. c. 9.
Amor meus, pondus meum, eo feror, quocumque feror. Aug. l. 11. de Civit. Dei c.
28. Sicut corpus pondere, ita animus amore fertur quocumque fertur.
in Bodies gives them their motion toward their center, so love in men: but
with this difference, that weight is restrained to local motion, an action of
one species; but love (as partaking of the nature of the soul, whose it is,)
reaches to several, and those of an opposite nature: for all we do, proceeds
from some love.

All our Passions are only love in a several disguise Aug. l. 14. de Civ. Dei,
c. 7.
. Is the thing, we love, absent, the love of it is called Desire. Is it in
danger to be post, it is fear: are we in aprobability of attaining it, it is
Hope: it is looked on, as irrevocable, it is despair, are we stirred up to
overcome th difficultyes opposing us, is it Anger: Do we possess it, it is
Joy: do we loose it, love is changed into Grief, or sadness etc. The same
love putting on these several dresses, and transforming it self, Proteus
like, conformable to the nature, and condition of its object. So that it would
be impossible to reekon all its species. Which are reduced to some heads both
by Philosophers and Divines, Philosophers draw it to three species, according
to three sorts of Good, Honor, Profit, and Pleasure.

But much more the our purpose, is the distinction of love used by Divines,
which (in order to a moral life in this world and eternal life in the next)
divides all mankind: viz, the love of God, and the love of our selves, commonly
called self-love. We received the love of ourselves from Adam; the love of
God, from Christ: that is an effect of corrupt nature; this, of repayring
Grace: from that spring out the works of the flesh; from this grow those of
the spirit. That ends in death, this is the seed of life. By these two loves
two cittyes are built, Aug. l. 14. de Civit. Dei, c. 28. Fecerunt Civitates
duas, amores duo, terrenam scilicet amor sui, usque ad contemptum Dei:
caelestem vero amor Dei usque ad contemptum sui.
Jerusalem, and Babylon, Heaven, and Hell. In the next world these loves are
pure for in Heaven raygnes the love of God, without any self-love, in Hell
self-love rages without any curb from the love of God. In this life they are
commonly mingled, nether so absolutely possessing the heart of man, as to
suppress all motion of its corrivall: For ever the greatest sinners feel some
motions to good, and the greatest Saints must say: Dimitte nobis, Forgive us
our sins, are we forgive.

And as betwixt the two brothers in Rebecca's. Womb, so betwixt these two
loves, there is a combat within our breast: For Gal. 5.17.
the spirit covets against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit and
these are contrary to one another. And this is that perpetual combat, which
we undergo, by reason of which this life is termed Job. 7.1. Militia est vita
hominis super terram.
a warfare. And Aug. l. 11. de Civit. Dei c. 28. Bonum est homini, ut illo
prosiciente quo been vivimus, elle desiciat, quo male viv imus, donec ad
persectum sanetur, and in bonum commutetur omne quod vivimus.
we are conquered when self love prevails over the love of God: but we
conquer, when the love of God gets the better.

Wherein then does consist the perfection of a Christian? In a heart pure from
bad love, not yiedling consent to the motions of self love; but resisting
them: and a heart filled with the love of God, following in all things the
motions of Divine Grace, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit. And Aug. in Psalm.
64. Interroget se quisque, quid amet, and inveniet unde sit civis.
could we certainly discover, which of the two loves rules in our heart, we
should certainly know the state of our soul. Supposing these principles, let us
attend Mr. G. B.

G. B. page 76. Religion elevates the souls of mn to a participation of Divine
nature, where by they being inwardly purifyed, and the outward co^versation
reguluted the world may be restored to its primitive Innocence, and men
admitted to an inward, intimate fellowship with their maker.

ANS. What you say of participation 2. Pet. 1.4.
of Divine nature, is out of Scripture likewise our souls being inwardly
purifyed, and our inward fellowship with God. All which is true, although you
nether tell, what they mean, nor understand it your self. But that by
Christianity the outward conversation should be regulated, or primitive
Innocence restored, is aliene, or untru. That by Christianity outward
conversation is regulated is aliene: Orderly conversation being a mere externe
natural quality, many times as excellent in Infidels as Christians: Certainly
the perfection of Christianity may be found in Anchorets, and preserved in a
desert. Whence a good conversation appears not to be a very material
ingredient of perfection. And that Christianity should aim at restoring the
world to its primitive Innocence, it absolutely false: for that Innocence
cannot be attained unto, nether in this life, nor the next: not in this, in
which the greatest Saints have their Romans 7.
combats, from which man in state of primitive Innocence was free: not in the
next, the state of glory being above that of Innocence. So nether of these is
the end of Christianity.

G. B. page 76. What devices are found out to enervate Repentance? sins must be
divided into mortal and venial.

ANS. From the beginning there has always been observed an inequality of
sins. I will omit modern Divines which you do not understand: and Councils,
which you regard not. Bid in c. 5. Jac. distinguishes them and the manner to
expiate them: which in the Greek Church is still in use. That same is observed
by S. Austin Enchir. c. 71. cited above Chapt. 18. sect. ^. The Beloved
Disciple 1. Io. 5.16.17.
speaks of sin unto death, and others not such. S. Paul 1. Cor. 6.9.10.
should discove rthe Plot? what? Was Christ concerned in this device, who
distinguishes sins against the holy Ghost, from others? whither will these men
Lead us, or go themselves? or what can besecure from those tongues, which
spare no more the doctrine delivered by Christ, by the Apostles, or the
primitive Fathers, then that of modern Divines? I know all sins are offenses
of God: yet I do not, with the Stoics, think all sins equal, or him as
great a sinner, who speaks an Idle word, as him, who kills his own father.
The contrary Paradoxes may find place. And be admired in Calvin by his deluded
followers; but certainly no sober man can approve them.

G. B. p. 77. Their asserting that simple attrition qualifies men for the
Sacrament?

ANS. You do more, for you think Attrition sufficient to justify without the
Sacrament. Page 76. having said, that Repentance and remission were always
united; you explicate. Repentance, to be a horror of sin upon the sense of
its native deformity, and contrariety to the law of God, which makes the soul
apprehend the hazard it has incurred by it; so as to study by all means
possible to avoyde it in all time coming. This is all you say: which any divine
knows to be only Attrition, as not expressing clearly the only motive of true
Contrition, love of God above all things, for his only goodness. Give Glory to
God. Is it not true, that you had heard of a dispute beyond seas betwixt
Iansenists, and their Enemies about the sufficiency of Attrition to justify
with the Sacrament: And you never would take the pains, to examine the
sentiments of either part, or their motives, but relied suppon the first
apprehension, which occurred to you? Your writings give a probable ground for
this conjecture.

G. B. p. 76. All the severitys enjoined by Papists for Pennances, do but tend
to nourish the life of sin.

ANS. You may as well say, the severity of the laws against Robbers and
murderers, the Axe and Halter tend only to nourish inclinations to rob and
kill. Sure your common sense is far different from that of others: else you
would never advance these Paradoxes. Nether will it serve your turn. if you
recurre to the pecuniary mulcts enjoined to some: for first, you cannot blame
those without blaming Scripture, which recemends Alms giving as a Dan. 4.24.
means to redeem sins. Secondly because worldly men are not so willing to
part with their money: and how generous soever you are, were you to give a
crown, for every untruth you print, you would by that pecuniary mulct not be
encouraged to write, as you do.

CHAPTER XXII. Theological Virtues.
G. B. page 78. That which is next pressed in the Ghospel for uniting souls of
mankind to God, is that Noble ternary of Graces, Faith, Hope, and Love.

ANS. You can never speak so much in commendation of the Theological
virtues, as they deserve: for their merits surpass all we can say. And if you
compare the least of them, with those called moral virtues, it will out shine
velut inter stellas Luna minores. Yet Faith, and Hope must do Homage to
Charity, (or Love) at to their sovereign, as to the end, to which they are
designed, to the fountain of their life, and cause of their value. This I have
said above, yet I again repeat it, for their sakes, who so set up the merits
of Faith, as to neglect Good works Iac. 2.17.
without which Faith is dead, and to place, is after Charity, without which
Faith 1. Cor. 13.
avayles nothing. I could wish our Adversaryes would vouchsafe to read with
attention that Chapter, last cited: In it they would see the seat due to
Charity, the queen of virtues which seems at present hidden from the eyes of
those wise, and prudent men, yet is revealed to little ones.

It is with great difficulty, that I undertake a comparison betwixt the
practice of these virtues, amongst Catholics, and amongst Protestants: because
all comparisons seem to be grounded at least on an appearance of equality in
the objects: which in this matter cannot be. Yet something must be said, to
make these presumptuous men know their wants, and weak nesse, that they may
seek to have them supplied, and that I may proceed more clearly, I will
begin with the definition of Faith, and Heresy.

SECTION I. Of Faith.
DIvine Faith is a firm assent given to an obscure Truth revealed by Almighty
God, because it is revealed by him. I say, an obscure Truth, because S. Paul
Heb. 11.1.
says the same, Argumentum non apparentium: a declaration of things not seen,
or known by natural reason. This is the material object, as Divines speak.
The only Formal object, is the veracity of God, quia Deus est verax, that is
can nether be deceaved, or mistaken, as being omniscient: nor deceive us, as
being all Good. To this the testimony of the Church concurres as a witness
assuring that God delivered such a systeme of Truths. So that is a condition
necessary to apply the revelation to us, who have not heard God speak, or
reveal.

S. Anthanasius in his Symbol delivers as a condition of Faith, that it be
retained entire, and undefiled, integra, inviolataque. For seeing all is
delivered by the same authority, those who believe not all S. Thom. 2.2. q. s.
art. 3.
, oppose that Authority delivering it, and by consequence even what they
believe, they receive not purely upon their submission to that authority
speaking, but for their own Caprichio, or Reason, or Pleasure.

That is properly called Heresy: which word is dedmed from the word (...),
tochoose. And it signifyes a choice of any things, what soever: but by common
use it is appropriated to that Choice Tertul. l. de Praescript. c. 6. Haereses
dictae Graeca voce ex Electionis interpretatione, qua quis sive ad
instituendas, sive ad suscipiendas eas utitur. Hieron. in Tit. 3. Haeresis
Graece ab Electione dicitur, quod scilicet unusquisque id sibi eligat, quod ei
melius esse videatur. Vide c. Haeresis, 24. q. 3. Vide etiam August. epist. 162.
, which is made af Points delivered as of Faith.

We Catholics have Faith, because we believe firmly those Truths, that God
has revealed, because he revealed them, to the Church, which as a faithful
withnesse, gives hitherto, and will give to the end of the world testimony to
that Revelation. And we cannot be Heretics, because Tertul. supra. Nobis nihil
ex arbitrio nostro indutere licet, sed nec eligere, quod aliquis ex arbitrio
suo induxerit.
we never take the liberty to choose ourselves, or to admit, what others
choose; But we take Bona fide what it delivered, as revealed, by the greatest
authority imaginable on Earth which is that of the Catholic Church. Let an
Angel teach us any thing contrary to what is delivered, and we will pronounce
Anathema to him, in imitation of the Apostle. Gal. 1.18.


Here is then the Tenure of our Faith. The Father sent his only begotten son
consubstantiall to himself into the world: Joan. 15.15.
And what he heard of his Father, that he made known to us. The Father and son
sent the Holy Ghost, and Io. 16.13.
he did not speak of himself: but what he heard; that he spoke. The Holy
Ghost sent the Apostles: and they 1. Io. 1.3.
declared unto us, what they had seen and heard. The Apostles sent the Highest
and lower Prelates in the Church, and the rule, by which they framed their
decrees, was: Let nothing be altered in the depositum: let no innovation be
admitted in what is delivered, quod Stephanus PP. apud Cyprianum epist. 74. ad
Pompeium.
traditum est non innovetur. By this we are assured that our Faith is that,
which the Councils received from the Apostles, the Apostles from the Holy
Ghost, and so by the Son, to God the Father. Where it rests.

Now to Protestants. Their proceeding is far different. They hear the whole
Systeme, of Faith commended by the Church as revealed by God, and take it into
examination. And some things displeasing them in it they fall to reforming it,
and cut off at one blow all things, not expressly contained in Scaipture. Here
is one Choice. Then Scripture is called to their Bar: and near a third part
of it condemned, and lopt off: which is a second Choice. Thirdly, there being
still several things in the remnanr, which displease them, (as understood by
the Church) they reject that interpretation, and six on it such an one, as
pleases them most. So that even what sense they retain, they do it upon
this their haeresis, or Choice. What evidence can convince a man to be a
Chooser in Faith, that is A Heretic, if these men be not sufficiently by this
proceeding proved such?

For a further confirmation of this, consider the several ways of Catholics,
and Protestants in entertaining Propositions of Faith. A Catholic, hearing
from the Church our Saviors words with the sense, that is the complete
Scripture (for the bare word without the sense is no more scripture, then a
body without a soul, or life is a man) presently beleives them, and what Reason
soever may appear to the contrary, he silences it, and submits his
understanding to Faith, and let the words seem harsh and the sense
unconceivable, yet the Truth of God triumphs overall those petty oppositions. A
Protestant hears the same: and presently consults his Reason, and till he has
its verdict, suspends his Judgment. If that say with the Pharisie Io. 3.9.
How can these things be: or with the Capharnaits Io. 6.
This is a hard saying: who can hear it? The Protestant immediately renounces
it. So we submit our Reason to faith, you set yours above it, we frame our
Reason according to the dictamens of Revelation, you shape Revelation, by your
reason. In fine you set your Reason on a throne, to Judge of that word, by
which one day, you are to be Judged. You may as easily prove the Pharisees, and
Chapharnaits to be better Christians then the Apostles, as that your proceedure
in receiving faith, is better then that of the Catholic Church.

SECTION II. Of Hope.
HOpe is an expectation of future Bliss, promised by our B. Savior to those,
who love him, and keep his commandments. It is built on a promise of God,
which cannot fail. And had that promise been absolute, we might have been
more assuredly certain of our future Happiness, then we can be of the Truth
of any mathematical demonstration. But it is only Conditional, requiring on
our parts a concurrence with his Divine Grace: and this is always uncertain,
by reason of the mutability of our will to evil, not withstanding our
strongest Resolutions to Good. Hence our Hope is mixed with Fear, sperando
timemus, Tertul. l. de cultu faeminarum cap. 2. p. 265.

We have a full assurance (...), on God's side: Who Heb. 6.17.18.19.
to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his Counsil confirmed
it with an oath; that by two things immutable, in which it was impossible for
God to lie, we might have a strong consolation who have fled for refuge to lay
hold upon the Hope, set before us, which Hope we have as an Anchor of the
souls, both sure, and steadfast.

On our sides we have always reason to apprehend the mutability of our own
will, not withstanding all present Grace from God, and the strength of his
Counsill. Hence the Apostle admonishes us 2. Cor. 6.1.
not no receive in vain the Grace of God. He sets before our eyes his own
example, 1. Cor. 9.27.
keeping under his body, chastising it, and bringing it into subjection: least
having preached to others, he might become hinselfe a reprobate a cast away.
And consequently warnes us to Philip. 2.12.
work our salvation with fear and trembling. When this Apostle fears, who
can presume? we may resolve well, pray hard; and act well, to day: but what
assurance have we, that to morrow will find us so well disposed? or even not
doing the quite contrary? and that being so ill prepared death will not
surprise us? S. Paul the vessel of Election, who had been taken up to the
third Heaven, feared least he should become a reprobate and S. Peter bred up in
our B. Saviors school, resolved to dye for him, yet shortly after denied him.
If these greare Pillars of the Church shake, and bend and fear breaking, or
actually Break, what may not such Reeds as G. B. and E. W. fear? you see
what grounds we have to fear, from Reason, from the example of the Apostles,
and from their Doctrine.

This is comfortless doctrine to G. B. Page 54.
and therefore had rather throw all on Christ, and persuade himself that
Christ's Prayer was sufficient, his satisfaction sufficient, his merits
sufficient. We need nether pray, nor suffer, nor merit: Believe in him, and he
will do all. Creed firmiter, and pecca fortiter.

Compare now this disposition of modern Catholics (which is the same with
that of the Apostles) with that of a Protestant: their fear with his
confidence: their trembling with his As. surance: their Apprehensions, with his
boldness: and you shall find in Catholics true Hope mingled with fear, as you
may see in Divines, and I have showed out of the Apostles, and in the
Protestant no fear, and consequently no Hope, which is accompanied always by
Fear: but in Lieu of Hope, that vice, which is called Presumption: which is a
sin against the Holy ghost. Timor fundamentum salutis est, says Tertull. l. de
cultu foeminarum c. 2. p. 265. Sperando enim timebimns, timendo cavebimus,
cavendo salvi erimus. contra si praesumamns, neque timendo, neque cavendo
difficile salvi erimus. Fear is the ground work and foundation of our
salvation. Our Hope is mingled with Fear, this makes us take heed, whence
proceeds our security of salvation. When on the contrary, when we presume, we
grow careless, and run great hazard of being lost for ever.

SECTION III. Of Charity, or Love.
CHarity, or the Love of God above all things, is much more esteemed, and
honored amongst us, then amongst you: you rank it (contrary to the Apostle)
even with Faith or seat it on a lower bench: where as we with the Apostle 1.
Cor. 13.13.
believe it to be the Io. 15.12.
commandment of Christ: the Romans 13.10.
fulness of the law: the Col. 3.14.
bond of perfection: which divides Aug.
betwixt the children of the kingdom, and those of perdition: the nuptial
Matthew. 22.11.12.
garment, with which we must enter into the wedding. That is the form of
virtues Council. Trid.
that without it all other virtues, 1. Cor. 13.
gift of tongues, power of working miracles, knowledge of mysteries, nay even
Faith and Hope, are nothing, avayle nothing, are no more to be regarded then
sounding Brass and a tinkling cimball, etc.

In fine, although, with Divines, we are persuaded, that these two great vertus
may be separated, yet we hold their separation to be their ruin: that as
Charity is but superficial; and not real, without the light of Faith, so
Faith is cold, without the warmth of Charity. He, who knows God, without loving
him, is impious: and he who loves without knowing him aryght, is Blind. A
Beleiver without Love is Ungrateful: a Lover without knowledge is senseless
so these two vertus must assist one another; we must aim to have a Living
Faith, which works by love. Galat. 5.6. and Love is the proper work, of
Faith. Opus Fidei dilectio. Aug. tr. 10. in epist. Jo. Love both gives to, and
receives strength from Faith. Charitas robur Fidei: Fides fortitudo Charitatis.
S. Leoserm. 7. in Quadrag. In Heaven there is Love, without Faith (1. Cor.
13.8.10.) In Hell, Faith without Love (Jac. 2.19.) Christians in this life must
have both: for Love without Faith, is the Love of Pagans; and Faith without
Love is the Faith of Devils. But Faith with Charity, is the Faith of the
children of God in this life. Fides quae per dilectionem operatur, ipsa est
Fides quae fideles Dei separat ab immundis daemonibus. Aug. de gratia, and lib.
arbit. cap. 7.

Thus we join together those two great virtues: this we believe, this we
teach of Charity: whilst you out of ill grounded opinion of your Fac totum,
Faith (relying on it for Remission of sins, Justification, Perseverance, and
Salvation) exhaust your Rhetoric so much in commendation of that your
darling, that you have no room to commend Charity, or Good works.

Our Practice as much surpasses yours, as to nourishing Charity, as our
doctrine does: for scing the love of God, and Love of our selves, are opposite,
and the one withers, as the others thrives, their practice must be most proper
to nourish charity, which aims most at mortifyng selve-love: and on the
contrary those who foster self-love, must annihilate Charity.

Now what practice can you show for the mortification of the body, the quelling
our Passions, the renouncing of our will? what documents do you give for
these? what examples can you show since your reformation of them? you have
never been able to find in the three kingdoms a dozen persons of ethersex who
for so many years, would sequester themselves from the enjoyments of the
world, to serve God, in voluntary Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. Whence
comes this, but from selve-love, which abounds in them, and the lack of the
love of God, which might cement their hearts together?

Whence comes that insupportable Pride, which makes your Proselits so
refractory to God, and his vicars, their spiritual, and temporal superiors,
that they are so tenacious of their extravagant phancyes, so stubborn in
their uncouth Resolutions, so intractable in their manners, so humor some in
all their actions, and conversations; but a latent Pride, the proper offspring
of selve-love, and the bane of Charity? Look into the 13. Chapter of the first
to the Corinthians, you shall there find a description of charity, and its
qualityes. Charity suffers long, and is kind: Charity envieth not: Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up: Does not behave it self unseemely:
Seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, Rejoices not
in iniquity, but Rejoices in the truth, Bears all things, beleiveth all
things, hops all things, endures all things. Should I now examine the life of
generally all, who deliver themselves to your direction upon these heads, and
show how little of this appears in your manners, and how much there is quite
contrary to it, the picture, if sincere, would fryght you, or confound you, how
great soever your confidence be.

In fine the words of our Savior to the Angel of Laodicea, may be very fitly
applied to you. Apoc. 3.17.
Thou say: I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing:
And know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind and
naked. God open the eyes of your heart, to see this: that so you may be moved
to seek for gold tried, (spiritual riches) where it is to be found, in the
true Church.

SECTION IV. An Answer to what G. B. objects.
G. B. page 78. Are Papists not taught to conside more in the virgin, or their
Tutelar Saints, them in the Holiest of all.

ANSWER. No: we are taught no such thing.

G. B. Ibidem. Does not the fear of Purgatory damp the hopes of future
Blessedness?

ANS. It does not.

G. B. p. 79. What impious doctrine has been printed in that Church, of the
degree of love, we owe to God?

ANS. I know of no such doctrine of the degrees of love due to God. I know that
all Catholics applaude that saying of S. Bernard: Modus amandi Deum est amare
sine modo. I know that divines require as well as S. Thomas, a mediocry in all
virtues except Charity: that all virtues are betwixt two vices, where of one
offends by exceeding, the other by not reaching its due mesure. And this they
assure even of Hope, which is betwixt presumption, and despair: and of faith,
which is betwixt a lyghtnesse of heart beleiving all things, and a hardness to
believe any thing: love cannot be too great, and so has only one vice
contrary to it, by defect, loving too little. Is this doctrine Impious?

Hence what you say: Some mincing it so, as if they were afraid of his being
too much beloved: This I say, is an untruth: and I challenge you to produce
your Authors, or to be held a Calumniator.

G. B. Ibidem: Some blasphemously teach, that we are not at all bound to love
him.

ANSW. This is also untru. All acknowledge a precept, to love God. But this
being a positive precept; which oblidges only for some determinate time, some
Authors have enquired when that time is? And in resolving this obscure
undecided question there have been some variety of sentiments, without any
difference as to the substance of the precept. If God has revealed to you a
decision of this intricate question, bless the world with that information,
and prove well, what you say: and I assure you we will not blame you for it.

G. B. Ibidem. There is an Impiety in the moralls of some of that Church
particularly amongst the disciples of Loyola beyond what ever was taught
amongst the worst of Heathen Philosophers.

ANSWER 1. You are no competent Judge, in matter of Piety, as being acquainted
nether with the practice, nor Theory of it.

ANSWER. 2. You are not sufficiently informed of the cause, in which you
presume to Judge: having no knowledge at all of one side, and but a very
superficial knowledge of the other. By shooting your bolt so lightly, you
will easier convince the world, that you are inconsiderate, and rash, then that
those you call the disciples of Loyola, are impious.

CHAPTER XXIII. Efficacy of Sacraments.
G. B. page 80. The doctrine of the efficacy of the Sacraments, for conveying
of Grace by the work wrought, Looks like adesigne against all serious
preparation, for the worthy receiving of them.

ANSWER. Many alive still remember, when the Godly could find out Plots,
dangerous Plots, Popish Plots, in every innocent recreation of the Persons
whom they misliked. You imitate exactly those factious sectarys, in fancying
the like dangerous contrivances. Is Attrition with the Sacrament said to
suffice for Justification? It is on a design to destroy Piety. Are Prayers
said in Latin? It is on a design against Piety. Are probable opinions allowed
of? There lies a design against Piety. Are we taught, to do our works with a
good intention? A Popish design against Piety, Are Sacraments connected with
Grace, and said to be efficacious signs of it? It looks like a design
against Piety. And what soever we do, these People suspect a Design, against
Piety. As of the Jews, Isayas Isayes 8.12.
said: whatsoever the People speaks of, is confederacy: Omnia quae loquitur,
populus iste, conjuratio est. So much were they fryghted then, with the
Apprehension of the union betwixt the two kings of Israel, and Syria, and so
struck are you likewise with the apprehensions of Popery.

The Jews surmized A Confederacy out of a real fear. The factious old
Parlimentarians, out of a pretended Fear. What moves you? a real, or only
pretended Fear? or do you speak out of Ignorance of our Tenets? or ill will
to our persons? either may easilier be suspected then any real fear, or
concern for Piety.

We have been taught to acknowledge some virtue in the Sacraments of the new
law, ( in virtue of Christ's institution, and because they are the instruments
to apply the merits of his Passion to our soul) which was not in the Saments of
the old law, nor in any ceremony of humane institution: for S. Paul Galat. 4.9.
calls the Sacraments of the old law, weak and beggarly Elements, in
comparison doubtless of those of the new. These then are more efficacious,
stronger and richer. Yet the others could stir up the receiver to an in ward
disposition, for Grace, nay a ceremony of mere humane institution may have
that force. Wherefore the Sacraments of the new law must, by the work wrought
do more, then to stir up the receiver to good Works.

G. B. page 81. By this Doctrine, be a man never so ill prepared, yet he is
sure of the efficacy of the Sacrament.

ANS. Here you discover your wilful ignorance of our doctrine, that you might
with some color calumniate it. We unanimously teach, that a bad disposition of
the receiver puts a stop, (ponit obicem) to the effect of the Sacrament, and is
it self a sacrilege: and that the Sacrament so received unmorthily, serves
for the damnation of the receiver, as those who receive the body and Blood of
Christ unworthily, 1. Cor. 11.29.
receive judgment against themselves.

CHAPTER XXIV. Probable Opinions, and Good Intentions.
G. B. p. 81. Christ came to fulfill the moral law. Mat. 5.7.

ANSWER. Whence do you learn, that those words of Christ are restrained to
the moral law? did not Christ fulfill the ceremonial law also? sure he did,
both as Antitype, and as never trespassing against it.

G. B. p. 82. Two general doctrines they have, which at two strokes dissolve
all the bonds of virtue. The one is the doctrine of Probability: the other of
geod intention. By the first they teach that with a safe conscience a man may
follow what any Doctor teaches: and some representing the worst actions as
good, there is scarce any sin, but may the ventured on. By the second he may
act any sin, provided he intend some good design. And then you send us to the
Provincial Letters.

ANSWER. What if the Author of those letters, being no Divine, was mistaken in
relating those opinions? what if he renounced the whole party which had engaged
him to write in that scurrilous manner? what if he was sorry before his death,
to have dealt so much with them? what if this can be proved under his Curat's
hand? now this is the plain Truth, as appears by this following Declaration,
given by the Curat of S. Stephen-uppon-the-Hill, to the then Archbishop of
Paris. Here is the substance.

Aujourd'huy 7. Janvier 1665. Nous Hardouin de Perefixe Archevesque de Paris,
sur ce que nous aurions apris, que Monsieur Pascal, lequel avoit la reputation
d'avoir este fort attache au party des Jansenistes, estoit decede dans la
Paroisse de S. Estienne, and qu'il yestoit mort sans recevoir les Sacremens,
avons desire scavoir de Mr. Paul Beurrier Religieux de S. Genevieve, and Cure
de S. Estienne, si ce qu'on nous avoit rapporte etoit vray, qu'il fut mort
attache au party des Jansenistes. Sur quoy ayant interroge ledit Sieur Cure de
S. Estienne, and sum de dire la verite, apres l'avoir promis, a repondu,
qu'il avoit connu ledit Sieur Pascal six semaines avaunt son deces, qu'il
l'avoit confess plusieurs fois, and administre le S. Viatique, and le
Sacrement d'Extreme Onction, and que dans toutes les conversations qu'il a eu
avec luy pendant sa malady, il a remarque que ses sentimens etoyent toujours
fort Orthodoxes, and somis parfaitement a l'Eglise, and a N.S.P. le Pape. De
plus il luy a temoigne dans une conversation familiere, qu'on l'avoit autrefois
embarasse dans le party de ces Messieurs, mais que depuis deux ans il s'en
etoit retire, parce qu'il avoit remarque, qu'ils alloyent trop avaunt dans les
matieres de la Grace, and qu'ils paroissoyent avoir moins de soumission, qu'ils
ne devoyent, pour N.S.P. le Pape........ Et que depuis deux ans, il s'etoit
tout a fait attache aux affairs de sonsalut, and aun dessein qu'il avoit
contre les Athees, and les Politiques de ce temps en matiere de Religion.......
F. P. BEURRIER.

You see here in this Declaration signed by the Curate, who assisted the
Author of the Provincial Letters, at this Death, that he had been engaged,
or entangled, in the party of the Iansenists, that he found their sentiments
were not tolerable, or orthodox, in those two capital points, of Grace, and
Submission to the sea Apostolic: that upon that score he had withdrawn from
them, and abandoned them. Yet you will have us go to him. Well: I will comply
with you: and from him I learn two things: one, that he blames some cases of
private men. Another, that those cannot be charged on the Roman Catholic
Church. Thus if Istand to his verdit your accusation will be cast out of the
court, as lying against the whole; not against a part only. If you say: believe
him when he accuses some, but not when he absolves others, do you think us so
weak, as to give credit to him, when you please, and when you please to recall
it? what is this, but to give, and at the some time take away his judicial
authority? to name him Judge Arbiter, and tie him to speak only what you
please. But I will leave him, and speak to the thing.

That you may conceive, what are probable opinions, you are to take notice,
that moral actions may be reduced to four classes: to such as are evidently
good, evidently bad, uncertain, and indifferent: according as they are related
to the law (whither Divine Ecclesiastical, or Civil) which is their proper
Rule. Those are evidently good, which are clearly conformable to the law: As to
love God: or deal with others as we would bedealt by. Those are evidenly bad,
which are contrary to the law: as to blaspheme God, or to wrong our neighbor.
Those are indifferent, which are nether commanded, nor forbidden, as to wash
your hands Mat. 15.
before eating, used by the Pharisyes. Those are uncertain, when a law is
known, but it is unknown whither it oblidges in some circumstances. For
example: the resisting an enemy 1. Macchab. 2.38.
who attackes you, on a Sabbath day, and repayring the breahes which he makes.

As to the first class Actions evidently good, Probability does not look on
them, as its object.

The same for those, which are evidently bad: They can never be committed
without offending God. If any hold the contrary, stone him; the stones will not
hit me, nor any Jesuit, unless by such an accident, as befell Jupiter in
Lucian, when directing his thunder bolt at a blasphemer, he mist him, and hit,
and fired Pallas her Temple. And what you say, of committing any any sin, with
directing intention, is so great a calumny, that no good intention of
opposing Popery, will excuse it.

The third class, of Actions uncertain in themselves, are properly the object
of probable Opinions: whilst it is not certain whither the laws oblidges hic,
and nunc, or no, in these circumstances, which are not specifyed in the law:
yet alter very much the nature of the Action. There being no evident principle
to show it to be lawful, or unlawful, the Judgment we frame of it, must be an
Opinion only, and if the reason be strong, it is called a probable Opinion. For
example: the Jews 1. Macab. 2.40.41.
(hearing that their Brethren had been assaulted on a Sabbath, and not
resisting, for fear of breaking the Sabbath by working on it, were all
killed,) Resolved notwithstanding that command to make what resistance they
could on that day. Which Resolution was grounded on a probable opinion: for on
the one side was the let er of the law prohibiting all labor on that day:
then, they might think God would protect them, whilst they kept his law, as he
Exodus 34.24.
conserved their goods; whilst they went thrice a year to the Temple: and if
he did not please to defend them miraculously, they might think, it was his
will, that they should glorify him by giving their lives, rather then break
his commandment: which persuasion possessed the greatest part of Chriltians,
near the Apostles times, as may be seen in Tert. Apologetick. On the other
side, they considered the law of nature oblidging to seek selfe-preservation:
and that to expect a miracle was to tempt God, etc. Hence they concluded, that
it was lawful to labor for self defense even on the Sabbath.

To make an Opinion probable, Suarez Suarez dis. 12. de bonit. and malit.
requires that it be nether contrary to the sense of the Church, nor to any
opinions commonly received, and that it be grounded on Authority, and Reason
great above exception. All Divines even the largest, require a wayghty motive,
a strong reason, and that even co^payring it with the contrary motives:
otherwise they agree, that the Opinion will not be probable; but dangerous,
rash, and improbable. See two large treatises, composed by R. F. Antony Teril,
(agreate ornament of the Society, and an honor to our Nation) in defense of
this Rule of conscience. You will find in him a solid discourse, well
grounded, and gravely handled, as Truth should be delivered; without any of
that Booffonnerye, which accompagnyes the Author of the Provincial Letters,
which may be tolerable in a Comedy, but not in a treatise of Divinity.

This I think cannot be doubted of in Thesi, or in general. I will not deny,
but in hypothesi, in particular doubts, or questions some men have not stuck
so close to the letter of the law, as they should: as Fr. Teril does deplore.
But those men's assertions do not take away what we have said: for their
private sentiments, not well grounded, deserve not the name of probable
Opinions.

The last class of Actions, are those called indifferent, as not being
mentioned in any law. These must draw all the morality they have Ex intention
sive voluntate operantis. In those a good intention of the man who produces
them, or his will to do them for the love of God, gives them a good morality,
which of themselves they have not: as on the contrary a bad intention gives
them the nature of fin.

Hence what you say, that our doctrine is, any sin may be committed innocently,
by directing our intention, is a great untruth, and as great a calumny. No
intention can justify a bad Action; but a bad intention may vitiate the best
action: as to give an Alms Mat. 6.2.
for vanity. Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quocumque defectu, is a maxim
never more true, then in moral actions. We are taught in the Catholic Church,
not only to do good things; but to do them well: not only to do just
things; but to dothem justly: nor pious things; but piously, non tantum bona,
justa, pia; verum etiam been, just, pie. Nay a pious modern Author says,
that God regards more the Adverbes; then the nounes, or verbes: for example: A
Judge hears attentively a cause pleaded before him, in order to give sentence,
secundum allegata and probata: the action of it self is good; yet his
intention may mend, or mar it. Does he that, for his lawful allowance, it is
of small merit. Regards he his duty to his Prince, and country; it is better:
If for God, it is best of all. But does he intend by it to pleasure a friend,
or practice Revenge on an enemy, although his sentence be just; yet he is unjust
in pronouncing it, to satisfy his own passions of love, or hatred. This is our
doctrine, this we teach, this we practice, which you understand not: and your
perpetual fault is, to speak Jude v. 10.
evil of things which you know not. If you desire further information of our
doctrine in this point, see S. Franc. de Sales l. 11. de Amore Dei c. 13.

CHAPTER XXV. Whither Papists allow to Break the Commandments?
FRom page 83. titt 91. you charge Catholics with teaching to break the
co^mandments: and produce several cases, for proof of it. To which, what I
have already said may be a sufficient return, and satisfactory Answer.

For if the Resolutions of those persons be not well grounded on solid reason,
I renounce them: so does the Church. If they be justifiable, why should you,
or we condemn them? Woe I say 1.20.
unto them, who call evil good, and good, evil: that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for litter. So that those are to blame, who call good, evil, as
well as those who call evil good. The lawgiver may make what laws he please:
our duty is to Judge according to the law he gives us, when the case is clear:
when it is obscure. to guess at it, as near as we can. And amongst the clear
laws, I reckon that, not to Judge other men, who are Romans 14.4.
God's servants, and by his Judgment alone must stand, or fall.

This general answer might suffice, considering I write not here a treatise of
moral divinity. Yet I will run over some of the particular cases specifyed by
you and consequently, which may seem to be with you of greater force.

G. B. page 84. Against the first commandment, they worship Angels, and Saints,
with Acts due only to God. The second is violated by Image Worship.

ANSWER. Here are your boiled Cabbadge over and over again. Both parts are
false, as is above said.

G.B. Ididem: The third is made void by the Popes dispensing with oaths.

ANS. I have spoken to this already Chapter 20.
I suppose you will not deny, that when an oath is unlawful, (v. c. the
covenant) it may be dispensed with. Item if it become impossible: as of a
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem on foot, and the man become Lame. Item, if the thing
become dangerous, or inconvenient as to lend a sword, when you hear for
certain the man designs to hill his enemy with it. Or if you promised to keep
another company, and after discover he would carry you to fight a Duel, take a
purse, or to a naughty house. What think you? are you or any other, bound to
keep dangerous, inconvenient, impossible, unlawful oaths? If not why may
there not be a power in the Church to declare for the ease of timorous
consciences, when those Oaths cease to oblidge? And why may not this Power be
acknowledged in the Pope as well, as in others?

But is the dispensing with Oaths a Prerogative of God? sure it is not: Seeing
God, who declared their force, Exodus 20.
Leaves Number. 39.
to some a Power to dispense with them, as to fathers, and Husbands, over those
of their children, and wives.

G.B. Ibidem. The Breach of the fourth (keeping the Sabbath) is not denied: it
being usually amongst them a day of mercating, dancing, and foolish Iollity.

ANS. What you charge ou us here (not keeping the Sabbath) was charged on our
Savior, and his Apostles by the Scribes, and Pharisyes, and is reproached to
Protestants, by the Puritans. I do not deny, but many are defective in this
observance, and that as other commands, so this, has suffered. Yet I think, I
could as easily find instances for the very things, you reproach to us amongst
you, as you amongst us. I will nor excuse all that is done amongst Catholics,
and believe you would find it hard enough to justisy all that is done by yours.
Yet I will tell you, that unless you will condemn Christ, and his Disciples,
and justify the slanders of the Scribes, and Pharisyes against them, you must
acknowledge that there is a preciseness of Duty, not intended by Alm. God. And
it is very remarkable, that several accusations of the Breach of the Sabbath
having been brought to our Savior, by the Scribes and Pharisyes, Christ
always blamed their blind, indiscreete Zeal, and retorted the accusations,
alleging several of their customs undefenfable; but never seconded the
accusation; quite contrary, either confounded the accusers, by minding them of
their own faults, or excused the fact from guilt. Which is a sufficient
proof, that the law of God does not require that superstitious observance
which the Scribes, the Puritans, and you require, for want of which you blame
us, and are your self blamed by others.

Yet I will not excuse all that is done by Catholics in this matter, which
cannot be charged on the Church, because she condemns, and censures it.

I must take notice here of a craft you use in this place, to mingle true and
false things together. For example page 85. That children may lawfully intend
killing their Parents: (Is false) that they may marry without their consent, is
doubted by none, I think, as to the validity of the marriage, unless there be
some municipall laws providing against it. Item page 86. They bar the chergy
the use of marriage (is true) that they allow concubinate, is false. By which
petty art you surprise your Reader, and puzzle one who undertakes an Answer.

Were I minded to imitate you, in giving a prospect of your garden and that
without offending Truth, as you have done, I could show matter enough for your
confusion, or for your zeal, if it be real. I never was with in it, I thank
God: and the greatest part of my life I have past at a distance almost out of
sight of it: yet fame has brought enough, to make a woeful description of it.
It is not needful to pierce Ezech. 8.8.9.
your walls, to discover wicked abominations: only looking over them with a
perspective glass a man may discover weeds, and thorns, and cockle, and what
not? They are unclean creatures, who delyght to wallow in dirt, or stir
about filth, which of it self yields an ungrateful smell, much more when
moved. An ancient Heretic Tertul. lib. contra Hermogenem, c. 1. p. 411.
thought it a sign of a good conscience to speak ill of every body. You may
with the ignorant multitude much easyer obtain the esteem of Piety and Zeal
by speaking ill of others, then doing well your self, and by blaming others
lives, then correcting your own. A secret malignity in nature prompts some to
detract from the good name of their neighbors, and disposes the Hearers to
receive with pleasure the detractions. Both Calumniator, and his Hearers,
follow in this the vicious inclinations of corrupt nature. But these must be
overcome, when true virtue is aimed at: and that is hard. You follow the easier
course, and the most taking with men, whom you affect to please. But how your
conscience at present, and God here after, will approve of this, I leave to
your more serious consideration. Maledicimur and benedicimus, says the Apostle
1. Cor. 4.12.
We are spoken ill of, and we speak well, or being reviled, we bless. Truly I
had rather find matter for a Panegyric, then for a Satyr, and should be more
willing to write some good of you, then otherwise, if there were any such
belonging to you as Protestants. But knowing no such thing, I will supply that
part, by Prayers, that God will put you into away of being so, by bringing you
to his Faith, which now you impugn: I wish it were 1. Tim. 1.13.
ignorans in incredulitate through Ignorance, or mere want of Instruction,
your sin world be less, and your conversion not so desperate.

CHAPTER XXVI. Riches, and Pride of Churchmen.
FRom p. 91. titt. 100. we have a long enumeration of the Riches and Pride, and
Ambition of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, and all Churchmen. You blame the
sumptuousness of our Church ornaments, the solemnity of our Processions, the
majesty of our Ceremonys, etc. which things being not of Faith, I think my
self notoblidged to answer further, then by showing a good use may be made of
them.

I grant that Christ founded his Church in real Poverly: he sent his Apostles
to preach with order to live Luc. 10: 8.
upon what they found in the places whither, they went: and be content with
what was given them. He gave them a right to a subsistence: declaring that Mat.
10.10.
a work man deserves his diet. And that 1. Cor. 9.13.
he who serves the Altar, ought to live of it. And although S. Paul wat pleased
not to make use of this Right commonly, for a very good reason: yet the rest
did and he might lawfully have done every where, and actually did it at
Philippi (Philip. 4.15.) Yet I do not find that ever our B. Savior stinted
the Apostles, so as if any thing were freely given, beyond what was merely
necessary, they should be oblidged to refuse it, or restore the overplus to the
donors. Nether do I find your Brethren in the ministry commend very much your
first Reformers for retrenching some of your Bishop's lands, although they left
enough for not only a competent but a noble subsistence: nay your modern W. L.
and Heylin.
writers accuse them of sacrilege. And I do not hear, that your richer
Bishops, do break their shins with have, to restore the surplus of their
Revenues to the heirs of the donors: which they were bound to restore, if it
were not lawful for Churchmen to enjoy more, then what is necessary. Since the
fall of Religion, indeed the Protestant Church has not much increased her
revenues: which rather proceeds form lack of charity in your layty, who give
you nothing: (or because the wife, and children sweep away what remains by
each incumbent at his death) then to your love of Poverty, for which virtue you
have refused it, when offered. I have heard, at least of none, who would refuse
a manor, (or other considerable Boon) when freely given: and the hard usage,
which some of your tenants complain of, from their Ecclesiastical landlords,
proves sufficiently, that you are not insensible to the allurements of the
attractive metal.

Were Church men such as they ought to be the layty would have little reason to
repine at their riches, although much greater then they are. If they were
Treasurers of the Poor, Fathers to the Orphans, Helps to widows, Hosts to
strangers, Protectors to the Oppressed, and common Sanctuaryes to all
necessitous persons such as some are in Catholic Churchs, whom I know, and
many of whom we read. To such as these Riches are no hindrance to their
function: they give them only occasion of doing much good, and practicing their
Charity. If you think this to be blame worthy, although Riches be so employed,
prove what you say out of Scripture: and excuse your own Bishops from that
crime, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.

Voluntary real Poverty is much commended in the Mat. 19.21.
Ghospel: and we have thousands in our Church who profess it,, and live in it;
and you could never get ten of your communion to embrace it. There is another
Poverty called of Spirit, commended Mat. 5.3.
nay and Mat. 19.24.
commanded in the Scripture: and how great soever a stranger you are to
spiritual things, yet you will not say, that this Poverty of heart is
inconsistant with effectual riches: otherwise it would be impossible for arich
man to be saved. A man may be a beggar, and yet be far from that Poverty of
Spirit, which gives him a right to the kingdom of Heaven, because his heart is
fixed upon things he has not. And on the contrary another man may be master of
agreate part of the world and yet have his heart as free from it, as if he was
not in the world: and to use the Apostles phrayse 1. Cor. 7.31.
use the world, as if he used it not. Of this sort of poor of spirit there are
many in the Church, and always have been. Hear S. Austin l. de moribus
Ecclesiae. c. 35. Sunt in Ecclesia Catholica innumer abiles fideles, qui hoc
mundo non utuntur; sunt qui utuntur, tanquam non utentes: there are innumerable
faithful in the Church, who make no use of the world: there are others, who
use it, of if they used it not. What has the Protestant Church to say here?

Pride, and Ambition are personal vices: so belong not to this treatise. Yet
I will say, that there have been both Ancient and Modern Popes, who have
given greater examples of humility, then any your Church can show; and who have
made appear, that their title, servant of the servants of God, is no
compliment. Sixtus V. would not own his mother, when she was brought to him in
rich clothes: sayng his mothers was a poor woman, who never wore silks in her
life, she was ashepe herds wife. The next day she being brought to him in
Rags, he presently acknowledged her. Some of them have asserted the Privileges
of their chair, against such as in trenched on their Ryghts: which may be done
without any Pride at all, seeing they require it as due, not to their own
persons; but to their chair, to its founders, S. Peter, and to his superior,
Christ Jesus. I never heard S. Ambrose suspected of Pride, for refusing to
admit Theodosius the great into the Church, before his Penance for the
slaughter at Thessalonica, or for excluding him the cancells after it. It was a
Zeal of the glory of God, and the good of the Church, which moved him: the
Emperor him self understood it so.

As for precious ornaments of the Church: I will own ours, to be too costly,
when you shall have proved, that any thing is too good for God's service; not
till then. The infinite Majesty of God is ground sufficient to oblidge us to
bear him the greatest respect interiourly, and express our duty to our
Creator, and our gratitude to so great a benefactour, by returning to him in
the best manner we can an acknowledgement of his most bountiful gifts. This
serves also to stir up in the auditory submission, respect and adoration,
which otherwise would fail.

CHAPTER XXVII. Unity of the Church in Faith, and Sacraments. G.B. ownes that
Protestants are Schismatics, of severity against dissenters: and of Hugo
Grotius.
G.B. page 100. A fourth design of Christian Religion was to unite man kind
under one head into one body, not by love, and pardoning injurys only; but also
by associating the faithful into one body, the Church, which was to be united
by bonds of love: Governed by Pastors and Teachers, and cemented with the
ligaments of the Sacraments.

ANSWER. You say something (though discorderly) but not all: for 1. you omit
Faith, by which we are inserted into the body of Christ. 2. You put Charity,
which does not make us parts; but living parts of that body, whose parts we are
by Faith. 3. You add Sacraments, which are only exterior signs of interior
communication. 4. You confound Charity and Sacraments, as equally concurring to
the Unity of the Church: yet there is a vast difference betwixt them: the one
formally quickening the members of the Church interiourly, the other only
effecting it interiourly, and testifying it exteriourly. 5. Betwixt the
Sacraments there is a vast difference, as to this (and you confound them) for
Baptism, being our Regeneration in Christ, is an efficient cause of our union
with him, and makes us his members: the others are designed only to nourish
those, who are already united to, and in him. When you speak of being governed
by Pastors, I hope the Pope may find place amongst them, he being the prime
Pastor.

G. B. page 101. The Ghospel pronounces us free, and no more servants, of men,
but of God.

ANSW. Free from the ceremonial law of Moses; not from that of the Ghospel,
and obedience to the Governors of the Church. How changeable are your
sentiments? In the forgoing page 100. the Church was to be governed by Pastors
and Teachers: now she is to obey none but God: and if any man pretend to
command, he changes the authority of the Church into a tyrancall yoke. So we
must have Governors, without authority to command: and subjects, without any
duty to obey. A new model of Government!

G. B. page 101. Those things for which we withdrew from the Church, are
additions to our Faith. She added to Scriptures, Traditions: to God, Images,
to Christ, Saints: to Heaven and Hell, Purgatory: to two Sacrament five more:
to the spiritual presence of Christ, his corporal presence.

ANS. Never man spoke more, and proved less then you: who offer not one word
in proof of these disputed points, which we declare to be evident untruths. Is
not this a poor begging of the thing in question? But they are, say you,
additions to your Faith. Did we add to your Faith: or you cut off from ours,
and that of the whole Christian world, before your deformation? How could we
add those things to your Faith, when they were in peacable possession all over
the Christian world, as you own your selves, many ages before Protestancy was
thought on?

You have here only one truth viz. that you withdrew from the Church. Which
convincingly proves the guilt of Schism to lie at your door.

G. B. page 105. If a Society of Christians visible swerve from Christ, so
that communion cannot be retained with it, without departing from Christ, then
the departing from the corruptions hrought in, can be no departing from the
Church. If then it appear that the Roman Church has departed from the truth
of the Ghospel, those who separated from her cannot be said to separate from
the true Church.

ANSWER. Here we have a Paralogisme, which might better become a Junior
Sophister, then a Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. You will see it in
these instances: The communion of that Church ought to be renounced, which
oblidgeth her Children to Mahometisme. If then the Inglish Protestant Church
oblidge hers to that, her communion ought to be renounced. Another: That man
deserves the greatest contempt, who writes controversy, and has nothing to
write, but calumnyes and Sophismes. If then Mr. G. B. has nothing else, but
such stuff to fill his books with, he knows his deserts. What think you, Sir,
of such arguments? which serve only to delude an unwary reader into an assent
of what you would, but cannot prove.

There is no Logician, but knows that conditional Propositions signify only
the connextion betwixt two things under such a condition; but they assert
nothing absolutely, unless the condition be proved. For example: If a man
slyes, he has wings: If the Heavens fall we shall catch larkes. These, I say
are granted to be trn, although the condition be impossible. Yet those who grant
them, do not expect those wings, to go a Journey, nor rely on those larkes for
a supper. In like manner suppose we should grant your conditional illation,
yet the guilt of schism would lie on our consciences, because you nether do,
nor can prove the condition upon which your excuse relyes.

G. B. page 106. The cruelty of Papists extended it self to as much bloody, and
barbarous rage, as ever sprung from Hell.

ANSW. You mean, the laws made against Heretics: which being made by the
secular Power, and not by Churchmen, I think my self not oblidged to vindicate
them. Yet seeing the most severe of them all, the faggot, was til of late (as I
am informed) in force in Ingland, and has been actually executed upon some
since the Reformation, I leave you to Answer to our Honorable Judges, for your
Pragmaticall boldness, in censuring them so severely. Another would take
notice of the laws in force against Papists: But I let that pass. It is enough
to vindicate our Churchmen, that they never made those laws, they never
condemned any man to them. All they do is to Judge of the matter of fact,
whither a person be guilty of Heresy: and if they find him so, to leave him to
the secular Power. This is the most, that ever the Inquisition did, as far as I
ever heard.

G. B. p. 108. Grotius says, that in Charles the V.'s time more, then one
hundred thousand, were butchered on the account of Religion. And in his son
Philip's time the D.d' Alva did in a short time cut down 36000.

ANSWER. Grotius was an eminent man for several things; but not renowned for
his skill in Arithmetic, I have heard from one well acquainted with him, that
he could not count ten: that he knew not the ordinary current money of his
country: that when he escaped out of prison, he had like to have been
discovered by a ferry man, by that ignorance; he was so noted for it. So I
should not wonder, that he were mistaken in his calculation of so many
thousands. Secondly, it is probable, hereckons into the number of those
butchered, such as perished in the Boores war in Germany, and wars of the low
countries: whose death must be put to the account of their Rebellion, not to
that of Religion. Thirdly he writ in favor, and defense of the States cause:
to whose vindication it was necessary, that the motives of their taking arms
against their Sovereign, should be aggravated to the utmost. We all remember
the infamous inscription put over the Niche, where the statue of the late King
of Happy memory stood: all the world knows that without any disparageme^t to
the rest there never before had been a king, who less deserved such a title;
yet no doubt had that usurped Government continued, stories would have been
invented to prove it, and those concerned in the Rebellion, would have believed
them, as you do Grotius. Lastly suppose all Grotius says true, It follows only,
that it was the misfortune of those great Princes to have many offenders in
that kind in their time, provoke the sword of Justice. As if in Ingland a
spirit of theiving should spread it self amongst the People, for which in the
time of the best of Kings many may suffer, yet without reflecting on the honor
of the King, or equity of the laws. These are not crimes of the Government; but
misfortunes, for which Princes are to be pittyed, not reproached with them.

CHAPTER XXVIII. Zeal of souls in our Bishops. And concerning Reformers.
Where, of S. Cyran, Arnaud, and Jansenius.
G.B. p. 111. What do Popes about feeding of souls? when do they preach the
Ghospel? or dispense the Sacraments?

ANSWER. They do it daily, by all those persons, who by authority derived from
them do it. As our Kings administer Justice by their Judges. And did you
enquire of those who have been at Rome, you would hear, that Popes do
administer Sacraments in person.

Ibidem. Cardinals, Bishops, and Abbots, imitats their Holy father, abandoning
wholly the work of the Ghospel.

ANSWER. You cannot discover better who is your master, and what a proficient
you are in his school, then by venting such palpable untruths. Cardinal
Barbarin Deane of the Sacred College has been known, to accompany many
times malefactors to the Gallows, heard their confessions, moved them to a
detestation of the sins, which brought the in to that punishment, raised them
up to hopes of pardon through the merits of our b. Savior: and comfort them
with hopes of a happy life, after that tragical end of this. I name him in
particular because he is, known to many of our Nation, who have and do
acknowledge his civilitye to to them, although of a different persuasion. In time
of the great Plague, under Alexander VII. he visited in person places
infected, inquired after the wants, informed of the diligence of the Officers
appointed for the releife of the sick, and provided according as occasions
required both for soul, and body. S. Charles Borromeus, a Cardinal and Arch
Bishop gave so great examples of Pastoral Vigilance, and Apostolical Zeal,
that none of our Reformed Prelates ever will imitate them. Your confidence is
admirable in relating such evident untruths, which all who have seen France or
Flanders can contradict. Inquire of the life of the present Lord Bishop of
Gant: of several in France: and if you have one ounce of good blood in your
body, some of it will appear on your face.

G. B. page 112. I deny not, but not even these last ages have produced great
men amongst the Papists who seem to have designed the reviving of the ancient
discipline, both among the Clergy, and the people. But as these instances are
rare, so they were hated, and persecuted: witness Arnold's book of the
frequent communion, Iansenius and S. Cyran.

ANSWER. There is no pretense more dangerous, or even fatal to both Church and
state, then that of reforming abuses, and reviving antiquated laws, which
serves every Pragmaticall head, as soon as he has read the ancient statutes,
or Canons (though the understands the sense of nether) to detract from the
present government, and (if by meeting others as rash as himself, he is enabled
for such awork) to endeavor the change of it, under the specious pretext of
Reformation. You must own the truth of this, unless you will justify the late
rebellion in Ingland, which was begun, carried on, and finished under that
color.

The opinions of men are as different, as their faces, scarce ever two alike:
educatio^, diet, company, friends, business, and other extrinsick occasions
alter our Judgment of things: many more have influence on our Judgment of
Governments, But most of all, love and hatred have an imperceptible, yet
unresistible force over our understanding: so that one, and the same action
will to one seem to deserve a Panegyric, which to another shall be the
subject of a Satyr, merely because they are variously affected to the person
who acts. Some, in fine, are so wayward, humor some, and peevish, as to be
displeased with what ever is done by others; who can agree with no body, not
because every body gives, but because they take from every body occasions, of
offenses.

It it a great error, to think that every one who blames another, has Reason
for it. Noman over was so holy, so perfect, so wise, as to satisfy every
body, and find no Momus, who blamed him. S. Paul was held a blasphemer and an
enemy, not only to the Ephesian Act. 9.
Diana; but also to the Temple Act. 24.
of Jerusalem. What less guilty, then the Apostles? yet some thought to do
God Joan. 16.2.
good service in killing them. What more innocent, then Jesus newly borne? yet
he was forced Mat. 2.13.
to aflyght to save his life. What less reprehensible, then his doctrine, his
man's, his miracles, his person? yet his doctrine Mat. 26.65.
has been accused of blasphemy, his manners Mat. 11.19.
of Gluttony, his Luc. 11.15.
miracles of magic, and his person Mar. 3.31.
of being beside him self. None ever had a mission from Heaven, with more
convincing proofs of Miracles, then Moyles and Christ: yet both had their
Schismatics, Moses not only Core, and his fellows; bur also Aaron, and Mary,
and Christ had, the Capharnaits, Scribes, and Pharisyes, and one of his
Apostles. And if we do not shut our ears, we shall hear God himself by
horrid blasphemys censured for bad governing the world: and even for not
creating it well: man by a presomptuous folly preferring his own dim lyghts
before the 1. Tim. 6.16.
inaccessible light of God, before whom even man's 1. Cor. 3.19.
greatest widome is folly.

It is therefore a great folly for any one to hope to give satisfaction to
all, or even to avoyde censure of some. That is a good fortune, not granted to
Saints, Martyrs, Apostles, or even Christ himself, Romans 9.1.
God Blessed for ever more and with what probability can any man hope for it?
Our endeavors must be, to give no ground for detraction, and so to behave our
selves, as nothing may be reproacht us with Truth.

Governments are more obnoxious to censures as including greater variety of
Actions and designs, in which more persons are concerned as Acting in, or
suffering by them. This makes a vast diversity of Judgments of Judgments in
several persons, according as they fancy themselves regarded, or neglected,
advanced, or kept back, benefitted, or prejudiced by them: and according as
they hope, or fear from them. A private man possessed with an opinion, of his
own abilitye, (which no body sees, but himself, nor he nether, but through
self-love) shall think him self as fit to fit at the Helm, as those who do:
and finding his preferment not to answer the opinion he has of his own
capacity, thinks him self wronged by those, who are advanced before him. To
revenge this imaginary wrong, he commits a reallone, by blaspheming higher and
lower Powers, calumniating their Actions, censuring their commands, and judging
their judgments. Erecting within himself (through a criminal rashness, and
ridiculous Ambition) a Tribunal over those, to whom by Public Authority, he
is subject. This man by some weaker then himself, shall be looked on as a wise
man, a Zealot of the public good, and a good Patriot: when in reality not
Prudence but Passion governes his tongue: Which only vents some indigested
choler.

I grant that in all governments there are some inconveniences, which we may
wish were corrected. The Passions of some, the weakness of others, cause
disorders, which may be punished; but not prevented. Those who govern, are not
always at their own disposal sometimes to pleasure their friends, sometimes
to accoyde displeasing others, they are in a manner forced to some things,
which were they left to themselves they would not do. They must sometimes give
way to a lesser evil to avoyde greater. In which they deserve rather
compassion, then Blame: more over they are indeed greater then others, yet not
Gods; but men: not omniscient; but ignorant of many things which pass in their
government, and it may be are acted in their name, and by their authority, yet
contrary to their intentions, which are (supposed to be) always, for the
public good. It may be they know the thing, and dislike it; but know not how
to remedy it without some other inconvenience (the avoiding of all faults, is
reserved for Heaven) Amongst men, he is best, who has fewest faults, not he
who has none (such an one is a thymera) and small ones may be connived at, in
consideration of great virtues. Thus every private man ought to suppose that
the supreme magistrate either does not know the faults of those he employes, or
thinks them not considerable, or knows not how to remedy them without incurring
others as great, or greater.

What is the duty then of a private man, who sees these miscarriages? 1. To
pray God, to mend all, or at least to prevent bad consequences. 2. If they have
occasion and abilityes to acquaint those, who may redress things, with what he
thinks a miss and suggest, if he can a proper remedy: yet to leave the
applying that remedy to those who are charged with the public concern. 3. In
case he be involved in common, or private sufferings, he ought to bear it
patiently, and expect the turn of the Tide. 4. He may reform his own life,
and actions according to the severest laws of state and cannons of the Church
provided he become, not by that trouble some to his neighbors (over whom he
has no authority) or dangerous to superiors (whose authority over him is
establitht by God) or disturb the public Peace, which is to be preferred before
all advantages, which can be hoped from those petty Reformers, or their
Reformations. 5. Having done that, he ought to content himself, and press
lawful superiors no further, assuring himself he has fully complied with the
utmost of his duty, by acquainting his Rulers with what he thinks, is for the
public good, and by correcting himself. And he may suppose, that if these do
not follow his advice, either they see the thing not feasible, or fore see other
inconveniences, or expect some fitter conjuncture. Where as by further urging,
he cannot but offend: for to communicate his dislikes to others, to draw them,
first to join in Petitioning, with a seeming submission, then by a real
violence to force superiors to what they pretend, to unsettle the present
Government; and to aim at setting up a new one, under pretense of reforming
the old, is in the state Sedition, and in the Church Schism: as great crimes
against both, as any, except Rebellion and Heresy, to which they dispose.

So that this Reforming humor in particulars, is the daughter of Pride, and
mother of Heresy and Rebellion. Which makes it be suspected by all lawful
superiors in all established Governments, till they know all the particulars of
which it consists. Absalon 2. Reg. 15.
alleged plausible reasons, for altring the Government of Israel, and Oza 2.
Reg. 6.
for upholding the Arc with his hand. The first that the state was abandoned,
no body looking to the administration of Justice. The second, that the Arc was
in danger of being overturned. Both greviously offended, exceeding the bounds
assigned them by God, not withstanding their specious pretenses.

Now to the subject of your complaint. The Roman Catholic Church, holding her
Faith by Tradition of all ages from the Apostles, and never admitting the least
alteration in it, from which she is preserved by the help of the Holy Ghost,
promised to her by Heb. 12.2.
the Author, and finisher of it: In this she knows there can be no occasion
for it, by any error. As to her discipline, she acknowledges some
alterations, and has no difficulty to admit of a Reformation provided things
be done according to order. This appears first by her Councils, even that of
Trent, and several celebrated in France, and Germany, in this last age.
Secondly by the practice of several Prelates, S. Charles Borromeus in Italy, S.
Francis de Sales in France, and others elsewhere. Thirdly by those of a lower
rank, as of S. Philip Nerius, who established the Congregation of the Oratory in
Italy: Pere Berule (after wards Cardinal) who established that in France: Pere
Vincent de Paul, who founded the Priests of the Mission: all Congregations of
Clergy living in common, under the obedience of their several superiors.
Lastly did you regard what they are, not what they are said to be, and as much
consult the Rules, and Lives of the Jesuits, in themselves, as you do in the
writings of their professed enemies, (whose testimony for that reason you ought
to suspect) you would be forced to own, that S. Ignatius de Loyola has
reformed the Clergy establishing a Congregation of Clergymen, who live more
conformably to the most ancient Canons, and to the Ecclesiastics of the
primitive Church, then any your whole reformation has, or shall be ever able
to show. Which you would perceive, did you reflect that the numerous and bitter
Enemies which they have had, never do alleadg any things against their lives,
or Rules: which is a convincing proof they are irreprochable,

Now a word to those, whom you commend for endeavoring a Reformation of the
R.C.

Iean du Verger Abbot of S. Cyran, was only a private Priest, not a Doctor of
Divinity nor recomended by any other degree, which might distinguish him from
the meanest: having no Jurisdiction, even over the Abbey of which hebore the
title. But his personal endowments, other to good or evil, were exceeding
great: A large, and comprehensive fancy, a tenacious memory, and a Judgment,
to use all his learning seasonably: Deep melancholy, abounding with adust
choler was his temper: the first fitted him for the labor of hard studyes: the
second emboldened him to write, whatsoever be fancyed, without any regard to
persons how great soever. Those who particularly knew him, say, that no
history shows a man of a more intriguing wit, and fitter to head a faction. For
using too much this faculty, he was by the King's authority cast into prison,
being accused by a Bishop (whom he had before invehgled) who discovered his
designs through horror of them. Cardinal de Richelieu being solicited to
release him R.S. late Bishop of Calcedon, answered. You Lordship does not know
the man you speak for. Had our fathers dealt so with Calvin, France had
enjoyed Peace. Now I would know of Mr. B. whither it be tolerable for a private
man, to caball in his own Church, to frame a party in it besides and contrary
to the orders of its lawful superiors, oppose all established order, to
unsettle old customs, and introduce new ones, to make for a new Government? If
you approve this in S. Cyran, how can you blame it in your Phanaticks?

Antony Arnaud was once a Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, but was cast out of
it, and degraded by the other Doctors, for his odd sentiments in matters of
Grace, which he obstinately defended, even after they were censured by Rome,
France, and his own Faculty. And why might not that faculty retrench from its
body members, who refuse to submit to the major part; as by the law of nature
all are bound to do, where there appears no sin? I know of no other
persecution he ever endured. As to his book of the frequent Communion, it
tended not the reforming, but to the destroying the Sacrament of Penance, as
is seen by its effects, where it prevayles. I will not say he designed so
much, I leave intentions to God, the Hieremy 17.10.
Searcher of hearts. Many times a Buke is shot as, and a man is killed. How ever
it was unexcusable in him to endeavor to change the customs, and laws
established by the Church, and in force. His title of Doctor could entitle him
only to explicate the laws received, and conform to them, not to abrogate, and
reform them: for a Doctor, as such, has no jurisdiction, without which no
laws can be made, or unmade. The least Bishop, nay the meaest Curate of a
Parish has greater Power as to laws, then the greatest Doctor, as such: seeing
those have some jurisdiction, and this has none at all.

Cornelius Iansenius was a Bishop, so his case is different from the rest, for
he had jurisdiction. Yet why he should be cited amonst the Reformers, I know
not, He has written several works: Mars Gallicus, Annotations on the
Pentateucke, and the Ghospels: Alexipharmacum, and his Augnstinus. His Mars
Gallicus is an invective against the french designs. His Annotations, and
Augustinus, do not touch the discipline of the Church. He contradicts in them
some points of the doctrine of the Church, defined in the Council of Trent:
which drew the censure of Rome on the later work of his: yet without touching
his person, who by his will submitted his Augustinus to the censure of Rome: in
whose communion he always lived, and did then dye, as an obedient son of it. To
know the opinion he had of your faction read his Alexipharmacum, (which he
writ against your Brethren at Boyleduc) and you will see it.

What reason have you to complain of sevetity used toward him? I know of
none. His person was never touched by any censure.

As for the Disciples of S. Cyran, and Iansenius, I grant there is amongst them
a spirit of independantisme. (And what assembly of men is entirely free from
such?) Yet you cannot glory in them, if what Mr. Brevint says in his Preface to
Saul and Samuel at Endor, be true that they are more dangerous to a Protestant
then even Missioners, or Jesuits: and therefore warnes all to avoyde their
company. So that even those who dislike something in us, condemn you.

CHAPTER XXIX. Other small objections.
G.B. page 112. Papists make children Bishops, allow of pluralityes,
non-Residences, commendams, etc. which are every day granted at Rome.

ANSWER. Here are acompany of hard words to fryght your Reader from Rome, as
Birds are fryghte from corn with a rattle: and there is likewise more noise,
then substance in both.

I have lived in the greatest Catholics Princes dominions, and never saw, nor
heard, of what you say is daily done. Our Canons require 30. years for a
bishop: few are made so young most are promoted to that dignity very ancient.
Yet this age being determined only by Ecclesiastical law, I will not deny, but
that on some extraordinary motive some have been dispensed with. If you blame
this, see how you will excuse S. Paul, who made S. Timothy Bishop of Ephesus in
his youth. 1. Tim. 4.12.

If you condemn pluralityes in our Church, how will you excuse your own, in
which they are practiced? must the canon law be a cablerop to us, and a cob web
to you? If you dislike pluralityes, begin with reforming your own brethren,
his majestyes Chapplins in ordinary, who can find a conscience to keep two
Benefices, if they meet with a Prince who will bestow them.

As for non Residencys, Vide Aug. epist. 138.
I demand, whither it be not lawful for a Bishop to be absent from his Diocese
in the circumstances following 1. For the good of the Church, as in general,
or particular Councils? 2. For the good of the nation, as in our Parliaments?
3. For the good of their Dioceses, as when Flavianus, Patriarck of Antioch went
to Constantinople, to preserve his Episcopal seat from being ruined, by
appeasing Theodosius the great offended for the throwing down of this
statues? 4. For any other reason so weyghty, that evidently it may be
equivalent to the good, which his residence might bring? No Papists thinks them
lawful but only on such occasions: for as for such, who do absent themselves
either for ambition, or Envy, or pleasure, or friend ship, or any other
unlawful design; or for some good, but so little, as not to countervayle
that of their duty to their flock, we no less blame them, then you: our
cannons for Residence are as severe, as can be, and those often executed with
the utmost rigor, What do you more?

Commendams offend you, that is, the recommending the means of Abbyes to those
who are not monks. Yet we give them only to clergy-youto mere lay men. Secondly
we give them only for their lives; you give them to their heirs executors,
administrators, and assigns. 3. We leave the Abbey, and its legal superiors a
competent subsistence for oath monks. You turn them a begging, out of God's
Blessing into the warm sun. When you have proved, that it is more lawful for
you Church to steal a Goose, then forours, to pluck a quill, I shall believe
your procedure legal, and outs illegal.

G.B. page 112. They struggled hard against the honest attempt of those who
labored to have had residence declared to be of Divine Right, in the Council of
Trent.

ANS. What might the Catholic Church do to please you? Had she past that
declaration you would have (clamoured at your ordinary rate, against new
definitions of faith now she rejected that Definition, she opposed the honest
attempt to premote it and she must be in the wrong and those who oppose her, in
the right, what ever she or they do, because she is the Church, and they a
discontented paty in her. In fine, as the Jews proceeded with our Savior the
Bridgroome, so do you with the Bride, the Catholic Church her Actions what
ever they are, are blamed. To Luke 7.32.
what are the men, of this generation like? They are like unto children sitting
in the market place, and saying: we have piped unto you, and you have not
danced: we have mourned unto you, and you have not wept. For does the Church
make a decree, you blame her for it: does she not make it, you blame her for
that too. But Wisdom is justifed by all her children.

A Conclusion of the first, and Beginning of the second Part.
G.B. page 116. I have run around that great circle, I proposed to my self:
and have examined the designs of Christian Religion, and have found great
contradiction given to them by the Dodrines of that Church.

ANSWER. You have indeed run a round and that so long, that you are giddy with
it, as appears by your frequent, and great falls, so evidently against common
sense, as I have all a long observed, and yet I have not observed all, for that
would have been too tedious to the Reader, and have taken up more time, then I
can bestow upon trifles. You have skewne no contradiction, betwixt doctrine of
the Catholic Church, and the designs of Christianity: I have thewne their
conformity. But your Book discovers a design against Charity, which is the
Heart of Religion, it being a heap of rash Judgments evident calumnyes, or
uncharitable surmizes, I say nothing of your faults against reason your
incoherentnotions, groundless Judgments, and perpetual sophismes: because
although these are great faults in themselves, yet not considerable, in presence
of those others against Charity.

And these faults are the greater, for being brought to up hold a schism, a
design contrary to Christianity: it being a most certain Truth that noman can
have the love of God, who withstands the union of all men in one Church. Non
habet Dei Charitatem, qui Ecclesiae non diligit unitatem. Aug. lib. 3. de
Baptismo cont. Donat. c. 16. And all your pretenses of causes given of your
separation, are but frivolous: this taring in pieces the mystical body of
Christ, is so great a sacrilege, that no pretext can excuse it. Apparet
(says S. Austin l. 2. contra Epist. Parmeniani c. 11.) non esse quicquam
gravius sacrilegio schismatis, quia praecidendae unitatis nullae est justa
necessitas.

When I saw you reflect on your running so long round in a circle, I hoped you
would come out of it: and was in hopes, that either I mght have been a
spectator of your following course, or else that you would have led me a more
pleasing walk. The design of S. Austin Aug. l. 1. Retract. c. 7.
came to my mind, who represented the Piety of Catholics, and the vicious
lives of the Manichyes, in his two books de moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae, and
de moribus Manichaeorum, and I imagined you might design the like in the two
parts of this book. I expected you would have given us a Panegyric of your
own Church, after you had spent your Satyricall vein on your invective
against ours. I thought we should have seen described the Beauty of the
Protestant Church, the advantages of Communion with it, the perfection of its
Faith, the decency of its ceremonys, the Majesty of its Hierarchy, the
reasonablesse of its canons, the fulness of its conducency to Piety in this
life, and Bliss in the next. And all these confirmed with examples of the
virtuous lives of its devotes.

But how much have I been mistaken I for casting an eye a little further, after
some few words in commendation of your Faith, I find you throwing dirt again,
as fast, as before: or rather faster, as if in the first part you had only
essayed, what in the second you act in ear nest.

Does your Garden (the Church, Cant. 4.12. is compared to one) afford only that
one flower? Is the soil so barren, or so ill cultivated, as none else should
be found in it? or if there be any other do they thrive so ill, as not to be
worth being pointed to? Or does it come from a morosity of nature, which
inclines you to blame, and reprehend? or from a propensity to entertain
thoughts only of faults, and imperfections, as flies pitch upon ulceres, and
some other creatures wallow in mire? or from another quality worse then that,
which turns all to bad, as a foul stomach turns all food into peccant
humors, and a spider draws Poison from that flower, whence a Be draws Honey?
something of this must be: for I will nether say there is nothing reprehensible
in the lives of Catholics, it is a propriety of the Triumphant Church to be
free from any spot, or wrinkle: nor that all is bad in Protestant besides their
Faith that being the condition of the damned spirits in Hell. But I supercede
these personal Reflections, and follow (though with little comfort) you in the
new maze, you lead me into.

CHAPTER XXX. Catholic Faith delivered by men divinely inspired. Rules to know
true Tradition. Faith never changed.
G.B. page 116. The first Character of our Faith, is that it was delivered to
the world by men sent of God, and divinely inspired, who proved their mission
by miracles.

ANSWER. All Divine Faith is built to the veracity of God: the men, who
delivered it at first, were but the organs by which God spoke, and their Words
were his words. When you received the word of God, says S. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.
Which when you received of us, you received it not as the word of men; but (as
it is in truth) the word of God. Hence those men frequently use that phrase:
Haec dicit Dominus. Thus says the Lord. And Faith is no further a Theological
virtue, then it relyes, solely, and only, on the truth (Veracity) of God, as on
its formal object: as with our Divines, and out of them Dr. Pearson, in his
learned explication on the Creed teaches. And in this even those men (...),
Divinely inspired proceeded as we do, resolving their Faith into the veracity
of God as well, as we: for their faith was univoca, of the some nature with
ours, with this only difference, that the formal object was applied to them
clearly, and to us only obscurely. The assent to such a mystery in Christ was
science, or vision; not so in any others: he might say, Io. 3.11.
We know what we speak; quod scimus loquimur, and quod vidimus testamur, and
we testify what we have seen; The rest must say 2. Cor. 4.13.
credimus propter quod and loquimur. We believe, and therefore we speak.

In this manner faith was first spread in the world. I say the Catholic
faith; not your Protestant faith, which as it contains your positive, and
negative articles (otherwise it is not Protestant) was never delivered by any
man divinely inspired; but invented by your first Reformers, who (as I have
said chap. 22. s. 1.) taking the whole sum of faith revealed, topt, and lopt
off it as much, as they pleased, and from them you have not the Christian; but
the Protestant faith, Fides temporum, non Evangeliorum; a faith of the times
not of the Ghospels, says Tertul. Were these the men of God divinely inspired
and assisted by miracles?

G. B. page 116. The doctrines about which we differ, can pretend to no such
divine Original.

ANS. You know we hold this not to be true: we receved all by the some
authority, from the same hand.

G. B. page 117. What man sent of God was the first Author of the belief of
the corporal presence, of the Sacrisice of the Mass, of the Popes supremacy,
of Purgatory, of Indulgences, and of all those innumerable superstitions; of
which scripture is absolutely silent.

ANSWER. Christ was a man sent of God, and he was the first Author of them.

G. B. Ibidem. If these doctrines were not the off spring of Revelations, we
cannot be oblidged to believe them as such.

ANS. Your former legerdemain comes again, another conviction of your
disingenous proceeding. This appears by these Propositions: If the Bible were
not the off spring of Revelation, we should not be bound to believe it. If
Christ were not true God, we should not be bound to adore him as such. Could you
with patience hear a Pagan with such a slyght undermine the authority of the
Bible, of the honor do to Christ? Prove what you odiously suggest, that the
things you wrongfully call superstitions, are not revealed: and you will do
something to the purpose. But you are too cunning to attempt any such proof,
which you know surpasses your strength. And there fore you had rather suppose
then prove it, that being more proportioned to your capacity, and Religion.

G. B. Ibidem. They vouch Scriptures for proof to some of these, but these are
so far stretched, that their sure retreat is in the Sanctuary of Traditions.

ANS. You speak as dogmatically, as if it were ex Tripode. Here is an
Assertion without any proof: and so is a convincing proof, that you have
none. Tradition is indeed our Sanctuary, to which you have no claim. By it we
received 1. Scriptures, 2. the sense of Scriptures, which is their soul.

Now when Scriptures are doubtful in any point, or as you phrase it, seem not
to reach home, without Stretching, can we have better assurance of their true
meaning, then by the authority of the Church, which is clearly commended us in
Scriptures themselves. And in following her sense, we are certain we follow
Scriptures: which is the discourse of S. Aug. l. 1. contra Crescon. cap.
penult. Quamvis hujus rel de Scripturis Canonicis non proferatur exemplum,
Scripturarum etiam in hac re a nobis tenetur veritas cum hoc facimus, quod
universae jam placuit Ecclesiae, quam ipsarum Scripturarum commendat
auctoritas, ut quoniam Sacra Scriptura fallere nonpotest, quisquis falli metuit
hujus obscuritate quostionis, Ecclesiam de illa consulat, quam sin^ alla
ambiguitate sancta Scriptura demonstrat.

G. B. Ibidem. Till it be proved, that an error could not creep into the
world that way, we must be excused from beleiving.

ANS. Unless you prove, that errors have crept in that way, you are
inexcusable. You actually rejected those things, as errors, which were in
possession all over the world: unless you prove them to be such, your fact is
criminal.

G. B. Ibidem. It is not possible to know what Traditions came from the
Apostles.

ANS. Habemus hic confitentem reum. For if it be impossible to know what
Traditions were Apostolical, your Reformers act in rejecting so many, was
rash, and inconsiderate. They had been better advised, to retain all, as they
found them in the Church, them to cut them off. But your proceedure is as
different in this as in the rest, from S. Austin. For was any thing doubted of:
this Saint's method was to consult the Church, and adhere to what she
believed, or practiced; (as you see in his discourse above) you consult the
Church too, but it is only to reject her practice, and condemn her sentiments,

The weight of the authority of the Church may be sufficient, to convince which
are Apostolical Traditions, as it convinces which are Apostolical writings.
Yet we have other signs. I will instance in two one taken from S. Austin l. 4.
de Bapt. contra Donat. cap. 24. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec a Conciliis
institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi Apostolica traditum auctoritate
rectissime creditur. We ought to believe those things to have come from the
Apostles, which the whole Church holds, and were not introduced by Councills;
but were always in use. To prove this, it is enough, that the first persons,
who mention them, speak of them, not as of things newly begun; but which were
of ancient practice.

The second rule is taken out of Tertullian l. de praescript. c. 28. Age nunc
omnes erraverint, deceptus sit and Apostolus de testimonio reddendo quibusdam,
nullam respexerit Spiritus sanctus, uti eam in veritatem induceret, ad hoc
missus est a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de Patre, ut esset Doctor veritatis,
neglexerit officium Dei villicus, Christi vicarius, sinens Ecclesias aliter in
terris intelligere, aliter credere, quam ipse per Apostolos praedicabat. Ecquid
verisimile est ut tot ac tantae Ecclesiae in una^ fidem erraverint? Nullus
inter multos eventus est unus exitus, variasse debuerat error doctrinae
Ecclesiarum. Coeterum quod apud multos unum invenitur non est erratum, sed
traditum. Suppose says he, that all churchs have erred that the Apostle was
deceived in the testimony he gave to some the holy Ghost looked to none, to
lead it into truth to which intent he was sent by the son, and demanded of the
father, to be the Doctor of truth: let the steward of God, the Vicar of Christ
neglect his duty and permit the Churchs to understand, and believe otherwise,
then he had taught by his Apostles. Is it probable, that all Churchs should by
error fall into one and the same opinion? when there are so many by ways,
those who loose the high way wonld scarce wander into the same error. So that
certainly what is sound one and the same in many Churchs is no ertor newly
invented, but it is faith of old delivered. Thus Tertullian. Answer you to his
discourse, if you can.

G. B. page 108. A late ingenious writer, whose sincere zeal had drawn
censures on himself, and his book, took away to repair his reputation by a
new method of proving Popish doctrines that they had them from their Ancestors,
they from theirs. But this pretense has been baffled by Mr. Claud, as all
know, who have been so happy as to read his works.

ANSWER. I am persuaded, that your Prelates will scarce think it sincere zeal
in Monsr. Arnaud (of him you speak) that the stood out solong against his
spiritual and temporal Superiors. But let that pass. You discover your
ignorance in saying that Method was new, or that Arnaud invented it. Mr. Tho.
White had it before Arnaud: Mr. Fisher a Jesuit, before T. W. Bellarmin before
him: and S. Austin, S. Stephen Pope, and Tertullian, before them all. I have
read Mr. Claude's works, and was far from finding so much satisfaction, as
you promise your Reader, I believe rather upon hear say, then on your own
experience. Nay I have from one of the eminentest wits, of the french Hugenots,
that Claud was not much esteemed a among his own for those works: which
would have been neglected, had not Arnaud's enemies commended them. You say
Claud Bussled him: others are of a different opinion. I confess Mr. Arnaud,
though very learned, yet seemed not qualifyed to manage a controversy in
defense of Church Authority and Tradition: having (as much as lay in him)
weakened both, by his writings, and practice, during the time he stood out
against the Censure and the Formula. Which gave such advantage to Mr. Claude,
who industriously gathered together, and cunningly returned upon him his own
arguments) that some thought he foiled his adversary. Yet without any prejudice
to the Catholic cause, which is not concerned in Mr. Arnaud's personal
faylings.

Let us now hear, what you can allege against the authority of Tradition, to
prove a change unobserved in our Faith.

G. B. p. 121. Weknow the chalice was taken from the people 250. years ago.

ANS. 1.o You are mistaken in your epoch: S. Th. 3. p. q. 8o. a. 12. assures
it was in his time taken away in many places: and he lived 400, yaeres ago, and
from the beginning some persons, and on some occasions received but one
species. 2. This is an argument that changes cannot happen without some notice
taken of them: As in this, we know when it begun (with the schools) who
opposed it, (the Hussits) what Council commanded it, and condemn its
opposers, that of Constance. Which confirms our Rule, that when none of this
appears, there has been no change,

G. B. Page 121. All once worshipped in their mother tongue, but after (by the
over throw of the empire) the latin tongue decayed, the barbarous worship was
obtruded on the world.

ANS. This proves a change in the People, whose language was spoiled, with the
mixture of Barbarous terms; not in the service which the continued the same:
it continving in latin, as it was before that inundation of Barbarians.

G. B. p. 122. We know that for the first seven Centuryes the Christians world
abhorred Images.

ANS. In what age did S. Gregory the Great live? sure with in the first seven
Centuryes. And he l. 7. ep. 109. and l. 9, ep. 8. rebuked Serenus Bishop of
Marseilles for casting them out of the Church. Was not S. Austin with in the
first seven Centuryes he l. 1. consens. Evang. c. 10. speaks of the pictures
of Christ, and the Holy Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul. Thus I have past your
three instances to prove a change in the faith of the Church: which you us
sherin, with that emphaticall term WEKNOW. If you have many other such points
of KNOWLEDGE, for the divertisment of the learned world, I wish you to publish
them. I am persuaded few, besides your self know such things: most know them to
be false.

CHAPTER XXXI. Revelations, and Miracles.
G. B. page 123. The Papist Church pretends to revelations for some of her most
doubtful opinions: which are the visions and extraordinary inspirations of
some of their Saints, from which they vouch a Divine confirmation to their
doctrine.

ANS. If you know of any decree made in matter of faith, upon a private
revelation, show it. Till you do so, I will not believe it. S. Thomas 1. p. q.
1. a. 8. ad 2. absolutely excludes all private revelations from grounding
Faith. Innititur Fides nostra revelationl factae Apostolis and Prophet is; non
autem revelationi, si qua fuit aliis Doctoribus factae. Out faith relyes on
revelations made to the Apostles, and Prophets; and not on such as are made to
other Doctors.

G. B. page 124. Saint Paul being put to glory of visions, and revelations, was
to run back 14. years for one.

ANS. S. Paul says that he had 14. years before that great revelation; but he
never said, he had noe others either before or after. And that Revelations were
not so extraordinary in his days, as you think not only amongst the Apostles;
but ever amongst ordinary Christians, you many learn out of S. Paul 1. Cor.
14.30.32. If any thing be revealed to another, that sits by, let the first
hold his Peace, for you may all Prophecy one by one, that you may all learn,
and all be conforted. And the Spirit of the Prophets, are subject to the
Prophets. And can you think the Apostle should have no Revelation for so many
years, when the meanest Christians had them even in the middle of their
public assemblyes, where they met with so many distractions? What will you
say to excuse your Ignorance, If other Revelations made to S. Paul, be recorded
in Scripture? now so it is: for first Amacedonian Act. 16.9.
appeared to him. 2. Our Lord Act. 18.9.
spoke to Paul in a vision. Nay the very place you cite to prove your error
confutes it: for he says: 1. Cor. 12.7.
least I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations,
there was given. He had then REVELATIONS: nay Aboudance of Revelations. See how
carelessely you read, how ill you understand, and how negligently you write
out of Scriptures! for you are certainly convinced, that when S. Paul spoke of
that one, he did it not because he had been favored with no other; but
because that was a singular favor, and as such esteemed. But I dispute
seriously against a man, who regards not what he writes.

G. B. page 124. Are they not credible stories, of Christ's appearing to some
of their she Saints, and kissing them, being married to them, etc.

ANSWER. I doubt not but you, and your brethren think this folly. S. Paul says
as much of such as you, 1. Cor. 2.14. Animalis homo non percipit ea, quae sunt
spiritus Dei; stultitia est enim illi, and non potest intelligere,
quiaspiritualiter examinatur. The natural man received not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, nether can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. Of such, as the Inglish Ministers S.
Paul speaks, who are by him declared incapable to Judge, yet will be still
Judging of the secret workings of the Holy Ghost in those souls, which he makes
his temples in whom he lives, and they in him; which things seem folly to
you, because you have no experience of them, and probably never made an hour of
mental Prayer in all your life nor know how to make it. Hence, You Jude v. 18.
speak evil of things you know not. It would be more to your credit to omit
those things, then by speaking of them, discover so shameful an Ignorance. The
best advice I can give you, is that of Job Job. 13.5.
to his friends: To be silent, that you may seem wise.

But Christ kissed them, and married them. This scandalizes your chaste Brethren,
who cannot hear of marriage! and Mr. Brevint surmized God knows what unclean
spirits. I cannot appeal to the conscience and experience, of any of the whole
ministry, for the reality, of what you deride; for I think there never was
granted to any of you such favors. Yet to free you from fear of illusions (in
those visits) from bad spirits, know (and I wonder any one, who reads the
scripture can be Ignorant of it) that there is a spiritual contract betwixt
Christ, and the Church: Item betwixt him and every Pious soul: that this
contract is called a marriage: that on this score sins of such souls against
their spouse are called Adulterys, and themselves Adulteresses. If you have any
Remembrance, these hints will bring to mind a number of Texts of Scripture,
which deliver what you scoff at. The whole Books of Canticles (or Salomons
song) celebrates that adorable nuptial solemnity. The very first words of it
are: Cant. 1.1.
Osculetur me osculo oris sui. Let him (or may he) kiss me, with a kiss of
his mouth. The Church, and every pious soul, demanding as a singular favor of
her spouse that Blessing, which when granted to some, scandalizes you, modest
man, so different are your sentime^ts in spiritual things, from those of the
Holy Ghost who says Cant. 8.1.
that the soul should receive that favor, she at first demanded, and yet not
be despised: you despise them all, as forgeryes, dreams, effects of melancoly,
or hystericall distempers. What is blasphemy, if this be not? O Lord, forgive
you, for you know not what you say.

G.B. p. 124. The inspirations of Holy writers, on whom we found our faith was
proved by miracles.

ANS. We build not our Faith on any of their Revelations, you speak of: so
this hint is nothing to the purpose. If we did, Miracles are not here wanting,
viz, the change of men's lives either from good to better, or at least from bad,
to Good. Which sufficiently proves the goodness of the Spirit appearing, above
all your frivolous exceptions. And if other miracles are necessary, those are
many times granted too.

G. B. p. 126. Was it not aworthy piece of the Angelical ministration, for
Angels to go trotting over sea, and Land, with a Load of Timber and Stones of
the Virgins House to Loretto.

ANS. Whither they trotted, or ambled, I doubt not, but that piece of
ministration was more pleasing to those B. Spirits, then to attend the
protection of men who spend their strengh of body and mind in offending God, by
impugning know ne Truth. Sin I know they abhor: other things are indifferent
to them; and all are welcome, when commanded.

G. B. page 128. The Miracles of Rome are not heard of till some ages, at least
years be past.

ANS. This is not true. They are all very strictly immediately examined by
authority from the ordinary: and then published. See that done at Gant upon D.
Mary minshall approved by the Bishop shortly. after it past.

G. B Ibidem. It is the interest of Rome to have them all believed, without
once questioning them.

ANS. Rome has no interest, but that Truth find place, and God by glorified. If
you consider how strictly those of the Portuguese nun were examined, and how
sincerely the cheat was published, you will acknowledge, that our church does
not countenance any deceit in this, nor think it her interest, that all should
be believed.

G. B. Ibidem. How comes it, that in heretical countries, where there is more
need of those miracles, and where they might be more irrefragably proved if
true, none of these mighty works do show themselves forth?

ANS. How comes it that when the Scribes, and Pharisyes demanded a sign from
Heaven our Savior refused it? Mat. 12.39.
An evil, and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no
sign be given to it. It is presumptuous for you, or anyother, to prescribe
rules to God Almyghty's Providence, which is never wanting in what is
necessary, and we ought not to expect things unnecessary to pleasure our
curiosity either in nature, or Grace: which he grants when he pleases, but not
always. Now miracles are very essicacious means, but not the only motives to
bring us to faith, and by consequence not absolutely necessary. The Apostle had
a Power to work miracles, and had a great proportion of learning, yet he used
nether for conversion of the world, when worldly men demanded it 1. Cor. 1.22.
Iudaei signa petunt, Graeci sapientiam quaerunt, Nos autem praedicamus Christu^
Crucifixum, Iudaeis quidem scandalum, Gentibus autem stultitia^. The Jews
require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, and did he work miracles
to satisfy the one, or use humane wisdom to work on the other? No, but we
preach Christ crucified, ascandall to the Jews, and folly to the Greeks. Both
tempted God, as the Scribes did, and you do: and nether obtained, what they
demanded. In deed those that will shut their eyes, to all other motives, would
easily baffle the conviction of miracles, either saying they are natural
works, or attribute them to Magic. You see how the cure of the blind man,
10.9.
borne so, was tossed: and how casting out Devils Luc. 11.15.
was attributed to to their Prince Beelzebub.

G. B. p. 130. My greatest quarrel at these forgeryes of miracles, is that the
People are taught to believe them, and the miracles of the Ghospel with an
equal certainty.

ANS. If this be only ground of your quarrel we shall quickly agree, for I do
not believe them with equal certainty. We are bound to believe with divine
faith each miracle related in the Ghospel; but not so those contained in
Ecclesiastical hystory how authentical soever.

CHAPTER XXXII. Whither all Mysterys of Faith ought to be common?
G. B. page 131. There are no secret doctrines in our Faith, which must be kept
from the vulgary: where by the Pastors of Christendom may have possession over
their souls.

ANS. Here you smell another Popish design, of which none, but your party ever
dreamed, of which we cannot be accused (suppose it were true) without reproach
to the Apostles, whose example we follow in this, if we practice it. Which in
some sort seems unavoyable, considering the weakness of men with which we
must comply, as much as we can, without withdrawing any saving Truth.

Our body by certain degrees grows up from the dimensions is is borne with, to
its full stature: and our mind from its native ignorance successively passes to
knowledge. Give Archimedes his works to anovice in mathematics, he will not
be the better form them. He must be first prepared to receive benefit by them,
by passing Euclide's elements. The same of other sciences: and one may learn
to read Hebrew-without-points, without learning his Aleph, Beth, as well as
may learn the abstruer conclusions of any Science, without learning its
Rudiments.

Faith differs from all other sciences in its object, that is God's veracity,
but agrees with them, that it requires some time, to be brought to its full
perfection. It contains many assents to several mysteryes, or Articles, to
whose understanding, we cannot attain at one hearing.

Nay each article requires some time, so that as the material sun chaces away
the obscurity of the night by degrees, rising on our horison: so does the sun
of Justice successively enlyghten our soul, This increase of Faith, the
Apostles Luc. 17.5.
demanded of our Savior. To this the Prince of the Apostles exhortes 1. Pet. 2.
desire the sincere Milk, that in you may may grow (...). not as your Inglish
translation has it, that you may grow thereby: as if our Growth were only by
Faith in other things; when it is in Faith it self.

Milk is frequently taken in Scripture by a natural, and very proper
metaphor, for the first rudiments or necessary principles of Faith,
communicated to Catechumens, or beginners, who being young, and at is were
infants in Christ, were not capable of more abstruse mysteryes, which are
called solid meat. So to Babes Milk is given, til by use of it they get
strength to digest solid meat. This method the Apostles used 1. Cor. 3.1.2. I
Brethen could not speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal,
even as Babes in Christ, I have fed you with Milk, and not with meat, for you
were not able to bear it, nether yet now are ye able: for you are yet carnal.
Here you see, sir, a whole Church a noble Church kept for a long time to her
Milk, because her progress in spirituality did not answer to the time of her
conversion.

A like conclusion may be drawn from a reproach made to the ancient converted
Jews Heb. 5.12.
When for the time, ye ought to be teachers, you have need that one teach you
again, which be the first principles, of the oracles of God, and are become
such as have need of Milk, and not of strong meat. For every one that uses
Milk is unskilful in the word of Ryghteous nesse, for he is a babe. But
strong meat belongs to those that are of full age, those who by reason of use,
have their senses exercised to discern good, and evil. Thus the Apostle dealt
with Babes in Christ. But to Proficients he discovered greater mysteryes 1.
Cor. ^.6.
We speak wisdom amongst the Perfect. And because he thought the
Thessalonians were such, he prayed hard daily, that he might see them again,
that 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
he might complete what was lacking in their Faith. Now whither this
completing was intensive or extensive, by adding new mysteryes of faith, or a
more ample explication of what they knew before, is not material.

This will help us to understand the meaning of another place of the Apostle,
Romans 12.
I say, through the Grace given unto me, to every man, that is amongst you not
to think of himself more hyghly, then he ought to think, but to think soberly,
according as God has dealt to every man the MEASVRE of faith. For as we have
many members in one body, and all members have not the same office: so we
being many, are one body in Christ and every one members of another. Having
then Gifts according to the grace, which is given us, whither Prophecy,
ministry, etc. Faith is distributed, you see, to all the Church yet not to each
member of it alike; but to each one HIS MEASVRE, proportionable to his
capacity, and the place, or function he is called to. Which similitude he uses
in alike sense 1. Cor, 12. and Ephesians. 4.7. And had you taught your Disciples,
as the Apostles did theirs, took content with their mesure of faith, there had
not been so many sects, in the world: who pretending to the fulness of
faith, of which they are not capable, have lost both Faith and Charity.

You see, Sir, whose example we follow in this, viz, that of the Apostles. So
if there be any design of Ambition to ground it, the Apostles are guilty of
it: not we. Origenes con. Cells. l. 1. p. 7. says all Christians were not
acquainted with all revealed Truths, only the most necessary points were
communicated to all. And l. 3. p. 122. he confirms that practice with the
example of Christ, who spoke in Parables to the multitude, and explicated them
to his Disciples. Mat. 13.11. S. Basil. l. de Spir. S. c. 27. discoursing of
the institutions of Christianity, divides them into two parts, (...), and
(...). The first might be familiarly preached to all (...): the others were
(...), not commonly to be divulged. Tertullian l. de praescript. c. 25. p. 335,
blames some heretics, who pretended to ground their errors on Traditions
obscurely delivered by the Apostles: and on that occasion seems to disowne any
doctrine taught in private. But in the following chapt. 26. p. 336. he
explicates his meaning, which was to reject only such clancular Traditions, as
should be contrary to the Word, or Doctrine publicly preached. And we say the
same.

G. B. p. 132. These are practices far different from the method of the
Apostles in preaching the Ghospel, who with held nothing of the counsel of God
from the People.

ANSWER. Those words are taken out of that speech of S. Paul to the Elders of
the Church, of lester Asia, Act. 20.27.
which you by a gross mistake say were the People, as if the Holy Ghost had
made the People Bishops to govern the Church of God. Now if the People
govern, who are governed? You are hard put to it, to find reasons against us,
when you are forced to such wretched shifts. Know then (which I wonder any one
who reads with attention that place can be ignorant of) that those to whom S.
Paul spoke there were Bishops, to whom by reason of their office a larger
mesure of faith was due: to them the whole counsel of God was made known, to
be communicated to others, not promiscuously to all; but to faithful men, who
might be able to teach others. 2. Tim. 2.2.

Now though according to the practice of the Apostles, the People amongst us
are not made, Teachers, Pastors, Prophets, and Apostles, yet all even to the
meanest Artisan have instructions necessary to salvation. What they are bound
to believe, what they are to hope for, and what to do. and what need of more?

If any amongst us will undergo the labor of Studys, the greatest mysteryes of
our Faith are obvious to him: our Scriptures, our Councils, our Decretalls, our
Fathers, our Ecclesiastical, and Profane Hystorys, our Divines, and our
Philosophers are extant in our Stationers shops; as well for the use of the
meanest Christian, as of the Pope, Cardinals, or Bihops. What is then
concealed from them, which may ground your Accusation?

Our procedure in this is so connaturall, that I am persuaded it cannot but be
your own practice. The Inglish Church has drawn to some few heads those
points of Faith which she thinks necessary to salvation, and delivers them to
all in her Catechism. As for the others, contained either in the Bible, or in
the Nicene and Athanasian Creedes, or in the four first General Councills, she
Leaves it to her Children to seek them out themselves, if they have will and
convenience, or to receivethem from their Ministers: and I do not see how any
Gouvernours of a Church can proceed otherwise. Dare you blame this in your
Mother Church? why then should you condemn us for it?

G. B. page 133. Matters of interest are the constant subject of their studyes
and sermons: whereas others, of the greatest laws of God are seldom minded.

ANs. If you could write this untruth with out blushing, you have no blood in
your body To confute you, it will be enough to open any one book of Devotion,
and hear, or read a sermon. In mala non possunt aliter. Aug. Your cause must
be very bad, which requires such untruths to up hold it: and ours very good,
seeing you have no Truth to allege against it.

CHAPTER XXXIII. Faith not dependant on senses.
G. B. page 133. God has sitted faith, and framed our souls so harmoniously,
that they are congenial one to another.

ANS. I find you in this point very much to seek, how to own agreate Truth,
and yet to establish a contrary falsehood, which is very dear to your whole
party. That Faith is above natural reason, and much more above sense, is
unquestionable. This you own and so place Faith on a throne. Yet something
must behad against transubstantiation, and nothing occurres butfrom sense. Then
you pull down Faith, and place sense in her place. Tantae molis erat sanctum
subvertere dogma. The my steryes about God, and Christ say you, are exalted
above the reach of our facultyes: But reason it self teaches that it must be
so. Here Faith is above reason. But after wards page 134. Our faith rests on
the evidences, our senses give. Here Faith doeshomage to sense.

Faith Heb. 11.1.
is an argument of things, which appear not. So that it relyes not on senses,
for its object does not appear: nor on Reason, otherwise it would be science,
if the reason be evident, or opinion, if it were uncertain. So it relyes only
on Gods veracity, which consists of two qualityes, one, that he cannot be
deceived, being omniscient. The other, that he cannot deceive, being good.
Nether is possible to God: for to be deceived is an error in the understanding
and to deceive, argues malice in the will. So the assurance, we have by Faith,
is greater then that of our senses, which may be baffled: greater then that of
Reason, which sometimes is mistaken in its principles, ofter deceived in its
deductious from them. Thus Romans 3.4.
God is true and every man alyer which later part imports a possibility oferror
in our cleerest operations, whither of sense, or Reason.

To say, that Faith rests on the evidence of senses (as you do p. 134.) is so
contrary to the nature of faith, that both Divines and Philosophers doubt
whither the same object S. Thom. 2.2. q. 1. ar. 4. ands.
can beseene and believed? and generally speaking deny the possibility of it.
And to what our B. Savioursaid 10.20.29.
because thou have seen me, thou have believed: They answer with S. Gregory.
Aliud vidit, aliud credidit. He saw man, and believed him to be God.

To what purpose then are miracles, if Faith does not rely on them? ANS. To
dispose our understanding to receive with attention and submissio^ the word of
God, by showing it was God who spoke. And when Christ appeals to his works
(If 10.10.38.
I donot the works of my father, do not believe me: but if I do them, if you
will not believe me, believe the works.) he assigns only the out ward motive
of Belief: by which his hearers were either drawn to believe, or made
inexcusable, if they persistedin their incredulity. Now it is the grossest
error imaginable, to think that faith rests on all those things, which dispose
to it: otherwise it would rest on the skill in tongues which is necessary to
understand the original Scriptures: item on the masters, who teach them: on
the stationer, who prints them, etc.

But what if the man, who confirms his mission by evident miracles, teach
things contrary to sense, or Reason? ANS. Our duty is to silence both these and
harken to him. 2; Cor. 10.
The Arms of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing, that exalts its self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought. Who says, every thought, co^prehend's both those
grounded on sense, and others more speculative. But to say as you do; that
Reason must be subject to Faith, but not senses, is very preposterously to put
reason, the mistress, under faith, and sense, the servant above it. You
declame against Catholics, for acknowledging in the whole Church an authority
in order to the word of God, much less, then that, which you give to the
senses of every particular man. What an occasion do you give us, to return
upon you all your declamations?

G.B. p. 134. We cannot really doubt, but things are, as they appear to us:
for we cannot believe it midnyght when we see clearly the sun in our meridian.

ANS. We should not doubt of what God says who (we are sure) cannot tell a lie.
We perceive daily the Halluzinations of our understanding. J am sure sometimes
my senses are mistaken, and my reason corrects them. All man is a Liar, every
knowing faculty in him is subject to Deceit. God cannot tell me it is
midnyght, when it is noone day, because he cannot tell a lie. But if God should
tell me it is midnyght, and my eyes should represent to me a luminous body in
the meridian perfectly like the sun. I should suspect my eyes, or guess I saw
a meteor, or that I dreamed, or raved or were yet in a worse condition. The
least, and last of my thoughts would be, that God told a lie: which is the
first thought you suggest.

G.B. p. 135. Senses unvitiated, fixing on aproper object, through a due mean,
are infallible.

ANS. Are they more infallible, then God? Are we infallibly certain all those
conditions concur? may there not be more ways to delude oursenses, then are
discovered? may there not be some latent defect in the Organ unperperceived by
us? or some want in the mean? Answer to these questions: and withal tell me,
whiter you have as great certainty of your answer to these queryes, as you
have of the veracity of God.

With more color another may say, that faith cannot be against Reason: and
with Socinus refuse to believe any thing contrary to discourse: and so turn
Antitrinitarian. I think my self as assuredly certain of that metaphysicall
Principle eadem uni tertio sunt idem inter se, as of any thing I know by
senses: yet knowing what Christ has taught concerning the Blessed Trinity, I
believe that, and explicate that principle as I can: why should we not proceed
in like manner with oursenses, when they seem to contradict what Christ has
taught? we are commanded to Mat. 18.8.9.
put out an eye, cut off a hand, or foot, if it draws us to sin. What shall we
do, if they draw us to Infidelity? or do you think it unlawful to keep
them: yet lawful to follow their suggestions, and deny our Faith in obedience
to their depositions?

Heap up then your absurdityes, your impossibilityes, your incredibilityes,
your sophismes against Transubstantiation to as great a bulk, as your little
studyes, and less diseretion will permit, you will only multiply proofs of
the insolency and folly of the Reason of man, which dares enter the lists
against the Truth of God.

G.B. page 136. It is little less unconcevable, to imagine, that a man of no
eximious sanctity, nor extraordinary skill in Divinity, should have the Holy
Ghost at his command, that his decrees must be the dictates of the spirit.

ANSWER. I pass that disrespectfull expression, having the Holy Ghost at his
command: No Catholic everspoke so. Do you think the assistance of the Holy
Ghost (whence flows all jurisdiction both spiritual, and temporal) is
restrained to only saints, and learned clerks? does Prelate and Prince loose
their jurisdictio^, by every mortal sin? Was Amos the sheep heard a great
divine? were Solomon and Cayphas greatesaints? were the Scribes, and Pharisyes
such, whose words all (Mat. 23.2.) were commanded to obey at the same time that
they were warned to avoyed their actions? And that I may give you an instance
proportionable to your objection, of an irrational creature to an unreasonable
doubt: what say you to Balaams Ass? was he either Saint, or Divine? He 2. Pet.
2.16.
rebuked his master for his iniquity speaking with man's voice and forbad the
madness of the Prophet. God grant he cure all amiss in you.

Know, Sir, that jurisdiction, gift of Miracles, tongues, Prophecy, and all
those graces, which are called gratis datae, and regard the sanctification of
others; not of the person to whom they are given (S. Thom. 1.2. q. 11 1. a.
1.) have no connection with any personal sanctity in their subject.

CHAPTER XXXIV. Mr. G. B. his intention in his book, and his meekness to
Catholics.
G. B. page 140. Thus far I have pursued my design, in the tract where of I
have not been void of a great deal of pain, and sorrow, for what pleasure can
any find by discovering so much wickedness. God is my witness, how these
thoughts have entertained me with horror, and regret, all the while I have
considered them: and it is not without the greatest Antipathy to my nature
imaginable, that I have paid this duty to Truth.

ANS. Here you give a very artificial confirmation of all you had said before:
that you tinder took this task with great reluctance, and carried it on with
grief and sorrow: vouch God as witness of he truth of this suspecting I
suppose, as you had reason, your bare word would scarce be received, whilst
so many pregnant proofs stand for the contrary.

For first: your Religion does not inspire such a spirit of mortification, as
to engage her children in pain full and sorrowful actions, for any time at
all, much less for so long a time as is necessary for composing a book of
so various matter. And for your person, I do not hear, that you seek so
much occasions of Grief.

Secondly: those who with sorrow and unwillingly think of others faults, avoyde
those usually, and entertain others of their virtues. Content is the thing all
men commonly seek, even in their grief. They decline contristating objects;
and sometimes seek a freedom from them by a cessation of all rational
operations, preferring the sottish, stupid, senseless condition of a beast,
before the rational; but Irksome thoughts of displeasing objects: as is too
common in Ingland, if I am not mistaken: But that a man, who may divertise
himself, or find employments pleasing, should trouble himself with what passes
in Iamaica, or China, or Rome, which concerns him not, is very unusual, and
almost incredible.

Thirdly, those who are truly sorry for their neighbors faults, do not easily
entertain false reports of them: are unwilling without pregnant proofs, to
harbor any bad opinion of them, or give credit to bad reports concerning them.
In fine show in their actions the truth of that saying: 1. Cor. 13.5.
Charitas noncogitat malum. Charity thinks no evil. You on the contrary take
all malicious reports against us, as true, although you either knew already, or with
a little labor might have known the wrong done us, in them, for as for the
greatest part of your difficultys they are such as have been answered over,
and over.

Fourthly you feign things yourselfe; which no body ever dreamed of, and are in
themselves most untru. As what you say page 133. The subject of our sermons and
studys are matters of interest and not the laws of God. Nay when the things
themselves are not blame worthy, you calumniate our intentions, seeking into
our hearts for matter to fix a calumny on. And can any body persuade himself,
our errors and faults afflict you, when you labor so hard to find them? And
feign them your self rather then miss of them? I cannot tell to what better
to compare this proceeding (if your greise were real) then to children, who
having dressed up a Puppet, fancy it sick, then dead: and then fall a crying, as
if it really were so.

Fifthly your manner of writing is too artificial for Grief: it is not so
serious, and grave as those are which that Passion dictates. It is
sarcasticall, insulting sharp, biting, in a word satyricall, no sign of
mercy, compassion, be moanings, bewaylings, etc, But only when you call to mind
your text, or strive to get your Readers favor, by pretending to greive for
our faults. So that, did you not tell us of it, we should rather guess any
other passion predominant in you, then Grief. We find many clear signs of
pride, emulation, hatred, contempt, anger, disdain, jealousy, fear, etc, and
but few of sorrow.

Lastly this very protestation gives an occasion to suspect your innocence,
according to the Rule of the law. Excusatio non petita, accusatio manifesta. An
excuse not demanded is an evident accusation. An Apology is al ways an answer
to some reproach of a crime and when no witness appears abroad, who made that
reproach, it is certainly suspected to be objected by the best witness, the
man's own conscience.

Hence I fear most indifferent Readers will think, that you never gave greater
ground to suspect your ingenuity, then now. It is a weakness to attend to good
words, when we see bad actions, to regard Jacobs voice, when we feel Esau's
hands. You very religiously call God to witness but I believe he will searce
confirm your deposition with a miracle.

But intentions are secret, known only to the searcher of Hearts, it is a
rashness for any to pretend to know them even by conjectures. And although you
presume to discover the designs of me^ dead many ages ago, yet I will not
imitate you in that Rashness, by prete^ding an Insyght into your heart, how
great soever may the ground be for a guess. I will not return evil for
evil. I will be as civil, and favorable to you, as I can: I admit you thought
you said True, when you writ this, and that if you deceive us, it is after being
deceived your self: so although you spoke an untruth (as these alleged Reasons
do prove) yet you did not tell a lie; which consists in a will to deceive
others. As for untruths the honestest man in the world may tell them, no
Honesty exempting him from mistaking things of him self, or being misinformed
from others: and so he may telan untruth, with out prejudice to his Reputation.

Now this possibility of mistakes, and error, reaches to our hearts, which are
hidden not only from our neighbors, but even from our selves, whilst we take
thoughts for resolutions, and transitory purposes for set led designs. S.
Greg. l. 1. Pastor. c. 9. Saepe sibi de se men's ipsa mentitur, fitque ut aliud
in imis intentio supprimat, aliud tractantis animo superficies cogitationis
ostendat: and singit de bono opere amare quod non amat, de mundi autem gloria
non amare quod amat. Our soul is often deceived by her self, says S. Gregory,
What swimmes on the surface of the mind is far different from what lies hidden
at the botto^ of the heart, (which has the maine part in our actions) some are
entirely possessed with the love of the vanity of this world who think they love
God. So that God alone knows amongst all those Affections, we have in our
wills, which is predominant, and as for our selves, we are often mistaken, and
as Thomas a Kempis says, think we are moved with zeal, and it is ouly passion
which transports us. Saep passione movemur, and zelum putamus.

You had then two Passions in your soul, when you writ this book, the one
swimming on the surface of your mind (as S. Gregory speaks) of grief for the
supposed errors of the Cutholick Church. The other hidden at the bottom of
your heart, of Hatred of Papists. The first enabled you to make your
protestation; the second (except in some very few places) governed your
intention. Now to your Meekness.

G. B. Page 141. I am none of those who justify rage or bitterness against
those in errors. And p. 155. We abhor the doctrine of cruel persecuting of any
for their consciences: The outmost we allow ^if or desire of that nature, being
the driving from us those who do so disturb us.

ANS. Wonderful meek, sweet, and charitable! As if Bannisbme^t from our
native Country Ingland, of such a number, as embrace the communion of the
Catholic Church of all conditions, wore an inconsiderable Punishment? If you
deal so with those, whom you pity, what will you do with those, for whom
you have some Bitterness.

But why must all, who profess the Catholic Religion, be banished? Because say
you, they disturb you. It seems a dangerous business, to disturb a Scottish
Minister, which deserves banishment of all yeomans, Gentlemen, Squires,
Knyghts, Baronets, Barous, Vicounts, Earls, and others, who are Catholics.
What will be your verdict against me, in case you think this book disturb
your? what torments will be sharp enough, and what gibet high enough, to
satisfy for this crime, on an obscure man, when for the like so many
illustrious persons are sentenced to banishment?

G.B. page 142. My design is to provoke pity, rather then wrath, and tears
more then flames, toward those deceived multitudes, that we may pray for them,
rather then rail at them.

ANSWER. If so, never was design worse handled.

G. B. p. 143. I shall not search into the depths of the mercys of God, how far
they may reach any of that Communion. None alive is more willing to stretch his
invention for sinding out grounds to fix his Charity on, then my self. But all
I can devise falls short.

ANS. Your meekness discovers it self more and more. Before you proposed our
Banishment from the Country, which God appointed us for this life, by ordring
in it our birth: now you banish us from Heaven, our true Country: So that in
the midst of your kindness, you design us the Punishment of Cain in this
world, and that of the Devils in the next. Is this all the effect of your
stretched invention to find grounds for you Charity? what destiny would you
have read us, if you had not stretched it out?

Seeing you give this occasion (if your protetestation be sincere) you cannot be
offended, that I help your invention, by showing a ground for your Charity to
fix on, by alleging those vere probable reasons, why Catholics do not
embrace your communion.

CHAPTER XXXV. Reasons, why Catholics do not embrace the communion of the
Protestant Church.
OUr B. Savior Mat. 7.15.
warnes us to beware of those who come to us in sheep clothing, but are
interiourly ravenous wolves: and gives us a sign to know them by, their
works. Catholics considered the works of the first Reformers; and by them
Judged of their persons, whither they were sheep, or wolves.

Imprimis they had a great motive to suspect the whole Reformation, because
the occasion opf it was evidently reproachful. In Germany Luther's motive was
emulation betwixt his order, and the Dominicans, and Envy, that these later
should have the preaching of the Jubily. In Ingland lust begun it under Henry
VIII. and Avarice, and Pride completed it under Edward VI.

By whom was is most hotly embraced, and promoted? By Apostatas, in whom the
flesh prevailed over the spirit: and the first step they made, was shaking of
the yoke of obedience to their lawful superiors, to become independants. This
is one sacrilege, which was accompanied with two others, breaking their vows
of Chastity and Poverty.

What motives did they use, to draw People to join with them? Propose Liberty
from all Ecclesiastical laws, that were any way burthersome, or contrary to
sensuality, as fasting praying on certain days, Pennances, etc. freeing men
from the obligation of Divine laws, by teaching they were impossible, and
rejecting some of them in particular, as that for Confession. Indulging
sensualitys, trampling on all that seemed burdensome, under pretense of
Christian liberty.

What effects followed the Reformation? A neglect of god's counsels, an
insensibility of his Inspirations, a contempt of Religion, an unwillingnesse to
be ruled, Rebellion in Church and state, a loosing of the spirit of Prayer, a
slyghting of all good works and anentire abandoning themselves to bad ones.
The light of the Ghospel promised, and that darkened with irreligious
interpretations, the word of God held forth, and a great part of it cut off. A
Reformation pretended in the Church, and the Church robbed of its revenues: the
Church worship purged, and the chief action of it, Sacrifice, abolisht, the
glory of God promised, and his sacred name by blasphemy profaned. Faith so
commended, as by it Hope was destroyed by Presumption, and Charity by Schism.
In fine, if any thing like zeal appeared in the first times of Reformation, it
showed it self by Avarice, Rapine, Sacrilege, Pride, Dissensions, Schisms,
Rebellious, Incontinences, Drunkenness, in a word Libertinisme. Which the
sincerer part of your communion deplore with true tears; not with such, as you
sheed for our errors. If these are the works of sheep, what are the works
of wolves? And if by works we must, Judge of men, what could they say of these
Reformers?

Letus lay aside what is past, and look on what is present: Is it not true,
that though you talk much of Christianity, yet all marks of it seem blotted
out of the lives of your flock? That therenever was more impurity in marriages,
more corruption in familyes, more debauchery in youth, more ambition amongst
the rich, more Pride amongst the Gentry, more Dishonesty in commerce, more
sophistication in marchandises, more deceit amongst tradesme^, more
intemperance amongst all? That fornication is thought a peccadillo; adultery,
good fortune: Chastity a reproach te the sex: cheating and treachery, court
virtue: Impiety and libertinisme, strength of wit: Oaths and blasphemys, or
naments of our language: perpetual gaming, a lawful divertisment for men:
contempt of their husbands, neglect of the Education of their children, and of
the care of their familys, a privilege of women who have some advantage of
birth, and fortune: and Drunkenesse for all who have time and money to cast
away? The prodigious numbers of houses designed for tippling is a sufficient
co^viction of the greatenesse of this vice: there being more in London alone,
then in any ten Catholics towns in Europe, and probably more then served the
whole kingdom in Catholic times: which are so many nurseryes of Idleness,
whence all vices flow: and the thriving condition, they all live in, shows
which may the riches of the nation go and on what their hearts are settled.

You will say these are faults of the Reformers; but not of your reformation.
But in this you are mistaken: for it comes from the very substantial parts of
your reformation: so that if any do well, it is to be attribued to the
goodness of their nature: If ill, it is to be charged upon your religion:
which has retrenched, on several pretenses, almost all helps of Devotion.

Christ to apply to us the merits of his passion, instituted seven Sacraments,
which are administered in the Cat. Church. To regenerate us, Baptism: to
strengthen us in faith, Confirmation: to nourisb our souls, Eucharist: to
restore us to God's grace, if by frailty we have lost it, Penance: to prepare
us for a passage to the other world, Extreame-unction: to confer grace
necessary for a Churchman, or a marryed-man. Order, and Matrimony. Of those
you have cut off five: and of the two remaining, that of the Eucharist, which
Christ said was his body and Blood, you make only a bit of Bread, and spoone
full of wine.

The Catholics have every day the unbloody sacrifice of the Altar offered, at
which they can as2is it: they are taught that mass is composed out of the law,
andp Prophets, the Ghospel, and Canonical Epistles: that it is a summary of
the life of Christ, and commemoration of his death: that when they see the
sacred host elevated, they must call to mind his elevation on the Cross for
their sakes: and that they must offer him and themselves, with him, to God the
father: As S. Austin teaches us l. 10. de Civit. Dei c. 20. This Daily
sacrisice you have cut off, having something in Cathedralls on sundays, in
other Churchs seldom. So the whole week in all places, and a great part of
the year in most places, passes with out that great exercice for your
devotion.

Ceremonies in divineservice are necessary to fix our Fancy on the things in
hand, and to help to raise our soul to God. This they do first by their
signification, as knocking our Breast is a figne of grief, and co^trition:
kneeling and bowing of our adoration of God: lifting up hands and eyes to
Heaven, of raising our wills to God, etc. They likewise increase within us
those dispositions, they signify, by a sympathy betwixt the soul, and body.
These you have retrencht, as superstitious, which has opened a door to the
contempt of your holy service, and places, where it is celebrated, to which
many of you show little more respect, then at other civil actions: nay many
would not enter into a friends house with so little respect as they show,
entering into the house of God.

G.P. page 135. Religion consists in few things. It Is true, nay it consistes in
one thing, (as to its perfection) the love of God above all things. But what
then? are helps to stir up that love of God to be neglected? It is
Pharisaicall to place our confidence in the ceremonies, or consider them as the
substance of Religion; but to look on them as its ornaments and means to
stir up and strike good purposes deeper into our hearts, why should it be
misliked? The wiser of your brethren in france acknowledge, and bewail the
want of them: So will you if you consider it well.

Catholics have an unquestionable ordination: for if we have none, yours must
fall to the ground, you having received yours from us. Yours is not only
questionable; but questioned actually and with seeming probability denied by
Cath. 1. for want of a due minister, A Bishop. 2. for want of due matter and
form. 3. for want of due intention for your Bishops owning no sacrifice of the
new law, could not intend to confer a Power to offer sacrifice, which is
essential to Preisthood. They were confirmed in their opinions of your want of
Ordination, by your Owning Communion with those reformed Churchs in France and
Holland, which have no lawful ordination according to your principles: your
directing yours to their Churchs, advising them to receive the Sacraments from
them: and admitting those Ministers to the Ministry amongst ou, without any new
Ordination.

To conclude they had those same motives to continue in the Communion of the
Catholic Church, which S. Austin had: which he relates I. contra Epist.
Fundam. c. 4. Tenet consensio populorum and gentium, tenet auctoritas miraculis
inchoata, spe nutrita, charitate aucta, vetustate firmata: tenet ab ipsa Sede
Petri cui pascendas oves post Resurrectionem Dominus commendavit, usque ad
praesentem Episcopatum successio Sacerdotum. Tenet postremo ipsum Catholicae
nomen, quod non sine causa inter tam multas haereses sic ista Ecclesia sola
obtinuiut, ut.... Apud vos autem, ubi nihil horum est, sola personat veritatis
pollicitatio. I am retained in the Catholic Church, by the consent of nations,
by an authority begun with miracles, nourisht with hope, increased by charity,
established by antiquity. I am retained by a succession of Priest: beginning
from S. Peter (to whom our Lord after his Resurrection commended the feeding
of his sheep) until this present Pope, Innocent XI. Lastly I am retained by
the very name of Catholic, which with great reason, amongst so many sects,
this Church alone obtaines.

What have you to oppose against such strong motives? Scripture and the
Ghospel: which if clear for you, ought without doubt be preferred before all
those other motives. But they found this very Ghospel this Scripture pronounce
in their favor, and against you. This is my body, says the Scripture: It is
not Christ's body, say you. The commandments of God are not heavy, says the
Scripture, The commandments of God are impossible, says you. A reward is due to
our Good works, says the Scripture; No works of ours are meritorious, nay the
best are sins, say you. Faith without works is dead, says the Scripture, and
you commend faith, so as to make all good works be neglected. I grant, some
amongst you of late, do not so crudely teach some of these doctrines, being
ashamed of their deformity. But you cannot deny, but that they were taught by
the first Reformers. Which was sufficient to convince the world, that Scripture
gave no evident verdict for them: and make all affrayd of their Reformation,
who had a care of their souls.

CHAPTER XXXVI. Greater exercise of Piety amongst Catholics, then Protestants.
Baptism is given validly in both Churchs, but with this difference, that we
retain the ancient significant Ceremonies instituted by the Apostles, or at
least in Apostolical times, which may be proved out of Tertul, S. Cyprian, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierosme, S. Austin, and S. Denis: you have retrenched all, save
only the sign of the Cross: And ( O judicium Exodus 8.19.
! This is the finger of God) the peevish refractory, stubbome children of your
Church, have wrangled with her about that, and with the same reasons, as she
had done with her mother the Roman Catholic Church: so visibly has God Mat.
7.2.
meeted unto you your measure, and Sap. 11.17.
punished you by your sin.

As ours come to the use of reason, a new Sacrament expects them, Confirmation
which is the same mentioned so frequently in the Act. 8.18.
Acts, of giving the Holy Ghost by imposition of the Apostles hands, which
arms them against visible, and invisible enemies, with the spirit of fortitude
to profess their Faith. Of this Protestants....

We find in every Church Mat. 1.11.
Malachy's Prophesy fullfilled, a pure offering made to God, mass said. And in
Catholic countries, rich, and poor, even the meanest artisans, and laborers,
as Porters, water-carryers, etc, will steal so much time from their (almost)
necessary Rest, as to give half an your to adore God, and his son Jesus in the
morning hoping they will bless their labors all the day the better for it. O
that you did but see with what attention, and respect they assist at those
Divine Mysterys: how with their knees on the ground, their eyes on the Altar,
their heart in Heaven, they accompany the Priest, and with him jointly make that
oblation to God, with what sentiments they adore Christ present, and desire him
to appease his fathers wrath, for their sins, by the merits of his Passion: and
preserve them from offending anew that day and to bless that days actions.
What do protestants? As soon as they are up, they have their hand in the cup
board, and in the cup their nose.

Have any by mortal sin shut against themselves the gates of Heaven, which the
Passion of Christ opened: they stir up a real sorrow for that offense of
God, purpose amendment, and with these dispositions address themselves to a
Priest, with a resolution to follow his advice, and perform what he shall
enjoine. They discover to him all the wounds of their soul their most secret
and most reproachful sins, as to God himself, whose vicegerent he is, being
assured of an inviolable secret (and itis doubtless a perpetual miracle, that
amongst so many thousands of Priests, not one should be found faulty in this
point) They harken to his advice, accept his Penance, to fast, pray, give
alms, visit Prisoners, serve poor in Hospitals, or the like, according as the
condition of the Penitent permits. Then receive Absolution in virtue of the
power given by our Savior Io. 20.23.
to Priests. The effects of this sacrament are Remission of sins past, avoiding
others, making Restitution, if any thing has been taken (as some Inglish in
France have experienced.) In fine, a newness of life. Of all this what is in
use among Protestants? nothing.

Are they judged fit, to approach the Divine table: they do it with a lively
Faith, beleiving it is the true, real, and substantial body of Christ, With
his blood, and Divinity, per concomitantiam, (Council. Trid. sess. 13. cap. 13.)
by reason of the inseparable union betwixt them: with profound humility;
professing, with the Centurion, Luc. 7.6.
their unworthiness to receive their lord, and desiring him to make them
worthy. And with a Love proportionable to that Christ showed by instituting
this Sacrament. What do Protestants? sometimes something: for their Ministers
distribute a morsel of bread, and a sup of wine, and they may expet, to meet
only with dispositions proportionable to those beggarly elements.

Amongst us, Iac. 5.14.15.
Is any sick? He calls for the Priests of the Church, they pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, that the Prayer of Faith may
save the sick, and god may raise him up, (in case it be for the glory of God,
and the good of the Patient) and if he have cemmitted sins, they may be
forgiven him. Thus in an Apostles words I have delivered our practice in
administering the Sacrament of Extreme-Onction. Of which Protestants nothing.

Besides mass, which all hear every day commonly: three times a day A Bell
rings, to mind us of the Incarnation of the son of God, and move all with an
Act of faith, to acknowledge it, and return God thanks for it: of which
amongst Protestants nothing.

I may conclude this comparison betwixt you, and us, as to the practice of
Piety, with S. Austin's Aug. l. de moribus Ecclesiae cap. 34.
words very pat to our purpose. Istis Manichaei, (Protestants) si potest is
obsistite, istos intuemini, istos sine mendacio, si audetis, and cum contumelia
nominate. Istorum jejuniis vestra jejunia, castitati castitatem, vestitum
vestitui, epulas epulis, modestiam modestiae, charitatem charitati, and quod
res maxim postulat praeceptis praecepta conferte. I am videbitis, quid inter
ostentationem and sinceritatem, inter viam rectam and errorem intersit. Nunc
vos illud admoneo, ut aliquando Ecclesiae Catholicae maledicere desinatis,
vituperando mores hominum, quos and ipsa condemnat, and quos quotidie tanquam
malos filios corrigere studet. Sed quisquis illorum bona voluntate, Deique
auxilio corriguntur, quod amiserunt peccando, poenitendo recuperant. Qui autem
voluntate mala in pristinis vitiis perseverant, aut addunt graviora prioribus,
in agro quidem Domini sinuntur esse, and cum bonis seminibus crescere, sed
veniet tempus, quo zizania separentur. Considering them well, see whither
without offending against Truth, you can reproach any thing. Compare yourfasts,
with ours: your chastity, your modesty, and chiefly your doctrine with ours.
You will presently perceive what difference there is, betwixt vain boasting,
and sincerity: going the stryght way, and wandering. At present I advise you, to
cease from detracting from the Catholic Church, blaming the lives of men whom
she condemns, and whom she daily endeavors to correct, as naughty
children. If any of them with the help of God's grace are converted, they
recover in the Catholic Church by repentance, what they lost by sin. If any
notwithstanding all these helps to Piety continue obstinate in their
wickedness, or add more grevious sins to those they have committed; they are
indeed tolerated in the field of God, the Church, until the time come designed
for the separation of the cockle from the good corn. Thus S. Austin.

Glory then as much as you please with the lukewarm Laodicean Angel, That you
are rich and increased in Goods, and want nothing. Yet assure yourselfe that as
he, so you are poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked. Your
boasting of the advantages of your instructions, and discipline amongst your
deluded admirers is like those Nurses, who wanting Milk, entertain their
children, with rattles and bibs, and some insignificant nourriture. In reality
there seems to be as much difference betwixt the spiritual food souls receive
in the Catholic Church and that of Protestants, as there is betwixt the
nourriture a child receives sucking a breast stretched with milk and that he
gets by sucking a moistened finger. Which shall be further shown in the

CHAPTER XXXVII. No Houses of devotion, nor spiritual Books Amongst
Protestants.
G. B. p. 145. A tentation, to become Papists, is the solitary and retired
houses among them for leading a devout, and strict life, and the excellent
books of Devotion have been published by many of that communion. and p. 147. I
deny not that is the greatest defect of the reformation t at there are not in
it such encouragements to a devout life. and p. 148. It is not to be denied, to
be agreate defect, that we want recluse houses. But it fixes no imputation on
our Church, her doctrine, or worship, that she is so poor, as not to be able
to mantaine such Seminarys.

ANSWER This is as pretty a sophisme of non causa pro causa, as I have seen.
As if the small number of Inglish Catholics were richer then the whole body of
Protestants; for we have founded many geate familyes of Religious: and you with
all your industry could never settle one. There are reasons, for your Churchs
being so unsuccessefull in these attempts, without doubt, as real, and true,
as that, which you give is false: and it shall be my work to lay them out
before you.

The first, and chiefest reason, is a Judgment of God Almighty upon you,
forbreaking up, and dispersing so many houses of Piety. God was served in
those houses, he was offended with that sacrilege, and there fore denies you
that Blessing of which you are unworthy.

A second: each one had rather keep his means to himself, then see them pass
against his will to another lay family, for whom he has nokindnesse. If any
give it to God, and Religion, they design it should continue there, which
cannot be expected in Ingland, as long as the memory is fresh of Henry VIII.
and Elizabeth.

A third: the foundation of your Reformation is inconsistent with a
superstructure of Religion, or living in community together. Men cannot live
together without a settled rule, or order, established, peculiar to that manner
of life, and proper for it. Your Reformation is inconsistent with this, it
teaching to reject all humane injunctions, as contrary to Christian liberty.
When out of that principle you have taught men to despise all decrees even of
general counsils, received by the whole Church, and confirmed by the practice
of many ages, how can you hope, they should esteem Rules given by modern new
men?

A fourth: your doctrine denying all merits, or Reward, due to our actions.
Hopes of advantage encourages us to labor: our industry is dulled as soon as
those vanish. S. Ambrose thinks the Novatians unreasonable, who preached
Penance, and denied the fruit of it, l. 1. de Poenit. c. 16. Frustra dicitis
vos praedicare Poenitentiam, qui tollitis. and lib. 2. c. 3. Merendi gratia
Sacramenti, ad precandum impellimur: and hoc auferre vultis, propter quod
agitur Poenitentia? Toll gubernatori perveniendi spem, and in mediis fluctibus
incertus errabit. Toll luctatori coronam, and lentus jacebit in stadio: Toll
piscatori capiendi essicaciam, desinet jactare retia. In hopes of arriving at
his Heaven the Pilot steeres his ship: the wrastler strives in hope to throw
his adversary: The fisher casts his nets in hope of catching some fish. All
these would relent, were they persuaded the thing they aimed at were
impossible. How then do you expect, that men should practice good works, when
you teach them to hope for no good from them? It were indeed to be wished, that
men would serve God, for God without regarding any reward. But that is a
perfection all do not arrive to: And even the best are feign to use some other
motives.

A fifth: your clergy is utterly unfit to Direct, and Instruct such houses: our
works have a greater influence on our neighbor, then our words. S. Hierome
thought it incongruous, that a man, with a full belly should preach fasting,
And how can a man preach chastity to others, who comes himself from the
embraces of his wife, if he has one, or has his head full of Amourettes, and
designs to get one, if he be a batchelour?

It is in vain therefore that you seek the advantage of those withdrawing
places from the noise, and trouble of the world, to those Devout Solitudes:
your lives are not fit for them, your doctrine is inconsistent with them, and
your past actions have shut that door of mercy unto you.

As for Books of Devotion: The Author of the Fiat Lux, says you have printed
several such composed by ours under your own names. So you hang us, and
cherish our writings, as the Jews stoned the Prophets, and canonized their
books. You own we have many excellent Books; All the world sees you have
scarce any: nor can rationally hope for any. For

He who writes a spiritual Book, ought to aim at two things the first to
instruct the understanding with divine and eternal Truths. The second, to move
the will to a hatred of sin, a contempt of the world, and to the love of God
above all things. The first may be an effect of study: but the second cannot be
attained unto, unless the Author be such himself. He must, as S. John, be Io.
5.35.
a Burning and, shining light. Burn to God, by a true and unfeigned love of
him, Shine to men, by the clear truths, which he delivers. He must feel with
in himself those motions, which he endeavors to communicate to his Reader. Si
vis me flere dolendum est primum ipsi tibi. A soul possessed with hope, with
fear, with joy, with grief, with love, with hatred, in fine with any passion,
does express not only the thoughts; but the passion it self with tropes
proper: by which means it not only informs the understanding, but also stirs
the will of the hearer, or reader to like inclinations.

Read Seneca's epistles, or other moral works, or Cicero's, you shall find
agreate many excellent Truths. Yet I never knew any man the better in his
morality for them: As they themselves notwithstanding those lyghts, were far
from being Good men, as you may see in Lactantius l. 3. divin. Instit. from the
13. Chapter. On the contrary the reading of Saint's works has a great force
to move us to Good. S. Austin l. 8. Confess. cap. 6. says some were converted,
by reading the life of S. Antony, several have have taken serious resolutions
of leading a Christian life, by reading those Confessions. And I have known
Several moved to love mental Prayer, by Reading S. Teresa's works: and to the
love of God, by using those of S. Francis de Sales.

This is a great defect in all our Protestant writers. I will instance in two,
who seem each in his kind to overtop his Confreres, quantum lenta solentinter
viburna Cupressi. The one Bishop Andrews, who by divisions and subdivisions
instructs well, only sometimes verborum minutiis rerum pondera frangit. The
other is the Author of the whole duty of man: who has many excellent Truths,
and very practical, as well as the first: yet seem not to move the will,
because of their cold way of treating their doctrines. They Shine, but they do
not Burn.

This heat is not to be attained unto but by Prayer. Which inflames our heart,
with the love of God ( In meditatione mea exardescet ignis, Psalm. 38.4.) It is
this love, which unites us to God: and this union makes us capable of doing
great things. For an instrument must be in the hand of the work man, to do
completely what is intended: if it be distant from him, and not held, but by a
small thread, the work will be difficult, and imperfect, if there can be any. We
are all the instruments of God in order to all good works especially in
writing spiritual books, in which, if there is any thing good, it must come
from God the fountain of all good.

The Apostles after the Ascension expecting the coming of the Holy Ghost Act.
1.14.
continued with one accord in Prayer. S. John Baptiste although sanctified in his
mothers womb, and designed for the office of Precursor, and by consequence
fitted from above for that office, yet He was Luc. 1.80.
in the desert till the days of his showing to Israel: sequestring himself from
the company of men, and co^versing only with God and his Angels, the far
greatest part of his life. And the word Incarnate not for any need of his
own; but to give us example, past 40. Mat. 4.8.
days in fasting, and prayer in a desert before he began to preach. And when he
had begun, he past the days with men, and the nyg^ts Luc. 6.12. Erat pernoctans
in oratione Dei.
in Prayer, with his heavenly father. Species tibi datur, forma tibi
praescribitur, quam debeas aemulari, says S. Ambr. lib. 6. in Luc. This was the
practice of S. Gregory Naz. S. Basil, S. Chrysostom. And in later times
Ignatius de Loyola before he began the Society past a retreat in a cave at
Manresa. Godalone is in peculiar manner the father of lyghts, all is darkness,
but what is received from him. The greatest spiritualists that ever held a pen,
even the writers of Scripture, at the same time they taught us received their
lesson from the Holy Ghost: and first the ears of their heart were open to
Psalm. 84.9.
hear what God spoke to them, then they opened their mouth to speak out Mat.
12.34.
of the abundance of their heart, to us.

Now what years, what months, what weeks, or at least days, do you of the
ministry pass in solitude in Prayer? I find little footsteps of it in any of
your works: and when you fall upon those things, you discover you are
strangers to them, for you advance like one, who groapes to find his way in the
dark: you have some terms of Scripture, of communication with the lord,
walking with God, and the like, which you use on all occasions: which are in
themselves very significant; but insignificant to you, because not understood
by you. I never found any, who could practically explicate them, so as to be
tollerably understood. In deed there are inscripture many things not to be
understood, but by Prayer. Such is that Saying of our Savior: Io. 12.25.
He that hates his soul: which S. Francis Xaverius used to say, was dark in
study; but clear as noone day in Prayer.

Humility is necessary in a spiritual man God being pleased, Mat. 11.15.
To reveal his mist erys to the little ones; when he conceales them from the
Proud and wise. Their are, those instruments, which God cheifely uses: For 1.
Cor. 1.
God chooses the weak things, to confound the strong: and the foolish things
to confound the wise: the base, and contemptible things to confound the proud,
and presumptuous, that no flesh should glory in his presence. Now this virtue,
is a flower scarce to be found in your garden.

CHAPTER XXXVIII. Protestant Doctrines contrary to Piety.
FRom your p. 149. till the end, you make an elogium of your Church, and you
describe an Utopian Congregation, rather then it, or if it, you speak rather
what you wish it were, then what it is. You except indeed from the common rule
some persons, whose lives contradict your assertion, and say their bad lives
ought not or eflect on your opinions. and p. 153. What ever the practices of
too many amongst us be, yet there is no ground to quarrel our doctrines.

I join issue with you as to owning this truth: that in the field (the Church)
there is cockle, wi th corn; in the Barne-floore, chafe with wheat: in the
net, bad as well as good fishes: foolish virgins, as well as wise. That as S.
Austin August Epist. 137.
observes, we cannot hope that in any Congregation consisting of many persons,
all should be great Saints, seeing in the Ark of Noe of eight persons one
(Cham) was accursed: that out of Abraham's family Ismael was cast: that in
Isaac's family, Esau was hated: in Jacob's Ruben defiled his father's bed. In
David's one son committed incest, and another turned Rebel. Amongst the
Apostles there was one Judas. In the earthly Paradise Adam fell; and in Heaven
the Angels sinned. Hence it is no reproach to any Congregation, to have some
bad livers sometimes discovered in it, provided its established laws do not
abette the evil, nor its doctrine incline to it. J ownesome ill livers in the
Catholic Church, as well as in yours. But we have many great Saints who
appease God's wrath; and you have none. We must see whither doctrines foster
Impiety? you say ours: and I have, I think, convinced y our error; we say
yours, and thus we prove it.

First: nothing is embraced or aimed at by our will, but what is good, and
possible to be obtained. It is not credible that any man in his wits, will
seriously set himself to make a ladder, to reach the moon, or boots to wade
from Ingland to Jamaica: both being Looked on, as impossible, considering the
heygth of the moorce, and the breadth, and depth of those seas. Wherefore
Protestant doctrine, teaching that the commandments of God are impossible, is
destructive to all serious endeavors to keep them.

How contrary to this was the discourse of Moses Deuteronomy. 30.11.
when he persuaded the Israelits to the observance of the commandments because
they were not difficult, the things commanded being nether in Heaven, nor
within the Earth, nor in remote regions, that is to say, nether so high, nor
so low, nor so remote, as to be out of their reach; but that they were in
their heart, and mouth, that is to say very near or easy. S. John, 1. Jo 5.3.
to the same intent, said the Commandments were light, with this motive we
encourage ours.

Two things may be answered to this reason: first that some of ours have taught
that doctrine, and secondly that some of yours do not teach it. To the first I
reply, that I ansenius indeed did hold it: but was immediately condemned by the
Pope, and the whole Church: so his doctrine does not discourage ours. And to
the second: your Church never made any solemn decree against it; nay it ownes
Communion with those who teach it: so the discouragement lies with you.

Secondly your excessive exagerations of faith as all sufficient to salvation,
and your neglect of other virtues, and good works, may incline to faith; but
stirs up to no labor for other virtues, as being of no necessity, and no
great use: now we place faith in the rank S. Paul assigns it, 1. Cor. 12.
at the feet of Charity: and with S. James we teach, that Iac. 2.26.
with out works, it is dead. We own with the Apostle, that without Faith
nothing can be done in order to eternal bliss, (because Heb. 11.6.
it impossible to please God without it,) and with it alone nothing
considerable is done. Hence we teach our People too keep their Faith, as the
Apple of their eye, but withal to cherish Charity, as their Heart.

Thirdly: Hope of advantage is a great spur to virtue, this encourages the
soldier in his battles, the merchant is his voyages, the Husband man in his
labors: whose endeavors would slacken was there no corn, no gain by
merchandise, nor victory, to be hoped for, Now we teach, that through the
Passion of Christ, and by the promise of God, a reward is due to good works;
and you deny this, pretending that nothing is due to the best of them, but
Hell, and damnation, they being all sins. So our doctrine encourages to good
works, and yours dishartens them.

Fourthly: what soever doctrine diminishs the fear of the punishment due to
sin, is contrary to virtue, because that fear is a great curb to our
Passions. Now your doctrine does diminish that fear, for you teach that faith
secures to you your act of oblivion, your full pardon, so that those who
believe soundly, need fear nothing: Faith having a virtue to blot out all sins.

G. B. page 154. We cannot be charged, for having taught our People to break
any one Commandment.

ANSWER. You seem charged for teaching them indirectly, to break them all:
saying the keeping them is impossible, in it self, fruitless if they should
be kept, and their breach not prejudicial.

G. B. page 160. Bad practices may furnish matter for regret; but not for
separation.

ANSWER. It is true, when and where principles of religion are contrary to such
practices; But when these bad customs are natural sequels of the doctrine,
and necessarily flow from it, not only the practices are to be detested, but
likewise the doctrine whence they flow, is to be abhorred as pernicious to
souls, and the Church which teaches them as doctrine either necessary to be
believed, or even probable in practice, what soever Church it be, is to be
forsaken as the Chair of Pestilence.

Si quid de Tuo, Deus meus, dictum est, agnoscant Tui: Si quid de Meo, and tu
ignosce, and tui. Aug.

AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chapt. 1. MR. G. B. his design, and his disposition, when be writ this book:
of the Wickedness of the world. Page 1 Chapt. 2. Of Antichrist. Page 6 Chapt.
3. The true designs of Christian Religion. Page 11 Chapt. 4. G. B.'s
explication of the Designs of Religion. Page 15 Chapt. 5. Of the Characters of
Christian Doctrine. Page 19 Chapt. 6. Scriptures suppressed. Page 23 Chapt. 7.
Idolatry of Pagans. Page 30 Section 1. Pagans thought their Idols to be Gods.
Page 31 Sect. 2. The beginning and occasion of Idolatry. Page 41 Sect. 3. What
were the Pagan Gods? and that the Pagan Gods had been men. Page 52 Sect. 4. The
Roman and Grecian Jupiter, was not the true God. Page 68 Sect. 5. Whither all
Pagans believed one God? Page 84 Sect. 6. Of the unknown God at Athens. p. 98
Chapt. 8. How G. B. proves Catholics Idolaters? p. 104 Chapt. 9. Of Mediating
Spirits. p. 107 Chapt. 10. Of the Intercession of Saints. p. 116 Chapt. 11.
Pretended charms of Holy Water, wax-Candles, Agnus Dei's. p. 126 Chapt. 12. Of
Ceremonies. p. 130 Chapt. 13. Scripture, and the Church and of the Resolution
of Faith. p. 137 Chapt. 14. Of Merits. p. 151 Chapt. 15. Punishments due to sin
forgiven. p. 153 Chapt. 16. Of Purgatory. p. 157 Chapt. 17. Preistly
Absolution. p. 166 Chapt. 18. Of Pennances. p. 171 Sect. 1. Fasting. p. 172
Sect. 2. Prayer. p. 175 Sect. 3. Pilgrimages p. 178 Sect. 4. Two Objections
answered. p. 182
Chapt. 19. Sacrifice of the Mass. p. 183 Chapt. 20. Regal Office of Christ,
and of Transubstantiation, Dispensing in vows, etc. p. 188 Chapt. 21. Love, and
its two species, Repentance, mortal, and venial sins. Attrition, and
Contrition. p. 192 Chapt. 22. Theological Virtues. p. 200 Sect. 1. Of Faith
and Heresy. p. 201 Sect. 2. Of Hope and Presumption. p. 206 Sect. 3. Of
Charity. p. 209 Sect. 4. Answer to what G. B. objects. p. 212
Chapt. 23. Efficacy of Sacraments. p. 215 Chapt. 24. Probable opinions, and
good intentions: and of the Author of the Provincial Letters. p. 217 Chapt.
25. Papists do not allow to break the commandments. p. 225 Chapt. 26. Riches,
and Pride of Churchmen. p. 230 Chapt. 27. Unity of the Church in Faith, and
Sacraments. G. B. own Protestants to be Schisinaticks, severity against
dissoniers, and of Hugo Grotius. p. 235 Chapt. 28. Zeal of souls in our
Bishops. Reformers: and of S. Cyran, Arnaud, and Jansenius. p. 241 Chapt. 29.
Small Objections. Residency, commendams. p. 254 Conclusion of the first and
beginning of the second part. p. 257 Chapt. 30. Catholic Faith how delivered?
Rules to know Tradition. Faith never changed. The dispute betwixt Mr. Arnaud,
and Mr. Claude. p. 260 Chapt. 31. Revelations, and miracles, p. 269 Chapt. 32.
Whither all Mysterys of Faith Common. p. 276 Chapt. 33. Faith not dependant on
senses. p. 283 Chapt. 34. Mr. G. B. Intention, and Meekness p. 289 Chapt. 35.
Reasons why Cat. embrace not the communion of the Protestant Church. p. 296
Chapt. 36. Greater exercise of Piety amongst Catholics then amongst
Protestants. p. 304 Chapt. 37. No houses of devotion, nor spiritual Books
amongst Protestants. p. 310 Chapt. 38. Protestant Doctrines contrary to Piety.
p. 318
A Catalogue of some Authors, whose Pages are cited in this work: with the
places where, and years, when, they where printed.
I name only those Authors, whose Pages I cite, by reason that their treatises
being long, or not divided into Chapters, the places I use would not be
otherwise easily found.

Authors. Where Printed. in what year. Aristotle Parisiis 1619. Arnobius
Parisiis 1666. Athenagoras Parisis 1636. S. Chrysostom Etonae 1613.
Commodianus Parisiis 1666. S. Cyprian Parisiis 1666. S. Cyril. Alexan. Parisiis
1638. S. Hierome Antwerpiae 1578. Julius Firmicus Parisiis 1666. Justinus M.
Parisiis 1636. Minutius Felix Parisiis 1666. Origin. c. Celsu^ Cantabrig 1658.
Tertullian Rotomagi 1662. Theodoret Parisiis 1642. Ger. Jo. Vossius Francofurti
1668.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
I intend only to correct those, which are considerable, and may alter the
sense. The rest I leave to the courteous Reader.

In the eight page of the Preface, line 26. Jupiter in Read Jupiter is. Page
5. l. 7. When r. Where. p. 11. l. 13. True the r. the true. p. 13. l. 31. c. 20.
r. c. 25. p. 18. l. 9. deprescript. r. depraescrip. c. 40. p. 338. p. 19. l. 9.
said r. laid. p. 32. l. 24. who, where r. which were. p. 38. l. 4. said to r.
said of. p. 41. l. 12. though r. through p. 44. l. 19. make r. made. p. 51. l.
10. sentelesse r. senseless. p. 53. l. 12. addicted the to r. addicted to.
Item l. 26. say the r. say then. p. 54 l. 23. God nations r. God of nations. p.
68. l. 1. sals r. falls. p. 75. l. 29. wife r. wife. p. 78 l. 14. place Ovid's
r. place in Ovid's. Item l. 16. mode r. made. p. 79, l. 18. Phiny r. Pliny. p.
84. l. 3. for r. far. p. 86. l. 13. beaty r. beauty. p. 88. l. 28 43. r. 47. p.
90. l. 26. (...). p. 99 l. 4. many r. may. Item l. 17. yet r. ye. p. 100. l.
18. then r. them. p. 104. l. 21. If r. It. p. 117 l. 10. bnow r. know p. 118. l
29. or the r. on the p. 131. l. 1. wherely r. whereby. p. 146. l. 8. fath r.
faith. p. 148. l. 6. your fall r. you fall. p. 159 l. 4. expianda r. expiandae.
p. 162. l. 5. incapable r. capable. p. 179. l. 28. adify r edify. p. 189. p.
189. l. 29. or him r. on him. p. 190. l. 13. (a) r. Act. 15.29. Item l. 27.
epickia r. (...). p. 191. l. 16. for idden r. forbidden. p. 194. l. 22. post r.
lost. p. 195. l. 27. ever r. even. p. 196. l. 2. are r. as. p. 201. l. 4.
place, is r. place it, p. 202. l. 28. dedmed r. deduced. p 213. l. 14 mediocry
r. mediocrity. p. 219. l. 27. this r. his. p. 221. l. 6. breahes r. breaches.
p. 226. l, 26. hill r. kill. p. 231. l. 7. Poverly r. Poverty. Item l. 14 war
r. was. p. 239. l, 4. our r. your. p. 243. l. 4. but not even r. but even. p.
244. l. 22. man's r. manners. p. 247. l. 28. they r. he. p. 251. l. 22 him R.
S. r. him by R. S. Item l. 21. to make r. to make way. p. 154. l. 13. fryghte
r. fryghted. p. 255. l. 19. this r. his. p. 256. l. 12. you r. your. p. 263. l.
4. do r. due. p. 266. l. 14. sound r. found Item l. 28. the r. he. p. 267. l.
13. buffled r. baffled. p. 269. l. 4, us sherin r. Usher in. p. 273. l. 12.
their r. those. p. 276. l. 14. vulgary r. vulgar. p. 277. l. 4. form r. for. p.
279. took r. tobe, p. 295. l. 23. you: r. your. p. 297. l. 7. burther some r.
burdensome. p. 305. l. 10. your r. hour.

A LETTER TO MR. R. CUDWORTH D. D.
SIR,
I had finished this treatise, before I saw your learned work against Atheism:
I seldom read any book, with greater desire to learn from it: Your Candor
discovered in your Preface by owning, and correcting a mistake, increased my
opinion of your abylityes, and my hopes of new lyghts in obscure matters, from
so great labor, accompanied with such sincerity. The first lesson of wisdom
is to speak of nothing, but what we understand perfectly. The second is to
correct Willingly, what is unadvisedly spoken. S. Aug. epist. 7. having said
that Cicero would never recall any thing, he had once spoken, says that he
thinks that no sign of a Wiseman. Haec laus, quamvis praeclarissima videatur,
tamen credibilior est de nimium fatuo, quam de sapiente perfecto. Nam illi quos
Moriones vocant quanto magis a sensu communi dissonant, magisque absurdi and
insulsi sunt, tanto magis nullum verbum emittunt, quod revocare velint: quia
dicti mali, and stulti, vel incommodi poenitere, utique Cordatorum est. We must
earnestly contend for that Faith, which was once delivered to the saints. (Jud.
v. 3.) and which from them has been handed down to us by the Church: Here we
must be immovable, as Rocks: But as for other doctrinall Points, whither
grounded on Hystory, or natural Discourse, we ought not to take them for
better, for worse, to have, and to hold, till Death us depart, or stick to
them longer, then they appear conformable to Truth. I think the best
qualification of an Author, is that Docile Disposition, which the best of all
purely humane Authors, S. Austin, expresses l. 1. de Trin. c. 3. Quisquis haec
legit, says he, ubi pariter certus est, pergat mecum, ubi pariter haesitat,
quaerat mecum, ubi errorem suum observat, redeat ad me, ubi meum, revocet me:
ita ingrediamur simul charitatis viam, tendentes ad Deum. Et hoc placitum pinm
atque tutum, cum omnibus inire volo, qu^ ea, quae scribo, legunt........ You
have given a pledge of that good quality: so I am confident these objections
against some points treated in your Book, will not be unwelcome to you.

You own some very few Philosophers to have thought God to be corporal, viz,
Epicurus, Strato, etc; but that the major part believed him a pure spirit, and
adored the only true God, under the names, Jupiter, Minerva, Osyris, or Venus. I
said with the ancient Fathers, and Primitive Christians, that although all Pagans,
(nay all men) had naturally a knowledge of the true God; yet those, they adored,
were Men. To the proofs alleged above, I add now four. 1. Taken from the
diversity of their sexes. 2. From their Generation. 3. From their Death. 4.
From their Rites.

1. The different sexes of the Pagan Deitys is a convincing proof, that they
were not spirits; but Men and women, or at least Males and Females, and by
consequence corporal. This reason takes up a great part of Arnobius's third
book, from page 46. where he begins with these words: Adduci primum hoc ut
credamus, non possumus, immortalem illam, praestantissimamque naturam divisame
esse per sexus. And he says, that Cicero having ingenuously professed his dislike
of this, the Pagans designed to get his works abolisht by the Senate, as
confirming Christian Religion, and destroying ancient true Paganism. Oportere
statui per Senatum, aboleantur ut haec scripta, quibus Christiana comprobetur,
and vetustatis opprimatur auctoritas. So essential to Paganism was this
diversity of sexes. Which being only designed for carnal Propagation, brings
on my

2. Reason: they received their being from their Parents, as men do. This I
proved p. 61. out of Ovid 4. Fastorum, speaking of Venus: Illa Deos omnes,
longum est numerare, creavit. You p. 488. distinguish Urania Aphrodite from the
vulgar, and p. 489. you say this verse signifyes, that All the Gods were made
by Venus, that is, one supreme Deity. Where our doubt is what Venus Ovid
speaks of, the Divine, which is God, say you: the vulgar, say I: and thus I
prove it. That Venus, which makes males fight with one another, and sport with
the females of their kind, for which young men break their sleep, to give
serenades to their misses: who by Adultery with Anchises brought forth Aeneas;
who contended for a golden Apple, with Juno, and Pallas, and under went the
Judgment of Paris: fought in defense of Troy, and was wounded there, is not the
true God (I scarce think any Theist will hear with Patience such Blasphemys
said of God) but is the vulgar Venus. Ovid speaks of her, for he says: Quid
genus omne creat volucrum, nisi blanda voluptas:
Convenient pecudes, si levis adsit amor.
Cum Mare trux Aries cornu decertat, and idem
Frontem dilectae laedere parcit ovis,
Primus amans carmen vigilatum nocte negata,
Dicitur ad clausas concinuisse fores.
Pro Troia, Roman, tua Venus arma ferebat
Cum gemuit teneram cuspide laesa manum.
Coelestesque duas Troiano judice vicit;
(Ah nolim victas hoc meminisse Deas.)
Assaracique Nurus dicta est, ut scilicet olim
Magnus Iulaeos Caesar haberet Avos.


You cite for your interpretarion Euripedes in Stobaeus, and Boethius, who
speak of the Celestial Love. What then? The Divines, the Fathers, the
Scripture speak of it, for they speak of the Holy Ghost. What is that to
Ovid's verse, which none of them mention, of which alone is our debate?

3. They dyed, as other men. This is likewise urged by all Fathers against the
Pagans, To those above cited I add S. Austin l. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 23.
where having proved out of Cicero, that all the Pagan Gods had been Men, and
alleged the later fiction of Cesar's being changed into a Star, of which
Virgil: Ecce Dionaei procedit Caesaris Astrum: He says: Videatur ne forte
hystorica Veritassepulchra falsorum Deorum ostendat in terra; vanitas autem
Poetica stellas eorum non figat, sed fingat in caelo. Neque enim revera stella
illa Iovis est, aut illa Saturni; sed post eorum MORTEM syderibus ab initio
mundi conditis haec nomina imposuerunt homines, qui illos quasi DEOS habere
voluerunt. You see, Sir, S. Austin's opinion, of the Pagan Gods: viz, that in
real Truth they had been men, even Jupiter himself, that they were, dead as
other Men, that they had been buried: and that in real Truth, their
sepulchers were to be seen.

4. Their Rites, or Ceremonies, show them to be dead men, as I have said.
Baruch 6.30. 31. describes them in this manner: Sacerdotes sedent habentes
tunicas scissas, and capita and barbam rasam, quorum capita nuda sunt. Rugiunt
clamantes contra Deos suos, tanquam in coena mortui. Which probably was the
reason, wherefore some of these things were forbidden to Priests of the old
law, Leu. 10.6. and to all the Jews Deuteronomy. 14 1. Hence proceeded that ordinary
Check of the Christians to the Pagans; that they should not lament them, if
they were Gods, nor adore them, if they were men. Which seems borrowed of
Xenophanes the Colophonian, who said, (...). Accordingly the ancient Poet very
judiciously inferred, that Osiris was a man, because his Priests lamented him.
Et quem tu plangens hominem testaris Osyrim.

You see, Sir, that the Pagan Gods were men: viz, Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, and
Venus, were such, as well as Quirinus, or Flora. And that Jupiter himself was
personated by a filthy Divill appears. 1. By his own confession. 2. By his
permitting the cult of Priapus, Venus, etc; and opposing none, but that of the
trv God. 3. By the filthy sportes he exacted, which were incentives to
debauchery. Hence Tertullian l. ad Scapulam c. 2. p. 129. says, that the Pagans
knew naturally the God of Christians, but adored only those whom the
Christians knew to be Divils. Nos unum Deum colimus, quem omnes naturaliter
nostis. Coeteros and ipsi putatis Deos esse, quos nos Daemones scimus.

You make two objections, which I have not yet answered. The 1. page 452.
Jupiter is called omnipotent. ANS. It is true, the Pagans took him to be the
Ether, as you may see in Euripides, and that is by the Poet called Omnipotent,
l. 2. Georg.

Tum Pater omnipotens faecundis imbribus Ether Conjugis in gremium laetae
descendit.

The 2. page 453. when Christians had obtained rain, Populus ad^amans
Iovi...... In Iovis nomine Deo nostro testimonium reddidit. Tertul. l. ad Scap.
c. 4. page 131. ANS. You might as well say that man was Vigil, who owned his
verses, and received a reward for them. Tertul, Apolog. c. 40. page 71. says:
Cum misericordiam extorserimus, Jupiter honoratur. We Christians obtain of our
God mercy, and you Pagans ascribe it to your Prayers, and to Jupiter's
goodness. Where in you are mistaken for you draw only mischeifes, and miseryes
on your Countries, and heads, by dispising God, and adoring statues. Vos
malorum ilices semper, apud quos Deus spernitur, and statuae adorantur.

But if Jupiter be the true God, tell us, which of the Jupiter's? Arnobius tells
us, there have been several: Vossius and Stillingf. reckon six: Varro in
Tertul. Apolog. c. 14. page 44. reckons up 300. It would be pleasant to hear
these contend which shall be the true God: as Arnobius lib. 4. page 59. and 60.
makes the Minerva's dispute which of them is his daughter. He mentions there
also three Dianas, and Aesculapiu's, four Vulcans, and Venus's, five Bacchus's,
six Hercules, etc.

As for the name, Jupiter, page 451. you will not have it come from Iuvans
Pater; but Iovis Pater: which, Iovis, without peradventure, is the very Hebrew
Tetragrammaton, only altered by a Latin termination. And you send the two best
Latinists, that Pagans and Christians ever had, Cicero and Lactantius, to
school, to learn Latin, for ignorance of this. I cannot subscribe to you, 1.
Because this is warranted by no latin Author. 2. The Tetragrammaton is not
known, as the Poliglot says prol. 8. n. 19. Josephus says it contained (...),
four vowells; but what they were, or how pronounced, he does not say: how can
you build so confidently upon so uncertain a foundation? 3. Many Latin names
end in A. as Scaevola, Nassica, Seneca, Galba, Caligula; none occur to me, in
Is: For Thais is of Greek descent. So if the Tetragrammaton was, what you to
confidently say, the termination, Iehova, or Iova, had been more Latin, then
Iovis. And we see, that if Iovis was ever in use, it was presently laid by, as
not Latin; when the names ending in A. were never changed.

As here you make Cicero an Ignoramus in Latin, p. 309. so you give the like
character of Plato in Greek; in the Etymology of Minerva, or Athena, which you
bring from Neith, thus: Neith, Thien, Then, Thena, Athena. Something like this
was this Etymology, of Hooper from King Pippin, thus: Hooper, Hopper, Happer,
Dapper, Diaper, Napkin, Nipkin, Pipkin, K. Pippin. You have a Talent in finding
Etymologys, it is pity you do not practice it more.

You pretend this Minerva, or Athena was a name of the true God, whom the
city; Sais, in Egypt, adored under the name of Neith. Arnobius l. 4. page 60.
will teach you another lesson, that she was a Woman native of Sais, ex caeno,
and gurgitibns prodita, coagulataque limosis: composed of the filthy mud of
Nilus, upon whosebanks her native Town stood. You will also see there, with
what disdain, and indignation the rest reject the claim of this Dirty Saitick
slut, to be the daughter of Jupiter.

Osyris is also raised to a name of God, whom all hystorys speak to have been
a man, brother to Isis, killed by her husband Typho for Incest with her, his
body cut in pieces, and scattred in several places. That she with the help of
Anubis, the Captain of her guards, or her chief Hunts man, found them all
again, except one, which Modesty should have hindered het from seeking, as well
as me from naming. Yet the pretended Goddess Isis, was so desolate for the
loss of this part, that to comfort her, in her sacred rites, a Resemblance of
them was shown to her, by her Priests, as if they had found that part. Osyris
then was a man: such were Venus, Jupiter, and Minerva.

Wherefore let us say with the Apostle Romans 1. The Gentills knew God, but
adored him not. All their Religion being taken up in the cult of Dead men.

P. 451. You say the Roman Capitol was dedicated to the B. Trinity: of whom
the Poet said: Trina in Tarpeio fulgent consortia Templo. viz. Jupiter,
Minerva, and Juno, and page 454. (so it should be, which is marked, 414.) you
find another Trinity in Egypt: Eicton, Hemphtha, and Osyris. As if by all
threes, the Pagans understood the Trinity. Had the three Graces, three Parkes,
three Gorgons, three Furyes, three Judges, and three Rivers in Hell, or three
headed Cerberus or three bodyed Gerion occurred, you would have given us more
marks of your Talent. To confute these dreams what I have said is enough:
seeing those persons have once been Men. That the Platonicians knew the mystery
of the B. Trinity, we learn of S. Austin: But that the Divine persons, as One
in Nature were exposed even by them, to public veneration, I cannot believe:
for the Fathers universally deny the Pagans to have adored the true God.

In your whole Book you endeavor to prove, that the unity of God was a prime
article of the Pagans Creed. I am sorry so much labor should be lost, as it
must be, seeing the thing is evidently false. To what I have said c. 7. s. 5. I
add these proofs out of Origin who l. 1. cont. Cells. p. 5. speaks of laws
for Idols, and Polytheisme. (...), and page 28. he says: Prophets were given to
the Jews, to hinder their falling into Pagans Polytheisme: (...). And l. 3. p.
155. he says the Wise Men, or Philosophers, fell from the cult of one God, to
Atheistical, or impious Polytheisme: (...). and l. 1. page 51. he says
Aristotle fled to Chalcis fearing the fate of Socrates from the Athenians,
least these should twice sin against Philosophy.

Yet I am more concerned (for your own sake) for what you say page 256. then
for any thing else: For there you assure, that Origin expresses l. 5. cont.
Cells. Great zeal against Christians, using the Word Zeus, Jupiter, for the
true God: as acknowledging some Christians to have used it. Whereas he says.
Christians would rather endure any torments, then use it: (...). Your other
slips seem to be mistakes; but this is a fault against that sincerity, for
which I commended you. Unless (as I had rather believe) you took that
Citation upon the credit of some other.

The Iansenists have published whole books of Fathers to make way for some one
sentence: and written lives of Saints, for one passage resembling their
condition. Some guess your book to be of that nature: and that Atheism is
only a Stalking horse, to conveygh you unobserved to your game, Popery: and so
your Book will be like a Pike, which is a long piece of wood, to give motion
to a little piece of Iron, which alone does the feate. J rather believe what
you pretend, that it really is designed against Atheism, and so, like a sword,
each part serves to wound your Adversary. I wish you had not with it mingled
those points against Popery, which may reflect upon the rest: for men are apt
to suspect all, when they find themselves once deceived. Irenaeus l. 2. c. 24.
Non oportet universum ebibere mare cum qui vult discere, quoniam aqua ejus
salsa est. Tasting here and there of it, is a conviction sufficient. In
Nabuchodonosor's statu, there was a little dirt mingled with the Iron, brass,
silver, and Gold: all strong or precious except that small parcel. (which
notwithstanding its littleness) occasioned the ruin of all. God forbid any
such thing should fall on your Work, whose arguments against Atheism are
unanswerable: and I have such an esteem of labors against that highest
Impiety, that I should think my time well spent in secking citations, or
playing the scribe for the workmen.

But seeing my condition does not permit that: I will give you this advice (the
only help withim my power,) that you consider in the first place, whither a
thing be true, and then, what use may be made of it, in order to other Truths.
Non indiget Deus nostro mendacio, ut pro illo loquamur dolos, says Job. 13.7.
And S. Greg. l. 11. mor. c. 15. Veritas fulciri non quaerit auxilio falsitatis.
You thought doubtless, it would be a great conviction of Atheists, that all
Religions, and public laws had established the contrary Truth. Now this being
untru gives an advantage to an Atheist, seeing you build your assertion, on such
a quicksand. The Argument it more convincing when drawn from that great
Truth, delivered by Fathers, that all men have a natural knowledge of one God,
and that so deeply engraven in them, that maugre all the strength of laws, the
rigor of torments, the force of bad education, the Sophismes of Philosophers,
the industry of wickedmen, desirous to ease themselves of the remorse of
conscience, and fear of a future Judge, and the wiles of the Devil, it
persevered, and showed it self in certain occasions, and so possessed the heart,
as to force the mouth to speak out of its abundance. Certainly this voice of
nature triumphing over all the force and Art of Men, and Devils, is a cleerer
Testimony of one God preserving his possession in, and over his creatures, and
controuling all adjectitious Notions, then any Demonstration man's wit can
invent; especially some Atheists pretending to invalidate this reason, from the
notion we have of a God, by saying it comes not from Nature; but Education, and
Humane Laws: which Plea is evidently defeated by this Truth that Laws,
Religion, and Custom were once against that Idea of one God (all concurring to
establish the contrary opinion of many Gods) which yet prevailed over them all.
So the dirt of untruths, mingled with the Gold of many great, and precious
Truths, does in reality weaken those, which would be more convincingly drawn
from, and established upon our Principles.

I wish you good success in attemps upon Atheism, as long as you confound
not with it any Catholic Truth: being

Yours, as much as Truth will permit. W. E.
December. 29. 1678.

