MISCELLANY POEMS.

WRITTEN By R. W. C. C. Cambr.

Non semper feriet quodcunque minabitur Arcus.
Hor. de Art Poetica. LONDON, Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1700.

TO The Much Honored And Most Religious LADY, THE LADY RUSSEL OF St EDMVND's
BVRY IN SUFFOLK, THESE EARLY POEMS Are most Humbly Dedicated BY Her Ladyship's
Most Dutiful, and Most Obedient Servant, R. Warren.

RELIGION: A PINDARIQUE ODE.
DESCEND Celestial Polyhim
From that Blessed Residence, where you
With Cherubim and Seraphim
The Almighty's Presence View.
Where, with Immortal Lay's
Ye Echo forth his Praise,
And unfatigu'd chant through along infinity of Days.
Descend, and now inspire my Thought,
Let me be Taught,
Like Israel's sweet tongued King of Old,
In mighty Numbers, mighty Things to unfold.
Mighty Things my Theme I Have chose,
What the vile Creature to his GREAT CREATOVR owes.
II.
Audacious Mortal, durst Thou then deny
The Almighty's Sovereignty?
Think thou His Being but an Empty Name,
Sprung from Imposture, nursed by Fame?
Is He no Being, who thy Being gave?
Has He no Power, who still does save?
Or wast thou then the cause that now Thou art?
Did thou thy self unto thy self impart?
Unheard of Nonsense! Then by this we know,
There Is One Almighty Cause of all below,
To whom at least, We must our Being owe:
Hence then our Gratitude and Praise, in Justice he may Claim.
(And the Ungrate's an Odious Name
We all are wont to blame)
For sure it is better far to be,
Than lost, for ever lost in Nature's dread Abyss, Nonentity.
III.
But still the unthinking wretch Would find,
(So hardly to what is good inclined)
Some fond excuses to delude his Mind.
Or terms the Almighty Partial in His great Decrees,
By Fating some to Bliss, some to Eternal Miseries;
Or thinks when first he came
A Finished Piece from the Aetherial frame,
He straight from Heaven's over ruling care was hurled
Upon the stormy Ocean of the World,
Where Chance alone destroys or saves,
Whilst He a Wretched Wight as blindly steers through Fortunes Waves.
IV.
But ah! can this be thought to be
The Effect of a Propitious Deity?
Such Him we sure may justy call,
Who freely gave Existence unto all.
For Blessings, (as it is owned That was)
Flow only from a kind well meaning Cause.
Then sure 'twill the same kindness still retain,
Still it is Dear Offspring with Paternal care maintain,
And Nature never, never works in vain.
Hence let us then reflect, and self condemned at last declare,
What Duty from a Son the Parent may expect
(If things so small with great we may compare)
Obedience, Honor, Fear,
Affection, Humble Resignation to His whole Desire;
And all that tender Nature can inspire:
It Is this we owe, but in a vastly more enlarged Degree
Our Filial Duty to the Bounteous, Kind, Protecting Deity.
V.
But oh! would Man consult his Breast
The Eternal Register of Good and Ill,
Those standing Laws there by the Almighty's Hand impressed,
His Stubborn will
With Horror must start from its Impious course at last.
It Is here stern Conscience spite of all his cares,
Unheard of Punishment prepares.
Not all the Torments that of Old,
Are of Relenting Tyrants told,
Or Poets fancies could create
Are half so great.
Those Flaming Whips Alecto bore,
The Vulture reeking in Prometheu's gore.
His Bosom the Eternal Food,
Nor Sisyphu's oppressing Load.
Conscience alone inflicts them all,
And Thousand, Thousand more on the offending Criminal.
VI.
And now (methinks) I Am ravished in a Scene
Of Bliss the Pious keep within.
What Joys? what calm? what sweet repose
The Virtuous Soul o'reflows?
Here then Celestial Charmer did I cry,
A stronger Flight of thoughts supply.
Enlarge my Soul, of that blessed State
More fully to Participate.
My Eager Soul the Cherub checked,
She told me that no greater Bliss below
A Mortal here could know:
She told me, here 'twas all in vain t'expect
A View of that Bright Fountain whence it came,
I might but taste the Flowing stream.
Thus spoke the Saint, and then Her Aid withdrew;
My Soul straight Flagg'd, my Lyre grew silent too:
She winged away, and all, me-thought, around
Did loud sweet Harmony from the Aetherial Arch resound.
STVDY and EXERCISE: An Anacreontick ODE.
TELL me Gentle Muses how
I still may best my time bestow;
And yet I think you have don't before:
It Is so my days to number over,
As every Minute there may be
A Compound of their Harmony.
'Twas sometime to Repair to you,
And pay the Visit there that is due.
Sometime to Unbend my Mind,
And moderate Recreation find;
Sometime to the Shades retire,
Charming my sorrows with a Lyre,
Where, as the Various Notes I hear,
Some grave, some shrill, to strike mine Ear,
Thus mixed, compose an Harmony;
In all my Actions so should I;
To follow Business when it calls
And pleasure in the Intervals.
'Twas in a word to use them both,
So that I never might either loath.
Upon IDLENESS.
AWake my Soul, shake off this drowsy fit,
Which though perhaps with ease,
May in soft Circles round Thy Temples sit,
It Is yet a cursed Disease.
Let not deluding Sirens Tongues,
With soothing Words and softning Songs
Lull Thee into a careless sleep,
And in Gilt chains Thy Active spirits keep;
But let them rove till they have broke the Chain,
And you can your Lost Liberty regain:
For Sleep and Death in all things so Agree,
That Soul that is lost in Sleep does cease to be.
II.
View how in Heaven's high Cannopy above
The Golden Sun does stray,
And whilst it in a Constant Line does move,
It measures out the Day.
Motion's that God, which by fixed Laws,
Such curious Forms in matter draws,
Matter it self an heavy Mass
Rude and inactive of one Common Face,
And ow's those Various shapes in which it is dressed
To motion's Seal on it is gross Lump impressed;
Ah! can you then in Sloth contented Live,
Useless, Supine, and Buried whilst alive?
III.
No, no, my Soul, you must without delay
Your Faculties employ
In something worthy of your thoughts, which may
Hereafter yield you Joy.
Which may with Virtues pleasing Art
Your Active self from sin avert.
When if with Luxury and Ease
You yield your sinful craving lusts to please,
And to unruly Passions once give way,
They Will quickly Lead your restless thoughts astray:
Like a well Manured Garden left unsown,
Which with Rank weeds will soon be over grown.
TRAVEL. A Pindarique ODE.
COME Mighty Muse inspire my Song,
A Rapid Tide of Thought prepare,
In Dithyrambick Numbers let it roll along;
Yet all will be too weak I Fear.
Come then your Utmost Forces join
To carry on my great design.
I mean to sail the World around,
And see great Natures Utmost bound;
I Will Pass where Roaring Seas, I Will hear,
Where Phoebus Cools his Burning Car.
Then on my first intended Road
With sprightly Vigor on I Will have
To View the Gilded Arches of the East,
Where rises first the Fiery God
From his Ambrosian Feast.
Nor shall the Ocean stop my Grand Parole,
I Will cross the Globe from Pole to Pole.
I Will cut the burning Line, and tread
Where Natures Fettered in Her Icy Bed.
For why dull Mortals, tell me why?
Should Active Spirits Lie
Like Oriental Gems still buried in obscurity?
II.
And whence ye subtle Vehicles of the Air?
Ye Gentle Spirits that are naught but Soul?
Is It we to duller matter you prefer?
But for your speedy Travel through the whole,
So swift that in a moment you appear
Both here and every where.
Whence is it that we all adore
The Glorious Planet of the day?
But that Heaven's Immense Posts He measures over
Dispersing every where his Rays?
Like an attempting Giant on
Some Noble Expedition.
Still with Unweari'd Force
Begins and Ends His course.
Thus, thus should every Active Spirit do
As far as Mortal Nature will allow.
And sure we have a Sphere as Glorious to Travel here below.
III.
What wondrous pleasure must it needs impart
To view the Effects of Nature and of Art?
In every place with various shapes
To see how this the other apes.
But most of all Great Nature's work surprise,
Hence we behold vast mountains to arise
And with their Aerie Tops to pierce the Skies.
(Nor does my Muse
Now Metaphors and Fancies use.)
This Taeneriff where Pico stands can show
Up whose vast rocky steep we Laboring go,
And leave mortality and things below,
Mounted above the clouds a pleasing Scene
Bright and Serene,
Environs all around, and here
We breathe like Gods, in pure Aetherial Air.
On some you will find vast heaps of Snow,
From some a Flaming Deluge flow.
Lo! Atlas vast stupendous Bulky frame,
It Is stately Head, how lofty Towers;
We may believe it hither came,
Another Globe dropped down on ours.
Contrary manners and their Laws
(For wondrously the Soul delights
To see such Opposites)
By which Each State it is People aws.
These and a Thousand more He knows, and only He
Who gives himself the loose, and then enjoys an Universal Liberty.
IV.
Tell me if we no Pleasure get
In changing of one constant Seat,
What made the grave Philosophers
Thus Travel over the Heavenly Spheres,
With so much eagerness to trace
A Petty Star's Mysterious Maze.
So nicely they direct the Scheme,
That if thy could, I Am sure they would run the same.
But since their body that denies,
Fancy the defect supplies.
And with ambitious thoughts dogs every where,
The little shining Traveller.
Yes, there is a strange, strange sweetness in Variety,
Which captivates the curious Soul, and draws it from its lurking hole
To view the spacious World's surprising Imag'ry
V.
But now my Muse declare
How we should still beware
Of that too Fatal Siren Curiosity,
The only Prison of our Joy.
When we our Native seat forsake
Only a Transitory View to take,
And slightly gaze away a few loose years,
Upon the Noble structure of the Universe.
No it is not this I mean to do,
In all my roving to and fro;
But Weighing and considering all
The Wonders of this Earthly Ball;
I Will then my strong affections raise
Unto the Almighty Author's Praise.
From manners which I Have here been shown
I Will draw a Model for my own.
Thus fraught my Muse, come let us no longer rome,
But wisely now return, and Travel over our selves at home.
MARRIAGE.
WHEN Man was first a Lonesom Creature made
The sole Inhabitant of Eden's blissful shade,
The Almighty saw Him, and resolved to afford
A Consort for the Melancholy Lord;
Here first from Heaven the Nuptial Tie began,
And Woman made a kind meet help for man.
With Pleasures winged their minutes gayly flew,
None in so short a time such Transports knew,
Nor ever will, as did that Happy Two.
But soon Alas! The Fatal Tempter came,
With Flattering hopes deceives the yielding Dame:
Shows her the charms of the Forbidden Tree,
What Beauty 'twould bestow, what Heavenly Majesty!
Straight she resolves the pleasing Fruit to taste,
And on it is sweets her longing Senses Feast.
Then with her Art as well improved the Cheat,
And gained her Husband with the specious Bait;
Hence both offend against their Angry God,
Whose Vengeance drove them from the blessed abode;
All Joy's now gone, a Piteous Life they lead,
In painful toil and sorrow seek their Bread.
Thus through succeeding years an Equal Fate
We often find attend the Marriage State.
It Is pleasing, the Fond Sense is all their care,
It Is this first joins, then slightly holds the heedless pair.
The Female still the Tempter's Art employs,
And fondly strives to enhaunce the fancied joys,
With Gaudy Plumes, and Beauteous charms assails,
And over the unwary Mortal's heart prevails.
So both deluded by the Fatal snare,
Not Heavens Blessings, but it is Curses share;
Ah! then let the first Parent an Example stand
That Virtues charms our Beauty should command;
Those prove the strongest Cement to the Nuptial Band.
HOSPITALITY. An Anacreontique ODE.
COME since I must a Treat procure
To Feast my Little Epicure;
I Will tell thee, Pretty Guest, my Muse,
What sort of Diet I would Use,
I know you don't expect to Eat
A Multiplicity of Meat,
The vain profuseness of the Great.
I Am sure you would be displeased to see
A rich and costly Tapestry,
Adorn my Room; And here a fry
Of interrupting waiters by.
No, no, not I, I Will none of these
They often cloy, but never please.
Nor need my gentle Stranger Fear
The starving on a Misers Fare;
I hate the Excesses of them both,
The one I shun, The one I Loath:
A Tippling Glass or two shall be
To make us merry company,
And all beyond's but Luxury.
Come now my friends, it is thus I Treat
We'll Eat to live, whilst others live to Eat.
CONVERSATION.
IT IS this Resounds through all the Universe,
It Is Nature's General charge that all converse;
Hence it is in Summer time we hear
The little charming Songsters of the Air
In strains to greet each other; all around
The Pretty warbling Choir by turns resound.
The Verdant Trees hence know each other's Mind,
And Model in like Notes the fanning Winds.
Each stream returns the Murmurs of its Neighboring Rill
And dancing Echo bounds from Hill to Hill,
This, This their Plastic conversation is,
And Noble Man, to Noble Man has his:
As Sympathetick Instinct mixes there,
So Divine Reason is the Compound here.
RETIREMENT, Sitting in an ARBOR.
LET Mortals proudly swell, and striving to look great
Peach on the Pinacles of State,
But fairer marks for Envies Hate.
The Crazy World's vast Hight I fly,
And in an Humble corner Lie,
There, There enjoy a blessed Obscurity.
II.
The Pleasures which at Court appear,
Are all but like the Fancied food,
They say the Accursed Fiends prepare
For those fond Wretches they delude,
Afford no real taste, it is all but empty Air:
To the considering mind they are too well known,
With me the Gilded Pill will never go down.
III.
I seek no Powerful but a safe Retreat,
I Would not be basely poor nor nobly great.
He only Happy lives
Contented with what sparing fortune gives.
Let safety all my Life attend,
And Blessed Tranquillity my end.
IV.
This granted, now methinks I see
My self the Happy Soul I wish to be.
Oh! how I Am blessed with Safety, Health, and Peace?
How ravished to behold Serenely these?
Free from all Boisterous care and noisy strife,
Stream through the flowery Vale, and soft Recess of Life.
An ODE to my Honored FATHER, On his Birthday; being the Glorious EPIPHANY.
ONCE more my Muse inspire my Thoughts,
Your Pious wishes all prepare;
With Charming Numbers, Tuneful Notes
Implore His Sacred Genius care.
Thank the blessed Guardian for what is past,
And beg His Happy days may last.
II.
His Actions by kind Fate be crowned,
And Plenty flowing still appear,
Nor Envy carp, that thus He 'has found
Success through each revolving Year.
So no obstructing cares shall stay
Life's gentle current in it is Way.
III.
May Feeble Age be blessed with Ease,
And here when Life's soft Lambent Fire
As Fading Nature's food decays
Shall of its self alone expire;
Then fed with Substance more Divine,
A Glorious Luminary shine.
IV.
All this the Angelic Spirit pray
For His Dear Sake, who lately took
A miserable frame of Mortal clay,
And all the joys of Heaven forsook,
To ease distressed, poor Mortal Race:
For all from thence breathes Love and Peace.
V.
And now arose His Genial Star,
A Bright Directing Pharus stood,
To light the Nations from afar
Through Error's Night, and Vice dire-Flood,
Where Truth marks out the Radiant way
To Bliss, and the Bright Realms of Day.
VI.
Like that, Kind Guardian, then dispense
Unto thy Lovely Pupil Soul
Such bright inliv'ning Influence,
Which all its faculties may Rule.
May from His Pen Angelic Precepts flow,
To guide bewildred Mortals in their course below!
Upon our Daily Preparation for DEATH. A Pindarique ODE.
-- Quisquam ne secundis

Lucan.
SAY Heaven-born Spirit, say
Dear Part'ner in this Tenement of clay,
Whither thou go, when hence thou 'rt winged away.
For sure You Are doomed by an unalterable fate
To some Immortal State
Of Woe or Bliss;
As thou have been employed in this.
II.
Ah! never let that Great Task be then laid by,
(Whilst Living to prepare to die,)
And after to be fitted for Eternity.
Eternity! How vast a Sum
That swallows up the Present, and confounds the time to come?
Eternity! How Natures frame
Shakes at the dreadful Name?
Come then Assist me Virtues mighty force,
Assist me now e're I
The shoarless Ocean Try;
And to an unknown somewhere must direct my course.
III.
Pure Innocence my Safety shall maintain,
And Equal Justice guide the Reign.
Firm Hope my Anchor, and a Mind
With Holy Thoughts refined
Shall be the Bark; the Heavenly Gale
Of Grace, I pray, may fill my Sail.
Faith is my Compass; Charity
My Stowage; and my Ballast Godly Fear;
My Pilot Prudence, who still bears an Eye
To CHRIST my Polestar; and while thus I steer,
No doubt my Weather-beaten Soul at last
May on the Blissful Shore of Happiness be cast.
IV.
And now (methinks) I hear
The Solemn Trumpet strike mine Ear, JVDGEMENT.

And a Dread Triumph does appear.
It Is thine Dear Savior who art come
To call the Buried from their Tomb,
To Summon those that Live t'appear,
And meet Thee in the Air.
Woe then to those sad Souls that want
The unspotted Robes, that should adorn the Saint!
V.
Assist us then Ye kinder Powers above;
That all our thoughts toward you may move.
May we like you in God delight,
Have still whilst Here our Heaven in Sight!
May all our faculties take care
Souls pure and Holy to prepare,
Meet Partners for you there!
May all whilst living so grow wise
(To avoid a fatal sad surprise)
Still, still to keep the last dread Scene prefixed before their Eyes.
Gloria Deo.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Table of CEBES the Theban Philosopher, or a True Emblem of Human Life.

Done out of Greek into English. Printed at the University Press in Cambridge,
for John Pindar Bookseller there.

A Poem upon Christmas Day, Dedicated to the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN
Lord Bishop of Norwich.


Both by the same Author.


