A DEFENSE of the Innocence of the LIVES, PRACTICE, AND DOCTRINE of the ENGLISH
PRIESTS, JESUITS, and PAPISTS. relating to the Crimes of MVRTHER and TREASON,
unjustly charged on them by E. C. in his NARRATIVE

Wherein are discovered His Gross Mistakes, His wilful Falsifications, His
shameful Falshoodes, and His groundless unjust Accusations


OF THE ENGLISH PAPISTS.

In mala Causa non possunt aliter: sed quis coegit eos malam causam habere?
Agust. A bad cause, (such is the charging Innocent Persons with grievous
crimes) cannot be better managed: But what forced them to undertake such a bad
cause?

ANSWER: Odio habuerunt me gratis. Joan. 15.25. They hate the Mystical Body of
CHRIST, without any cause at all.

Permissu Superiorum. 1680.

THE PREFACE.
THE Narrative, which I here examine in its design is like the rest of the
Libells, which have of late appeared with that title, but is far different in
the means it makes use of, to compass it. All conspire to persuade the world,
that Catholics are not fit to be permitted in any Government, by reason of the
Designs contrary to them, which we drive on. But the first Narratives differ
from this, that those alleged several pretended Treasons of Papists them
alive, either committed, or designed in our days, in the presence of those
Informers, and which might have ruined Church, and state had they not been
prevented by the seasonable discovery of those villainies: so they were made up
of personal Acts either done, or designed, as was pretended, by Papists, then
alive: and which therefore were justly charged on them, if the Informations
were true. But that plea being evidently baffled by the many contradictions, and
improbabilities it contained, this Narratiue arraignes the English Catholics
in another way, charging them with what its Author thought blameworthy in any
Professor of the same Religion, how distant soever he was from English
Catholics, both in place where, and time when he lived. To this intent he
takes the Liberty to range over all ages, and Countries, where Catholic
Religion has been professed; and if in this, or any former age, in Spain, or
Italy, France, Portugal, or Germany he finds an indiscreet Schooleman, a
Choleric Pope, or a Passionat Prince, Write, Speak, or Act reprehensibly, all
that is charged upon the English Catholics in this Libel. So what the D. de
Alva did in the Low Countries, what Lewis VIII. in Languedoc, and what S.
Gregory the great writ above a thousand years ago to Phocas the Emperor,
all these, I say, and many more serve to increase the indightment drawn up
against us in this wise Narratiue.

Here we see this our Friend has opened a way to find matter enough to charge
us with. But with what color of Justice can any of th^se illegal actions
(suppose them such) be charged on us, who have no more hand in them, then in
the Actions of the Cham of Tartary, or the Great Mogul, or those of Marius,
and Sylla, seeing these were dead before we were borne, so was Lewis VIII. and S.
Gregory; and with the D. de Alua we had no more communication, then with the
great Mogul, or the Cham With what Topicke then can we be made answearable for
those faults, of which we knew nothing, unless this worthy person thinks, we
could know, before we had any Being

What Innocence can be proof, when it comes to be tried as ours is? We were
first charged with personal Actions, as actually and personnally plotting
against his sacred Majesty's life and government. The falsity of this charge
being made evident, whereas we should be acquitted, a new endightment is drawn
up against us by E. C. containing all the faults, he had read, or feigned of
the Catholics of what soever country, or age: all which he has deposed in
this Naratiue. Why so? he considers all Catholics that are, or have been, as
one Mass of perdition, one Reprobate Person, whereof each part is made
answeareable for the bad Actions of the whole, and of each other part of it.

How hard soever it be for any Innocence to stand such afiery Ordeale, yet ours
has stood this, and either the virtue of past and foreign Papists has been so
wonderful, or his Blindness so great, that all which Hystories of past
times, or remote parts afforded him, could not satisfy his hatred of us, nor
complete his charge against us, without helping it out, with new crimes of his
own feighning. Witness what he cites page 6. out of Suarez, that it is
lawful for any man to kill an excommunicated King. Which he relates as Suarez
his Doctrine: whereas in Suarez after those words, immediately follows this
censure upon them: This position is most false. Haec Propositio falsissima est.
You see Suarez does absolutely condemn that very Doctrine, which he is accused
to have taught.

Again page 9. he assures, that none but monyed men can get absolution from
their fins in the Roman Church. Peccatorum venia non nisi nummatis impenditur.
A thing so false, that I defy any man living to produce one single instance of
a man, who upon score of Poverty was refused absolution. And in all our
Churches our Confession seats are as free and open to ^^us^, as to Craesus.
More examples of the sincerity of this tale teller will occur in the following
Treatise. These two will suffice for a show of his Art.

Recrimination is a familiar, ordinary, and obuious Apology: yet I think it the
least satisfactory, and worst of all as being fitter to multiply the number of
guilty Persons, then prove the Innocence of any one. For it does not follow,
that M. Whitebreade was Innocent, if it should be proved, that Oats has
always had an aversion to the Royal family. Or that the Papists are loyal
subjects, because the Wicleffists held seditious Doctrines. Yet I have been
persuaded not to omit that way of answering too, to obliege the Protestants, if
possible, to combat wicked maxims in their own, as well as in Papists, and to
move them to some compassion of humane frailties, to which they are much more
subject then we. For two very material differences are observable betwixt the
things they charge Papists with, and what the Protestants are accused off.

The first: that those charged on us are consistant with Authority. For what
bad effect could those words of a Pope Spoken in passion have: Either I will
have Philips Crown, or he shall have my Myter? They forewarned the King of the
danger, by discovering such a bad talent in the Pope against him. And moreover
probably the Pope himself having slept upon it, was ashamed of such a
passionate expression so unbeseeming his Dignity. Whereas the Doctrines we
charge on Protestants, are settled seditious maxims, which lay the Axe at the
root of all Authority Civil, and Ecclesiastical. For example that of the
Wicleffists; no man in state of mortal sin retains any Authority. What King
can be sure of his crown, what Bishop of his myter where this Doctrine
prevails.

Another difference is, that we have long since rejected these Doctrines (if
there were ever any such amongst us) and I challenge Protestants to show any
Papist alive, who does teach them. Whereas the Protestants retain the same
vnretracted, uncondemned to this moment, and upon occasions spread them a new
As that seditious maxim of the Wicleffists, (of which I have spoken.) which
Oats has printed in the Dedicatory of his Narratiue to the King himself.
Whence follows a

Third difference: that what is found blame worthy in our Predecessors cannot
be laid to our charge, seeing we neither practice, nor teach it; nay our
Prelates have condemned it, as we shall see at the end of this Preface; whereas
Protestants are answerable for the doctrines of their Fore fathers, and all the
pernicious consequences flowing from them, because they never condemned, or
disowned them; but do still approve of them.

Wherefore seeing nothing can be with lustice charged on English Catholics, for
whom alone I plead: seeing their life is so clear from sin, and their Doctrine
from error, that neither can be blamed without a calumny, nor our reputation
wounded but through the side of Truth: Let Oats and Prance, Euerard and
Dugdale, Smith, and Ienison, Bolron, dangerfeild, and E. C. (one for any thing
I know like the rest) multiply their Narratiues as often as they please, and
stuff them with calumnies to as great a bulk, as their little wit, and great
malice will p^rmit, the only effect of those Libels will be to cloud our
Reputation from the eyes of the people for a time, and give them some bad
impressions of us: yet our Innocence will disperse those mists, and shine so
brightly, as to be conspicuous to the whole world. And the People it self whom
their Ministers seduce with these Fables, and disingenious Arts, will give to
us, and to the Libellers their due; to us, in acquitting us of the crimes
charged unjustly upon us; and to them, by finding them guilty of uncharitable
lies, at the private tribunal of each ones Judgment.

It is uncertain when we may expect to see an end of these disputes betwixt
our Innocence, and their malice. Nothing put a stop to the false accusations of
the Author of the first and greatest Narratiue, but his loss of credit, by
the open discovery of his lies. A like loss of credit may happily put astop to
the pens of these Libellers. And I doubt not, but the better part of our nation
will be glad to see Truth asserted against Falsehood, and Innocence triumphing
over Malicious slanders.

Of the Author of this Narratiue I will only lay, that if he had not Honesty
to speak only the truth, he had wit enough to conceal his name, that he might
preserve his credit, notwithstanding all his lies.

Now because I shall have occasion to cite in our Defense hereafter some
Decrees of Popes (to which all Catholics submit) in our vindication, I will
here give an extract of such Propositions condemned in them which relate to
MURDER, and equivocation.

Out of the Decree of Allexandre VII. Anno 1665. 24. Septembris.
On that day, 28. propositions were condemned under pain of Excommunication
reserved to his Holiness, upon any that should practice, teach, or hold lawful
any of them, or speak of them otherwise, then condemning, or impugning them.

Amongst these the seventeenth is as follows:

17. Est licitum Religioso, vel Clerico Calumniatorem grauia crimina de se, vel
de sua Religione spargere minantem occidere, quando alius modus defendendi non
suppetit: vti suppetere non videtur, si calumniator sit paratus vel ipsi
Religioso, vel ejus Religioni public, and coram grauistimis viris praedicta
impingere nisi occidatur.

18. Licet interficere falsum Accusatorem, falsos testes, ac etiam judicem, a
quo iniqua ^erto imminet sententia, si alia via non potest Innocens damnum
euitare.

In English thus:

17. It is lawful for a Religious man, or Clergy man, to to kill a
Calumniator, who threatens to accuse him, or his order of some greiuous crimes,
in case there be no other means to defend himself; and there seems to be no
other means, when the Sycophant is ready to accuse him before Persons of
quality, if he be not killed out of hand.

18. It is lawful to kill a false Accuser, false witnesses, and even the
Judge, by whom certainly the Accused shall shortly be condemned, if the
Jnnocent can by no other means avoyde the damage.

Out of the Decree of JNNOCENT XI. published 2. March 1679. stilo no.
On that day Sixty five Propositions were condemned, and in alike manner
forbidden under pain of Excommunication. Here I give those, which I shall cite
hereafter.

26. Si quis vel solus vel coram alijs, sieve interrogatus, sieve propria sponte,
sieve recreationis causa, sieve quocunque alio fine juret, se non fecisse
aliquid, quod reuera fecit, intelligendo intra se aliquid aliud, quod non
fecit, vel aliam diem ab ea, in qua fecit, vel quodvis aliud additum verum,
reuera non mentitur, nec est periurus.

27. Causa justa vtendi his amphibologijs est, quoties id necessarium, aut
vtile est ad salutem corporis, honorem, res familitares tuendas, vel ad
quemlibet alium virtutis actum, ita vt veritatis occultatio censeatur tunc
expediens, and studiosa,

30. Fas est viro honorato occidere invasorem, qui nititur calumniam infer,
si aliter haec ignominia vitari nequit: jd m quoque direndum, si quis impingat
alapam, vel fuste percutiat, and post impactam alapam vel ictum fustis fugiat.

31. Regulariter occidere possum furem pro conservatione vnius aurei.

Jn English thus.

26. Jf any man either alone, or in presence of others, either upon
examination, or of this own accord, or for diuertissement, or for any other
intent, swears he did not do, what he really did, imagining he did some other
thing, or some other day then he did it on, or any other truth, that man does
neither lie, nor is perjured.

27. A just cause to use Equivocation, is when it is necessary, or useful to
preserve our Health, our Honor, or our goods, or for any other Act of virtue;
so that when these occur, it may be thought expedient, and laudable to
conceal the Truth

30. It is lawful for a man of Honor, to kill an aggressor, who endeauours to
slander him, if he cannot some other way avoid the disgrace. The same is to
be said, if the aggressor give him a box oth'eart, or cudgel him, and having
done so, runs away.

31. I may ordinarily kill a man, to presence the value of a crown.

These propositions concerning Equivocation, and Murder, are in alike manner,
condemned, and the greatest Ecclesiastical Censure annexed to those who teach,
practice, or defend any one of them, as probable. And there is no English
Catholic, Jesuit, or other, who does not submit to this Decree.

As all English Catholics, particularly Jesuits are ready to declare publicly
when it shall be legally or by Public Authority required of them.

CHAPTER I. Reflections on the Preface. Where of the pretended danger hanging
over libellers against Catholics.
E C: Being very sensible how much this small treatise will expose me to the
industrious malice, and hatred of all stiff, and positive Papists (...) My
chief business was to find out one, that would boldly stand up with me in the
same defense, and be ready to justify the truth and honest sincerity of these
following sheets.

Answer: It is a common Topic for all who accuse Catholecks, to increase the
Odium against them, and recommend their own zeal for the common good to the
Public benevolence by representing the dangers, they expose themselves to, by
discovering the faults, the conspiracies, the murders, the Treasons of the
Papists: As if the Protection of the Law, the security of the public Peace,
the vigilance of Magistrates, and the number of Libelling Ministers, and
factious and malicious scriblers, were not a sufficient Protection against a
few disarmed men, and for the most part Prisoners; but either by Authority a
guard must be appointed for every libeller, or else by their whining complaints
of imaginary dangers, they would engage others without Authority in any illegal
Association for mutual defense. I leave to our venerable Judges to declare
whither this stand with the law: and his Majesty's most honorable privy
Council to consider whither it do not endanger the Public Peace.

Whence this Panick Fear, of an inconsiderable number of men, all disarmed,
and most of them either imprisoned, or banished? From a bad conscience, which in
the midst of Peace, and the greatest security always thinks of dangers. Cum Pax
sit, ipse semper insidias suspicatur. Job. 15.21. And the wicked fly, when no
body pursues them. Prou. 28.1. This is the miserable condition of sinners, says
S. Chrisost. Hom. 8. ad Pop. Antioch. They suspect all things, they fear
shaddows, they tremble at the least noise; no body whispers, but they think it
is against them: no body moves, but they surmise it is to attack them. Such is
the nature of sin: it discouers itsself, although none else dream of it,
arraignes the guilty person without any other witnesses, and condemns him at
the Tribunal of his own conscience from which sentence there is no appeal.
Hence he flies, though no body pursues him, thinking that every man he sees or
phansies, is his Executioner. Is not this a Picture of these Champions of the
Protestant Church and Accusers of Papists? Is not this danger alleged framed
by their own guilty conscience, which accuses, arraignes, judges, and
condemns them, and then represents all men as designed to execute the
sentence, as Cain said, all who find me, will kill me? Genesis 4.14. Yet you offer
at a reason, and here it is.

E. C. The Doctrines of the Church of Rome are bloody ones, and such as are
directly contrary to the word of God, and the constant sense of the Church of
all ages, and if blindly followed, what can we ever expect, but Rebellion,
Murder Bloodshed, and all manner of confusion?

Answ. It is easy to say Our Doctrines are contrary to those of the ancient
Church but impossible to prove it, because it is evidently false. They are
bloody ones, say you. I know no doctrines defended by the Church of Rome
against Protestants, but those contained in the Profession of Faith of Pius
IIII. show one bloody doctrine contained in it, and I will yield the cause. If
you can show none there, this Assertion of yours is a great slander. You
produce indeed some pieces out of private Authors, with what sincerity, we
will hereafter ex^min. Now suppose what you say be true, and they really held
those Doctrines, why should their singular sentiments be the Doctrine of the
Church, when others as learned, and pious as they, say the contrary, and the
chief Prelates of the Church condemn those opinions? Is there any law which
makes each English Catholic answerable for every Action, or writing, or word
of every Sicilian and Spaniard? Jf not, we may be Innocent, hate Murder, and
abhor Treason, although some of those said the contrary, if they did say so. Of
which hereafter.

E. C. As uncontrollable Dominion, and Rule is the ground, and bottom of all
their Designs, if ever they come to attain it, KING, Lords, and Commons,
should be the meanest of their Subjects, and the whole Kingdom be as one
general Flame.

Answ. were this spoken in a Nation, where Catholic Religion were utterly
unknown, you might hope to frighten People from it: but to say it in England,
where during its prevailing there appeared no symptom of such dismal effects,
and to English, who, know it still preuailes in their neighboring countries,
without those mischeifs, is impudent. What Kings more absolute in their
Dominions, then the Most Christian, and Catholic Monarks? what subjection are
they, and their Nobles, and Commons brought under? And as for our own Kings,
when were they more honored and obeyed, and their subjects at home by loved by
their Friends, and Allies, and feared by their ennemys abroad, then when
Papists? Popery instructs all to give to God, what is Gods, and to Caesar, what
is his: It trains up her children in due obedience to spiritual, and temporal
Magistrates. Whereas your Reformation first quite cast off the yoke of the
Ecclesiastical Superior, and by degrees so weakened that of the Civil
Authority, by perpetual en croachments upon its Prerogative, that it broke it
too. And then you sent your King to the grave with the formalities of Justice,
and pulled the Lords out of their seats into the lowest ranks of the People,
annulling all the Privileges of Peers, and equalling them with the meanest of
the Commons. This done how mercifully you dealt with Lords, Gentlemen, and
Commons, appears by the hystory of those times, and many still alive can
witness. Show such an example of exorbitant Tyranny in any Catholic nation.

E. C. We must not say it is only the Duty of Kings, Princes, and Governors,
but of every particular man in his way and measure, to lend his helping hand to
the furthering of so good a work, and to do what he can for the mantaining of
that Religion and worship of God in its Primitive Purity, which Christ and his
Apostles taught.

Answer: your words here seem as smooth as oil; yet they are Darts, Darts
shot at the very heart of Government: for they encouraged and authorize each
private man to meddle with the Church Discipline, and order, even the Altar,
according as he phansies the ancient worship of God, in its Primitive Purity:
to which People are prone enough of themselves. Every one is willing to deferr
to the Physician, to the Lawyer, and even to the smith, or Cobbler in their own
Art: yet in matter of Church, or state, every one thinks himself wiser, then
those who sit at the Helm, and sufficiently qualifyed to correct them: and
being once imbued with this opinion, that it is the Duty of each Private man to
lend a hand, to further the work of the Lord, and mantaine the Church in its
Purity, as established by Christ, it necessarily follows, that each one presume
to direct his Superior, to what he likes, take upon him to govern, whose rank
is to be governed, and by that means he will break the order established,
disorder the Counsils of the Magistrate, hinder his Actings, and disturb, or
dissolve the Government. No way more Innocent for subjects to represent their
minds to superiors, then by Petitions: yet these are declared seditious by the
Judges, and found such by Practice, because the People are taught (as the late
King of Glorious memory said) first to Petition, then to Protest, then to
dictate, at last to command, and over aye the Parliament, and all lawful
Authority. To prevent which mischeifes to the Public, with great reason
Petitious have been of late forbidden by Proclamation.

How much more Peaceable are the ways of Catholics, who are taught to leave the
care of providing for public security in Church, and state to the lawful
superiors of both, and to obey them in all things, where there appears no sin?

E. C. My Lord of Shaftesbury, your Pious and Constant Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, has ever been very remarkable; and it is so much the more improued
now, as your Lordship sees it in a most desperate, and languishing condition.

Ans: what you mean by Protestant Religion, I know not: (it is as hard to
frame a Definition of it, as to make a gown for the moon, in the Fable) and I
believe you know as little what has been, or is that noble man's Faith, or if he
has any. By what I hear of his past life, I dare say, that if the English
Protestant Bishops take strict informations of it, they will scarce canonize
him. And why you should represent the Protestant Religion, in such a gasping
condition, I know not. Papists cannot have reduced it so low, who are by it
reduced almost to nothing: their Priests executed, imprisoned, or fled: if any
remain, to conceal themselves from your Argos eyes, they are forced to ly
hidden, as the Primitive Christians, in dens, caves, and woods: their nobility
imprisoned, their gently banished, their houses ransacked, their estates
confiscated, and you poor remainder of them scarce secure of one day's, nay
one hours liberty. And what hurt can such a shattred, defeated, despicable body
of men do to the Triumphant Protestant Church? This representation of its
dismal condition, is but your old stratagem, to stir up the rabble to sedition,
to prevent its utter ruin, which by such tragical bewaylings you effected in
42. and now endeavor it again. For before you told your Reader, that each
private man is bound to lend a hand to hold up the Arc, when it is in danger
of falling: now you say, it is in most imminent danger. What follows, but that
at this time each private man is bound to fall to work to protect Protestant
Religion, and do what he can to mantaine it? Which if it be not seditious, I
know not what is.

I observe generally in all your Libels against Catholics, that in your
Prefaces, (which are writ with most Art, and red with most Attention) you
always have some desperate fling at the Present Government: as if your prime
design were to ruin that, which breares the first brunt in all you attacks. I
think without casting a figure, we may guess at your intentions.

E. C. I can no better acquit my self of my Duty (to preserve the life of
gasping Protentantisme) then by pulling of the masque, and rectifying the
Judgments of those that are not too much bigoted to the Roman communion, in
convincing them of the cruelty, and Bloodiness of their Doctrines, and
Principles.

Ans: It seems if others neglect theirs, you will comply with your Duty, and
here you give us a summary of your whole book: which contains a great charge
against us, if true; and if false, as great a charge against your self, who
publish such a calumny, and against your Church, which approues, and applauds
it. I hope to make it evident that you pull no mask off of Papists, but which
you put on them, and which they detest as much, as you or any Protestant.

E. C. I could wish, that care might be taken, that Papists children should not
suck in this so dangerous a Religion to the Peace of the state; with their
Milk, but that they should be baptized after our way, and educated in the
Principles of Protestantisme.

Ans: here we see your own meekness, whilst you reproach Cruelty to us: for
although the laws enacted against us, and of late executed with such severity, be
said by strangers to be written, like those of Draco, with Blood, yet they do
not satisfy you, who require a further law, to take away all our children to be
bred up in Protestantism. A thing so contrary to the law of nature, and so
barbarous, that it never was practiced; not even in Rome it self, upon the
Jews. Thus you inhance the Honor and credit of your Religion, which is made up
of Love, and charity, and a sweet condescension, and Peaceablenesse of mind to
all Men. Which are your words. You affect the voice of Jacob; but we seele the
hands of Esau.

CHAPTER 2. English Catholics do not hold Murder Lawful.
E. C. I cannot but wonder, they (the Papists) should be to far lost so all
Humanity, and sense of Pity, as to hold that most damnable Tenet of Murder,
and Treason, not only to be lawful; but in many, if not most cases, to be
necessary, commendable, and meritorious. Now that they hold these four Points
in Murder and Treason I shall prove it palpably upon them, from the Testimony
of their own writings.

Answer: you may with reason wonder at the Inhumamanity of English Papists, if
this charge be true: and we may wonder you should have lost all shame of men,
if it be false. The charge is general, and involues all Catholics: so it must
be false and unjust, if any be innocent: for two contradictions cannot be true:
viz: All Papists hold Murder, and Treason lawful, necessary, etc. And: some
Papists have no such opinions of Murder, and Treason. Yet both Propositions
are your own: the first, in the words above cited: the second, page 5. where
you have these words: I will not be so adventurous, as to say or think, there
are none amongst them of a less, savage Temper, and disposition. Which are
contradictory to the general charge, as owning some Papists to be free from
those opinions of Murder, and Treason.

We seldom find any of the Protestant Ministers speak without contradictions,
when Papists, or Popery is the subject of their discourse: because there are
two contrary inclinations in their wills, the one of love to Truth, the other
of hatred to Popery and Papists. The first is so natural to all men, that they
cannot totally free themselves from it: Quid amplius desiderat anima, quam
veritatem? Aug. tract. 26. in Joan. The second is so tenaciously retained, for
what motive I know not, but leave to them to declare) that it works commonly
more violently, and controwles the love of Truth, although it cannot quite banish
it out of their Hearts: for this finds some occasions to make them give Glory to
God, and acknowledge the innocence of Catholics, which the other represents as
the worst of men. I will prove this out of this very pamphlet.

Page 9 and 10. I find these, words: Are they, the Papists, not men like the
rest of Mankind? Have they not the same Passion, and Tempers, the same Impulses
of Tendernesses, and pity in their Nature with others of different Judgments,
and persuasions? -- Take them out of that Character (their Religion) and they
are in all things like unto the rest of their Fellow Creatures, and Brethren;
their minds are Peaceable, their Deportment affable and Generous and the Gros
of their Tempers full of a sweet, and indearing Complacency. Yet Page 17. you
say -- Their Tempers are Fire and Toe. And in the very same place, where you
commend our natures and Tempers so much, you say: Their Religion forces them to
put off their Humanity, and makes them so bloody minded as therein to be far
worse then beasts that perish. And a little after: No Tigers are more fell, and
savage then they in their Natures: they could cut off the whole race of the ^an
kind: -- they could call down fire from Heaven, nay the very stames of Hell on
all such, as would not bend the knee to their BAAL, and adjust their Faith and
Consciences to the wild Caprichio of their Idolatrous Enthusiasmes.

How with Truth to reconcile these different chatacters of us, I cannot tell.
That our Minds should be Peaceable; and yet we be bloody minded: we like the
rest of Mankind and yet have put off our Humanity our Deportments affable and
generous; and yet we more fell, and savage, then the Tigers. Our Tempers full
of a sweet and Indearing Complacency; and yet our Tempers should be fire and
toe. In reality as these contradictions cannot stand together, so they discover
clearly those two contrary Passions in your breast of love to Truth, and hatred
to Papists. The first speaks aduantageously of us, the second blames us: this
condemns, that absolues us. The first is evidently true, and visible to all,
who converse with us; the second surmized only by the Ministers. Just so the
Pagans persecuted the Christians of their times. Caius is a good man; but his
Religion spoils all: Titius is a Peaceable man; but he is a Christian: such
and such are civil, and honest good natured men; but they devour Children,
commit incest with their Mothers, and sisters, etc. Laudant, quae sciunt, said
T^rtul. Apol. c. 3. vituperant quae ignorant: and id quod sciunt, eo quod
ignorant corrumpunt. Cum sit iustius occulta de manifestis praeiudicare quam
manifesta de occultis praedamnare. They commend what they know certainly and
find by experience; they blame what they surmize, and feign of us: and they
bereave us of the good name due to our known virtues, by reproaching unto us
such unknown vices. Whereas in Justice they should, rather judge favorably of
our known hidden actions by reason of our public virtuous lives, then condemn
our virtues, for faults only surmized. Thus Tertullian. Whence it appears that
in your calumnies you imitate the Pagans; and we follow the example of the
Primitive Christians in our Apologies.

You say we allow of Murder and Treason: we declare that we detest them: and
we prove this detestation of them from our Divine and Humane, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical laws. The command not to kill, is extant in our Bibles, our
Canons, and our Codes, we teach it to children in our Catechismes, to Scholars
in our lessons, and to all men in our Sermons. The Catholic Church punish
Murder, with Irregularity, Catholic States with Death, and Catholic Faith,
with Hell fire, if it not be repented Nay voluntarily exposing a man's self to a
probable danger of Murder, in a Duel, is Death without remission in France,
where Catholic Religion still preuailes, and Jesuits are to be found. Lastly
our English laws against Murder were made by our Catholic ancestors. What
greater evidence can you give of a Detestation of Murder, and horror of
Blood, then we have given, and do stillgiue?

You ground your accusation chiefly on the sayings of some writers, whose
sentiments shall be examined in the next Chapter: where I doubt not to make it
evident that you impose on them things, which they never held. Till then (to
show how insufficient your proofs are) I will gratis admit, that they truly
taught, what you falsely say they did. What is that to the English Catholics,
(whom you accuse, and I defend, who never read their works, know nothing of
their Doctrine, and (probably) never heard their names? will you condemn all
the Apostles, for one Judas: all the Corinthians for one Incestuous man, all
the Deacons, for one Nicolas: all the neophits, for one Simon: all in the Ark
for one Cham: all men for one Cain, and all Angels for one Lucifer? you can
hear (says S. Austin Epist. 137.) your Neighbor's wife has broken her Faith
to him, without comdemning your Mothers or sisters married, or turning your own
wives out of doors, and though your freind's son take bad courses, yet you do
not brain your own, nor present them as Felons at the Assizes. Why should then
the English Catholics be arraigned as holding Murder lawful, because Lessius
at Louen, or Amieus at Gretz, taught it, although they never heard any thing of
the Doctrine, nor men, nor towns where they resided. You will say, it may be
they know, and approve it (that is the most your can draw out of this argument)
and I answer it may be, and certainly is most commonly so, that they neither
approved, nor knew of it. What ground here for arraignment? In Treason the will
is reputed for the Fact, and both punished alike: not so in Felony. Would you
have Catholics condemned on much less ground then a will to Murder, for a
thought of it? nay for the possibility of a thought? For all you can infer out
of the sentiments of those Authors, is that it is possible, English Catholics
may have the like sentiments.

Again: if there be such a communication of bad works amongst all Catholics,
that each one must be answerable for all the faults of any other, although unknown
to him (for this you must say if you say any thing) why is there not a like
communication of good? Lessius say you allows Murder, to save a man's honor:
another condemns this. Why shall not this man's writing against it be as
efficacious to absolve me, as the others writing for it, to condemn me: when I
never gave you any cause to suspect I frame my conscience either in
speculation, or practice, rather according to the allower, then the condemner
of Murder.

And which is yet more conuincing, not only private Persons have declared their
dislike of these Doctrines; but several universities, and Bishops have censured
them, and the Pope has condemned them. I say those very Propositions which you
cite out of Molina, Lessius, and Amicus. That of Amicus, that it is Lawful for
an Ecclesiastic to kill a Detractor, was condemned by Alexander VII. 24. Sept.
1665. Those of Molina, and Lessius, that it is lawful to kill to save our
honor, by Innocent XI. 2. March 1679. which decrees are enforced with an
Excommunication for all such as dare disobey. Now I suppose you know, that all
true Catholics obey the Popes decrees in Doctrinal matters; and how ever they
take the freedom to Judge of things, before any Declaration of the Church, or
her head under Christ on Earth, yet when any decree is published, we all lay
down our private sentiments, and frame both Actions, and conscience according
to that venerable rule. With what Justice then can you charge any with those
Doctrines which we all do renounce, and are bound to do so, under pain of
Excommunication?

Lastly I appeal to the Experience of English Protestants, who have traveled:
let them say, whither in Flanders, France, or even Rome it self they found the
Papists such Blood thirsty Ruffians, as you describe them. A Minister, who had
preached in England, that the Pope was the Beast of the Apocalypse, had seven
heads, and ten horns, coming afterward to Rome, and being admitted to the
presence of the Pope, who had heard of it, the Pope said to him: Come hither
son, view me well, see that I have but one head, and never a horn at all:
look upon my head, (which he then uncovered) and feel it, and believe your
own eyes, that I am no such a monster, as you in England describe me. This was
Vrbaen VIII. Another of the same tribe, took the liberty in Rome amongst the
Natives to declaime against the Pope: who hearing of it, sent one to advise him
to be more wary in his words: for although, said he, there shall be no public
procedure against you, yet I cannot assure, but that you may receive some
displeasure from some of my subjects.

As for Jesuits, whom you represent as most addicted to Murdering
Protestants, I never heard any complaint of Inciuilities received from them,
and I have heard several travelers and Merchants acknowledge favors received
by their means even in Spain, Italy, and the Indies. Mr. Oats, your Oracle,
has done nothing in England, which he did not design at S. Omers: and with his
usual discretion discovered there that black hellish design. Mr. Whitebread
then Prouincial knew this very well, and spoke of it with much anguish to some
alive, who can witness it, foreseing what mischief might be feared, when that
man's malicious lying humor should ioyn with the Popular Odium of Catholics,
and particularly Jesuits. Then, or never there was occasion to practice upon
him that case of Amicus, had the Jesuits approved it. Yet no such thing was
thought on: the Prouincial ordered him a decent suit of Cloths, and four pounds
sterling to bear his charges to London, and sent him away with all possible
charity, to see whither he could by that sweeten his malignity, and overcome
Evil with good. Rom 12.21.

This, this is the way, which Jesuits, use toward their enemies: thi^ they
learn our of the Ghospel, and their Rules: this their Superiors recommend,
this they practice, to heap hot Coals upon their Ennemies, not to burn the
least hair of their heads; but to warm their hearts with the fire of the love
of God, which will introduce that of their Neighbor.

And that the English Catholics are bred up with the same peaceable
sentiments, appears by their Patient suffering whatsoever Oats, and his
Associates have acted in pursuance of his Majesty's order, but beyond his
commission, and contrary to his merciful intentions: although their cruel Actions
have been accompanied with insulting barbarous words, which are much more
greiuous to a generous mind, then the Actions themselves. All which have met
with no other return, but prayers for his Sacred Majesty, and even for those
instruments of God's wrath upon the Nation. I say the Nation, which in reality
suffers more, then Catholics, (who seem the greatest, and only sufferers in
this Tragedy) for, Non qui patitur: sed qui facit iniuriam miser est.

I now appeal to your self, sir, what has appeared in all this sharp and
tedious trial of the Catholics, which does confirm the Character, you give of
them; viz: that their Tempers are Fire, and Toe that they have cast off their
Humanity are more fell and savage then Tigers, worse then the Beast which
perish, etc. To confute these Impudent calumnies, nothing is necessary, but to
look on our lives. Apologias non scribimus, sed viuimus.

CHAPTER 3. The Jesuits cited by E. C. do not teach Murder to be lawful.
I have hitherto admitted your assertion to be true that those Jesuits, you
cite, did teach Murder to be Lawful, yet that the English Catholics were
vnconcerned in it: and that there is not the least color of Reason, or
Justice, to charge it on them. I now come to examine that assertion, and if your
proofs fail you there too, then I hope you will own, that your Bill ought not
to be found.

E. C. page 2. Lessius de Just. l. 2. c. 9. d. 12. n. 79 says that h^ who has
received a box oath Ear, may be permitted to strike again, for the avoiding of
infamy and to that end may immediately put bucke the Injury, and that with his
sword, etiam cum gladio.

Answer 1. those are not the words of Lessius; but taken by him out of Victoria
de Iure Belli n. 8.

Ans. 2. Lessius condemns that opinion: for he says n. 80. Haec sententia non
videtur in praxi facile permittenda. This opinion is not easily to be followed:
and gives two very good reasons why it is not to be practiced.

Answ. 3. It does not appear out of those words, that the Author of them
speaks of killing, neither does the use of the sword signifye that: seeing a
sword may be used 1. for our defense. 2. to fright an adversary. 3. to beat
him, Au plat d'Espee say the french, 4. to give some slyght wound not mortal,
either with point, or edge.

Answ. 4. Whosoever taught that opinion, and what ever his meaning was, all
Catholikcs, and particularly Jesuits renounce it: for Innnocent XI. expressly
condemned it. And all the Jesuits in the world submit to that decree.

E. C. Page 3. Lessius l. 2. c. 9. d. 12. n. 77. says: If you endeavor to ruin
my reputation by opprobrious speeches, spoken before persons of Honor, and
that I cannot avoid them other ways then by killing you, I may: nay tho the
crime you lay to my charge be such as I am really guilty of, it being supposed
to be so secretly committed that you cannot discover it according to the ways
of Justice.

Answ. 1. Lessius has not those words, nor any bearing the same sense in that
place, nor any where else in his whole works. And I challenge you, and all
your brethren to disprove this, by showing them.

Answ. 2. Lessius in that place speaks of an opinion allowing a man of honor
to kill a raskal, who cudgels, or buffets him, if there be no other means to
avoid the disgrace. And afterward, n. 78. he condemns that opinion: Haec
sententia non est sequenda, says he: this opinion ought not to be followed. For
it ought to suffice, that verbal injuries be put by with words, and that
injurious Actions may be punished by course of Justice. Thus Lessius.

Answ. 3. All Catholics condemn that opinion, it having been condemned by
Innocent XI. Thus much for Lessius. The next Jesuit you produce is Molina.

E. C. page 2. by Molina the life of a man is reckened at six or seven Ducats:
and he assures us, that it is lawful to kill him for it, nay tho he, who has
taken them, fly for it: adding further in the same place, that he durst not
charge that man with any sin, that kills another, who had taken from him a
thing of the value of a crown, or less, vnius aurei, vel minoris adhuc
valoris.

Ans. 1. If he reckons a Man's life at 6. or 7. Dukats, he rates it much higher
then our English Laws, who reckon it at 13. pence-half penny.

Answ. 2. you confound two cases in Molina, one of a theif who comes to rob
you. The other of one who has robbed you, and runs away with your purse, or
goods.

As to the first, he says, that if a theif sets upon you, and threatens to kill
you, if you do not deliver your money (be it but a Crown or less) that you may
defend your life, and money; and if in the fight, you chance to kill him, he
dares not condem you. I do not think our laws in England would hang one, who
should in that manner kill a Hygh-way man on the road. If they would, they are
very favorable to theiues.

To the second case he answears, that if the theif run away with a confiderable
sum (five Ducats he esteems as nothing) and there be little hopes to
recover it, having called in vain to him, to restore the goods, it is lawful
to shoot at him, yet so as to avoid giving him a mortal wound. Semper
consulendum est, ne proximus occidatur, are his words. Then he says, if by
chance the theif dye of that wound, non auderem condemnare. I dare not condemn
the Man as a Murderer, to the pains appointed by law to such. This I speak
not approving the opinion; but only to explicate his meaning, and to show how
you have wronged him 1. in confounding two different cases, and 2 in
mis-representing his meaning in both. But as to the thing, or opinion itself.

Answ. 3. both I, and all Papists detest the opinion, and condem the practice
of it, in obedience to the Decree often cited of Innocent XI.

E. C. Page 3. Amicus tom. 5. Disp. 36. n. 118. It is Lawful for an
Ecclesiastic, or a Religious Man, to kill a Detractor, that but threatens to
diuulge th scandalous crimes of his Community, when there is no other means
left to himder him from doing of it, as if he be ready to scatter his Calumnys,
if not suddenly dispatched out of the way.

Answer 1. Amicus his fault in advancing that Proposition was great: although he
corrected the malignity of it, by adding that he did affirm nothing; but left
his Discourse to the judgment of the discreet Reader.

Answ. 2. in the Antwerpe Edition of Amicus an. 1650. made by Jesuits, that
whole discourse was left out: and by order of the General of the Jesuits, it
was blotted out of all copyes of the first edition in the Libraries of the
Jesuits. By both which actions the Jesuits have sufficiently declared their
disowning of that Doctrine.

Answ. 3. that same Proposition was condemned by Alexander VII. on the 24.
September. 1665. from which time, all Catholics, have been obliged under pain
of Excommunication to disown that Doctrine.

Thus much in vindication of the three Jesuits, you cite: out of which three
things are evident.

The 1. that not one of them taught the Doctrine you charge them with. Two
positiuely teach the contrary: and the third leaves the Judgment to the Reader.

The 2. that if they had erred, no English Catholic would be concerned in it,
1. because they knew nothing of the Doctrine. and 2. because they believe, and
practice the quite contrary.

The 3. no Catholic in the world can be charged with those doctrines, they
being condemned by the Church, and all Catholics owning obedience to those
Decrees.

E. C. Soto says in defense of his person, a man assaulted may kill another:
and says, that to hold it not Lawful in such a case, (tho to the ruin of the
man's soul to boot) is both to pervert the law of nature, and to render the
sweet, and easy yoke of Christ intolerable.

Answ. Soto l. 5. de Justi: q 1. ar. 8. proposes this question: Whither it be
lawful to kill another in my own defense. And he answers 1. When I can sane my
own life without killing the aggressor, I must not kill him.

2 When I cannot escape without killing the Aggressor, I may kill him.

3. It is never lawful for any private man to intend the Death of another.
That being permitted only to absolute Princes, and Souueraign states, and by
their order to their officers, soldiers in time of war, and Executioners. What
displeases you in this. Does not our English Laws permit a man to kill an
aggressor, who h^th driven him to a wall, so as he can not save his life by
flight? and what is that, but Soto's 2. conclusion?

Then he proposes this objection against his 2. Conclusion. The aggressor is in
state of mortal sin, because he seeks my life. Wherefore if I kill him, he
will be damned, as dying in mortal sin. Now I am bound to loose my life rather
then his soul: ergo, I must let my self be killed. And he says, if this reason
were good, it were never lawful for any man to defend his life from any
Aggressor, who presses beyond all possibility of escape. Which duty, to let
my self be killed, being contrary to the law of nature, so favorable to
Ruffians, and so hard for Innocent ^ersons, it would make the sweet yoke of
Christ uneasy, and intolerable.

To clear his meaning, I propose another case: suppose a Captain of one of his
Majesty's ships, should scruple to shoot bullets at the Algerins, as thinking
it more conformable to the law of Christ, to let his ship be taken then to save
it by the Death, and Damnation of those Infidels. What answer would you E. C.
give? that he ought to yield his ship to avoid the loss of those souls: and
that the law of Christ obliges to it? If so, I believe his Majesty will never
appoint you to instruct his seamen. If you say, he may use such means as God,
and his Prince have furnished him with for the defense of his ship, although by
that means some Algerins be killed, and their souls lost: for Christ's law
would be intolerable to Absolute Powers, if it enjoined the contrary; if I say
you answer so, you say as much as Soto says.

Not to tire my Reader with vnecessary matter. and repetitions, I omit what you
cite out of Nauar, Grassu, and Bonacina. One word suffices for all: either they
truly approve of Murder, or they do not. If they do, we disown them: and so
you have no right to charge their sentiments on us.

CHAPTER 4. Protestants both teach, and practice sedition and Rebellion.
IT is with the greatest reluctance imaginable that I rake in this kennel,
whereof the fumes and stench is able to infect a People so susceptible of the
infection as English are. It were to be wished these seditious maxims had never
appeared in the world, or that upon their first appearance, that severity had
been used on them, which the Roman Senate practiced on Monsters, that they had
been transported out of the fight of men, and butyed in perpetual oblivion.
The G^nerals of the Jesuits have often forbidden their subjects to treat of
any of these seditious points, least by writing of them, their memory might be
preserved; which is always dangerous, when People are disposed to practice
them. And I doubt not but experience will show, that is the most prudent way,
to prevent all mischeife. Yet to comply with your importunity, I will follow
and encounter you in this. I own that there have been excesses on both sides
in their writers, whose zeal for the cause they embraced was greater, then
their Discretion. Yet the fault is less in those who stand only for what was
of old believed, and practiced, then in those, who would have all things
changed according to their phansy: and therefore the excesses on the Catholics
side are more excusable: yet we shall find the Protestants more pragmatical,
more refractory to Superiors, more violent, more seditious, and Rebellious,
then Catholics without comparison. I will begin with your Doctrine, then pass
to your practice.

The root of all our seditious maxims is that detestable Proposition of your
Patriark Witlef, no Prince, nor Prelat, nor Bishop continues such in state of
mortal sin. Council Constant. f. 8. of which Melanction said (Comment. in
Polit.) Wicles caused much mischief, by teaching that those loose all
Authority, who have not the holy Ghost. What Oats has the impudence to say
even to his Majesty is much worse, for he requires not only that Princes Live
vertucusly, (that is have the Holy Ghost) but also punish all who do not, under
pain of Deposition.

Goodman in his Apology is of the same mind. Bad Princes according to the Law
of God ought to be deposed, said he: and in case the Magistrates neglect to do
their Duty, the People have as free liberty to do it, as if there were no
Magistrates at all, and in those circumstances of time, God enlarges them with
liberty to use the sword.

Calvin in 6. Dan. v. 22. and 25. The Kings of the Earth do deprive themselves
of Power, when they make head against the King of Heaven. Yea they are unworthy
to be numbered amongst men: and therefore we are rather to spit in their faces,
then to obey them.

Knox: If Princes govern tyrannically against God, and his Truth, their
subjects are absolved from their Oath of Fidelity. But is this freeing from
their oath all? No: For

Buccanan says: The common People have right to dispose of the scepters of
Kingdoms at their pleasure. Again: the People have Power to Judge of the life
of their Kings. Yet more: It were to be wished, that rewards were appointed for
such as kill Tyrants, as there are for such as kill wolves.

Goodman: Kings have right to reign from the People who upon occasion can also
revoke it.

In fine Osiander says it is the common opinion of Wiclef's followers, that the
People, may, as they shall pleafe, punish their Princes, who offend.

These and many other seditious Doctrines may be found in the Protestants
Apology. And if any desire to see their number increased by modern Factious
Spirits, he shall see enough in the ordinary Gazets viz: that the King is one
of the three states, that the house of Commens made him what he is: that it is
not treason to bear arms against the King, provided it be not against the
three states. That the Parliament CAN DISPOSE of the SVCCESSION of the CROWN:
and many such maxims, which you daily advance, of as malignant a Nature as any
before cited.

Here I must observe a remarkable difference betwixt Catholics and you:
Catholics do not follow these Principles (I defy you to name any one Catholic
alive, who has taught any of them) and you retain them still: or rather grow
worse and worse. Which is of no small consequence to discover what party is
dangerous to the state, which guilty of treasonable maxims.

I come now to your practice: which gives reason to say, you came into the
world like the Cadmean brood, all armed: and that many, or rather all your
Princes felt your arms, as soon as they saw your faces. In Geneua you cast off
the Authority of your Bishop, Prince of the town. In higher Germany you shaked
the authority of Charles V. Emperor. In lower Germany you withdrew many
Provinces from the obedience of their King. You usurped upon Rudolphus the
Emperor in Transiluania; upon Christiernus, in Denmarck; and upon Sigimund, in
Swedeland. You fought for the Crown of France against Francis II. Charles IX.
and Henry III. and in the time of Charles IX. you coined money in the name of
one you held for King, says Cardinal Richelieu.

Let us come to our dear Country. In England you set up Jane Gray, against the
lawful heir queen Mary. You bore arms against another Mary lawful queen of
Scotland, brought her into restraint, forced her to depose her self, and to fly
her country: and not content with keeping her Prisoner nineteen years, at last
you put her barbarously to a violent death. Your perpetual insolences against
her son and Grandson, and your encroachments upon the Royul Prerogative, are
written with a Beam of the sun. Your whole proceedings against Charles 1. of
Glorious memory, are so known, that I need not to mind you of them: and so
detestable, that I need no Art to make them appear odious. I defy you to show,
that ever any Catholic designed upon his Souveraigne, what you have lately
acted on yours. Now with what face can you reproach unto us any seditious
Doctrine, whilst you teach much worse, and have executed things more execrable,
then ever any Catholic dreamt of? Remove this beam out of your eye, before
you take notice of a moth in ours, which yet we have long since removed, as I
said.

CHAPTER 5. English Catholics teach no seditious Doctrines.
E. C. page 4. describes us to be men, who sweep away whole towns, Cities
and Nations, subvert sundamental Laws, change Governments, cut off Princes, and
rightful Monarks, absolve subjects from their Natural allegiance, etc and page
7. he adds: we are full out such constitutioned Persons as he has described
us, and not a jot better: nay if we prove not worse, before he has done with
us, we shall be obliged to him for his Ciuility, and Moderation. A formidable
charge: but if we do not tell him it is as great a lie, and himself as false
an Informer, as Oats, he ought to thank us for our Moderation: for he brings
not one word to prove his accusation out of any English Catholic, nor of any
other countries, alive: nor any of the dead, who speak home, let us see your
proofs.

E. C. page 4. Peruse the canon ( c. Excommunicatorum 23. q. 5.) we do not
account them Murderers, who burning with the zeal of our Mother the Catholic
Church, shall happen to kill any of them. And are not men of such wicked and
bloody designs, like the fatal Sirius, or Dogstar,

Answ. read the Canon out, and you will find no subject for this Tragical
Exclamation: for that very Canon declares that action, killing an
excommunicated Person, to be a sin, and commands the Bishop of Lucia, to impose
upon the homicide a severe public Penance. Ne eiusdem Ecclesiae Matres
disciplina deseratur, Poenitentiam eis indicito congruentem. Least the
Discipline of our Mother the Church be abandoned, oblige the sinners to a
Penance proportioned to their offense. And is this to approve of those
attempts? I would willingly see your Bishops impose a Penance on the Rebels,
who killed several of their fellow subjects, loyal to their King: and whither
they call it Murder, or no, I shall not trouble them about the word.

E. C. page 5. Bellarmin l. 3. de Laicis c. 22. says: If it were possible, to
root out the Heretics (not any in the world excepted, whether KINGS, or
EMPERORS, etc.) without doubt they are to be cut off every mothers child of
them. Is not here enough, (surely too much) to evidence how lawful they hold
MVRTHER to be? But if it cannot be done because they are too hard, they must
lie still.

Answer. It is hard to heap together more malicious falsications in so few
words. Bellarmin in that place enquires whither those words of our Savior Mat.
13.30. Let the good seed and the tares grow until the Harvest, do not forbid
the Execution of malefactors in general: for he says, that by the good seed
are understood all good men, and by tares all wicked men: according to those
words: the good seed are the children of the Kingdom: tares are the children
of the wicked one. versu 38. And he says that malefactors of what kind soever,
are to be punished, when it may be done without danger to the public: but when
they are so numerous, as to cope with the bulk of loyal subjects, they ought
to be spared, to avoid greater evil. Which is so conformable to common sense,
that none, but such a momus, as E. C. could reprehend it: and it is practiced
in all states. 1. If they can all crush a Rebellion in the egg, by the Death
of one, or a few Traitors. 2. Is it spread over a great part of the Nation,
some few heads are punished, the rest are pardoned: and 3. some times propter
bonum pacts, the heads themselves are pardonned too. Charles 1. designed the
first, when he sought the five members: and offered the third, when he was a
Prisoner. And Charles 11. at his happy Restoration practiced the second: for
he punished his Father's judges, and pardonned the rest.

Now I come to score up some of your Falsifications.

1. That Bellarmin speaks only of Heretics. He speaks of all kinds of
Malefacters. Quaestio est vel de Haereticis, vel de furibus, vel de alijs
malis, an extirpandi sint The doubt is either of Heretics, or Thieues, or other
Malefactors: whither they be to be cut off.

2. That he does not except Kings, or Emperors and to make your Impertinence
more obseruable, you put these names in Capital letters. Sir, I never thought
it necessary to except Kings, when we speak of punishing Rogues, and theiues:
because no man in his wits will think them meant by those words. I believe on
the same score all our English laws may be arraigned for I do not think, when
they order a theif to be hanged, a Knight of the Post to loos his ears: etc.
that they add except he be a King or Emperor.

3 That Bellarmin teaches by those words MURDER to be lawful. Is the
Execution of Felons, by due course of law, Murder? of that Bellarmin speaks.

Gentle Reader: I earnestly desire thee, to have some Christian compassion of
the condition of Catholics, thy countrymen, and neighbors who upon such
malicious mis-representations of most innocent sayings, are exposed to public
Hatred, and cruel Persecutions, by a senseless, unchristian, disingenious sort
of men, whose minds are blacker, then their coats: and who make as little
bones of a lie, and swearing to it, as drinking a glass of small be when they
are thirsty.

E. C. page 5. Their Religion tempts them to all Actions that are horrible
against Protestants, by giving them their Lands, and Estates, which as soon as
they have exterminated Heretics, they shall possess without control. Council,
Later. sub Innoc. III. c. 3. Now Council's decrees are by Papists honored as
Oracles of the Holy Ghost. Says Stapleton.

Answer. No body is ignorant how variously that Canon is spoken of. Platina
says that Council made no decrees. Others say Absolute Princes are not
comprehended, because not named as they ought to be by reason of their
particular dignity, in odiosis, C. seeds Apostolica, de Rescriptis: jndeed the
words seruato iure Domini principalis, preserving entire the right of the
supreme Lord, shows that the Canon speaks only of Vassals, or subordinate
Princes; not of the Absolute, as Kings. It is also, said that the Kings
consented to the Law, by their Ambassadors, and they may enact what pleased.
Lastly it is only a positive law: which may be repealed, and does not oblige
until it be received in the several Catholic states. As appears by those of
the Council of Trent: which are universally received no where.

As to Stapleton his words are nothing to the purpose, seeing he speaks only of
conciliar Definitions in matter of Faith.

E. C. page 6. Whatsoever the Holy Father the Pope does, if it be Theft, or any
other thing, which of it self is evil (as for example MURDER, etc.) we must
like wise impute that to the jnspiration of GODS spirit. And you cite C. non
nos D. 40. in Glossa.

Answer: no great wonder you Protestant Ministers, should falsify glosses of
Canons, who build your Faith on falsifications of the scriptures. Neither
canon, nor Gloss say, what you produce them for, both lay the quite contrary.
The title of the Canon is: The Papal office does not give; but takes a way the
liberty to sin. In the canon: we do not think, that God has given us any leave
to sin. In the Gloss: when the Action is dubious whether it be good, or bad,
w^ must judge favorably of the Pope If it be of its own nature bad* as
Adultery, or MVRTHER: we must own that he sins in it: although there be no man to
whom he ought to be accused, by reason of the dignity of the first Chair.

You see, sir, that the gloss says just the contrary to what you cite out of
it: for it says the Pope sins by murder; and you make it say, murder is no
sin in a Pope.

E. C. page 6. As yet we have not proved upon them their KING KILLING doctrine
pray let one quotation supply for all, and I think it is such an one, as is
sull home to the Point. Suarez l. 6. ad M. B. Regem 1.24 says. A King if he be
once excommunicated, may be deposed, or slain by any person whomsoever: and
that with impunity. Therefore it is past all manner of doubt, but that they h^ld
it exreamely Lawful.

Answer: It is past all manner of doubt, that you hold it extremely Lawful to
tell any kind of lies, and falsify any Authors you please, provided it may
concontribute to charge some odious opinion on Papists, how contrary soever it
be to the Authors you cite. Suarez having written that Proposition immediately
adds: Haec Propositio simpliciter sumpta est falsissima. This Proposition
absolutely taken, is most false. What say you, Christian Reader, is this fair
play? what cannot these men prove at this rate out of any Author; by making
him say what he condemns, and condemn what he says? What credit do they
deserve, who discover so little sense of Truth, honesty, shame of men, or fear
of God?

These are his proofs of our holding Murder to be Lawful, which he does not
1. because there is not one word cited out of any English Catholic.

2. Nor out of any other alive.

3. He falsitys impudently all he cites.

CHAPTER 6. Catholics practice no Treason.
E. C. page 7. What was the offense of the Citizens of Toulouse and Auignon,
when P. Gregory IX. Set Lewis the French King to war against them, and their
Earl Raymundus, without cause, but only that of their Religion, and where the
said King dyed at the siege?

Answ. Here are two great untruths.

The first, that there was no cause of that war, besides Religion. There were
two wars made upon the Albigenses The first by Simon Monfort, with the forces
of the King of France, Lewis VIII. Sovereign Lord of the Earl of Toulouse, for
having killed an Ambassador, or Legate, against the law of nations. The second
by Lewis himself for their Herely, and Rebellion. So neither war was on the
score of Religion purely.

The second untruth is, that the King of France dyed at the siege. He finished
the war, united those Countries to the crown, and on his way home he dyed at
Monpensier in Auvergn. See De Serres a Huguenot.

E. C. p. 7. You give many instances of crueltys showed toward Heretics in
Cabrieras Merindol, Prouenc, Vassy, Germany, the Lowcountryes, etc.

To all I answer they were rebels, stood in open defiance of the Ancient Laws
established, and of their Princes commands.

E. C. p. 7. Pray for the fuller satisfaction in this thing, beside D. Fowlis
his History of their Rebellions and Treasons, read the ungrateful be hauiour
of the Papists and Priests, toward the Imperial Indulgent crown of England.

Answ: I will not undertake to vindicate the actions of all Papists, that have
been; I speak for those alive. If any here to fore were really guilty of
Treason, I excuse them not yet the late proceedings against Catholics, although
certainly Innocent, yet charged with the most heavy Accusations imaginable,
ground a suspicion that their Ancestors may have had hard measure in that kind.
Howeuer if our fore fathers left any blot on their Religion by some illegal
attempts, Catholics since have washed it out with their Blood. And I pray God
with all my heart, that all Protestants were as faith full to the Royal
interest, as Papists are.

In your pages 8. and 9. I find nothing worth mentioning, but a saying of
Aeneas Syluius, that nothing is given at Rome but for money, not even jmposition
of hands, and what you cite out of Caramuel: that a Priest may kill a Detractor.

As to Aeneas Syluius he recalled all those writings being made Pope Pius II.
This is so falls that Absolution, which is one imposition of hands, was never
refused any man upon score of Poverty. And as for Caramuel, that proposition is
condemned by Alexander VIII. Caramuel has no credit even in his own order (he
is a Bernardin) his writings being forbidden amongst them under great Penaltys.

E. C. p. 10. The Pope is called by Papists: our Lord God the Pope.

Answer: those words are found but once, and that in a Glossa: which sort of
writings are little regarded by our Divines. Howeuer you have no reason to
reproach us with that expression, who say the same of all Kings page 16. and of
all men, page 21.

E. C. p. 11. Bellarmin says, God has given to the Pope the Power to make sin
to be no sin; and no sin to be sin.

Answer, this imports no more, then that God gave the Pope to oblige by his
laws the conscience of the Faithful in things indifferent: viz, eating flesh
on a wednesday which of it self is no sin, but is a sin when forbidden. But
Bellarmin expressly says, that the Pope cannot make Lawful a thing of it self
cuil, as Theft, or Murder: nor unlawful a thing of it self good, as the love
of God.

E. C. p. 11. What could stir the Roman Catholics up to that dreadful
Rebellion and massacre in Ireland, where in cold Blood were murdered above
100000. Protestants, without the least provocation, but only the Indispensable
necessity to kill Heretics.

Answer. The late King knew other reasons: These are his words: The
preposterous vigor, and unreasonable severity, which some men carried before
them in England was not the least incenture that kinaled, and blew up into
those horrid flames the despair of discontent which wanted not predisposed
fuel for Rebellion in Ireland: where Despair being added to their former
discontens, and the Fears of utter extirpation to their wonted oppressions, it
was easy to provoke to an open Rebellion, a People prone enough to break out
to all exorbitant violence, both by some Principles of their Religion, and the
natural desire of Liberty: both to exempt themselves from their present
restraints, and to prevent those after rigours where with they saw themselves
apparently threatened by the Covetous zeal, and vn^haritable fury of some men,
who think it a great argument of the Truth of their Religion, to endure no
other, but their own.

The Rebels were exasperated to the most desperate Resolutions, and Actions,
by being threatened with all extremitys, not only, to the known heads, and
cheise Incendiarys; but even to the whole community of the Nation; resolving to
destroy Root and Branch, men, women, and children: without any regard to those
usual pleas for mercy, which Conquerors not wholly barbarous, are wont to hear
from their own breasts, in behalf of those, whose opprestiue faces, rather
then their malice engaged them, or whose imbecility for sex, or age was such,
as they could neither lift up a band against them. Thus his late Majesty.

Here you see, Sir, not a little; but a great, and manifold cause and
Provocation to that Rebellion, (which I do not intend to justify) viz.

1. Desire of Liberty in a nation subject to a foreigner. 2. Wonted
oppressions, 3. Discontents grounded on them. 4. Despair being threatened with
utter extirpation, Root and Branch, man, woman, and Child.
When you have considered this you will conclude that very little of that
Rebellion can be charged on Religion. So your saying it was without the least
cause, or Pronocation, is Rash, false, and un charitable.

Moreover the readiness with which the Irish accepted a Cessation of Arms,
when offered by his Majesty, (as you may see in that place) although without that
cessation the Protestant Party had perished, shows the Irish sought self
Preservation, as the King says; not destruction of Heretics, as you fasly
surmise.

All which I say, not to excuse all the Irish Actions; but to discover your want
of truth and charity in charging all on Religion, which is Innocent, even when
those, who profess it, offend, because she teaches not, nor approues those
offenses.

Page 11. and 12. You relate some words and actions of some Popes; which I
think Religion not concerned in, seeing it does not oblige us to think them
impeccable in words, or Actions. What if a testy Pope said either he would have
Philip's Crown, or Philip should have his Miter: it was a Passionate
expression. And if S. Gregory congratulated Phocas his being Emperor, and
commended his Merciful Acts, it may as well betaken for an exhortation to
mercy; as relation of what he was.

Page 13. You charge Religion with the massacre of Paris; although done without
the Pope's knowledge, and resolved on by the King, to rid his kindome of those
who had lately endangered his Crown. It was a pain of Rebellion, not of Heresy.

Page 14. You cite strange things out of Frasuis du veron. Bonarcius, white and
Mariana. Who having all been condemned by Catholics none alive reading them,
as far as I know, Catholics cannot with any color of Justice be charged with
their writings. If you please to look back to 42. you will hear all Pulpits
ringing with, and Prints speaking of as desperate things, as in any of of those
writers, as far as I know of them.

Page 15. You serve up again your cold cabbadge the Council of Lateran, and
the war on the Albigenses. To which I have already answered.

E. C. p. 15. With what pompous ceremonys do they hallow those Instruments,
which are to do the blessed work? By what charming names do they call that
Bloody wretch, who is to be employed in the Horrible Business? No less then
Elected son of God, Blessed vessel, the Arm of the Almighty to execute his
Justice. How they blasphemously come before their Altars, and with a seeming
fervent zeal, pray to the God of Heaven, That all the Saints may arise, and
give place unto him: and that the Lod may appear to be his strength, and to in
fuse, into him the Beams of his Consolation! How do they Diuilishly when edle
him into a belief, that there is a celestial splendor shining round his head,
and like the skin of Moses his face, appearing with so great abryghtness, that
they are not capable of looking on him without Trembling, and Confu^ion. How do
they throw themselves prostrate at his Feet, and pretend that he is no more a
mortal; but changed into a Deity? And how they tell the credulous Cully, that
he will by so glorious an Action be certainly freed from the pains of
Purgatory, and immediately translated into Paradise, and there be swallowed up
of Eternal Delights, and satisfactions?

I have given this place at large, that you may see the Malice, and
Impertinency of it. In what place did this happen? what man euersaw it? what
Author ever mentioned it? The Bishop of Lincoln, in his Annotations on the
speechs of the five Jesuits was the first, that ever mentioned it, as far I
could ever discover: till he name another, I shall take him to be the Author
of this Fable. Yet it has lost nothing in your hands. The splendor of his
face like that of Moses, and Papists falling at his Feet, are of your
invention. And who can tell what further Additions may be made by others: For
in these jmaginary spaces of Fictions, who can six any bounds to Ministers, who
without scruple tell any lie, as a Truth? But the success is quite other then
you pretend: for thus laboring in vain to prove us guilty; you effectually
prove us Innocent. I assure you, that when any of our Church shall write
against you, he will find Truth enough to say, without having recourse to such
lies.

E. C. p 17. They hold it to be no sin Not to keep Faith, nor Peace, not to
obserne either Truth or Honesty toward Heretics: it is no deceit to
Equivocate with them in private Dealings, or Public Transactions; it is no
Dishonesty to cheat them of what they have, no Perjury to break Oaths with
them, no Toes to rob or spoil them, it is no inhumanity to burn their Houses
over their heads, no Murder to kill them, although KINGS, and PRINCES: in a word,
it is no sin for all Relations, to deny them what God has made their Respective
Dutys.

Answ. We disown this Doctrine in all its parts: and our lives confute it
sufficiently, but yours is so conformable to it, that we may think it a
description of your own practice. Add only the hiring men of desperate
fortunes and flagitious lives, to bear fals^ witness against Innocent
Papists, with vast rewards, applauding their Depo^^tions, ^ho^gh evidently
false, and accompanied with that infallible sign of a lie, contradictions,
condemning honest and loyal subjects upon such mock evidence to the greatest
Penaltys which the law appoints for real Traitors etc. and we have a perfect
picture of your proceedings with Papists. Stupor and mirabilia facta sunt in
terra, Prophetae prophetabant mendacium: and Sacerdotes applaudebant manibus
suis: and populus meus dilexit talia: quid ergo fiet in nouissimis eius? Hierem
5.30.31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, England: the
Prophets ( Oats and Dugdale) Prophecy falsely, and the Priests (Ministers)
applaude this with their hands, and my People, upon whom I have showred so many
Blessings, Love all this: what will become of them in the end?

E. C. page Jf Murdering of Heretics should really be a sin (as none of them
will acknowledge) yet so long as the Priests and Jesuits shall tell them to
the contrary, nay shall cry it up for a signal Act of Piety, they are bound to
believe them, and so many MURDERS as People shall commit on such a belief, and
from the pure Principle of blind obedience, so many worthy, and Holy Actions do
they perform, and by a necessity of consequence do merit accordingly. Therefore
how great must needs be their Reward in Heaven, who shall not only have their
hands imbrued in a few trifling, petty Murders, but shall make whole nations
swim in Blood, and shall not spare their Magistrates Princes, or Kings.

Answ. Here is not one true word: and the whole discourse relyes on two
abominable lies, equal to those of Oats, your Brother Minister. The first
that none of us will acknowledge MVRTHER of Heretics to be a sin. We
unanimously profess it is a sin: we are ready to sign it with our Blood, if
need be. We declare, we believe that it is a mortal sin for any private man to
kill another, unless it be for his own necessary defense. This we say, and
are ready to confirm with Oath.

The second Lie, is, that Papists are bound to believe what their Priests
teach, contrary to the law of God, and that MVRTHER committed in consequence of
that belief becomes meritorious. This is most false, all Papists know they
must obey God rather then men and the credit they give to their Priests, is
merely because they teach what God commands. And did they find their Priests
guilty of such lies, as you of the Ministry fill your Sermons, and Libellous
writing with, (contrary to the law of God: thou shall not bear false witness)
they would never vouchsafe to hear them, but cast them off, as a pack of
knaves.

E. C. page 21. I think this will suffice, to make clear the Truth of my whole
Assertion, how the Jesuits account MURDER and TREASONS to be Lawful,
necessary, commendable, and meritorious.

Answer. You have proved no one of all those points: we declare against them
all: we protest, we hold MURDER and TREASON unlawful on all occasions: and
that neither the one nor the other can be m^ritorious. When soever his sacred
Majesty shall be pleased to order it, all the Jesuits, and other Priests in
his Dominions are ready to declare in such form as he shall prescribe them,
that they detest MURDER and TREASON, and all Doctrine teaching either of them:
and all this in the obuious plain sense of the words, without AEquiuocation,
or mental Reservation, which two ways of c^^aking a man's mind they renounce,
and acknowledge to have been deservedly condemned by Innocent XI. 2. Mar. 1679.

And they do further declare, that they shall think themselves sensibly obliged
to any Person, who shall procure his Majesty's consent to the making of such a
public Declaration.

E. C. p. 21. I shall now come to give the Papists some serious CONSIDERATIONS
upon what I have said, and so conclude.

Answ. Those who design mischief to a town give falls allarmes, that defendants
being drawn to a place where there is no danger, may neglect those where there
is some. Whether you intend such a stratagem, I cannot tell; but I am sure your
considerations are needless to Peaceable Catholics, and necessary to your
seditious Brethren. So you mis apply your Plaster, where there is no sore.

I will not gratify so much the Factious party, as to examine your
Considerations.: and show their defects. Whereof some are childish: some others
substantial in themselves, and taken out of Popish Authors, yet handled so
awkwardly, that I once thought you Preuaricated and would divert your Readers
from their Duty to their Prince, by commending it weakly. Yet I hope this
proceeds from an inability to compose stronger discourse. Indeed those strong
Reasons taken out of Papists in your understanding, are not unlike to
Hercules's club in the hand of a Pigmey.

E. C. p. 30. For our King, let all true loyal hearts pray with me.

Answer. J I pray God, that both you, and all the Ministry did heartily pray for
his Majesty. I do assure you, that Papists, and particularly Jesuits do pray
heartily for him: and I will confirm it out of a Pamplet printed in french by a
Jesuit, in which speaking to the five executed, he says: Pray also for his
Majesty: that God be pleased to give him a wise Council, faithful officers,
courageous armies, a Peaceable People, a happy reign, a long life, and an
eternal Glory. This I assure you that Jesuit said from his heart: and is ready
to seal it with his blood.


