AN ANSWER TO Certain Observations of VV. BRIDGES, concerning the present
War against His MAJESTY.

Whereby he pretends to justify it against that Hexapla of Considerations.

viz.

Theological, Historical, Legal, Critical, Melancholy, and Foolish;
Wherein, as he says, it is looked upon by the squint-eyed multitude.

Printed in the Year, 1643.

To the READER.
ALthough I am not much in love with Apologies, yet for the prevention of
objections in this cavilling age, give me leave to premise a word or two. It
may be thought here that I have done too much and too little. Too much in that
I have been so large in my Answer unto so short a Preface. Too little in that I
have not proceeded to a reply unto the Sermon it self, as well as to the
Prooeme. To the first I confess it has been thought that my pains therein
has exceeded the merit of the Preface. Neither did I intend to bestow the
fifth part of that pains about it that I have done; but if I have erred
herein, I hope it may deserve a pardon, in that it has proceeded from a desire
to satisfy: nor need it be any wonder that the wedge is so much greater than
the knot, since it is the wisest way for them that cannot endure the light to
wrap up themselves as close as they can in obscure brevity. They that are to
speak in an ill cause had best to take heed they say not too much, for the
more they say of it, the more they betray it. Since it is a hard thing for them
that have such a task to be so vigilant over their pens, but that in many
expressions some discoveries will intrude; it is very difficult to be constant
in falsehood, and therefore errors had need have but a narrow way to walk in,
lest they betray themselves by their reeling. You can hardly give a lie so good
a tire, but if you ty it not up it will betray it self. But for the truth,
which is my business, the more it is unfolded the more it is preserved, and
indeed, the more closely error is wrapped up and entangled, the more work is
necessary for the unraveling it. The work of Master Bridges, as it is a work
of darkness, so it is a work of thick darkness, like a thick compacted
cloud of errors, incorporated one into another; and my work is to disperse
this cloud, and to lay open these errors. And if the dispersion of a cloud
take up more room than the thickning or condensation of it, I hope the light
that did it is no way to be blamed. Besides, in the persecution of one or a few
falsehoods we are many times led into the view of many profitable and necessary
truths: and if I have made my journey so much the longer to take them along
with me, so that I have not gone much out of my way, I presume the Readers
profit may excuse my labor.

For the second objection, my answer is brief. That the truth is, I find
nothing in the Sermon of any danger, and therefore as a toothlesse dog I
might well trust it amongst the nakedst people without a muZZle. And so having
said thus much for thy satisfaction, I entreat thee to read without prejudice,
with an upright unengaged judgment, with a resolution to embrace the truth
where thou find'st it, and to relinquish error where thou discover'st it. And
so I commend thee to God, and rest.

An earnest defirer of thy salvation, and of the peace of the Church and State,
THO. WARMSTRY

AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS of W. BRIDGES, concerning the present
War against His MAJESTY; whereby he pretends to justify it against that
Hexapla of considerations: viZ. Theological, Historical, Legal, etc.
NOt to trouble my self much with those impertinencies, in the beginning of
your Preface; where you most rashly and impiously set our blessed Saviors name
in the style of this unchristianlike design, calling it the business of
Christ Jesus his Kingdom: And as you transgress against Piety there, so
against Charity too in the same clause, as if your malice were not active
enough, if you did not in the same breath and sentence blaspheme God and injure
man. You style the good and obedient people of the Land by that scornful title
of The squint eyed multitude, as if every eye were asquint that is not
bloudshotten like yours. And to let pass your slighting of those books that
have been set forth. which you say have had their answers, though I could tell
you that all have not been answered that we know of. And for those answers of
yours and some others to Doctor Fern, whom you bite in the margin, their
answers have had replies too: nor yet to insist upon your vain promises of
delivering the sense of the whole in that of Romans 13. He that resists, etc.
which it may be you were afraid to speak out, lest your own pen should
transcribe your sentence, and allot unto you that judgment or damnation which
the Apostle there denounces against resisters of the higher powers; and in
that of the Evangelist, resist not evil, etc. And to give you leave to pass
over, and let go Fathers, Counsels, the Doctrine of our own Bishops, since
they are so little for your turn. I leave all these upon your score, and come
to observe upon your Observations which you commend unto your Reader.

And first in the Theological consideration, you observe thus:

1. That the King must command not only according to Gods Law, but man's also.

Answ. It is most true, That the King is bound in duty to regulate his commands
by the rules of the Law of God and the Kingdom, and if he does otherwise he
sins, and is answerable to God for it. But it does by no means follow that
he is answerable unto the Subjects, or corrigible by them, for all correction
is to proceed from a Superior; and the King who is acknowledged to be
supreme, has no Superior on earth to judge him.

2. That if he do not so command, the resistance is not a resistance of power
but will.

Answ. Though the King do exceed the limits of his duty, yet the resistance
may be a resistance of his power; for they that judge not superficially of
things may easily discern, That a Kings power is larger then his duty: And he
may exceed his duty in commanding, and yet his authority may injoyne the
Subject to obey. Pharaoh exceeded his duty in commanding the Israelites to make
brick without straw. And Casar's Officers exceeded the limits both of the Law
of God and man, when against the liberty of the Subject they require tribute of
our Savior, yet we have examples of obedience in both. There are somethings
unlawful for a Governor to command, which are not unlawful for the Subject
to obey, as in the cases before named, and in all tyrannous and frivolous
commands; in such cases we may petition, and some admonish and reprove the
King, with reverence, and put him in mind of his duty: or in case he will not
hear, we may use the weapons of the Church, Preces and lachrymas, we may
complain to God who is above the King, and the sole Moderator betwixt Him and
Subjects, but we must obey and remember that such commands are the Governors
sin, but our punishment. Indeed, if the Governor command the Subject to do
that which the Law of God forbids him to do, he must not yield active
obedience, but obey God rather than men. But yet he must not resist by taking
up Arms or the like, but patiently submit to suffer the punishment. Otherwise,
I pray you resolve me, why the three children yielded their bodies to the
furnace, when Nebuchadnezzar commanded them, against the Law of God, to worship
the golden Image, if they had held it lawful to resist, they might as well
have looked for assistance from Heaven to have made good their party against
the Tyrant, as that God should preserve them in the midst of the fire? But the
Text notes it of them, that they yielded their bodies, which implies a
voluntary submission. And yet the command was against the Law of God; and
Nebuchadnezzar as well as King CHARLES ought to have commanded, not only
according to the Law of God, but of man also. If you are wise and peaceable,
you ought to consider, that as the Kings duty is to regulate him, upon pain of
Gods displeasure; so his power is to regulate us; sometimes where he exceedes
his duty; and if where he transgresses the Law of God, much more where he
transgresses the limits of humane Laws, which notwithstanding he is bound in
conscience to observe.

3. That to say such a resistance must be only defensive is nonsense, for so
a man may be resisting ever and never. Resist like the silly women, of whom the
Apostle says, They are ever learning, and never attain the truth.

Answ. Nor never are like to do, unless they meet with better teachers than
you appear to be; for indeed here you speak the plainest falsehood of any the
most impudent advocate, that for ought I know has pleaded in that cause you
are fee'd in: and we are to thank you for your plain dealing, it is honestly
done however that you will speak your mind; if all men should do so, I am
persuaded we should have a speedy end of the business. I was in doubt the
people should have been borne in hand, that this war against the King had
been only defensive, but you have drawn the curtain, and will justify it
seems the legality of it as an offensive war. That it is lawful to set up
an offensive resistance against the King, in case he command either against the
Law of God or man. And your reason indeed drawn from nonsense, Argumentum ab
absurdo it is I confess; it is nonsense say you, to hold that we may in such
case resist the King, only by a defensive resistance. This if any is the sense
of your Observation, and how do you make this good? Why thus, an't please you;
for so say you a man may be resisting ever, and never resist. Indeed I confess
that is plain nonsense to say, that a man should be ever resisting and yet
never resist; as well you may be ever a good Subject, and yet never obey your
Prince. Yea, indeed upon the point it is the very same, to be ever resisting
and never resist; as to be ever resisting and yet to be a good Subject: since
not to resist is essential to a good Subject. And therefore in stiling this
nonsense you accuse your self, since that is the maine business. You are
about to make us believe that resistance and subjection may well stand
together: so that if that be nonsense, as you style it, there is but little
sense in the maine attempt of your discourse. And I can see no more reason for
you to say, that it is no more sense to admit of desensive resistance without
an offensive, then to say a man may ever and never resist. Or is there no
difference between a shield and a sword: nature and reason allows a servant
to save his head if he can from his masters cudgel, and I know no Law either
of God or man that forbids it. But yet you must take heed how you allow a
servant to deal offensively against his master, lest you set houses on fire as
well as the commonwealth. It is no nonsense to admit of one thing with the
denial of another, in assertion or discourse, which may and ought sometimes to
be done without the other, in action and performance. But it seems there is no
sense, reason, nor religion, that does not comply with your purposes. Those are
the only rules of truth and falsehood, good and evil; yet methinkes you might
have done well to have spared the Apostle, for you seem to be very bold in
quoting that saying of his, nay of the Holy Ghost, as a parallel to that which
you call nonsense, as if the Apostles saying of silly women (such as your
faction leads away) That they are ever learning, and never attain to the
truth, were no better sense than for a man to be said to be ever resisting, and
yet never to resist. It is no wonder that you are over-bold with Gods
Substitute, when you are so sawey with God himself. Remember you have
something to answer another day for this: your calling might have admonished
you to have dealt more reverently with the Scripture, then to have brought in
any part of that as an instance or parallel of nonsense: but howsoever we may
know your meaning by this, that if the people please to quarrel at the Kings
government, or to conceive any of his commands to be against, or not according
to the Laws of God or man, they may not only defend their own rights or
persons by force and arms, but even offer violence to his Sacred Person in a
vindictive way, and in allowing an offensive resistance without any restraint
or limitation, you lay a fair ground, for ought any man can see, even for
killing the King, either by force or treachery, for this without all question
lies within the generality of an offensive resistance: it was pity you did not
live, or were not better known in the beginning of King James his reign, you
would have made an excellent Chaplain to Guy Faux, or the rest of the
Gunpowder-Traytors. What though they were Papists, that had been no great
matter: They whose stomachs can digest such iron principles as these, like
enough would not have been very squeamish in point of religion. But for your
Argument, Assertion, Observation, or what you will call it, truly it scarce
deserves an answer; yet the wise man may seem to admonish me to give you one,
lest you should be wise in your own conceit: And therefore I tell you, that
the Apostle forbids that any resistance at all should be made against the
higher power; and the higher the power is the more wicked the resistance: and
therefore to resist your Prince, which is your Supreme, is the most wicked of
all resistance. And the Apostle gives you a reason, because it is the ordinance
of God; and it is showed before, that resistance even in such case where the
Magistrates commands are not according to the Law of God or man, is a
resistance of the power as well as of the will of the Magistrate, and therefore
is not to be undertaken sub poena (...), under pain of judgment, or
damnation; and they that like the wages let them set up the work. Besides,
this is to put a sword as it were into every offenders hand, to provide for his
own life or freedom, even by the ruin and destruction of the King or
Magistrate, if he can but have faith enough to persuade himself that he is
condemned contrary to the Law either of God or man; and certainly he had a very
dull brain that could not find color enough for such a persuasion, in the
worst case almost we can imagine, especially if that old note be true, Quod
quisque vult id ipsum putat. There needs no great strength of argument to
persuade a thief or murderer that he ought not to be hanged, but I doubt I
shall take too much pains with you. There Is an end of your three Observations
of the business, as it is looked on, as you say, in a Theological
consideration: and for ought I see, the people may look asquint still for any
thing you have yet applied for the rectifying of their sight.

The next survey you are pleased to take of the matter, is to correct the
errors of the people in their Historical view of it: you conceive their
complaints to be groundless, when they conceive and say, Never such times,
such taxations, such presidents, such a war, etc. never? Yes, you can tell
them of the twentieth part, fifteenth part, seventh part, as in the reign of
King John, and others. And you cite the Chronicle too of Edw. 2. in the
margent: truly I have scarce leisure for the present to examine the Chronicle
to confute you. We read indeed of a sixth penny levied of temporal men's
goods, in the time of Edw. 2. and what others you have found out in your
Historical translations, it makes no great matter if they be of the same
stamp. But can you find a president of a twentieth part imposed by an
Ordinance of the two Houses of Parliament, without and against the King, and
for the maintenance of so unnatural a war? can you find any president for
those legal robberies, that authentical thee very under the name of
plundering and that working of iniquity by a Law? But however you seem to take
the people for pretty easy and tame fools, while you would persuade them to
lie down whilst they are loaded, because their forefathers perhaps have gone
before them in suffering the like or more grievous pressures. What? do you
mean to prescribe for tyranny and oppression? But to come to your
Observations, you will have those that are willing to learn, to know,

1. That if some be taken away, it is to preserve them and the rest.

Answ. That Is more then you can assure them: rather it may seem to be for the
destruction both of themselves and the residue of their estates, since it is
but oil cast into that fire, which is likely if not quenched, to expose all
unto desolation. And if those madmen that have hitherto fed that flame with
the expense of their estates, were they not jurati in insaniam, they have had
experience enough to have been as good as a Bedlam to them, and make them now
at length to grow wiser, and even let that go which is already gone, until
the public faith shall come to her lands, and make much of that wit they have
received for interest. and shut up their hungry purses and coffers with that
motto of the Poet, Scelus est post omnia perdere naulum: That they may at least
keep something to bury them. Yea, it may prove a great blessing if those purges
they have received of that overmuch fullness, which has made them swell so
much with pride, to the disturbance of the State, may now leave them in a more
healthful temper of humility, to the quieting thereof. This would enrich them
much more in their minds, then they are impoverished in their estates, and be
an excellent recompense for all their losses. But little do you think what an
excellent Observation this of yours might have been, had you vented it but two
or three years sooner, for the justification of Ship money. And yet I doubt it
would scarce have gone for weight then, and we had best look well to the
scales, e're we accept it for so now, lest if this once go for current, it be
made a common color for the greatest oppressions, and most injurious and
perpetual taxations of the people, though (if it be possible) more illegal
than that of the imposition of the twentieth part, if it be enough to bear the
people in hand; That if some be taken away, it is to preserve them and the
rest. But what an age of fancies do we live in? can you tell the people who it
is that would take away either their estates or their lives; or if you could,
is there any honesty in it, That you should take away the peoples goods without
Law, and please them by telling them no body else should rob them? Or to
persuade them to throw their estates into the fire, to keep them out of the
hands of thieves; small comfort in this. What is the next Observation to make
the matter fair in the Historical prospect?

The second Observation is by way of question,

Whether they had rather part with it to the Parliament, or that and their
lives too to the Cavaleirs?

Answ. Truly this is a hard question. A pitiful necessity that the poor
people are brought into: it were worth the while to consider who they are that
have shut them up into such an uncomfortable Dilemma, and what is the cause
that they are so concluded: and sure it is no hard matter to discern. We can
yet remember that there was a time not long since, when there was no necessity
of either of these, when the Royal Authority of His Majesty, and the known
Laws of the Kingdom were in force, and yielded the due protection to the
Subjects; and they returned their due obedience unto them, till these hedges
were broken down, under the pretense of mending the gaps in them: there was no
room for so sad a question. And therefore the people may know whom they have
to thank for it, even those that for the bringing to pass of their own
ambitious and turbulent designs, have removed those ancient land-markes, and
demolished those known and certain bounds and fences, and instead thereof
brought in a new ambulatory, uncertain Government by Ordinances of the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, in opposition to the ancient and settled
sundamentall Laws of the Kingdom, and without and against the Royal
Authority of the King. And now it seems the people (if you may be Judge) are
left only to this lamentable choice, from whose hand they shall receive their
ruin: or whether they will undergo a voluntary slavery on the one side, or an
enforced one on the other. This is not much unlike that miserable choice that
David was put unto, in the 2d of Samuel, 24. chapter, and the 13. and 14.
verses. Whether the sword, or the famine, or the pestilence should be the
reward of numbering of the people. That David was indeed to submit unto,
(though as he says he was in a great strait) because it was sent unto him by
God, by the Prophet Gad, a Prophet of the Lord. And David wisely makes it his
choice to fall into the hands of God, and not into the hands of men. And truly
the strait that you put the people into, me thinks is worse in some respect
than David's. They must needs it seems by you fall into the hands of men. And
indeed I confess we do well deserve it, because the hand of the Lord in the
plague and pestilence, which has been so long and so often upon us of late in
this Kingdom; and I think scarce yet removed, though it is as it were drowned
in a greater judgment, has done so little or no good upon us. But what
Divinity is it, I beseech you, that sent you upon this errand upon the people,
or who made you to be a Prophet Gad unto them, to circumscribe them within the
limits of so hard an election? Or how long have they been Gods, into whose
hands you would have them fall? Or what do you mean by those strange unheard
of monsters, the Cavaleirs, that you make such bugbeares to fright the people
with? Or how comes this name of honor and dignity to be made by you, and
others of your party, a name of reproach and disgrace? I pray you tell us what
this strange word signifies, that we may know these horrid creatures by their
names: let me tell you, it little becomes one that is a pretender to learning,
to give his vote to so foolish a denomination, to so injurious a debasement and
misacception of an innocent and honorable term. Foolish it is, let whose will
be the Nomenclator, for names or titles are imposed for distinction, and to set
forth unto us the nature of things as they differ from others; and that either
according to the importance of the word or title, which does in the etymology
or sense of it represent the thing entitled thereby; or else according to a
customary received use and acception of the word or style, whereby it is by
usurpation drawn from that which it properly signifies to represent some other
thing, either by limiting the signification thereof, or diverting it to
something that has some resemblance or analogy unto the proper signification,
or perhaps through mere ignorance of barbarism, or a blind and wilful
prescription of custom, embraced by the people at all adventures; which
notwithstanding when it is once grown current, it is no wisdom in any to
contradict, so that it be but an harmless absurdity: or else sometimes names
or styles are imposed upon individuals which are of that multitude, and their
personal properties so obscure, that they can hardly be all known, or
designed by proper attributes, upon such sometimes, and indeed most commonly,
unless by some extraordinary providence they are employed by those that have
the power, ex instituto, of mere voluntary choice of the imposers, without any
regard unto any similitude or proportion that the name bears unto the person,
upon which it is imposed as a mere voluntary mark upon them, to distinguish
them from others; or sometimes they are imposed as common marks upon those
that are of the same stock and kindred, either by original descent, or by
translation, or engraffing, as by matrimonial contract, adoption, or the like.
But this style as you have no ground at all to make this a style of ignominy
unto any, indeed as a name of honor, so it has been used as Eques which is a
Cavalier in Latin, was an ordinary and almost the only usual word to
signify a Gentleman, or Nobleman amongst the Romans; and so you may plead the
usage of the word to apply it to His Majesty's Army, where you may find almost
all the Gentry, and the greatest part of the Nobility of the Kingdom, whom you
may not amiss in this sense style the Cavaliers, in opposition to that Rabble
of the meaner sort of discontented people, that make up the Bellum servile on
the other side. So indeed it is very proper to design forth those noble and
honorable Commanders of His Majesty, whose veins are full of Princely and
Noble blood, that can admit of no taint of disloyalty, in opposition to those
right honorable Buttonmakers, and the rest of those right famous mechanicke
Commanders, who are of late become intolerable fumblers in this strange and new
trade of war, to the great danger of their forgetting of their occupations.
But how than does it become a name of reproach amongst you? surely we may well
guess what care you have, and the rest of your party, to maintain the honor
and dignity of the State, when you go about to make the very terms of honor
to become contumelies and reproaches. Is it not enough for you to put confusion
into the frame of the State, but you must also confound the language of the
Commonwealth. But indeed you may be excused perhaps in point of policy, for
you were somewhat hard driven to find out a style for the designation of that
party whom you oppose; and therefore it is no wonder if in so great necessity
you take the boldness to make a force upon the language, as well as the
estates and liberties of the Subject, by drawing the one by violence from their
proper signification, as well as the other from their proper possessours; for
indeed what should we call them. Rebels? Surely that might have done well, but
it seems your consciences could not digest so great and palpable a
misapplication: you know well to whom that style did properly belong it is like,
and you could not be so injurious unto them, as to make so unjust an alienation
of their property. What than? should you call them the Royalists, or the Kings
party? No. There was no policy in that, for it was nece^^^^y for you to use His
Majesty's name, that you might not fright the people with a bare-fac't
rebellion; but therein indeed you do exceedingly discolor it, and in going
about to hide it, you lay the wickedness thereof so much the more bare unto
any discerning eye. The very style of your war condemns the very action of
it, and declares you to be ashamed of your own enterprise, since you are feign
to mask over the face of it with an empty veil of a pretense of loyalty, and
therein you fulfill that saying of our Savior; He that does evil hates the
light, neither comes unto the light, because their deeds are evil. Oh that
you durst be but so honest, so ingenuous in your wickedness, as to aver that
you do in plain terms. Surely this sculking under false colors, and hiding
of your selves behind a thread, makes but little for the credit of your design,
if you dare justify what you do speak plainly; and let the people know it,
lest hereafter when they find how they have been deceived, they fall to curse
you for your collusion, when they shall lie weltring in their own blood, and
shall expire in the votes of your damnation. But it is the nature of vice to be
so conscious of its deformity, as not to dare to come abroad but under the name
of virtue. Treason dares as well be hanged, drawn, and quartered, as be seen
abroad without a disguise. And therefore however you (I speak not of you all)
may seek the ruin of His Majesty's Person or Government, yet you will protest
to maintain His Majesty's Person, and His Honor and Estate too: And your
style must be for the King and Parliament, wherein indeed you let us know if we
had eyes, that you ought to be for the King, and in being against him, your
own title confesses you to be --. But I pray you by the way, why is not for
God and the King as good, as for the King and Parliament? I pray you tell us
why you unsheathed you swords against those that come under that motto into
your hands, is it because you are against God? or against the King? or are you
for them severally, or against them when together? Methinks such a conjunction
should make no separation. Well, but however you are for the King: you durst
not trust the queazinesse of the peoples stomachs without this allay of His
Majesty's name upon that hard diet you prescribe them. But indeed we may thank
them for it, for had they been but of so strong a constitution as you could
have wished, it is probable they should never have had that sauce unto their
meat, but the name as well as the authority of His Majesty should have been
forgotten amongst you, unless sometimes you had thought good to talk of him
in reproach, or so. I remember a pretty trial that was once made upon the
people unto this purpose; perhaps it was not so well noted by all men. When
that strange Ordinance of the Militia was to be put in execution in the County
of Warwick, by the late Lord Brooks, and some others that were put in
commission for that purpose, the Warrants for the drawing together of that
County, were first sent abroad without His Majesty's name, to feel the people,
as it may seem, whether they would digest it or no; and if it had passed for
current, it is a great question whether the King should have been heard of any
more in the business. But when the Commissioners found the dislike of the
people, and that the Warrants were excepted against as invalid, for want of the
mention of the Kings Authority: they could readily then pretend it as an
oversight, and mistake in the drawing of the Warrants, and it was presently
mended. And ever since the Kings name (if I may so speak) has been taken in
vain, and is set as a lie unto the whole business. But, I pray you, give me
leave a little, is there any likely hood that that was an oversight? did they
employ men of no better trust and discretion in the transcribing and sending
abroad of their Warrants, that none of them could discern the error? or could
they be so strangely constant in a mistake in a matter of so great moment, as
to let it pass through such a multitude of Warrants, as were then sent abroad
into that County, and no man amongst them all so wise as to reform it in any
one of them? Things that are done by mistake and oversight are commonly found
but rare and inconstant: but when the same error goes through a whole
business, it leaves a dangerous conjecture that it was purposely committed;
and then certainly that had more of the Fox, than of the Lion. But what a
strange unlucky thing it was, that they could light upon no error but that,
that they must needs leave out the principal sinew of the Warrant? Surely a
man may doubt the King and his authority was but very slightly fixed in their
thoughts, that they could not so much as dream of him in the writing out of so
many Warrants. What confidence can the people have, that the great business
they look after shall be well managed in the hands of those that are so apt
to over-see? They had need to take heed how they follow them at a venture, or
how they commit their consciences unto their guidance. But sure if it were an
oversight, it would make a man guess that there was Digitus Dei in it, to
make them speak plainly their intentions against their wills, and that God
suffered them in their haste to send the hagge abroad undrest, and without her
veil. That the people, if they would not be wilfully blind, might see what a
beautiful business they were invited to admit into their embraces. And that
they might behold this rebellion in its own colors, and learn to hate and
abhor it with their souls, for surely the face is the same still, though the
mask be on; and they that are so easy as to believe otherwise, are doubly
abused, and made at once not only Rebels, but even stark fools and Idiots.
But the people disliked it naked, and so the veil was quickly put on again,
and all was well. Now they must believe there is nothing but beauty in it: the
Kings style walks fairly in the front of the business, and they must rebel
against the King, for the King and Parliament. And so they must by no means
call them that are truly for His Majesty, the Kings party, or by any name like
unto that; but the name of Cavaliers must be their style, and, though without
sense or reason, their contumely and reproach too. But a man of your learning
should not have subscribed to such an absurd and senseless injury, done unto a
harmless and honorable term.

At least a man of your calling should have been wary how you had contributed
to the present and future distempers of the people, by setting your hand to the
pass of an odious term. that serves for nothing, as it is now used, but to
maintain rancour and hatred amongst those that you should endeavor to unite
in the bosom of the same Church, and in the body of the same Commonwealth.
For my part, I believe those two names of Cavaliers and Roundheads, as they are
now in use amongst some, were the inventions of the Arch-enemy of mankind, to
blow the fire of division withal amongst us, and to nurse up an
irreconcilable variance in this Nation. And therefore I could wish there were
a Law made for the utter abolishing of both those names, as they are now used
for names of opposition, least the Devil and his accomplices under the one cast
an odium upon the service of God, and under the other upon loyalty to our
Prince. For my part I will endeavor to keep them both out of my mouth in any
such odious acception, since I conceive them to be full of uncharitable
non-sens. And I am sure you did not well to become the Devils fueller, by
contributing to the passage of that odious title as it is made, whereby you
here entitle the Kings Subjects: it were more proper work for you to quench
fires, then to foment them. But we know well enough who you mean, and is it
necessary then that we must be devoured by the Cavaliers, as you call them; or
the Parliament? Is our great expectation of the redress of our grievances come
to this? Is this the fruit of two years consultation? Is this all the
advantage that has been made unto the poor abused people of the Land, of all
those large and happy opportunities, that have been afforded this Parliament
for the procurement of the good and safety of Church and State: that out of our
fears and doubts we should be now concluded and shut up unto an unavoidable
ruin? Sure if it be so, we must needs conclude, that the wisdom of humane
Counsels is not omnipotent; and that the Argos eyes of the greatest politic
bodies may be sometimes so charmed asleep, as to betray their charge unto
danger, especially when they intercept the free intercourse betwixt themselves
and the head, and that there is no confiding even in Parliaments themselves.
And it may be God is now about to teach us this lesson, That we may learn to
rely upon none but him; and that he has now suffered us to fail of our hopes,
that he may instruct us by experience to place them better, than upon the
wisdom or power of any concurrence of humanity, even upon none, but upon that
indefeatable power, and that incorruptible wisdom that is in God himself.
And indeed this lesson if it be well learned may be worth more to us than any
other good that we gaped for, since there can be no greater strengthening unto
a Nation or People, then to teach them to deny all strength in the creature,
and to cast themselves totally upon God. I confess for my own part I once
thought with the rest, That the calling of a Parliament had been almost that
Panchreston, that (...), that universal medicine, that would have brought with
it a cure for all our diseases. Yea, and I yet think, that if we take a
Parliament in the right and genuine sense, as it is, or ought to be, an entire
body, unmaymed, unmangled, and undivided, it is one of the best grounds for a
confidence to rest on, that the sphere of mortality can yield us. And therefore
if we be not altogether indocible, the Lord has hereby taken the most absolute
and summary course, to beat off our dependence upon any earthly thing that we
can almost possibly imagine; since he has hereby showed us the failing of
that, which of most things that the world can afford, was most likely to yield
an all sufficiency to our hopes. But I could wish, if it had pleased God, that
we might have learned this document by some more gentle means, and that we had
not deserved to have such a curse sent upon that which we took for the
greatest of our blessings, as to be put into such a miserable strait between
the devouring jaws of two inevitable destructions, like the poor Israelites
between the Egyptians and the Sea; or like the miserable Britains infested
by the Picts, between the slaughter of the enemy, and the devouring of the
waves, when they sent that lamentable complaint unto the Romans, To Agilius
thrice Consul the sighs of the Britains. The enemy drives us to the Sea, the
Sea drives us back again to the enemy, so between both we are either drowned
or slain: but yet we hope better for all your Augury, God can open a passage
where you can see none, for the escaping of both these dangers. To conclude
this point, we have two Answers to your Observation. First, it is but your
groundless presumption and surmise, or rather it may be your excogitated
pretense; That if those you speak of should yet be so just as to let men alone
with their propriety and liberties, they should then necessarily be made a prey
both in their goods and lives unto those you style Cavaliers. Nay, we do
firmly believe, that if they might be suffered to retain their own, and not
forced or persuaded by you and your like, to contribute to that unjustifiable
design which is on foot, they might have a far more comfortable enjoyment of
their estates and lives too, by the protection of His Majesty's goodness and
justice, then you can promise them by that course you advise them to: whether
it be that you would have them be content to be plundered, or willingly to
offer up their rights. Neither do those that have experience of them find the
Cavaliers (as you style them) such ravenous beasts as you would make them, I
could name some places where they have most to do, where the people enjoy both
their lives and goods far more peaceably and quietly upon the terms and
obedience and subjection to their Prince, then as we believe you in London can
boast of, or any other places where your party has long settled. Witness
Oxford, Worcester, and the rest. We hear not in those places of any such
violence offered to men in their estates and liberties, as you have so frequent
amongst you in other places.

But if the danger were as great as you would make it. In the second place it
is but a poor miserable comfort that you offer unto the poor people, when you
would have them give up their estates unto your party, that they may be free
from the Cavaliers. Ne moriare mori is a strange kind of medicine, you would
not like such a recipe from your Physician, I believe. This is in a sort to
advise a man to drown himself, and tell him it is a sure way to escape
hanging: or to cast his goods into the Sea, to keep them from a Pirat. Or as
if one should meet me upon the highway, and advise me to give him my purse
upon fair terms, least another that comes after may take it by force: it is
indeed to persuade the people to embrace a certain ruin to avoid a possible
one. But thirdly, what justice is it in your party to take upon them to deprive
the Subjects of their rights and liberties, under the pretense of preventing
others from doing them the like, or a greater mischief. That conscience walks
by no perfect rule that thinks it lawful to commit the least injustice, to
prevent another from doing a greater. And therefore this your Observation is a
very poor allay, either unto the peoples misery and oppression, or unto the
guilt of those that act it upon them: and your question upon the matter in the
Historical consideration, Whether they had rather part with it, that is, with
their estates to the Parliament, or that and their lives too to the Cavaliers,
makes not a mite either to the comfort of their wretched condition, or to the
justice of their illegal taxations, which yet we believe in all things
considerable, is unparallelled in any History. And therefore notwithstanding
all that you have said, they may still cry out, never such times, such
taxations, such precedents, such a war. And so I have done with your second
sort of Observations.

The third classis of your Commentations, is upon the business in a legal
consideration, wherein you offer some Propositions to those your Malignants, as
you call them, that are skilled in the Law.

The first is, Whether you had better trust to your own strength, or another
man's favor for your defense?

Answ. This question I can scarce see how it is very pertinent to the business
in hand, but whilst you are obscure, you think perhaps that we are bound to
take you to be wise; but as it is you may take this answer to it. That it is
not very good for you to trust either to your own strength, or another man's
favor for your safety: and I would advise you to write more divine like
hereafter, then to build upon such suppositions of carnal considence. The best
way is for you to trust God alone for your safety, and that you may have
comfort in that, to live in that subjection and obedience to your lawful
Sovereign, his immediate substitute, as the Lord requires at your hands; and
that is the safest way for the people too; for they are like to find but little
advantage to themselves, that go about to work out their own security by
resisting the divine ordinance: leave therefore these carnal contrivances, and
if you are wise and honest, show it in advising the people to live in that
obedience unto His Majesty, that God, who has placed Him over them, looks for
from them; teach them without consulting with the flesh, to do that God
requires of them, who is best able to secure them against all dangers that can
befall them in their duties unto Him: and yet let me tell you withal, that
though we must not trust upon the favor of any other for our safety, yet
where God has so ordered it in his providence, and enjoined it by his
authority, we must make use of the favor of another, or at least of the
justice and authority of another for our defense and safeguard, and not
altogether of our own strength; or otherwise, what confusion would it not
bring into the world, if every man must stand or fall by his own strength, the
weakest would be sure then to go to the wall, and every man that were more
powerful then another, might be ready to build up his own security by the
danger and ruin of others that had less strength then he, though far
greater right; but you tell us what you mean here by strength, My strength
(say you) is the Law, against which if the Government command, it does me
wrong, if I obey, I do my self wrong. To this I answer, that it is true in
some sense, that the strength of the Subject is the Law under God; but yet this
strength which is the law is not to be managed or enforced by every private
hand; but by him principally to whom God has principally given the charge of
it, within this Kingdom is his Majesty, whose authority and power is to give
life unto the law, either immediately by himself, or by his subordinate
instruments, unto whom authority is derived from him to that purpose: for the
law is dead in a sort, but when it is in the Magistrates hand, whose power is
as it were the soul of the law, otherwise the law would quickly become
destructive unto it self, if every private man might take upon him to set the
force of it in motion. And therefore though private men know the law never so
well, yet they may not ordinarily be their own carvers by it, but must be
content to receive the benefit thereof from the Magistrates hand, otherwise our
Savior might seem to ask an impertinent question, who made me a Judge or a
Ruler over you? And therefore though the law be the strength of the people, yet
the people must expect to receive this their strength by the dispensation of
the supreme Magistrate and his substitutes, and not at their pleasure to carve
it out unto themselves, otherwise the office of a Magistrate were to little
purpose in the Commonwealth. But yet this law is to be the rule of government,
and as you say truly, if the Government command against, it does you wrong, if
you obey, you do your self wrong: and why then do you countenance those
illegal Ordinances, and other commands that are now on foot, which are
directly contrary to the known law of the Kingdom, and so clearly and
directly injurious to the Subject? Or why do you woo the people to obey them,
and so to become accessaries to their own wrong? And yet let me tell you, as
for the supreme Magistrate, who has none above him upon earth that can
authorize you against him, this will by no means infer the lawfulness of a
resistance, such a one as is now on foot; for though it be true that if he
command contrary to the Law of the Kingdom, he therein does the Subject wrong,
yet he is not accountable therefore unto us, but unto God, since he has no
superior upon earth that has corrective power over him; and therefore to his
judgment we must leave him, who only is above him, since he is acknowledged
by Parliament to be supreme upon earth in the government of his Kingdoms.
That saying of one herein may seem much to the purpose. Reges si aliquando
potestate sibi concessa abutuntur, non sunt a nobis graviter exasperandi, sed
ubi sacerdotum admonitionibus non acquieverunt, Domino judicio sunt reservandi:
And therefore it is not in the power of any to take up Arms against him to
force him to do right, but we must learn of David to leave them unto God, 1 Samuel 24.12, 15. And though in some cases perhaps you may be said to do wrong
unto your self, if you should obey the command of the King contrary to the
Law; yet it is not so in all cases, for we find examples, and one most
authentical one, of active obedience unto the Magistrate, even commanding
contrary to Law and right: for we find our Savior paying tribute unto the
Officers of Caesar, though they required it unjustly, and contrary to Law and
right, and against the liberty of the Subject, as our Savior intimates, Matthew.
17.25. First, there our Savior shows it to be a freedom belonging unto him.
What think thou Simon (says our Savior unto Peter) of whom do the Kings
of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?
Peter says unto him, of strangers? Jesus said unto him, then are the children
free. Where our blessed Savior proves that Caesar could not justly require
tribute of him, as is clear unto any man of judgment. Well, what does our
Savior do then, does he stand upon his terms, does he send Peter unto them
with an harsh denial? or command him to draw his sword and set them packing?
No, he condescends with a non obstante to his own freedom, notwithstanding,
(says that blessed Master of obedience, to the silencing of all rebellious
mouths) least we should offend them. What? Why he will have it paid, both for
himself and Peter, and yet we do not find that so much was required, but
only of our Savior himself, as if our Savior would even almost
supererrogate in obedience: nay, he will work wonders but he will do it. And
he that would not do a miracle to feed himself when he was hungry, by turning
a stone into bread; yet he will do a miracle to give us an example of
obedience, and to pay tribute to Caesar, though requiring it against right, by
making a fish become his treasurer, to supply his wants for so good a purpose.
The riches of the Sea shall be ransackt for it, rather than he will give the
least countenance to disobedience; and his watery Subjects shall pay tribute
unto him that was King of Kings and Lord of Lords. That he being now in the
form of a servant, might pay it to his vassal an earthly Prince,
Notwithstanding, least we should offend them, says he to Peter, Go thou to
the Sea and cast in thy hook, and take up the fish that first comes up, and
when thou have opened his mouth thou shall find a piece of money, that take
and give unto them for thee and me. Mark, I beseech you, though he might have
pleaded his liberty, and so, as you speak, might seem to wrong himself in
condescending; yet (says he) lest we should offend them: Vnicuique licet
renunciare privilegio suo, and therefore he will rather dispense with his own
privilege, then give offense by causing a disturbance in the Kingdom, or by
making the least show or appearance of disobedience to Governors, thereby to
bring a scandal upon the doctrine that he taught, or upon the Christian
religion that he came to plant in the world: from whence for your conversion
(if it may be) if not, for your confusion (I doubt it will be) I collect this
Observation against yours, That we may and ought to obey the Magistrate,
though commanding against the Law; and so wrongfully, to our own private
injury, where the disobedience is like to be offensive, in causing a
disturbance in the State, or scandal in the Church. Will you have the point
clearly discussed, take it then thus. The question is, and indeed it is a
maine one, how the Subject is to carry himself toward His Majesty, in case he
command contrary to the Law? I hope I shall give you a right determination of
this doubt in these several propositions. First, I grant it clearly that the
King in duty ought not to command any thing contrary to the Law; for the Law is
unto the King as the Rule unto the Builder, the Compass unto the Pilot, the
Map or Card unto the Travailer, whereby he ought to gage and square out all his
motions and actions of regality and government; and wheresoever his operations
are disproportioned unto this rule, they are irregular.

2. The command of the King or supreme Magistrate may be said to be against
the Law two several ways; either so as that it enjoynes me to do something
which the Law forbids me, or forbids me to do that which the Law enjoynes me.
Which is against my duty that I owe unto the Law; or else in that it commands
me to do or leave undone something, which the law gives me freedom not to
do, or not to leave undone, which is against the privilege that the law
allows me: in the first case I ought not to obey him actively, for the law of
the Kingdom is the declared and deliberate will of the supreme Magistrate, and
therefore so to obey him, were to disobey him, since thereby (as one has well
said) I should disobey his deliberate will to obey his sudden will, which is
unreasonable. Yet in this case I must obey him passively, by submitting unto
the punishment that he shall inflict upon me, at least so far as to forbear
all forcible resistance.

In the second case, I may and ought sometimes to obey him, since therein,
though he indeed may seem to break the law in commanding, yet I do not
break it in obeying, since the law though it allow me, yet it does not tie me
to my privilege, and therefore forgoing it, I do not contradict my duty to
the law, but only forgo the liberty that the law gives me, which I may and
must forgo (sometimes at least) that I may obey the command of the supreme
Magistrate, in case it may make for the obtaining or preserving of some greater
good, or for the prevention of greater evil, then the preservation of my
liberty can recompense. As where the forgoing my freedom or privilege in my
estate may preserve some greater good unto my self, or may make for the peace
of the Commonwealth, or for the preservation of some great and notable
disturbance in the State, or where it may further the peace of the Church, or
prevent scandal from our profession, or impediment from the preaching of the
Gospel, or the like. I prove it thus; First, a fortiori, If I ought for these
causes to depart from the liberty which the law of God allows me, much more
then ought I in such cases to depart from the liberty which I am invested in by
the law of man; if from my christian liberty, much more from my civil liberty.
But the former is clear, much more then the latter; for there is no man that
can reasonably deny but for peace sake, and to avoid scandal, I ought to
dispense with my christian liberty; for this, we have both precept and
example, precept 1. Cor. 8.8, 9. Galat. 5.13. Romans 14. from verse. 12. to the
end. Examples we have too, and those pregnant ones, as that of Paul dispensing
with that liberty which he had in Christ from the ceremonies of the law, for
peace sake, and to further the Gospel, and for prevention of scandal, and
this we have both in his practice and profession, in his practice, Act. 16.3.
where we find him circumcising Timothy for peace sake with the Jews, and that
the Gospel might not be hindered: and upon the same ground we find him
purifying himself, Act. 21.26. and that by the advice of Saint James and the
Elders, his profession you may see also to this purpose, 1 Cor. 8.13. if meat
make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest
I make my brother to offend; yea in Act. 15. in that famous Apostolical Synod,
we find the Apostles, for peace sake, and to avoid scandal, making a
constitution for the abnegement of that freedom in meats and drinks which the
Church had obtained in Christ, as you may see in that first and most
authentical decretall Epistle which is there recorded, sent from the Apostles
and Elders with the whole Church, by the hands of Paul and Barnabas, together
with Judas and Silas, unto the brethren which were of the Gentiles in Antioch,
Syria, and Cilicia, which examples and precepts if they were well considered,
they would teach us more moderation and charity then is found in too many in
these days, who are ready to turn the Church upside down, upon every fancyed
inconvenience that they apprehend in the discipline or ceremonies of the
Church, they cry up liberty, liberty, but in the mean time they make havoc of
the Church in that that more nearly concerns us, which is peace and unity;
whereas the Apostles teach us both by precept and example, that we are rather
to part with liberty then peace, and that many other inconveniences, even as
great ones as Circumcision was after Christ, may be admitted, rather then the
peace disturbed, or the preaching of the Gospel hindered. And if we may and
ought upon such terms to part with our christian liberty, then surely it is
most reasonable that upon the like terms, (i. e.) for the peace of the
Commonwealth, to prevent disturbance, to avoid scandal, or to make way for
the Gospel, we ought to depart from our civil liberty; for sicut se habet
libertas christiana ad pacem Ecclesiae, sic se habet libertas civilis ad pacem
reipubl. And therefore in such case the command of the supreme Magistrate is to
be obeyed, though it be contrary to the law, in that that concerns the
privilege or liberty of the Subject. Secondly, this is more precisely
confirmed here by the example of our Savior, who to avoid scandal, obeyed
Caesar's Officers, and made Peter join with him therein, although it were
against his liberty and privilege, as our Savior seems to intimate. So it
appears clearly that our Savior was free by the law or custom of that
Nation, and yet to avoid scandal or offense, he obeyed Caesar's Officers
requiring tribute of him, though contrary to the liberty of the Subject; and
Christi actio nostra instructio, you cannot walk more safely then in the
footsteps of Christ in those things that concern either your civil or
spiritual conversation: this will be a far more authentical guide unto the
people, then any rules you can prescribe against it, especially in those things
which he did of ordinary dispensation, as this which was not a matter of power
but submission, etc. And therefore I may ask, did Christ well or no in paying
tribute against the liberty of the Subject, and so in obeying Caesar's Officers
command against the law of the Kingdom? I doubt not but you will answer, yes,
(unless you are out of love with him too because he is a King) but here he
presents himself to us as a subject, well, why than I say unto you, and to
every other man, as our Savior once in another case, (...), the demand of
tribute against the law was sinful in the Officers, but our Saviors obedience
was good and laudable, (as he did all things well) and therefore imitable by
us. Thirdly, this will appear by the rule of reason in three conclusions,
which I hope you will not deny: the first is this, That we may and ought to
dispense with our private right, where it cannot likely be preserved without a
public ruin; nature teaches the arm to expose it self to a blow to save
the head and the whole body; for the general safety is always to be preserved
before the particular, though never so near us.

Secondly, That the preservation of the Church from scandal, or the
Commonwealth from division is the preservation of a public good, and the
prevention of a public evil; and both these are in themselves full as good,
or better then liberty, and therefore, especially, when they are enlarged by
the advantage of the gratuity of them in respect of a private freedom: and
this is according to the rule of charity; for as Mr Calvin well has it, sicut
charitas fidei, ita libertas subjicienda est charitati: and therefore although
it be granted, that where nothing else is to be considered, the Magistrate does
an injury in commanding you contrary to the law of the Kingdom, and that you
do wrong unto your self in obeying such a command; yet if the command enjoyne
you nothing that is contrary to the commanding part of the law of God, or the
Commonwealth, but only against the permissive part thereof, not against duty
but privilege, you ought to obey in such case rather then give occasion of
scandal upon the Church, or bring reproach to your profession, or disturbance
to the peace of the State wherein you live. And in such case, your obedience is
no wrong to your self, but your disobedience a wrong to the Church and
Commonwealth.

Thirdly, By way of corollary to prevent an evasion, least any should object
that the public liberty is endangered by suffering entrenchments to be made
upon the private. The third conclusion is this, that as public good is to be
preferred before private, so amongst public and private goods, peace is more
necessary than liberty, as that which concerns the very being of a body is
more necessary then that which concerns only the well being: now that peace
concerns the very being of a State, our Savior himself seems to instruct
us, when he tells us, That a Kingdom divided cannot stand. But we cannot say
so of liberty, and therefore even the public liberty is to be dispensed with
for public peace: we must dispense with commodities for preservation of
essences. Besides that we have learnt by lamentable experience, that when
liberty is built up upon the ruins of peace, it cannot stand long upon such a
foundation, but is quickly buried in the ruins which it has made: Pax est
custos libertatis, The peace of the Kingdom is the nurse and guardian of the
liberty and freedom of the State; and if you take away that to preserve this,
it is as if you should pull down the foundation to enlarge the building: or,
as if you should send away the nurse for the preservation of the child, or
remove the fuel to maintain the fire. And truly I conceive this rule may be
well observed, for the discovery and prevention of one maine plot of the
Devil, who has been ever and anon setting liberty against peace, and exposed
this to ruin by the intemperate desire of that. This is the ordinary stratagem
of Satan to set Schism a-foot in the Church liberty; liberty has cried down
peace there. This is the very engine whereby he does usually convey sedition
and faction into the body of the State; liberty, liberty, it that popular
voice, together with a pretense of Religion, whereby the peace of the State
has been so often demolished and cast down: for my part I wish there may be
a perpetual contract between peace and liberty, but if one must go, we had
far better part with liberty then peace. And therefore by the way we may
note, that they are no better Politicians then they are Christians, that go
about to preserve or recover liberty by Sedition; their first care should be to
preserve the integrity of the body, and then that it may be fat and
well-liking. And now it is very easy for me to bring it home unto you, since
it is as clear as the light. That however the commands of His Majesty have
been either with or against the Law of the Kingdom, as concerning matter of
privilege and liberty; the disobedience, and much more the active resistance
of you and your party is most clearly, to the great disturbance of the State,
yea even almost to the destruction thereof, whither it is still drawing nearer
and nearer by that means, and how foone it may come to that unhappy period we
know not. And it is as clear, that it has been very scandalous to the Church
and our profession, and given as much or more occasion to the enemies of God to
blaspheme, and exposed the Protestant Religion, yea the whole profession of
Christianity, more to ignominy and reproach; and to an odium with interesse,
than any action, that has been publicly carried by the professors of the
Protestant Religion, since the Reformation, has ever done: And therefore you
must either profess your selves to be much more wise then our Savior, which I
hope you dare not aver; or to be much more wicked then becomes those that
profess to be his Disciples, which I doubt you will not admit. But, I pray
you, what commands do you find enjoined you by His Majesty, contrary to the
Law of the Kingdom, as concerning the commanding part thereof? or when against
the privilege or liberty that he denies to them? If you should ask me the
like question on the other side, I believe I could furnish you with store of
instances. Since I take it, it may be easily proved, that the whole business,
and the maine body of that design which is now in hand against His Majesty,
is a bastard issue, and can derive no pedigree from the Law either of God or
man to make it legitimate. As for His Majesty, He desires nothing but that
Authority to be acknowledged in Him, which the Law has placed in Him: He
desires to make the known Law of the Kingdom the only rule of His rule and
Government. But it is by no means so on the other side, if they can find any
colors from the Laws that may put any plausible appearance of legality upon
their business, well and good: but if not, let the Law cry never so loud, A
monstrous headless vote of the dismembered Houses of Parliament, or for a need
of the House of Commons alone, without or against the King and the House of
Lords, shall be countenance, though to set forward the prosecution of their
most illegal purposes. And to make good their Protestation for the maintenance
of the true Protestant Religion, the Honor and Estate of His Majesty, the
Privileges of Parliament, the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the
Subject; The Protestant Religion must be scorned and reproached, by Brownists,
Anabaptists, and Atheists; The Honor and State of His Majesty must be exposed
to the contempt of the vilest of the people; The Privileges of Parliament must
be perpetually trampled on at the pleasure of some few that are predominant in
the Houses, by casting out the Members, by mere arbitrary Votes, for nothing
but because they make use of that privilege which the Law allows, and the
Houses themselves begged and obtained of His Majesty at their first entrance
upon their consultation for a freedom of speech, (nay sometime a whole side as
it were of the House of Lords, first forced out by terror and tumult, and then
voted out upon mere pleasure.) And the power and authority of the House of
Commons, to a most palpable abusing and betraying of the trust reposed in them
by His Majesty and the people of the Land, reduced to a close Committee of
about 15 or 16 persons: some strange design sure that they have in hand, that
they must get into such corners, and have such clouds over them to cover it.
And they say the business is made a night-worke too, it seems they dare not
trust the Sun with it, a fit time to consult about a work of darkness. But
they must remember either now or hereafter, that there is a light over them
that they see not, that discovers all their secrets. There is one still amongst
them that they cannot vote out neither, to whom light and darkness are both
alike, and the night is as clear as the day. There is an invisible notary too
that takes our records of all their determinations and plots; and truly they
had best find him out, and prevail with him if they can to take an oath of
secrecy: (which they can never do) before they proceed any farther in the
business; for as sure as they live he will reveal all else, and a thousand to
one will undo all their plots by some counter-plot or other, and will be as
bad as an Elisha to the King of Syria, to defeat and disappoint their most
secret designs. They may guess at some thing if they will by what has
already fallen out; they have had diverse experiments how unprosperously their
counsels thrive: And therefore methinks Master Pym might well propose that
question, that the King of Syria did unto his servants, upon the several
defeats that he observed to have befallen him in his enterprises against
Israel. Will ye not show me which of us is for the King? But to save him a
labor, let him but the next time they meet read the 12 first verses of the
139 Psalm, and a hundred to one that will be as good as any charm they can
use to discover him who it is that does thus secretly intrude into their
counsels, and that does thus defeat and make void all their most subtle
contrivances, so that hitherto for the most part they have brought forth
nothing but wind, though I confess it has been a whirle-winde that has
disturbed and shaken the frame both of Church and State. Even the very same
that defeated the Counsel of Achitophel against David; little do they think
how he sits and laughs at their most wise plots and contrivances of
wickedness. Let them but look into the second Psalm, and they may see him at
it methinkes, if they could but put on the spectacle of the Psalmist. They may
there see him as it were deriding at them, and laughing at their grave and
prudent madness, whilst they with such confidence sit together, as if all the
wisdom in the world were in their breasts, striving to break off from
themselves and others, the bonds and cords of the Lords Anointed. Little do
they see how he blasts all their consultations? how he damps all their
purposes, even as fast as they give them issue: read Is. 8.9, 10.

Oh that they would at length be wise indeed, and remember that woe of the
Prophet, Is. 29.15. Woe be to them that seek deep to hide their counsel from
the Lord, and their works are in the dark; and they say, Who sees us? and
who knows us? Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as
the potters clay. But is this to maintain the privileges of Parliament, to
divest the Members of that power and trust reposed in them by His Majesty and
the people, and to commit the managing of the affairs of the Kingdom, to your
new device of a close Committee? And to make them not only the Masters of the
rest of the Members of the Houses, and them their slaves and shadows; but to
make them Lords Paramount over the King and the whole Kingdom, to require
oaths of Allegiance unto them, as of late has most insolently and impiously
been done in London, (if we are not misinformed:) and to put the lives,
liberties, and estates of all the people of the Land, into the disposing of a
matter of 15 men, that have no such power given them either by King or
Subjects; and those for ought we know, neither Angels, nor Saints, nor of the
best sort of men, that they may sacrifice all at their pleasure to their
passions; and no man must so much as ask a reason of them, for fear of
pressing into a secret of State? Was there ever a Nation so befooled? Was there
ever a people brought to such a pass? Is the famous and flourishing Government
of this Nation, by the King and the States of the Kingdom under him, brought
now to an Oligarchy, a mere usurpation, a most tyrannical and arbitrary rule
of 15 men, that are made as it were absolute Lords of the Laws, the liberties,
the lives and estates of the whole Nation? Sure they have played their cards
well, they have showed themselves excellent projectors; so handsomely and
undescried, to set up a Monopoly in themselves, both of Regal and
Parliamentary power; a Monopoly upon the point of all the wealth and estates of
the Kingdom. They have carried the business very cunningly, to bring things
unto this pass, and when they have done to make such fools of the poor
people (whom they ride in the business, and likely enough laugh at them in
their sleeves, to see how silly and simple the poor fools are to be led so
gently by the nose of them) as to get them out of conscience to undo
themselves, their wives and children, to furnish them with money, and to expose
their lives unto the greatest dangers, to the loss of so many thousands of
them: and all to make good their own bondage and slavery to these Masters of
the Close Committee. En quo discordia cives perduxit miseros! We have
quarrelled our selves into a pretty condition. But shall we be mad still? Have
the people of the Land abjured their senses and reason with their consciences?
Will they never be weary of such a miserable slavery? Now for the Liberty of
the Subject and the Laws of the Kingdom, you may easily guess what becomes
of them, when the Privileges of Parliament are trampled on by their own feet.
Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? if they make so bold with their own, you may well
imagine what they do with ours. Or where, I beseech you, is the Magna Charta,
is not that a Law of the Kingdom? When contrary to the very first words of
that Charter, the liberties of the Church are professedly invaded, etc. Or what
is become of the Petition of Right? which was so much talked of heretofore,
when at the pleasure of these men without any due process at Law, the estates,
nay, the lives of the Subject must be taken away by force and violence:
witness the late murder of His Majesty's Subjects at Bristol and at London by
Martial Law, (which no Law puts into their hands, either without or against
His Majesty's Authority) for that loyal design of theirs to have delivered up
those Cities unto His Majesty. Or where is the Law for the Militia, or for the
taking away of His Majesty's Ships and Forts? Or where is there any Law to
enable them to command any of the Kings Subjects to take up Arms against the
King, whose Subjects they themselves confess themselves to be in their
language, though they do indeed most clearly deny it in their practice. Or is
it subjection to seek the ruin of a Princes Authority and His life by open
force and hostility; if this be subjection, I pray you tell me what is
rebellion? or why do they dissemble with God and man in stiling themselves His
Majesty's most humble and obedient Subjects, when they are in actual
opposition against Him, and will neither obey Him nor the Law by which he
governes: if this be subjection, Jacke Cade had a great deal of wrong, and Wat
Tyler too. And Percy and Catesby were a couple of fools, that they would not
come in to justify themselves to be the Kings humble and obedient Subjects.
But it seems it is no wrong at all done by the people to themselves, when they
obey the most unlawful and most unreasonable commands of your party. But if
you obey the King against the Law, you consent unto your own wrong: but we
cannot so much forget our reason as to believe it. Or do you mean to bring in
a new reason, as well as a new religion? But I beseech you, what if I am not
bound to obey him; nay, what if I am bound not to obey him, as in some cases I
confess I am, if His Majesty should command me contrary to the Law of God,
etc. must I needs then take up Arms? no certainly, in such case I must submit
to His Authority, in the willing suffering of that punishment he shall inflict,
as is aforesaid. Or did our Savior wrong himself in submitting unto Pilate?
or did those good Christians in the Primitive times wrong themselves, when they
glorified God so much in their cheerful sufferings upon this very ground. If
you may be Judge they shall all have actions of the case against themselves,
and were Martyrs in their own wrong: indeed I doubt you will never be guilty of
such a sin. And so I have done with your first Proposition that you propose
to the Malignants, as you most malignantly style them, that are the Kings good
Subjects. And now let us see what instruction you give us in your second, (Cum
bonis avibus) What is it? The great offense of Authority is whatsoever is
committed against the State: spoken like a Politician. And what is this to your
purpose. The great offense of Authority you say is whatsoever is committed
against the security of the State. And I say so too, and infer upon it, that
therefore that design which you are about, and would justify, is one of the
great offenses against Authority; for what greater offense against the security
of the State, then to incense a people to rebel against their Governor, or to
teach them to trample under foot that supreme power of the Magistrate, and
those Laws of the Kingdom, upon which the safety and security of the State is
established. Talk what you will of the danger and oppression of a tyranny, you
may see if you will in the fruit of this your bloody design, that one
rebellion and civil war may bring in more mischief against the safety and
security of the State, then half a dozen Tyrants would likely have done: for
show me any Tyrant that ever reigned in this or any other Kingdom, that by his
single oppression brought a Kingdom to the sixth part of that consusion, that
this ungodly design now on foot has brought our Kingdom unto. Great
complaint there was of the tyranny of Ship Money and Loanes, etc. and are they
not all reduced? But for my part (I care not who knows my mind) though I
cannot justify the things, nor those that advised them, yet I conceive it had
been much better for us to have borne Ship Money, Loanes, Monopolies, and many
more oppressions, then to have changed those burdens for such a confusion as is
now brought into the State, which is like without Gods great mercy, to end in
the ruin and destruction of the Nation: And therefore you are no good
Counselor for the safety and security of the State, for though that grand
principle which is so much abused, be admitted for true, That Salus populi
suprema lex, yet I can tell you it will make little for your purpose, since it
is no way for the safety of the people, (as you see written in blood before
your eyes, upon Edgehill, and at Braynceford, and many other places) that they
should enabled to take up Arms against their Prince, as often as they shall
fancy, or be persuaded by any others, that mean to plough with them for a crop
to their own ambition. That the Prince has broken his covenant with them, or
transgressed the limits and bounds of his Government. The peoples safety is
never at greater hazard, then when it is put into their own hands: show me a
Commonwealth that ever suffered so much in the gripe of a Tyrant as many have
done by the feet of a multitude, and otherwise your Observation will be turned
against your self. And your own pen will condemn you for a great offender
against the security of the State, when you incense the people to maintain
Sedition: you see the Malignants are but little the wiser for this your second
Proposition.

I come to your third. Heathens tell us, that the wise must give as much to the
Law as may be, but to the Lawgiver as little; for (says he) he is a man
subject to passions, may be miscarried, etc. Had I a mind to cavil, I could
quarrel at your Grammar. But let that pass: Heathens tell us, you say, Well
said, it is very well done, Heathens are fit Authors for such an heathenish
business. But yet you must deal electively amongst them, you may not take
them all at adventure, some are too honest to countenance your business, and
that is not well where Heathens must correct Christians. And truly I doubt you
have mistaken your choice here, for what (I pray you) do these Heathens tell
you, That the wise must give as much to the Law as may be, but to the Lawgiver
as little, because he is a man subject to passions. What do you mean by the
Law, if you mean the authentical constitutions of the Kingdom, made by the
King, with advice of the two Houses of Parliament. The quarrel is then His
Majesty's and ours, who do complain that there is too little given unto the
Laws; That they are vilified and despised, battered down and demolished by I
know not what arbitrary and illegal Ordinances: give you and your party the
Law its due, and there will be quickly an end of the quarrel; then the King
shall have His Rights and praeeminences acknowledged which the Laws do give
Him, and the Subjects shall have their rights and liberties made good, and
their lives secured from plunder and violence, which the Laws allow them; then
those offenders that have violated the Laws shall be brought to condign
punishment: Then Brownists and Separatists, depravers of the
Common-Prayer-Booke, and all rebellious and seditious people, shall have their
due portions that the Law gives them; and in that distribution I doubt you
would have little cause to rejoice: Then the Militia of the Kingdom shall be
restored into His hands, unto whose trust the Law has committed it: Then new
Laws shall not be made without the royal assent of His Majesty: Then treason
shall be treason again, and loyalty shall be loyalty again: Then the good
Subjects of His Majesty shall not be imprisoned, or spoiled of their goods, or
deprived of their lives, without a due and a legal trial: Then there shall be
no Supersedeas'es sent out to prohibit or interdict a legal proceeding against
any routs or riots in Southwarke: Then Habeas Corpus'es shall be granted unto
the Subject upon just and legal causes, without any quarrel against the
Judges. But alas, that is the cause that we groan, that you give so little to
the Law. I would you were so good an Advocate as to persuade those, whose part
you seem to act, to re-establish the Law in its full and authentical force;
and I think the King and his party will ask no more of you. But you deal
deceitfully with the Law, as well as with His Majesty: you talk much of it;
you speak it fair, you give it good words, but in the mean time you make too
little account of the force of it, it is with your party no better then
Sampsons withes or cords, at best you use it but as a leaden Lesbian rule,
bending it and bowing it to your own purposes; and things never go right when
the structure is made the measure of the rule. But I would feign know what you
here mean by the Lawgiver, whose portion you would have to be so straitened,
as little as may be to be given unto him. Do you mean by the Lawgiver the
King? I thank you for that then, for sure that is your meaning. But truly in
my opinion you deserve to be complained of to the Close Committee, for giving
so much as that style imports unto His Majesty, for if the King be the
Lawgiver, then the Legislative power is not in the Houses, but in the King;
for there must be but one Lawgiver, unless you mean to confound the body of
the Commonwealth, (as indeed it seems you do) and then what will become of
your Ordinances of Parliament? Sure you have much to answer for for this;
neither can I see how you will slip the collar, unless you should say, that by
Lawgiver here you understand the Houses of Parliament. And then you run into
another error, that will deserve the Bar; for sure it will be thought a
strange doctrine there, that as little as may be should be given unto the two
Houses, that we may give the more unto the Laws. It will seem then that you
would have them regulated by the Laws, and not to be left unto such a God-like
power of arbitrary rule, as some seem to affect. Sure this was not well
considered, otherwise Master Glyn might have been sent upon another message
unto you, then to give you thanks for your Sermon, even to have required you
to make a recantation, and the Order before your Book should have ended there.
That no man should presume to print your Sermon, and then Andrew Crook might
have had the more leisure; but I see wise men may sleep. Indeed we may see
plainly here, how they that shoot upward against God or his Substitute, make a
mark of their own heads: and here you may note too what a scurvy scab this
conscience is, that will speak interlocutory truths for us, even a-fore we
are aware, even when we are bent to the most contrary falsehoods. You might have
done well to have looked a-fore you had leapt into this Dilemma, if you had
been more constant in your errors they might perhaps have passed the better.
But this reeling shows you to be drunk, whether with malice or ambition, or
popularity, I know not: you cannot walk steedily it seems, a giddiness that
many of your side are sick of. Now you are on one side, now on another; so
here you have clearly forsaken your rote, and reeled clean over the gutter to
the other side. However you would be understood, you are a very Royalist in
this, though indeed you confound your self too by contrarieties even in the
same period, so that I can scarce tell what to make of you, neither do I
believe you very well understood your self. Do you mean the King must have as
little as may be given to him? then you acknowledge the King to be the
Lawgiver, and that the Legislative power is in Him. Or do you mean the
Houses of Parliament by the Lawgiver? then by your doctrine the Houses of
Parliament must have as little given to them as may be. See how you are caught
in your own spring, see Pro. 18.7.

But your good meaning may perhaps save you from the bar, greater faults than
these have been looked over, in those in whose affection the Houses have
confided. They and we too know your meaning well enough, your meaning is, that
the King must have as little as may be given unto him, and perhaps you will
leave the honest Philosopher to answer for the term of the lawgiver: but then
you must have something to say for the application. But let us go. And I pray
you tell me then, would you have the King have less than he has? I hope those
good men whose advocate you are, by this time have done their endeavors to
have left him a pretty naked Majesty. They have taken a good competent care,
that his Highness should not surfeit, either of revenue, or authority. They
have not only been frugall in their gifts, or indeed in their no gifts: but
they have done the best they could to purge him of all superfluities. Good
fair attempts have been made by some to have drawn out his very blood. As
long as his Majesty has such careful Physicians, you need not fear his
being Plethoricall. But why do you spend time and Paper? briefly, sir, you may
know this: That his sacred Majesty (whom we believe against all those
slanders, and blasphemies that have been raifed against him) has professed
his intention to govern by the laws only. And we find not that he desires any
other power than such as the law gives him, and his ancestors have quietly
enjoyed, and such as may enable him to give life unto the law, if this be so
then, for ought I know, the more we give to the King, the more we give to the
law: and the more unto the law, the more unto the King: if this be not so,
prove the contrary, for they that are wife will not take your jealousies for
proofs, yea with his Majesty's favor, I durst almost be bold to lay him
before you at your mercy thus far. Take not from the law of the Kingdom, and
spare not the King, take as much from him as you can. But then you must leave
him as much as the law allows him, and I am confident he will be well content
with it. Indeed the Philosopher was wise and honest in his rule, and puts us in
mind, that the safety of a State does much depend upon this, That all cases as
near as may be, that fall under consideration in Government, should have their
clear, full, and positive rules set down in the received laws of the
commonwealth, whereby they are to be ruled and managed, that as little as
possibly may be may be left to arbitrary government. Where the rule of the
magistrate is only his own will and judgment which is subject to be misguided
by passions, which the law is not liable unto. And we find not but that this
is his Majesty's earnest desire; Persuade you if you can the houses of
Parliament to join with him in these designs by leaving of all arbitrary
government, by ordinances or otherwise, in opposition to the known
constitutions of the Kingdom, and then you need go no further for an umpire.
The law will be the days man of this great quarrel, and will send every one
home in peace with his own portion. The King, the Parliament, the Subject
shall have all their own. The King shall be the supreme governor: The
Parliament the great Council: The Subjects shall have their lives and
liberties secured, excepting only such as have forfeited their titles. And God
shall have his service duly and peaceably performed. And then instead of a
deformation of the Church, and a destruction of the Commonwealth, we may have
a full and happy reformation of the one, and a reparation of the other, Quod
faxit Deus. And I entreat you in the mean time to remember, that the houses of
Parliament are neither Gods, nor Angels, sure some of them are men subject to
passions as well as others, otherwise there would never have been such doing
and undoing as there has been, no nor half that ado amongst us that there
now is. And therefore I pray you entreat them not to challenge absolute power
to themselves, but that they as well as his Majesty may make the laws their
rule too, for there is some doubt made, I can tell you, that some of them are
carried, and so may be miscarried, by more passions than their own, or else
ask the Londoners. Give me leave only to mind you of one thing more, and I
have done with this proposition, That if there be little to be given to the
Lawgiver, by that wise rule of the heathen, surely much less is to be given
to the Subject, and then your proposition is not much for your turn. Hitherto
you see you edify but little, the malignants may be as malignant as ever for
ought you have said yet, for their conversion.

But perhaps there is more weight behind: well, we'll endeavor to poyze it if
there be, let us see then what is your fourth proposition.

The law say you is the common surety between the King and the subject. I say
so too, and wish its credit had been so good that its word might have been
taken something better than it has been, it might have been better security
both to King and Subject, as some think, than the public faith: I pray you
restore it unto its credit if you can, and the King will be no looser by it, no
nor the subject neither, But to help our dull understandings you tell us what
you mean, when you say the law is the common surety, etc. that is to say (say
you) it binds me to pay the King tribute. That Is strange, why do you not do
it then, and persuade others thereunto? Sure you nodded here, you had sat up
late about the contrivance of these propositions, so zealous were you for the
good of the poor foolish malignants if they would but be guided. And here your
eyes grew heavy, and your pen it may be for want of their guidance, fell a
wandering toward the truth, for you seem here to speak here in the person of a
subject. And your sense is equivalent to this, that the law binds the subject
to pay the King tribute, what is it then I beseech you tell me, for though I am
a malignant I am willing to learn, what is it I pray you that binds or
allows the Subject, not only not to pay the King tribute, but to rob him of
his revenue, to interrupt his rents, to make seizure of his goods, to ransack
and make spoil of his exchecquer? Do you know what you have said, or whom you
here accuse, surely if the law bind the subject to pay the King tribute, there
is no law that allows the subject to rob him of his rights. Nay, you are not
content with that neither, but you say it binds you to pay the King tribute,
etc. What? are you mad now? Take heed of that I beseech you, why, as sure as
can be, you are hired by the malignants to plead the Kings cause under pretense
of opposing him. Do you not yet know what a danger us thing an etc. is?
certainly you stole this out of the late Canons. The Law binds you to pay the
King tribute etc. why in this etc. you may bind the subject to pay obedience
too as well as tribute, and so bring in the heresy of the Christians amongst
us again, and root out that wholesome doctrine of the Galileaus, Nay, by this
etc. you may take off the edge of all those swords that are lifted up against
him, I pray you bethink your self, has not the Correctour of the Press
abused you? you may do well to get an order for the turning him out of his
place if he has, for this is directly the language of Ashdod as some think:
but we take it indeed to be the language of Canaan, if it be rightly
interpreted, and the very sense of our Savior: sure you forgot what you had
lately written out of your heathen: That this law giver must have as little as
may be given unto him. But perhaps, you will make him pay dear enough for it,
and that ere you have done, he shall have little reason to brag of your bounty.
I confess I think so, Well but how do you make amends? why you have bonds
for the King too. I pray you let them be golden chains, and then I doubt not
but he will be willing to wear them. The law you say, binds the King that I
shall enjoy my protection, your meaning is that the subject shall enjoy his
protection, for I hope you do not mean to monopolize protection, your sense
then is, that the King is bound by the law to protect the subject, take heed
then you prove not a rebel, for then I shall tell you, that your proposition
will not hold in those terms that you render it. The King is not bound to
protect rebels, but the subject he is, I doubt not but he will confess it; yea,
I am confident would most willingly yield it. But I pray you mistake not: the
law binds the King, so that in duty he is bound to perform it, and if he
does it not he is answerable unto God for it, who will most certainly bring him
to an account. But let me tell you withal once more for your instruction, that
he is answerable unto God alone, since he who is acknowledged to be supreme
Governor, and only supreme Governor in all his dominions, has none other
above him but God alone, nay none in his dominions equal unto him. And sure,
they that are below him have no power to judge him, and if not to judge him,
neither to correct him, or who I pray you, has made the subject his ruler? or
is a Commonwealth reversed now the only fashion for a State? what authority
has the inferior to call the superior to an account? does the Steward use to
call the Master to a reckoning? or where is the Tribunal, at which the King
must be judged? Or in whose name shall the Indictment be made against him, or
the Writs go forth for the execution of judgment? Or what if the King please
to grant himself a pardon, sure you must ee'ne be content to leave the King
unto the judgment of the Lord, yea, and to leave his heart unto his guidance
too. The last refuge of the Subject is to make his complaint unto God: And
Kings have reason to take good heed how they give occasion of such complaints,
for they are like to meet with an impartial Judge, that regards not the
person of Princes. But for the Subject to take upon them to force the King
their supreme Governor to his duty, or to take upon them to correct him, is
to thrust into Gods office, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only
ruler of Princes. See whose property this is, Revel. 1.5. and 17.14. and 19.16.
See whose virtue it is that has that name written upon it King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. And take heed how you go about to cloth any other in his
garment, or to part it amongst any: Or how you invest any other with His
Authority, for He will not give His glory to another. But alas His Majesty is
very hardly dealt with: He is required to protect His people, and yet he is not
allowed that Authority, or Power, or Revenue, which is requisite thereunto.
They do all they can to disarme Him, and then require Him to defend them. They
bind His hands, and when they have done they quarrel with Him, that He does
not use them in his defense, is not this a very Egyptian oppression, to bid him
make Brick without straw, or indeed rather it may seem to be a mere jeere of
his Majesty, but they had best take heed how they mock at Gods Substitute.
This I hope may serve for your fourth proposition. Your fifth and last is
definitive. And you give us the character of a good Subject in it: In a word,
he is a good subject (say you) that looks upward, to see what in God, Gods
Vicegerent commands; and secondly, That looks downward, to see whom the
obedience thereunto does either hurt or hinder. Why, now it seems you would
teach them to look a squint, for he that looks upward and downward at once
must needs do so: but however I observe, that you would have the subject have
his eyes about him, that he may look and see. And so would I: it is my prayer
unto God, that he would open the eyes of the subject, of you, and all the rest,
that they may see in this design against his Majesty and themselves, how they
run headlong upon their own ruin. And I wish they may see with their own
eyes, and not with the eyes of other men only, to take all things upon trust
that shall be imposed upon them magisterially, by those that seem to deny the
use of reason. Secondly, I observe, that you would have them first look
upward, and so would I, and to see what in God the Lords Vicegerent does
command. And wheresoever any thing is commanded by the Vicegerent contrary unto
the Lords command, I advise them take that counsel of the Apostles, rather to
obey God than men: but yet in such case, I advise you and them according to the
example of the Apostles to submit by passive obedience, where they cannot by
active performance of his commands. Thirdly, I observe that the King according
to your confession is Gods Vicegerent, and therefore to despise him is to
despise God, and therefore none can divest him but God, whose substitute he is.
Fourthly, you would have the Subject look downward too, to see whom the
obedience to the Superiors command does either hurt or hinder. I am afraid
there has been too much looking downward to worldly ends and purposes, to
private aims and contrivances, which have made us forget our duty to God and
his ordinance, and our regard to the public safety. And this is the ground of
all our mischief, and this looking downward is no good posture, if we believe
the Psalmist, Psalm. 17.11. But yet I would have them to look downward too in
a good sense; and first in humility with the Publican, and secondly in
Christian charity with the good Samaritane, that with a Christian wariness
they may as much as lies in them frame their obedience to the good of others;
but not so as to take upon them the power to moderate the commands of their
Superior, as if wheresoever they shall be pleased to fancy an inconvenience,
either to the public or any private concernment, it should be in their power
to deny obedience; for that is the Governors charge, to look he commands
nothing that may disadvantage the Commonwealth, or any part or member thereof:
it is not for every private man, nor indeed for any to be the Judge of that,
otherwise there could never want pretenses for disobedience. There can hardly
be found any such inconvenience that can be answerable to that succession of
mischief that is like to accrue upon the dissolution of Government; or the
exposing the Magistrates command unto the examination of the rude and ignorant
multitude, so as to enable them to resist where they shall dream of some hurt
or hinderance that may therein accrue unto others, or themselves. We must
remember here that the fifth Commandment is the first of the second table: And
that that is indeed the guardian of all the rest, and the Kings Throne stands
highest there even at the very footstool of the Throne of God, which is set
up as it were in the first Table of the Law. And therefore so that we do not
any act that lies contrary unto the rest, we must be content to suffer and
leave consequences to God; however, you cannot bring in active resistance or
rebellion to the definition of a good Subject. So I have done with your
Propositions, and come to your confirmation of this last. You tell us that
Papists grant you this, (and your margent points me to Bellarmine) That in the
Superior three things are concurrent. 1. The place, which is from Christ
alone. 2. The person, which is from the choosers. 3. The union of these two,
which is from Christ, but by the mediation of a humane act; let Protestants
then, say you, have their eyes in their forehead. I could answer you very
briefly, by excepting against the force of your argument, which seems to
run a majori, as if what Papists say in derogation from Magistrates, must
much more be granted by Protestants; or as if they gave more unto obedience
then we, which is no such matter; for I would have you know, that maugre all
your seditious doctrines, it is yet the glory of the true Protestant Church,
which neither you nor Papists shall ever deprive us of, that we according to
the judgment and practice of Christ our Master, and the Apostles our leaders,
and the Primitive Christians, are the best maintainers of obedience to Kings
and Magistrates; and herein we leave behind us both Papists and Schismatics,
as two kinds of Foxes tayled together with firebrands of Rebellion betwixt
them. And therefore you must not think to drive us from our station, by
telling us, that Papists yield this or that. We abhor Popery in this and all
other points: Do not you know that the Throne of the Roman Antichrist must be
built up upon the ruin of the civil Authority of Emperors and Princes? take
heed you play not his game for him. The truth is, you may be ashamed to lay
such a scandal upon the Protestant Church, as to give Papists the precedence
in point of Allegiance. I do here in the name of the whole Protestant Church
of England enter my Protestation against your admission, and do avow it to be
clearly against the tenet of the true Protestant Church: That Subjects may
upon any pretense take up Arms against their lawful Prince. If any that have
called themselves by the name of Protestants have said or done any thing to the
contrary, we do so far disclaim them. Your miscarriages in this point have
brought a scandal and reproach upon the name of Protestants, and have opened
the mouths of Papists against us, as if we were countenancers of Rebellion,
and all because we through (I was about to say) too much charity, have
tolerated such as you are amongst us. It is you Schismatics, not we
Protestants that have given this occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme; it is you that like Simeon and Levi have made us, as much as in you
lies, even to the stink amongst the Inhabitants of the world, when even
Papists, Turks, and Heathens are ready it may be feared, to lay your
mischievous opinions and ungodly practices upon us, as if Protestants were
patrons of Rebellion: which we do abhor from the very bottomes of our
hearts. Witness the clear Article of our Church of England.

And therefore it matters not to us what Papists say or do in this point, it
has been an old quarrel between Papists and us, and you may even go and
shake hands with them in this point. And yet I see not what great advantage
Bellarmine gives you, in that you here quote out of him, I could direct you to
some others of them that speak much more plainly to your purpose; and it
seems you are yet but a novice in the study of Rebellion, that you are
furnished with no more pertinent authorities, for what I beseech you does
Bellarmine grant you here? truly all is scarce worth thanks for ought I see.
1. The place is from Christ alone, then take heed how you despise the authority
of that place or office which is derived from Christ. 2. The person is from the
choosers, it may be in some sort true in elective Kingdoms: but I pray you
remember that the Crown of England is successive and hereditary, and therefore
none but God is the chooser here, so that the person is from him too. 3. The
union of these two is from Christ, but by mediation of an humane act. What then
though it were granted, this would make little for your purpose, for if the
union between the person and the place be from Christ, let what humane act
soever intercede, none but he that makes the union may take upon him to make a
separation, if that rule of the Apostle be authentical, Those whom God has
joined let no man put asunder. Besides, by this act they set him above all
their own power, and do part with that very power unto him which was before
in them, in designing him for their supreme Governor, and you must show some
superior authority to enable the doing of such an act. And now let Protestants
have their eyes in their foreheads, and see how grossly you paralogise, to
deceive both your self and others. Did you not find that the people are mad
already, a man might think you would scarce venture such stuff amongst them.
But let Papists and Schismatics hold what they will at their perils, we
Protestants by Gods grace will live and die in obedience unto God and our
Gracious Prince, whom God long preserve, to the peace of this Kingdom.

The fourth Consideration you say is critical. I leave you to make good the
sense of this title, which for my part I am not so good a critic to understand
very well. But to the matter. And herein you seem to lay down one exception
of the people against the employment of their estates in this present bloody
business that you plead for, and thereto you return your answers, My money
shall not help to kill men; that you set down as the voice of the squint-eyed
multitude as you call them. And now let us see your answer; and indeed here you
are liberal, that you may teach them to be so: you give them two answers for
failing, and it was but need of your bounty, for both will scarce make up half
a good one; one six pence would have been better then two such slips, but what
you want in weight it seems you would make up in number. And first you tell
them, Their money is none of theirs; if the Lord, the Law, the Liberty, the
Cause, or the Defender thereof stand in need thereof, no more then the Ass in
the Gospel, or the bread and beef of Nabal. Theirs in the like case.

Secondly, you tell them, that If they hinder the killing or quelling of those
who would both kill and quell you, yours, your Religion, Kingdom, they become
friends of Gods enemies and yours: and resolve to make peace with them, with
whom God is resolved to have war.

In your first answer your Thesis is true. But it will trouble you to make good
your Hypothesis; neither are your proofs so clear and pertinent. I shall
endeavor to display your argument thus.

1. You lay down this for a ground, That where the Lord, or the Law, or the
Liberty, or the Cause, or the Defenders thereof have need of our estates,
private men's purses are none of their own: That Is the meaning of your Thesis.

Your Hypothesis you term to be understood, and if you speak any thing to
the purpose, it is this.

But in the present design against His Majesty, the Lord, the Law, the
Liberty, the Cause, and the Defenders thereof have need of the peoples money;
and therefore as the case now stands, Their money is not theirs, their property
cease, they have no power to deny.

Your Thesis you make good by two examples or presidents of holy Scripture, The
first, out of Matthew 21.3. where we find the Ass delivered up for the supply
of our Saviors necessity, to furnish him for his journey to Jerusalem. The
second out of the 1 of Samuel the 25. and the 11. where we find David in his
necessity desiring supply of Nabal, and being denied by that unthankful
churl, going about to revenge himself upon him by a resolved plunder, and
destruction of Nabal and his family.

1. Give me leave to say something unto your Thesis, and to examine your
proofs, and then I shall show the vanity and fals-hood of your hypothesis.

And first I grant you this with all my heart, that every one is bound to part
with his private estate where the Lord calls for it, or has need of it, either
for the procurement of his glory, or for the supply of the necessity of the
Church, or his poor members, or where the exigency of the public requires
it, for the maintenance of the law, the liberty, or the public good: for the
defense of a good cause, and the assertours of it, and whosoever does not part
with their estates in a due proportion being legally required, preferring the
public good before their private commodity, sins: for the Word of God
teaches us, that the Lord is the chief proprietary of the whole world, and
that of him we hold all that we have, and are but Stewards of it to his use,
and for his glory. And nature it self teaches us, that the good of the parts
must yield unto the necessity of the whole body: and we find the parts of the
universe, though senseless and irrational, putting this rule in practice: as
they are swayed in their motions by the invisible hand of divine providence in
the government of the world, since even the senseless creatures and elements
of the world, are content to forget their own private good, and to forsake
their proper motions, to procure and maintain the integrity of the universe,
so for the prevention of a vacuum or emptiness, wherein the integrity of the
universe is concerned: we find that water will forget it self and its own
proper motion, and ascend upward, and air will become retrograde, and descend
downward; and I could wish we that are rational creatures had learnt this a
little better than we have, public matters would not then have been carried
with the private spirits of ambition and revenge, as it may be feared, they
have been too much in our days, which has too great a share, it is thought,
in our present distempers: public aims procure unity. But dissentions are
usually the brood of private resolutions. But yet give me leave to put in a
little caution, lest there should be some misunderstanding of the matter, and
to desire it may be received sano sensu, and cum grano salis, for though all
that be most true, yet give me leave to put you in mind, that the necessity
of others or of the public, does not destroy the propriety of the subject,
for we must distinguish here between the power that a man has over his
estate, and the duty that lies upon him in the mannaging thereof. A man does
not always loose the power of a proprietary over his estate, where his duty
engages him to part with it. I am bound in duty to relieve every poor man
that I find to stand in need of my help, and to part with my estate unto him
according to my ability, and his necessity, but yet I have still a property in
my goods, which I ought so to impart, until I have alienated them by gift.
Otherwise you will authorize every one upon pretense of necessity, to become
carvers unto themselves of other men's estates, which would be a fine color to
make violence and plunder become authentical, and to take away the thanks of
charity and alms, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, Philemon the 14. who
though he had need of Onesimus to minister unto him in his bonds, yet he would
not do it without the consent of his Master, that the benefit of Philemon
therein unto him, might not be as it were of necessity, but willingly. And in
the 9. of the second to the Corinthians, at the 7. verse, speaking of the
ministering to the necessity of the Saints, he does not take upon him to ravish
a supply from them, but leaves it to every man to do it, according as he
purposes in his heart. So let him give, says he, not grudgingly or of
necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver. Yea and Saint Peter in the 5. of
the Acts, notwithstanding the necessity of the Church, at that time, yet he
allows Ananias and Saphira to have had a power and propriety in their lands,
until they had sold them, and professed the alienation of the whole price
thereof unto the Church, Acts 5. verse 4. whiles it remained, says Saint Peter
to Ananias) was it not thine own, and after it was sold, was it not in thine
own power? A pregnant place, not only for the purpose we now speak of, but
also for the quashing of that pernicious doctrine that is thought to be too
busy in the world, as though none but they whom some men please to style the
children of God, had any right or propriety in their estates, but that they may
rob them at their pleasure as Egyptians, or defraud and cosen them how they
list in their dealings, so that they deal uprightly with the brethren. A fine
trick of the Devil, to teach men to cosen and cheat in sincerity: whereas we
find here, the Apostle S. Peter allows Ananias and Sapphira, though wicked
and ungodly people, and none of the true professors of the Gospel, yet I say,
he allowed them a propriety in their land before it was sold, and in the price
of it after it was sold, and such an one, that the necessity of the Church
could not make void: had they not declared their consent to an alienation, than
indeed the keeping back of any part was both Sacrilege and dissimulation with
the Holy Ghost: Sins that I would wish you and your party to take heed of.
And if the necessity of the Church does not destroy propriety, so neither
does the necessity of the Commonwealth, but where consent of the owners,
either express or implied does some way go along with it. And yet in both
these and other such like cases, all men in duty are bound to part with their
estates: neither does either of the presidents you bring out of Scripture,
infer any thing more than I here set down. Though indeed if they had any
thing more in them: we know there was that extraordinary in them, that might
very well exempt them from being presidents for us to follow: in the former, we
find the mediate Authority of our Savior who is Lord paramount of the whole
world, and the chief and absolute proprietarie, if I may so speak, of all men's
possessions: who are but tenants at will under him. And therefore that divine
power in him that gave away by express donation the goods of the Egyptians
unto the Israelites, might well challenge what he pleased unto himself,
notwithstanding all private right that any other had in it subordinate unto
his. And for David we know it is possible there might be some sin in his
attempt, designed upon Nabals goods, as it is clear enough, there was in his
resolution for his destruction, as you may well guess by that thanksgiving
that he returns unto God, for sending Abigail to stay him from his purpose. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. or if not so; we know David was a Prophet subject to
extraordinary motions of the free spirit. And you must take heed how you make
all such examples your presidents, lest with Sampson you pull down the house
upon your heads, to be avenged of your enemies, Opera liberi spiritus non sunt
trahenda in exempla communit vitae. But we find in both these examples still a
propriety acknowledged in the owners. And therefore we read in Saint Lukes
relation of the same passage with that of Matthew. 21.3. That the owners thereof
said unto them, what do you loosing the Colt? neither do we find that our
Savior gave the Disciples commission to take the Ass or the Colt by force,
but he tells them, that upon their declaration of his necessity they would send
them. And he by his divine power as you may see, plainly there inclined them to
consent thereunto, and you know, volenti non fit injuria. There was no
destruction of propriety for ought I find, but a voluntary consent of the
owners to supply the necessity of our Savior. And for that passage about
Nabal, 1 Samuel, 25.11. we do not find but that David in his message does leave
Nabal a propriety in his goods, notwithstanding all the necessity that he was
in, or what else you can observe; though perhaps in his passion upon Nabals
refusal to relieve him, he might set upon a design destructive thereunto. But
passionate undertakings are no good rules. And therefore it is more safe for
us, to gather instruction from David in his cool blood, before he was put into
a heat by Nabals churlishness. And then we shall find clearly, that he
acknowledges Nabal to have a right in his goods. And he desires a supply of
courtesy and bounty, does not challenge it as of right and debt: and therefore
he entreats, not demands, I pray thee: and what does he entreat? not a
payment, but a gift. Give I pray thee. And what? not what David pleases, but
what Nabal shall think fit. You may know him to be a beggar in that he is no
chooser: Da quaeso quod obvenerit manui tuae servis tuis, Give I pray thee
whatsoever comes to thine hand, unto thy servants, and to thy son David.
Neither did Nabals denial alter the property, as now some may seem to
intimate by their practice. They will allow man a property to give unto them,
but not to deny them, nor keep to themselves; if they once deny, they forfeit
their property. And surely they allow us but a poor interest in our estates,
that yield us no more power but only to give them away at their pleasure, to
whom they shall think fit. Our Savior allows a greater privilege to a
propriety, and to understand something else by it. when he asks that question
in the Gospel, May I not do what I will with mine own. Where he sets forth
the power that a propriety gives a man over his own estate, which is, that he
may do what he will with it, so as to exclude force to awe or compel him to
the contrary. Though I say in duty it is otherwise, for so men may not do what
they will with their own, for they are engaged in duty to part with it, to the
necessities of the Lord in his poor Members in his Ministry, in his Service,
in his House, in his Church, of the Law, of the Liberty, or the public cause,
and the defenders thereof: So that if they deny supply unto these, they sin,
and are answerable to God for it. But this does not expose them to a
deprivation by violence or plunder, by force or compulsion, otherwise your
argument might serve as well for the re-calling of Ship Money. But now it
seems the case is altered, any thing is of force when it serves your turns;
but take heed, you do not know what may be built hereafter upon these
foundations that you lay. We must distinguish between the power of Kings over
their Subjects, and their duty; and we must distinguish too between the power
of Subjects over their estates, and their duty, if we mean to judge aright of
either, or to behave our selves aright toward either, or that they shall behave
themselves as they ought to do; for we must know and they must know, that
power is larger then duty in both, and duty must set limits unto their power,
but those limits must be set by God and themselves, not by others without them.
The power of Kings must engage us to subjection, either active or passive,
though they use it unjustly. The duty of Kings must teach them subjection to
that power of God which is above them, that they may not use their power
unjustly.

And the power of both Kings and Subjects over their Estates and Revenues, must
keep us from offering any force or violence to deprive them of their
properties, though there be good cause they should impart them as abovesaid,
without express or employed consent. And the duty of Kings and Subjects must
teach them so to moderate their power of property, as to impart themselves
freely and proportionably to God, his Church, and to the Commonwealth, and to
what other exigencies, are just and charitable, whenever the Lord calls them
thereunto by giving them occasions and opportunities of performance; otherwise
there would scarce be room left for the free practice of virtue, either in
Prince or people in the disposition of their estates and powers, if all were to
be compelled. But God has so disposed of things in his wisdom, which for my
part I cannot but admire, though I am not able to express it as I would in
this particular. That he has left men some freedom for the practice of
virtue: So he has given Kings power to be Tyrants, (I mean so far as that
they they are not to be resisted by their Subjects) that they may have room to
show their virtue in performing the duties of good Princes. And he has given
Subjects a power to restrain their liberality, their charity, etc. to abuse
their estates (I mean so far as that others without consent either express
or employed, where there is a true and free property, cannot compel them to the
contrary) that they may show their free virtue in performing their duties, both
in the due employment, and imparting of their estates, that it may be as the
Apostle speaks, a matter of bounty, not of covetousness or necessity; and
also in the due and temperate use and husbanding of them, otherwise we might
turn all virtue into necessity. And indeed hereby God has provided for peace,
order, and tranquillity in the world, which you and others attempt, even to
banish out of the world; whilst either through ignorance you discern not
(which in charity I will hope of you) till you make me know the contrary: or
through malice you go about to remove these land-markes, which God has set
between King and people, between one Subject and another; for otherwise if
Subjects might take upon them to compel Kings to limit their power to what
they shall conceive to be duty, this must needs in all probability open a door
to perpetual confusion and rebellion, and the case must be the same between
the Subjects and Parliaments, as between Subjects and Kings, Et jam vestra res
agitur, for you can show no reason to the contrary, I am confident. And on the
other side, if others might take upon them to be moderators of my estate, and
to compel me to impart at their pleasure, where they shall conceive their
exigency requires, we should hardly ever be free (it may be feared) from such
pretenses, of necessity, etc. to countenance continual intrusions and violent
surprisalls of one another goods, by this rule every poor man that can plead
necessity may come and take your purse for ought I know, and you and he both
had best take heed of that; remember here that of Solomon, Prove. 6.30. Men do
not despise a thief if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry, but
if he be found he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of
his house. You may see there though he deserves favor, yet his necessity does
not exempt him from being a thief, not from the crime, no nor yet from the
punishment, (and God does not use to prescribe penalties where there is no
offense) he shall be fined in a seven fold restitution. And therefore though
men be truly engaged in duty to supply such exigencies you before speak of,
yet this does not destroy their property, as if that ceased, as you imply,
whenever such occasion or necessity is present, but obliges their duty: And
therefore in those cases where you have not or cannot gain their consent, you
must leave them to perform their own duties, or else you will transgress
yours, whether you be King or Parliament, or a single Subject. But perhaps you
will say, that the Parliament has in them a devolution of all the Subjects
propriety, so as to dispose of their estates to public purposes: if you mean
by the Parliament the King and the Houses, I grant so that they do it by Act
of Parliament. And you must take in the body of the Convocation (if the Clergy
be Subjects, or have any liberty or property) for the disposing of the estates
of the Clergy.

But if you mean by the Parliament the two Houses without the King, I deny
that they have the consent of the Subjects for the disposing of their estates,
since they were chosen by the Subjects not to manage the public affairs of
themselves, but in a Parliamentary manner, order, and motion, to join with His
Majesty, and to do things by His consent by Act of Parliament; and therefore
since they have not His consent for the disposing of the estates of the
Subjects, as they now do: Nor do it by Act of Parliament, which cannot be
without the King. They can plead no consent of the Subject, who gave them their
power only in that sense, and to that purpose as aforesaid: If you are
rational you understand this, if impartial and honest you will acknowledge
it, and give over abusing the people with your Observations. And here the
people may see who mean best unto their properties and liberties, since you
put us to plead for them, whilst you oppose them for the advantage of your
party. And yet will they never open their eyes? but still run on madding upon
their own ruin. I pray you speak to them to have a little more wit and
honesty: let them have your example, it may be it may work much with them. But
what if I should grant you your Theses in your own sense?

Yet it will trouble you exceedingly to prove your Hypothesis: you are so far
from doing it, that for ought appears you were ashamed to mention it. You
leave us to collect it, but prove it, I pray you, for your credit is not so
great that we are bound to take your bare word, though you gave it us never so
plainly. Prove it then, that the money and goods that is forced by your party
from the poor Subjects, is for the supply of any of those necessities you
speak of.

Is it for the supply of the necessity of the Lord, to maintain a War
against his Substitute, (acknowledged so by the Scots in their late Petition to
His Majesty) and directly contrary to Gods command? Romans 13.

Is it for the supply of the necessity of the Lord, to maintain practices of
Sacrilege, demolishing of Churches, violating of Sepulchers; to set forward a
disturbance of Gods Service in his house, to abandon the daily use of public
Prayers where they have been used, and whereby God has received so much
glory, and the people so much comfort, and to bring in profaneness, or at the
best to undertake a reformation by a way God allows not, when it has been
offered in a peaceable and fit manner? or where do you find that the sword is
to be moderator, or that reformation in Religion is to be founded in blood?

Or is it for the supply of the necessity of the Law to nourish a War
clearly against Law, both in it self, and in the purpose and drift of it? in
it self, as being without and against the Kings command, and against His
Person and Authority, who is declared by Law the supreme Governor, and so the
supreme Moderator of the Sword in the drift or purpose, which we understand
not at all, if it be not to abridge the King of that preeminence and authority
which His Ancestors have, and He ought to enjoy by the Law of the Kingdom: As
the power of the Militia, of consenting or withholding His assent to the
allowance or dis-allowance of Acts of Parliament; of choosing Privy
Counselors, etc.

Some say necessity has no Law, but I am sure the Law has no necessity of the
plunder of men's estates to any such purpose.

Is it for the supply of the necessity of liberty of the Subject, that their
liberty should be taken away to cure men of their diseases by killing them, or
to cast them into the Sea for fear they should suffer ship-wracke?

Is it for the necessity of the cause, or the defenders? what cause is it I
beseech you that does necessitate any such thing? is it Religion? have we not
been Protestants all this while? why do you not confute the Articles of the
Church of England? it may be indeed your new Synod will do it for you. Has
not the truth flourished amongst us all this while till of late? you your self
seem to confess it, if there be any sense in your words in your next
Paragraph as we shall see anon. Who is it than that goes about an alteration?
might you not have thanks if you would let it flourish still as heretofore it
has done, or if any thing be to be mended, has it not been offered? what is
that cause then, the necessity whereof does lay such fanges upon the Estates of
the Subjects? or who are those defenders you speak of. I am sure I know who is
the Defender of the Faith under God; and then remember who it is that you
oppose: surely you had need explain your self, for for ought we can yet learn
by you, the Subjects have good right to keep their goods unto themselves, for
any necessity that you can plead; it does neither alter their Property, nor
engage them in duty to impart for the maintenance of this dismal War
against His Majesty. They are much more engaged to impart them to Him, that
stands for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, together with the Law
and Liberty of the Subjects. This is the cause, and this is the defender, that
may much better plead necessity of supply.

But you have two strings to your bow, and so you had need, for you see one of
them will not hold. And what is your second? let us see what that will do. Your
money shall not help to kill. That Is the resolution of the squint-eyed
multitude: well say you when you mean ill; but what is your answer? why you
tell them, that if they hinder the killing, quelling, of those who would both
kill and quell you, yours, your Religion, Kingdom. They become friends of Gods
enemies and ours, and resolve to make peace with them with whom God has
resolved to have war. How do you prove that? why Exodus 17. ult. what says
that place? why, these are the words which you leave us to find out there, for
he said, because the Lord has sworn to have war with Amalek from generation
to generation. Go to now, where does your great strength lie? or how may a man
do to bind this Sampson of yours? This invincible persuasive or reply, or what
you will call it, wherewith you do so unmercifully seize upon the judgments of
the poor blear-eyed people.

We Will examine it a little, Your drift is or should be to show, that the
resolution of the people is not good, that their money shall not help to kill
in your design, for that must be your meaning? now how do you drive them from
this resolution? why thus, you show them very learnedly that their money must
help to kill, etc. how prove you that? why, because they may not hinder the
killing, quelling of them, etc. well, it seems then you are all for killing
and quelling, we might have hoped of more favor, you might have given the
people leave to have thought you more merciful; but is this good Logique? they
may not hinder, therefore their money must help; is there no mean between
helping and hindering? consider it well and you will find there is, but that is
your weakness, or perhaps your have; we will pardon it and allow it that force
it wants: But how do you prove they may not hinder the killing, quelling of
the Kings Party, for that is your meaning without all question? why, because
they are those that would both kill and quell you, yours, your Religion, your
Kingdom: we need your help a little here, we understand you in part, your
(Us) there stands for your Party I conceive, and your (Ours) for your Wives,
Children, Friends, Family, and the like: but we cannot tell yet what you mean
by (our Religion) nor very well what you mean by (our Kingdom,) your
Commentary here a little I beseech you; do you mean by Your Religion the
Brownists, or the Anabaptists, or the Familists, or the Seperatists, or the
Libertines, or the Papists; for it is thought you have of all these sorts in
your Party, so that your party is very party-colored; or do you mean that
which we doubt you have too little to do with, the true known Protestant
Religion, or what do you mean by Your Kingdom? is this Kingdom any more
yours then His Majesty's or ours? or what Kingdom is it that you mean? I
presume you will say, that by (Your Religion) you mean the true Protestant
Religion, and by (Your Kingdom) this Kingdom of England, that is so
denominated a Kingdom from that good King that God has set over it: and if
so, then give me leave to ask you first, how it appears to you that the Kings
party would kill you or yours, or that they would quell you? do you but quell
your rebellious spirits, and I dare warrant you for either killing or quelling
by His Majesty or His Party, if He can help it, any further then the Law arms
Him against you; nay, you may assure your selves His Majesty has that grace
and clemency in Him that will moderate the severity of the Law too, and it is
not best for you to deny Him that power; you have had good experience of His
Majesty's mercy if you would think on it: some have thought He has been
cruel to Himself in being merciful to you; I but I hope all His mercy will
return at length into His own bosom; you had best take heed you slight it
not too much, lest if it be kept too long before you make use of it, that good
and pleasant Wine turn Vinegre. You may do well to remember that mercy loves
not to stand too long at the door, clemency is not easily wearied, but if it
once grow thoroughly angry, it may prove the greatest fury. If you will needs
put His Majesty to His choice, which of the two He will have spilt, He knows
there is difference of price and value between rebellious and loyal blood.
And if there be no help for it, but that you will work your ruin, (the price
of the safety and preservation of His faithful people) you may thank your
selves for setting up such a Market, I know not how to help you, but in truth
I shall be sorry for you. But you may prevent it if you will, it is but
returning to your obedience and loyalty, and I doubt not but shall find His
Majesty's sword that is now most unwillingly drawn against you for your
correction, ready most cheerfully to exercise it self in your protection: and
so you and yours may be safe if you please, and the Subjects may keep their
money for better purposes then to employ it to set forward the killing of men;
it was sure ordained for a means of preservation, not for the instruments of
ruin and destruction. But your Religion your Religion. That will be killed and
quelled; if this cry were not in your mouths I could scarce think you to be
Rebels; for, is not this the usual accoutrement of rebellion to march under
the colors of Religion? at least in pale, or in quarter with some others; as
liberty perhaps, or some such like, because Religion will not of it self take
with all palats; but I pray you do not believe that this vizour will always
be undiscovered: this velvet mask has been so much used, that the nap is all
worn of almost, and the bare face may be seen through it. This pretense of
Religion is grown so stale, and has been so often made the lure of sedition,
that the very boys can almost spy out the imposture; and therefore your wiser
way will be to get some new fashion for your strumpet, unless you mean to
have them throw stones and rotten apples at her; alas, this is an old trick to
begin mischief in the name of God: In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, is too
old and too true a saying; but let them take heed that set it forward in such a
style: for this is something worse then to take Gods name in vain, and then
they are not like to be held guiltless. And amongst others you had best be
wary, for whilst you make God and Religion the style of this horrid business,
your whole progress is a kind of a running blasphemy; nay, perhaps I could
easily show you that in many of you is a running perjury in those that have
taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; further answer I cannot give you
so fully, as perhaps I might if I did but know what stamp you are of, only
this let me tell you, first for the Protestant Religion, as it has been for
these many years in this Kingdom, under the successive and sucesfull reigns
of three gracious Monarchs without interruption until now: so (if you hinder
not) His sacred Majesty has given us good assurance, and we have good
witness of it, even God himself, besides many thousands upon earth, that it
shall not be killed nor quelled, but maintained, and if ever any thing fall out
otherwise, I am persuaded we shall have to thank such as you for it, which
God forbid. And for those other things that walk under the name of Religious,
I hope His Majesty will by Gods assistance take some good course for quelling
of them, as well Popery as Brownisme, and the rest of that rabble, that we can
scarce tell what to call: Both God and his good people do expect from His
Majesty, that He will be vigilant for the extirpation of these by all due and
lawful means, and that He will not admit of the least show of a toleration of
them; but yet we do believe His Majesty will find out more proper ways than
the sword for the rooting out of those errors from amongst us; and if they can
be but quiet, and keep themselves from sedition and corruption of others: it is
like His Majesty will shed no man's blood merely for His opinion, but will
rather take care for the application of the due means for their conversion,
and so leave them to the mercy of the Lord; for we believe His Majesty has
other principles, and those far more gracious and god-like, than those that
you seem to walk by. Though he be never so zealous for Gods house, yet we
conceive He does not think that He should have any thank from God if He should
build up Sion with blood. His Majesty we hope will rather remember that David
was not suffered to build the Lord a Temple, because his hands had been imbrued
in blood, that the Temple was to be built by a Solomon, a King of Peace, and in
a reign of Peace, and in a peaceable manner without all noise and tumult not
so much as the noise of an axe or an hammer to be heard in that holy business,
much less of a Sword or Spear, or of those thunder-emulating instruments
which have been the brood of cruelty of these last times of the world: we
believe His Majesty will not willingly make use of any such instruments as
these in that work, unless the malice of the adversaries compel Him to it.
Indeed it may fall out, that Sanballat and Tobiah, with their accomplices of
Arabians, Ammonites and Ashdodites may put Nehemiah's workmen to their weapons
as well as their tools, in the building of the Walls of Jerusalem, and to set
them upon the business with a Trowell in one hand and a Sword in the other,
that the builders should have their weapons girded by their sides and so build,
and that Nehemiah may be enforced to set a Trumpeter by him; but this was only
for the defense of the work, not to offer any violence to any, but to repel
it, in case it were offered by any unto them; neither do we know of any
violence intended of that sort you seem to suspect, either against you or your
religion as you call it, be it what it will, if you will be but quiet, and not
raise tumults in Church or Commonwealth, nor quarrel with other men, because
forsooth they will not put out their eyes that they may be as blind as you; if
you can (...) alone and be quiet, you may if you will needs be let alone and be
quiet in your folly, for any matter of blood or the like. And yet we believe
His Majesty will not let England become an Amsterdam, Truth shall have more
encouragement then Error: it is fit that those dotards that will persist
should be made sensible, it is mercy not to let them perish upon too easy
terms: this is not to cut them off from the clemency of God, but to hasten
them unto it, and this may be done without killing I hope; and therefore we
believe you fright the people in vain, and make bugbeares of your own
fancies, when you seem to persuade them they shall find a bloody persecution
for religion, but I hope they will be wiser then to think it is any good
warrant for them to be rebellious; because you are pleased to be fearful and
suspicious. It is no wisdom for them to cast their goods out of their
vessels, because you are pleased to dream of a storm; they might likely
provide much more for their safety by casting out such a rebellious Prophet as
you are, that have outrun the errand the Lord sent you on, and are become a
fugitive from his work; like Jonas, who when the Lord sent him to Niniveh
runs to Joppa, and from thence is bound for Tarshish. It were happy for you
if some storm or other might but send you into your right course again. But I
would feign have done with you, you cannot make it appear that the King or His
Party has any mind to kill you or yours, nor to quell the true Protestant
Religion, no nor yet to divorce you from any of your fantasies by the sword,
admit any of His Army would, yet I am confident you may look for more mercy
from His Majesty, and if you hinder not He may have power answerable to His
goodness; but your Kingdom is in danger, they would quell the Kingdom, who
are those I beseech you? if you will not tell me, I can tell you who they are,
even they that go about to demolish or diminish the majesty and authority of
the kingly Throne; for so much as they take from the power and eminency of the
King, so much they quell and destroy the Kingdom; for it is the King and the
regal power that gives it the name of a Kingdom: they than that go about to
turn the King into an empty style, or a mere shadow of regaity, and to change
the regal Government into a popular State, or Aristocraticall, those are they
that go about indeed to destroy the very essence of a Kingdom: look than who
they are that are against the King and against Monarchy, those are they that go
about to quell the Kingdom; but perhaps you mean not by the Kingdom this or
that form of Government, but the people and inhabitants; and in this sense,
who are they that would quell the Kingdom, but even they that have been the
Authors of this most bloody and unnatural War against His Majesty, that have
divided the Kingdom against it self; that have most mercilessely sacrificed
the lives of the poor seduced people of the Land, to their passionate and
ambitious or malicious designs; they that have abused both Parliament and
people, by endeavoring to make them flaves to their humorous resolutions
against their duty both to King and people; they that have stricken at the very
foundation of the State and Government, and brought the Commonwealth into a
mere Chaos and a confusion; these, these are they that would quell the
Kingdom, and therefore if you will needs have the people buy blood, you must
send them to market there; there they may perhaps find some within their
purchase, but royal and loyal blood is of too great a rate I can tell you,
for all the money they have to pay a sufficient value for the least drop of it.

But yet I am not come to the maine force of your argument. They must give
their money to help to kill those that would kill and quell you, etc. why?
otherwise they become friends of Gods enemies and yours, and resolve to make
peace with them with whom God is resolved to have war; and you prove it,
because Moses tells us, that the Lord has sworn to have war with Amalek
from generation to generation.

Well, than it seems we must needs admit, that all that are your enemies eo
nomine, are Gods enemies: now that we are no way convinced of, because we do
find your cause to be Gods, or that you have any commission from him, but
rather you have many prohibitions from God, if you would take his word in the
holy Scripture, unless you mean with the Libertines to take the warrant of a
private spirit. And then secondly, you seem to hold, that we must all assist
you with force and violence for the destruction of your enemies and Gods; how
than shall the rule of our Savior be made good, that will have you forgive
your enemies, and I say unto you resist not evil, which must bind all private
men from revenge; but you will say the Members of the Parliament are all
Magistrates, I grant it in subordination to His Majesty; but wheresoever they
are found in direct opposition to Him, they become so far private in their
motions; like the Moon in the Dragons tail, in direct opposition to the Sun
she loses her light.

But God you say, is resolved to have war with them that have war with you,
and therefore the people must. Prove that. Why? The Lord is resolved to have
war with Amaleck from generation to generation; therefore with the King and
his party: for it seems, we must necessarily believe that you are Israelites,
and they are Amalekites: but that the people are not satisfied of, they must
therefore look for better evidence from you to convince them: in the mean
time, let me desire you to take heed how you misinterpret the Lords oaths,
lest you should seem to tax God of perjury, as well as some body has done
the King. And there is an end of your critical Observations.

And now in the fifth place, you come like an operatour to cure the people of
their melancholy: you draw them forth in their sullen fits, as you conceive,
venting their sad and discontented thoughts, in those sorrowful notes you are
pleased to set down. That trading is dead: There money goes: Never so many
payments. I cannot blame them, I confess, to think they pay something too
dear for their ruin: but what is the salve you give them for their sore? why,
surely they are like to find but little comfort from you. First, you tell such
a man, that he is not worth the answering. And I tell you, that he that gives
such an answer, is scarce worthy to receive a reply unto it. And therefore let
that go. But yet upon second thoughts you are a little more pitiful. And in
some doubt of his capacity you send him to learn of Job, That we must receive
good at the hand of God, as well as evil. True, there is very good reason for
it, that they should be patient in misery, and thankful in prosperity, unto
God. But yet under favor, this does not infer that men are bound to contribute
to their own miseries, or be any way accessory to draw them upon themselves,
no nor yet to return any thanks unto those that are the instruments of their
calamity: we must submit to Gods justice even in the oppression of men, and yet
that does no way justify their oppression, nor hinder us from the use of any
lawful means to deliver ourselves from them and those pressures they would
lay upon us: it no way ties us to give our selves up into their hands, or to
consent to our own ruin.

Thirdly, you tell them, that the Gospel has been a beaceable plentiful
Gospel, and then they loved it, ran after it. But now it is otherwise they are
otherwise affected, and you commend unto them that of our Savior, Ioh. 6.26.
you follow me for the loaves.

And has the Gospel been so peaceable and plentiful a Gospel, when was
that, I beseech you? under what Kings reign? or, how comes it to pass that it
is not so still? Surely, if that Gospel could have contented you and others,
that have been so amourous of changes; that which was amongst us in the time
of Queen Elizabeth, King James, or in any part of the reign of our Gracious
King, I am well assured you might have had it, in as peaceable and plentiful a
condition as ever, if men had not been weary of Gods blessings. His Majesty
has made you very fair offers, if they might have been embraced, but it seems
you are grown weary of that Manna, and your wanton palates are fallen a
lusting after some new diet. And because other men will not be persuaded to
part with all they have to serve your humors: you seem to challenge them of
temporizing, and that they measure out their zeal by their worldly advantage.
This is indeed a heinous crime I confess, like the rich man in the Gospel, to
go away sorrowful from Christ, because he requires him to part with his
estate, or with the Gadarens to drive him out of their coasts, upon the
apprehension of the loss of a few swine. They that will part with our Savior
or his Gospel upon such terms as these, are very worthy of their own choice
even to loose that Jewel that they hold at so low a rate. But that this is the
case of every one that refuses to undo his wife and children, to supply you
with his estate, to buie fuel for that fire which is now raging in the bowels
of the Church and Commonwealth: or, that it is to be disaffected to the
Gospel of Christ, not to promote a war against the substitute of Christ, is
a paradoxe that I can never admit into my belief, nor do I think the speech
of our Savior in the 6. of John 26. is any thing at all to your purpose. And
therefore you are no good Quack salver for melancholy. The people may even die
of their purse-dumps, for any remedy you here afford them.

But it may be you are better at the cure of their folly. That Is the sixth and
last consideration, which you say is a mere foolish one, if it may be so
termed: or rather (for fools also will be talking) a mere prating, a mere
nothing, and non-sensicall thoughts about the present things in the Kingdom.
within the verge of this you shall include (you say) the indiscreet running
before authority, in things where the command and countermand are not alike,
and this (you say) you shall desire to be proposed in these two Propositions.

First, manners to stay the States leisure: but,

Secondly, Is it any offense to do their work for them? And you conclude with
much gravitie thus; Good meaning may be grounded on errors: But the bad must
be shadowed with colors: and so you commend unto your Country men, whose
salvation you say, if you know your own heart you earnestly desire, your notes
and your self with an apology; first, for your self, that you have spoken
unto Christians like a Christian. Secondly, for your notes, whereof you say,
that none can be so ignorant, as they are plain to a mind desirous to learn,
and for the percase you say it is such as you can speak, and you desire to be
thankful it is no worse, considering your deserts. And lastly you say, there
is not all that might be said, but what you could say, which if it may serve
the Church, the public, the Lord Jesus, and your Reader, you say you have your
end, desiring his prayers for your self, under the style of the poorest of All
the servants of Jesus Christ, W. Bridges.

Give me leave to run over this you have here said. And first, for that which
concerns your Answer to the peoples mistakes in this last which you call a
mere foolish consideration, a mere prating, a mere nothing and nonsensicall
thought, about the present things of the Kingdom: What this foolish prating
nonsense of things is, I can scarce discover, that you are so angry at, and
therefore I could wish you had bin more clear and less passionate in your
accusation: only something you tell us first, of an indiscreet running before
authority in things wherein the command and countermand are not alike. Truly I
can scarce tell how to make sense of what you say, for what things are those
wherein the command and countermand can be alike? or what do you intend by
this designation? but yet I can find out something here to thank you for, that
you would not have the people indiscreetly to run before authority; if they had
taken this counsel, or had it given them in convenient time, I conceive things
had never been so bad as they are, for what were those Tumults that have had
so great a share in the bringing of things to this sad condition they are now
in, but an indiscreet running before authority? and therefore thus far we
join, and I wish your counsel may be well embraced. For farther explication
you offer your mind in these two propositions.

First, Manners to stay the States leisure, This is some thing short of a
proposition; but if I mistake not, your meaning is, that you would have the
people have so much manners to stay the leisure of the State, and not to take
upon them to do things of themselves to the disturbance of the work. I
heartily consent unto you, in this likewise. Only I desire that His Majesty
may be understood as a man of authority, and a principal part of the State,
and than take heed you condemn not your self, and cast a blemish upon the
whole carriage of your design.

Your second proposition as you call it, seems to be a reply to an
expostulation of the people, whom you seem to bring in justifying their
rashness, with this question, whether it be any offense for them to do the
work of the State for them? (this if I understand you is your meaning.) And to
this you return your answer thus, you tell them that good meaning may be
grounded on errors, but the bad must be shadowed with colors. And truly I see
nothing much amiss in this, but your mis-application; for herein methinks you
set before us the very complexion of that unhappy business you would seem to
plead for, at the best you can make of it; if there be any thing good in it, it
has only this, not for the justification of the business, but it may be for
the excuse or extenuation of the fault of some that have been seduced and
engaged therein; that it is a matter of error in them, not of any evil or
malicious intention; but this excuse I doubt me will not serve you all there
are some amongst you too knowing to plead such ignorance. And where error is
wanting, they have nothing to hide their bad meaning withal, but the shadow
of some specious colors, which are at once both a cloud to hide them, and to
blind others withal. If we could but prevail so far as to separate errors
from the good meaning of some, or remove the false colors from the bad meaning
of others, things would than appear again in their own shapes, and
disobedience and bloodshed would be no longer pursued with rejection of
obedience and peace; and so there would ensue a perfect accommodation. For that
which follows, I have but little to say, only I commend unto my Contrymen
too these Notes of mine to be considered with yours, and I am sure I earnestly
desire their salvation, I will not yield to you a little in that; and being
glad that you acknowledge us Christians yet, and that indeed was spoken like a
Christian, if all the rest of your Preface had savoured as much of a Christian
as this, I should never have spent time upon this work; for the Apology you
make for your notes, how plain they are, or what the phrase of them is, I
leave them to judge that shall read them. I am sure for the substance of them
it is so bad as you apply it, that it does bespeak you of none of the best
deserts; and whether this be all you could, or that others might have said to
your purpose, I list not much to examine, I know it is much more than you
should, or than any other ought to have spoken. And you have much failed of
your end, if you thought by this to serve either the Church, the Public, the
Lord Jesus, or your Reader, and therefore you have my prayers, that the Lord
would give either more knowledge or more sincerity; if this latter be your
want, let me give you my advise in the words of your quotation in the margin
out of Saint Augustine, (a little altered) Qui non valuit non poenitenda
dixisse, poeniteat quae cognovit non dicenda fecisse. And so I have done with
your Preface. I see no great matter in your Sermon, that does deserve an
Answer, and I have other business to do.

FINIS.

