Mr. Warner's Answer to Mr. Rider's Reply.
THE State of Mr. Warner's Case stands briefly thus, about two Years since he
obtained a Grant from his Grace the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury and the
other Lord of the Soil, and a Lease from the Corporation of Deal, for Ninety
Nine Years to bring fresh Water for the said Town and Service of the Shipping:
And in pursuance thereof also took several other Leases for the purposes
aforesaid, at considerable Yearly Rents, during the said Term; And has
actually expended above 1600 l. for carrying on the Work, which may be finished
in two Months time, if not obstructed by Mr. Riders Bill. All which he fully
proved before the Committee.

As for the Bill now before this Honorable House in favor of the Pattent
under which Mr. Rider Claims, Warner is advised that the Award made the 24 th
of December 1694. by the then Lord Keeper and the two Lord Chief Justices, and
the Decree made in Confirmation of that Award is an inv^^^^ble Bar against Mr.
Riders pretensions and all claiming UNDER THE CROWN.

And for the 2500 l. upon which Mr. Rider grounds the whole Equity of his Case:
Not on^ ^^^y of it was (...) ^^plyed to the Waterworks, but is altogether
(...) to this matter. If there was any thing of Reality in it, the Money
according to his own Evidence was borrowed by the Lord Griffen (about the time
of his going into France) for which Mr. Rider became bound, and for his
Indemnity took my Lords Counter-bond and an Assignment of this Pattent as a
Colateral security. Neither has Mr. Rider yet proved that he has paid any
part of this money, but if this were as Mr. Rider would Insinuate, it would be a
great hardship upon Warner to be defeated of his property for the payment of
the Lord Griffins Debt.

And whereas Mr. Rider suggests there is nothing in his Bill that will obstruct
Warners proceedings. In Answer thereunto, it will not only deprive him of all
those Wast Grounds, and Ways of which he has taken Grants, that are absolutely
Necessary for the Completing his Water-work, and for which he must unavoidably
pay Yearly Rent for the term aforesaid: But also defeat him of the benefit of
his Chargeable Undertaking for a Public good. Wherefore Warner hopes his Legal
property shall not be taken from him to make good Mr. Riders invalid Pattent.

All which he humbly submits to the Consideration of this Honorable House.


