The Effigies of Love.
T. Cross Sculp.



THE EFFIGIES OF LOVE: BEING A Translation from the Latin of Mr. Robert Waring
of Christ-Church in Oxford, Master of Arts, and Proctor of that University.

To which is prefixed A Tombstone-Encomium, By the same Author, Sacred to the
memory of the Prince of Poets, BEN. JOHNSON; Also made English by the same hand.

The Pox, the Plague,and every small Disease,
May come as often as ill Fate please;
But Death and Love are never found
To give a second Wound.
We Are by those Serpents bit, but we are devoured by these.
Mr. Cowley in his Mistress, page ult. London: Printed in the year 1680.

TO The Fair and Excellent LADY Madam Sarah Cock.
Honored Madam,
TO make an Apology for Dedications, in an Age wherein it were almost
ridiculous to appear without them, were a folly like his that should excuse
himself for not being singular; besides that he must needs be a person of a
very desperate desert and fortune too, who can neither find nor make a friend
that will accept or patronize his labors; and it must needs be scandalous for
the child, whose both parents and friends are ashamed to own it. But that I
should single out You, most Excellent Madam, from the rest of your fair Sex, to
shelter me from the dreadful effects of merciless Critics, need be the wonder
of none but Your self, whose Modesty has restrained You from too near a
familiarity with your own deserts, and made You happily ignorant of Your own
virtues and power; the knowledge of which ought not to be trusted with any
goodness less than Your own. But tyranny, and insolence, and triumphing over
the infelicities and miseries of those men whom themselves have made so, is
such a piece of Barbarity, as will find entertainment among none but the
basest and the worst of men: which is all the security I have that I may once
see a period of those sufferings I have so long patiently, and scarce patiently
endured, since the remedy is in the power of her whose very outward appearance
carries with it a certain indication of generosity and goodness. I was long
silent, and with much reluctance at last broke it: but if grief, though silent,
have a voice; if anguish without a tongue be vocal; if sorrow be loud to Elah,
or the groans of an expiring Lover can be accented; if a mighty amazement and
consternation of a mind but reasonably sollicitous for its own happiness, have
any Emphasis; my present sufferings can neither want arguments nor orators:
and whilst I plead my own Cause, and that with You, I shall much sooner be at a
loss where to begin, than what to say.

Dearest Madam, this little Book will inform You what You can do, and I have
suffered: my torments (the Characters of Your powerful Beauty) are here exactly
delineated, that You may read and pity me, now almost become Loves emphatical
Martyr. It will seem a wonder scarce capable of his belief, should I tell the
Reader, The described Passions in this Book, come short of what I have, and the
Torments of what I endure for You. In some places You will see Your self
deservedly seated on a Throne, which can dart astonishing influences and a
dreadful pleasure, distributing desirable afflictions, and pleasing deaths,
which the most greedy of life would desire, and joyfully embrace: In other
places You may visit Your easie-gotten Conquests, and see the unhappy Trophies
of Your Beauty. Others You have slightly touched, and but with a few Darts, Me
You have transfixt with a thousand: their wounds do not need, mine are scarce
capable of cure; and their greatest Emphasis is their not being mortal. Yet We
valiant Lovers like these pleasing Cruelties, love the hand that strikes us,
play with the flames that scorch us, and enjoy them the blessed Authors of our
deaths.

But lest, whilst I talk of Sufferings, my trespassing too long upon Your
patience, may justify Your inflicting them, and so turn them into Punishments;
and lest the Prologue drown the Play, and forestal the patience of the hearers,
which would be more advantageously reserved for the ensuing Acts; I retire,
only begging leave to advertise You, that whereas some Expressions in this
Book are harsh and uncouth, that may not be charged upon the Translator, who
has in favor of Your fair Sex trespassed more than once upon the Author, and
fears he shall stand in need of the learned Reader's pardon for making so many,
as he begs Yours for not making more alterations.

Dearest Madam, read this little Book, and see the reflex image both of Your
self and Me: there You will find what You already are, and what all other
Ladies from Your example fain would be; who only blame You for setting Your
Example so high, that it deceives their sight, baffles their hopes, and
discourages their endeavors of imitation. In mercy to the gazing world, bridle
this Luxury of Virtue, this Prodigality of Goodness: it is thrifty counsel, and
conduces to Your happiness and Ours too: it gives us hopes, that though we
cannot attain Your course, we seeing our Guide, may go part of that Religious
way: for though by a higher pitch of Virtue (if that supposition be no Crime)
You might be transcribed into something above humanity; yet wrapped in Clouds, we
had lost our knowledge, You our love; and You leaving us in danger of seduction
into Idolatry, lest you should be without fault, are become guilty of ours.

But methinks I begin to forget my Crime, which I promised to amend* which
cannot be better done, than by not anticipating Your reading of this Book,
which when read, will supersede the trouble of subscription. Whatsoever is
there of Love or Adoration, I shall do You that Justice and my self the Honor
of acknowledgement and payment: which tribute I humbly beg You will not refuse
from,

Dearest Madam, Your entirely devoted and most obedient Servant, Rob.
Nightingale.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Here present thee with a Translation of the deservedly admired Effigies
Amoris; but with such Variations from the Latin, as will make me obnoxious to
thy Censure. To give you the particular reasons, were a direct thwarting of my
interest, and undoing all I have already done in prosecution of my end: yet I
dare tell you my reasons are such as will either secure me from, or enable me
willingly to bear the worst that Zoilus can do; I shall be as capable of his
Envy, as he will be deserving of my Scorn, and needful of my Pity: but because
it is so easy to pretend any reasons when a man is beforehand resolved not to
discover them, I think fit to acquaint you, that there are in the Latin so
many harsh and jarring expressions, so derogatory to the honor and the
dominion that the fair Sex (for whose sake I avow the undertaking of this
Translation) have by their victorious Beauty acquired in the world, that I
thought my self obliged (having listed my self under Cupid's Banner) to espouse
their Cause, and thereby become at once an Orator for them and Virtue.

Mr. Waring the ingenious Author of this Book, might be allowed some Exotic
transports, and ought to be pardoned the roving Excursions of a boundless fancy
and unlimited invention: he was full, and those expressions must be looked upon
as the frothy overflowings of a luxuriant brain: though after all, if taken
entirely, he is certainly one of the most ingenious Authors that ever this
fruitful age has produced; whose excellent Character (set down by Mr.
Griffith, (the Publisher of the last Edition) will easily excuse me from
speaking farther of a person whom I no otherwise knew but by Fame; and this
little, but best Monument of himself: which renders my attempt of translation
as bold and as dangerous as Horace pronounced his Endeavors to be, who durst
emulate Pindar. But Love commanded, and I had nothing else to do but to obey: I
told him I was not eloquent; he replied that he could make me so: he commanded
me to speak, and taught me how; and whilst he unsealed my lips, influenced my
tongue. Cupid is the Muses and the Worlds Hannibal, whose prosperous adventures
serve to teach us, that to him, and us under his Conduct, nothing is
inaccessible, nothing is invincible: and let him that laughs at me and my
undertaking, beware lest by the influence I have upon my Master, he be not in a
condition of shaking hands, and prove as emphatical a fool as he thinks I am.

Thus, Reader, I have acquainted you with some of my reasons, and told you
likewise that I have more in my Budget, which being purposely kept there for
secresie's sake, you are by the laws of Modesty forbidden to make any farther
enquiry after them.

The Epitaph upon Ben. Johnson I was unwilling to leave out, though I am
sensible it has lost much by the translation. It was in the Latin (as I have
made it in the English) rather a Monumental inscription than a Poem. So that in
this Verbum verbo curabam reddere fidus Interpres.

Accept, courteous Reader, or at least pardon these my first adventures: I have
chosen a Subject generous and bold, which may provoke some one better qualified
for it than my self, to add those Ornaments which I were not able to give.

TO The ever Honored And most Accomplished Gentleman, Sir John Birkenhead Knight.
Doctor of Laws, Master of Faculties, And one of the Honorable House of Commons.
Illustrious Sir,
IT is my hopes that you will not disdain these first fruits of our Gratitude,
though gathered out of your own Nursery, in regard we never offer to the
Deities themselves other than their own proper Incense. That these few Remains
of so dear an acquaintance survived their Author, is that which all learned men
owe to your care; and therefore that they should return dedicated to your Name,
was not only mine, but the desire of the Learned* whose farther design it
was, that I should make known by the testimony of this Treatise, as well their
public as my private Gratitude. Who could not think it enough to enjoy a Jewel
so precious in it self, unless (as it happens to the Pearls and Diamonds of
great Princes) it had received something of higher value, more august than
innate worth, from the Cabinet of the late Possessor: For to them that should
enquire Cujum Opus, it would not be enough for the Printer to answer, Not
Aegon's certainly, unless he added, But Waring's; or to you that farther
demanded, Whence came this Work? nothing else could satisfy their Importunity
but this reply, That it was produced, most excellent Sir, out of your Library.
And while the Publisher prepares another Edition, the former Copies being
either lost or sold, it is your Command, that the true and genuine Author of
this third Edition should be known to the world in the front of this third
Impression; not wanting surreptitious Feathers to imp the wings of thy Fame,
who can deservedly boast those Offsprings of thy own Quill; which should the
world enjoy all together, would soon eclipse whatever the Modern Wits have
brought forth: from whence I am not able to determine whether or no something
greater than the Iliads might arise. To you in the mean time all the Learned on
this side Tagus and Ganges bow their heads, as being the only person famous
for the high applauses for Wit and Judgment both conjoined; so far in you is
the subtlety of Wit from injuring the sharpness of Judgment. But I fear lest
while I am paying Truth her due, I should offend your modesty, which is not the
meanest of your great Virtues: I will therefore correct my self in time,
wishing only this, that we may at length obtain what all desire, an Edition of
your Lucubrations, that so you may do justice to your Fame, and the vast
expectation that the world has conceived of you. In the mean while I beg you to
accept this Testimony of a grateful mind, till I am able to make a better
acknowledgement, which for gratitudes sake, I desire may be dedicated to your
self,

To you, my best Patron, Your most devoted Servant, Will. Griffith.

THE PROEM OF WILLIAM GRIFFITH TO THE READER.
TAke, Reader, to thy self, what thou have so long desired, the new Edition of
this polite little Work; little indeed, if thou regardest the bulk, and not the
merit of the Piece, to prevent the tedious labor of transcribing so frequently
requested Copies. This was the Printers care, to whom I was willing to
condescend, that if I could any way be ayding, this third Edition should come
forth more copious and more corrected. To which end, if any thing were done to
the purpose by me, it is all to be ascribed to that worthy and excellent
person, through whose favor the Learned World enjoys the lovely birth of so
divine a Wit; I mean, that noble Gentleman Sir John Birkenhead, who was not
satisfied to inter and preserve the Ashes of the Author, who was his intimate
Acquaintance, unless be might also preserve his Memory; which he did, by
exposing to the world these draughts and descriptions of Love deposited in his
custody. They have breathed forth Nard where're they came, with the fragrant
Odours of Amomum. The name of the Author was absent from the Title in the first
Edition: For then it crept forth, such was the sat of those times, as the work
of a person who had been always faithful to his Prince, and therefore thought
it necessary to conceal his name, which was all he could do. For it became not
such an Ingenuity to be concealed, which like Royal Furniture carries its
peculiar marks wherever it is found.

Nor is that small Addition to be despised, I mean, the Tombstone-Encomium upon
the Prince of our English Poets, BEN. JOHNSON, by which he has rendered his
Memory, with his own, immortal; which the Author finding most miserably mangled
in a Book called Johnsonus Viribius, was forced almost to make new again, that
he might restore it to its first splendor, to himself a Peonian Apollo,
renewing, like the Pelican, that life which he had given to his Offspring once
born, and twice restored to life; born from the hand and invention of the
Author, risen once from the Errors of the Press, and a third time exposed to
Eternity by the favor of the forementioned Knight. The Author was deservedly
numbered among the chiefest Wits of his time, as Cartwright, Gregory, Diggs,
Masterson, and the rest: Who while they lived, Oh Heavens how great they were!
of all whom for all, the noble Birkenhead only survives. These were the
Tutelar Numens of Oxford, every one an Ingenuity descended from Heaven; which
while she kept within her walls, Oxford stood, yielding neither to the policy
nor force of her Enemies. In vain the Enemy labored to entice these Heroes to
his Party: Whom nevertheless while a greater force, piety and fidelity to their
Prince, carried several ways, whereby their Pens were not able to assist the
Royal Arms, reduced to Extremity, at length the hostile fury prevailed, while
they were otherwise employed; as the Temple of Diana burnt at Ephesus, while
she was busy at the birth of Alexander. The Enemy therefore having obtained
his wishes, proudly using his Victories, as it were triumphing over Victory her
self, carried away as many of these Genius's as he could meet with; believing
he could no otherwise restrain and curb those divine Souls, than with Cords and
Chains. As the Tyrians tied the same golden Chain to the Ogmean Hercules, lest
he should desert them, which the Gauls tied to the tongue of the same Deity, to
attract and allure others. In the midst of these Cruelties, the most of those
Heroes breathed forth their blessed Souls, yet not yielding to fate, in regard
that every one of them has drawn Eternal Lines in their several Writings, as
amongst the rest, ROBERT WARING has depainted The Effigies of Love to all
Eternity.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle Dedicatory, p. 6. l. 19. read they instead of that. In the
title of the Epistle to Sir John Birkenhead, r. Master of Requests. p. 2. l. 4.
dele as well. p. 3. l. 13 r. looks, instead of countenance. p. 5. l. 8. read
that instead of a. p. 27. l. 22. read, yet this is to. p. 77. l. 18. read Vices
instead of Virtues. p. 95. l. 11. r. approaches.

These, and if there be any other Errata, occasioned through the Translators
absence, the candid Reader is desired to excuse and amend them.

TO The PRINCE of POETS, BEN. JOHNSON, A TOMBSTONE-ENCOMIUM.
Greatest of Poets,
Whether suffering Death or Ecstasy,
Thou lie a venerable, more than mortal Pile.
Thus, after the received honor of sacred Fury,
When the aged Prophetess
Had wasted the now-exhausted Inspiration,
And the divine Soul no more to return
Had taken its last flight,
Thus lay the Sibyl's Carkas,
Even yet to be consulted by her trembling Adorers.
To none the God-like Soul so largely indulged it self,
To none more unwilling it bid farewell,
Transmitting equal Flames
While an Exile, and while an Inhabitant.
And now the Evening of thy years growing on,
It did not leave thy breast,
As it were the Horizon of Poetry,
Without its gloomie redness.
It Is the fate of some Poets to betray, not know their Parts;
A great Mystery to others, a greater to themselves;
Like some Prophetic wild Beasts,
They boast an included Numen, which they know not;
Wise by unintelligible instinct;
In whom, while boldness creates wit, it is profitable to be ignorant.
To thee it first happened to enjoy thy own Fury,
And govern thy celestial gifts,
While with an equal strife, thy judgment and thy inspiration went together,
Twice divinely possessed.
Thou have added Muses to other Muses, Arts and Sciences,
A Poet, full of thy self:
Who separating Fury from Rage,
Have taught that the Aonian Springs may be soberly quaff't.
Who have chastised the lawless extravagance of Rapture,
By thrifty counsel.
That Britain might at length possess,
The World admire
An Ingenuity that needs no pardon;
And find nothing to be farther added to thy Writings,
But Fame.
That the Prologues therefore,
Like the Portico's of great men, should advance the Titles
Of the Master,
The Author himself is celebrated as the perpetual Argument.
This is not to be called Arrogance, but Judgment,
Or Prophecy.
For it is the property of Virtue and a Poet,
To please himself.
Therefore not to increase our Envy, but thy Praise,
The Fates commanded thee to appear Great,
Who alone have showed thy self to Us an entire Poet.
While others only crop the Lawrel-boughs,
Thou claim'st the whole Grove.
Nor do thou flatteringly praise, nor enviously bite;
Abominating both,
Either to mix Honey with thy Sacrifice, or Vinegar
With thy Physic.
Nor have thou burst thy Oaten-pipe with too much breath,
Nor effeminated thy Trumpet with too little.
Observing the Laws on both parts, as being thy self the Law,
Thou have obtained an Empire by the devotion of Obedience.
Servant of Things, but not of Times.
Thus being the Darling of all the Muses,
Thou sett'st them all at a perpetual strife.
Let it be Homer's Glory
To have Cities at variance for him, for thee
The Muses dispute.
Who whether in thy Tragic Buskins, among the Poets,
Thundering Jupiter,
Or whether thy round feet fill the Comic Sock;
Whether thou do dictate Epigrams
That may be acted,
Or Wit which the hands can show.
Thou leave those footsteps Posterity must adore,
And seem to Us to pitch the Theater.
Thy Scenes exhibit not Spectacles of Sand;
Thy Scenes produced not Poems, but Poesy it self,
And gave both Minds and Laws to the People,
By which they might condemn thee, if thou could have erred.
Thus thou affordest both sights and eyes to the Beholders;
And make those Scenes which choose rather to be read
Than be beheld,
Scorning to owe thy wit to the Actor.
Others not beholding to Apollo, but to Mercury,
Whose Inspirations proceed from Wine and Love,
Who obtrude Vices upon the Stage, whom Diseases
Make Poets,
Whose Muses more fit to ride after the old custom in Carts,
Never bring forth, but suffer abortion
Of a few dying Verses,
Which the very Press it self stifles.
Authors exposed to darkness by a new fraud of Lucina,
While their Poems, like Diurnals,
Serve only for their Year and Country.
Thus the Modern Wit of Plautus
No longer lived than Plautus lived;
And the Domestic Jests of Aristophanes found
No applause but upon his own Theater.
Thou in the mean while
Breathest the Genius of Ages yet to come,
The World's and thy Theater is the same;
While in one word, thou pourest forth a lasting
Poem,
A Verse immense, and increasing with the Reader.
We congratulate thy happy Delays:
But why call we that Delay,
Which was made only for
Our sakes?
That ought to be eternally written, which
Would be so read.
Thou alone art able
To govern the world with thy Pen, far greater than
Scepters.
The Sword subdued the Britains to Rome;
Thy Quill, Rome to the Britains:
Which thus rejoicing to be vanquished,
We now behold more sublime in the English Buskin,
Than in the height of her own Hills.
But what is greater, thou subdu'st the Age to Us;
And, Vicar of the Oracle,
Like a faithful Priest, perform'st what God commanded,
Teaching men to know themselves.
Our Language
Nursed wit, increased by thee:
Thou did form the Country-speech and thy own words together.
No more we boast our own, but Johnson's Eloquence;
To the end thou may be always praised in thy own
Language;
Who have also taught
Rome it self more eloquent words,
Vaunting in the servitude of a foreign Idiome.
Greece also,
The Mistress of the world, thou have adorned;
Now glorying in another than the Attick Dialect.
Rich in thy self alone, thou were able to contemn
The Ingenuities of Others,
And without them were a Compendium of Wit.
But as that Painter
Who strove to give the world an Exemplar equal to the
Idea,
Artfully collected
Those Beauties which Nature had here and there
dispersed;
And forcing the wandering Rivolets of Form into one Ocean,
Commanded thence another unblemished Venus:
So to the framing a structure of the same nature,
Thy Poesy was like that Painting.
Other Authors afforded Materials for thy Wit,
Thou art added to them as Art and Polishing.
And if others might be called Poets, thou Poesy itself.
Not another Pen, but the Author of Authors.
Long sollicitous Writers teaching at length by thy Self,
What Genius a Book that would live ought to have.
How many soever went before,
Did but serve as Guides in the Road:
Thou alone the Pillar.
That Virtue which profits others, endammag'd
The Owner.
And thou that had more correctedly transcribed others,
Art not to be transcribed thy self:
A Match equal to them gone before,
To Posterity unequal.
Perpetual Dictator of the Stage.
Rob. Waring.
These Flames of Love Robert Waring offers and consecrates to the Altars and
religious Fires. This old and worm-eaten Harp of Love he also hangs against the
sacred Walls of his poor Habitation.
NOw Cupid grant me Feathers and Quills from thy own Wings, and an Opportunity
of Stealing thy Divinity. There is a greater Task in hand, and a larger Theme
of Love, the Patron; whom I should believe more proper for me to invoke, were
it not a piece of impious Worship to pretend so great a Person for the occasion
of our Sloth. Yet (O thou to me more admired Divinity than Cupid himself)
grant me the pardon of this one Crime (for it is not an unheard of Crime of
Piety) to hang my Harp upon the sacred Walls, that will then at length prove
grateful when it can sound no more. I, in imitation of Praxitiles his Art, (for
what is it we Lovers dare not do?) have sent this idle Piece, not so much for
the Pencil's, as for Pieties sake, the Messenger of my Love, and as a Pledge
for my self. Thou shall not find here so much of the Painter, as of a person
that makes his Confession, as having spent the Heats of a distempered Breast
upon the Table, and weakly delineated, what I more powerfully suffered. Neither
shall I seem to have described to the Life, but only the Blindness and Madness
of Love. So that I fear a further demand, What it is I deliver into your Hands,
under the notion of a Present. However, if deluded with the Shadow and Dream of
a Representation, you require something farther, behold more willingly here
approaches your Hands, either as a Present, or as a Captive, the very Picture,
or if you please, Original of Love.

The Answer of R. W. to his Friend, importunately desiring to know what LOVE
might be?
I Acknowledge the wanton Tyranny of imperious Love, that is always requiring
the most difficult Trials of the Affections. Now though it be a kind of an
Herculean Labor it self to Love, considering those severe duties, those toyls,
and hazards appendant to it; as if Cruelty were its sole delight: Nevertheless
we believe it reasonable, what names soever we have given to Love, that he
should exercise his Sovereignty, which is certainly very great and puissant;
and by the Severity of his Commands, that he should augment the glory of his
high Rule, and our obedient Submission. Let him command as well what is beyond,
as well as what is within the verge of our ability to perform, all things, but
only that one thing, Not to Love. Let him command nothing below a Miracle,
seeing that he who exacts the duty, affords us also Strength and Power, and
raises our Wit and Ingenuity above its self, transforming Man into a
Semi-Deity. So that he cannot be said to Love, who does not act beyond himself,
and pursue the accomplishments of his desires, with Enterprises equal to his
wishes. He is no thorough-pac'd Lover, who does not something above
extraordinary, to gain his Prize.

But justly do you redemand those Affections, which you your self have taught,
though despoiled of your Faceteness and Eloquence. Will it so delight ye, to
behold in my devoted Breast, as in a Mirror, the reverberated resemblance of
your self? Or to take a thorough view of me, as being a piece of your own
workmanship? because it is impossible that any outward stain should blemish
your fair Image; the very Spots whereof afford a brightness, like those of the
Sun. Will you not however, like a haughty Lady, be angry with the
Looking-Glass, that discovers to your sight Freckles and Deformities not your
own, and throws a counterfeit Scandal upon your Countenance? I know not for
what reason; but certain it is, that we love the very miscarriages of Nature,
and the disgraces of our own Bodies; as old and maimed Images are more
religiously adored. Thus Parents for the most part caress with a more tender
Affection, as it were to the comfort of their Misfortunes, the lamest and most
deformed of their Children; more vehemently admiring these Monsters of the
Womb, as the Portenders of some great matter. We are pleased to behold the
transposed* Members of a distorted body, moving like Man's Anagram. Certainly,
Deformity is a sacred thing, which much more divine than Beauty, pleased the
ancient Priests, that assumed Divinity under antie shapes, to render their
Oracles more reverend; which not only terrifies us Mortals, but admonishes us
withal, that this Deformity is rather to be adored than loved. Every one is to
himself the most pleasing Theater, and the most delectable Object; and then the
Eye seems to enjoy the Dignity and delights of the Mind, when it shoots its
piercing sharpness backward upon it self, at once both the Spectator and the
sight. Whatever it be, that for double reasons renders us doubly favored by
you, ought to be most chiefly in our esteem; which if it show us lame or
imperfect, under that very notion either of injury or antiquity, we are also
for that very reason to admire it. I am obliged to Nature that she has
afforded me a smooth Table, from whence to take off so much of your likeness,
as to delight both her self and you too. But it will be a wonder indeed, that
an Image should talk any longer.

But I am much more apt to love, then speak a word, which covets rather to be
the subject of Contemplation than Demonstration; and because it keeps its
station in the most secret Recesses of the Heart, disdains acquaintance with
the Tongue. A thing which we poor Mortals never learn, either from precept or
examples; but then at length all first began to understand, when we had all
practiced the same thing. You would say that Love were not only blind, but
Tongueless, who has made all the joints of our bodies vocal, unless the Tongue
alone. Whence it comes to pass, that Lovers more eloquently make use of sighs
than words, to convey the Intelligence of their secret flames, and like Paphian
Doves weep enlivened Epistles; by which means they also discourse with their
eloquent Fingers, without the assistance of a Pen; and dialogue in signs, with
affable Nods, missary Smiles; and by means of those vocal Messengers of their
Desires, hear each others mutual Wishes, and read each others visible Souls. At
other times the Rhetorical Tropes of Gesture woe in a mysterious and various
Idiome, while Pilgrim Glances, seeming to be out of their way, outwardly
renouncing all familiarity, privately hold a strict correspondence together.

Their counterfeited Frowns display an outward displeasure, when they are
studying all the charms of Friendship in the midst of their Anger. At other
times their Souls taking reciprocal flights from each others eyes, ravish from
each other Bridal Kisses at a distance, returning in Triumph with the Thefts of
Embraces in thought. And among all their Triumphs and their Pleasures, this
they look upon as the chiefest, that the business lies hid. So frequent a thing
it is for Lovers to appear upon the public Stage, and yet beguile the
Spectators by disguising the Comedy. These Angelic Interlocutors seem indeed to
be above all humane Laws, and consequently by most certain signs to understand
each others Wishes, to inspect each others Entrails, and to manage their
Affections rather by way of Oracle than Discourse; while they display in
thought a clearer discovery of each others Minds, before the addresses of
words, or that they know how to deceive; and their Desires, like Apparitions,
show themselves to the eye: Such however as by no other Art are to be seen,
than that which bred them; while issuing visibly from the Body, they not only
appear to the sight, but assume the shape, and enliven the person whom they
design to discourse. As if there were within the same Body a free Intercourse
of restless and wandering thoughts, that commune with others abroad with no
less silence than they observe at home. This one Affection that cannot be
expressed, is adored as a Mystery; whose sacred Rites, like those of the most
ancient Deities, are like Crimes protected by a modest Shame and wary Silence.
Love has always its Vail; and the Adorers of Venus, like Aeneas, walk envelop'd
in a Cloud, and keep themselves secret in the most public Assemblies of Men.
Nay Cupid himself, hardly content with one Vail, delights to peep out of his
Ambushments, and to see the hearts he daily wounds; beholding all, himself
unseen. Thus Love that composed the world, kept his Station in Confusion,
lurking in the ancient Darkness of the primitive Chaos.

Still does Venus, as if she were a Traitor, fly the Sun; and for fear of
being discovered, I know not what Divinity has enclosed within a Labyrinth, not
only the Affections of Pasiphae, but the whole Love of all Mankind; or if at
any time he chance to be apprehended, he appears either like one caught in a
Net, or else in the shape of a Monster. Thus in complaisance to Mortals that
love Riddles, Love is become a Problem to himself, living without Rule, and
exercising the Affections at his own pleasure; while contrary Desires agitate
him, no less impetuously driven this way and that way by the Ebbs and Flowings
of the Passions; from whence it may be easy to infer, that the Cyprian Queen
was born upon the rolling Billows, in the midst of contrary Winds. Strange
Riddles! That the same person should both serve and live free, should be at his
own disposal, and at the command of another; as it happened to the Freedmen of
the Roman Emperors, who governed their Lords and Masters under the title of
Slaves! That this same Love should both live and dye both at the same time, and
like the Phoenix, revive from the Ashes of his own Funeral Pile! Mad and
malignant Wishes of the same Lover, therefore to wish his most beloved
Favorite unfortunate, only to have the opportunity of being his Comforter!
Therefore to desire him deprived of Friends, and bereaved of Subsistence, that
he may have the honor of supplying both! Therefore to wound, that he may be
the Author of the Cure! That Necessity rather than Love and Merit should
enforce the Obliged to retaliation! Not to know whether to desire the Hatred
and Enmity, or the Favor and Kindness of his Friend! while Hatred and
Jealousy are equally mischievous in their undertakings. It Is a piece of
Inhumanity, to hinder the effects of all other men's Kindness, only to engross
the Affection singly to himself; to remove and implead all his other Rivals, as
the injurious Authors of his private wrongs: but above all things, to be
solicitously careful lest at any time hereafter he should grow wiser, which
might render him contemptible; with so much delight are Lovers blindly
misguided.

See how an enamored breast grows cold and hot reciprocally by fits, as it
fares with those in high Fevers; neither is there any one that loves without
perfect indignation. Deservedly he curses the pleasing Executioner, that burns
him in those flames, that rob him of himself; Yet like a Butter-flie, delights
to play about those flames, and enjoy the happy Author of his Death.

He seeks himself without himself, and lingers to be taken, that being a
prisoner, he may be in a capacity to redeem himself; and to be next to himself,
sticks close to his Possessor. It is a difficult thing for him to love; as
difficult, not to love; but more difficult than both, to enjoy Love. So
miserably is his afflicted Mind tormented, not so much with his own wishes
themselves, as with the necessary event of what he desires. So that if the
Heavens prove propitious, to favor him with success in his Love, he then cries
out again for his former miseries, and that pleasing torment of sighing and
desiring. So much more grateful it is to aspire to embraces, than to be
fettered in the Chains. Every one more highly esteems the pleasure of desiring,
than the Desires themselves; not likely to be happy in any condition, who
complains of the event, and with reluctance suffers his Sighs and delightful
Anxieties to be lost. Which is the hard and cruel fate of Lovers, that what way
soever Fortune favor them, they are still adversaries to their Happiness.

Whence comes it to pass, that he flies the sight of her, the sight of whom is
his most pleasing Nourishment, while he thinks it a new birth to be admitted
into her Presence? What unhappiness is this, that he that has his hearts
desire, should not be able to enjoy his own Wishes? That Majesty encircled with
the Graces, both allures and terrifies. That Sunlike splendor of a most serene
Countenance, both recreates and annoys the sight. The Veneration of that
Divinity, which he has feigned terrible to himself, astonishes the Worshipper,
suffering like a Cyclops, under the oppression of his own Thunderbolts. Love
has beguiled him with that imposture of Titles and Divinity, that he believes
the possession more worthy than is fit for him to enjoy; neither will Religion
suffer him to envy his misfortune; for what he looks upon as a Divinity, he
judges not proper to be approached with the Eye, but with the Mind alone.

So carefully has Heaven provided for this Affection, by intermixing Fear and
Anguish with Joy, to render that Pleasure more delicate. Hence it is that our
Desires so torment us, that they may also delight us; and our Delights are so
infested with Misfortunes, to increase our Sorrows. They are so sparingly
distributed, that they appear like the Ladies Faces, which by their Silken
Vails are but more openly concealed. So that they may be said to enjoy and to
want, both at one time; being such for whom greater things are aimed at, than
are convenient to be allowed them: the single felicities of a Glance, or a
Smile, or a short charming Discourse, being enough at a time. Nevertheless, our
restless and hungry Passion, not satisfied with the sweet repasts either of
converse or view, attempts to taste something yet more Divine, which it is nor
allowed neither to obtain or know. Neither do I know how it comes to pass that
this Misfortune turmoils us, that because we are wont to enjoy Felicity only in
Dreams, we are doubtful whether we possess what we really enjoy or no; and
believing that we still enjoy what we imagine to be only Dreams and Shadows, we
refuse to be any farther deluded, and therefore fear enjoyment.

That Passion which settles all other motions of the Mind, that reconciles
Men, Brutes, and Philosophers, is at enmity with it self alone; by the ties of
Discord coupling things altogether repugnant to each other. We are not
therefore to reproach him for soft and tender, whose Arms are tired only with
Embraces; who always breathes either Perfumes or Sighs; who suffers himself to
be cast to the ground by the threats of a smooth Brow, or the glance of an Eye.
Neither are we to account him bold and daring, that endures the nocturnal
Importunities of his Cares, or the diurnal Solicitations of his troubled
Thoughts; or by a tedious sufferance of Injuries, exercises his greediness of
Danger; so that although his fears cease, he delights to dissemble more, and to
invoke Jeopardie and Hazard, as favors and arguments of his Love: as if
Paleness and Wanness were the Symptoms of Woing; or that the only way to prove
himself a Lover, were to make himself miserable.

On the other side, shall we count a man stupid, because we find that Rigor
and Disdain so frequently inflame and provoke a Lover? That person, believe me,
is all transmigrated into Soul, or that Ethereal particle of Fire, which feels
no wounds. Or if this seem a Riddle, know that it is Loves Philosophy to
vanquish Hatred by Affection, and to assail one Fire by another, though much
the brighter. Consider nevertheless, that this is not the Stupidity, but the
Heat of a Lover. For as all Injuries contemned, loose their end and perish: so
being kindly taken, they pass for Benefits; or else like flints, are broken by
that soft and tender Breast that gives them way.

Again, Why do we exclaim against him for being mad, or blind, who beholds the
spots and blemishes of his Mistress, as so many Ornaments and little Stars;
that he assigns her Imperfections for Beauties, and by a most kind mistake,
extols and adorns her failings, with the title of the nearest resembling
Virtues? The more she needs it, the more curious is her Lover to dress and set
her forth in his own ascititious and borrowed Colors. But in this case men
prove partial Censurers, not Friends, requiring Judgment instead of Affection;
envying to the Lover that most happy Error, which gives him his greatest
satisfaction. Suffer him to impose that most honest deceit upon himself, and to
form in his Mind a more Majestical resemblance of Her, whom he has there
decreed more seriously to contemplate, and to worship more devoutly. It Is the
custom of Painters to pensil Faces not like, but fairer, and to flatter the
Original; polishing his workmanship rather according to the reflection of the
Mirror, than after the real Representative.

Believe me, we are not to think that Lovers have lost their Eyes, which are
only overshadow'd with a Vail, through which they take their prospect more
clearly and securely. Nevertheless you may think them three quarters shut, as
in persons taking aim, that they may more judiciously discern; and being fixed
upon one Object, they are not only purblind to all others, but loath the sight
of them, and quite close up themselves. Now when the Eyes are wholly intent
upon one Object, and employ all their quickness and vigor upon that,
resolving, as it were for the nonce, not to contemplate any thing else; this is
not to be dim, but too quick-sighted. So that if to Philosophize be only to
contemplate Idea's, then is it the particular work and office of Philosophy,
to Love. Nay, if a man may be said to love as much as he understands, then that
which is accounted the madness of Passion, that is to say, to be ready to dye
for Love, may be adjudg'd an Argument of Knowledge. Do but consider the
Stratagems and Sieges of Lovers, equal even to the Assaults upon Cities, and
winning of Kingdoms. Behold the Virgins daily led in Triumph, as the Trophies
of so many wily Ingenuities, whom there was a necessity of deceiving, before
they could be taken captive, and brought to an unwilling submission to their
Admirers desires. So odly do they choose rather to be deluded than beloved: As
if they looked upon the Shackles of Wile and Fallacy to be the forerunners to
the Fetters of Embraces. Consider how many great Wits the word Mistress has
inspired; how many Lyricks Amorous Desire has begot; how extravagantly the rage
of wounded Hearts has taught the Epigrammatist to wantonize. Then, emulous of
so much glory, thou will cry, Give me an object to love: And then instead of
Apollo, the Darling of Venus shall become thy Deity. He is in an Error,
whoever he be, that believes those things to be the raving Dotages of a
distracted Mind, which are the Mysteries of divine Fury. Thus the God of Love
himself prosperously governs the violence of his Actions, though contrary to
Reason. His right hand never misses when he shoots the Hearts of Mortals,
though blind, and never aiming at the mark: For the hand is not governed by
the Eye, but by an Inward and Divine Impulse. Neither is Love led by Reason,
but by something more Celestial than Reason; and as a Deity, that avoids
Reason, which might cause him to err, acts by a more certain Violence, and is
wise without Wisdom.

To be wise, and to Love, how harmoniously do they accord together! The first,
in the first place, is the Attribute of Jove himself; and next to him, of a
Prudent man, who, like an Oracle, can unfold Who is the best of Mortals: For it
is impossible for any but the best of Men to love. He is the only Lover, whose
Sentence, like that of Fate, is irrevocable. He cannot be said to love, whose
Judgment failed, whose Embraces ever erred, or who at any time had an incumbent
Necessity to hate.

The Conjugal Obligation of Lovers, like solemn Wedlock, admits of no Divorce.
When the Maiden-Girdle is once unloos'd, that same Knot is knit, which is never
to be untied; though like the Gordian Noose, it may be sometimes cut asunder.
So though the ties of Souls may be cut asunder by Death, they cannot be by
Death unloosed. Love ceases not, though the thing beloved cease. A Wife shall
not seem old, when she is really in years; for still that Form, now withered
and decayed, shall flourish in the faithful breast of her Husband; and she that
has so far suffered a change, as to be almost unknown, shall still remain in
memory beloved. Then also when the Fates have snatched away the Mistress of my
heart, as if only separated by intervals of absence, then shall she surviving
breathe in my never-forgetful breast: and while I embrace the beloved
Apparition, I will deny her dead. Fond Destinies! ye have spent your Malice in
vain; we still converse, and still are two. From others ye have forced a
Virgin, from me not so much as a Shade. Before, we enjoyed only the same Soul;
now, Body and Soul together. She is reunited to us as to her particular Sphere.

Now Love may seem to have finished his Circle, who always returns in that
manner to the place from whence he sets forth, as if he intended with his
perpetual Motion to imitate the Celestial Circumgyration; so ending in himself,
that he may begin again. For he cannot be said to Love, who can at any time
either slacken, or not love at all. There is not the same determination or
satiety of Love, as of other things; neither is it satisfied like Hunger or
Thirst. Love is not extinguished by satisfaction, but reinflam'd with new
delights, and every day finds new objects of pleasure in his beloved Features.
He takes perpetual recreation, a perpetual greediness seizes him, and he always
finds something yet farther to desire. Like a mind devoted to Contemplation,
or like the Heaven it self, he moves perpetually, never rests; never weary, but
refreshed by toil: thus the end of one Benefit is the step to the next, which
taking its rise from a redoubled heat, first cherishes the person, and then its
own favors.

Love ought to be immortal, whether as consecrated to Eternity, or whether it
be, because he always supplies the Misfortunes that happen by Death. For who
knows not, that the Death and last Will of a Lover both go together, while the
expiring Lover breaths out his Soul, to be read in his last sigh, whereby he
constitutes her the sole Heiress, sending back all his Affections thither from
whence he last departed? With whom it fares, as with the ancient Philosophers,
to be hurried out of themselves, to enjoy a perpetual ecstasy of Life; and to
be deprived of their own Souls, that another may take their place. Pythagoras
as a Lover, not as a Philosopher, makes me believe the Transmigration of the
Soul. Which in a fleeting posture, as it were at pleasure laying aside her
proper Vestments, and putting off the Spoils of the Body, hastens to more
delightful Mansions, and a fairer Entertainment, as it were to another Elysium.
There is no man happy before this decease, of which Love and Philosophy are the
Cause: while this from the Body frees the Soul, pleasingly swooning away in
Contemplation; the former sends it forth to the Embraces of new Amors. Thence
a loathing, hence the flight and Exit of its self; both ways eagerly desiring a
hasty dissolution, as if covetous to perish like the Arabian Wonder. We find,
that among some of the nicer sort of Ladies, upon the first sight of a noble
Structure, there is a distaste and haughty disdain of the Building; then a
peregrination to those flowery Canopies, wherein because they had not the chance
to be born, they are willing to abide as Strangers, and wax old together; or
rather to be born again, by renewing the first principles of Life. Whoever
denies these to be the Excursions of Transmigrating Souls, let him more
attentively consider, how the Soul still directs herself to that part, where
she may approach nearest to her Lover. If two Lovers join right Hands, you
would swear their Souls were to be felt in their Fingers, and that they
mutually interweav'd themselves together. If they close side to side, you shall
perceive their very Bowels to leap for joy, and the mustering Spirits taking
the alarm, assembled together in a body, beat and salute each other with
frequent Pulses, and as it were strive to make way by breaking Prison. I would
fain know what secret Charm that is, which summons all the blood into the Face,
at the sight of the beloved Object, and causes the discoverer of the wound to
fly upon the Assassinate; just as the blood of a slain Corpse bursts forth at
the appearance of the Homicide, returning the wound to him that gave it: The
purple stream, by what Instinct I know not, here hastening to Revenge, there
speeding to apply the most present Remedy. Behold how greedily those souls that
stand Sentinel in the Ears, catch the Sounds, and presently convert themselves
into the same. The spirits interchange in the mixture of words, and enter into
those very wishes which the Tongue expresses. Those Souls that with a continued
succession dart themselves from the Eyes, consume themselves with gazing, and
languish away with frequent beholding. To all true Lovers, it is the same thing
to speak and to expire, to see and to abandon himself, to behold and
transmigrate into the Object. Thus the whole man speeding to make his Exit,
throws himself sometimes into the Eye, sometimes into the Ear; and only lives
in that part, where he enjoys the object of his Love. Thus Love compels men to
live more contractedly, and like some imperfect Animals to be contented with
one Sense; and yet this to render a man not imperfect, but more Divine, by how
much he requires the fewer Instruments of Life.

However, the Soul is advantaged by the Bodies loss. For by a certain extension
of its Spiritual Bulk, that which seemed confined to one Breast, now governs
two; as if it had two Lives. Distracted between two Bodies, it scarcely knows
for which it was first formed; such is the Increase that all true Love
produces. As it fares with people that have drank over-hard, all things appear
double to Lovers: but no otherwise double, than as the Eyes are so; of which
there is but one only Motion, one Sight alone. You may see two so closely
folded in each others embraces, that they seem to be but one. It Is the same
thing which desires and is desired; that knows not whether it love more truly,
or be beloved more ardently; that cannot be said so much to enjoy, as to be
converted into the wish itself. Ah! bountiful Cupid, thou play'st foul play,
while thou hidest within my Breast what I desire to embrace. Thou art too
favorable; act somewhat more rigidly; order it so, that we may be two, that we
may find our selves to be what we would be. In vain I beg; excess of Enjoyment
will not suffer it: It cannot be; I would divide what is but still the same. To
will and nill the same thing, affords much of Vanity and Irksomness, nothing of
Consortship. While we consult, we only mutually agree; we do not mutual Offices
of Kindness, but incorporate our pleasure. I seem to embrace a shadow for my
Mistress, that presses close at my heels, and imitates my footsteps. Forbear,
my Fairest, I beseech thee, more near to me than my self; order it so, that we
may wish well to each other, but love less. By how much the more simple and
uncompounded every thing is, by so much the more perfect it is. Not to be
comprehended, circumscribed either by Number or Place, is the mark of a Deity.
Whatever is Best, and most supremely Chief, ought to be singly one.

As Love therefore has this mark of Perfection, that is to say, Unity in an
high degree; so is it dignified with another badge of Perfection, to be
Communicative. For whatsoever is perfect, has this strange way to multiply and
increase, by distributing and dealing it self into many parts. This is one part
of his Revenue, that he enriches and advances others. Hence it was that this
bountiful Deity, born for the tutelage of Humane Kind, as prone to Love, as
worthy to be beloved of all men, first instituted that generous sort of
Liberality, to give himself to another; which is the good that may be called
man's Propriety, and is his primitive Gift. Other Gifts are not to be accounted
our own, that is to say, the Graces and Favors of Heaven and Fortune; which
are no more in our power to bestow, than to give away the Sun, or the common
Air we breath, and only enjoy by permission.

Whoever loves, approaches nearest to the Deity, and, like the Deity, makes
this his only business, To do good. No less therefore than they who boast
corporeal Strength, do they who prevail in Vigor of Mind, feel in themselves
the titillations of generation, that is to say, of Speaking and VVriting, which
are the travails of the Brain, and a chaste desire to propagate Virtue. For the
wrestling Inward Soul, and throbbing Spirits, compel fruitful Capacities to
power themselves forth, as the inward heat of Fountains forces up the boiling
water. So far is Love from proceeding of Want, that it rather seems to be
Opulency it self, whose chiefest aim is the relief of Nature; unless any one
will account the Remedies Distempers, because they are joined with the
diseases. We are to complain of the distresses and straits of Nature, since
Love has indulged us this noble Commerce of Humane Kind, whereby every one
delivers himself, and takes another; and whatever is divine in another, he
transfers into his own Coffers: the Heir to another wealth, and supplying his
wants from the abundance of his female Friend.

And yet I am deceived, or there is no Traffic in Friendship, neither is this
the true Rule of Love, Love that thou may be beloved. Gratis, and not in
hopes of Gain, we give freely away to another, this same Thing, whatever we
are; yet with a desire of communicating, though it be our hap to change. For
what more liberal and free Examples of Loving, than those of God and Parents?
Whose Affections, above all Gratitude, can only be adored, but never
retaliated. Yet where all endeavor of Gratitude might well be adjudg'd
malapert and impossible, there are some glimpses of a submissive return, while
the Worshipper of a Deity makes him in some measure to be a God by Adoration.
And who from his Parents receives a short use of Life, repays him with a
posthumous being, no less the Heir than Guardian of his transmitted Soul.
Behold the Vine, more truly Cupid's than Bacchus's tree, how with a thousand
Arms, a thousand Embraces, it courts the Oak her Husband, to the end she may
afford to him, by whom she is supported, a more plentiful Ornament and Succor.
She loads him with no other burdens than juicie Pearls, and shade to defend
from the Injuries of the weather him that sustains her. Love never seeks, but
brings assistance. So that it is a mark of Grandeur, and the grand Difference
of those above, more willingly, more gladly to love, than be beloved.

Hence then, you who believe, that like the feeble beasts, men only propagate
for safety, rather than for Friendships sake. Know, that Love, whom once you
thought a Boy, is now grown up to Maturity. Know, that to these Mysteries
whatever is infirm, or of weak and tender years, is forbidden to approach.
Neither Children, nor Old-men, nor above all, any of perverse and froward
Disposition, are to serve under Cupid's Banners. What an inequality of Combat
is that, where it will be a shame either to vanquish or overcome, where to fly
will be more honorable? What League or Commerce can there be between those,
who have nothing in common but only this, That they live?

And why should that wanton Age be admitted, that changes Companions like the
Sports it uses? In whom not to understand the Causes of Love and Hatred, is the
Merit of their Innocence, and a Virtue deserving Pity? Which as it renders to
all Parents equal Duty and Affection, deserves for that reason their Parents
Indulgence.

What should we do with that other over-rigid fag-end of Life, no less
troublesome to its self than others? That Age which only doats upon a Staff, and
takes a piece of Wood for a Man, to support himself; who is as often angry as
his Gout rages, and querulously imputes his Diseases, as Crimes, to his Friend?
Who with a Mind, as trembling and shivering as his Body, suspects all People
and all Sexes. He fears all Kindnesses, as devices to ensnare him. To seek to
please him, is to act the Surgeon, and embalm the dead. He envies me the Sports
of Youth, or else corrects them according to the Exemplar of his past Life. He
blames my actions, that he may applaud his own, too nearly my Rival. You Would
think him crazed, to hear him repeat the Stories of his Youth, and make his own
Epitaphs. Nay, he continually chides and bauls at me, because I am not as old
as he, that we may dye together. I seem to stand before a Magistrate, not a
Companion. What man, more cruel than Mezentius, would espouse dead Carcases to
warm Embraces? or disturb the Pleasures of Life with maundring Counsel and
unseasonable Advice? What unequal Judge is that, who would command me to live
backward with a man of another Age? With whom to live in familiarity, is a
Crime; to reverence, is to proscribe him without the bounds of Love and Laws of
Humanity, by a kind of Canonization. To whom this only remains, to intrigue
themselves with the Amors of others, to intermix their Precepts and Directions
like Philters, to teach and wish. For these poor Creatures only twinkle like an
expiring Snuff; they live only to show they have lived; and usurp the Torches
of Hymen, to grace their Funeral-Pomp, and light 'em to their Graves.

But when Youth and Beauty court each other, there is the perfection of
delight. For true Love is a desire of real Beauty; which real Beauty is not
humane and mortal, but immortal and divine. So that they who associate with
this divine Beauty, live not in this world, but as it were in Heaven, like so
many Deities. For they are a sort of Deities, who despise mortal things as
divine; and aspire to divine things as mortal. Now for a Man to love a
beautiful Woman, is not to love another, but in part to love himself, or rather
the other half of himself. For Man at first had two Faces, four Hands, four
Feet, and all other Members alike; but afterward he was divided into two
Sexes, as now he remains, by Jupiter, against whom he adventured to rebel. But
misliking this Separation, and willing to return to his first estate, as they
rose upon their feet, both the halves closed together again, as they have done
ever since; and this is called loving and being loved. For when a Man loves a
Woman, he seeks his other half; and the same thing do Women, when they fix
their Affections upon Men.

However, this is the supreme Office of Reason, to make a right choice of
Disposition and Conditions; to choose a Companion with whom we are sure to live
with more delight than with our selves; whose judgment we may be sure to follow
as our own: or else to stay till we can find a proper Object of Love. Then
also so to love, like one who is guided by Judgment, not carried away by
Passion; like one so far from ceasing, that he is always beginning to Love.
This is to join Patience with Constancy. This is to receive the Idea more
fairly imprinted in the Mind, than in Wax, and to preserve more steadfastly.
It Is the Office of Virtue, to determine upon one measure of wishing; to covet a
disposition and inclination like his own, through all the changes of Fortune;
and so to make two of one, that they may act the same person. They are to be
such, as of necessity ought to have the same Will, having no other Desires but
what are virtuous and noble. There ought also to be an exact Communion, because
they are to impart the Virtues which they possess, without Envy; and therefore
eagerly desire to communicate the Riches of the Mind. It being the part of a
candid Soul, like the Light of Heaven, to lavish it self with a perpetual
Prodigality. It is a firmer Bond, than the Stoic's Chain of the Fates, which
creates the alliance of Souls, not so much to have the same Parent, as to have
the same Original of Life, that is to say, Reason; and which has a more vital
vigor to be filled with the same honest Affections, rather than with the same
Blood: that the Heart should be smitten with the same Desires, rather than that
the Arteries should spin the same Spirits. It Is a small thing to believe the
same Soul, only somewhat separated in two Bodies, to have the same Thoughts in
two Minds. There can be no distraction of thoghts, where there is nothing left
to make a distinction of Two. For whatever distinguishes, at length separates;
nay sometimes propinquity of Alliance begets a fiercer Enmity, which often
happens among half Kindred.

In vain do Vices imitate the leagues and ties of Friendship, as they endeavor
to ape several other acts of Virtues. In vicious men, to have the same
Delights, as well as to have the same Mistresses, kindles Hatred out of Love.
To have the same Benefits, (though this sounds more religiously, than to have
the same Parents) ill grounded upon familiarity, feeds Envy; and begets louder
brawls, than those of Crows or Coheirs, that mutually prey upon each other.
There are none that will envy them, but admire how they came together: rather
they will deny any Complacency between them, but only as it fares with those
that sail both in one Ship, whom Fears and Dangers knit together; who are no
sooner come ashore, but their Friendship shipwracks, as if they had met with a
Land-storm; and their affection to Trade rather than Friendship, separates some
one way, some another. With what Fidelity can they agree with others, whom
nothing of Kindness, but a loathing of themselves, have constrained to this
custom of Society? With much ado they endure themselves, and strive to shun
themselves among the Crowd; not out of any delight, but to ease themselves as
much as lies in their power. For who can please them, who are displeased with
themselves? Who abominate undefiled conditions, and unlike their own, and dread
them, as the Guilty do the Seat of Justice. Emulous manners (as if they feared
to be tried by Imitation) as Rivals, lest they should be excluded, they utterly
exclude, and like the deformed, fly the sight of the Mirror. This is the first
punishment of Improbity, by her own Sentence to be condemned among men to the
most desert of Solitudes, and unfaithful Society: with much labor to act all
things in vain; by Obsequiousness to purchase the favor of others; to let out
his mercenary Soul to Flattery; diligently to court his Friends, but no
otherwise than as we clean our shoes, and take care of our Cattle, that they be
the more serviceable to us: to toil for his own sake, to meet with Ingratitude
in the midst of his profusion; and among all these Allurements of Fortune, to
fear and doubt, and be tormented with a hatred and loathing of himself. Who
would choose him for his other self, whom he sees to be his Adversary? Or who
would accept the severe Favor of him, whom he cannot love with the same
Affection as he loves himself? Whose most serene looks, like those of Mars or
Fortune, he ought to fear; and timorously enjoy his own Joys as snares, or
Pleasures perishing with the next Sun and Wind. Methinks I see Twins at strife
with each other, the Embraces of Wrestlers, the Countenances of Divorcements;
contrary flights, always avoiding each other. Hence, thou Prodigy of Venus;
Nature abhors those more than Monsters, being the Copulations and mixtures of
Creatures of various kinds: Who like the ancient Emperors, Married solemnly
for a time; but when the humor was over, dissolved their Nuptials, and renewed
their Divorces as often as the heat of their desire cooled. Whose Favors
continue but the short space of a Banquet, which presently dismisses the Guests
when their Bellies are full: Who are altogether ignorant of what they so
eagerly desire; an accidental Affection, springing from the Rage of Desire, as
Venus formerly from the rage of the Sea. Sustained by the Drunkenness of
Error, but voluntarily condemned, so soon as they come to themselves. I may
say indeed, that whosoever loves through violence of Passion or Distemper, may
be thought to burn and rage like men in Feverish Fits, but never truly to
consent, or harmoniously to agree.

It was not for the maintenance of Luxury, but for the Instruction of the
world, that Nature, like Lycurgus, provided by a more severe Edict, that no
person should be without his Friend. Prudently done, that the same Necessity
should be imposed upon us, of Living and Loving; and that the same Heat should
cherish and inflame the Hearts of Men. Thus the Epicureans, who could think
themselves secure without the Protection of the Gods, could not live without
Love, the Fear and Religion whereof rendered their Lives more pleasant. So
prone we are rather to feign than confess a Deity. And because it is natural to
us, to be acted by the Instinct of Love and Piety; by the same Zeal of
Superstition, lest we should want an Object of Veneration, we adopt into our
Friendship Dogs, Cats, and whatever idle Egypt worshipped. Nay, for want of
Woers, the impatient Gellia commits Adultery with her own reflection in the
Looking-Glass; and what Egypt would have been ashamed of, a more filthy
creature than all the Monsters of Nile, she falls in lustful Love with her
self: in this only to be pardoned, for that the same Madness possesses all
Mortals, rather to love insipidly than not at all. Other Affections, being
either at our own disposal, or wasting with their own violence, easily vanish.
Grief, if it does not give way to Reason, yields to Time or Hatred. Hatred
itself reproached by crabbed Choler, or stifled by Fear, grows first of all
displeasing to it self. Fear also, if other Remedies are wanting, may be
oppressed by the evils themselves; and overcome by its own weight, may be cured
by Insensibility. Anger also, the fiercest of all the Passions, tamely changes
into a kind of Clemency; or being satisfied, buries its fury in the wound.
This is the only Passion that riots in Adversity, and wantonizes in Oppression:
not born, like the rest, to be extinguished; but being content to cease, it
passes into Necessity and a voluntary Fate. Spontaneously it disrobes it self
of that Liberty, which it has consumed in choosing that, which with a perpetual
desire it may both possess and prosecute: what is distastful, it may at some
time utterly hate. For what shame or curb can there be upon Desire, whose
wishes though erroneous, yet with an ingenuous Error, aspire to what they
think the noblest of all things? He is also esteemed the most unworthy, who is
not mad beyond all measure; who coveting more, still thinks he covets not
enough; and more enjoying, believes he enjoys not enough; in vain applauding
himself as always happy.

So it is, Nature has by the same Edict ordained, that we should love none, or
not the best. The first of which is, with an inhumane Pride to condemn all
humane Kind. The other is the worst sort of Parricide, to make away with
himself; who having the choice of Life, who being the Arbiter of his own
Nativity, when it is in his power to create himself anew in another, had rather
perish. There is but one Kingdom of the Heart, like that of Alexander, which
is due to the best; whom to find out, is well worth the labor of Life. A
person endowed with all the perfections of Humanity, adorned with the whole
Hyperbole of Virtue, which we may either meet with or feign; which man has only
the liberty to know, not to possess. Such an one, that when we have formed in
our impossible Wishes, we shall find at length to be, either an Idea or a
Deity. But now you will say, we have imagined one too worthy, as to be above
being lawful to be beloved, as being only fit for Adoration. That which is
worthy of Love, is more worthy of being worshipped. These flames are only due to
Altars. Nature indulged this desire, which she is not able to satisfy, as a
reproach to her self. But lest that should become a Torment, which she intended
as one of her chiefest Graces; whatever is wanting in the things themselves,
she would have supplied by our Imagination and Opinion, that at least we may be
happy in our Frenzy. We are deluded by the supposititious Fucus or false
coloring of Beauty, and are deceived, before we seem happy. Like Pigmaleon, we
fall in love with the Statue which we have made, not believing it to be carved,
but begotten. Deluded by the Darkness of our own Mist, we embrace our Cloud for
Juno: and it delights us to be deceived. So natural it is to Humanity to fail,
to err and be beguiled. The Imposture is not put upon our Misfortunes, but
upon our Wishes; to the end the Deceit may more gainfully delight than the
juggles of Accomptants, and enrich with a specious sort of Gain. For that
indeed we are more certainly happy in our Credulity, and as it happens among
many, we are richer in the fame and opinion of our Wealth, than in the
ampleness of our Fortunes. Most auspicious Gifts, not of Fortune, but of
Imagination! Oh Prodigy of Riches never to be foregone, as often as we think it
requisite to be angry with the Gods, or jest with Fortune! Which no Violence
nor no other opinion can ravish from us, but only to supply us with more. Let
it be so, let Variety delight Opinion, as the Sister of Fortune or Nature; yet
shall she not admit Monsters for varieties sake. She does not wantonnize in
this Levity, but strives to supply the defect of things. For the Vicissitudes
of Affections and things, are composed for Solace and Remedy, not for nice
inspection. It Is not man's fault, but the Reproach and Infelicity of Nature,
that we reprehend the wandering and alternative humors of Love. That put off
their old Friends, like their old Clothes; that slightly taste Men, as Bees do
Flowers. To whom because we propound a Skeptical Love, it cannot be thought
Inconstancy, but Judgment, to wander with delight, and sip from all Plants,
that of which they can never find enough. There is nothing that deserves a
long Embrace. Those things we so much boast of, are not Virtues, but the
shadows of Virtue: which like Pictures that are to be looked on at a distance,
will not endure a near, a close survey. The whole name of Constancy is not so
much worth, that I should not admire clearer Merits; that I should not regard
the greater Stars, because I was once born under lesser; that I should love my
Diseases and Distempers, lest I should be said to have changed my former
Condition; that I should submit to Chance, or what more often erres, my own
Judgment, as to a certain Destiny. Suffer me, pray now, more vehemently to
admire these particles of a Diviner Genius, which first astonished me in thee,
grown to a riper perfection in another. Permit those progresses in Love, which
thou thy self have begot, cherished up. Thou who have taught me to prefer the
candor of the Mind, before the Snow of Lillies; and rude Sincerity, before
soft but over-foolish Courtesy, have now taught me, upon the sight of a
brighter splendor, to despise thee; unless from thence I may not seem so much
to contemn, as to adore thee, under a most illustrious Image. Thus lesser
Tapers are not extinguished, but out-shone; and less Stars for shame abscond
themselves, when a more splendid Constellation rises. Why do thou invoke the
Faith of Gods and Men? Thou art beloved by me on this condition, while thou
either art, or seem to me to be beyond compare, the best of all.

Behold the insensible Love-sports of Nature! behold how she has excited the
worst of all her pieces to workmanship to the best of Actions, out of an
admiration of a more excellent Beauty. It was the Will of Nature, conscious to
her self of Injury, and shameful sloth, which oftener brings forth Abortives,
than perfect Births: and therefore she has endued them with an Operative
Faculty, to enable them to come nearer their Idea's, and owe their own
polishing to themselves. Hence the Marigold, though fixed in the Earth, follows
the flight of the Sun; and sucking in his Beams with a greedy appetite, becomes
a vegetable Star. With the same emulous Ardour while the Stones imbibe the
Ethereal flames, they receive a congealed Brightness and solid Light; and they
that were the excrements of a hard and rigid heap, become Jewels, and shine no
less in the Rock, than in the Lovers Rings. By this alluring Art, while the
Ocean admits as well the Image as the Motion of the Moon, it seems to
correspond with the Intelligence of the Celestial Orb. By this lovely Envy,
while Iron is drawn away, as it were with admiration of the Magnet, by and by
becomes the Magnet it self; it exercises all its Operations, and draws, as it
was drawn before. Though Philosophers were wanting, we have the Mathematical
waves, that tell us of the Eclipses of the Moon, more certainly than the
Ephemerides. We have your Astronomer-Flowers, that teach us the Motion of the
Sun, and instead of Dyals, show us the time of the Day. And though there were
no Spectators of this Theater, yet is universal Nature ravished with a
Veneration of it self: And as both the Eyes of the World, so both Worlds
contemplate and feed themselves with the mutual sight of each other. Nature
has ever provided for her affairs, by committing the World to the Guardianship
of Love; so that an idle Deity may be either denied or contemned.

But when other things are so ordered, as to receive and want, only Man knows
how to love. In those things she has only rough drawn an imperfect Affection,
to practice in lesser things, what she intended to bring to perfection in Man.
Though I confess this Affection of men has the same original and growth, as
man himself; being as it were at several births endowed with Life, Sense and
Reason. For Love at first unfeather'd, creeps along by the instinct of formless
Sympathy; then it comes to use the wings of Desire; after that it matures to
Manhood, becomes Reason, which was before the violence of Passion, or the
weight of the predominant Element. For while the Infant-heat sits brooding in
the Heart, ere it has hatched the panting sparks, Desire dares hardly give
credit to itself. When the new-wounded Heart, uncertain of the Smiters hand, or
of the hurt itself, feels the pains of Infants, when their Teeth first cut
their Gums: but when Desire increasing, they begin to kiss and bill, then
Ring-doves you behold, not Men: When in wanton Contentions they make their
Amorous moans, then you hear the Turtles voice, who being by Nature composed to
Kindness, with a harmless Affection prosecute their innocent Loves, while
Dolphins and Lizzards prefer humane kind. But a more generous Passion seizes
Men whose flames are of full maturity, though blind enough perhaps. By this
blind force, like the Idalian Doves with their eyes sealed up, we are carried
upward, and ignorantly strive with all our might to reach Heaven, as our Nest.
In this manner do the very Vices of Lovers show a nature covetous of Divinity,
and the very Errors of this Affection breathe somewhat immortal. So that that
more impure Desire which derides the Nuptials of the Virtues, and the
Copulation of Minds, that seeks for something to fill its embraces, and
worships Venus, though threatening Storms and Shipwreck to its Nativity, seems
to be inflamed not so much with the Tapers of Hymen, as with the desire of
Eternity; while it so eagerly seeks to survive itself, and by a continued
series* of Succession to survive itself. He, whom a Supper makes thee his
Friend, and a Morsel causes to sawn upon thee like a Beast, who loves thy
Dainties, not thee: He that values Man, as he values his Farm, and exercises
mercenary Love with a trafficking Soul; the one makes use of Love like Money,
but the Money of the Gods, by means whereof we traffic with Heaven, and enrich
ourselves with Divinity; the other enjoys his Love for the advantage of Luxury
and Banquets: for Love is accounted the Nectar of the Gods. Both certainly with
less Covetousness provide for their own advantage, whether he that seeks for a
Patrimony, or for food out of Affection, than he who with a liberal Mind
hastens to give away perishing Riches, and to transfer them out of the reach of
Fortune or Fate, before they are quite decayed. Who though he expect no return
of Gratitude, yet carries off a vast gain, which is, That he has done a
Kindness; So that although he gave greatly away, yet his recompense is much
larger, that is, Virtue. Great Gifts, and such as Modesty almost forbids us to
receive, are more profitable to the Donor, either because they render him the
more revered, as from whom little things are not expected; or because he
bestows a Benefit more necessary than that of Jove, or the Sun itself; as from
whom Benefits are looked upon as Debts, paid by him out of Duty and Custom;
whose Munificence is such, as if he intended to loose the benefit of Thanks,
through the largeness and frequency of his Bounty.

What shall I think of him, that seeks to please, and not to love? Whom I visit
like a Summer-tree, which affords me leisure and shade, but of no use in the
depth of Winter; to whom we that love more severely, are often used: thunder
out this Saying, The name of Friend, like that of Wife, is a name of Dignity,
not of Pleasure. Thou have invented a new Delight, beyond that of embracing. By
this sort of Wantonness, worse than that of the Stews, thou have deflowered Love
it self. Diligently to please, is the Art of Flatterers, and the alluring
venom of Harlotrie Society: Splendidly to entertain, is the Intrigue of those
that fish for their own ends; to soothe with Bribes* the common trick of
Suitors; the Rudiment of loving, not the life of Lovers. Far be it from us to
believe him to be a Friend, whom while we desire, he is a torment to us; when
we enjoy him, irksome. Yet they are not far out of the way, who believe all
Lovers inhabit Elysium, and that Flowers spring up, wherere they tread. There
are no other Joys in Heaven, than to Love and be Beloved; no other upon Earth.
That divine Flame which makes the Empyreum, and is to be the Happiness of our
future Life, shall be the only Solace of this. All other things we suffer;
those only we enjoy, which we pluck up by force with our wishes, which we
choose, and for whose sake we endure all other Hardships. In Storms we see the
Brethren Twins, with an earnest gladness rejoicing together, and bringing no
less liquid Joys to the Saylors than to themselves; but having joined their
Lights, they loose themselves in their Embraces, and become Twins again. We
have seen the Favorites of Venus encompassed with a Cloud, like young Brides
under their silken Veils, led to their wishes with a more secret Triumph. We
confess, there is in Love something more potent than Misery, more Majestical
than Honor, more splendid than Riches, more delightful than Pleasure; for
whose sake we despise all those things; for whose sake on the other side we do
not contemn, but have those things in Veneration. It enjoys that Privilege of
Majesty, that no Ignominy can touch it: rather it frees from Infamy, and
renders glorious the very stains and blemishes of Life. Hence it comes to pass,
that the Thirteenth Labor of Hercules is so much applauded, and that it is
reckoned among his praiseworthy deeds to have handled a Distaff, as well as
brandished his Club; wherewith, after he had vanquished all other wild Beasts,
it remained for him to tame that Monster Woman. Why do we admire those
immaculate Rays of Phoebus, since the Tapers of Hymen give a luster to sordid
things, being never themselves defiled?

Why does the famished Soul so sollicitously seek Divinity in things below, if
it bring Divinity along with it? And indeed whatever we love, all that is
Deity; Whatever thou desire is Jupiter. How? Does Jupiter buy and sell for
that sordid person stamped all over, that admits no Companion without a Dowry?
Yes; but Jupiter thundering under the shape of Gold, and the Deity converted
into a Price. How, Does Jupiter itch with a libidinous Desire? Yes; but Jupiter
in the shape of a Satyr, and the Deity converted into Semeleian flames. Jupiter
invites himself to Supper; but Jupiter lurking under the soft Down of a
beautiful Swan. Jupiter is luxurious, but it is the Ganymedean Jupiter, bedewed
with Nectar and Ambrosia. The Poets were not altogether deceived. Our Loves and
Amors, not those of Jupiter, transformed the Deity into these conceited
Disfigurements.

But because volatile and wandering Love is never at a stay till it come to the
top, or pleasingly discerned, believes itself there arrived, when it is always
the companion of the chiefest Good; or as if it were the chiefest, it ought to
acquiesce in this one thing, and travel earnestly toward this, as Souls covet
Heaven, or Fire the Center. He will have no leisure to tend the Allurements of
new Felicity, if there be any such: He will not endure to love another, nor so
much as himself; he will complain that he is below his own desires, and so
overmuch wanting to that which fills and wearies with overmuch desire; and
after he has wholly set his mind upon one, yet cannot find he has done
enough, it remains that he must be cruel to all, but Stoics and Monks. Hence
Monster of Syracuse, who invented a new Tyranny, a third degree of Friendship.
Who could not endure to murder a pair of Friends, but endeavored to separate
them; and to intercept the Fidelity which he had emulated, of a Tyrant, being
become a Rival. Tell me, Tyrant, if thou came a threefold Lover to these
Twins, which would thou first receive into thy Bosom? If thou challengest
the equal Embraces of both: Suppose one of them to be led to Death, which
would thou choose, to dye with the one, or live with the other? I find thee
at a loss, like a piece of Iron between two Loadstones, detained from both,
upon the confines of the two Elections. Foolishly thou desir'st to live and dye
both at a time. Equality of Affection amuses a Lover about to adhere to
neither, yet to both. The one expects thy tears, the other would have thee
laugh. Toward the one over-faithful and officious, toward the other impious. So
that the Mind thus torn in several pieces, like Metius, deservedly merits the
punishment of Metius for its Perjury. Consider well Loves Dominion, or his
Submission (for certainly these new Eteocle's and Polynice's, command and obey
by turns) there is in both somewhat singular, they will not admit of two
Masters. If thou supposest Love to be a God, he has but one Heaven. If Fire,
Fire has but one Sphere. If Death, the Gods forbid us to expire often; and not
above once to deposite our Souls in the bosom of another, having allowed us
but once to live. If thou call a Lover the Representation, Coin, or Seal of
the Party beloved, which take their form and price from the Image; the Mirror
can be enlivened but with one Effigies at a time; the Coin is to carry the Face
but of one Lord or Prince; the Seal closes up the Epistle to all but one. But
if in Friendship you look upon the Marriage of Souls, it would be a great Crime
to admit Polygamy in male Amors; to wed a new one, having married a former,
and commit Adultery with his Friend.

Does this Affection then, which has distinguished Humane Society from the
herding of Beasts, bring Men about again to Stoic Barbarism, which is the
contempt of all men? Must the the rest of Mankind be hated, to love one?
Heavens forbid. There is nothing more kind, nothing more benign than
Friendship and Philosophy, nothing more the support of the World (except the
Deity.) Minds already soft, easy, and prone to Affability, behave themselves
without Severity or Perverseness to all others. They diffuse their beams like
Phoebus, who guilds Rhodes with a more peculiar Light. The party beloved is
dedicated to the Lover, no otherwise than a Book; sent to one, but to be read
by all. We congratulate those candid Souls, who like the Gods, cherish with
their favorable Influence, not one person, but all humane Kind. Who like our
first Parents, look upon all Nations as one Family; or as if their Minds were
equal to the extent of the Terrestrial Globe, love all the World as their
native Country. But this we do not call Friendship, but a certain Benevolence,
and uncertain Humanity. Neither do we blame this, or receive it with less
candor, than what we practice toward Enemies; but we would restrain those
luxurious and Court-like Affections, that pride themselves in number of
Salutes, and bands of Followers; that hunt after these Ensigns as well of
Grandeur as Virtue, sweating in the crowds of their Retainers. But it is the
humor of your haughty Ladies, and suspected for their Chastity, by a
dissembled Obsequiousness to lie in wait for the Affections of others; merry
toward all, but kind only to one; to give nods of distinction sometimes to
one, sometimes to another; to distribute up and down their alluring Looks; to
scatter and divide their enticing Smiles; lastly, as it were to swoon away; and
having caught the prey, to withdraw both the bait and the allurement. A most
wicked sort of Pride, to number the herds of Lovers among Female Riches and the
Revenues of Beauty.

But because he cannot endure to love less, and more he cannot love, whoever is
inflamed to the highest with a genuine fire; nor is it enough for him to labor
under a disgust of others, unless he also loath himself; denying the division
of his flames as well to himself, as to others; therefore he freezes within his
own proper Sphere, and in the midst of those fires wherein he breaths, grows
stark and benumbed, like the cold Salamander. For that his Soul, being
altogether departed from, and forgetful of its self, he fears all things in his
Friends behalf, in regard of himself, nothing, but only lest he should fail in
any part of his duty. While he deceives himself, he is wise for another, and
submits himself to Fate, or to a better Guardianship, the Providence of his
Friend. Who on the other side, alternatively takes care of him, fears, and
provides against Danger. He like an assisting Soul appoints him a Mind, that
he may seem to approach the regiment of Heaven, which is governed by an
Intelligence: Because, I say, whoever adopts himself to another, abjures
himself, and as one deceased, delivers himself up to Oblivion; and as it is but
reason, esteems him only dear, with whom, as youngest born, he lives a more
lively Life, and like a pallid Shade abides and sports about his Body. Whoever
he were that was the Doctor of Amors, he established for an unjust measure of
Affections, the Love of himself; and idly proposed our selves to our selves, as
Exemplars of Loving. How little is every one to himself? Who is he, not
enslaved to his own Desires, or infected with his own Customs, that lives less
for another, than for himself? Neither does this Precept spring from our Vices,
but from our Virtues, that we should be assistant and serviceable to others.
Some Virtues are severe toward the Professor; and they serve with us, that
under others merit generous Stipends. That Modesty, which dictates reproaches
to its self, and abhors all sorts of Scarlet but that of a chaste and humble
Lip, obstinately vaunts the Praises of another, and translates the Honors due
to its self. Ambition that toyls under another name, meets with the Titles of
Candor and Fidelity. That Brass and Iron which surrounds the breast, only forms
man into a shield for others; that he may be able to endure the blows, which he
labors to ward from others. No man dies in the defense of himself, lest he
should dye; but to prevent the fate of Parents, Children, or some other Friend.
What have I said, no man dies? No man lives for his own sake. If then so much
Gallantry, on this side Friendship, proceed from bare Virtue and Nature it
self, certainly Friendship should not impose any other Law upon Good Will, but
only this, Not to know the measure, or to prefix other limits, than what the
Desires of Lovers design. Let no man love who governs his Affection, but will
not be governed; who loves cautiously according to rule, as if he were about to
hate. Some one may love naturally; no man truly loves, who answers his Lover
according to proportion, and as it were loves by weight.

Long Veneration keeps me in suspense, as a confused Lover, that has wasted his
Sight with beholding a Divine Form, uncertain which part of noble Beauty first
to admire. Yet has he made such a progress, as to admire his own amazement, and
to give the chief honor to every particular Feature; and to assent to all,
though praising distinct parts, and various in their judgments. I hear
Dionysius defining Love to be a Circle returning from Good, through Good, to
Good again. Hence I acknowledge Rings to be not only Pledges, but the
Hieroglyphics of Love. This Circle seems to be expressed by the perpetual heat
of Lovers, that whirls round with the Blood like an Orbicular motion; such is
that Ethereal fire, where the immortal flame both feeds and satisfies it self.
Who loves what he has loved, moves Spherically in his own footsteps: And he
that loves only that he may love, revolves to himself, and there meets himself,
and closes the Circle.

I hear Aristophanes, and readily assent, who affirms, that the main Mystery of
Love, is to be reduced to the same from whence we were. For we see in Natural
Motion, how all things run back to their first Principles. By the Law of Nature
we wholly employ the Faculties of our Souls in the service of those from whom
we received 'em; and by a certain series of Piety, and gradation of Affinity,
we reverence those names of Country, Parents, God, as more dear than our Lives.
I know not whether I may call a Manlover blind and incestuous, or provident
and holy, who is always deeply in love with something of his Original, and
therefore prosecutes his Parents with a pious flame. Neither is he much out of
the way, who takes for his Parent the person from whom he gains a new lot of
Life; and renews his Nativity at the noble price of his Piety. But you, O
Thales, and you, O Empedocles, the one leaping into the Water, the other into
the Fire; the one by chance, the other advisedly; both of ye made too much
haste to dissolve not only Philosophy, but the Philosophers themselves into
their first Principles, and to plunge the vital Particles of Souls in their
first Elements. Yet thus the Errors of Philosophers excuse the Errors of the
Affections; and while famished Souls, like famished Bodies, are nourished with
those things of which they consist, you would swear that the liquid Soul were
infused into great Drinkers, the bloody Soul into Tyrants. You would say that
sordid people were newly come out of the mud; that the barbarous Stoics were
only the Statues of men, hewn out of the cold Stone. If we suppose that
familiar and well-acquainted Souls are sent again into the world, not without a
divorce from the common Seminary of Souls, or the conjoined Mansion of formerly
Double-bodied Man; we find this in some measure to be true, by the eager
endeavors of the Parts of dissected Worms to meet together again; as also by
this, that we see some persons at first sight, rushing into each others
Embraces, as if they had remembered their former Fellowship. How did the
Platonic transmigrate all into Memory, when he taught* that to Love and
Philosophize was but to remember!

Indeed, to him who believes that to Love is the same thing as to Philosophize,
this is no more than to excite those Souls slid down from Heaven, together with
their Bodies, to a perpetual Contemplation of Heaven, and to breathe with a
continual desire of Eternity. This is that, I know not what Ardour, which
begetting in Mortals, always in Emulation with the Gods, both a loathing of
their condition, and means to remedy it; hastens to put off the most frail part
of man. Hence furnished with many eyes, what the Sun cannot do, we behold both
ends of the Earth at one time. Hence it was that Amphitryo could look after his
House and his Camp at once. Hence it is, that without any limit of time or
space, we live a posthumous Life, either by our Friends the Guardians of our
transmitted Souls, or our Children, Heirs of our transmitted Lives.

Plato prevents the wonderer at these things, with a nearer Experiment; for
this same Platonic affirms, that this same Cupid is a desire of enjoying and
forming Beauty in a fair Object. Fain, indeed, we would enjoy, not with a
fruitless delight always woe and contemplate, that by an addition of Splendor,
as by the meeting of a Star in Conjunction, the Influence may be the greater,
and that so the Star may become a Constellation. Therefore as Pictures, so the
Countenances of extraordinary Majesty, flattering beyond our humane condition,
affect the Beholders with a certain pleasure, but with no desire. And that same
portion of Beauty, which recreates the Eyes with that same delicacy of Symmetry
and Color, after death shall meet with more Spectators than Lovers. Nothing
withered, or dead, can move living Affections; neither is the pleasure of
enjoying, greater than that of forming pleasure. Lust is from Nature, which
indulges this Art as well to the Mind as to the Countenance, that where e're
it should fix its sight, it might expunge it self. Therefore all Beauty loves a
Mirror; and lest there should want a Spectator, seeks its self, beholding its
own reflection. I call thee to witness, noble Socrates, the Master both of Love
and Sanctity; who do the same as a Philosopher, which the Statuary did
before, both shape and polish men; though the price not only of the Art, but of
the matter, must be enhaunsed. For which reason it was thy Custom to enrol in
thy Schools, as in a Nursery of Women, such beautiful Auditors, as Phaedrus and
Alcibiades, who might easily imbibe thy Soul, and render thy reflection more
fair: as being more smooth than all the Mirrours in the world, and more apt to
take an impression than wax it self. Something there is, whatever it is, which
with a Celestial brightness, like that of the Stars, surpasses humane Envy; but
allures Adoration, and ravishes Love to itsself with a specious enticement; and
so certainly, so entirely possesses us, that it will not suffer us to turn our
sight upon any other Object. Nothing but what is adorned with such beams as
these, nothing but what thus draws and smites the Eyes, can dazzle and inflame
our Minds. Even our very Virtues flatter us under the lovely shape of Virtue.
And as often as we are minded to err with Nature, as often as we seek among
Monsters for something to be adopted into the number of Angels, as well as into
humane Society; this in them appears pleasant and delightful, that they fear no
Rival, and serve to show the incongruous pleasure of Nature in Contrariety.
Unless any one will deny, that there is any thing deformed in Nature; since
those Animals, which the Grand Artificer has condemned to darkness, retain a
certain Beauty in ugliness; and like Warts and Shadows, set off the rest of the
worlds face. For that which less flatters the sight, is not therefore ugly to
the Eye; but may be accounted a rarity, not frequently seen; which the nicer
sort are wont to purchase at any rate. What may not be accounted sacred, when
Owls and the most ill-favored Creatures have found Adorers? Where since there
is no Deformity, nothing of Hatred remains; neither is the name of Antipathy
admitted, but among the Sects of Philosophers. Wherefore do thou tell me,
among the Documents of Sobriety, how the Colewort shuns the Vine? Sober, not
out of a loathing of Wine, or love of Sobriety, but for thy healths sake. Thus
the Wolf devours the Lamb, Fire feeds upon Water, not out of Hatred, but for
Self-preservation. Thus Man abhors not Man, but Inhumanity; and therefore
guards himself. Thus we do not envy others their Riches, as offended at 'em,
but over-unjustly solicitous for our selves. If there be any Strife of Nature,
certainly the Contention is very favorable, and such as founds and raises
Commonwealths; as sociable Thievery, which lays the foundations of its
Greatness upon others Losses; neither can we call these Spoils, but Gifts, by a
reciprocal Concession. Severe Love! If these Wars must be carried on with thy
Weapons; if Helena must be always purchased by Rapine and Bloodshed, and Venus
be only granted to Mars? Nevertheless, of so great moment it is for us to
perish, that we may please him. Nor do I wonder, when Beauty sets the Gods at
odds, if miserable Paris, and the rest of Mortals, prove such vigorous Rivals
in the same case. Hence it was that Love, the Parent of all the world, formed
Harmony out of Discord, and coupled Vulcan to Venus, that is to say, Fire to
Water; and made an intertexture of the most disagreeing things in Nature. And
when he had framed and adorned the vast bulk of the Universe, for a more than
ordinary Show, He was the first Admirer of his own work; and first felt the
force of that Beauty, which He himself infused. This is that Order, from whence
things borrow not their Softness, but their Strength and Ornament together.
Beauty seems to me to be nothing else but the Consummation, Flower, and
Maturity of every thing. That I take to be beautiful and splendid, which is
entirely what it ought to be. The innate Vigor gives Strength and Figure to
the Sinews: how the half-concocted Gem sparkles in the unpolished mass! and how
the inward juice not only fructifies, but adorns with an Emral-greenness! Thus
we find a Mind composed within, polishes the outward Countenance; honest
Thoughts, and a Mind incontaminated, adorn the cheeks beyond all the Fucus in
the world. The Mind appears through its natural Veil, like the Sun through a
Cloud. This is that brightness of an undefiled Mind, that adds a luster to
the members, that by the virtue of Similitude they may be capable to allure
Souls to themselves; till we come to understand this Original Form, to take a
nearer view of this Deity: and then we find the small value of this Image of
Clay. For what are those Features of the Face, that busy our Eyes with viewing
new Graces, springing every Day? Which we show one to another, calling
auxiliary Worshippers to aid our praises, though so jealous of Rivals? Nothing
but a Superficies, nothing but mere Color, a certain reflection of Lights, a
most thin Shadow; which if we long admire, fades and vanishes while we behold
it. What is that bulk and structure of Sinews, built as it were by Rule and
Compass? Alas! Statues boast a finer skin than men; and the Palace shows us a
more noble Building, than the Master himself. What is that, which is the
chiefest grace of our Bodies, which no painting can imitate, I mean Motion?
Were it more soft and equal than that of the Spheres or Time itself, it has
only this to patronize its vanity; that while it pleases, lest it should grow
irksome, it passes away, and ceases as soon as it begins. But I seem more than I
ought to favor the Errors of Lovers, and the Encomiums of Beauty, who believe
all that is thought beautiful in Bodies, to be rather the shadows of Beauty,
than the ravings of Imagination, or the false coloring of Opinion. Every where
we love that which we suppose to our selves, not what we see. Tell me whence it
comes to pass, that the same face which to one seems brighter than the Stars,
another meets with dislike. Tell me, why some are allured by the fallacious
Softness and Delicacy of the Female Sex? Why Women are delighted with a manly
Fierceness, or, which is more, a careless and stern countenance of Terror? Why
the little and Diminutive are admired by some; Why to others the tall
Proportion, which fills the Eye, appears most Majestic.

I will tell you freely how the business stands. Whatever Figure it be that
feeds the eyes, is either imaginary, and of that kind, that we loose it, when
we cease fondly to dream; or if it be true, unworthy to detain the Soul; but
only it stirs it up, admonishes it, and sends it otherwhere. What ardour of
mind can remain in that, which only the Eye enjoys, and which it knows not how
to communicate? For no man whatsoever, the Beauty of the Mind excepted, could
ever believe himself to be made beautiful by the view of Handsomness, by a
kind of Contagion. That which abides beneath the Soul, ought certainly to be
akin to the Divinity, that is, incorporeal; much more would we have it be
beloved: though that grace of Body, how little soever it be, is without a bulk,
and like our Soul, is seen to reign and wander thorough every part. There is
manifestly to be discerned a flux and splendor of the Soul, or of the Idea,
which intermixing itself in the last operation, diffuses itself through all the
Arteries, and forming all things to its own likeness, translates an assembled
collection of Graces into the Cheeks and Eyes, as to the Center.

Here the Boy Cupid has his Throne erected, who cheats the Beholders, and
brandishes his enlivened flames, having besmeared his Arrows with the wanton
Tapers kindled by the Lightning of his Mothers Eyes. Here Love sports away his
youthful days; but when he comes to riper years, he changes both his abode and
his Arrows. First possessing a middle Dominion, between the Mind and the Body,
upon the confines of both, he innocently deceives the sight: but by and by he
takes his flight into the Mind, where he makes use of a pure and Starrie
Flame; or else he descends to the Body, and like a Meteor, deludes it with an
impure and drossie splendor. Not to use many Arguments, this one thing will
condemn the unhappiness of that Affection, for that it more frequently seizes
the absent, than those that are present; and that sight and enjoyment enforces
them either to a Loathing, or to Madness. What Deity thus afflicts the Madness
of misguided Cupid? Who compells him to desire that, which he most amply
enjoys; and what he most eagerly panted after, nauseously to refuse: and sooner
to loath himself, than to be satisfied with what he desired? He confesses, that
he sought not these delights, but that being ignorant what he should desire,
through the force of a blind Passion, he fell by accident upon these things.
But because these are only the shadows of the thing which the Mind hungers
after, it flies greedily to them, as deluded Birds to painted Grapes, though
those painted Junkets prove rather its torment than its food. Nevertheless, I
acknowledge that these shadows of Beauty will beget the shadows of Love. And as
in the Soul we reverence the likeness of God, so in the Body we admire a
certain shadow, in both a Deity in similitude, and become the woers of
Divinity. For the Mind looks up toward God, as the Eye toward the Sun: From
whose Light it obtains this peculiar, that it sees, that there is nothing else
available to be seen, nor that it can behold any thing else, beyond the sight
of that Object; the full luster of whose beams however we are not able to
behold: For which reason we rather choose to fix our Eyes upon the refracted
Beams, and clouded splendor, to refresh our selves with shadows and faint
delights. Whatever it be, whether a ray of Divinity, a reflection of the Idea,
or an efflux of the Soul, that takes our Eyes and Minds captive under the
Notion of Beauty, it must be something divine, it being only proper to Man to
covet and contemplate Beauty.

And here I cannot but take notice of those Spectrums of supercilious Severity,
who under a form of Sanctity take upon 'em to be pleased with nothing; who
condemn all acts of Humanity, as the extravagancies of solid Kindness tending
to Luxury; who would make this God Cupid, the Contriver of Lust and immoderate
Desires, and the Author of all manner of Tragic Crimes and Impieties; whom we
find to be the Match-maker of Immortality, and the Author of Divinity. Herein
Love exceeds effeminate Luxury, that where there is no return of thanks, there
is the same profit in Love and Liberality; it has its reward in its self. It is
recompense enough to have well deserved. But there is that sought for, which is
of greater value than all this, to be retaliated with equal love; where Souls
equally heated, intermix their awakened flames and light by a mutual collision,
in the same manner as Iron is sharpened by Iron; and foster each other by
reciprocal generation; while the Reflections of two harmonious Hearts answer
each to other, like Faces in a Crystal Fountain. Certainly there is nothing
more pleasing than to love or be beloved, unless it be to love and be beloved
both at one time.

For where we love unfortunately, and that Animals are espoused to our
Embraces, as where Zerxes was joined as it were in solemn Matrimony to Plato,
Polydorus to a Statue, Lesbia to a Statue, whereby they did not so much desire
as undergo a change, and experiment in themselves the Fables of the Poets,
finding themselves as it were changed into Trees, Stones and Birds; it is not
our meanest Felicity to feign Discourses, Answers, and frame Delights to our
selves, as if we intended to be happy at our own, not at the Will of another.
It pleases us to enjoy an Affection, not in vain returning to the Author; where
there is that of Delight still remaining, which is accounted the chiefest in
Love; that we love our Love reciprocally, and like the Sun, enjoy the reflection
of our own heat.

Nor does that other chance of being Beloved, afford less Delight; but more of
Honor. Whence men more extensively court the Affections of others, than they
expend their own. This is without the Ensigns of Magistracy or the Scepter, to
extend the proper Kingdom of the Gods in the Minds of Men. This shows us vast
Felicities and Virtues, and causes us rather to suffer, than render good
Offices. Hence are reckoned so many Trophies of thy Virtues, as we find
Retainers following thy Triumphal Chariot.

But when the Contest is, who shall render most good Offices; when it is a
Combat of Kindness, not after the fashion of the Court, but with a modest shame
to submit, and out of a fear of less well-doing, then is that parity of
reciprocal Kindness, which Aristotle dignified with the known Title of
Friendship, though giving no Example. Well fare that Equality which Justice,
with her Sword and her Balance, has been long attempting, but Love has easily
brought into Custom among Mankind. Sometimes it happens that the distance of
Fortunes or Merits separates Friendship. Jupiter must descend to Earth, and put
off his Deity, before he can enjoy the Embraces of Mortals; Nay, the brute
Deity must descend below man, and work his admittance rather by Contempt than
Terror. Semele has sufficiently taught us, how great a punishment it is to
admit a Deity to her Bed. The adoration of great people, is only sweet to the
ignorant, as approaching nearer to Flattery, than Charity. It Is our Ambition,
not our Friendship, advises us to this, to purchase our selves into the number
of Servants, rather than of Friends. But they are both equal, who have
captivated each other at the expense of true worth. Sometimes we experiment a
more fragrant Ambition, while humble Masters strive to love themselves, and
choose rather to suffer a contempt of Dignity, than a decrease of Candor.
Alexander puts off the Emperor, and by Loving, looses what he won by Conquest;
content that Ephestio should reign, upon condition he may be a part of his
Kingdom. He bestows upon Ephestio the Flatteries which he receives from others;
while he serves Ephestio, he seems to enjoy more than another World. We all
confess that Love is a soothing and restless desire of pleasing them who please
us, either by chance, or through their own virtue, or our mistake. It little
imports either to Life or Friendship, where the heat first kindled. The Heart
moves and throbs never the less for that, continually reverberating our
breasts; and like a double-diligent Importunate, either to tire or force, to
deserve or assuage, cherishes Kindnesses with Kindnesses; and where there is no
place for kind Offices, like one always rendering something, obliges the
Inclinations of the other with a countenance of diligent Obsequiousness, and
strives to please with a fear of displeasing. But this he accounts a benefit,
to have sometimes displeased; by which means he may either hate or reform his
own proceedings. For to be most like to this person, is to be both good and
happy: he dives into the most inward Motions of the heart; performs commands by
conjecture, and fulfils them as yet unknown to the Master, before the pangs of
laboring desire can come to torment him. Neither shall he ever satisfy
himself, though the other has done sufficient: whereby it is apparent, that he
who is the Courter, is delighted with those Offices of Kindness, not so much to
gain favor, as out of a desire to serve; as if Man were a Slave, born by
nature for that one Mistress.

For you must know, that there is the same pedigree and original of Loving, as
of Living. Of some certain things there is an order and mutual agreement among
themselves, either instituted by Nature, or voluntarily undertaken: of things
like or dislike, whereby those are conjoined, those are disunited and parted
asunder. But that tie of Blood is the work of chance, nor does it show any
merit of Affection, as being engrafted in our Breasts, we never admit, but
ignorantly suffer; and now so much as it brings of Necessity, so much it
imposes of Burden. Pardon me therefore, if I hold the name of Friends more
holy than that of Parents. We owe all that to Love, which we attribute to our
Parents; that is, to be led by the Error of easy Piety. For out of their
mutual Love, not out of any Charity to us, it happens that we come to receive
the benefit of this light. Neither does proper Alliance inflame or cherish
Domestic Friendship, but Familiarity, and that same sweet Society in
Calamities, and reciprocal Kindness in common Miseries. I am deceived, or
Lovers are joined together by a more strict alliance, and by a tie so much the
straiter, by how much Reason is above Nature. The force of a man's own Will is
greater than that of Consanguinity. For every one obeys himself the more
steadfastly, by how much he does it with more pleasure, and submits to his own
Laws. But both these conspiring together, how promptly and placidly does this
Affection sway the Mind, by a tacit consent confederating our Will with
Nature?

But O thou least of all the Gods, though greatest of all the Deities, divine
Cupid! It is beneath thy Merits, that the audacious Philosophers and Poets
should only feign thee a God. However, thou have this proper to a Deity, to be
unknown, and to receive sacred reproaches from men. He has also this farther
property of a God, to lead men by a tacit Influence, so that they obey, though
they feel not his Motions; and to draw others against their Wills: insomuch
that all Affections contrary to it, at the beck of his Majesty submit their
Services. While he is pleased to jest, the lofty hang their drooping heads:
the brave and stout fear and tremble at the glittering Darts of splendid eyes.
The Illiterate Heir of a sudden grows eloquent; he no longer buys his
Love-Songs, but grows enraged himself, and sings her praise. To omit the other
Attributes of his Divinity, Love is a Circle eternal, immense, in whom reside
those acts of Providence, to Govern and Cherish: wherein I am the more
confirmed, for that Love's Religion strikes an awe upon the very wicked. They
court in such a manner, as if they were performing Divine Service: Their
Countenances fail, they view their Garments, and compose themselves to all the
habits of Reverence. To what intent? That they may approach their Mistrisses,
as so many Altars: Nay, they strive to be decently absent: For whatever we
love, we believe to be every where present. She is the Arbitatrix of our
Undertakings, the Assistant both of our Virtue and Wit; the lucky Guide of all
our Enterprises; from whom he that goes a Voyage begs fair Weather, the
Travailer safe Return, the Soldier Victory, and all from her to whom he has
devoted the Spoils of his Enemies. Henceforward let it be lawful for Lovers to
salute each other with names borrowed from Heaven, and reverently to sooth one
another with those Titles, under which they are wont to worship the Immortal
Gods.

Neither is there any one who has any reason to envy this Deity, who is so
easily pleased without slaughter and bloodshed; who requires not the fat of
beasts, but faithful Adorers for his Victims; and that he may not want Temples,
erects Altars, and kindles Fires in humane breasts, while the God himself
converted into fire, seems to take care of his own worship. And thus it is,
when a Lover sends forth the sighs of Grief, it seems to me like a certain
kind of Lightning breaking from a Cloud, with a rumbling Thunder, that
afterward vanishes into smoke. While he sweats Tears and boyls his Complaints,
I then think upon the burning of Aetna, and Vesuvius vomiting flames in the
midst of Snow and clouds of Ashes. When burning with a short ardour, feigned
Love sells it self to counterfeit flames, I acknowledge those fictitious
Tapers, and vain Meteors, like the wandering Lights of the middle Region. What
though Fire serve only for humane Use, and for the worship of the Gods? What
though it not only enlighten, but heat out Wits, so that Bacchus and Apollo may
be truly said to derive their Birth from the flames of Love? What though it
rage, where it finds Obstacles in the way, and be nourished with Injuries and
Offenses as with Water? All this does but show the properties of the Ethereal
Fire, which burns and refreshes; which being immortal, satisfies itself, and
needs no fuel. For Love, contented with it self, is the price of its self; that
being immaculate and inviolable, it expiates and takes away the Crimes which it
does not admit, and maintains the Virgin Honors of the Vestal Flame. Lastly,
This farther property has the Celestial Fire, that as the uppermost Element, it
encompasses the vast Orb for the safeguard of the world. Thus the fire of Love
possesses the supremest Creatures, and preserves and closes all the other
Affections. In this only unlike, that it descends below its Sphere to cherish
and foster all the meaner sort of Creatures with vital Heat. Thus is Love made
equal to those two most pure and powerful Beings, God and Fire.

But that which is numbered among the Miracles of Love, astonishes us much
more; while we feel a burning Fever creeping up and down, and burning in the
midst of our Bowels, and yet nothing appears; so that while we feel this
Subterraneal Heat, yet cannot tell from whence it arises, we deny that we burn.
We admire whence it comes to pass, that the Fibers of the Heart, like the
strings of two Lutes, so Harmoniously answer one another. To this, like the
ignorant Musician, we stand mute, and cry, that those Fibers and Strings were
formerly extracted out of the same Entrails. We grant this Maxim to the
Physicians, That Motion is a certain consent in Bodies; finding the same thing
to be true in Minds.

Nor let us torment our selves with doubting, but confidently aver with Plato,
that Love is a Magician. Whence comes it to pass, that Souls by a secret
contact conceive the Seeds and first Flames of Desire? Whence comes it to pass,
that Lovers, like Sorceresses, burn and melt away, by the means of Images and
little Figures, the Bowels of wasting men? Whence comes it to pass, that
beautiful Eyes, like those of Basilisks, bewitch the Sight, and intermixing
beams with beams, knit those Knots, and frame those Chains that bind and
fetter the Beholders? What may I call other than these, those soft Charms by
which Endymion called down the Moon from Heaven? What are all those alluring
Sobs other than Magic Murmurs, and the Philters of Discourse? What are Presents
other than Charms, which infuse a pleasing Poison into those that wear them? I
know not whether to admire the forcible Attracts in her that is Beloved, or the
vanquishing Arguments of obsequiousness in a Lover; those Incantations against
which there is no Remedy, as against Sorcery, either by way of Curse or
Exorcism. Certainly all the whole force of Magic is seated in Love, of which
this is said to be one Miracle, mutually to attract and change things by a
certain commutation of Nature; For that the Members of this world, like the
Arteries of some great Animal, depending upon the same communion of Nature, are
coupled together by a Spirit, that throws it self into the whole Body. By
reason of this binding and commerce of things, it secretly comes to pass, that
Love by a mutual Attraction of Souls, like a Disease contracted by Contagion,
seizes chiefly upon the sound, yet by and by willing to submit to the pleasing
Distemper; while the Captive more severely binds himself, than finds himself
bound in these soft Chains and silken Fetters, and like the Chain itself, is
ignorant of the embraces which he enjoys.

Methinks I seem rather to suffer than describe the passionate and violent
Desires of Lovers, and to act my Argument before I have finished it. Before,
being gently deluded with Dreams and Apparations, I rather underwent, than
described the alternative Fluctuations of a Madness newly enraged. But so soon
as the lovely Countenance of my Mistress had infected my Blood, not with the
rude Image, but with the shadow of the Image; so soon as it has signed my very
Soul, and imprinted its indelible Characters, and possessed the entire man, no
otherwise in my sick Breast, than beneath the tossed and troubled waves; an
uncertain species and shadow, withered and meager, which flies the Approacher,
and vanishes from my Embraces. Streightway removing gently Cupid's Vail, no
sooner does the divine Form of tasted Felicity show it self, but a troublesome
Ignorance begat a care in me of seeking into particulars, what Disposition,
what Endowments, what Family, what Pedigree. For this is the first and last of
Lovers cares and joys, not only to call to remembrance their former Sports, and
rudiments of their Amors; but also to enquire into the years and worth of the
Parents, and to discourse from what noble beginnings their Friendship took its
rise.

Whither does this first Violence, not only of Nature, but of Reason carry us!
Voluntarily deceived, we not only adore Virtue itself, but whatever carries
with it the outside and appearance of Virtue. Sometimes that difficulty, which
guards the path of Virtue with a sacred Horror, and drives away the profane
Vulgar, repels, and yet allures with flatterng Injuries. We more greedily suck
the Honey that lies hid among the Stings. Thus it is a kind of Spur and
Encitement to our future Pleasure, to wait at the threshold of a Mistress, to
suffer a repulse from a more unworthy Rival; and undergo indignities, which
cause him to tear his Hair and bite his Lips.

Note also, that those are the Allurements of Lovers, which among the shadows
of the Virtues are accounted the chiefest. Praises wherewith, as with Incense,
the Gods and Men are pacified; how easily they obtain this property, that while
we endeavor to please others, we please our selves! By what precious
Allurements they enable us to please the most chaste of Matrons; who denying to
be beloved, yet covet to seem amiable. Both egregious Arguments of Virtue. But
there is more of certainty in praising than being praised. For the undeserving
are wont to be most praised, and most desire it, as the deformed covet Fucus's.
But no man can truly praise, but he that is praiseworthy himself. The same
thing does he, or at least would do, that seeks renown by other men's deeds; as
he that erects a Statue to himself, erects a Monument of Virtue. For this is
not to exercise, but to admire and worship Virtue, as a high desert. These are
the Darts of Cupid feathered with his own Wings, which while they gently seem
to stroke, wound more severely.

We are so much men of Glory, and creatures of Virtue, that I am doubtful,
whether I ought to confess, that among the Virtues, we diligently regard those
which are profitable; that is, which exercise and invite Humanity, as Modesty
and Equity; or those which govern and preserve Humanity, as Fortitude and
Munificence. But as Emulation is to the rest of the Virtues, so Munificence
knits our Affections together. Though his Merit is accounted greatest, by how
much there is the less of Desert in the receiver. For all which we ought to be
beholding to Favor, and not to Judgment, which for our sake would cast
Contumely upon the Well-doer. To this Munificence thus awakened, that
Liberality answers which is bred in the breast of every one. And though perhaps
at first it had an unjust esteem of the Donor, because of the Benefits; yet by
and by it loves the Gifts for the Authors sake, who extended that indulgent
mind of Houshold-gods and Parents, beyond the verge of his own Family, and
with a nursing Piety receives Strangers into his bosom, and fosters as her
Relations. Here vanquished Gratitude submits, and being sensible that nothing
can be returned, unless the man himself, he retaliates the Patroness, like a
Goddess, with a faithful Worshipper. Neither does that seem to me to be an
ingenuous Ardour, which returns Benefits as it were Debts, and repays Gifts as
if to quit Scores. He acts not piously but proudly, who unwillingly suffers
himself to be overcome. This is, to refuse, to stop, and not to receive: this
is with greater Pride than Gratitude, to boast particular Wealth, and a
wonderful strife of Munificence. But in regard that Benefits seek nothing more
beyond reception, he only knows to exercise Liberality in receiving, who
heartily interprets, and returns nothing but a grateful Mind. Neither does he
believe this to be the price of his own, but the pledge of another man's
Liberality. These Benefits are the Darts of Cupid, which with a Golden Shaft
inflict a faithful, but a splendid wound. Jupiter courts more powerfully in the
shape of Gold, than under his gaudy Feathers, or in his own divine Form. For
the Idioms of Presents are understood by all; but the Characters of Majesty and
Dignity, and the persuasions of a Rhetorical Pen, are discernible to few.

May not I affirm* that from this Humanity of a facile Mind, proceeds that
Commiseration, which softens the Breast like Wax, and causes it to receive any
impression? May I not say, that from this amplitude of Mind, that proud
Benignity springs, which while it seeks the place of Munificence, extremely
loves the miserable, and loathes the fortunate? May I not believe that hence
proceeds that generous Haughtiness, which shows more Kindness to bended Knees
and downcast Looks, than the Embraces of the Happy; and loves with that
magnificent condition, not to be beloved again?

And here we must confess the wonderful Amors which are darted from the whole
body, where Virtue shows it self; where Candor of Mind tempers the Blood with
Milk; where a liberal Countenance as it were entertains the Beholders; and the
glances of the Eyes are gathered like scattered Coyns; where thou may observe
the dictates of a prudent Lip, and draw from thence certain tacit
consultations of Wisdom; where you may observe reduced to a certain Law, by the
balance of Justice, the strength and vigor of our Arteries, as well as of our
Inclinations; and may as it were handle with thine eyes the enlivened System
of Ethics; where when thou have beheld the transparent Members, like Gems fixed
to the members for Ornament as well as Service, then beholding the rammass'd
strength of Beauty, thou shall cry out, Here, Vulcan, here; come bring away thy
Nets, we have once more here taken Mars in Copulation with Venus. O most
admirable Form! worthy the Empire of more than one Sphere. We give thanks to
Jupiter, that he has not envied so much Beauty to the world. The sight of this
Form, more powerful than Orpheus's Lyre, is sufficient to tame wild Beasts and
Philosophers. This Splendour, more pleasant than the Light itself, deserves,
instead of Phoebus Rays, not only to try the births of Eagles, but of Men: One
would swear that Souls, like falling Stars, had flowed from Heaven, while we
admire the glittering Splendor of Beauty. These are the Darts of Cupid, tipped
with the Light of Eyes brandishing flames, that sparkling burn and prick.

Thus whatsoever is conspicuous, and to which we would be like, that snatches
us to it self with the same ardency, with which we draw those things to our
selves, to which we seem to be like. We give and ask pardon of this Madness,
through which, as Men, we act as Boys, and covet the representations of our
Looking-glasses to kiss and embrace. It Is not the Fate of one Narcissus, but of
all Mankind, to be in love with their own Shadows. This Covetousness is to be
indulged us, whereby we feed upon our like; it being the Law of Minds to be
nourished with their like. Wherefore I do not so much admire the force of
Custom, which reconciles us not only to Bodies, but to Places themselves, and
inanimate trifles. Thus Familiarity, without which, though present, we are but
Pilgrims, gives this efficacy to Custom, to form natural and proper Manners,
and to fit the Mind to the Mind, that we may converse more sweetly and freely
with another, than with our selves. It Is a Hell upon earth, not a Society, for
fear of displeasing, to set our faces in the Looking-glass, in respect to the
Visit; to weigh our words like Gold, before we speak 'em; and to be put to
behave our selves, as at a public Assembly, with premeditated Gestures.

But why do I recount those agreeable species, slightly painted in our Minds,
either by Art, or Nature, or by Custom? When Love has fixed a living Image in
our breasts of all these things, by whose power they move and act. It was well
provided for Lovers, that it is lawful to Love the unwilling. There is no need
of requiring returns and the debt of Loving. If it move nothing that thou art
her Image and her Slave, that thou have lost thy Life and Liberty for her sake;
if the Crime of Impiety and Homicide terrify nothing; yet necessity of Nature
kindles Love out of Love, and Flame out of Flame. Yet Nature would not indulge
that power to love, to dissemble, or otherwise to burn, than as a painted fire.
For let the Countenance or Gestures counterfeit never so much, Dissimulation
will betray it self, either out of an overstudious emulation of imitating, or
by reason of its own sloth. If yet thou will not acknowledge Love to be the
price of Man, that thou may admit him under the notion of Profit, know that
he comprehends in himself all the benefits which he does, or is able to do, and
all above our wishes; without whom I would attribute the Benefits themselves to
Chance and Fate, not to Man; and shall account them rather as things found,
than accepted. By virtue of which Gift, the Poor is Liberal, while he gives
nothing, but liberally wishes. Than which, the Gods neither ask, nor bestow any
thing greater upon Mortals. Surely the potent Philter is this, beyond all the
power of Herbs and Flowers; Love, if thou will be beloved.

But as it is an uncomely thing to ask or give a reason of Love, so is that
Love most worthy which springs, like some Flowers, without the help of seed;
and has this property of Eternity, to exist without a Cause; and like the
Heavens, to be moved by an unseen Intelligence. This is that which we
acknowledge to be all Love by Nature: That Similitude, which partly manifest,
but chiefly occult, which we call Sympathy. From whence without Propinquity or
Custom the near and familiar Soul adheres to the Soul, as plain Bodies adhere
to plain Bodies, only by the glue of Aptitude, never to be separated. Nature
seems to produce Twin-like Minds, as to assign companions for Minds, like
Shades and Genius's to Bodies. Hence, contrary to the Wills of their
Nativities, Men undergo the same Fates, and are born Twins. Most happy pair of
Lovers! more noble sight than that of the Gladiators, where the whole strife in
the duel of Liberality is carried on by good Offices. In this one thing
disagreeing Passions show themselves, while both sollicitous for one another,
exercise their Hatred and their Fears; both, endued with each others Choler,
discern and judge the same things, the one as the other; both touched with the
same Magnet, turn themselves the same way, tend and close the same way. The one
puts on the Countenance of the other, and represents it more faithfully than
the Mirror: The one imitates the Inclinations of the other, more than a
Parasite; to the end he may be like his other self, yet not himself.

While I was stammering out these imperfect Notions, Cupid in disdain snatched
the Pen out of my Hand, and flew away.

FINIS.

