AN APOLOGY FOR THE DISCOURSE OF HUMANE REASON, Written by MA. CLIFFORD, Esquire;
Being a REPLY to PLAIN DEALING. With the Author's Epitaph and Character.

Frustra ei consilium datur, qui per se non sapit, Machiavel. -- Princep^^.
London, Printed for Walter (...) Amen Corner, MDC(...)

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY, EARL OF SHAFTESBURY, Baron Ashley of
Wimbourne St. Giles, and Lord Cooper of Pawlet.
SIR,
I Presume to lay this my Discourse, tending to Peace, humbly at your Feet:
because, it is well known, You are a Courteous, Generous, Excellent, and
Impartial Judge; and not so, more from your long Experience in the highest
Concerns of your Native Country, than from the unequalled choiceness of your
Natural parts; and besides all these (which were not my least Inducements) from
my assurance of your Lordships Condescension, in formerly obliging the, now
deceased, Author of the Discourse about HUMANE REASON, by a particular Favor,
and so significant then, that there may be Reason to doubt, whether, if it had
not been seasonably done, we had ever seen the Publication of that Issue of his
Brain; for nothing has more often dampt the pregnancy of clear Understandings,
than the Iron hand of terrible Necessity, which was Mr. Clifford's Case, till
by the Mediation, and prevalent Influence of your Lordship, his (before) narrow
Salary, as Master of Sutton's Hospital, was enlarged; and consequently, by this
my Apology for him, I have happily gotten opportunity of presenting the best
Sacrifice I could, of Gratitude for him and my self. If then what is here
advanced, shall happen to please your Lordship; I may rationally conclude, it
will not displease the most Discerning and Virtuous part of the English Nation;
so worthy an Esteem it has, of whatever Action does any way appear considerably
good in your opinion; because your Soul cannot own a mean thing, nor
unprofitable to the Public Interest. Pray therefore, Honorable Sir, be
pleased to pardon this boldness of him, whose Design is, and has, for many
years, been, only to let you know, he is, and from a true sense of Duty,

Your Lordships, Most devoted, and most Humble Servant, Albertus Warren.
London, October. 1680.
THE PREFACE.
DEdications, and Prefaces to Books, seldom (if at all) used by the Ancients,
though never so tempting or glorious; like the Bushes of our Taverns, which,
unless answering the Readers or the Guests expectation, always subject the
Writers to Scorn or Ridicule, the Booksellers to Repentance, and I the
Vintners to Poverty: a^er, of which Effects, no Age has been more fertile than
the Modern; every Apology supposing a tincture of Guilt, and good Wine not
needing a Garland: Therefore all that I dare to say here, is, That I have
advisedly done my utmost, to justify Mr. Clifford's Licensed Papers, in his
Discourse of Humane Reason, (which is the Gift of God, as well as Faith) in
opposition to that Gentleman, who, (to confess the truth) has as strongly and
smartly as, I think, can be done, endeavored to expose ^ur Author, not only as
a bold and weak man, but as pernicious in the consequence of his Arguments, to
Men, as Christians and Subjects; which Charge, if it had been true, I, that
honor Truth, would never have opposed: but now, whether that Gentleman who
wrote the Answer, or I, who reply, be in the wrong, (for we cannot both be in
the right) others must judge; or whether, which is possible, we have divided
Truth betwixt us, it is not very considerable, if the standers by reap any
profit by it, which was my aim, and, I hope, was his also. However, I am apt to
flatter my self as Victorious, from this Evidence, which no man can properly
gainsay, that if Humane Reason were not experimentally found to be the supreme
Arbiter in all Appeals, and the true Allay to all the sensible privileges of
Beasts, then, Beasts, for ought we know, are more happy than men: for they can
think, though not syllogize: then, I say, (bateing Reason, which is our Light
to judge of our Self-preservation by;) all Precepts imposed by men in Power,
must be swallowed, though contrary to Peace, all Exhortations to Obedience, in
order to Temporal or Eternal Happiness, must be unexaminable, and we had
continued in a state of War; for no other tie could have obliged us to keep
Covenant, when the Violation had appeared more profitable; and then the Laws,
which Necessity first begot, might have been truly said to be, in a great
measure, (if they who made them did not pretend Reason) rather traps to get
money from honest men, than designed to continue Peace: and though with me, the
Public Reason shall always be very Sacred; yet I hope to wish for, or
propound the Rationability, of either the Explanation, or Correction of some
Laws strainable, and strained by het men, and, posibly, ignorantly zealous, or
ill men, for their private Interests, beyond, if not contrary to, the intent of
former Legislators, in Times of other Complexions, will never be, by any true
Englishman, and wise, objected to me as Criminal: especially at this time,
when some Tools, (made when the Times required them) have their Edges turned by
accident against many quiet, though, probably misguided, Dissenters, to the
pleasant humouring of that Classis of men amongst us, whom both his Majesty,
and his Great Counsel, have declared, we have reason to suspect, and prepare
against, as our Enemies: though, it is plain, that the Bigots on all sides, and
on our Dissenters also, have made moderate Men, and true Lovers of their King
and Country, uneasy; which ugly Fever, next malignant, if the Reason of the
Seat of Power cannot Remedy, we shall be in great danger, lest that Mischief
may return, which a Great Man, not long since, honestly deprecated, in words to
this Effect, viz. It were strange, if We should be twice undone by the same
Method, which God forbid: and every good Subject, by being quiet in his
Station, ought to endeavor to prevent. In the mean time, it is better to
examine, and consult the Reason of things, than by trusting to any Book (not
Sacred) to be slily Cully'd into affected, and unnecessary Zeal, or foolish
Atheism, which will, if it increase overmuch, vainly project to invalidate, not
only the King's, but higher Evidence: nor do I know a better Method of Cure,
(relating to those Fears and Jealousies, which, perhaps are now less terrible
to some good men) than a close retirement to Reason; nor better Advice for
Individuals, when they do go to Law, than to consult that generally Learned and
Old Sergeant, who is reported wittily to have answered a Client lately, That he
thought his Case was good, but could not be positive, unless he knew the Judge:
which shrewd, yet ingenious Opinion, may stand for a celebrated Precedent, and
is as reasonable for us to admire, as it was for the Worthy man to give: and if
it were truly ascribed to that prodigious Master of Law, and consequently of
Humane Reason, it clearly shows, it is generally safer for a man to trust to his
Natural Reason, than to be guided by Books; which are the Counters of Wise men,
but the Money of Fools: For, though Error be almost as old as Truth, and he
that in the Gospel asked what Truth was, would not stay for an Answer, and that
Infidelity, after due search, yet disconviction, may seem no Crime, there is
left to us poor mortals no imaginable Cure for that Evil, nor a more proper
Antidote for to prevent the Debauchery of this conceited Age, than to study the
excellency of Humane Reason, which will lead us to confess, believe and obey
the Commands of the Giver thereof. And this great Truth is that, which,
according to my capacity, I have, in the following Discourse, illustrated, not
by quoting of particular Books, (tho the chiefest are wholly on my side, that
way being a little out of fashion) but by familiar and known Instances, and
whereof, the Reader may easily judge, without trouble or charge: and I have
declined to say any thing (as foreign to my Apology) in Answer to some other
Papers, Printed since the Answer, called Plain Dealing) about the Abuse of
Humane Reason; because it is well known, the wickedness of man's heart has
always been too ready to abuse God's chiefest Blessings unto wantonness, which
does not take off from the Excellency of the Gift: on the other side, we are
commanded to offer up to God our Reasonable Service, and if Faith were contrary
to Reason, no body could believe at all; nay, to speak freely, tho Faith may be
above it, yet few men, without special and particular Revelation, have hitherto
believed the truth of Canonical Scripture, upon any other Conviction, but
Tradition and Comparison, which cannot be done without Reason. As for External
Obedience to Humane Powers, which is a great part of man's Duty, no man (as
Christian) ever pretended hitherto to be warranted therein, but by considering
of it as a general Duty, where such Commands do not contradict the Divine
Precept: so that still it is Reason which must show him such contradiction; and
therefore, till any man can show us a Safer Guide, the point is, if not
absolutely gained, yet all pretenses of a safer Guide must be looked upon as
very fallible.

AN APOLOGY FOR Humane Reason.
IF for no other Cause, yet for this, that it is more generous to vindicate the
Dead, where the Living are concerned in the impressions of Envy upon their
silent Ashes, than to comply with the Humors of our Dearest Relations; and
especially, where Truth is like to suffer by our silence; I have adventured to
publish this small Piece, for the Justification of Mr. Clifford's Excellent
Treatise, Entitled Humane Reason, by way of Reply to that Gent. who wrote the
Answer, called Plain Dealing, without assigning any Reasons why this was not
published till now, having been written at Mr. Clifford's desire, who dyed soon
after.

Pursuant therefore to my Title Page, as to the Country Gentleman's pretty
Story of his traveling and enquiring of a lusty Follow the way to the next
Town, and of his direction, (after wise circumspection) to go by the Esquire's
House; I am obliged to say, the Folly lay in the Enquirer, who might, with the
same Breath, have asked, on which hand, or whether right on, the House stood:
but it seems the Queen of Waters had too much influenced his upper Garret,
being as much out of his Wits, as out of his Way.

But I Will be charitable, only craving leave to infer, it is more than probable,
his narrow Collegiate Education (a thing often fatal to good Wits) has a
little blown him up, and consequently exposed him to the Character of Pedantry;
otherwise, had he consulted, more cooly our Learned Author's very generous
Design, and observed how general an Applause that which he terms a little
Pamphlet, has worthily had here at London, from the best Persons, as to
Understanding, he would have been more civil to the Writer, and more cautious
in his Censures; unless it be grown a Fashion at Cambridge to make up defects
of Reasoning with Clamor or Impertinency: if that be the Mode there, or if it
be not, the Gentleman's Design is equally defeated; for even in the Conduct of
it, he has yielded up the Palm to our Author, as having made use of what way
he conceived most rational to confute him.

However, the Gent. says, and truly, that all which the Author has said
amounts to no more than this, that every man must follow right Reason, which
is his direct way; whither? to his proposed End; and what is that? he has told
him, to Happiness; but he urges, that he who does not before hand know wherein
right Reason does consist (as most Mankind does not) will, says the Gent. be
as much to seek in his way, notwithstanding the Author's Directions, (which
are, that a man should use those Directions with Care and Constancy which
Reason affords) as he himself was, not knowing whereabouts the Esquire's
House was, whereunto his wise Guide directed him.

To all which the Answer is at hand, and easy; for if the way to Happiness be
no otherwise to be found out and attained, than by an orderly pursuance of
Virtue, (which the Gent. will not deny) then to live virtuously is to live
Rationally; consequent whereunto, it appears, that to use Reason, is no
other, than to be obedient to the Divine Law, of which if any man be ignorant,
in Christ'ndom, either he does not follow Reason's guidance, or is a Fool, by
reason of some Defect in his Natural Organs.

The Gent. grants, that by reason of the intricacies of the way to Happiness,
to choose the right paths, and then to guide our selves therein, we had need of
a better Eyesight than is left us by the Fall of our First-father; but
quarrelleth that the Author, after all Considerations, assigns no other Guide
than Reason, and pretends not to understand how that can be; nay, he puts
his Life upon it to verify his ignorance; for he knows of no other Guide
left unto us, after the Fall but Humane Reason; concluding, that the Author, by
telling us we had need of a better Guide, has confuted his whole Book: for
then we have need of a better Guide than Humane Reason, and this the Gent.
calls the coming out of Truth in spite of the Author's teeth.

The only Question here is, what those Directions are which a man's Reason
ought to take, before, and in his Journey to Happiness: for the Author told the
Gent. Reason would do it, if it took right Directions, which the Gent. somewhat
slily pretermitteth in his disingenuous and carping Inference; I say, what
those Directions are, and really, I (after having considered the great truth of
the Assertion) do more admire the Gentleman's blindness, than he himself can be
pleased with what he has written: for, that the Author intended by right
Directions, Tradition, is obvious to any indifferent Reader; which is, a due
consideration of the History of God's Providence, his Love, Promises, and
Performances: but, lest the Gent. should still be obliged to rejoin that I also
have left him in the dark, I make this Explanation of what I think the Author
meant by the other Guide, which was, that after the Laws of Nature, the only
Rule, for ought appears, afforded by God to govern the World by, for some
thousands of years, at first, became either neglected, or forgotten. Moses was
commanded to publish the Decalogue, and some other Laws, partly repeating the
Laws of Nature, and, in part, superadding, upon the Complexion of all which,
and of Christ our Savior, we have rationally informed our selves of the Way to
Happiness.

As to what the Gent. says of our bruise in our Reason upon the Fall of Adam,
that it cannot now take directions fit for our Journey, and that it is a
Supposition as improbable, as to assume, that if the Sky falls we shall catch
Larks, I think the Simile Ridiculous: I am sure it is improper, and shall only
desire to be resolved by him, if Reason be not the most probable way to
Happiness, what is? But we come now, having passed all his Out-guards, to his
main Posts, upon the Front whereof he boldly pretends to prove, that the
Author's Assertions are impracticable, and destructive to all Arts, Orders, and
Corporate Societies of men; taking a Leap from the Happiness there intended by
the Author, after this Life, head and shoulders, into the Politic Interests
and Concerns in this World, which, how foreign soever to the Author's Design in
that place (though afterward considered by him) I intend to refute in every
Instance worthy my consideration.

The first Instance the Gent. gives is this, that if every man must make Use
of no other Guide but his own Reason (suppose in Cases which concern his Life
and Estate) and must take Directions from himself only, (which the Author has
not yet said) the honorable Professions of Physic and Law would be useless;
and that it is impossible Private men should understand so well those things as
the Professors thereof. I answer, That the Use of Temperance has preserved,
and still does preserve, many in constant Health; that Laws are begotten and
continued mostwhat from the Vices of men; but because some are either from the
Infirmities of their Parents, their own Constitutions, or other accidental
Causes, valetudinary, Reason teaches men to find out proper Remedies by
Physic, and it is only Reason which teaches men the Use of it, or to apply to
such other Persons as they suppose can ease their Distempers; which also
instructs others to apply themselves to such Lawyers for Advice, whose proper
Study it is: not but that Rational men have a great deal of Law in themselves;
so the particular Persons in each Science being chosen by Reason of man's own,
or by the Advice of some others upon whose Judgment they depend, it cannot
thence be supposed, that the exercise of Reason is any way destructive to
either of those two honorable Sciences.

But, says the Gent. this also holds as to Divinity, for if men were as
careful of their Souls as of their Bodies and Estates, they would, in all
difficulties of Confcience, take the Advice of Divines, as frequently as of the
Judge and Doctor in Cases proper to them; and then concludes, we must not be
governed by our own Reason (exclusively taken from all other helps) for this
would destroy all the Chief Professions of the Nation; we might pull down all
our Inns of Courts and Chancery, all Colleges, the Charter House, the Royal
Society, and all Schools of Learning; and that it would destroy all Laws and
Order, if every man, with the Author, were resolved to have no other Guide than
his own Reason, which the Author never said.

A Charge with a witness, but let us examine it a little: the Gent. complains
of men's not being careful to advise with Divines in difficulties of
Conscience: As to the point of Conscience, I presume every Sober man does or
should advise himself, and can finally have no other Adviser: (yet not
exclusive of others Advice, and of others Reason) for the Author never said so,
but on the contrary, told us of fit helps for Reason's Assistance, and surely
Advice must be one of them. If the Gent. mean about matters of Faith, which is
but Reason reciify'd, the Assent any man gives to any Proposition of that
kind, must be from Causes, otherwise he believes he knows not what, nor why;
who can believe so? Now I think there are very few men of Understanding but do,
one time or other, consult with others about their Scruples of Conscience, or
at least, their Consciences were not fixed to any Credentials without
Observation, Advice, or Reading; however, I know no Law of God or Man which
obliges me to be totally governed in my Conscience by any particular Classis
of men, now in Being upon Earth: If I am satisfied, it is well with me, having
used all Rational means to satisfy my self; and I wish it were not true which
the Judicious Author has observed, viz. that if men had used their own
Reasons, so many had not been misled by the Errors and Deceits of others: And
as to the other Point, of taking direction from a Judge, the Gent. speaks
without Reason; for he is to know, that for any Judge to speak extrajudicially,
is, many times, Criminal in the Judge, and uncivil in him that desires his
Opinion; and for that Inference, as if the Use of Reason would dissolve Orders
and Bodies Politic, it is a non sequitur; for all Rational Persons are
presumed to know, their Constitutions are founded upon Reason and Law; and it
is for the interest and safety of the Members to obey their Superiors; because
their Disobedience naturally begets Exclusion: so far is any thing, or all the
Gent. has objected against the reliance upon Reason, been from proving it
destructive, or prejudicial to any of those Noble Professions, as it appears it
is the only thing which fortifies and consolidateth them, or all Artificial
Corporate Bodies whatsoever.

The next thing the Gent. objecteth, is, that the Author has said, They that
dispute against Reason, do it because their own Reason persuadeth them to that
Belief, etc. and this he calls, Ironically, a killing Argument. But for the
Truth of it, I appeal to every man's Reason. viz. If I dispute against any
Proposition, either I do it really, or feignedly; if feignedly, it is idle, if
really, is it not, because I conceive it irrational? neither can the
Gentleman's Instance help him out, which is, (and he borrowed it out of Mr.
Chillingworth) that though Reason must direct us to the Rule by which we are to
act, yet when we have found out such a Rule, as our Reason assures us is
infallible, we ought no longer to govern our selves by our bare Reason, but by
our Reason guided by that Rule, and to act such things (not that Reason does
direct but such) as our infallible Rule does command us; so that we see (says
he) that Reason is so far from being our Guide, that it directly leads us to
the Scripture, and leaves us to be directed by it, by which, it confesses, it
self ought to be guided.

It is very well, the Gent. has confessed that Reason must direct us to the
Rule, but stay the Bells; Sir, when I come thither, how shall I understand to
take my Measures by that Rule? that is, how shall I use it, if Reason do not
still direct me: For the Question is not amongst Christians, whether the
Scripture be true or no; but this, what the meaning is of particular Texts
therein: or if any man can show me any other way to understand it but Reason, I
shall be very thankful; if then there be no other way but the Mediation of
Reason, Reason, and bare Reason, is to be followed: Which Demonstrative Method,
lately generally embraced by the most Learned Divines in London and elsewhere,
has, certain I am, brought more Fixation upon men's Spirits to Truth, than all
the Canting of many years before, if I should say many Ages, it were no
Hyperbole.

This may serve for Explication of the Author, and to exempt him from the
Aspersion which the Gentleman endeavors to cast upon him; as if his Design
had been to deter any man from conforming to the Church of England; because, if
it be rational to comply, he that does not, being convinced, it is so, is
brutish; and he that does it unconvinc'd, is an Hypocrite: but if any Dissenter
whatsoever, from the Church, have collected other things than the Book will
bear, it is not the Fault of the Author, but the Ignorance of the Collector.

Here I might add the inestimable Benefit accruing to all rational men in those
vast Tracts of Land where the Scripture was never published, and where,
probably, the very Name of Christ is unknown, from their natural and
instinctive Adorations of a Deity, whereunto, and consequently to Morality,
very Reason does invite.

And I could wish the Gent. who pretends so much to civil Education, and to
be so dutiful a Son of the Church, would be a little more charitable to men of
tender Consciences, who cannot conform, without offering Violence to their
Reasons; for that, it was not long since, a very great Politician, and rational
man said, There is nothing which is not made necessary by Divine Precept, but
is eligible.

But says the Gent. I would have the Author, when he writes next, show us
more of his honesty, though less of his Ingenuity: how that Confession of the
Authors Ingenuity does consist with the Gentleman's often future Endeavor to
expose him to the Censure of Folly, though weakly enough, God knows, will
appear afterward in this Reply; for like the good Cow that spills her Milk
with her Heels, he immediately repents of the Character, so given to the
Author, of Ingenuity, by telling of us, he is resolved Step by Step to lead us
out of those Errors, which the Treatise of Humane Reason has lead us into, by
showing us the way back again, by the same Steps we were first led into them.

And I am resolved to follow the Gent. till he loses himself, or meets with
some Ignis fatuus, and there it will be fit for me in all our March, ever to
retire to my Center, which is Reason, whose Guide if I follow, I am sure to be
very near the Road unto Happiness, this being, I think, taking of things by the
right Handle.

And now the Author answering the Objection supposible, viz. That many of the
greatest Wits, by following their own Opinions, have increased the Catalogue of
Heresies, thus, that those men either followed not their own Reason, but their
Wills, or first hudwinckt their Reason by Interest, Prejudice or Passion;
escapes the Gentleman's Censure, it is very well, how then? What shall we think
of that frightful Word Heresy, Which the Scripture has not defined, that one
Church calls Piety, another Impiety, which must be in the World, and which
has occasioned the Effusion of so much Christian blood, but this, that the
Tares must grow up with the Wheat till the time of Harvest; and that Experience
has more than once, made it evident, that men of fiery and blind Zeal, have,
for haste, plucked up the Wheat also?

But the Gent. grows angry with the Author, for saying it is no great matter
for falling into Heresies (so called) by the Weakness of their understandings,
for they are neither hurtful to themselves, nor others: and,

I cannot choose but add Coals to his Wrath, being of the Author's Mind as
understanding nothing else by the Term Heresy, but Opinion, for how can it
hurt others, what I think? Nor my self, for I do nothing which I can avoid,
while I think so, as the last Dictate of my Understanding; and when I am
convinced by Reason, I must think and believe otherwise.

Ay! But says the Gent. is it not the best way for the Magistrate, since the
Number of Fools exceeds the Wise in Number, by Penalties to restrain these
Fools within the Pale of the Church, thereby to prevent Heresies, Irreligion,
and Atheism? Grotius was of another Opinion, and I believe ten parts of twelve
in London are of Opinion, that to punish for a bare Opinion, is something
against the Hair, and abhorrent to the English Nation; indeed it is not
practicable now here, nor consistent with Trade which is preferrible much to
the Humor of a few violent men.

Nor do I believe Irreligion gets any Ground by the Peoples not conforming,
nor Immorality neither; for they that do but pretend to Religion, are for the
most part, careful (at least outwardly) to appear honest men.

Probably, it were better in several considerable respects, if the People would
conform, but it will not do, nor is it, some think, as of absolute necessity
for the Peace of England, nor for any individual Man's Salvation, unless he does
believe himself obliged in Conscience to conform.

But the Gent. is displeased highly with the Author, for saying, That every
man's Soul has so much Light in it self, as is requisite for it is Travel
toward Heaven, apprehending it to be downright Pelagianism.

I am persuaded, Pelagius is not very well understood, but what if it be
Pelagius his Opinion? If it be Truth it is not the worse for being his Opinion.

Certainly, every man is capable to consider God, as in the course of Nature,
which is the way he is pleased to govern the World by, in the Scripture, which
is the History of the divine Providence, and his Duty, and the Consequence of
Sin: Why is it not then proper to say, every man has so much Light in his
Soul, as will lead him to Happiness? (for I take Light, Reason, and Conscience
to be the same thing) so that notwithstanding the Gentleman's Objection, the
Text stands impregnably firm.

And seriously, methinks the Gentleman trifles, in excepting at the Author, who
says, That we must search for Truth in the Center of our selves; it being an
Assertion worthily memorable from so judicious a man.

Where should we search for Truth but in our Hearts, which is the Center? and
it is the Heart God requires.

Let men be of what Persuasion soever, make what Pretenses soever of never so
much Christianity or Morality, (which goes very far) is not Truth in the
Center? Do not the Pretenders know, whether they are cordially religious, or
whether they lay on that only as a Fucus for Interest sake? But I pass on.

The next Accusation which the Gent. brings against the Author is, that he
endeavors to shift off the third Objection, calling it the most tragical
Argument against him, which is, That an universal Liberty of particular men's
Discourses, would beget as many Religions, as there are men, and would be
inconsistent with the Peace of all Societies. The Author's Answer to the said
Objection being in the Negative, and proving it from the Examples of different
Sects of Philosophers; for, says he, There were not fewer Sects in Athens,
than in Amsterdam or London; and yet this Variety of Opinions neither begat any
civil War in Greece, neither was there any Inquisition nor high Commission to
prevent them.

If the Gent. did not forget his Promise of leading us out of all those Errors
the Author (as he pretended) leads us into. I believe he would have disproved
it by a more pregnant Instance, than that out of Josephus, about Apollonius
Molon's inveighing against Plato (who commanded the Citizens to persist in the
unalterable Obedience to their Laws and against the not retaining in his
Country, men of strange Opinions or Religion; the Gentleman telling of us,
Apollonius was ignorant of the Athenian Constitutions, but how he could be
ignorant of them, and yet inveigh against them for not admitting such men of
strange Opinions and Religion, I cannot imagine, nor by what figure that Slip
is to be made good.

I believe there was amongst the Grecians (as there is now amongst us
Christians, of other matters) various Disputes touching the Souls of men, viz.
whether they are praeexistent, traductive and mortal, or eternal? of the summum
bonum, about the Pythagorean Metempsycosis, of the Nature of Demons, the Seat
of the Passions, the Origin and Nature of good and evil: whether the highest
Power (God) did sit majestically idle, or did providentially govern sublunary
Affairs? whether the World were eternal or no? and many such; but I never heard
or read of any (besides Diagoras and Protagoras,) who were taken notice of for
absolute Atheists of old, and who were therefore worthily condemned for that
irrational Opinion: and it is very well known, what Ages passed away in those
kind of innocent Altercations, before ever the name of Christ (at least before
his Doctrine) was known in Greece: neither is it impertinent to our Subject, to
insinuate, that the Crime objected against Christians, was not, at first, for
worshipping Christ, but because men gave Him Divine Honors, who was not by the
Roman Senate enrolled amongst the rest of their Dieties.

Certain it is, where the Law is silent, men have Liberty, and so they had in
Greece (at Athens and elsewhere) therefore, till the Gentleman does show us any
positive Law there, forbidding Disputes about Divine matters (every Poet there,
feigning Romances about their Gods, and yet the wisest amongst the Grecians
confessing and believing one Supreme Power) the Author's Instance stands
firm. What Liberty Tamerlane gave, as to particular Modes of Worship, so men
did acknowledge and believe in one God, is well known; and that the Turks, at
this day, permit men to enjoy their general Liberty in Worship, so they do not
interrupt theirs: whence a great Argument may be drawn, by supposing it to have
been not the least Means to support the Force, Peace and Grandeur of that
Empire: so that every Society or Kingdom in the World, does (not to speak of
the Low Countries) not impose severely merely for Opinions in religious
matters, no, nor for the variety of external Worships, so men obey, as good
Subjects, in all other things.

But says the Gent. Christians ought not to follow such Examples, if any such
have been or are, because we have a positive and stated Religion given us by
God, in a most clear and infallible Revelation, which our Governors ought to
establish and maintain, and therefore men must be restrained from discoursing,
else there would be as many Religions as there are men; and so says he, the
Author's Argument remains as Tragical as ever it did. This is indeed a very
Tragical Story, to say, Men ought not not to be restrained from discoursing.

I am satisfied we have Religion well stated here, but for all that, we do not
pretend to infallibility; wherefore, for us to impose, being our selves
fallible, is a little severe: as to the Romanists, they have something more
color, they pretending to Infallibility; though it was not because of their
pretense to Infallibility we left them, but 'twas principally, because they set
the Miter above the Crown: See the Laws, and the Reason of them: but the truth
is, that Disease of, at least, equalling the Miter with the Crown, does, some
suppose, still affect all those who pretend something like a Title to their
Commission without the Law, which no wise Divine will do: be it how it will,
there is, nevertheless, a great Latitude for Reason to discourse, without
offering Violence to any Article of our Faith: and if I do believe any Article
to be true, either from Tradition, or from Education; yet, if another can
handsomely make it appear, it is otherwise rational for me to believe it, I
shall believe it upon a more strong Motive.

And as to the Gentleman's terming the Author's Assertion, a sly Insinuation,
which was, That the Stoics themselves, who inslaved the Will, did never offer
Violence to the Understanding; I suppose it not at all sly, but true, and
proper: for they had more Wit than to think the Understanding could be
violently imposed on, any other way than by Reason; they meaning, as we do,
that the Will must necessarily follow the last Dictate of the Understanding,
that is, of the considerative Faculty; so the Will is not, cannot be compelled.

Let the Gentleman show us, if he can, that the Author has any where said, the
Church of England goes about to inslave our Understandings, (but a galled
Horse back is soon hurt) if he cannot show it, why does he ask that Question of
the Author, whether he does or no? What then, has the Author done, or written
shamefully, to forfeit the Title of an English Gent.? to prove he has (a
strange Proof) done something meriting that Degradation, the Gent. insisteth
upon the Obscurity of page the 12. and 13. of the Author's Book; an obscure
Proof, scarce able to satisfy any Jury: as if from those pages, the Author
seems to deserve the Loss of his Spurs, and the Gent's. Exoration to the
Author, is, that he would, upon his Reputation, discover whether the Church of
England be there meant or no? I do not understand that there is any Necessity in
point of Reputation, to accuse a man's self: let those who are disturbed blow
the Coal first; this is a pretty Low, not an High Commission Court, but like it.

Certainly, it had been more ingenuous (if he had not mistaken the Handle) for
the Gent. to have manifested to the Reader, what was justly exceptionable in
these two pages; but he takes another Course, and seems to hold it for
granted, the Author meant the Church of England: I know not how to judge of an
Author's meaning, but by his words, and they must be these in the 12 page; viz.
That the greatest Inconveniences, (meaning Vexatious and troublesome Heats)
hind'ring Peace every where, have been begotten from the strange and
uncharitable Pride of those men, who (having justly vindicated their own
Reason, from the Tyranny of unnecessary Bonds) endeavor, nevertheless, to
impose upon others: so that, not the use of such Liberty, but the appropriating
it to our selves only, is the sole Fountain of these Disorders. That this is
true, who is so blind, but may observe? and that it is applicable, especially
to such, who study all imaginable ways to punish men who dissent, and cannot
comply to their so much extolled, but alterable external Worship, which is, at
least would be, very prejudicial to Trade, if the Rigor of Law did run with a
fierce Current, I say Trade and Commerce; and how one Trade depends upon
another, I suppose the Gent. little considers.

Now as to what the Author says, That some Errors are the inseparable
Companions of Humane Nature; a Tincture of self Opinion, being in most men,
which Reason ought to correct; I think it was no great Crime to say so.

And to give the Gentleman his due, it was none of his least Policies, silently
to pass by the Author's, never to be enough commended, words page the 14. of
his Book, which are, that all the Miseries which have followed the Variety of
Opinions, since the Reformation, have proceeded entirely from these two
Mistakes, viz. the tying of Infallibility to whatsoever we think Truth, and
Damnation to whatsoever we think Error: a most uncharitable Method to Judge
by, I leave the Readers to consider who are guilty.

But the Gent. will never leave beating upon the old String, that the Church
punishes none for Error, unless it be accompanied with Contumacy, and
Contempt of Authority.

He means, unless the parties refuse to do as she would have them externally,
or shall discourse any thing repugnant to her Doctrines; but I think, this is
another Error inseparably accompanying humane Nature, (if it be an Error) for
who can be contented to run on in the Course of his Life under the Umbrage of
an implicit Faith, which the Gent. labors to infuse every where, though under
other more specious Pretexts: whereas it is apparent, cool and rational men, do
soonest obey and conform every where.

I wish heartily, those men whom our Law intrusteth with the Power of
Excommunication, were more careful upon what Grounds that now contemned (but of
old Solemn) Exclusion should be issued out; for familiar Storms afright little.

Next, as to what the Gent. inserteth, that the Author might have spared his
Discourse about the Causes of so much bloodshed since the Reformation, I wish
it had not been true; and the Gent. must give me Leave, for this once, to mind
him, that while he so confidently excuses the Church of that Crime, and all
her true Sons thereof, he forgot that haughty Bishop, which I suppose he will
grant, was a legitimate Son of the Church, who, in our late civil Wars, having
deserted the Royal side, defended, with Arms, a Castle against his Sovereign's
Forces: and it is yet fresh in Memory, how much blood was spilt in the Low
Countries in the sixty years War 'twixt Spain and the Dutch, and upon what
Cause; let the Gent. consider it, and the direful Effects of the Scottish
Covenant, but I stop here. Heret lateri lethalis arando.

Then, for what is presently objected against the Author's peaceable Doctrine,
page 11. and 12. viz. That to permit different Beliefs would take away all
Occasions of Quarrels, when both he himself is suffered to enjoy his own
Opinion; and his own Opinion is this, that he ought to suffer others to do the
same: This, I say, is perverted by the Gentleman, for the Author only speaks
of Opinions, not of Practices disturbing the public Peace, for that they may
be justly punished for breaking the Peace, was never denied; but that the
Difference in Opinion must necessarily beget Disturbances against the public
Peace, is, de facto, inconsequent from many years Experience in England, of
late: so that the Peace being unbroken, and all Obedience yielded to every
Command, which is not about Conformity ecclesiastical, they that shall
unseasonably, against the most general Inclination of the People, actually
disturb the Dissenters in their respective Exercises of their Consciences, are
more likely to break the Peace, than the Dissenters who keep it; and I say, are
obliged, in point of Interest, to keep it; that is, in Respect of Trade, the
main thing.

That the Papists do promote a general Toleration of all Opinions in Religion,
I believe, nor can any man blame them, it being their Interest, that way, to
shroud themselves from the Rigor of the Laws.

But for the Presbyterians, who alone (it is said) are so fierce, that they
will abate nothing, by their good wills, of their endless Ambition to get power
to prosecute others; I suppose their Zeal over-boyling, and really they are too
blame if they do so.

I could never think any man, very eager for External Ceremonies, which is but
the shell of Religion, wise, therefore (and I blush to name it) far more those
of New England were too blame, for their barbarous Cruelty in destroying some
Dissenters there; since the very Original Grant from the Crown did express the
Royal condescentions to have been for the ease of their Consciences who at
first transplanted themselves thither.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum? Nor do I think it impertinent to insert
that single Argument of Grotius, who I named before, to prove the
irrationability of any other, as well as of Sanguinary Punishments, for a bare
Opinion: I say that single Argument, but a good one, from the Example of the
Jews permission of the Sadduces, not only to enjoy the liberty of their
Opinion, so contrary to what was the Natural Religion, but also to enjoy
Judicial Places amongst them.

The next thing considerable is, the Gentleman's huffing at the Author for his
Answer to this Objection presupposed by himself, viz. That if we guide our
selves by our own Reasons, we shall differ from our selves as well as others,
and change our Religion as often as our Habits, unto which the Answer is given
in the Text, That he cannot conceive the fear of this Scandal obliges us to a
blind, unalterable obedience to those Laws and Opinions, to which either the
Fate of our Birth and Education, or other Accidents have engaged us: and this
is called obscure and impertinent by the Gent. How the Author is guilty of both
at once here I cannot imagine, for it is very confessedly plain, our Birth and
Education do most times engage us in our Religion: where is the Obscurity? and
it is accounted Scandalous to change our Religion above once, at least, that is
plain; and that we are not obliged to a blind, unalterable obedience about
outward Forms, is also reasonable to say for any Protestant, which
non-obligation the Gent. also agrees is unnecessary.

And I will admit the Gent. says well, that it becomes every Separator from
the Church of England to inform himself from his own Reason, and from the
Reason of others, especially from his Lawful Minister, (I loving to hear the
word Lawful in this case) whether she does enjoin him any thing that is sinful
in it self; and if he cannot find her guilty of any such Command, then his
Separation can no ways be excusable either before God or Men, for it is mere
Obstinacy.

But what if after all these Enquiries and Consultations with others, mine own
Reason (that is my Conscience) does inform me, it is not lawful to obey her
Commands, must I violate that Light? Surely the Gent. will not persuade me to
do so, if he does, I shall and ought to deny his Rhetoric: for he is to know,
it is sinful for me to act without Faith, and if I do not believe it Lawful,
and yet do it for Fear or Interest, it is not only sinful, but argues a
Servile and degenerous Spirit. And though I may think there ought to be some
visible Judge of these things, that is, either the Pope, or my particular
Sovereign, or those he appoints; yet at last, my own Reason, you may call it
Conscience or Light within, will be my Judge do what I can.

And now, as to the Reasons and Causes which moved some, upon the Act of
Distinguishment, to take the Sacrament, and yet to refuse hearing of our
Liturgy; which Refusal the Gent. instanceth and calls a great Sin; though it
concerns not the Author nor me neither, and was drawn in by the Gent. after
his Custom of abounding in his own Sallyes: yet I shall adventure to say, from
an unexceptionable Authority, viz. Bishop Andrews, that de modo, of
Understanding the Subsistence of Christ in the Sacrament, it was never disputed
till some Centuries after his Ascension, and is not considerable; which
satisfied a very learned King of our own, and many, the most authentic learned
Protestants besides: that, to wit, it is enough if a man, after due
Preparation, take it reverentially in Obedience to Christ's Command, and live,
after the taking of it, like a true Christian, holily and virtuously, as aware,
and minding the damnable Consequences of returning to Impiety, and the great
Assurance by hope of the Benefit, accruable from future Obedience, all which
Complexion and Satisfaction to Protestants depended, and still does depend upon
the Reasonableness of the Bishop's Argument, where I leave it.

From whence I proceed to observe, what an huge Crime the Gent. makes it, in
the Author, for saying, A man may be a Papist at one time, and seven years
after a Protestant, and yet the Faith of the Party so changing, may remain the
same: for that, says the Author, It is all the while actuated by the same Soul
of Faith, which is Conscience; presuming, that both when he was a Papist, and
when he is a Protestant, he may truly say, with these Eyes I shall behold my
Savior. But I answer, If it be a Crime to change from Popery to Protestantism
upon rational Gonviction, it wants a name; and that great Wit Chillingworth,
was mistaken who was induced so to change alternately (for he was first a
Protestant, then a Papist, and lastly a Protestant, and so died) he alleging
Reason always to be the Cause of his Changes, but certainly, it was Reason
(with its due helps) which urged him to change: that Chillingworth, who
outwitted the most learned Romanists, putting them to Silence, 'twas he who
first (after Sir Walter Raleigh began and was stopped by Queen Elizabeth upon an
Insinuation that it would bring in Atheism, Cujus contrarium verum est) from
rational Inferences made it evident, that insignificant, scholastic
Velitations, were too weak to hold sagciaous men in that blind Obedience, which
had long muzzl'd the greatest part of Europe: wherefore unless the Gent. be of
opinion, that any Power upon Earth is entit'led from above to subject us to an
unalterable Obedience to Ecclesiastical Sanctions, which is to admit one
universal, visible Monarch Ecclesiastical: or if the Romanists have all truth,
though superadding many unnecessary things, and probably, impure: I say, if the
Learned cannot agree, then it is very charitable to conclude, men that are
actuated by Conscience to Holiness, while on one side or other, may be in a
salvable Condition. I cannot think otherwise, than that the Question at the
last day shall not be, whether I have lived allways a Protestant, or allways a
Papist? whether I have been an high Churchman, a Latitudinarian, or a
Dissenter? but whether I have lived holily, and have used all rational ways to
inform my Understanding of the Truth expressed in Scripture and Nature? which
is to pursue the main end of my Creation; it necessarily begeting a rational
Adoration toward God, and Duty toward men. Which last (that is, the
Observation of the second Table) is so indispensibly necessary, that if there
were neither God nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell, it is most undenyably true, the
World could not stand without the Observation thereof, and was worthily
intimated by the judicious Raleigh.

And if I should suppose this Plaster, as the Gent. calls it, will serve an
Heathen's turn, under invincible Ignorance, (as to the truth of the Scripture,
which he never heard of) yet living according to the Light of Nature, I do not
think it amiss (charitably) to suppose he may be saved.

But for that idle Question of the Gentleman's to the Author, whether he
thinks an erroneous Conscience shall excuse a man from all Crimes whatsoever,
it is scarce worth answering: for as much as every sober man will grant it to
be impossible for him who follows the Dictates of Reason, to be advisedly
wicked, Conscience being, without all doubt, an act of Reason or Intellect,
(not a habit) it is always a Judge, yet may err, as all other Judges: but it
sits a-top, and is divine, therefore who resists it, resists his own
Reason, and what is done against either, or without Faith, is Sin: what then is
the best Medium to rectify my Conscience which is erroneous? Even the same way
that I was lead into Error, will bring me out of it, that is, by giving my
Reason its free Mediation without hud winking of it, darling or strangling of
it by implicit Faith, insignificant Terms, violent Distractions, and
Prejudices, and Preoccupations, Pride, Interest, or other Vices, of all which
pestilent Fevers, I can assign no other cause than the Author has done already
to my hand, which is the not giving Obedience to, and not exercising of that
Light wherewith the infinite Goodness of God has endued men as men.

However, certain it is, let a man (suppose him Christian) hold what Opinion he
will (and we find as great Differences amongst the Learned as the Unlearned) if
he follows his Conscience, that is, his Reason, he shall at last, enjoy all
the possible Advantage that Opinion can yield him, living morally virtuous: and
that any Separatists amongst us (in terminis) do hold any Opinion, which does
necessarily exclude them from Salvation, through Christ, is more than, I
believe, the Gent. can prove: and the Dissenters generally obeying all Laws
besides the matters of Conformity to the external way of Worship, publicly
commanded, and declaring it to be their Principle, (as I know, and they also,
it is their Interest to obey in all other things) I presume to say, it seems
not, that the Magistrate is obliged to vex and disturb so numerous a party of
peaceable and considerable Persons, merely to gratify a few in respect of the
Whole; and further to alleviate the matter, we know very well, there is a Due
to God, and a Due to Caesar.

But to come closer to the Causes of Nonconformity of late years: it seems
not the least, that it is contrary to the Principles of Many, nay most men's
Education (in the Southern parts of England) all the times of the Civil Wars,
other Opinions having gradually been instilled into them, and the Examples of
their Parents and Masters confirming their Aversion to Conformity, or these
Ministers or Heads of Parties, who pretended to have a Call to instruct them,
and whom they thought they had reason to believe, whence has arisen that
tenacity of Prejudice against our Church Government; and it being grown a
Chronical Distemper it is harder to be cured.

I may add the Act which ejected so many Ministers for Non abjuration of that
lawless, (but nevertheless, as they were persuaded, obliging) Covenant, which
produced Effects quite contrary to the Project of those, who so earnestly
advanced it. For the People being in Love with the Plausibility of their
Teachers, and their zealous Urgency to Strictness of Life, their Detestation of
the Roman Church, by them called and believed to be idolatrous, and other
captivating Insinuations, did really apprehend, upon their Pastors Leaving of
the Pulpits, all Religion went away with them: who if they had stayed there,
would, in all Probability, have kept them closer, and whom they since either
conscientiously followed to other Meetings, or, for want of being united as
before, under some kind of Order, they moulder'd away into Indifferency, or
other more wild Excursions.

And that these now last mentioned, which make up, or from whence are spawned,
a very considerable part of Dissenters, do necessarily involve many others, in
point of Interest depending upon them, to the Humor of Nonconformity, is
easily conceivable; which humor (if it were no more at first) was easily
cultivated by more subtle heads, into the reverend name of Conscience, and may
gradually, possess the well-meaning part of these men into a real Belief, that
to conform is sinful; where they must be left, till otherwise convinced, for
Force will not do it, if Reason cannot.

I do freely confess, we are, at this hour, very happy in the admirable
Learning and Virtues of many of our Clergy: and as for my self, I do say, That
neither the length of our Service, my Love of Variety as an Englishman, nor
being an Islander, nor the Vices of some Clergymen, nor the Weakness of
others, nor Laziness of many, nor any Exceptions that can be taken against our
Liturgy, either as to Matter or Form, seem, together, Ground enough to me for
to leave going to hear the public Service at Church; which Calvin did not
dislike, who persuaded Bishop Hooper to Conformity, and which is so
unanswerably defended by incomparable Hooker: but for all that, some of these
Objections may sway with others, my Superiors in point of Learning and Wit,
with others of more tender Consciences, with others, in respect of Interest:
all which I dare not condemn, because I would not be condemned; and we must
allow some Grains to Persons, Times, Infirmities, and men's Lively-hoods, or
dissolve Commerce, the very Life and Strength of every Body Politic.

From whence I have reason to hope, no Gentleman who has taken but a cursory
View of the Design of Fiat Lux, (which is to captivate our Reasons to the Will
of the old Gent. who pretends to Infallibility, and which I. O. as it is
evident, has discovered to be a pious Cheat) but will excuse me from a
particular Replication to our Gentleman's impertinent Comparison betwixt the
Author's Intention, and the Project of Fiat Lux: not to say, how much the
Gentleman seems pleased with those Shadows he has raised, and the pretty mock
Fights naturally arising from them.

Let I. O. defend his Book himself, I reply to the Gentleman's next Objection
and say, it is not so wonderful an Impossibility, but that men may be thought
to renownce Christ as soon by other Guides, as by following their own Reason,
whereof the Arrian Heresy is abundant Testimony, settled by Council under
Constantius: who, says the Gent. was wheadl'd into that Party, and that it was
not a general Council, which is a piece of Confidence, only due to the
Gentleman I suppose, and crave Pardon if I am mistaken.

Whether the Holy Ghost was sent to Trent in a Cloak-bag from Rome, as the
Covenant was in Mr. Marshal's Portmantua from Scotland to England, I think it
scarce worth while to enquire.

However, since General Councils have erred damnably, that they may do so
again, is probable enough: which does evidence, that particular Reason is safer
sometimes, otherwise, how come those Errors to be discovered? And if Luther had
not followed his own Reason, the Reformation would not have been, in all humane
Probability, brought to pass: for either it was Reason which satisfied him
then, and others since, who forsook the Roman Church, or they were unreasonable
that did forsake her; and we as unreasonable, nay more, who follow their
Examples, which I hope the Gent. will not affirm.

But the Gent. designedly has slipped over the Author's pertinent Question, viz.
what it is (for something it must be) which is properly placed in the same
Ecclesiastical Authority with Reason; it being evident from the very Elements
of Councils, and their frequent Declinations from Truth; that If God had not
stirred up Persons of extraordinary Abilities to examine, by the Rules of their
own Reasons, those Follies and dangerous Errors in Religion, which, by the
Ignorance or Interest of men, or the insensible Advances of ill Customs, were
blindly embraced by the World; the Christian World before this time, from the
Adoration of Images, and the boundless Increase of vain and superstitious
Ceremonies, might have past to its vain and abominable worship of several
Deities: To which I presume to add, or of none at all; for I know nothing has
more augmented the unreasonable Folly of Atheists, than that very gross
Doctrine which diverted the great Arabian Philosopher from Christianity: not to
mention their Claim to Infallibility, and our own Persecution of one another;
who pretend not to it, yet endeavor to lock up the only way left us to
vanquish Atheists, Heathens, Papists or any other, in the magisterial,
positive, and implicit Breasts of that sort of Men, who give the greatest Blow
to Religion it self, by such Preclusion of Enquiry; when the Scripture bids
us search, and we cry out upon the Church of Rome for her imposing implicit
Obedience.

The next thing the Gent. falls upon (after his having abounded in his
Repetition of Rules to interpret the Scripture by) having also before agreed
Reason to be useful in leading us to the Truth of Scripture (which Rules are
ordinarily in Books laid down) is, that the Author uses too great a Latitude,
in setting the Gates of Heaven too wide open, calling it Charity with a
Witness; inferring, as if the Author had designed to prove, we ought to believe
Turks, Jews, Heathens and Atheists themselves to be in an equal Possibility of
Salvation with the unerring Christian, which must be true, so far as it is
possible, these or any of these are in a Possibility of being convinced of
their Turkism, Judaism, Heathenism, and Atheism to Christianity; and may be
true, as to the Heathens, from the Plea allowable to them of invincible
Ignorance, not so as to Turks, because Christianity is amongst them, nor to
Jews from their Obduration against immediate Miracles done for their
Conversion, nor to Atheists, because they are convincible from the course of
all natural Agents, though the Author only asked the Question, Whether we ought
to believe these be forenamed were in an equal possibility of Salvation with
Christians? and to show he did not believe it, he confesses, there is no other
name to be saved by (that is, to speak strictly) but that of Christ, and then
subjoyneth, that he may very well believe, there are other secret and wonderful
ways, by which God may be pleased to apply his Merits (that is, Christ's Merits
to mankind) besides those direct, open, and ordinary ones of Baptism and
Confession; which I suppose is no Crime to say, nor hard to prove, if the time
would give Leave; so that for all these Scratches of the Gent. the Author's
Charity is safe enough. Let us see how charitable the Gent. is to his own
Countrymen; for I must make Leaps as he does, else I cannot overtake him.

To evidence it, page 75. of his Answer, he says, that when he sees others,
when they should worship God, sit on their Tails like Dogs, or wallow and loll,
and grunt, and groan like Swine, or stand up and wriggle and make ugly Faces,
and grin and make Mouths like Apes, or Baboons, he must confess, he cannot, for
his Soul, but think, their way of Worship ridiculous and contrary to the due
Expressions of the Reverence they owe to the infinite God of Heaven and Earth,
which is the Witness of his Charity. Now pray observe if I have not Reason
enough to think, that the Gentleman's way of Worship may seem as ridiculous to
the others; I am sure his Censure is very uncharitable: for though men,
worshipping according to their Consciences, may miss, in legal Circumstance,
yet it is rational to suppose, there is much of Devotion in their manner of
worship: and Saint Paul was of another mind than this Gent. is, for he would
not eat, rather than offend his weak Brother; and there is no one thing more
pressed by Christ, than Charity, which I leave to the Gent's. Consideration at
his Leisure.

But he objecteth against the Author, for saying, That as well different
Thoughts may represent the Worship of God and his Son Jesus Christ, as
different Words can represent the same Thoughts; which the Gent. terms an
extravagant Assertion in the literal Sense of it; to which I answer.

It is possible I may have Thoughts of God's several Representation of himself,
as by Moses, by the Man Christ, by his Apostles, which is to worship him for
his gradual Exertion of himself; and in the Wisdom and Method of his Operation,
and otherwise; I may reflect upon the Creation of the World beyond that, upon
the first Race of Intellectuals: and then again, of the fall of man, his being
thereby subjected to God's Wrath; and finally of Christ's Passion; which put us
again into a potentiality of being saved: by all which (to instance in no more)
I do render him no different, but one Worship, though every part of my Worship
be not at all times subtiliz'd in my Imagination and Memory. Therefore, though
I should admit to the Gentleman, that the Worship of God is essentially placed
in the Thoughts, it does not thence follow, as he would have it (though
illogically) that different Thoughts must make different Worships; for there is
allways an Identity of Worship both natural, and grounded upon revealed Truths:
and if internal Worship be no more than conceiving of all ways, according to
the best of my Reason (so governed) to honor God, by, from and under the
Satisfaction to me, of his incomprehensible Existence and Power, I shall have
much Peace by it.

Again, How disingeniously the Gent. endeavors to possess his Readers, that
the Author goes about to prove a man may be excusable, though he follows
humane Reason, to the denial of Christianity; when the Author expressly says,
page 57. and 58. That the best and truest humane Reason could not have found
out, of it self, the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even that hidden Wisdom which
God ordained before the World, which is the Mystery of Christ, Jesus Christ;
for says the Author, it was necessary it should be first revealed by the
Spirit of God, which can only discover the deep things of God, but as soon as
God had revealed it by Miracles, fulfilling of Prophesies, humane Reason was
able to behold it, and confess it, not that Grace had altered the Eyesight of
humane Reason, but that it had drawn the Object nearer to it. So far is the
Learned Author from alleging, that a man may be excusable by following of
Reason to the Denial of Christianity, that he has made it primarily
subservient to the Divine Spirit, and yet capable to embrace the rationability
of Scripture-evidence; which is one of the main, but not the sole Foundations
of Christianity.

And for Answer to the Gentleman's confident Challenge to the Author, that he
would prove, that ever the heathen Greeks had amongst them any Question which
they defended, more directly contrary to the Christian Religion, than the
Author's, I suppose he means our Relyance upon Reason. I will Instance in one
only, though I might produce more, and that is, the Epicureans Doctrine, which
acknowleding God, denied nevertheless his Providence, by pretending it below
and inconsistent with his Majesty Divine, to trouble it self with humane
Affairs: but if Providence had been exploded out of the minds of men, it had
been impossible to have persuaded us, that God was ever displeased at the Fall
of A^an; and consequently, there would have appeared no need at all of
Restoration by Christ.

But the Gent. flies yet higher in the very same page, by charging the Author
that he has busied himself to prove, Humane Reason may, with Safety to eternal
Happiness, tolerate Atheism it self, and consequently, all kind of Lusts and
Wickedness whatsoever.

Really, a most irrational and degenerous Objection; such an Objection, as no
man, who pretends to be a Gentleman, but would blush to make: to cancel
which, I need do no more than repeat the Author's own Words. page 31. which are
these, I believe first, that Reason it self will declare to every man in the
World, that he ought to adhere to the Christian, rather than to any other,
Religion in the World. Now if Christian Religion ought to be adhered to, it
follows necessarily, that Virtue ought to be embraced, and Vice detested,
because that Religion does engage men to Holiness, without the Practice
whereof, none can be happy, according to the very Elements of that Religion.

The next things quarreled at, are those Positive and undeniable Arguments
which the Author propounds to establish, the Excellency of Humane Reason,
(taking it with it is due Helps) that is, by comparing it with other Guides,
standing in Competition with it: in the Prosecution whereof, how learnedly,
accurately, and judiciously, the Author has particularly demonstrated the
Uncertainty of many other pretended Guides, and the Improbability of their
being able to satisfy a solid Inquisition after Truth, and which we are
commanded to make, and for which, the Bereans were called noble, appears so
clearly from the 62 page of his book to page 64. that I dare say, no
unprejudiced Reader having considered them, will suppose less than this, that
his Arguments need not any other Proof, but the bare Prolation.

But however, to give the Gent. fair Play, I will go back a little to the
Author's page 63. where he proves Authority less safe than humane Reason; out
of which the Gent. would very fain squeeze something like a Face of
Contradiction; to which I answer.

He that believes any thing because enjoined by Authority, is not, nor cannot
in his own Conscience, be so fase, as he that believes and obeys Authority;
because he is rationally convinced he ought to obey it, having commanded a
rational thing.

As to the Gentleman's Instance of the Judges passing Sentence Secundum
allegata and probata, he is mistaken; for our Judges do not so judge, nor will
our municipal Law bear it (nor is it any thing pertinent to the Business in
hand) for it is the Jury that groundeth the Sentence here, the Judge only
pronouncing it.

And touching the Gentleman's Instance about Adam's Fall, from want of
following of the Dictates of his own Reason, asserted by the Author, and which
the Gent. would elude, by saying that Adam's Crime was for believing Eve,
rather than his own Reason; insisting, that the Inhibition was not a Law of
Nature or Reason, but a mere positive Law. I answer, if the Law were merely
positive, Adam had the greater Reason to observe it, and therefore it was
irrationally done, to follow the Persuasions of his Wife (you may call it
Authority if you please, considering our Wives now in England) before the
Command of his Maker, and indeed a thing altogether unbecoming his masculine
Superiority; and by the Gentleman's Favor, Eve did not plead the Authority,
but Fraud of the Serpent which beguiled her, nor did the Serpent pretend to any
Dominion over her. But I see the Gent. grows angry, by his Excursions in the
upper part of his 96. page being nothing civil at all to the Author, nor indeed
pertinent to the Controversy: which for the Gentleman's own sake, because
possibly, 'twas but the effect of mere Passion, I shall forbear to mention here
particularly, and now I must look backwards.

To what is objected against the Author's Words, which are, That they who
commit themselves to the Guidance of their own Reason, if they do commit
themselves wholly to it, are as safe on the Left band, as on the Right: as
secure of Happiness in their Errors, as others are who are otherwise guided
even in the Truths which they happ'n to fall into. I suppose it is no more than
if he had said, that Councils, Doctors, Fathers, Schoolmen, Churches etc. have
erred both ways: and therefore I am in as great Danger in submitting to such
fallible and blind Guides every whit, nay greater, than if I happ'n to err,
after having searched, with all the imaginable Strength of my Reason, for Truth:
for says the Author, There is no danger of perishing but for Disobedience, to
what? to God's Commands: and I am commanded to offer a reasonable Service, I am
to give a reason of my Faith, and that Hope which is in me, and does it look
like a good Plea to say, that I did search, and prayed to God, to direct me in
that Search by his Spirit? or is it better to say, and more tolerable, that I
believed as the Church believed, and rested there as safe I thought, as a Thief
in a Mill? but this last Plea can never hold, for me to pretend I did so with
other men's Eyes, when God has given me Eyes of mine own: and this made Luther
stir, and H. 8. too; who being King of a Kingdom independent of Rome, properly
(though many ways usurpt by the Pope) was not, a part rei, obliged to refer
himself to the Decision of any foreign Potentate about that which, he alleged,
troubled his Conscience; or if it were from any other Motive, yet it was
generously done upon the main; and God can bring Good out of Evil: whence the
Author's Assumption, that there is in man a natural Ability of searching for
spiritual Truths, and that it can be nothing else but the Understanding,
neither to any thing else can the Command of searching be directed etc. cannot
be shaken by what is objected; besides that, the Author has the Suffrage of the
best learned in all Ages to back him.

As to what fell in betwixt the Author and Master Hobbs, it does not much
concern me to meddle with, in this place, T. H. will shift for himself: but I
will tell the Gent. he is the first Christian that ever interpreted the fifth
of Matthew, Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, to warrant the Necessity of Obedience to external Worship; nor will the
Scope of that Chapter bear it, the Apostle intending to explain thereby, the
blessed State of Christianity in Suffering for Christ. etc.

And that it is impossible, Humane Reason (so guided as the Author has told
us) should lead men into those Sins of Theft, Murder, etc. and all other
Villainies, appears from this, that nothing else besides it, can preserve us
from the Commission of them; for no man while he used his own Reason rightly,
ever committed any of them, it being impossible to suppose it could be the
Effect of Reason, to be impious, but it may be the effect of the enslaving of
our Reason, to the brutish part of a man, which is his sensual Appetite, or the
like, which indeed is too familiar while Youth lasts.

It is true which the Gent. affirms, that whoever fails by the wilful
neglect of finding out of Truth, which was in his Power to help, is therefore
inexcusable; but he that persecutes those who have searched according to their
best means, and yet cannot satisfy their own Consciences, is more inexcusable;
by doing that to others which he would (for no man would be persecuted) not
have done to himself.

But the Gentleman excepts against the Author's asserting, That we ought not to
believe Errors of Faith to be damnable, it being unreasonable to teach men,
that Errors overthrow our Hopes of Salvation, unless we could likewise give
them a Catalogue of those Errors which are so: Paul indeed says, there are
damnable Heresies, and Peter, but names none in particular, but denying of the
Lord that bought us, thereby bringing swift Destruction, etc. it is very plain
thereby, Peter defined, or rather determined the denying of the Lord that
bought them, to be the only damnable Heresy, which indeed I take to be
Apostasy.

However the Gent. adventureth to give us another manner of Catalogue of
damnable Heresies, which he says, are all such as are continued in, in
Opposition to the Authority of the Church perversely and obstinately; I grant
it true. But if all are guilty of damnable Errors, or damnable Heresy, who do
not obey what the Church enjoyneth, that is, the Law in England and Scotland,
considering the Indifferency of some, and the dissenting of others; there will
be but a few compared to the guilty, in any Possibility of Salvation in those
two Kingdoms; and it must needs invite all lukewarm Protestants to the Roman
Religion, rather than to stick to the Religion of that people, so generally
infected with damnable Errors; the Papists have reason to thank him for it.

Yet again, the Gent. quarrelleth at the Author, for saying; Where we do not
know our Fault, we have no means of Repenting of it, and consequently, cannot
expect Pardon for it, there being no Forgiveness without Repentance, and
Repentance is impossible without knowledge of our Fault.

To which the Gentleman's answer is, if this be true, it would damn all
Mankind; and my Reply is, If it be not true, it must damn most of Mankind: for
confident I am, there is not one in a thousand that thinks himself obliged to
repent of Sins he never knew of, it being enough, and more than most men do, to
repent of known sins. Pardon implies a Guilt, Guilt is a Breach of the Law.
The old Testament condemns none but for actual Sins, the new makes few new
Sins, more than the old: for Thoughts, if transient, and not reduced into Act,
are not Sins; and what David says, Who can understand his Errors? there is not
any more meant by it, than that it is difficult to understand them; and when he
prays to be pardoned his secret Sins, he intended not any other than such
Sins, as were only known to God and himself; so against presumptuous Sins,
which are intended against Light, against Reason, no man having ever had
greater Reason to be thankful to God than he, who had been preferred and
preserved in so admirable a manner, more than once from his Enemies, etc. And
the Gent. cannot forget who prayed to be delivered from unreasonable men, nor
who fought with Beasts at Ephesus.

Again, the Author having said, the great Probability of Truth on all sides,
even in the erring ones, ought to make us believe, that God will pardon those
Errors: the Gentleman answers thus.

If our Errors be such as are not the Effects or Causes of any Sin, we have no
Reason to think but God will pardon them: and I say, If our Sins be the Causes
of our Errors, we have no Reason to think, that God will pardon them; and that
Sin is for the most part the Cause of Errors, is plain to any man who shall
observe the Effects of Debauchery: for how is it possible, any man can act
rationally, who drowneth his Reason? or believe, as convinced by Reason, when
he will offer Violence to it, and brutifie himself.

But says the Gent. if our Errors are the Effect of wilful Ignorance, Pride
or Idleness, if they have lead us into Schism and Heresy, and thereby into
Contempt of Authority, then we can have no Hopes of Pardon without Amendment;
wherefore Sin being most commonly the Cause or the Effect of Errors, or both,
it proves there is no small Danger in them.

I must mind the Reader here, how the Gentleman runs the Wild-goose Chase;
one while putting an erroneous person in hope of Pardon (in which he implies
Guilt) or else why Pardon? Another while, no Pardon without Amendment; as if
Amendment were not the tacit Condition of every pardon; which if it were not
true, men might presume to sin daily upon Assurance of daily Pardon, or, at
least, upon Presumption of it: I suppose he should rather have said, no Pardon
was to be had without Repentance in any Case: which he was afraid, or unwilling
to say, least he should have admitted the Truth of the Author's Assertion,
which was, that true Repentance could not be without foreknowledge of the
Fault; and I think, as concerning Errors, to mend is no more than to repent of
them.

But for that the Gent. makes Wilful Ignorance a damnable sin, I do not well
understand what he means by the term Wilful, there, it being as absurd, to my
apprehension, to call Ignorance, Wilful, as to talk of Free Will; the Will
always following, and being acted by the last Dictate of the Understanding: so
that, it not only seems to be, but is necessitated, being no Faculty in it
self: men cannot therefore believe what they please, nor think what they
please, that such or such an Opinion, or thing, is true or false. Indeed a man
may act contrary to his Understanding, which is Hypocrisy, and which, if the
Gent. pleases, he may call Wilful Hypocrisy: nor do I know a fitter man to
make Hypocrites than himself, who is so fierce, nay fiercer than our Laws are
themselves, to have all men compelled to Conformity, whether it be with or
against their Reasons, after the way Carters use, by the Whip, to teach their
poor Horses obedience.

Now again; the Author having said, and truly, that there is no such great
danger from Errors, since there is but one true way for a thousand false ones,
and that there is no mark set upon that true way, to distinguish it from others,
(Reason being the Judge) the Gent. argues, that where the difficulty
surpasses the Faculty that God has given us (Reason still, for we have no
other) we need not fear he will punish us for not finding out such Truths:
(Where Is Wilful Ignorance now? for, says he, if they had been necessary (I
wish he had told us what are necessary for our Salvation,) they would have been
suited to our Capacities, but if we are wilfully ignorant of necessary Truths,
then it is not more contrary to the Goodness of God to punish us Eternally for
that, than for any other sin which we dye in, without Repentance. I reply,

That in all Cases where I cannot assent to any Proposition about Faith,
(because unconvinc'd) having searched and tried what possibly I could to
convince or inform my self; I need not fear God will punish me eternally; for,
in this case, I cannot be guilty of that he calls Wilful Ignorance, for it
follows, that all Truths which I assent not to (having so searched by my
Reason) do either surpass my Understanding, or they do not: if they do, I am
not punishable, says the Gent. eternally, and I say, If they do I am not
punishable eternally, because I could not know they were Truths; Punishment
always presupposing Guilt, and it is no Crime not to be able to know, but a
natural Infirmity: indeed it is a Crime not to search for Truth; but none to
think such a Position false; Neither do I know that men are any were, in
Scripture said to be condemned eternally for any other but unrepented actual
Sins.

But if I should grant that some Errors are damnable, how shall I know which
are so? one Church condemning another, must not my Reason judge for me?

Yet higher, If it be hard to say, which a Great Author says, not yet
answered, (nor perhaps ever will) that God who is the Father of Mercies, that
does, in Heaven and Earth, all that he will, that has the Hearts of all men
in his disposing, that Works in men both to Will and to Do, and without whose
free gift a man has neither inclination to Good, nor repentance of Evil,
should punish men's Transgressions without any end of Time, and with all the
extremity of Torture that men can imagine, and more: it seems hard to think
(which I add) that he will punish men eternally for not being able to find out
the Truth: harder for their Errors, which they believe to be Truth, but hardest
of all, for not conforming to the External Modes of honoring him, which are
alterable, and many times accommodated to the Interest of a Nation; and are
only honorable toward him, because they are legally declared to be honorable
in one place, not so in another. How much therefore does it concern the Supreme
Power, every where, to consider and weigh the present Genius of the People,
before they make Ecclesiastical Laws? for they always touch the Consciences of
men, not so other Laws (for they are for Public Peace (strictly) and must be
obeyed) they are, I say, to be considered, especially there, where, in the very
Nature of the People, there is much pity for Sufferers about Religious
concerns, and in whom there is a general abhorrence (as with us, about
Religion) from Persecution, which His Majesty well understood, when he afforded
that Gracious Condescension: besides, all men know, Persuasion was the Method
of the Apostles, not Rigor, nor will Rigor prevail here.

And we have lived to see (once more to say it) the Profit of that
demonstrative and rational way of Preaching, and Printing used of late;
whereof. D. Stillingfleet's Book Entitled Origines Sacrae, that most Excellent
Book, proving the Being of God, the Immortality of the Soul, and the truth of
Scripture, is no mean Example; nor are D. Tillotson's Printed Sermons less
considerable against Atheism. From whence I pass by (as granted on all hands)
the Gentleman's long Harangue (which he before played with) of the
Rationability of Men's being obliged to consult with Divines, Lawyers and
Physicians, as answered before.

Though I may pertinently subjoyn, what great Reason our Author had to mention
the Ignorance or Malice of one sort of our spiritual Phisicians, together with
their too visible Vices (I mean in some of them) as none more likely to let in
a Flood of Atheism and Popery, than the Disobedience of Dissenters: from whence
I pass to the Gentleman's next Argument against our Relyance upon Reason; he
putting the case, of meeting with a Jesuit, or Sectary, who shall attaque me,
how I will avoid being made either of those two?

To which I must reply, and can give no other than this, that in such a Case, I
must fly to Reason as my safest Guard; all other Guides being fallible, which
no man in his Wits was ever yet so irrational as to say of Reason, nor the
Gentleman neither.

Yet to speak freely, I cannot think otherwise, but that I am obliged to yield
to either of those two, if they appear either of them to have greater Reason
than mine; and that I may be safe with either of them, the Gent. allows: so
there is no Danger at all, in meeting with either the one or the other, but a
possible Profit.

So great is the use of Reason, and so great is the Force and Defense of it.
The plain Truth is, it is the thinking man that is wise. As for Books, they may
be useful, yet it is dangerous relying upon them: it is true, a few Books well
chosen and digested may open and establish the Understanding, when as too much
reading dazles it: how many Persons of good Natural Parts, acquired Wit and
Learning, wear out their days in a perpetual hurry of reading, is obvious to
every man of general Conversation; such are always learning, and never come at
truth. So that every Humane Excellency resolves into Reason, or shrowds under
its Umbrage; Reason, which (as a Light Divine) governed the World before the
Metaphorical word Conscience was known.

This begot Government, teaches Obedience; and, first of all, obliged men to
Natural Religion, which can never be cancelled or forgotten. All the Lawyers in
the World cannot make any Case Law, which is not Reasonable; it is not
Precedents will do it, they are but Opinions. Nor can any Divine preach me into
a belief of any Proposition, unless he be able to convince my Reason, that what
he says is true. Nor any Politician warrant the soundness of his Advice to his
Sovereign, till the Event has justified the Rationability of his Counsel, which
is the Reason, why it has been observed, that some wary men in Counsels
endeavor to speak last.

It Is hard to conceive, what that thing is, which the Learned call Physicum
Fatum; so many little (and impossible to be foreseen) intervening Accidents,
may, and do often, alter the most subtle Projections.

On the other side, a Rational and Prudent man may live in Peace in most Times,
under the changes of Government, by complying; as Judge Hale did, in the times
of Usurpation, to maintain Property. It Is true, Subjects have Liberty in all
things, where they are not restrained by Laws, and in such things they have
restrained themselves. As too furious Use of Power has endangered many States,
so the want of Power has ruined others.

But, as there is nothing weaker than to think, that any Government will be
baffled by Private men; so, upon this Discretion, the Peace of every Nation
depends; which is the greatest Earthly Blessing.

And, if I do say, the Peace of most men depends upon the Use of their own
Reason, I think it is no Paradox: it is the want thereof puts us many times,
(uncompell'd) upon accidental Juries; where, very often, Passion, Malice, or
secret Interest swayes; or the corruption of Judges, or their cowardice, or
want of Patience to hear; or, which is too frequent, the mercenary impudence of
some Pleaders; or, which happens sometimes in Courts of Equity; where, unless
the Judge be very able, the Bar will run round him, and abuse his Intentions,
to the ruin of the unfortunate Plaintiff or Defendant.

And, though I may appeal to most men of Business, for the Warranty of these
general Instances, yet, because the Gent. is guilty of uncivil Excursions from
the Text, he undertakes to confute: I will discover the Fox, that Vulgar Eyes
may see his unkind wiles, to evade the Author's fair Intentions with labored
Fallacies.

Pursuant to which Design, the Reader may please to observe, what Pains he
takes in half a dozen Pages, of his Plain Dealing, to tell our Author the
necessary Consequences of taking Religion quite away from the World, by
removing it, as he calls it, out of the minds of men, which no man will deny
(if it were possible to banish it) but whether he had any reason to huff, with
all that Harangue, from any slip of the Author's, I leave all Ingenuous Persons
to judge, considering the whole thread of the Author's Book: for, where the
Author says if such Pretenses (meaning Pretenses of Religion, not Religion it
self) were removed, by granting Liberty of Conscience every where; I say, such
Liberty, as does not hinder Peace and Trade, the cause of most Wars and
Bloodshed would be removed; the Cause, I say again, of most Foreign and Civil
Wars.

This to prove, I may instance the War by the Spaniard in 88. against England;
the Irish Rebellion in the Queens time: and more dreadful in ours, the direful
Effects of the Scottish Covenant, the present Stirs in Hungary, etc. all which
evince the Truth of our Author's Argument.

As to the French King's Actions, be they the effects of Ambition or otherwise;
yet this is plain, there is a Kingdom of Darkness endeavored to be imposed by
the dark, cunning, and indefatigable Industry of it is Emissaries and Bigots
every where; and very wise, loyal persons, do ascribe much of our peace, since
the happy Restoration of our present King, to his being freed from humouring
of uncharitable Zealots even amongst our selves at home.

Nor need I reckon up Zisca's Actions; nor the Ravage of the Swedes, under
Gustavus Adolphus, in Germany, the Effusion of Blood by Duke D'alva, who put
18000. to death in cold Blood, (having touched the indiscreet Zeal of his Master
Philip already,) nor the misguided Zeal of our Queen Mary, nor the prodigious
Fortune of O. C. in his Pretenses for Religion, nor his Actions complying with
such a Vizard: yet it may not be amiss to remember the Breach of that League
the Hungarians had made with Amarath the third, the Turkish King; how 'twas
broken by the religious heat of the Pope's Legate, which was the cause of
shedding so much Christian Blood, and God was pleased to give the Turk Victory
after three days Fight, and the Othoman's appeal to Christ for Justice; and we
must not forget the Sufferings in Peimont of late years, upon the score of
Religion, not to speak of particular Massacres occasioned from Biggotism,
whereof Histories are so full, it is not necessary to insert them in this Paper,
nor would I have so far waded in Particulars, but to show and expose the
Gent's. unreasonable Confidence on the other hand inferring, that most of our
late Wars have arisen upon purely politic Pretensions, and not upon religious
Colors.

And I not only hope, but am really persuaded, it will never be within the
Power, nor Design of any dissenting party in England, (so men be not too much
prosecuted for Nonconformity) to stir up my Countrymen into actual
Disobedience against his Majesty's Laws, farther than to suffer: for the Scars
of the late intestine Wars, remaining still, being fresh in Memory, the
greatest Convulsions the British Empire ever felt (which I hope never will be
renewed) being hardly yet shak'd off.

But because this general Toleration to all Protestants which I seem to plead
for, at least wish, if Authority shall think fit, may seem of Right,
indulgigible to that sort of men, who claim their Religion under a foreign
Head. The Answer is easy, viz. That it is not for their Religion, but for
designing to alter the Government, and for drawing off his Majesty's Subjects
to the Allegiance of the Roman See, they are corrected by our Laws; which Laws,
when strained by passionate Judges, beyond the Intention of former Legislators,
to the Oppression of peaceable dissenting Protestants, gratify ill men, hinder
Trade, scandalize the Protestant Churches beyond the Seas, and seem to deserve
a Parliamentary Explanation.

However, our Diffenters are to know, there must always be, and ever since
Christianity was embraced by Princes, there has been, general Rules authorized
for the Church, whereby Indecencies have been punished, which are judged so to
be such, by the Supreme Authority in all States, relating to the external way
of honoring God; and because Peace is the end of Government, men's opinions,
when publicly vented and found inconsistent with Peace, must be regulated by
the Magistrate, which is not to make men see double by being dazzled betwixt
Ecclesiastical and Temporal powers, for all Power is temporal, as Power.

Nevertheless, as T. H. says, Paul or Cephas, or Apollo may he followed,
perhaps as the best way, according to a man's liking, so it be done without
Contention, and without measuring the Doctrine of Christ by our Affection to
the person of the Minister; (the Fault which Paul reprehended in the
Corinthians,) his Reasons follow, See the Leviathan chapter 47. page 385. and they
are such as no man has ever hitherto presumed to refute; though his sworn
Enemies have assaulted him otherwise by Shoals.

The English are loath to venture their Salvations at Cross and Pile; which
Becanus urges in his Chapter, de fide, a little too eagerly.

Let us take heed, Since the Tares must grow up with the Wheat till the
Harvest, least by furious Zeal, we be found guilty of plucking up the Wheat
with the Tares.

And let us remember our blessed Savior's Censure of those who required Fire
from Heaven, to consume the apparent Unkindnesses of, perhaps, (in some
measure) ignorant men; he tells his Disciples, they knew not what Spirit they
were of.

It Is as hard to be virtuous, as to be whipped into any particular Religion;
because our natural passions are contrary to the Laws of reason: and for that,
the Vices of some of the Clergy, on both sides, have rendered them
contemptible, for which last, God has, more than once, removed the Candlestick.

The Object of their Profession being properly, Eternal Life; the people think,
and truly, they ought not to inter-meddle with Government, at least in the
Pulpit: England has felt the ill Consequence of their Excursions more than
once, and what Prejudice the Spaniard has gotten, and how he has dwindl'd in
Power, by his bloody and perverted Inquisition and blind Zeal, otherwise, he
that runs may read.

What Liberty the Turk allows to peaceable Christians in his Empire, is well
known, and how he thrives by it, has been here hinted before.

We are near enough to the United Provinces, to understand their Permissions,
as to Conscience, and the Advance of their politic Interests thereby, which
never lies.

The Seat of Power is absolute there, and every where, therefore a Lenitive Law
is not impracticable here, in reason, if our Superiors please, nor inconsistent
with our Government Regal.

The Church depends upon the State not the State upon the Church, for the King
is Head of both, and they both ^re consolidate in him, Jure Coronae.

All Kings, as Kings, were originally vested with that Power, so the Pope, in
his own Dition, has it Jure Papatus.

Some say, Nothing is Conscience to any man, which ought not to be so to
another; it is regularly true, I think, and though, sure, he that said, Tales
publicly told and allowed, was Religion, spoke wittily, relating to Sacred
History; yet, methinks, 'twas something below his Gravity, it was a Definition
a little too jocular, but that Gentleman spoke of Religion in General.

However, since the Gent. in his Plain Dealing, has discovered his dislike of
T. H. I may take leave to say, I think him a most excellent Philosopher, and
Great in several other respects; for warranty whereof, I need only produce that
admirable Pindarick Ode upon him, written by my School-fellow Cowley, where he
says, There Is none but God does know,
Whether the fair Idaea thou do show,
Agrees entirely with thine own, or no.
Speaking of T. H.

It Is such an Ode, as perhaps excells all made before it, and I shall think it
true, till I see a fairer Idaea of Truth, and no longer: for it is not my
purpose to be an obstinate Heretic, no nor a State-Martyr neither. Nor to
suffer at all for Disobedience to Laws. I take him to be the best Subject, who
obeys them; not him, who patiently yields to pay the Penalties; Passive
Obedience, and Free Will, are sense alike to my Understanding.

Why should a man be miserable before his time? was the Question of the Wise
King.

I do think, it is best to be of the Religion of a man's Country, Externally at
least; and sure I am, there is nothing morally evil in ours: and for External
Worship in Religion, as to time and place, it is determinable by the Supreme
Magistrate (in my opinion) not as a Christian, but as King. For neither the
Brazen Serpent, nor the Golden Calf, were naturally preferrible one more than
another; 'twas Moses gave the Precedence. Betwixt the Laws of Reason (which are
undoubtedly God's Eternal Laws) and the Laws of a man's Civil Sovereign, which
we are commanded to obey, I know none; the Moral Law being but a repetition of
the Laws of Reason.

This Consideration gives me occasion to slight the huge Volumes of stuff
obtruded upon us, otherwise, impertinently, as grounded upon the Old Testament,
but without any warrant to oblige us, as Christians and Subjects; to believe
the Authors of such waste Papers, in what they write. All this while, every
good man is to consider the most Excellent Counsels of cur Savior, every where
in the New Testament, and the History of God's Divine Providence in the old.

Herein we agree; but I do not understand what the Gent. means by the Laws of
the Church: for the Church of England never did, nor can make any Law, nor is
it Rational to say she can, for when Laws are made, they are the King's Laws,
and the Bishops are his Bishops.

And if all the Bishops in England had been dead, when the King was restored,
(there did not above three survive the Usurpation, as I am informed) unless the
King had been pleased to grant his Licentiam Eligendi, there could have been no
new ones made. His Majesty, in his Natural Capacity, is the Causa sine qua non.
This strikes off the Exploded Pretense of the Bishops Jus devinum, and for
their Politicum, they were better without it. Let the Parliament judge, as to
their Legal Rights.

But, whether the greatest part of our Dissenters go to Meetings, out of
Interest to carry on their Trades, and not out of Religion, (which the Gent.
says they do) I know not: Probably they do: and it is as true, that many go to
our Churches for such Ends, or worse. Let every man examine himself, and, by
the Lives of each sort, judge which are most probably Atheistical; it being
hard to believe, that they who live in advised sins, do really believe there is
any God at all, let them be of what Party they please.

As for my own part, I am apt to think, there are with us two main and Evident
Causes of Atheism: The first is, the Example of Great Men and Vicious; the
second is, the Debauchery of some Ministers, especially in Countries far off
London: for, in and about London, to speak heartily, I find many worthy
Preachers, and virtuous men; but how the Flights and Mountees of the Gent.
against Atheism, came to be inserted into Plain Dealing, as in answer to our
Author, I cannot tell, unless it were to show his flosculous Oratory; much good
may it do him, he is a Plain-dealing Person: but the plain truth is, the
midling sort of men will not be brought to rest with an implicit Faith in their
authorized Teachers; that will not do in England: the People apprehend well
enough, for they feel soonest; so far Vox populi is Vox Dei. It Is the mediation
of Reason must convince them, and reduce them, or the special Revelation of
Gods Spirit, which, how easily mistaken, is easily understood; I say, mistaken
by such, who take their own Dreams for the Holy Spirit.

All men's Condescentions, Adherencies, and Procedures in Moral, Religious, and
Politic Affairs, being built upon what they think Reason, and no otherwise,
which needs no illustration to a direct Atheist; for he, disbelieving a Deity,
gives no Adoration: to a mere Pagan, for he, probably, gives it to Sun or Moon,
and yet thinks they are Divine Powers: to one of the Roman Church, for he takes
the Pope to be infallible, etc. to any Dissenter; for if his dissenting proceed
from Conscience, it proceeds from his Reason: So the Merchant, and all other
Tradesmen are directed, and conducted by that which seems the most Rational way
toward their respective Ends. Yet the Gent. is pleased to term the Author's
Argument, proving, invincibly, the necessity of our Appeal to Humane Reason, a
foolish Argument. But some are too hasty to wear Swords.

I might add, that Obedience is more cheerfully and rationally given to
Princes, from their Subjects, from their being protected by their Princes:
Self-preservation being an essential part of the Law of Nature, and involves
the Summary of the Laws of Reason, to do as a man would be done unto; for if I
abuse my Power, there are Arms stronger than mine.

And as things are, (in my poor Opinion) at this Juncture, it comports best
with the Interest of England, and consequently with the King's Interest, (whose
Greatness and Safety is involved in the Riches and Strength of his Subjects)
that all Dissenting Parties, about the External Worship of God (for Opinions
may be, and will be internally free) should be kept, as near as can be, in a
Balance (the Romanists excepted, so far as they are inconsistent with the
Government, because, it is said, they would bring in a Foreign Head;) all which
W. Penn has substantially proved, in a little Treatise lately published, and
dispersed into most Parliament men's hands by himself; which, to speak truly, is
accurately, heartily, and juicioussy composed, and with a good Masculine Style,
free from Canting; which, without offering violence to Reason, can never be
answered: for it is proved from the Laws of Reason, from Scripture, from the
Laws of Nations generally, and from those of England, and relates to Eternal
Happiness after this Life, as well as to Temporals. Besides, I am very well
satisfied, the Scale of Trade would never have held, as it has here, since the
King came in, if the Dissenters had been rigorously punished in London, the
Center of Commerce.

It Is true, now that the Dissenting Parties are fixed under their respective
Ministers, into a kind of Corporate Societies, and their Ministers live by it:
it may be supposed it will be more difficult, every day than other, to make
such a Comprehensive Law (as is desired by the most Prudent men) to bear well
at this time: As to that, the Parliament can cure it well enough, with the
Permission of the King, and by apt Qualifications and Restrictions, if it
pleases. And, I am informed, Judge Hale did draw an Act for that end, which Sir
Orlando Bridgman put him upon: but there is a Time for every thing, and God's
Time is the best time. And now to return to our Province, that the Gent. may
not think I have forgot him.

I must presume to tell him, his Answer does contain many other frivolous
Objections, impertinent Stories, wild, and illogical Conclusions, deduced from
precarious Principles, or totally Foreign to our Author's Treatise and Design;
which, I cannot hold my self obliged to reply. Neither did I ever promise, or
undertake to obey the Gent. in such invitations, nor to follow him in such
extravagant Processions; for I hold it loss of time, and a kind of sawing off
the Reader's Ears.

We are indeed too much pestered with Books, every day creeping abroad,
scribled Pro and Con by passionate men, which signify nothing.

But the Design of our Author was, in Appearance at least, pious and honorable
to pacify all parties in Religion, I mean all Protestants, of what Species
soever, here in England, with a Lenitive both charitable and rational, which
may seem now seasonable, since it is found by Experience, such Corrosives as
have been applied, prove altogether ineffectual. And let us consider maturely,
the Wish of Moses, I would that all God's people were Prophets, the Example of
our blessed Savior in chiding of his Disciples, Who asked Fire from Heaven
etc. of St. Paul's being all things to all men, that of following Paul, Cephas
or Apollo, and the Patterns of the Primitive Times of the Church, when
preaching was, as it ought to be now, catechetical, not theatrical. I say, let
us consider, if all the Causes and Reasons before sparsedly given in this
Reply, and the Complexion of things, do not seem to conspire for a legal
Plaster, to cure that incancerating Humor of vexing one another about Trifles,
at least, Indifferencies, compared to the Elements of Christianity, or to the
Essence thereof. Good Laws, and well executed, to suppress Vice, will keep all
steady; let the old Gentleman at Rome, be as angry as he pleases, he has got
nothing by us of late; and had he seen the throng, in our Streets, of stout
Fellows, when his Effigies was burnt last, 'twould have made him despair of
being able to riggle in here.

The Nation is well roused up, and we have a Wise Prince, able to judge of
Exigencies: all the little Shams and pretended Plots, I say, pretended Plots,
of ill-affected men, of all sorts, to the Government, begin to dwindle, and
look as they indeed are, ridiculous. How far the main Design of our Adversaries
does still advance, and by what Artifices, Authority must judge, and does, I
doubt not, take Care to prevent the Mischief.

Now as to our Design in this Reply, I hope enough has been said to satisfy
all ingenious men, and unprejudiced, that Reason is the safest Guide; and
consequently, that the Author of that most ingenious, much admired, and
fortunate Treatise, entitled Humane Reason, well deserves the Gratulation of
every judicious person, for his Pains in composing it.

As to the Reader of this Paper, I shall not (as the Author of Plain dealing
does) implore his reasonable and impartial Censure (though I know it is a very
critical Age) because if he that reads be rational, I am sure I shall have it;
if he be otherwise, I cannot have it, therefore I will not ask it.

Nor will I counterbuff the Gent. with Grub-street Poetry, in Opposition to his
Comical Ralpho, though I can do it with as nimble a Sarcasme; it being at best,
only a gentile kind of Buffoon'ry, something like the Rymes which the Parson of
Pentlow, in Essex, when he was seventy at least, told me he tied in Paper about
a Buzards Neck, taken a little before in Lime-twigs, which had snatched away one
of his Gosslings, and which follows here.

The Parson of Pentlow that now is,
For stealing of one poor Gosling of his,
Has sealed up mine Eyes, and stich'd up my Bum,
And bid me go fly to the day of Doom.
What became of the Buzard so used, after she had spent her Wings, I never
heard, but if it were plain, it was not fair dealing from a man of his Coat to
be so cruel to the hungry Bird.

Neither was it Charity in the Gent. we oppose, to design the switching out of
our Author's Light, because he saw farther into a Millstone than other men,
and taught the Geese how to avoid the Fox, by perching upon the tree of Life;
Reason, whose Fruit, when taken into a Stomach, not overcharged with Choler,
always purifies the Brain.

I have done with the Gent. and having a small Book just now sent me by a very
ingenious Lady, designedly written by a Romanist to strike our Author dead; I
read it over and found it filled up with Arguments of Universality, Tradition,
and Infallibility of that Church, Peter's Authority etc. and all these larded
with Zeal to persuade me into a Dependence and Reliance upon the Roman Church,
as the true one; in which Treatise that Author boldly said, my Reason ought to
Acquiesce, it is well that side also makes Reason the Judge.

I was pleased with the sound of the Word, more than with his reasons, for they
did not satisfy my Understanding: yet had I known that Authors Genius inclined
to Poetry, I would have recommended him, for Instruction, to, my old Friend the
Parson of Pentlow.

And now I begin to think my self fortunate, having hitherto sided with a noble
Captain (for so I account Humane Reason) which it is confessed, every side
pretends to, and which may possibly be beaten from it is Posts by the clatter of
some Coffee-house, but it will always recover and baffle its greatest
Antagonists, at the long run: for Truth is strongest, but Reason does assure
it, without whose gentle Mediation and Midwifry, we had still remained in the
State of War, and consequently, had been miserable.

THE END.
A RE-VIEW AND APPENDIX.
OUR Reply having been written now above two years, I have re-consider'd it,
and, from the past Circumstances of Affairs, and present, do think it necessary
to add this Re-view, and other Amplifications, as either subservient to the
Design, or otherwise material; insisting upon the Prospect of Reason, and the
ill consequence of neglecting its guidance, viz.

That, from the Petulancy, Heat, and unseasonable Eagerness of some, not very
Discreet nor Learned; and of others, Learned, Honest, and generally Prudent,
but not infallible, occasion is taken, by the other side, to answer, upon such
Provocations, as they can, alleging, that their Sufferings are, and have been,
all along, for Conscience Sake, and for well-doing, though the Letters of the
Laws are against them, a Plea ever favored in all Ages.

That these Disputes about Externals only, (for both Parties agree in
Substance of Doctrine) are mischievous to us at home, and scandalous to the
Protestant Churches abroad beyond the Seas.

That the Roman Church, if it gets no Proselytes from these unseasonable Heats,
yet it has great reason to be pleased therewith; for she thrives by our
Divisions; and can thrive by no other means here now.

That that Church was more Politic (while she had as fair hopes as ever, to
prevail after the Queens death) by complying outwardly with our Laws: for, till
the 12th of Q. Eliz. all, or most Romanists, in England, did, and were
permitted by the Pope, to go to our Protestant Churches, to hear the Service,
receive the Sacrament, and take the Oath of Allegiance; though since, the
Jesuits procured a Bull of Inhibition, for their own profit, yet, 'twas never
accounted any Crime for a Romanist, at that time, not to go, or to go to the
Protestant Church: whence, our want of Charity, to the Dissenters, appears
less, than that of the Roman Church, our Policy less, and our uneasiness too
visible thereby.

Neither are the Dissenters altogether excusable, in their too stiff
Separation, and boggling at small things; but I will be sparing in judging
tender Consciences; nevertheless it is obvious, That from our pernicious
Divisions, so dangerous to our Religion, and because, tho the first Reformers
went a good step, yet no great progress has lately been made toward the Reason
of our departure from Rome, and reforming things amiss, moderate men on both
sides here, do wish for some new Laws, to consolidate the Conformists, and
Non-conformists, in some measure; or, at least, that some Ceremonies might be
left: and for the Explanation of some Laws now in force, or limiting the force
of others, and particularly of that for imposing twenty pounds per Month, for
not coming to Church; which Law, I suppose no Lawyer doubts, was originally
intended against the Romanists, and not against Protestant Dissenters, who were
few then; and 'twas the Roman Party at that time which confronted the Laws, and
begot the Statute.

The next Observation relates to Excommunications: which, how familiarly
decreed, and for what slight Causes, and upon what gainful Designs; and
consequently, how prejudicial to many of his Majesty's good Subjects, and how
contrary to its Primitive and Grave Institution, all Wise and Honest men of
this Nation are, and have been long, very sensible of, and of the ruin of some
Families, and the enriching of ill Officers, by such Methods.

But, may some say, the Statute of Q. Mary against disturbers of Preachers, is
partly in force, and of Use, which was principally intended against
Protestants; for they were the Persons likely to disturb the Romanish Preachers
then, wherefore they say, Why is not that of Eliz. also to be put in constant
practice, it being a general Law, and provides for Peace?

Our Answer is, The Case is altered; for, though equal Principles do lead to
equal Ends, it is but when the matter about which we are conversant is equal:
And now the Papists are the most dangerous to our Peace, and do plot to that
end, if we may credit King and Parliament, or our own Eyes; therefore that Law
of Elizabeth against Recusancy stands in force; yet it seems to want some
Discrimination; and that of Mary, being in part repealed, is continued, as to
the disturbing of Preachers, the true Definition of Law being the Will of the
Legislator.

There are many other antiquated, and, as things are, inconvenient Laws, Civil
and Ecclesiastical, which I have not room to remark here; and as to the
brangling practick part of both Courts, the Judges may, at least, they ought to
correct it: tho one said wittily, yet truly, that no body but themselves
(meaning the Civil Practisers) understands their Practice (I had almost said
Laws) nor themselves neither. The like may be said of the Practice at Common
Law, depending upon great Officers, as some say; if so, it is all dark.

This, however, since we are upon Discourse of Reason, I Will venture to say,
it is evident, that, too often, the Clients are tortured betwixt Prohibitions
and Consultations; so dangerous and troublesome it is, where Courts do strive
for Jurisdiction: so also, where the Judge's Power increases, and the Jury's
decreases or is over-awed: for where Judges (as has been our Case in Richard
the Second's time) presume to determine, or delay by discretion, or border upon
the thing called perversion, upon misapplied Maxims, (which, I hope will not be
our Case:) Those Nations are more at ease, where their Laws are unwritten
(supposing the Eternity of the Laws of Reason;) and which minds me of the
familiar and exorbitant Practice of some (as a wise Lord lately called them)
Trading Justices, by their granting Warrants upon easy, or unprov'd
Suggestions, (above 10000 having been made out in one year by one of them
lately, which I can prove;) insomuch, as few honest, modest men can be free
from their discretional Lash: which is a Gravamen, I think, and may, or ought
to be prevented by a new introductory Law; for, I suppose, the Common Law is
too dull to do it; or the Medicine, that way, has given place to the Disease:
for the Remedy by an Action against the Justice, is worse than the Disease,
since their awe upon Juries, from their abused Power, to the scandal of the
Government, and thereby, to the indisposing of Subjects from their due and
peaceable obedience to the Laws, wherein Religion properly consists: And as to
our Reply,

Whereas the Gentleman boldly assumed, but never proved, the consequence of
Atheism, by the reliance upon Reason, which I have refuted, and showed who were
two of the most probable Introductors of it; I think fit to add a third Cause
of irreligion, if not Atheism; namely, the daily Printing and publishing many
Translations, and other Books, which presume to treat of the inexplicable
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, and of God; which indeed fall not under
Humane Capacity to examine Logically; and whereby, in stead of reconciling
that, which they call Philosophy, to the Doctrine of the New Testament, or
remarking upon both Testaments, they render the plain Truths thereof, not only
to the Vulgar, but to some pedantically Learned men, suspicious. Such is, the
now publicly sold, Spinosa's Tractate, which does hurt; and if I should say,
D. Cud. Repetitions also, possibly 'twere true, though the Dr. meant well, and
is very Learned.

The Contemplation whereof, obliges me to add a fourth Cause of Irreligion, if
not Atheism; which is, that several Books of late years have been Licensed,
even by the Universities, bearing glorious Titles, the Subject matter whereof,
does unhinge the Foundations of our Revealed Religion, whereof one instance may
be in a celebrated Folio, wherein, amongst other wild Opinions, it is positively
said, and often insisted, that the Soul of man, before its attainment of
Heaven, must pass through, (and run the hazard of being bewildered and
suffocated in) thick, gelid Vapors, dusky Clouds, and other such like, which,
though the Learned may digest safely, yet ordinary men, who have been taught
that the Soul of a good man passes immediately from Earth to Heaven, after
death, (without such intermediate Probations, Purifications and Punishments,)
are apt either to lean, from such infusions, toward the Doctrine of Purgatory,
or to think, there is no proper dependence upon our Systeme of Religion; or,
which is more probable, from such Chimaera's of the Learned, to think, that
Religion it self is nothing else but a Politic Device. These Books, I say, so
authorized, or Printed otherwise, are the bane of Unwary, and especially young
men, not able truly to weigh matters, nor to take in such Pills without
chewing of them. And these are the fruits of exuberant Fancies, not grounded
either upon Reason or Scripture, whereof I might give a thousand instances.

Moreover, whereas I have hinted, in my Reply, that our Dissenters ought to
understand the necessity of some Laws for the Government of the Church; I
should have added, that the Conformist Ministers, by several Discourses of many
Persons, Eminent for their Degrees and Parts, have best defended Protestantism
against its Adversaries of late, tho it does not therefore follow, but that
some better Progressions may be made; and if her Outworks and Guards grow
crazy, or become languid, by overmuch watching, it may be necessary to repair
the one, and reinforce the other, with detachments from her disbanded, yet
valiant, and politic Officers.

For, where Workmen or Soldiers are left, or put out of Employment, upon
presumption that there is no occasion to use their help, (if there happen to be
occasion for their assistance by a sudden irruption of the Enemy;) it is not
only convenient, but necessary to take them into Service again, unless their
former Unfaithfulness have rendered them totally unworthy, or incapable: Now,
whether the present time requires the whole strength of our Friends, or not;
or, whether the Nonconformist Ministers are fit to be considered as Friends,
upon the main, who a^ beloved of the greatest number of Civil People, are
generally moral men, and are obliged, in point of Interest, and otherwise
disposed, to oppose the Romanists, I must leave Authority in Parliament to
consider; and I doubt not but the thing will be considered there, with all the
imaginable Duty, and rational Representations to His Majesty, with the utmost
respect to his Imperial Crown and Dignity, which ought to be the wish and
Prayer of all Protestants: and possibly, the undoubted truth of this Aphorism
may enforce the Consult, viz. That where the Danger of any action out-weighs
the probable profit, it is no wisdom to attempt it: but where the possible
profit outweighs the Danger, it is imprudence to neglect it.

But, whether these Instances will be pleasing to men otherwise influenced by
Interest, or misguided by the Artifice of others, not truly English, it does
not much concern me: for I am well persuaded, by Humane Reason, that they need
no other proofs of their veracity, to all knowing and good Subjects, than their
bare Prolations (yet I do but propound (as I think) what is Rational.)

Pursuant to my Design; No man questions, but that Peace is the proper end of
Government, so it is admitted, that the Magistrate is Judge of the ways and
methods which conduce to that end; nor is it denied by any that pretends to
Sense, but that Opinions, if contrary to Peace, (in the Judgment of the Supreme
Magistrate) may be regulated, because men's Actions commonly follow their
Opinions: and, it is experimentally true, that our Divisions about small things,
do weaken the Protestant Cause; and it follows thence, that rigid and
indiscreet, starcht and positive men of all sides, relating to the External
part of Worship, are the hindrance of Peace.

Next these, follow the foolish, yet dangerous Atheists, who are the only
Rebels against God, with which Disease, whoever is tinctured, is ready, if
possibly, to shake off all obedience to his Vicegerents upon Earth, and,
consequently, to reduce Mankind to the state of War, which is Anarchy; and
against which Poison, I have proved, Reason to be the only Antidote: whence it
naturally follows, that all those who daily, by Discourse and Writings,
industriously strive, not only to undermine the Basis of the Protestant, but
to cancel the undoubted and Eternal obligations of Natural Religion, are
Enemies to Peace; and without which conviction (which begot all Covenants, the
very foundations of Property) no fear of present or future Punishments, for
violation of such Covenants, can be at all; and thence, all obedience to Humane
Laws will decay, if it shall seem against Interest. I suppose therefore, it
mainly concerns the Supreme Magistrate, as well in his Natural, as Politic
Capacity, by all possible condescentions, upon emergent occasions, and Bylaws,
in time, and Penally, to obviate the growth of such idle Discourses, as
threaten the dissolution of Government it self; unto which end, there can be no
such direction as Humane Reason, whose Excellency I defend, and endeavor to
prove, not only to be the safest, but the only guide, with due helps out of
Gods revealed Will; which also Reason teaches to understand, and apply.

Besides, It is the Magistrate's true Interest so to provide, by prevention,
who can never be supported, but must fail, when either he wants Power de facto,
(which all fiery Zelots of any side would circumscribe) to discharge his Duty
to God and Man; or shall be obliged to part with any of his necessary and
essential Rights of Sovereignty, (whereof want of Money is always the Parent)
and which makes me think, that no man can be judged a good Subject, nor a Lover
of that Government, (under which we have lived for so many Ages happily) who
designs such Limitations to his King, as may hinder the discharge of his Trust,
as a King. Nor can any man be accounted a good Counselor to his Prince, who
shall advise such ways, (tho never so specious) as, if followed, may lessen
his Master's Reputation of sincere Care and Study for the Preservation of his
Subjects; to which Distemper, so pernicious and fatal to the best Princes,
(where their Favorites are false or weak) it is impossible a great General
Council (whose Safety is involved in the Safety of their King) can be
obnoxious, considering the Elements of such a Council, for whose Session and
Progression, all men, not conscious of ill Actions toward the Public weal of
their Native Country, really pray.

Yet I will not deny, but some others ought to be rather convinced by Reason,
than accused for Malignancy against the Public: such are those, who take wrong
measures, and create, to themselves, unnecessary Fears, from our late Abuses,
in the times of Civil Wars here, and of that Usurped Power, by a sort of
Masterless, and ill men, to the Reproach and indelible Infamy of our English
Nation; tho, God knows, it was against the will of the greatest, and most
considerable part thereof. Such are others, and possibly well-meaning men, who,
from the inutility of another now dissolved long P. since, (to say no worse) or
from the ill Complexion of Affairs now, and difficulty of Cure by Parliamentary
Methods; or from the immoderate Heat of some, too many, Great, but young men,
who, probably, have not well considered the Late Civil Wars, nor the Danger and
Incivility of too eagerly pressing the Sovereign Power to unseasonable
Concessions, not of absolute Necessity, or upon other more remote or distantial
Fears, whose Effects to obviate, only lies in the Power of God: or from what
other Causes I know not, that they and other men become opposite to the general
desires of all those, who are satisfied, that no other means can be found out
to set us right every way, but a true understanding in P. betwixt his Majesty
and his People: for the securing us from the most unkind, unprovoked,
indefatigable, and industrious Designs of all such, who either, blinded by
furious Zeal, moved by Interest, or, which is worst of all (and which I am loath
to believe) out of mere spite, leave no stone unturned, to introduce a Foreign
Jurisdiction, tho hitherto, thanks be to God, such Concussions have rather
fixed and awakened us, than weakened our Foundations, both Politic and
Religious; for whose supportation, to speak humanely, we are more beholding to
his Majesty, to the braveness of the Gentry and City, than to the Zeal of some
others, as much obliged by their Interest, if they could see it.

But, as to that Pretense, that our Laws are already so good, as there needs no
better; certain it is, there is, and always has been, and will be, from the
nature of Laws themselves, Causes and Accidents (which no Humane Laws, nor the
Wit or Reason of any Body of Men could ^ore-see) to explain, alter, and enact
new Laws; unto which ends, if there be any better way or method than Humane
Reason, I would be glad to understand it; and then, and not till till then, I
shall stand convinced, that what the Gent. I oppose, has offered in
disparagement thereof, is cogent. But, if Reason be the only way to settle
Peace, (I say, Reason, which is antecedent to all Laws, and therefore the
Determiner of the Rectitude and Obliquity of every Action, a thing confessed
every where;) let us stick to it; unless we desire to be enrolled amongst the
number of those who are delirious in one single point, not by defectuous
Procreation, but from the untamed Carcer of their own Passions. For, whether
some men's adhesion to others of contrary Principles, upon general Pretenses of
Love to mankind, or of an exploded Claim to Infallibility; or that other vain
fears, which have disordered their Understandings; or whether the deplorable
and impolitick Expressions of some of our Clergymen, as to their rather
enduring the Roman, than the Presbyterian Form (whereof there is no fear) be
not a plain evidence, that such Persons are beside themselves, I leave wise men
to determine.

And now I shall forbear the Gent. a little while, fearing to have tired the
Reader's Patience, and being very sensible, it is something against the grain to
plane with a Tool, whose edge is already bazal'd, by his taking of it by the
wrong handle, or not steady holding of it; or otherwise, possibly by his
overweening conceit of having the better Cause; but it is no great matter which
way it come, nor which of us two are mistaken, if some other better workman may
chance to be awakend, or rowz'd up, to correct us both; which may be necessary,
for ought I know; for, while two strive, a third often gets the prize: this I
am sure of, men of general Conversation are the best Judges, not mere Book-men;
the want of which, has, if not corrupted, yet apparently weakn'd the Judgment
of a brave Person, and worthy the Title of a Learned, and very Rational men.

Sir M. Hale, that Virtuous and Equitable Judge, whose Law, as it is Piacular
for me to question, yet, if I should with his Philosophy unwritten, the wisest
would conclude me his Friend. This was that large capacious Head, who wanted
the happiness of Conversation; which, had he used, many Notions which he
Printed, and thought rare, because appearing so to him in his Study, would have
appeared very trite to himself; and consequently, he had never, by their
Publication, taken off from the general opinion most men had of his Excellent
Endowments Natural, and acquired Parts; but all -- men have their blind sides.

The next shall be T. Hobs, whose Arguments no man ever condemned, who read him
without Prejudice, and could understand them, and whose Writings plainly clear
the difference betwixt a poring and a thinking man, which last he was, (pious
in his Life, and dying like a true Christian Philospher) yet, certainly, it had
been impossible, (notwithstanding his great Advantages of Learning, Quiet, long
Life and Health) if he had not traveled, and conversed with the greatest Wits
much abroad, and at home in his younger time; for him to have made all men see,
and his very Antagonists confess, the prodigious Strength of his Reason and
Wit, whereof his golden Book de Cive, so valued by all Lawyers at home and
abroad: (to speak it for the Honor of England) and his Objections against
Worthy Des Carts, about his Meditations concerning the Question, Whether we
can have a proper Idaea of God, or not? are such evident Proofs, that to deny
it, is to be accounted stupid, or short-sighted: And for his Arguments about
Liberty and Necessity, against Bishop Bramhall, they are so hugely fine, and so
curiously, yet naturally, cogent, that, for the future, 'twill be judged mere
Presumption, to superadd any thing upon that Subject, so briskly canvass'd
betwixt that Learned Prelate and him: and of what great weight, and yet hardly
fathomed consequence, those Arguments are, and how far the dilucidation of
those Points there handled, will operate in present and future Ages, the
sharpest Eyes now alive cannot penetrate; tho this inquiring time has shrewdly
guessed at it, and already improved those undeniable Proofs to no small
Advantage, even to the Exposing of the Schoolmen, and the old mistaken
Physics, as waste Paper, and Judicial Astrology to a Ridicule: Let the Reader
conclude what becomes of all the stuff which is laid as a foundation to build
upon by the two first, and may easily see besides, the inconsistency of the
third, if the Will be free. I am glad however, the Learned have left us the
Faculty of Deliberation, and for such men's positive imposing, I take it to be
for want of breeding.

But, why should our present great Pretenders to all the Wit and Learning, be
troubled at our diffidence in their Judgments; when it is plain, Let them take
out of Books (when they do find themselves galled) never so imperiously,
Private Preachers do every where, for Fortune, equalize the Pulpits, Quacks and
old Women Physicians, and Sollicitors Lawyers: So hard a thing it is for
Pedantick men, or for any others, who are too much affected with that pitiful
Disease of keeping of themselves in favor with themselves (by referring to
Books in Company) not to be tiresome, as well to their Opposers, as often to
their best Friends: indeed such Dogmatizers, who would brow-beat others, of
better breeding, with such endless Vanities, or a Spanish shrug, are the most
incorrigible Fops about the Town; and had need, for all their Noise, and
flatteries of their Friends, be cut of that Disease, which in Essex is called
the Simples; but it is hard to find a fit Surgeon, where the wounded Party will
not believe he is in danger; 'twere happy for such men, if they had but just so
much Wit, as to know themselves to be half-witted: But the breed of these
Teazers is Clerical, they are too eager, scuddle, and ranging.

Nor is it less difficult to cure the itch of those, who, on the one hand,
contend to prove the grand sinfulness of Separation, and on the other hand, for
the Alleviation of that Crime; whenas, at this time, to my knowledge, two parts
of three of the most knowing Gentlemen, and others about London, are sensible,
a man may be very safe without inclining to the one side or other; the whole
Discourse being about little, or, at best, indifferent Stuff; the Quarrel, I
say, is about things of no great moment, if any at all, as to man's future
happiness.

However, I would have those eager ones for Conformity, well consider the
present Genius of the People occasioned by the late mutinous Times; whose
tinctures and infusions, as to Religion, are still growing, and therefore
render it wholly impracticable here to force a Conformity; unless 'twere
possible to reduce England to that state it was in before H. the Eighth's time,
when so great a part of the Land was in the Churches, and the Nobilities
possession; whereas now, it is, in a great measure, come into the hands of
Trading men, who set the meaner sort at work, who are thereby obliged to be, or
at least seem to be, of their Employer's Opinion, who love Power, as all men
do; and since, in other things, their Education, or other Incapacity bars them
from the exercise thereof, they are pleased with such homage as their
Dependents do, and cannot avoid giving of them: and this translation of
Estates, if it have made the Church weaker, it has made the King stronger; for
it has Enriched the Body of the Nation, in whose riches his Majesty's Strength
consists.

And further (to speak freely) I much question, whether the Roman Religion
could have hitherto been kept out, (at least not so easily) if much of those
Lands, and other noble Estates since, had not been dispersed into Trading
hands; and, as for the present prospect of Affairs, where the one Party
endeavors (which is Natural) to introduce the Religion shut out by Laws, and
the other Party (for it is now wholly reduced to whether Papist or Protestant)
to keep their own in: I may conclude, it is London which stands in the way of
the first, under his Majesty, and is the Buckler for the Second; London, I say,
the very Eye of the Three Nations, and Envy of the World, and will so continue,
if she be so happy as to be sensible of her own Happiness, and wherein it
consists; which is so obvious, that if any of her worthy Citizens be ignorant
of it, they want that very thing I have so much magnified, and will confess it
upon better consideration; when Time, or their own Experience shall furnish 'em
with a Glass to inspect the Fidelity, and Discretion of their Friends, and the
ill projects, and weak, even of all those also, who, upon what specious colors
soever, fall from the common Interest of this great City and Kingdom, into a
discontented Humor, or dangerous Neutrality, which is worse.

But there is reason to hope, a short time will produce such serene Winds, from
the Agreement of our Superiors, as will dissipate those dull Meteors which
seem to threaten our Peace, tho, as the Seas, after a Storm, will boil a while,
so it is impossible the Fears of the People, from the Provocations of ill men,
should vanish in an instant: but while the Groundsels are good, and the Studs
sound, there is no fear the Building will fall, tho it may rock to some degree.
Let us patiently wait upon that Providence, which never fails the just man, tho
sometims it seems to be unconcerned in these Sublunary matters: but we are
better instructed, and since we have lived to see the uselesness of all the old
Philosophy, which consisted merely in Words; of that kind of whifling Theology,
which was composed, most what, of insignificant Notions; and of that Physic,
which, by its dull activity, was, for the most part, more tedious than the
Disease; so we may hope, that Time, and the Exigency of Affairs, will bring us
into such a fresh Composition, and new Fabric of Laws, as shall cheer up the
hearts of all true English Protestants, and render his Sacred Majesty more
secure at home, and more formidable abroad; which, that it may be effected, is
so reasonable a Prayer, that I am confident all those who but pretend to so
Excellent a Ladies Favor as Reason is, and love their Native Soil, or enjoy
the Repose of England, must cordially second it; and will show the Obduration
of that sort of men, whom, neither the long and prosperous Reign of that Queen,
who baffled the, then greatest Prince, and greatest Bishop, can yet convince,
'twas God's special Favor to a very good Cause; nor that the Preservation of
his Majesty's Grandfather, and the Body of the State, from that black Design,
was beyond Humane Wit, and the mere Blessing of the Divine Power: nor that the
Counsels of such, who in the late unhappy Times produced such deplorable
Effects, were influenced by that very Society, which is not only -- troublesome
now to us, as Protestants, but to the rest of the Romanists, of milder tempers;
these, I say, unconvinc'd of these Truths, I must leave to their own Weakness,
for it can be no other; unless it be mere obstinacy or ill Will, and they must
thank themselves, if thereby, they at last oblige our Government to a smarter
Execution of Laws against them, and that deservedly; tho, I confess, it is the
less wonder to me, that Persons of inferior degree among the Romanists, should
grope in the dark, (who are the proper Subjects of the Kingdom of Darkness)
since Daylight, from the present Mists interposing at home, can hardly appear;
tho it may be pious to suppose, God may be pleased, even by the Contests, and
alternate Disputes of our own Clergy, to cancel all beggarly Rudiments of
indifferent Forms, so much (too much) contended for, and perhaps, too eagerly
opposed at this instant.

Mean time, it is observable, what inveterate Enmity there has always been
betwixt those, who claim their Spiritual Commission to preach, from Heaven, and
those, who either do, or should know, the Laws are their best Commission;
witness the Violence (and very fatal to our Peace) of the high Churchmen
before the Great Parliament, against the old Puritan Ministers, then, the hard
usage of these last, when they got into the Power, toward the Episcopal Party,
during the Civil Wars; and the present eagerness of some to punish the
Nonconforming Ministers, which is not to do as we would be done unto: but the
Jesuits and Seculars do the same, such is the general Disease of Ecclesiastics
every where.

The truth is, here is great clamor in some Pulpits, and otherwise, against
the sin of Separation, to prove it so (tho it is by others as briskly defended
not to be a Sin) but how little is said there against the public Sins of the
Nation? Many exclaim against Petitioning, but how few stand right as to the
Public Interest? as if the Laity were so blind, as not to observe these
things, and that they that are not for truth are against it.

Further, It has been often known in England, and in our time, that Soldiers
of different sides, upon Renditions of Garrisons, Acts of Grace etc. have
contracted Friendships, and loved one another afterward; that Complainants and
Defendants, after long and exasperated Chancery Suits, have agreed lovingly, to
a high degree of Friendship; that Tradesmen have loved and helped one another,
who have been Competitors, when there was room for both to live: that the
greatest Hectors and Huffs, after the Vapors of Wine were spent, have forgot
their Quarrels, and hugged one another: Nay, our Women, who so seldom agree,
(the fair ones) when Preferment has been opened to each of two, have loved one
another; but the Anger and Jealousies of that other sort of men, is
unappeasable, and will be so, while one side rubs old sores too much, and the
other side gives uncivil Language, even to those who have best defended the
main Posts against the Romanists, who also pretend to Reason, and take
advantage by these interferings.

But what is the Reason of this Heat at home? Is it not for Power, and from
Ambition? contrary to their Master's Doctrine: 'twere better if they would let
these Disputes alone, and, according to their Duties, teach men Virtue,
properly consisting in obedience to Laws; but these janglings will be endless,
to the disquiet of the People, while both sides violate, by their Reflections,
the Act of Grace, so solemnly penned, which retrospects to 1637, and extends to
1661.

For my part, I know not why any wise man should concern himself which side
speaks most to the purpose, (for it is all to me good purpose) since in other
things about Religion, the more we know, the worse they like us.

But it is well, we have at last found out, that Ignorance can never in England
be the true Parent of either Civil or Theological Devotion: and it is plain,
that unless the little, but notable Weekly Describer of the Roman Devices,
(which out-does all the Theaters, how glorious soever since the Fire, I had
almost said Pulpits) if that Pen, I say, cannot be corrected, (which is true,
as to matter of Fact) we shall yet infinitely improve our Understandings; and
if the Coffee-houses, (those open Enemies, and dangerous to the sick Kingdom of
Fairies) be not suppressed, the solid truth of our Author's Assertion, which
the Gent. carped at, but weakly, will shine still brighter, viz. That it is
impossible any man should have been, is, or hereafter can be guided, by any
other thing but his own Reason: as in all other things, so in matters of
Religion, I say, says the Author, impossible: for in all Belief, and in all
other Actions, the last Appeal is to Reason; for I believe this or that
Doctrine, or do this or that action, because I have some Reason for it; and
that this does justify the whole Doctrine of his Treatise, and my Reply, is
evident enough.

Wherefore, this Apologetick Review and Appendix is written by me, who am one
of those very loath to be bestridden by the Gallopers of either side: tho I
should rejoice to see our Clergy love another, and the Dissenting Ministers
also to love the other; which can never be, whilst the Paper skirmishing grows
ranker and ranker; and, to speak out, there can never be any cordial Affection,
even amongst the Conforming Ministers, while Preferments, and maintenance
Ecclesiastical are so unequally divided; while so many worthy men can scarce
get Bread, or must live too meanly; (for the Clergyman of an indifferent
Living is pinch't too much) and mean time, too many others abound with various
Preferments; it is high time to reform this Evil, and specially now, when the
Harvest is great, and the Laborers are too many, (or might be enough) if they
were paid for their Work, which they are ready to do, or have done, and ought
to be retained to do; while the Vermin are hovering about to devour and spoil
the Crop by wide Mouths and sharp Talons. But cursed Cows have short Horns, and
we begin neither to admire the Policies of that Party, nor have cause to value
their Force, the first being fathomable by the easiest capacity, and the second
prevented by the vigilance of the Government.

And, to my solid comfort, I well remember the resolution of my good Friend,
Bishop Gawden, while he was Parson of Bocking, in Essex, to my Question,
Whether, if I believed in God and Christ, I were obliged to be a Member of any
particular Church or no; which was this; That if I were one of God's Universal
Church 'twas no great matter whether I were joined to any petty Church Policy
upon Earth, or no. A golden saying, and I must not belie the dead; and this
Doctor kept his Parsonage all along till the Restoration of his Majesty, and
knew well, 'twas not necessary for him to be a Martyr of State in those ugly
convulsions of Government; tho he was so bravely honest, as, by an excellent
and Loyal Protestation in Print, to dissuade those bad men, who then were about
destroying of the King, and did do it, from so horrid a Crime; but when 'twas
done, he sat still, and lived splendidly, never opposing the Usurpation to no
purpose, as all wise men do, who wheel about when there is reason: And it is
best to be silent, where Force (tho usurped) runs high, and beyond the help of
private men: and this made the Judges act in the other times, for Right and
Property must be maintained; and made Bishop Juxon fall to hunting.

And I never knew any man very wise, who showed himself eager to punish others
for not complying with Externals about Religion; So the Peace be not violated,
which is the greatest of Earthly Blessings, and which we have enjoyed at home,
ever since the King was restored, and whereof, I suppose, there will not in his
time, (and long may he live) be any want, if this great Animal, the Empire of
Great Britain, be but true to its own Interest, the Protestant Religion.

And to prove the truth of that Maxim, let it be noted, how, for now above an
hundred years experience, by the Sufferings of good men in Q. Mary's days, and
otherwise, it has been from Scripture and Reason, warranted and defended
against all the Wit and Machinations of the other side, even to a plain baffle
of late, by D. Stillingfleet, which deserves all imaginable thankful respects.

And let it be considered, that our Religion is most consonant to the Genius of
the best, and most of his Majesty's Subjects, to our Common Laws, and our Form
of Monarchy, and has been more than once signalized with Blessings from Heaven,
against all its dangerous Opponents.

This, I say, is the prop of our Peace, and the proper Antidote against
Profaneness, Atheism and Popery (which are unseparable) when it is secured by
wholesome Laws, and their due Execution (the Life of all Laws) unto which
Sanctions, all Romanists, from their Protection under them, are obliged, by the
Laws of Reason, to render obedience; at least, they should not endeavor to
pervert others from it.

Whence this conclusion naturally arises, That the Disturbers of our Peace at
this time in England, of what sort soever (so protected) are unreasonable men,
where there is such plenty, and where, all Arts and Sciences flourish to a
degree beyond any part of the habitable World; and thence it follows, that if
any ingenious Person is uneasy here, he ought to consider, if his want of
Humility, severity of Opinion upon begged Principles, Credulity, or too great
an esteem of his own Wisdom, have not made him so uneasy.

But further, If neither the searching Wits of the Rainbow Coffee-house, the
generous Learning of Covent Garden, the Politic Gown-men at Paul's Cross, the
fixible Mercury of Fuller's Rents, the Presumptions of Charing Cross, nor the
huge strength of the new Chapel near the great Arch, can reduce us to
Moderation, nor satisfy our Doubts and Fears: if the Ludicrous Drolls of
future Fortune cannot be foreseen by the highest Star-gazing Philosophers; no
nor by the Magic of honest Fl. If the quaintest Lawyers cannot agree, whether
a Pardon, after an Impeachment, etc. by the Public hand, signify something or
nothing; If some rank high Ecclesiastics cannot be cured of their Melancholy,
without vent'ring to take that Ignatian Powder, which will never do their
Business, and does but suspend the Fever: Nevertheless, let the Winds shift as
they may, the Lee Port is at hand, and safe, Humane Reason, which will shelter
us from storms, if men, in their stations, will discreetly follow its guidance,
as the safest Rule for Self-preservation; for the examination of all Doctrines
obtruded by Humane Authority, and of every miraculous pretension, as the best
measure of Conscience (because of Scripture;) without whose free Use, (I mean
of Reasons,) Impudence will pass for Sense, Stupidity for Discretion, Fury for
Valor, the Town Bullies and Cullies for the most accomplished Gentlemen, hagg'd
Curtezans for modest Ladies, and the most senseless, infatuated Bigots for the
most Religious: therefore, to avoid mistakes of such natures, or at least, to
allay the sharpness of our Epidemical Distempers.

I hope I have, in this Reply, and by the favor of Reason, not only defeated
the Forlorn, but the united Phalanx of the Gentleman's best disciplined
Infantry, and his Body of Horse also, who durst oppose Reason's Bravery and
Strength.

It remains, that I come off as civilly with him, as he does with the Author,
where at last he says, that he (the Author) could not be angry with him upon
his own Principles: for, says the Gent. I have guided my self in my Answer
wholly by my own Reason, which I thank him for, he having thereby justified the
whole Treatise of the Author's, and thereby shrivl'd his Answer into waste
Paper; and serves to show, that my Replying is no greater Crime than his was,
who was charged to say, O. Cromwell's Horse was shod with Iron; and far short of
Banks his sin, who shod his with Gold; tho the one escapt the High Court of
Justice, yet the other could not the Star Chamber; the Usurpt Dominion of the
first dissolving naturally, for defect of essential Rights to sustain it; and
the second being abolisht for Exorbitancy; which Defect can never justify
Disobedience to Lawful Sovereignty, as ours is; and whereunto, if Calvin's Case
had never been printed, I should have rationally submitted, because my
obligation lies in the nature of my Submission; Oaths adding nothing to it; and
our Laws say, Obedience is due from Nature; wherein, Sir R. F. my Country man
is right, tho out in other things; and tho Paul advises Obedience, not for
Fear, but Conscience, yet is an equivocal word, never used in the Old
Testament, and more subject to Error than Reason, because less supported by
solid Argument, and too often dazzled by Enthusiasm, the Disease of Reason, and
Conscience also, which first, to speak humanely, must yet be admitted to be the
elder, considering God's Inhibition probational to Adam, etc.

But, to let that Mystery alone, and yet to leave nothing unweigh'd, which the
Gent. has offered against Humane Reason; Upon Review of his Answer, I am
obliged to say once more, that one part of three in it swells with illogical
Consequences, and is against constant Experience: for he undertakes to show
what mischiefs must come to pass, if Liberty of Conscience were permitted: as
to that, it is plainly otherwise; for, since Liberty has been generally assumed,
the Nation has been very peaceable and obedient every way otherwise; this, I
say, is another experimental confutation of the main part of his Answer.

Therefore, I would not have the Gent. spoil the Tone of his Stomach by Choler,
if I do discomply with him in not granting the not so horrible consequences of
such a Liberty, as he presumes, contrary to Reason and Experience: For if the
Gent's. desire had been seconded with Execution rigorously against the
Dissenters, it might have hazarded the putting of the English Nation into great
Disorder by this time: his words being, Page 152 of Plain Dealing, That if the
Nobility and Gentry will not suppress the Sectaries, by the Execution of the
Laws, they will soon arrive at that height, that the Sword must do it, or else
there will be no Government at all in our Nation: but what if it be
impracticable to suppress them, because the People will not accuse one another?

It Is true, Reason of State has been forced to strike smartly that other sort
of men, who, by their barbarous and impolitick Actions, have dared to confront
the Government, but I hope they will be made wiser hereafter, by the late
Examples of public and infamous Inflictions; for, it seems, the Common Law is
in many Cases in the breasts of the Judges, de Modo Poenae.

And let the Event be what it will, (to use the Gent's. own words, in the close
of his Answer) I must also with him profess, that I have fully satisfied not
only my Conscience, but my Reason also, which is the surer way, and from better
motives, in this Reply, by showing my self, according to my Duty, a sincere
Lover of Peace, of Religion in general, and of that particular Religion, the
support whereof I have asserted to be the true Interest of England, and was
always so esteemed since the Reformation.

And I will add my promise to the Gent. and that upon the word of a Gentleman
(which ought to be as sacred as that of a Priest) that if he shall please to
give me a Rejoinder without departure from his first Plea, I will not demurr
for want of Form, but leave the Dispute to the Censure of indifferent Judges,
upon the whole Argument, viz. Whether Humane Reason be not the best and safest
Guide, with its due helps, beyond Popes, Councils, Fathers, Canons, and all
Books whatsoever, the Scripture excepted; which yet, if any man will ask me how
I think to understand, I can give him no other Answer but this, that I must do
it by Reason, which is the only Talent God has indu'd me with, for my
preservation here, and hereafter; and by which, and no other mediation, it is
possible, for a man of good Understanding, and not clogged with false
Principles, to be satisfied, that the natural Dictates of God (Reason) carry no
repugnancy to the Law and Will of God, revealed in the Scripture; the study of
which Learning, is the foundation of all true Ratiocination, and the most
generous, and most useful Science for all men to aspire unto, who would know
their respective Duties, as Christians and Subjects; and upon the Presumtion of
which Axiom, it is, that our Law of England, (if it were well digested into
Method, certainly the best in the World) does say, that if any Law shall be
enacted contrary to Reason, it is void, eo instante; because contrary to God's
undoubted Eternal Law, the Law of Reason, my Province to maintain: wherein, if
any thing have slipped from my Pen, not consistent with the Duty of a good
Subject, or true Christian, I do, submissively and heartily beg pardon for it.

And, to complete my candid, and, at present, sole Design of supporting
Reason's Energy, and for the justification of H. the Eighth's forsaking the
Roman Church, and thereby to justify the Reformed Protestant Religion: let the
Reader consult the Decretory Council held under, and by the Command of Pope
Paul the Third, 1538, Printed 1609 at London, and taken out of Mr. Crashaw's
Library, then Preacher of the Temple, wherein the Abuses of the Roman
Ecclesiastics are manifested, under the Certificate of Nine of the most
Eminent Cardinals then living, (whereof Pool was one, and Sadolete another) to
whose Inspection, the Inquiry was then referred by the said Pope; which Abuses,
the Court of Rome would not then correct, nor are they yet corrected, the Book
being suppressed by Order of that Church, and coming to my hands something late
from a worthy Bencher of Grayes Inn, which, otherwise, had sooner been made Use
of, to prove Reason a safer Guide than that Church which pretends to
Infallibility, and may serve for Answer to that Romanist, who published some
weak Reflections upon our Author's Discourse of Humane Reason, who, if he
failed in any thing handled in his Book, 'twas in his a little too slightly
referring the Cause of H. the Eighth's deserting of the Roman See to his
Wantonness, etc. For, that there were many other concurring motives to his
Desertion, is very probable, from some Speeches I have seen of his in
Parliament, and from Histories about him, who was, tho a severe, yet withal, a
very stout and inquisitive Prince, and fitted thereby for the Work he so
worthily began, and whereof the Advantage accrues to us at this time: Such are
the unsearchable depths of Providence, which, tho few observe, and fewer are
willing to resign their Wills unto, will do what is best for good men.

Lastly, Because some men are most guided by Book Authorities, I think fit to
add, that Montaigne, Erasmus, Raymond Sebond, Charone, Cassauder,
Chillingworth, Cartesius, Milton, Gell, Baxter, and Hobbs also, with others of
Fame, as D. Stillingfleet, not to forget Bishop Tailor, have unanimously
approved of Reason as the best Guide, and favored, or cooly advised, a
circumscribed Toleration, I having named Grotius before: but I refer the
ingenuous Reader, once for all, to that excellent Discourse of the Rise and
Power of Parliaments, Laws, Courts, etc. and of Religion, printed 1677. by way
of Letter to a Parliament Man, wherein, a Toleration in Religion here, for all
(but the Jesuits and Seculars) is argued to be, not only Political, but highly
Rational, and consonant to the Doctrine of the Holy Jesus; of which Opinion,
till I am convinced otherwise by Reason, I am resolved to be, and no longer,
for I cannot.

Mean time, as a Corollary to this Reply, I subjoyn, with submission, that it
appears plainly, by his Majesty's Royal Father's Golden Book, he was not much
averrse to it; and that even Charles the Fifth, during the Interim, (see
Sleydan) did allow a kind of Toleration in Germany, where I leave the Cause,
but really unwillingly; for, further Proofs crowd so fast into me, that to
forbear venting them, is a kind of Disease upon me, tho, I hope, not Mortal.
Neither do I stand in awe of any Censure upon my Conclusions, already
published, by the future Impressions of any Bigotical Opponent whatsoever.

Epitaphium Cliffordianum.
HIC jacet insignis Cliffordi capsula, terrae
Reddita, sed melior pars resoluta Polo.
Carmine non opus est famam celebrare, polite
(Ni fallor) Libro gloria certa micat.
Humanae Rationis opus munivit, and ultro
Esse ducem vitae, subsidiumque viae.
Si quae praeterea superaddere vota Poe^sis
Auderet, nitida sacrificanda manu.
Englished.
HEre, snatched by Death, Clifford interred does lie,
Whose Nobler Part is vehicl'd on high;
There needs no Muse to celebrate his Fame,
Whose Book eternized has his generous Name.
He proved Humane Reason's worth so well,
From other Arts it bears away the Bell.
If any Poet superadds to this,
With impure hands, his Holocaust's amiss.
His Character.
AS to his Person, 'twas little, his Face rather flat than oval, his Eye
serious, Countenance Leonine, his Constitution Choleric, Sanguine, tinctured
with Melancholy: of a facetious Conversation; yet a great Humorist; of quick
Parts, so of quick Passions, and Venereal, thence Lazy; he was learned, very
critical, positive and proud, charitable enough, and scorned to be rich; he had
a will to be just; would drink to excess sometimes. His Religion was that of
his Country; he was always Loyal to his King, and a very good Poet. He died
'twixt 50 and 60, at Sutton's Hospital, whose Master he then was; not much
lamented by the Pensioners; few knew him well. He was a man strangely composed;
it is questioned whether his Virtues or Vices were most; I incline to the last,
yet he departed peaceably and piously.

FINIS.

