A hopeful way to Cure that horrid Sin of Swearing: Or an help to save
Swearers, if willing to be saved: Being an Offer or Message from HIM, whom they
so daringly and audaciously provoke. Also a Curb against Cursing.
By R. Young.
Before you lay it by, at least read the Postscript at the end.
Messenger: SIr, Me thinks you Swear and Curse as if he that made the ear could
not hear, or as if he were neither to be feared nor cared for, who for sin cast
the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise, drowned the old world, rained
down fire and brimstone upon Sodom, commanded the earth to open her mouth, and
swallow down quick Korah and his company; he who smote Egypt with so many
plagues, overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea, destroyed great and
mighty Kings, giving their land for an inheritance to his people: and can as
easily with a word of his mouth strike you dead while you are blaspheming him,
and cast you body and soul into Hell for your odious unthankfullness: yea it is
a mercy beyond expression, that he has spared you so long.

What, because you are displeased with others, will you fly in your Makers
face? and tear your Saviors Name in pieces? This is worse then frenzy, this
is to send challenges into Heaven, and make love to destruction; consider of
it, lest you swear away your part in that Blood which must save you, if ever
you be saved; yea, take heed lest you be plagued with a witness, and that both
here and hereafter: for God (who cannot lie) has threatened that his curse
shall never depart from the house of the Swearer, as it is Zach. 5.1, to 5* And
I doubt not but you are already cursed, though you know it not; That either he
has cursed you in your body by sending some foul Disease; or in your estate,
by suddenly consuming it; or in your name, by blemishing and blasting it; or in
your seed, by not prospering it, or in your mind by darkening it, or in your
heart by hardening it, or in your conscience by terrifying it, or will in your
soul by everlastingly damning it, if you repent not. Wherefore take heed what
you do before it prove too late. Yea, my brethren, bethink your selves what God
and Christ has done for you. It is his maintenance we take, and live on, The
air we breath, the earth we tread on, the fire that warms us, the water that
cools and cleanses us; the clothes that cover us, the food that does nourish
us, the delights that cheer us, the beasts that serve us, the Angels that
attend us, even all are his. That we are not at this present in Hell, there to
fry in flames never to he freed. That we have the free offer of grace here, and
everlasting glory in Heaven hereafter, we are only beholding to him. And shall
we deny this Lord that has bought us? shall we most spightfully and
maliciously fight on Satan's side against him with all our might, and that
against knowledge and conscience? I wish that you would a little think of it.

Or if you regard not your self, nor your own souls good, yet for the Nations
good leave your swearing: for the Lord (as now we find to our) smart) has a
great controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because of swearing, Hosea
4.1, 2. Yea, because of oaths the whole Land (even the three Nations) now
moutneth, as you may see, Jer. 23.10. Neither object that ye are so accustomed
to Swearing that you cannot leave it, for this defense is worse than the
offense: as take an instance; Shall a thief or murderer at the Bar allege for
his defense, that it has been his use and custom of a long time to rob and
kill, and therefore he must continue it; or if he do, will not the Judge so much
the rather send him to the gallows?

Besides the objection is false and frivolous, for were you forced to pay three
shillings four pence for every Oath you swear, (as the Law enjoins) or if you
were sure to have your tongue cut out, which is too light a punishment for this
sin, damnation being the due penalty thereof, as the Apostle sets it down, Jam.
5.12. you both could and would le^ve it. Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies
of God (who has removed so many evils, and conferred so many good things upon
you, that they are beyond thought or imagination) to leave it: especially after
this warning; which in case you do not, will be a sore witness, and rise up in
judgment against you another day.


Swearer. Did I swear or curse?


Messenger, Very often, as all here present can witness, and Satan also, who
stands by to take notice, reckon up, and set on your score every Oath you
utter, keeping them upon Record against the great day of Assise, at which time
every Oath will prove as a daggers point stabbing your soul to the heart, or as
so many weights pressing you down to Hell, Rev. 20.13. and 22.12. As also the
searcher of hearts, who himself will one day be a swife, witness against
Swearers, Mal. 3.5. For of all other sinners, the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain, as the third Commandment tolls you,
Exed. 20.7.

But woe is me, it fares with common Swearers as with persons desperately
diseased, whose excrements and filth comes from them at unawares; for as by
much labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sense of labor, so their
much swearing causes such a brawny skin of senslesness to overspread the
heart, memory, and conscience, that the swearer swears unwittingly; and
having sworn, has no remembrance of his Oath, much less repentance for his sin.


Swearer. Alas, though I did swear, yet I thought no harm.


Messenger. O fool! What Prince, hearing himself abused to his face, by the
reproachful words of his base and impotent Subject, would admit of such an
excuse? that whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, yet he thought no ill in his
heart? And shall God take this for a good answer, having told us beforehand,
Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. that if we do not fear and dread his glorious and fearful
Name, the Lord our God, he will make our plagues wonderful, and of long
continuance, and the plagues of our posterity. Besides, how frequently do
thou pollute and profane Gods Name, and thy Saviors? the Jews grievously
sinned in crucifying the Lord of life but once, and that of ignorance; but the
times are innumerable that thou do it, every day in the year, every hour in
the day, although thy conscience and the holy Spirit of grace has checked thee
for it, a thousand and a thousand times. Do thou expect to have Christ thy
Redeemer and Advocate, when thy conscience tells thee that thou have seldom
remembered Him but to blaspheme Him? and more often named Him in thy Oaths and
Curses, than in thy Prayers.


Swearer. Surely, if I did swear, it was but Faith and Troth, by our Lady, the
Mass, the Rood, the Light, this Bread, by the cross of the silver, or the like;
which is no great matter, I hope, so long as I swore not by God, nor by my
Savior.


Messenger. That is your gross ignorance of the Scriptures, for God expressly
forbids it, and that upon pain of damnation, James 5.12. First, our Savior
Christ in his own person forbids it, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. I say unto you,
Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods Throne; nor by the earth,
for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great
King; neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make one
hair white or black: but let your communication be Yea, Yea; Nay, nay: for
whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. And then by his Apostle. Above
all things, my brethren swear not; neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any
other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; left ye fall into
condemnation, Jam. 5.12. Where mark the Emphasis in the first words, Above all
things swear not; and the great danger of it in the last word, condemnation.

If the matter be light and vain, we must not swear at all; if so weighty, that
we may lawfully swear, as before a Magistrate, being called to it, then we must
only use the glorious Name of our God in a holy and religious manner, as you
may see, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Isa. 45.23. and 65.16. Josh. 23.7. Exodus 23.13. Jer. 5.7.
And the reasons of it are weighty, if we look into them; for in swearing by any
Creature whatsoever, we do invocate that Creature, and ascribe to it divine
worship; a lawful Oath being a kind of Invocation, and a part of Gods worship:
Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate both as our witness, surety and
judge, Heb. 6.16. and by consequence deifie it, by ascribing and communicating
unto it Gods incommunicable Attributes, as his Omnipresence, and Omnisciencie
of being every where present and knowing the secret thoughts and intentions of
the heart: and likewise an omnipotency, as being Almighty in patronizing,
protecting, defending, and rewarding us for speaking the truth, or punishing us
if we speak falsely: all which are so peculiar to God, as that they can no way
be communicated or ascribed to another. So that in sweating by any of those
things, thou committest an high degree of gross Idolatry, thou spoilest and
robbest God of his glory (the most impious kind of theft) and in a manner
dethronest Him, and placest an Idol in his room.

And as to swear by the Creature makes the sin far more heinous, so the more
mean and vile the thing is which you swear by (be it by my fey, by cock and py,
hares foot, by this cheese, and such like childish Oaths, which are so much in
use with the ignorant and superstitious swarm) the greater is your sin in
swearing such an Oath: because you ascribe that unto these basest of Creatures,
which is only proper to God, namely to know your heart, and to be a discerner
of secret things; why else should you call that Creature as a witness unto your
conscience, that you speak the truth and lie not? which only belongs to God?
And therefore the Lord calls it a forsaking of him; as mark well what he says,
Jer. 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this! thy children have forsaken me, and
sworn by them that are no gods? And do you make it a small matter to forsake
God, and make a God of the creature? Will you believe the Prophet Amos. If you
will, he says (speaking of them that swore by the sin of Samaria,) That they
shall fall and never rise again, Amos 8.14. A terrible place to vain swearers.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our Oaths, for in so doing, we
make base Idols, and filthy Creatures, Corrivals in honor, and Competitors in
the Throne of Justice with the Lord who is Creator of Heaven and earth, and the
supreme Judge and sole Monarch of all the world.

Or in case we do, our doom shall be remediless; for the Lord threatens by the
Prophet Zephany, That he will cut off them that swear by the Lord and by
Malcham, which Malcham was their king, or as some think their Idol, Zeph. 1.4,
5.

But admit the sin were small, as you would have it to be, yet the
circumstances make it most heinous; for even the least sin in its own nature,
is not only mortal, but rests unpardonable, so long as it is willingly
committed, and excused or defended.


Swearer. But all do swear, except some few singular ones, and they also will
lie, which is as bad.


Messenger. You must not measure all others by your own bushel, for although
ill Dispositions cause ill suspicions, even as the eye that is bloodshed sees
all things red; or as they that have the Jaundice, see all things yellow; yet
know that there be thousands, who can say truly, through Gods mercy, that they
had rather choose to have their souls pass from their bodies, than a wilful
premeditated lie, or a wicked Oath from their mouths; wherefore when you want
experience, think the best as Charity bids you, and leave what you know not to
the Searcher of hearts.

As for the number of Swearers, it cannot be denied, but the sin is almost
universal; and this is it which has incensed Gods wrath, and almost brought
an universal destruction upon our whole Nation; But is not this excuse [That
others do so] a most reasonless plea, and only becoming a fool; when our
Savior Christ has plainly told us, that the greatest number go the broad way
to destruction, and but a few the narrow way which leads unto life, Matthew.
7.13, 14. And St John, that the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19.
And that the number of those whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the
sea, Rev. 20.8. and 13.16. Isa. 10.22. Romans 9.27. And tell me, Were it a good
plea to commit a Felony, and say that others do so? or, Will thou leap into
Hell, and cast away thy soul, because others do so? A sorry comfort it will be,
to have a numerous multitude accompany us into that lake of fire that never
shall be quenched.

Besides, it is Gods express charge, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil; and St Paul's everlasting rule, Romans 12.1, 2. Fashion not
your selves like unto this world.


Swearer. But I may lawfully swear so I affirm nothing but the truth.


Messenger, If you be lawfully called to it, as before a Magistrate, or when
some urgent matter constrains, for the confirming of a necessary truth (which
can by no other lawful means be cleared) and for the ending of all contentions
and controversies, and clearing our own or our neighbors good name, person or
estate, and to put an end to all strife, aiming at Gods glory, and our own or
our neighbors good, which is the only use and end of an Oath: in which case a
man is rather a patient, than a voluntary agent; you may swear, otherwise not.

Neither must we swear at all in our ordinary communication, if we will obey
Gods word, as you may see, Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. Jam. 5.12.


Swearer. Except I swear men will not believe me.


Messenger. The^ had as good say, I have so often made shipwreck of my credit
by accustomary lying, that I can gain no belief unto my words without an Oath:
for it argues a guilty conscience of the want of credit, and that our word
alone is worth no respect, when it will not be taken without a pawn or surety.
Neither will any but base bankrupts pawn so precious a jewel as their Faith, or
offer better security for every small trifle. Besides, he that often swears,
not seldom forsweareth. And so I have informed you from Gods Word, what the
danger is of vain and wicked swearing.

Now if you either believe the Scriptures, or desire to escape that direful
sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. No longer excuse nor defend it, but repent of it
and forsake it; and so much the rather, for that of all other sins this sin of
swearing is the most inexcusable. First, because it is a sin from which of all
other sins we have most power of abstinence, as I showed you before; and the
easier the thing commanded is, the greater guilt in the breach of it; and the
lighter the injunction, the heavier the transgression; as Austin speaks, and
Adam his eating the forbidden fruit sufficiently proves. Secondly, because it
is a sin, to which of all other sins we have the fewest temptations; for all
thou can expect by it is, the suspicion of a common Liar, by being a common
swearer; or that thou shall vex others, and they shall hate thee: for it
brings not so much as any appearance of good unto us to induce us: for
whereas other sins have their several baits to allure us; some the bait of
profit, some of honor, some of pleasure, this sin is destitute of them all,
and only brings much loss here, namely of credit and a good conscience; and
the loss of Gods favor, and the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter, which is of more
value than ten thousand worlds; which shows that thou love this sin only
because it is a great sin, and swearest out of mere malice to, and contempt of
God, which is most fearful; and (as a man would think) should make it
unpardonable: I am sure the Psalmist has a terrible word for all such, if they
would take notice of it: Let them be confounded that transgress without a
cause, Psalm. 25 3.

And no marvel, that this fearful imprecation should fall from the Prophets
mouth? for that man is bottomlesly ill, who loves vice merely because it is a
vice, and because God most strictly forbids it. He is a desperate, prodigious
damnable wretch, who (rather then not die) will anger God* on set purpose.

But as if Swearing alone would not press thee deep enough into Hell, thou
addest Cursing to it, a sin of an higher nature, which none use frequently, but
such as are desperately wicked, it being their peculiar brand in Scripture; as
how does the Holy Ghost stigmatize such an one? His mouth is full of cursing,
Psalm. 10.7. and Romans 3.14. or he loves cursing, Psalm. 109. 17. and indeed,
whom can you observe to love this sin, or to have their mouths full of
cursing? but Ruffians and sons of Belial, such as have shaken out of their
hearts the fear of God, the shame of men, the love of Heaven, the dread of
Hell, not once caring what is thought or spoken of them here, or what becomes
of them hereafter; yea, observe them well, and you will find, that they are
mockers of all, that march not under the pay of the Devil.

And whence do these monsters of the earth, these hellish miscreants, these
bodily and visible Devils learn this their damnable Cursing and Swearing? Are
not their tongues fired and edged from Hell? as St James has it, Jam. 3.6.
yea, it is the very language of the damned, as you may see, Rev. 16.11, 21.
Only they learn it here before they come thither; and are such proficients
therein, that the Devil counts them his best scholars, and sets them in his
highest form, Psalm. 1.1. And well they deserve it, with whom the language of
Hell is so familiar, that blasphemy is become their mother tongue. Besides, it
is the very depth of sin, roaring and drinking is the horse way to Hell; whoring
and cheating the foot way; but Swearing and Cursing follows Korah, Dathan and
Abiram. And certainly if the infernal Tophet be not for those men, it can
challenge no guests. But see how witless, graceless, and shameless, even the
best are that use to curse; for I pass over such as call for a Curse on
themselves, saying, God damn me, Confound me, The Devil take me, and the like;
which would make a rational man tremble to name; because I were as good knock
at a dead man's grave, as speak to them.

Thou art crossed by some one, perhaps thy wife, child, or servant; or else
thy horse, the weather, the dice, bowls, or some other of the creatures
displease thee; and thou fallest a cursing and blaspheming them, wishing them
the plague of God, or Gods vengeance to light on them, or some such hellish
speech falls from thy foul mouth. And so upon every foolish trifle, or every
time thou art angry, God must be at thy beck, and come down from Heaven in all
have, and become thy officer to revenge thy quarrel, and serve thy malicious
humor. (O monstrous impiety! O shameless impudency! to be abhorred of all that
hear it) not once taking notice what he commands in his Word; as, Bless them
that persecuteyou, bless I say, and curse not, Romans 12.14. And again, Bless
them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6.28. which is the
practice of all true Christians, 1 Cor. 4.12.

But this is not one half of thine offense; for whom do thou curse? Alas,
the Creatures that displease thee are but Instruments, thy sin is the cause,
and God is the Author, 2 Samuel 16.11. Psalm. 39.9, 10. Genesis 45.8. Job 1.21. from
whom thou have deserved it, and ten thousand times a greater cross: but instead
of looking up from the stone, to the hand which threw it; or from the effect to
the cause, as Gods people do; thou like a Mastiff Dog, set upon the stone
or weapon that hut is thee. But, in this case, who are you angry withal? Does
your Horse, the Dice, the rain, or any other creature displease you? Alas, they
are but servants, and if their Master bid smite, they must not forbear: they
may say truly what Rabshakeh usurped, Isa. 36.10. Are we come without the Lord?
and all that hear thee may say, as the Prophet did to Senacherib, 2 King.
19.22. Whom have thou blasphemed? and against whom have thou exalted thy self?
even against the holy One of Israel?

Besides, why do thou curse thine enemy? (if he be so) but because thou can
not be suffered to kill him. For in heart, and Gods account, thou art a
murderer, in wishing him the pox, plague, or that he were hanged; or damned.
Nor will it be any rare thing at the day of judgment, for cursers to be
indicted of murder. For like Shimei and Goliath to David, thou would kill
him if thou durst; thou do kill him so far as thou can. I would be loath to
trust his hands that bans me with his tongue. Had David been at the mercy of
either Shimei or Goliath, and not too strong for them, he had then breathed his
last.

And what will be the issue? the causeless curse shall not come where the
Curser meant it, Prove. 26.2. yea, though thou cursest, yet God will bless,
Psalm. 109.28. but thy Curses shall be sure to rebound back into thine own
breast, Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. Prove. 14.30. Cursing mouths are like ill made
Pieces, which while men discharge at others, recoil in splinters on their own
faces. Their words and wishes be but whirlwinds, which being breathed forth
return again to the same place. As hear how the holy Ghost delivers it, Psalm.
109. As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him; and as he loved not
blessing, so shall it be far from him. As he clothed himself with cursing like
a garment, so shall it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his
bones; let it be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith
he shall always be girded, ver. 17, 18, 19. Hear this all ye whose tongues run
so fast on the Devils errand; you loved Cursing, you shall have it, both upon
you, about you, and in you, and that everlastingly, if you persevere and go on;
for Christ himself at the last day, even he which came to save the world, shall
say unto all such, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Where they shall do nothing but curse
for evermore; for they no farther apprehending the goodness, mercy and bounty
of God, than by the sense of their own torments, the effects of his justice,
shall hate him, and hating him they shall curse him, Rev. 16.11, 21. They
suffer, and they blaspheme: there is in them a furious malice against him,
being cursed of him, they recurse him; they curse him for making them, curse
him for condemning them, curse him because being adjudged to death, they can
never find death; they curse his punishments, because they are so unsufferable;
curse his mercies, because they may never taste them; curse the blood of Christ
shed on the Cross, because it has satisfied for millions, and done their
unbelieving souls no good; curse the Angels and Saints in Heaven, because they
see them in joy and themselves in torment; Cursings shall be their sins, and
their chief ease in Hell, blasphemies their Prayers, Lachrymae their nores,
Lamentation all their harmony; these shall be the^r evening songs, their
morning songs, their mourning songs for ever and ever. And indeed, who shall go
to Hell, if Cursers should be left out. Wherefore let al^ these learn to bless,
that look to be heirs of the blessing.

Other Objections follow in this Conference, and are accordingly answered (with
the means of cure prescribed, etc.) in the ensuing pages, which are also
printed for such as think these eight overshort. But being loath either to
surfeit or cloy the Swearer, who is commonly short-breathed in well doing: and
lest adding more should hinder him from reading this (for Satan and his corrupt
heart will not condescend, he shall hold ou^ to hear his beloved sin so spoken
against) it breaks off thus abruptly.


POSTSCRIPT.
YOu that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward the precious souls
of those poor ignorant men, women, and children, whom you hear to swear and
curse as Dogs bark; (that is not more of curstness than out of custom;) wish
them to read these eight pages; neither count it as a thing indifferent which
may either be done or dispenst withal: for besides that God has commanded the
duty of admonition, Heb 3.13. 2 Timothy 2 25. and commended the practice of it,
Rev. 212, 6. and condemned the contrary, ver. 20. If you do not it, or the
like, you hare your brother, Levit. 19.17. and make your self guilty both of
his sin and ruin, Ezekiel. 3.18, to 22. Nor can you love God and patiently hear
these miscreants blaspheme his holy Name as they do, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Or manifest
your self his by adoption and regeneration: for well born children are touched
to the quick with the injuries of their parents, and not to be moved in this
case, is to confess our selves bastards: Which being so, make it a part of your
charity to give of them as you meet with occasion: as that you shall hourly do,
even as you pass the streets, if you but mind it.

Now think what account you shall give of that you have read, and that here is
set before you life and death, Heaven and hell: for you to rake your choice: if
you will choose to go on and perish, your blood be on your own head, and not on
mine, I have discharged my duty. Yea I much fear, the many thousands that of
these have been given to Swearers, will increase the damnation of not a few of
them; who are the same, and swear as frequently after the hearing it, as they
did before.

This half sheet with five sheets and a half more upon as needful Subjects,
are all to be had for a Penny at Mr Younges in Bores head Court by Cripplegate,
during his life.

Imprimatur,

John Downame, Tho Gataker.


London, Printed for James Crump in Little Bartholmews Well Yard* where any may
have them gratis, during his life. Also at the same place, such as would may
know or have the several Pieces published by this Author; which are in number
Thirty. Though I rather commend to my Reader that excellent Piece of Practical
Divinity, called Heaven and Hell Epitomized, and The true Christian
Characterized By Mr Swinnock. M. A. 1659.


