THE Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, Atheism, Profaneness, etc.

OR, A most Hopeful and Speedy way to grace and salvation, by plucking up
impediments by the root.

Reduced to Explication, of Genesis 3.15.
Confirmation, Application: tending to Illumination, sanctification, devotion.

By R. YOUNG of Roxwell in ESSEX.

They call evil good and good evil, etc. They justify the wicked, and take
away the righteousness of the righteous from him,

Isai. 5.20.23. Wherefore slew Cain his brother, but because his own works were
evil, and his brothers good,

1 John 3.12. I was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, but I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief

1 Timothy 1.13. Printed at London by R.I. for N. Brook at the sign of the Angel
in Cornhill, MDCXLVIII.

Courteous Reader,
HAving perused this Cause and Cure of Enmity; Profaneness, etc. we find it to
contain, a lively description of the worlds envy and hatred to the godly:
Together with a perspicuous discovery, of the original, Continuance,
Properties, and Causes of the same. In which also the Ignorance, Atheism, and
Prophannesse of most men; are pithily and pathetically painted out; and the
remedies of either prescribed, with many forcible inducements to a pious life,
and religious conversation: saving knowledge, and true wisdom soundly
described, and distinguished from their counterfiets; with the means to attain
both: The necessity of repentance, etc. pressed home. All which, is laid down
pithily, orderly, and ellegantly: with much, both sinuous strength of argument,
and variety of graceful, and delightful illustration: which may draw on the
Reader, to his no small benefit, and (through Gods blessing) prove of much use,
to all sorts that shall read the same: whether for information, or direction;
diswasion from evil, or confirmation in good: as tending much to the
comforting of believers in their sufferings; and to the reclayming, or (at
least) the convincing of such as any way oppose the way of truth. So that
whatsoever time, labor or diligence; thou shall spend in often reading the
same: we doubt not, but the profit will recompense thy pains abundantly.

George Walker. Edm. Calamy. Joseph Caryll.


An Advertisement to all such; as speak evil of the way of truth: and of the
things which they understand not, 2 Pet. 2.12.
MY brethren, many of you to my knowledge; what chiefly concerns our selves, we
apply to others.
have read this Cure, and highly approv^d of it: but for want of acquaintance
with your own hearts, you think it concerns others, not you. As David
thought of Nathans parable, 2 Samuel 12.1. to 8. And Ahab of the Prophets, 1
King. 20.39. to 43. when it concerned no less, then his own life. So that
these lines to you (for want of application) are but as so many characters,
written in the water, and this makes all means to prove ineffectuall.
which leave no impression behind them. For you are the same men ^till, as
bitter malignants to the power of godliness; and as much forestalled with
prejudice against the religious as you were before.

Though I did hope better things, both of you and it: and that upon good
probability. Sufficient has been spoken to convince the most malicious.
For it cannot be denied; but I have said sufficient in this, and the
succeeding parts (which sundry of you have read also) if not to convert, yet at
least to convince all gainsayers: and consequently to stop the mouth of
iniquity, which is set so wide-open: To quench those tongues, which are set on
fire from hell; And to charm the mouth, of the most envious Momus, that ever
hell did hatch; from barking at professors, and practisers of piety. Which
makes me fear, that what this will not effect, no ordinary means are like to
do.

As what can be further expected? No glass can more lively represent your
faces, The reason why so few are converted.
than this book does your hearts; Only this is the misery, as when a child
beholds his own face in a glass; he thinks he sees another child's face,
and not his own: So fares it with you. Which is the sole cause, that in the
midst of so much means so few are converted: for otherwise, the word of God
is so powerful; and the Gospel so ravishing: that the World could not stand
before it, without submitting to it. Whereas for want of applying it to their
own consciences: every one can evade, whatsoever their Ministers can speak to
them out of the word. I have shown you what God in his word speaks, and
proved that your condition is no whit better then the condition of Caine, Al
scoffers as bad as Cain, Ishmael, etc.
and Ishmael, and Hamman, and Eliab, and Goliath, and Michal, and Doeg and
Shemei, and Rabshekah, and Tobia, and Sandballat, and Pashur, and Zedekiah, and
Herod, and Saint Paul before his conversion, and Ananias the high Priest, and
Demetrius the Silver-smith, and Alexander the Coppersmith, and Elimas the
Sorcerer. No expecting a voice from heaven, as Saul had.
What, do you look that Christ Jesus himself from Heaven should call to you
severally by name; as he did to Saul: and say ho Ishmael such an one; Or ho
Elimas such an one; Why do thou persecute me? I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest, Acts 9.4, 5. And this book is an Epistle, which I have caused to
be writ unto thee; therefore see thou be warned by it, and persuaded to
repent: or I will come against thee shortly, and will fight against thee, with
the sword of my mouth, except thou amend, Rev. 2.6. -- and 3.20.

and yet if so, it would not p^evail with them
And yet if Christ himself should do so: I question whether you would be any
more warned, or reclaimed by it; than Hazaell was, when the Prophet told him
what abominable wickedness he should commit, 2 Kings 8.12, 13. etc. Abraham
tells Dives as much in effect, Lu. 13.31. I know you think well of your selves,
and so did Hazaell: The worst think well of themselves.
which made him answer the Prophet, what is thy servant a Dog; that I should
do this great evil? though he afterward did it, and was worse then any
Dog. Yea, you call your selves Christians, and will face us down, that you
are the servants of God: and that the word may prove your baine, the prophanest
of you can snatch the comfort of every promise you hear; The most profane can
apply the promises which belong not to them.
as belonging to you, witness my Sovereign Antedote, in which there is not one
word of comfort for; or intended, for you that are scoffers: but for such as
suffer reproach for the name of Christ, and for well-doing. Yet it is admirable
to consider, how you comment upon those comforts, and apply every passage
therein; to your selves, and against the godly: In which case it is hard to
say, hard to say whether their applying the promises, or not applying the
precepts and threats most occasions their impenitency.
whether your applying the promises in that, and such like books and sermons:
or your not applying the threats, and precepts in this, and the like, will most
occasion your final impenitency. And whether it best pleases Satan, that you
thus read, and hear Gods word; or that you neither read, nor hear it at all.
Oh the many ways that Satan has, to gull, and delude carnal men: and how
willing, and apt they are to gul, and delude themselves!

But consider! Has God made any promise to Scoffers? Or can the Cross of
Christ, Salvation not more promised to the penitent, then damnation threatened
to the impenitent.
save them that continue malicious enemies to his Cross? Phil. 3.18. No, God
has promised to show mercy unto thousands, of them that love him and keep his
co^mandments Exodus 20.5, 6. And to forgive the most unrighteous, if they will
forsake their evil ways, and return unto him, Isay 55.7. And Christ has
made a general Proclamation, that whosoever (have they formerly been never so
wicked and vicious) shall repent and believe, and obey the Gospel shall be
saved, Mark 16.16. Heb. 5.9. But withal Christ has no less told us, (and I
pray mark it) that except we repent, and believe, we shall for ever perish,
and be damned Mark 16.16. Luke 13.3, 5. and threatened, that he will come the
second time, in flaming fire, to render vengeance unto them, that know him not;
and that obey not his Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8. Psalm. 11.6. Adding, that no
unrighteous persons, shall inherit the Kingdom of God: but shall have their
part, and portion in that Lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.21. Revel. 21.8. And that without
holiness, no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14, and God no less tells us,
that he will recompense every man, according to his works, be they good or
evil, Revel. 20.13. and 22.12. Romans 2.6. Jer. 25.14. and 32.19. and 50.29. and
51.56. Ezekiel. 7.4.8, 9. and 9.10. and 11.21. and 16.43. Yea he tells us
expressly; that he will not be merciful unto such, as flatter themselves in an
evil way: but that his wrath, and jealousy shall smoke against them; and
every curse that is written in his book shall light upon them, etc. Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20. And that if we will not regard, nor hearken unto him, when he calls
upon us for repentance: If we will not hear Christ now, he will not hear us
hereafter.
he will not hear, nor regard us, when in our distress, and anguish we shall
call upon him for mercy: but even laugh at our destruction, and mock when our
fear comes, Prove. 1.24. to 33. Neither is salvation more promised to the
godly, in any part of the Bible; Old Testament or New: than eternal death, and
destruction is threatened to the wicked. For though to all repentant sinners, he
is a most merciful God: yet to wilful, and impenitent sinners he is a
consuming fire Heb. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4.24.

Do you indeed believe, that he who is truth it self; speaks as he means
in his word? Or will you hearken to God, Christ came not to be a patron for sin
but to sanctify as well as to save us.
and Christ, rather than to Satan and your deceitful Heart: that would gull
you of your soul, and plunge you into everlasting horror? If so, take notice;
that Christ came not to be a Patron for sin; but that he might destroy the body
of sin, and the works of the Devil in us 1 John 3.8. and to sanctify, as
well as to save us, Romans 6.5, 6. Titus 2.11, 12, 14. Luke 1.74, 75. And that
the very end of Gods electing, and of Christ's redeeming us, was: that we might
be holy, Ephe. 1.4. Matthew. 19.17. And therefore he binds it with an oath: That
whomsoever he redeemeth, out of the hands of their spiritual enemies: they
shall worship him in holiness, and righteousness all the days of their
lives, Luke 1.73, 74, 75. 1 Pet. 2.24. Nor ought any indeed, to call upon
Christ; or once to name him with their mouths: except they depart from
iniquity 2 Timothy 2.1^.

And this do all that are spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. Such as resolve to do
Gods will, If Christians we will imitate Christ, if Gods servants, we will obey
him.
Psalm. 111.10. (to whom alone Christ reveals himself savingly, John 15.14,
15. 1 John 2.20.) know: that if you were Christians indeed, as you say you
are: you would immitate Christ, and endeavor to square your lives according to
his Gospel, 1 John 2.4, 5, 6. John 15.14, 15. Or if you were Gods servants,
you would do what he commands! 1 John 1.6, 7. Mall. 1.6. Ier. 7.23. and 26.13.

But certainly, as Linacre said long since, so may I now.

Either the New Testament is none of Christ's Gospel: or you are not
Christians, John 8.31. Gal. 5.24. 1 John 5.3. And so of the Old, either it is
none of God's word: or you are none of his servants. As mark what the Holy
Ghost says; Romans 6. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves as servants
to obey; his servants ye are to whom ye obey? But scoffers are Satan's servants.
v. 16. to 23. 2 Pet. 2.19. And 2 Cor. 5. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, v. 17.2 Tim. 2.19. and our savior himself, who affirms that we are
the Children of the Devil: if we do the works of the Devil, John 8.34, 44.
Luke 14.26. And what work, or service, can the Devil put you upon like this?
which both blocks up the way to heaven so; and opens such a flood-gate to all
profaneness: that few, or scarce any, do sufficiently discern and deplore.
But that Satan is your Father, The great evil that scoffers do
your King, and your God: and how you advance his Kingdom, by your daily
scoffs, reproaches, etc. 1 in detaining many from entering into a Religious
course. 2 in staggering many Who have made some progress in the way. 3 in
keeping many From doing the good which they would, or appearing the same which
they are. 4 in beating many Clean off from their profession. 5 in hardening
many And making them resolve against goodness. 6 in intentionally slaying many
With death eternal.
the ensuing pages, Satan the god, king, and father of all unbelievers.
sufficiently show. Only I would (if it were possible) make your selves
acknowledge, that you are the men there spoken of. For though all experiensed
Christians know, and God in his word tells you plainly: that Satan is the God
of all unbeleevers, 2 Cor. 4.4. And their King, John 14.30. and 12.31. And
their Father, Genesis 3.15. John 8.44. And that they are all his Servants, kept by
the Devil in a snare; and taken captive of him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. And
that he rules by, and works his pleasure in; all the children of
disobedience, Ephe. 2.2, 3. Yet poor souls, Satan speaks in and by scoffers
but they know it not. Of which many examples.
you know it not: as those four hundred of Ahabs Prophets, in whom this evil
spirit spoke; did not know that Satan spoke by them, 1 Kings 22.22. Neither did
Judas know, when he eat the sop that Satan entered into him; and put it into
his heart to betray Christ John 13.2. For he had more plausible ends in it, as
thinking that Christ could at pleasure, deliver himself out of their hands,
and the like.

Neither do Magistrates (when they cast the servants of God into prison) once
imagine; that the Devil makes them his Jaylors: but he does so, whence that
phrase of the Holy Ghost, The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, Rev.
2.10. They are his instruments, but he is the principal Author. Neither did
Ananias, and Saphira once think; that Satan had filled their hearts, or put
that lie into their mouths, which they were struck dead for, Acts 5. yet the
Holy ghost tells us plainly, that he did so, ver. 3. No, Eve in Paradise: had
not the least suspision, that it was Satan that spoke to her by the Serpent:
nor Adam, that it was the Devils mind in her mouth: his heart in her lips,
when tempted to eat the forbidden fruit. Nor did David once dream, that it
was Satan, which moved him to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Much less did
Peter; who so dearly loved Christ; imagine that he was set on by Satan, to
tempt his own Lord and Master with those affectionate words; Master pity thy
self: for if Christ had pitied himself, Peter, and all the World had perished.
Yet he was so, which occasioned Christ to answer him; get thee behind me
Satan Mat. 16.22, 23.

Whence we may argue, that if Satan can make the best, and wisest of Gods
children and servants: who hate the very appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
Jude 23. Ephesians. 5.27. 2 Pet. 3.14. Iam. 1.27. have the eye of faith, 1 Timothy 6.^4,
and the spirits direction, and know the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.12, 13, 15,
16. John 10.14 above others; to do him such service unwittingly, and besides
their intention: how much more can he prevail with, and make use of his own
servants, and children; that delight only in wickedness, and have not the
least knowledge of, or ability to discern spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.14. 2
Cor. 4.4. 1 Timothy 4.2.

But will you know, how it comes to pass? that you call evil good, and good
evil; put darkness, for light and light for darkness; bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter: that you justify the wicked, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him, Five main reasons why they fight
under Satan's banner, and yet think themselves Gods servants.
Isai. 5.20.23. And so fight under Satan's banner against Gods people: And yet
take your selves to be (not Satan's but) Gods servants? I will show you five
maine Reasons of it; I pray mark them.

First, So long as you are in your natural condition; you have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, hearts and understand not spiritual things: 1 Their
ignorance of spiritual things.
As Christ himself plainly affirms Matthew. 13.15. and his Apostle, Acts 28.27.
and before them both the Prophet Isay chap. 6.9.10. And the reason of that is,
you have a veil or curtain drawn over your hearts: which is never taken away
until ye turn to the Lord by repentance: at which time it is taken away, as
you may read, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 16. Romans 12.2. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16.

2 the commonnesse of this sin has taken away the sense of it.
Secondly long custom, and the commonnesse of this sin; has taken away the
sense of it, 1 Timothy 4.2. Heb. 3.13. Yea, quite turned it from a sin (and that
the greatest) to a virtue. As how many in this land, for all they are Traitors
to God; and take up arms against all that worship him in spirit and in truth:
would yet be counted (and are so by the blind world) not only honest men; but
good Christians? Whereas if it were not so common, and in fashion: they would
be counted very Atheists, and Devils: and so they are accounted of all, but
them that are Atheists. How many that scoff at, traduce, and nickname the
conscionable Puritans; and hate them, even for the graces of Gods spirit which
shine in them: would yet be counted Religious men? whereas if it were not so
usual, and that custom had not bleered men's minds: This counted no sin and
yet worse then all his fellows
it would be counted no better than open rebellion, and blasphemy against God:
and so it is counted, by all but them that use it. This sin is counted no sin;
and yet it is the most desperate sin; and does more hurt than all his
fellows.

Thirdly, 3 They reject all means of being bettered*
To help forward: when God sends to you his Gospel, thereby to cure and save
you; you will not be cured, Jer. 51.9. Yea, you so hate the light of the
Gospel; that you shun it all you can least your deeds should be reprooved,
John 3.19, 10. Or else you stop your ears, and shut your eyes; least you
should see with your eyes, and hear with your ears, and should understand
with your hearts; and should he converted, and Christ should heal you, as
himself affirms, Matthew. 13.15. And what is light to him, that will shut his
eyes against it? Or reason to him that will stop his ears from hearing it. 4
Because they will not embrace the truth they are given up to believe lies.


Fourthly, Here upon; because you will not receive the truth in love, that you
might be saved: for this cause, God gives you up to strong delusions; that you
should believe a lie. That all of you might be damned, who believe not the the
truth; but take pleasure in unrighteousness: They are the very words of the
Holy ghost, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. of which see more, Romans 1.21. to 32.

5 The Prince of darkness blindes them.
Fifthly and lastly, Satan the God of this World; has blinded your minds, that
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the image of God; should
not shine unto you, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. 1 Timothy 4.2.
For as Satan is the Prince of darkness, so he rules in the darkness of
the understanding: dealing with wicked men, as Faulkoners do with their Hawks,
who that they may carry them quietly, and do what they list unto them: First
blind their eyes with a hood.

Neither could men else hear the Gospel (day after day, and year after year)
which is the strong arm of the Lord, and the mighty power of God to salvation,
Romans 1.16. and the sword of the spirit, Ephe. 6.17. and like as a fire or an
Hammer that breaks even the rock in pieces. Ier. 23.29, 30. And that
irresistible Cannon shot, that is mighty to beat down all the strong holds of
sin and Satan, 2 Cor. 10.4. quick and powerful And sharper then any two
edged sword; and peir^eth even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit,
and of the joints and marrow, and to the discerning of the very thoughts, and
secret intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12.

And stand it out, even refusing the free offer of grace and salvation. Neither
could they other then hate sin, and love holiness: For (besides that any wise
man, would rather be saved than damned) Plato a very heathen could say, that
virtue if it be clearly seen; moves great love and affection. Yea, if we
could descerne good from evil perfectly; that subtle Serpent, could deceive
no longer.

And because he cannot force men against their wills; Satan prevails most by
desception of our reason.
(which leaves us without excuse) for though that old Sheba, blows many an
enticing blast, to carry us away from our true allegiance to Christ Jesus our
King: yet the mind of man is not capable of a violation, either from man or
Satan: therefore he uses his utmost policy to persuade us. And by desception
of our reason (whereby we mistake virtue for vice, and vice for virtue) he
chiefly prevails. We mistake good for evil and evil for good.
For no vice could ever be loved but for the seeming good which it makes show
of. And Satan is so cunning a Sophister, and so dexterous a Retoritian in
persuading: that he desires no more, then to be heard speak. As what think
you; if that old Serpent and Sophister, did so easily persuade Eve by himself,
and Adam by her to believe what he spoke: Satan desires no more then to
beheard speak.
though they had heard God himself say the contrary immediately before: what
hope have we to stand out? being so extremely degenerated. If they in the
state of innocence, when they had wisdom at will, and reason at command; found
him too hard for them; when they fell once to argue the case with him; how much
more too weak shall we find our selves, that are as we are; and when our
own flesh is become our Enemy, and his cunning Soliciter.

My brethren! be no longer deceived, but hearken more to what God speaks in his
word; less to the Tempter: for he will set a fair color, upon the foulest
sin that ever was committed, witness his words to Eve, He will put a fair
color upon the foulest sin and make the best action odious.
when she eat the forbidden fruit, at the price of death eternal, Genesis 3.
Witness the glorious pretenses which Hammon made to Ahashuerosh; that he might
procure that bloody decree, against all the Jews, Ester 3. and a thousand more
which I could reckon up. And so on the contrary, what good action can be so
splendent, and glorious; but he will bring reasons in appearance, to make it,
not only faulty, but odious? witness our saviors casting out devils: which
says he (by the mouths of the Scribes and Pharisees) is done through
Beelzebub: he will make the people believe, that either the action is evil; or
if good, not God but himself will have the glory of it, Matt. 12.24. Yea,
through Satan's subtilty, Christ was made the greatest offender; that offended
not once in all his life, which would make a wise man suspect his own
judgment or the common fame, and to examine things thoroughly, before they
condemn one, whom they know no evil by. But not to weary you with instances,
If he can persuade men (as he has done millions) that they shall do God
good service, He has persuaded millions that they do well in persecuting the
saitus.
in putting his prophets to death: as Christ himself expressly tell us, John
16.2. What can he not persuade them to? As what stone so rough, but he can
smooth it? what stuff so pitiful, but he can set a gloss upon it? for like
a Bear, he can lick into fashion, the mostmis-shapen, and deformed lump. Or
like a Dog, heal any wound he can reach with his tongue. Yea, your selves
cannot choose but know (except you be stark blind) what golden eloquence, he
will whisper in your ears; what brazen impudence, what subtle shifts, what
quainte querks, what cunning conveyances; what juggling, shuffling, and packing
he will use; to make any sin feasible, like the Hare which if she dare not
trust to her speed; she will try the turn. And so on the contrary, to
discourage Gods people in good.

Neither could concupisence bring forth sin, without the consent of reason: and
reason would never consent, so long as the eyes are open. Yea* if the light of
knowledge, might freely shine in the soul; If Satan showed the hook as well
as the b^ite his Kingdom would not be so populous.
Satan's suggestions would soon make him ashamed, and vanish with all his
works of darkness. Or if temptations, might be but turned about and shown
on both sides; his Kingdom would not be so populous, wherefore when he sets
upon any poor soul; he shows the bait, hides the hook.

Whence it is, Satan more servants here then God.
that Satan has more servants to fight for him here below; then the Trinity
which made us: Else how should that be true, which our savior Christ, and his
Apostles so often inculcate? viz. that the whole World lies in wickedness, 1
John 5.19. That the number of those, whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand
of the Sea, Revel. 20.8. and 13.16. Few compared with the multitude shall be
saved.
Isay 10.22. Romans 9.27. That the greatest number, go the broad way to
destruction: and but a few the narrow way, which leads unto life Matthew. 7.13,
14. That many are caled (viz. by the outward ministry of the word) but few
chosen, Matthew. 20.16. and 22.14. sad predictions! Oh that we could not apply
them! but experience shows, that among them that call themselves Christians;
scarce one of an hundred; whose practice is answerable; either to the gospel,
their christian profession, or the millions or mercies they have received.

The difficulty of entering the strait gate.
Yea, notwithstanding the Holy ghost tells us in the word; and we hear it
daily; That every man shall be judged according to his works; be they good or
evil, Revel 20.13. and 22.12. And that we shall give an account, at the day of
judgment: for every idle word we speak, Matthew. 12.36. And that we need no
other ground of our last, and heaviest doom: then ye have not given, ye have
not visited etc. Matthew. 25.41. to 46. and that the righteous, shall scarsly be
saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.
And that many shall seek to enter in at the strait gate and shall not be
able, Luke 13.24. the which scriptures, if they be true? what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation, and godliness as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Pet. 3.11. Yet most live as if they had no souls.
And yet most men live, as if the Gospel were quite contrary to the rule of
the Law: as if God were neither to be feared, nor cared for. As if they were
neither beholding to him, nor afraid of him: both out of his debt and danger.
Yea, as if there were no God to judge, nor Hell to punish, nor heaven to
reward. I cannot think of it without astonishment!

I remember Cyprian, brings in the Devil triumphing over Christ in this
manner; The foolish ingratitude of ungodly men.
As for my followers says the Devil; I never dyed for them, as Christ has
done for his: I never promised them so great reward, as Christ has done to
his: and yet I have more followers than he; and they do more for me, than his
do for him. Oh that men would duly consider how true this is, and amend before
the drawbridge be taken up: but this is the misery, and a just plague upon
our so much formality, and profaneness under our so much means of grace: there
be very few men, that make not the whole Bible, and all the Sermons they
hear; Want of application on the cause of al impiety.
yea, the checks of their own consciences, and the motions of Gods spirit
utterly in-effectuall for want of wit and grace to apply the same to
themselves, whereas if they would rightly and ingenuously apply but one text or
two, as Matthew. 7.12. and 16.26. or the like unto their own souls: as they can
unto others (being better able to discern others moates, than their own
beams) they might be everlastingly happy. But this is the gift of God alone,
and natural men love their sins, better than their souls.

Objection, But you will say, what is this to us? We live unrebukably, we pay
every man his own; we are temperate, chaste, etc. we go duly to Church;
pray in our families; make conscience of swearing, lying, etc.

All performances abominable except they proceed from right ends and a heart
sanctified
Answer, But does it flow from a pious and good heart sanctified by the Holy
ghost, 1 Timothy 1.5. Acts 15.9. Is it done in faith, and out of right ends as out
of love, and obedience? because God commands the same; that he may be
glorified, and others edified thereby. Otherwise, all your best performances;
are no better in Gods account; then the offering of swins blood: or the cutting
off of a dogs neck, as himself shows Isay 58. chap. and 66.3. 1 John 3 12.
Matthew. 7.22, 23.

Again do you pay God his dues also: do you repent, and believe the Gospel:
Trial of a Christian by the fruits of his faith.
precepts and menaces, as well as promises? do you declare your faith by your
works? do you pray by the power of the spirit? and with the understanding
also? 1 Cor. 14.15. do you receive the word with good and honest hearts?
read, confer and meditate upon it? and also bring forth the fruits of it in
your lif and conversation? do you sanctify his Sabbaths? and see that all
under you do the same? love his children, promote his glory, and strive to
gain others to embrace the Gospel? instruct your children and servants, and
teach them to fear the Lord? do you fear an oath? hate a lie, etc? love
zeal, and devotion in others? make conscience of evil thoughts? vain, and
unprofitable words? grieve for your unprofitablenesse under the means of
grace? for the evil which cleaves to your very best actions? and for sins of
omissions, etc? No, you may be good morrall honest men: but none of these
graces, grow in the Gardens of your hearts. You have a form of godliness, but
you deny the power of it: and are reprobate to every good work 2 Timothy 3.5.
Morrall men count zeal madness, and Religion foolishnes
Titus 1.16. Yea, have you not strange conceits, and base thoughts of the best
men? do you not deeply censure, and condemn the generation of the just? and
think the worse of a man, for having of a tender conscience? do you not envy,
hate, scoff at, nickname, rail on and slander the people of God; and
mis-consture their actions and intentions? watch for their halting, and combine
with others against them? do you not with Festus, account zeal madness? and
religion foolishness with Michal? For men of the world, think the Religious
fools, and madde-men: but the Religious know them to be fools and maddemen.
Do you not sharpen your tongues in gall; and dip your pens in poison, to
disgrace the graces of God in his children? yea, have you not beaten off many
from being religious by your scoffs and reproaches? and made them resolve
against goodness? and staggered others, that have made some progress in
holiness? yes, every place where you come, and all that you are conversant
withal, can witness it. Yea, you hate zeal, and devotion so invetterately;
They so hate holiness that they will hate men for it.
that you can in no wise, bear with it in others. I speak not by rote; for
would I be so uncivil as you are, or do by you, as you by others: I could
name hundereds of you: though you will not confess it, when taken in the
manner; but justify your so doing, by many collourable pretenses. For poor
souls, you are so ignorant of Satan's wiles, Ephesians. 6.11. That with Saint Paul
before his conversion, They persecute us out of zeal
you persecute the Church of God: even out of zeal, to the traditions of your
fathers, Gal. 1.13, 14. Phil. 3.6.

Which is the case almost of who not! Which is the case of not a few.
for this sin, is so epidemicall that take forty men where you please City or
Country, As they dwell, pass the streets, or sit in their pues: and nine and
thirty of them are malignants to the power of religion. You will say it is a
big word; but I have warrant for it: does not our Savior say, you shall be
hated of all men and nations for my names sake, Matthew, 10.22. and 24.9. which
infers, that all who are not hated for religion, are haters of religion.
Neither is Christ's name, any where more spoken against, All hated for
religion, or haters of reigion.
then in Israel, Luke 2.34. where all profess themselves to be Gods people.
The like place you have Matthew. 5.11. And what is meant by these words? I will
put enmity between the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman, Genesis
3.15? but that all men living, are either the woman's, or the serpents seed.

As for other sins, one man is given to lust, another to intemperance, a third
to swearing, a fourth to cousening, some to more than one, some to all of them:
but who is not tainted with this sin? who is not an open or secret enemy to
holiness? by reason of that general contempt, which is cast upon professors.
Yea, who is there, even of those that have resigned up their pride, and their
lust, and their lying, and their co^sening; or what other sins they have
been prone to? with whom this sin does not remain, as though they had a
dispensation for this evil. Yea, and think they do wond^rous well in it for
they delude themselves, with a multitude of mispris^ons, and false surmises
against the godly; the souls of most men, being drowned in their senses; and
carried away with weak opinions, raised from vulgar mistakes, and shadows of
things.

And which is worst of all; They have so hardened their hearts that we were as
good admonish a stone.
they have so hardened their hearts, and so seared their consciences, with
accustomary using it, even from their infancy: that a man were as good speak
to a stone, ( Ezekiel. 11.19.) as admonish them of it, having Pharoah's curse upon
them, an hard heart, and a seared conscience. And a bruit beast, is as capable
of good council as they. Yea, braying in a Mortar, as Solomon speaks would not
alter them Prove. 27.22.

Nevertheless, though they resemble those Beasts that went into the Arc
unclean; and came out again unclean: yet it shall comfort me, that I have
done my best, to pluck up this infectious weed out of men's hearts: that I
have hopefully ministered unto them; whom I cannot cure. And that I have brought
water enough, to wash these Blackamores white: if it were in the power of water
to do it

Besides I did it as well for the godlies sake, as for theirs: I considered,
how my self was formerly forestalled with prejudice against goodness; and how
extremely I mis-judged both actions and persons; by reason of that general
contempt, which was cast upon Professors: which for many years hindered me from
entering upon a religious course.

Yea, when God of his free grace, and good pleasure had brought me out of
darkness, The reason why al are not beaten off by their s^offes.
into his mavelous light: and touched my heart with the lodestone of the
Gospel: that I was not beaten off again, from ever being religious; (through
the daily scoffs, and reproaches which in every place I met withal; for
refusing to do as others, with whom I was conversant) no reason can be
rendered but that of the Apostle, whom he did predestinate; them he also
called, and justified, and saved. Romans 8.30. And O the depth, Romans 11.33. How
to have our ^udgments cleared and our prejudice cured.


Wherefore when once my judgment was cleared, and my prejudice cured: by the
sage council of a friend, and by pondering these few scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.12.
Mat. 10.22, 23. etc. and 24.9^^ Luke 2.34. and 4.29. John 15.20. Genesis 3.15. 1
John 3.13. 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. Luke 14, 27. and 6.26. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
Phill. 1.28, 29. Both of them being driven home, or set on by the rod of
affliction: By Gods grace, I not only shook off this slavish yoke of bondage
and fear, in which Satan for the present held me: But probably conjectured,
that God would enable me to discover and sound this depth of malice in Satan
and his adherents, which makes them so swel and rage against the godly: And
thereby so convince the one, that they should not dare to pervert the straight
ways of the Lord, Occasion of writing upon this subject.
by turning away the weak from the faith: And so furnish the other, with
Armor of proof against their scorns that they might see there was no cause;
nor have the least thought, or purpose of returning.

For the effecting whereof, I have not been sparing in either pains or prayer
to God; for divine a^sistance (it being a subject, that none, (as I conceive)
have hitherto handled) which I found extended to me, blessed be his holy name
beyond my expectation. All ineffectual except God give a blessing
Indeed we may speak to the ear, but God alone has the key of the heart,
Acts 16.14. To whose blessing I leave the success, and its use to the world.
Humbly beseeching the Almighty, that these lines may not rise up in judgment
against those Hazaells; that have read them and are never the better: And so
instead of curing their sin, prove a means to increase their torment.

R. Y.

An Alphabeticall Table, both for the Book, and for the Advertisement.
A.
ACtions, our best actions abominable, except they proceed from right ends, and
a heart sanctified. Advertisement. Aa. Accuse, wicked accuse the godly of many
things, but prove nothing. Page 68 They will coin matter to accuse us. 70 They
dazzle men's eyes with false accusations. 73 And have a great advantage therein
of the godly. 63 They have so hardened their hearts, that we were as good
admonish a stone. Ad. Ee Adversities, distinction of them. 27 Agree, impossible
the good and bad should ever agree. 132 Carnal men can agree with any, so they
be not religious. 133 Though they differ in other things, they will agree
against the godly. 133 Agreement in some points does but advance hatred the
more. 136 Anthipathy, a secret enmity, and antipathy between the wicked and the
godly. 2 Look enmity. All means ineffectuall for want of application. Ad. A.B
Want of application the cause of all impiety. Ad. A.B.Z What chiefly concerns
us we apply to others. Ad. A.Z The most profane can apply the promises which
belong only to such as suffer for well-doing. Ad. D Hard to say whether their
applying the promises, or not applying the precepts and threats, does most
occasion their final impenitency. Ad. E Assitance, divine assistance in time
of trial. 192 Atheism, fruits of it wherewith the lands abounds. Look
unbeleef. 23 Atheists on earth, none in hell. 214 Fire and brimstone shall
confute all Atheists. 219 The most grounded Atheism has a mixture of belief.
215.217 Atheists would give all they have to be sure there were no bell. 216
Their convicted consciences shall be witnesses against their unbeleefe. 218
None so confirmed in Atheism, but will fear in time of danger. 211 At least
on their death beds they confess a God. 212
B.
Belief, unbelief, a cause of persecuting us. 202 Proved by testimonies.
ibid. By examples. ib. By experience. 204 Men think they believe, but do not.
ib. Evidences of men's unbelief. 205 A carnal heart flint to God, wax to
Satan. 221 That most men believe not an hell, proved undeniably. 226 Did men
believe the word, or a judgment to come, they durst not live as they do.
208.226 Carnal men believe the promises, but neither the precepts, nor
threats. 222 All men apt enough to presume upon Gods mercy. 220. Ad. D All true
believers the children of God. 131 All unbelievers children of the devil. ib.
Satan the God, King, and father of all unbelievers. Ad. K Admonition to
beware, before it proves too late. 230 All that has or can be spoken, will
prove fruitless, except Gods blessing do accompany it. Ad. Hh Bruising the
head, what is meant by it. 32. And what by bruising the heel. 33. Bible Genesis
3.15. an epitomy of it. 35
C
Causes of hatred and persecution eleven. 127.239 Censure, they censure our
actions, and misconsture our intentions. 64 They pass over our good parts. 69
Look murmuring. To censure all for the faults of a few, is only the part of a
fool. 148 But most are such fools and beasts. ib. If Christians, we will
imitate Christ, if Gods servants, we will do what he commands. Ad. H
Christians, if a tithe of them be Christians that are so called, there are
millions of Christians in hell. 232 They combine together, and lay divelish
plots to destroy the godly. 105 They will easily find occasion. 107 Our
serving of God shall be ground sufficient. 108 Or a Ministers saving of souls.
ibid. The manner of their consultations. 106 Would we accompany them in evil,
their malice would cease. 144 They condemn us that themselves may be
justified. 66. Look judging. Means to confirm, comfort and strengthen us
against the worlds hatred. 12 To consider before it prove too la^e. 214 They
will make an evil construction of whatsoever we do or speak 6 Constancy,
such as fear God as immovable as a rock. 253. Look profession. They contemn
the godly which is not for want of ignorance. 56 Contempt of Religion makes
many resolve against goodness. 6 Contrariety a maine cause of hatred and
persecution. 130 They are contrary and differ, 1. In their judgments touching
Wisdom, Happiness, Fortitude, Sin, Holiness. 138 2. In their passions and
affections of Love, Fear, Anger, Joy, etc. 139 3. In their practice, and this
breeds many a quarrel. 139
Sufficient has been spoken to convince the most malicious. Ad. B They give
devilish counsel against us. 72 Miserable condition of cowardly Christians. 4
Christ and his cross inseparable. 10 They use to curse the godly. 87 And those
that least deserve the same. 90 Curse us that they may discourage us. ib.
Though they curse, yet God will bless. 91 How miserably cursers shall be
cursed. 91 They that curse us, would kill us if they durst. 89
D.
Of denying Christ a memorable example. 5. Look profession. Foul mouthed men
and women are devils in Scripture phrase 83 Good men may differ in many
things, yet agree in the maine. 157 A vast difference between another
discipline, and another doctrine. 158 Discretion eats up devotion. 156 Wicked
men think they grace themselves by disgracing others. 79 How fitly they are
called dogs. 81
E.
An enmity or war proclaimed between the wicked and godly. 15 The author
proclayming ib. The Captains and soldiers between whom. 16 Several uses of
instruction. 17 The certainty of this war. 20 Four lessons of instruction. 21
The end why, threefold. 23 God the author, without being the author of sin. 24
Of which sundry reasons. ibid. The same further cleared. 26 Original sin the
original of this discord. 23 The time threefold. 28 Use of comfort. 29 The
manner of their venting it. 30 The place threefold. ibid. What will be the
issue, and who shall get victory. 32 This war is perpetual. 28 It was before
the flood. 40 After the flood before the law. 41 After the law before Christ.
ib. In the time of Christ and his Apostles. 42 After the Apostles in the time
of the ten persecutions. 43 From the primitive times hitherto. 44 In the times
wherein we live. 46 It will continue to the worlds end. 50 Application of the
point. 52 Twenty two signs or properties of this enmity. 53 Four mental. ib.
Eleven verbal. 62 Seven actual. 98 Eleven causes of this enmity. 130 First
cause is contrariety. ibid. This enmity makes them forget all natural
affection. 49 Several uses of their enmity. 124, 125 To inform us whether we
be children of the devil or members of Christ. 125 Application of the point.
52.168 They envy the godly, because better then themselves. 139 Application of
the point 142 And because they fare better. 166 Application first to unhallowed
Ministers. 168. Secondly to the rabble. 171 The good man's honor is the envious
man's torment. 168 Envy the devils cognizance, as love is Christ's 54 Example of
the multitude. 239 Some of their excuses. 151 Genesis the 3.15. opened and
explained. 14
F.
Trial of a Christian by the fruits of his faith. Ad. Aa, Bb Natural men
fear visible powers, not the invisible God. 210 Moral men count zeal
madness, and Religion foolishness. Ad. Cc. To be a Christian requires
fortitude. 160
G.
Wicked men manifest their enmity against the religious by their gesture. 98 As
the tongue speaks to the ear, so the gesture speaks to the eye. 99 Gods
goodness aggravates our wickedness. 234 No living for the godly if their
enemies hands were allowed to be as bloody as their hearts. 93 Nothing more
contemned then goodness. 143
H.
All natural men hate the religious. 2.60 The best men most hated and spoken
against. 1 All the Saints have been hated and persecuted. 11 They so hate
holiness, that they will hate men for it. Ad.Cc All hated for Religion, or
haters of Religion. Ad.Dd Original of this hatred. 14 They will hate a man to
the death for being holy. 6. Look persecution. None but the desperately wicked
will malice his brother for goodness. 165 They will hate us, because they have
hurt us. 104 Causes of the worlds hatred eleven. 127 Many wives, children and
servants hated for being religious. 135 Hatred for Religion the most bitter,
implacable, etc. 136 Their hatred extends to the whole generation of the godly.
60 But they have not so much authority as malice. 61 Though their punishment
shall be never the less. ibid. They will neither hear themselves, nor suffer
others. 104 They come not to be caught by a Minister, but to catch him, 109 But
are taken in the snare they spread for others. 110 As they belong to hell, so
they speak the language. 89 A holy life cannot escape persecution. 47 We may
appeal to themselves who are the honester men. 145 An humble man will never
be an heretic, 102 see pride. They will hurt and maime the godly. 115
I.
Ignorance a main cause of hatred and persecution. 172 Proved by testimonies.
173 By examples, ib. By experience. 176 Ignorance the cause of all sin. 175 The
more Ignorant the more malicious. 177 Ignorance ever makes the worst
construction of things. 178 Ignorance causes suspicion, suspicion hatred, etc.
ib. Look wisdom, knowledge: Objection that great Scholars and wise men do
the same, answered, 179 They have enlightened heads, but dark hearts. 179 Their
deeds prove them ignorant. 180 That Indifferent to one, that is not so to
another. 58 To be scrupulous no ill sign, 159 In cases of a doubtful nature,
best to take the surest side. ib. It is well for the innocent, that the wicked
cannot keep their own counsel. 94 They judge others by themselves. 67 Look
censure, Means to clear our judgments touching the worlds hatred. 8 Men may
doubt, but the Devils believe a judgment to come. 219 The worst of men can
justify and think well of themselves. Ad.D. Five main reasons why they fight
under Satan's banner, and yet think themselves Gods servants. Ad.N. 1 Their
Ignorance of spiritual things, ib. 2 Long custom of this sin has taken away
the sense of it. Ad.O. 3 They reject all means of being bettered, Ad.P. 4
Because they will not receive the truth, they are given up to believe lies. ib.
5 Satan the Prince of darkness blindes them. Ad.Q
K.
What knowledge is peculiar to the godly, and what common to them with
hypocrites 188 No attaining supernatural knowledge by any natural means, 190
Saving knowledge such a jewel, that God gives it to none but his children. ib.
Of which many instances, 191 The same further amplified, 192 See more of this
in Wisdom and in Ignorance.
L.
Were it not for the Law, there were no living among wicked men. 49 The first
part of conversion is to love them that love God, 180 Nothing has proved more
successful to Satan than lies. 79 Wicked men lie, when they speak the truth,
88 Look slander.
M.
Carnal men think us mad, but we know them so. 76 Malignants as witless as
wicked, 175 Wicked men's malice, makes them like beasts or stocks. 116 Their
malice a good sign we belong to God, 13. Look hatred. Mercy, salvation not
more promised to the repentant, than damnation is threatened to the impenitent.
Ad.E Christ came not to be a patron for sin, but to destroy sin in us, and to
sanctify as well as to save us, Ad.G. If we will not hear Christ now, he will
not hear us hereafter. ib. A powerful Ministry most opposed. 101 Nor will
they be appeased. 103 Of Misprisson, 239 Men mistake good for evil, and evil
for good. Ad.R. Most men will do as the most do. 163 They murmr against the
godly. 62 And against God himself. ib. For being better than themselves. 63
They would murder the Saints, 117 Look cruelty. Instead of arguments they take
up arms, ib. Are exceeding salvage and bloody, 118 Of which five Reasons. 119
N.
Natural men want both the light of the spirit, and the eye of faith. 189 All
natural men the devils chidren, 131 Their manner is to nickname the godly. 78
Number few, compared with the multitude, shall be saved. Ad.X. The difficulty
of entering the strait gate, Ad.Y. Most men live as if they had no souls. ib.
O.
We must obey God rather then great ones, 153 But this they call great
disorder. ib. How far we fall short of primative Christians in our obedience.
333 Occasion of writing upon this subject, Ad.Gg. Where Christ comes, there
will be opposition. 143 Order and distribution of the whole Book. 37 Original
sin, the original cause of all discord. 23
P.
No peace to be expected between the seed of the serpent, and the seed of the
woman, 21 Wicked men persecute the godly for being better than they. 139 Of
which many examples, 140 And further amplified. 142 Formal Christians the
greatest persecuters of true Christians. 145 Yet none think better of
themselves, 155 Tongue-taunts in Gods account is persecution. 165 The woeful
reward of persecuting Christ's members. 64, 77, 206 But they bless themselves,
and think to speed as well as the best. 208 Why persecuters are not always
punished here, 207 Look hatred They cry up practice, to cry down preaching 170
The preaching of some Ministers the cause of hatred and persecution. 140
Prejudice blindes them. 65 No reclaiming such as are forestalled with
prejudice, 7 Prejudice, how to have it cured, and our judgments cleared. 8.
Ad.Ff. The Prelates more r^ady to yield their aid, then the rabble to ask it.
74 Wicked men all in extremes, and either presume or despair, 223. Look
faith. They are prone to imprison us. 111 Not for any crime. 112 But to prevent
further dispute, ib. And for other the like reasons. 113 Good men will hold
their profession though they lose their lives. 161 Common Protestants can be of
any religion. 154
R.
They rejoice at our supposed evil estate. 58 But most if they see us sin. 59
Religion most opposed by formal professors 9 Most men can be of any religion,
which shows they are truly of none. 234 They think to add to their own
reputation by detracting from others. 104 They revile and rail on the godly,
80 They so hate righteousness, that they will hate men for it. 75
S.
Satan speaks in and by scoffers, but they know it not, of which many
examples, Ad.L Satan more servants here than God, Ad.X Satan prevails most by
desception of our reason, Ad.R. Satan desires no more than to be heard speak
Ad.S. He will put a fair color upon the fowlest sin, and make the best
action odious, Ad.T He has persuaded millions that they do well in persecuting
the Saints. Ad.V If Satan showed the book with the bait, his kingdom would
not be so populous, Ad.X Scandalous lives of some Professors, one cause of
hatred and persecution, 240 Wicked men use to flout and scoff at the
Religious. 75 Even for their zeal, purity and holiness, 124 They would scoff
us out of our faith, 159 And would effect the same, did not God support us. 160
Millions beaten off from being religious, by their scoffs and reproaches, 3
Some will better abide a stake, then others a scoff* 164 Scoffing counted no
sin, and yet worse than all its fellows, Ad.O.P The great evil that scoffers
do. Ad.I.K All scoffers as bad as Cain, Ishmael, etc. Ad.C They are Satan's
servants, Ad.I The reason why all are not beaten off from goodness by their
scoffs. Ad.F f To be scoft out of our goodness, how ridiculous. 162 The
character of a malicious scoffer. 149 No greater argument of a foul soul, 77
They scoff at us, God laughs at them, 76 Good counsel for scoffers, 237
Separation a main cause of persecution, 240 Flocking after Sermons another
cause. ib. Satan and sin do besot the wicked. 220 They use to slander the
godly, 83 They traduce whom they cannot sed^ce, 65 Slanderers do satan the best
service, 84 Great wits not apter to raise slanders, then others to believe
them, 85 A slander once raised, never dies, ib. At least it leaves the scar of
suspicion, ib. Wise men will examine before they believe 86 Their policy in
slandering us, 87 They slander us out of policy. 147 Slanders both make and
increase jealousies, and disable us from discerning the truth. 84 Their
matchles malice in slandering us. 73 It is satan that speaks in and by the
slanderer. 78 A slander is the devils heart in their lips 83 Singularity our
great and grievous crime, 152 They use to smite the godly, and confute them
with fists, 114 Their arguments are al steel and iron, ib. Because the Law
binds their hands, they smite with their tongues, 80 How satan plays the
Sophister, 158 They speak evil of us, because they cannot do evil to us. 81
They think not as they speak, 146 Satan gets more by subtlety than by violence,
63 Suffering, our Savior suffered 22 several ways from ungodly men, 121 Let
none look to fare better than Christ. 126 What a multitude have lost their
lives for professing Christ, 42 Comfort for such as suffer. 126 God will assist
such as suffer for him. 22
T.
They are wont to carry tales of us to the Rulers, 67 How to hear the
talebearer, 70 No music so sweet, as to hear well of themselves, ill of the
Religious. 71 The tale-bearers End. ib. The Thief, most forward to cry stop
thief, 87 They use to threaten the godly, 93 Speaking of truth, a main cause of
hatred and persecution. 239 Wicked men fly the light. 101 They use to withstand
and contrary the truth by us delivered. 100
V.
They will undermine us in talk that they may betray us. 95 Their cunning in
this case. ib. And dissimulation. 96 They have borrowed this craft from Satan,
who sets them on work. ib. Beware we trust them not. 97
W.
A War proclaimed between the wicked and the godly, 15 The time when. 28
Warning, No expecting a voice from heav^n as Saul had. Ad. C And yet if they
should it would not do Ad. D They are forced to give us warning that we may
prevent them. 94 All wicked men are the serpents seed. 16 We cannot anger them
worse then to do well. 137 Wicked beholding to the godly for their lives. 174
How strangely they gull themselves, 150 Many that have a depth of knowledge are
not soul wise. 181 Examples of many wise in the worlds esteem yet fools in
Gods account. 182 With God the greatest sinner is the greatest fool: and he
most wise that is most religious. 182 God regards not braine-knowledge, except
it seize upon the heart also. 183 Rightly a manknows no more then he
practices. 184 Saving knowledge or wisdom described. 185. That the meanest
believer knows more then the profoundest clark. 186 In what sense the word
calls worldly men wise men. 187 Strong brains too wise to be saved. 102
Vengeance makes wise, whom sin makes foolish. 213 They that would have this
tallent, must resolve to improve it. 194 The way to obtain true wisdom, ib.
Instruction from the premises, 195. First, for all natural men, ibid.
Secondly, for such as speak evil of the way of truth, 196. Thirdly, for Gods
people, 198. A Fourth Use, 199. A Fifth, 200. A Sixth, 200. A Seventh Use 201,
Look more in knowledge. and in ignorance What is meant by the woman and her
seed, 17 Their words are to be slighted, 82 If we cannot concoct ill words, we
would never endure blows, 162 They will cavil against the very word of God,
and oppose the Messengers. 101
Z.
They are zealous against all that are zealous. 76 They per^ecute us out of
zeal, Ad. Cc Which is the case of all morrall men, Ad. ib.
THE CAUSE and CVRE OF Ignorance, Error, Enmity, Atheism, Profaneness, etc.
SECT I.
Question.

HOw is it, The religious hated, and spoken against of all, and every where.
that the practice of Christianity is every where spoken against, under the
name of Schism, as the chief Jews told Paul in his time? Acts 28.22. And
that so soon as men become religious and conscionable, they are made a byword
of the people, Job 17.6. A song of the drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. And generally
hated of all, Math. 10.22.

Answer. Know ye not (says St. James) that the Amity of the World, is the
Enmity of God? And that whosoever will be a friend of the World makes himself
the enemy of God? A secret enmity and antipathy between the wicked and Godly.
James 4.4. A wicked man (says Solomon) is abomination to the just, and be
that is upright in his way, is abomination to the wicked, Pro. 29.27.

There is a natural Enmity, and a spiritual Antipathy between the men of the
World and the Children of God; whence it is that the holy Ghost (who can give
most congruous Names to Natures) uses in the Scripture, Gods Dictionary, not
only to call wicked men Adders, Alps, Cockatrices, Serpents, Dragons, Lions,
Tigers, etc. Psalm. 10.9. and 74.13. and 80.13. and 140.3. Esaias 14.29. Dan. 7.
Zeph. 3. Math. 23.33. which are the mortallest Enemies to mankind that live;
but most frequently Wolves, and the godly Sheep, Behold (says our Savior to
his Apostles) I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10.16.
between whom there is a strange contrariety and antipathy living, and dead, as
both Naturalists and Lutinists observe.

It is an everlasting rule of the Apostles, He that is borne after the Flesh
will persecute him that is borne after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. not because he is
evil, but because he is so much better then himself. 1. John 3.12. because
his life is not like other men's; his ways are of another fashion, Wis. 2.15.
for therefore speak they evil of you, because ye will no longer run with them
to the same excess of riot, 1. Pet. 4.4.

SECT. 2.
Quest. But are not many discouraged, Millions beaten off, from being
religious: by the scoffs, and reproaches of wicked men.
and others beaten off from being Religious, through the daily scoffs and
reproaches, which in every place the Godly meet withal, for refusing to do as
others do with whom they are conversant?

Answ. Yea millions, there being no such rub in the way to Heaven as that
general contempt which the Devil and the World have cast upon Religion and
the practisers of Piety; which makes our Savior pronounce that man blessed
that is not offended in him, Math. 11.6. For hereby it is grown to that, that
men fear nothing more then to have a name that they fear God, and are more
ashamed to be holy then profane, because holiness is worse entreated then
profaneness: with Peter we are apt to deny our Religion, when we come in
company with Christ's Enemies: and with David, to dissemble our Faith, when we
are amongst Philistims. Like those white-livered Rulers, John 12.42. who loved
the praise of men, more than the praise of God, we choose to conceal our
knowledge of, and love to Christ, lest we should be mocked, have so many
frowns, and frumps, and censures, and scoffs, be branded with that odious and
stigmaticall name of an Hypocrite, etc.

True, with Nicodemus, we owe God some good will, but we dare not show it
because of this, we would please him, yet so as we might not displease others,
nor our selves. The mise^^ble ^ondition of cowardly Christians
Like the young man in the Gospel, we will follow Christ, so Christ propound
no other conditions, then what we like of: but what will be the issue, our
Savior says expressly. That he will be ashamed of such at the latter day, who
are now ashamed for his sake, to bear a few scoffs and reproaches from the
World, Mark 8.38. A sad saying for all such: which considered seriously, would
alter the case with many; as it fared with Vstbazanes an old Noble man, and a
Christian, that had been Sapores the King of Persias Governor in his minority:
Who when Sapores raised a great persecution against the Christians was so
terrified, that he left off the profession: But sitting at the Court Gate when
Simion an aged holy Bishop was led to Prison, A remarkable example.
and rising up to salute him; the good Bishop frowned upon him, and turned away
his face with indignation, as being loath to look upon a man that had denied the
faith: whereupon Vsthazanes fell a weeping, went into his Chamber, put of his
Courtly Garments, and brake out into these words; Ah! how shall I apeare before
God, and my Savior whom I have denied; when Simion a man will not endure to
look upon me: If he frown how will God behold me when I come before his
Tribunal, etc. For this Physic so wrought with him, that he recovered not
only health, but such spiritual strength, that he went boldly to the King,
professed himself a Christian, and dyed a Martyr gloriously.

SECT 3.
But secondly, it so forestaleth (such as are without) with Prejudice against
goodness and circumspect walking, The contempt of Religion makes many resolve
against goodness.
that they resolve never to be Religious so long as they live: As how many not
only stumble at Christ, the living and chief corner stone, elect of God, and
precious, but quite fall as at a Rock of offense: yea, ^tterly disallow of the
things that are excellent, only through the contempt which is cast upon
Religion? 1 Pet. 2.7.8.

What such men's thoughts are we may hear from the damned in Hell, We fools
thought their lives madness etc. Wisd. 5.3.4. And experience shows, that they
will hate a man to the death, though he have nothing to condemn him, but his
being holy.

Yea, where Satan has once set this his porter of Prejudice, They will make an
evil construction of what soever we do, or speak.
though Christ himself were on earth, that soul would stumble and be offended
at his very best actions, as we see in the Scribes and Pharisees, who made an
evil construction of whatsoever he did or spoke: For when he wrought Miracles,
he was a Sorcerer: When he cast out Devils, it was by the power of Devils: When
he reproved sinners, he was a seducer: When he received sinners, he was their
favourer: When he healed the sick, he was a breaker of the Sabbath, etc. John 8.

Nor can the highest eloquence of the best Preacher ever reclaim such. No
reclayming such, as are forestaled with prejudice.
For first, words are vagabonds where the admon^shed has an evil opinion of
the Admonisher Secondly, they are resolved against yielding. Thirdly, let them
be convinced by strength of argument, the thought of those things presently
passes away like the sound of a Bell that is rung. O this is a difficult Devil
to be cast out, even like that which we read of, Math. 17.16. For as all the
Disciples could not cast out that Devil, no more can all the Preachers this:
for the Cure of prejudice alone in one man, is more then to cure the seven
deadly sins (as the Papists term them) in another. Nay (if I may speak it
with reverence) what means can God use that shall be able to convert such an
one? The nine plagues shall not prevail with Pharaoh, the graves opening, the
dead arising, the veil of the Temple renting the light of the Sun failing, the
Centurion confessing, etc. will do no good upon the Scribes and Pharisees: Yea,
though Ahab be told from the Lord, that if he go to War he shall perish, yet be
goes and speeds accordingly.

SECT. 4.
Quest. But how should weak Christians know the mystery of this iniquity,
Means to clear our Judgments touching the worlds hatred.
shake off this slavish yoke of bondage and fear, in which Satan for the
present holds them?

Answ. Search the Scriptures, and they will so clear your judgment, and cure
your Prejudice, that in some measure you shall be enabled to quench those fiery
darts, Ephesians. 6.16. I mean, the reproaches of those evil tongues, which are
set on fire from Hell, James 3.6. for Virgil most excellently and profoundly
couples the knowledge of cause, and the conquest of all fears together.

First for the informing of your judgment, our Savior Christ and his Apostles
has abundantly foretold the same. Of a multitude of predictions I Will only
instance three or four. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution, 2. Tim. 3.12. Not some, but all: and what all, but even all that
will live godly? Now, methinkes, if there were no other texts in the Bible but
this one, it were omnisufficient to take away Prejudice and wonder touching the
Worlds hatred and calumny: but the Scriptures are full of the like, Ye shall be
hated of all men and Nations (says our Savior) for my names sake, Math.
10.22. and 24.9. Not of a few, but of all Men and Nations, that is, all
natural men, or the greatest part of men in all Countries and Nations, yea,
and for no other cause, but for professing of Christ's Name. Neither is Christ a
sign to be spoken against of many in Babylon, or Assyria, Religion most
opposed, by formal professors.
but of many in Israel, Luke 2.34 where Religion is professed publicly.

Yea, when sincerity is wanting, the nearer the line with any opposition, the
greater Eclips. The Gadereans but besought Christ to depart, his own Country
men drove him out, and cast him down headlong, Luk 4.29. Yea, who was his
greatest enemy but his greatest friend, even one of his houshold-Chaplains? And
who but Ieremies familiars watched for his haulting?

Again (says our Savior) The servant is not above his Master, John 15.20.
But Christ having suffered so much, if we should rest, the Servant were above
his Master, which were senseless to think: For could not his wisdom,
innocence, and holiness, fence him from these scorns, and can thine fence
thee? Besides, that ancient prediction must be fulfilled, I will put emnity
between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman Genesis 3.15. But, if
there be no war between the men of the World, and the children of God; if
they should not hate and persecute us, this Prediction were not fulfilled: Yea,
all the former predictions of Christ, and many, that I omit, should be false;
which were blasphemy once to think.

Wherefore marvel not my brethren, though the world hate you, as Saint John
speaks, Christ and his cross inseparable.
1 John 3.13. Neither count it strange, as Saint Peter has it, concerning the
fiery trial which is among you, to prove you, as though some strange thing
were come unto you, 1 Pet. 4.12, for Christ and his cross are unseparable,
Luke 14.27.

Whence that definition of Luther that a Christian is a crosse-bearer.

Again, search the whole Bible over and you shall not find one holy man
mentioned, without mention of something he suffered from ungodly men; as it
were easy to instance, how Abel, Lot, All the saints have been hated and
persecuted.
Noah, Righteous men Abraham the Father of the faithful, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph
Patriarchs and Fathers of the Church, meek Moses, upright Sam^^l, holy David,
wise Solomon, all the Lords Priests, Prophets, Apostles; yea the harmless
Babes and our Savior Christ himself, did severally suffer from wicked and
ungodly men, yea, never man came to Heaven, but first he passed through this
Purgatory: God had one Son without sin, but never any one without
suffering; which makes our Savior say, Woe be to you, when all men speak well
of you, that is, when evil men speak well of you, for so did the Jews of the
false Prophets, Luke 6.26. Whereas he pronounces them blessed, which hear
ill for well doing, Mat. 5.11. Which leads me to the second point.

SECT. 5.
SEcondly, For Scriptures to confirm, comfort, and strengthen weak Christians
against the worlds hatred and calumny, Means to confirm comfort, and
strengthen us against the worlds hatred.
these would be applied which follow.

Blessed are they (says our Savior) which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.10. And
again, B^essed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you an^ say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you, ver. 11.12. And Saint Peter, Rejoice, inasmuch as ye
are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding joy, for if ye be reproached for the name of
Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of Go^ rests upon you;
Which on their part is evil spoken off, but on your part is gloryfied, 1 Pet.
4.12, 13, 14. Lo here is reward enough for all that men or divills can do
against us: And what will not men undergo, so their reward may be answerable?
This has made thousands even ambitious to embrace the flames. Your cruelty is
our glory, said the Martyrs in Tertullians time, to their persecutors; for the
harder we are put to it, the greater shall our reward be in heaven. It is to
my loss (said Gordius the Martyer) if you bate me any thing of my sufferings.

But yet further, what says Saint Paul? In nothing fear your adversaries,
whose malice is to them a token of perdition, Their malice a good sign we
belong to God.
but to you of salvation, and that of God, Phil. 1 28. Yea, in the same
Chapter, ver. 29. He prefers the gift of suffering before the gift of
believing: And in his Epistle to the Church of Thessalonica peremptorily
concludes, that they are elect of God, from this ground, That they received
the word in much affliction with joy in the holy Ghost. They that dwell where
Satan's seat is, holding fast Christ's name, without denying his faith: are
Protestants indeed, Revel. 2.13.

Examine these Scriptures again and again, for every word of them is
ponderous, and consider of whom and by whom they were spoken: then certainly
thou will confess, that if their be any Nectar in this life, it is in sorrows
we endure for Righteousness. And methinks, when I hear goodness
calumniated, I bear it the easier, because the servants of vice do it.

SECT. 6
The original of the worlds hatred.
Quest. WHat is the original ground of the worlds hatred?

Ans. That Proclamation which God himself made in Paradise Genesis 3.15. where
he says unto the Serpent; I will put enmity between thee, and the woman, and
between thy seed^, and her seed, he, or it, shall bruise thine head, and thou
shall bruise his heel.

Genesis 3 15 opened and explained.
Quest. As to the building of an house, it is needful, first to lay a good
foundation, before we either raise the walls, or cover it with the Roof: so
this Text being the foundation, root, or spring of our ensuing discourse, it
is necessary (for the better supporting, and also conceiving of that which
follows) clearly to open it, or take it in pieces, that every part may be
viewed severally.

Ans. The whole frame, or substance of the text being a general Proclamation
of War, even of its own accord, falls, or empties it self into ten parts;
And they especially lead us to consider these particulars, Viz. The Thing,
proclaimed, The Author, proclaiming, The Captains and Soldiers, between whom,
The Cause why, The End wherefore, The Time when, The Manner how, The Place
where, The Continuance, The Issue and effects.


Quest. An enmity proclaimed, and what it is.
The whole being thus let fall into parts, let us take up each several in
order, and view it. And first tell me what is intimated, by this Enmity which
is here proclaimed.

Ans. By Enmity is meant, a bitter, inveterate, irreconsiliable and endless
hatred and devision; opposite to that amity and familiarity, which formerly had
been between the Woman and the Serpent. Briefly it is the very gall of the
Prince of darkness.

Quest. The Author proclaiming.
Who was the Author and proclamor of it?

Ans. The Author and principal efficient of it, is God himself: for it we
look a little back to the preceding verse, we shall see that this ( I) is
Jehovah; the eternal God, and Lord of Hosts.

The Captains and Soldiers between whom,
Quest. Between whom was this Enmity proclaimed?

Ans. Between the Serpent, and his seed on the one side: and the woman, and her
seed on the other.

Quest. What is meant by the Serpent, and his seed.

Ans. By the Serpent we are to understand Satan who opened the Serpents
mouth; and caused it to speak with man's voice. as the Lord by an Angel,
opened the mouth of Balaams Ass, Number. 22.

All wicked men are the Serpents seed.
Secondly, by the Serpents seed, is meant the whole Generation of wicked men, as
interpreters conclude generally: and other Scriptures make clear, calling them
Serpents, Generations of vipers, and Children of the Devil. Mat. 23.33. John
8.44. and 1 John 3.10. yea! when Satan by seducing Adam, to break Gods law in
eating the forbidden fruit, had deformed him after his own Image; as God had
formed him after his: he entitled all his heirs to that name the seed of
the Serpent. John 8.44. of which more hereafter.

Quest. What is meant by the woman and her seed?

Ans. By the woman is meant Eve: What is meant by the Woeman and her seed.
by her seed, we are to understand first and cheifely Christ; the singular
seed, who was so the seed of the woman, as that he was not of the Man. Gal.
4.4. being borne of a Virgin. Esaias 7.14.

Secondly it implies all the elect his members; who are not only Eves seed,
as she was the Mother of all liveing by nature; but by faith also: as else
where they are called the seed, or children of Abraham Gal. 3.29,

Quest. Several uses of instruction.
What may be gathered from these terms thus explicated? and what
instructions afford they?

Ans. 1. 1. Use.
That there was a twofold Kingdom set up in this world: A Kingdom of
darkness, of sin, and of misery; and a Kingdom of light, of holiness, and
of happiness: the King, and chief Commander of the one being Satan, the
Prince of darkness; the God of this world, (that is of all wicked men in this
World) And chief of evil spirits, his subjects all the sons of Adam, without
exception, or exemption of any; even the Elect before calling, and
Regeneration; and the reprobate without limitation. And the King of the other
being Christ, called in scripture the wonderful Councellor, the mighty God the
everlasting Father and Prince of peace, the Lord of Lords and King of Kings.
Isa. 9.6. Rev. 17.14. who is also the chief of men, even the chief son of man.
His Subjects, the godly alone, by which I understand so many of the Elect, as
are regenerate: though indeed we have all received our presse-money in
baptism, and ought every one according to our engagement; maintain this fight
against the Devil and the World.

2. That Satan has more Subjects, th^n any Emperor in the world; 2 Use
yea, more men to serve and fight for him; th^n the Trinity which made us: that
the little handful of the Church, is environed, and besieged with a numberless
Multitude of deadly Enemies: All the Armadoes and Troops of Devils, all the
Companies of the wicked, all the forces and powers of Hell; have bent their
Bows, and made ready their Arrows, that they may privily shoot at the
righteous; who are the only mark of their malice, and white at which they
level. Psa. 11.2.

I confess among us Christians: Christ is the subject of all tongues; Oh that
he were the object of all hearts! but whereas the School disputes of him, the
Pulpit preaches of him, Hipocrites talk of him, time servers make use of him,
Politicians pretend him, Profane men swear by him, Civil honest men persecute
him, Millions profess him, few love him, few serve him, few care to honor
him. Godly men even amongst us Christians, are like timber Trees in a wood;
here one and there one; yea, it is to be feared, that as once in Israel, a
thousand followed Baal, for one that followed God: So now in England, many
serve the world, and the flesh and the Devil, for one that truly serves God
in sincerity, truth and holiness. 3 Use


3 If our Enemies are so many in number, so great in might, in malice, in
experience and cunning; as from hence we are informed: yea, if we have
Enemies inferior, as wicked men, exterior, as the world; interior, as the
flesh; superior, as the Devil; it behooves us not to trust to our own
strength ( Hercules himself could not coape with two adversaries at once) but
to implore the assistance of Almighty God, and Christ our Captain; whose
weakness was too strong for all their power and might; the which being done;
fear not a strong Enemy against thee, seeing thou have a stronger friend with
thee.

SECT. 7.
Quest. WHat collect you in particular from those words; I will put Enmity etc.

The certainty of this War.
Ans. This shows the stabillity, and certainty of it, for with God, neither
does his word disagree from his intention (because he is truth it self) nor
his deed, from his word, because he is power it self: God is not as man,
that he should lie; neither as the Son of man that he should repent: Has
he said, I will put enmity, and shall be not do it? Or has he spoaken the
word, and shall not he accomplish it? Numb. 23.19. Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but one jott, or tittle of ^is word shall not pass, til all be
fulfilled, Mat. 5.18.

Quest. What instruction affords this?

Ans. Lessons of Instruction from hence.
1 That to be without reproaches, or persecutions, we may rather wish then
hope; for what peace can we look for, 1 Lesson.
between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, seeing God
himself from the beginni^g has set them at Enmity? yea, once to expect it
were an effect of frenzy, not of hope.

2 Since we can expect no peace from the Serpents seed; 2 Lesson.
let as many as are of the woman's seed, and of Christ's side; ^nanimously hold
together. It is hard to say, whither Bazil* and Eusebius, who perceiving the
Arrians to improve a difference between them; to the prejudice of the Orthodox;
soon reconciled themselves, and united their forces together against the
common enemy, are more to be commended, Or the Pope to be abhorred, who was
so busy and hot against Luther, that he neglected to look to all
Christendom against the Turk. Which declared, that he could easier digest
Mahometisme, then Lutheronisme. The case of too many in our days, that think
they love Christ fervently, though we may justly suspect the contrary, by
their being so busy, and hot against the Reformation established. Against
which they cannot bring any express scripture; only they seek straws to put
out their own eyes, and puzzell others withal. As Bernard speaks of some in
his time; and sure I am, it would argue more love to Christ, and obedience to
his gospel; if they would join with the godly party, against Atheists, and
Papists. As, let but two Mastifes be jarring between themselves: when the
Bare comes they forget private strife, to assail their common Enemy. And
certainly they might be as firm friends to truth; although they were not such
bitter enemies to peace. For as the case stands it is hard to determine
whether they more intend to do God service; or really do the Devil and his
instruments service; by their contradicting, and aspersing all that are not of
their own judgment.

3 Lesson
3 If the Lord have put this Enmity, between us and the wicked. Here is warrant
in opposing, comfort in suffering.

4 Lesson
4 If the seed of the Woman, fight on Christ's side, and they have Gods word for
their warrant: they are sure to have him assist them, and prevent their
Enemies: and is not that God we fight for able enough to vindicate all our
wrongs?

SECT. 8.
Quest. Original sin the orig^nall of this dis^cord.
What occasioned the Lord to proclaim this enmity?

Ans. Adams si^ne in eating the forbidden fruit. and Satan's malice in moving,
and seducing him thereunto, was the meritorious cause: the original of this
discord, The end why ^hreefo^d,
is from original sin.

Quest. What was the final cause or end why God proclaimed it?

Ans. His end was threefold, in regard of himself, the wicked, and the godly.

1 In regard of himself: his principal and was his own glory, which should
a^ise from the manifestation, or admirable composition of his justice, mercy,
holiness, wisdom, power, and providence herein.

2 In regard of Satan, and wicked men^ that he might for the present punish
one sin with another, and in the end take due vengeance on them in their
greater condemnation, and final Ruin and destruction.

3. In regard of the Godly for their greater good, as namely that they might,
by this affliction and chastisement, be stopped in their course of sin, be
brought to the ^ight of their evils pas^, and made repent of them, and
prevented from si^ning for the time to come, and lastly to keep them in
continual exercise, that so they might walk on in the way of holiness which
will bring them to eternal happiness, and not to be condemned with the world.

God the Author without being the Author of sin.
SECT 9.
Quest. But how can God be the Author of it, without being the Author of Sin?

Ans. Very well; Even as the temporal Magistrate may put a fello^ to death,
without committing of Murder: That he, which is the fountain of all good, is
not the Author of any evil herein, may appear.

1. Reason.
1. By considering how the case stood at this time, with Adam and al his
posterity, being condemned persons, every moment expecting, and waiting for
that direful sentence to be executed, and inflicted upon them, which God
before had threatened, in case they should transgress his Royal command Genesis
2.17. namely the sent^nce of death.

Which was threefold, viz. of Body which is the temporal Death. Soul, which
is the spiritual Death. Body, and soul which is eternal Death.


Opposite to that threefold life of Nature, Grace, Glory.


The which if it had been fully, and universally accomplished, we could have had
nothing to say, but that God was just (as now we have no reason to give why so
many should be Redeemed, but because he is merciful) yet because he would,
according to his nature in Justice remember Mercy, he ordained a Savior, and
Remedy even Christ employed in the Pronoune Relative, He, for so many as he had
before predestined, to be borne again by his word and Spirit. John 3. to a
lively faith, whereby they might lay hold on this Remedy, yet with all he did
appoint, that this their way to Heaven should be thorny and troublesome. To
which end he mixed with the sweet promise of Salvation, the bitter Ingredient
of grief and sorrow, Employed in the word Enmity, but yet more to justify this
Judgment of God: that is, to make it appear just.

2 Reason.
2 It will appear if we distinguish the ends of God, Satan, and wicked men. To
which purpose I will instance in our Saviors example; Judas delivered him to
death for gain, the Jews for Envy, Pilate for fear, the Devil provoked each
of them, through this Enmity; Christ himself to obey his Fathers will, God the
Father in love to sinners, and for their Redemption, each did one and the same
thing. But to contrary ends: so when this Enmity breaks forth in the wicked,
Satan has a hand in it as a malicious Author, As when he entered into Judas
and made him betray Christ, The same further cleared.
Luk 22.3. Man himself as a voluntary Instrument, as when Pharaoh hardened his
own heart against the Children of Israel Exodus 9.34. God as a most Righteous
Judge, and Avenger, as when he also hardened Pharoahs heart, Exodus 9.12 but
how? even by permitting the seed of the Serpent, from his own malicious
inclination to hate the seed of the Woman: not by infusing this malice, nor by
withdrawing any grace, but only by denying that grace which he was not bound
to give: he does not infuse corruption, he does not with hold the occasion,
Even as when the Rider gives his fiery horse the Reyns, we say he puts him on;
In mercy infusing this Enmity into the seed of the Woman, against the seed of
the Serpent: Not against their persons, as they are his Creatures, but only
against their condition, disposition, and wicked conversation; we and the
Devil should never have fallen out, we agree but too well, but that God has
put an enmity between us. Yea in the last place, as God turned the treachery of
Judas, not only to the praise of his Justice, Mercy, etc. but to the good of
all believers, so he turns this Enmity of Satan and wicked men, to his
Childrens great advantage, and his own glory. The distinction of adversi^ties.
And hereupon is that distinction of adversities: as they come from Satan,
they are usually called temptations; as they come from men, persecutions; as
from God, afflictions. And well may he work good, by evil Instruments, when
every Prince, or Magistrate has the feat to make profitable Instruments,
as well of evil persons as of good: And each Physician can make poison
medicinable.

SECT 10.
The time when this war was proclaimed.
Q. This rub being removed, and the passage made clear: proceed in the ways of
your Text, and show me the time of this Enmity.

Ans. First I will make a distinction, and then give the Answer. The
circumstance of time is twofold; the time when it was proclaimed, And the time
that it is to continue.

1. If we consider the time when it was first proclaimed; It was immediately
after the fall* when Adam had newly sinned: not long after the Creation: even
when time it self was not a week old, as is probably conjectured by the learned.

2. The time that it is to continue.
2. If we consider the time that this Enmity is to continue, it is either
general, or particular; The general time is here set down in the Text
indefinitly, I will put Enmity between ^hee and the Woman, and between they
seed and her seed, which being without limitation, is to be understood largely,
and so signifies that it is perpetual without end, from the beginning of time*
to the end of all time, when time (says one) began, this malice first began,
nor will it end but with the latest Man: It is an everlasting Act of
Parliament, like a Statute in Magna Charta.

3 If we consider the time more strictly, 3. The time more strictly in regard
of the subject and object.
then it signifies in the Subject possessed of it, the whole time of a wicked
man's life: or if in time he becomes the Woman's seed by a new birth, then it
signifies that part of his life, which went before Regeneration: But in the
Object of it, for the whole time of a godly man's spiritual life, after he is
become the Woman's seed, even from the morning of his new birth, to the evening
of his departure hence, without intermission which makes the Psalmist cry out,
for thy sake are we killed all the day long, Psalm. 44.22.

Quest. What way we gleane from hence?

Answ. Some comfort, A Use of comfort.
in that this War shall once have an end: The Israellites shall not always
live under the Tyranny of Pharaoh, or travells of the Wilderness: Nor the seed
of the Woman always under this heavy yoke of affliction and persecution: for
Death shall free us from our sorrows, as well as from our sins, yea as this
is their time to persecute, ours to suffer, so their time will come to suffer,
ours to triumph, let me rather feel their malice, then be wrapped up in their
vengeance.

SECT. II.
The manner of their venting this enmity
Quest. WHat is their manner of venting this Enmity?

Answ. Satan the Prince of Darkness, and his adherents the wicked world: do war
against Christ and his Members two ways, by Persecutions, and by Persuasions,
under which two Generals, are comprised diverse and sundry particulars, which I
shall severally speak of, when I come to the Properties of this Enmity, In the
mean time we are to take notice, that all Satan's business was, and is (at,
and ever since the fall of Adam) to slay Soule^, 1 Peter 5.8. Job. 1.7. Neither
does he want Instruments in all places, The circumstance of place three-forld.
to further, and promote this his design.

Quest. Now a word of the place where.

Answ. The circumstance of place, is threefold.

1. If we consider the place strictly, in respect of the Subject in whom it
resides: then it is principally the heart of Man unsanctified. 2. If we
consider the place, where it was proclaimed, then it is Paradise, or the Garden
of Eden, as verse 23. shows. 3. But if we consider the place, where they
exercise this Enmity, then it is the place of this miserable world, where the
Church is Militant indeed, Revel. 12.7. It is said there was war in Heaven,
Michael and his Angels, fought against the Dragon: and the Dragon fought and
his Angels; But this cannot fitly be construed of Heaven in Heaven, but of
Heaven on Earth: For in Heaven the Church is triumphant, and the Devil in the
beginning was cast out of that Heaven, 2. Peter 2.4. And there is no Warfare,
but all welfare, no Jarr; but love and peace; yea such a peace, as passes all
understanding, So that by Heaven there, is meant, the Church of God on Earth;
called in holy Scripture Heaven, and holy Jerusalem above; for that her chief
treasure is in Heaven. Math. 6.20. her affections in Heaven. Colos. 3.2. her
Conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. and for that the Lord of Heaven, dwells in
her heart by faith. Ephesians. 3.17.
SECT. 12.
Quest. WHat is promised shall be the issue, or effect of it; and who shall get
the victory?

What will be the issue and who shall get the Victory.
Answ. The issue or effect is declared in these words; He shall bruise thine
head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The meaning whereof is this.

1. By bruising of the head, is meant Satan's overthrow, and final Ruin and
destruction by Christ, in respect of his Power, Dominion, and Works, John
12.31. and 1. John 3.8. to which purpose the words of the Apostle, are very
significant. What is meant by brusing the head.
He also himself took part of our flesh and blood that through death he
might destroy him, that had the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2.14.
And he being overcome, his seed are overcome, and perish with him, Revel. 12.9.
John 14.13.30. and 12, 31.32. And this is the first promise of grace, and life
made to Eve, and all mankind, now dead in sin, and enemies to God. Collos.
2.13. and 1.21. Neither is it only meant of Christ in his own person, but it
implies that all his Members, by resisting the Devil steadfastly through faith
in him, shall have victory also 1 Corinthians. 15.57. given them by the God of
peace, who shall bruise Satan under our feet shortly, as the Apostle speaks
plainly, Romans 16.20. Faith in the Lamb, shall put this roaring Lion to flight:
They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, Reve. 12.11.

Secondly by his heel bruising is meant, What by bruising the Heel.
1. First Christ's holy ways, which Satan should by all means (either of
Temptations, or Persecutions) seek to suppress: 2. And secondly his humane
Nature, which Satan should afflict all manner of ways, until he brought upon
him That Shameful, Death of the Cross, Ga^. 3.13. That Painful, and Death
of the Cross, Ga^. 3.13. That Cursed, Death of the Cross, Ga^. 3.13.



For then his heel was bruised, when his Body was crucified. And it was no
more then the bruising of his heel; his divine Nature being impassible and
untouched; where note that it was the politic malice of the Devil and the
World, that aimed by the death of the General, to disband the Army. So long as
Christ lived on earth, we read of no persecution against his Disciples, Math.
9.15. But let him be once removed, and then there is havoc made of the Church,
Stephen is stoned, Peter crucified, Paul beheaded, some strangled, some burned,
some broyled, some brained, all but only St. John murdered. And Thirdly it is
meant, that all who believed in Christ's name, shall suffer bruising, in one
kind or other for his sake: And then his heel is bruised, when his Members
are afflicted: But all the hurt they can do is, but to bruise the heel.

Bruise them in their Persons, Estates, Good Names;


For to hurt their best parts, their Souls, they shall never be able: yea all
this bruising in the end shall turn to the further good.

Of their Souls, Here in Grace, Hereafter in Glory.


And so you have the matter, the Author, the Subject, the Object, the Cause,
the End, the Time, the Manner, the Place, the Continuance, the Issue and
effects of this Enmity.

SECT. 13.
Quest. BY your opening of this Text, and unveyling of the terms: I see it
looks two several ways, and that it reaches out as it were with one hand,
a blessing to all believers, as well as a curse with the other to all wicked men
and Spirits.

Answ. Yea it is like a Checker; half white, half black.
Consisting as

Much of Mercy and Consolation, This text an epitomy of the whole Bible.
as Judgment and terror: resembling Moses who saved the Israelites, and slew
the Egyptians. For as harsh as the words sound, they are so full of grace, and
mercy; and contain so much in a little, that this text may well be called the
Gospells Epitome; yea the marrow, or pith of the whole Bible, compiled by
wisdom it self; A short, yet absolute Sum of all holy faith, yea the
foundation of all whatsoever the Prophets and Apostles have written, or
Ministers do preach; The key of the Scriptures, as Ambrose calls the Creed; It
is but of a short sound, but of a large extent; little in show, infinite in
sense.

In fine, it is so large for matter, so short for phrase, so profound for
depth, so sweet for Consolation, and yet so terrible for severity, that it well
suites with the Author who spoke the words and none else.

Quest. I perceive then, that to draw this Well dry, to dig this Mine to the
bottom, and to speak of each several, in this universe were an Herculean
work, and fit for some divine Theseus, or Solomon.

Besides it would require too large a vollume, for Common use: wherefore it
shall content me, you only Anatomize that part or Member of the whole which is
here termed Enmity, by laying open the veins, and Arteries thereof; it being
the very point, or mayn Center, the pole, or Cardinal Axeltree, upon which
this text moves, and is turned. And that will be sufficient: For where
prevailing is by lies, there discovery is victory; yet lest the Pages should
still grow, As fi^h into a multitude, garble your notions, and give us but the
very Marrow of the matter. Order and distribution of the whole book.
And because Method to the matter is as fashion to Apparel; and form to
building, propose what shall be your order of distribution.

Ans. As the Throne of Solomon was mounted unto, by six stairs: so this Throne
of Satan, this strong hold of the wicked, may be mounted unto (for I only
intend a discovery at this time) by a Ladder of six steps, set upon this ground
which is already laid, or if this original, be counted for one step, then the
Ladder consists of seven staves, answerable to the seven steps which led up to
that Temple in Ezekiels Vision, Ezekiel. 40.26. For

I will draw all our present discourse, to one of these heads: (taking liberty
so to place them, as may serve best for my purpose, and the Readers benefit.)
Viz. The Original, of Enmity. The Continuance, of Enmity. The Properties, of
Enmity. The Causes, Why wicked men hate and persecute the Godly. The Ends, Why
wicked men hate and persecute the Godly. The Reasons why, God permits them; The
Reasons why, The Godly suffer it so patiently.


These seven shall limit my speech, and your patient attention, and I take
them only to be inherent in the words, there be some short adherent
circumstances, which I shall salute as I pass, they may be within the
circumference, these are in the heart and Center; And these alone as I suppose,
may serve as spectacles, to see the Devil and his Works by, in the matter of
hatred and persecution.

SECT. 14
Quest. TO begin with the second point proposed (having dispatched the first)
and to proceed from Explication to Confirmation, The continuance of it in all
Ages.
and so to Application. How prove you that there has been in all Ages past, is
now, and ever shall be between these two Kings Satan and Christ, and their
Regiments, the wicked and the Godly, a perpetual War, Enmity and strife,
according to the Lords prediction or Proclamation?

Ans. For proof I could produce Testimonies and examples innumerable there
being scarce a Page in the Bible, which does not ^ither express or imply
somewhat touching this Enmity, yea as if the Scriptures contained nothing else,
the holy Ghost significantly calls them the book of the Battles of the Lord,
Numb. 21.14. as Rupertus well observes.

And because examples, give a quicker impression then Arguments: the proof
shall be by Induction of particular instances collected from the Scripures and
Ecclesiastical History, wherein I will be brief, and only mention, Three in
every Age (though the Sea of examples has no bottom) for that I shall be
forced to speak more at large when I come to the properties and Causes of
Enmity.

The continuance of the worlds Enmity in all Ages. Viz.
1. In the old world before the flood. 2. After the flood, before the Law. 3.
After the Law, before Christ. 4. Since the Gospel in the time of Christ and
his Apostles. 5. After the Apostles for the residue of the ten Persecutions. 6.
From the Primitive times and Infancy of the Church hitherto. 7. For these
present times wherein we live. 8. For the time to come unto the Worlds end.
1 It was before the Flood.
1. To begin with the first Age, Viz. the old World before the Flood. We read
of this War, enmity and strife between Cain and Abell, 1 John 3.12. Between
Lamech and the holy Seed, Genesis 4.23.24. and between those wicked Giants, which
Moses speaks of, and the sons of God, Genesis 6.2. to.12. Yea, those Giants bad
battle to Heaven, as our Mythologists add, to ver. 4.

SECT. 15.
2. AFter the Flood, 2 After the Flood before the Law.
before the Law, between all the men of Sodom and righteous Lot, Genesis
19.4.9.11. 2 Pet. 2.8. between Hagar and Ishmael, the Bond woman and her son,
and Sarah and Isaac, the Freewoman and her son, Genesis 21.9.10. Gal. 4.29. And
between Esau and Jacob, first in the womb, the more plainly to shadow out
this enmity, Genesis 25.22.23. and after they were borne, Genesis 27.41.

SECT. 16.
3. AFter the Law, 3 After the Law before Christ.
before Christ, between Doeg and the eighty five Priests, which he slew with
the edge of the sword, 1 Samuel 22.18.19. Between Iezabell and all the Prophets
of the Lord, which she destroyed, 1 Kings 18.13.14. And between the Heads in
Israel in Micahs time, and all that were good, Micah 3.2.

SECT. 17.
4 In the time of Christ and his Apostles.
4. SInce the Gospel, in the time of Christ and his Apostles this enmity so
manifested it self, not only in the Gentiles, but in the Jews, Gods ow^e
people, who first moved those persecutions against Christ and his Members, that
having beheaded John Baptist his Harbinger, and crucified himself the Lord of
life, we read, that of all the Twelve, none dyed a natural death save only
Saint John, and he also was banished by Domitian to Pathmos; and at another
time thrust into a Tun of seething Oil at Rome, as Tertullian and Saint Hierom
do report: See Acts 7.51. to 60. and 12.1. to 5. Romans 8.36. John 21.18.19.

What a multitude have suffered for professing Christ.
Now all these, besides many other of his Disciples, suffered martyrdom merely
for professing the faith of Christ; whereof some were stoned, some crucified,
some beheaded, some thrust through with Spears, some burnt with fire, with a
multitude of other Believers, for Ecclesiastical History makes mention of two
thousand which suffered the same day with Nicanor, Acts and Monuments, page 32.
which makes Saint Paul cry out, I think that God has set forth us the last
Apostles, as men appointed to death, 1 Corinthians. 4.9.

SECT 18.
5. AFter the Apostles, if we consider the residue of the ten Persecutions, 5.
After the Apostles in the time of the ten Persecutions.
raised by the Romans against the Christians, which was for three hundred
years, till the coming of godly Constantine, we find that under Dioclesian,
seaventeen thousand Christians, were slain in one month: amongst whom also was
Serena the Emperesse, yea under him and nine other Emperors, there was such an
innumerable company of innocent Christians put to death and tormented, that St.
Hierome (in his Epistle to Chromatius and Heliodorus) says, There is no one
day in the whole year unto which the number of five thousand Martyrs might not
be ascribed, except only the first day of January, who were put to the most
exquisite deaths and torments that ever the wit or malice of men, or Devils
could invent to inflict: we read of no less then twenty nine several deaths
that they were put unto, if no other be omitted.

SECT. 19.
6 From the primitive times hitherto.
6 FRom the primitive times and infancy of the Church hitherto the Turk and the
Pope have acted their parts, in shedding the blood of the Saints, as well as
the Jews and Roman Emperors: touching which, for brevities sake, I refer
you to the Book of Acts and Monuments. Yet because a taste may please some, I
will insert what the Holy Ghost has foretold in the Revelation, touching the
Pope, who calls himself Christ's Vicar and supreme Head of the Church: the
Angel, speaking of the Whore of Babylon, says, She was drunk with the blood
of the Saints and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Revell. 17.6. Which
in part was fulfilled in England, under the reign of Queen Mary, when in one
year, a hundred seventy six persons of good quality were burnt for Religion,
with many of the Common sort: and in France, for before these late bloody
Massacres, there were more then two hundred thousand which suffered Martyrdom
about Transubstantiation: For the chief persecutors of Christ and his
followers, are not Atheists, or Turks, or Jews, but such as hold great place
in the Church, Antichristians and Pseudochristians, which makes our Savior say
they shall excommunicate you, that is, they shall blot out your names from
among Gods people, or cast you out from the visible outward communion of the
Saints.

And indeed, Formal Christians the greatest persecutors of true Christians.
virtue has ever suffered most from those, which should and seem to uphold
her: and instruders upon other men's right can endure any man, how bad soever,
rather to live by them, then the servants of him whom they intrude upon, as you
may see, Mat. 21.33. to 39. where those Farmers of the Vineyard killed the
servants, who came to receive their Masters rent: they did not kill the Thieves
and Robbers, and spoylers of the Vineyard, but the servants; yea, and the Son
too, and the end of all was, that they might take the inheritance.

Yea, the godly have ever suffered most from such as profess the same Faith
and Religion with them. It has been the complaint almost of all the Fa^^ers
and Saints of God, which have written, that the faithful, in their several
times, were hated, traduced, calumniated, slandered reproached, accused,
persecuted and condemne^ of such as profess the same Religion with them,
(though under other pretenses, yet only fo their au^ier and holy lives, that
they stuck close to the truth, made conscience of their ways, and would not
rush so boldly into sin as others. Ecclesiastical History. lib. 6. Chap.
4.5.16.

SECT. 20.
7 In the times wherein we live.
7 TO come unto these present times wherein we live. Is the World mended with
age? Yea, I would to God we did not find, that as it is in the little world,
the older it grows the more diseased; so in the great world, the older the more
vicious; that the consummation of times and sins were not met together upon us.
But as commonly in a diseased body all the humors fall down into the Legs or
feet, and make an Issue there: so the corruption of all ages has sliden down
into this of ours, as into the feet. Many (says the Apostle) walk, that are
enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. If many in Saint Paul's time, more
now; for Satan, who was then bound is now loosed again out of his prison, and
has great wrath* because he knows he has but a short time, Revel. 12.12. To
speak only of the entertainment which piety finds among such as would be
counted (not only Christians but) Protestants, A holy life cannot escape
persecution.
which principally I intend. Is it possible for a man to live a conscionable
and unreprovable life, abstain from drunkenness, swearing, profaning the
Lords day, separate himself from evil, yea, wicked company, be zealous for
the glory of God, etc. Without being traduced, calumlumniated, hated, slandered
and persecuted for the same? No, it is not possible: for if our righteousness
do but exceed the righteousness of a swearer, or a drunkard, we are sure to
be persecuted for our righteousness, as Abel was persecuted of Caine, because
his Sacrifice was better than his. If a man walk with God, he is too precise:
if he will be more than almost a Christian, he is curious, fantastical,
factious, and shall be mocked with the Spirit, as if the spirit of God were a
spirit of dishonor and shame. How common a thing is it to wound all holiness
under the name of Puritan, a name so full of the Serpents enmity, as the egg
of a Cockatrice is full of poison? What should I say? The world is grown so
much knave, that it is now a vice to be honest. O the deplorable condition of
these times! Even the Devil himself durst not have been so impudent, as to
have scoft at holiness in those ancient and purer times: but now I could even
sink down with shame, to see Christianity every where so discountenanced: our
very names come into few mouths, out of which they return but with reproaches.
Amongst the rest of our sins, O God, be merciful to the contempt of thy
Servants.

True, blessed be God, and good laws, we suffer little but the lash of evil
tongues; but were wicked men's powers answerable to their wills and malice, they
would deliver us up to be afflicted, put us out of the Synagogues,
excommunicate and kill us, as our Savior shows, John 16.2.33. and Mat. 24.9.

Yea, This enmity makes them forget all ^^turall affection.
their enmity and hatred would be so virulent and bitter, that the brother
would betray the brother to death the Father, the Son, and the Children would
rise up against their Parents and cause them to dye, the kinsman against the
kinsman, and the friend against the friend, only for professing Christ's name,
and being religious, as himself affirms, Math. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 21.16.17.
Neither is it strange, for this was one of the ends of Christ's coming into
the World, as appears, Mat. 10.34.35. where himself says, Think not that I
am come to send Peace, but the sword; meaning between the seed of the Serpent
and the Seed of the Woman; for I am come to set a man at variance against his
Father, the daughter-in-Law against the Mother-in-Law, and a man's enemies shall
be they of his own household, Luke 12.51, 52, 53.

Neither want we precedents of this; For, by whom was upright Abel persecuted
and slain, but by his own brother Caine? Who scoffed at righteous Noah, but
his own son Cham? By whom was that virtuous and religious Lady Barbara put to
death, for embracing the Christian Faith, but by her own Father Dioscorus? Who
made Serena the Empress, a Martyr for her faith in Christ? but her own
Husband Dioclesian. Who helped to burn Bradford? but Bourne, whose life he had
formerly saved. And lastly, by whom was our Savior Christ betrayed, bu^ by his
own Disciple Judas?

SECT. 21.
8 It will continue so long as time continues.
8. FOr the time to come, As this strife and enmity in the wicked against the
Godly, was early in its entrance, taking its first being in the beginning of
time, and has constantly continued hitherto: so it will be long in
continuance, and endure to the end of time, as the Scripture shows: Yea, the
last remnants of time are likely to have the most of it, because as in them
love shall wax cold, Math. 24.12. so as love grows cold, contention grows
hot.

More expressly the Holy Ghost foretells, That in the last days shall come such
perilous times, that all who will live godly shall suffer persecution, and that
toward the end of the World there shall be scoffers, false accusers, cursed
speakers, fierce despisers of them that be good, such as shall turn the grace
of God into wantonness, and deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ;
And being fleshly, not having the Spirit, they shall speak evil of the things
which they know not; And whatsoever things they know naturally as bruit beasts,
which are without reason, in those things they shall corrupt themselves; And
that many shall follow their damnable ways, whereby the way of truth shall be
evil spoken off: And that as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses: so these also
shall resist the truth, being men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
Faith, being before of old, ordained to condemnation, 2 Timothy 3.1. to 13. 2.
Pet. 2.2. and 3.3. Jude 4.10. 16, 18, 19. And so much of the continuance.

Now to wind up with a word of Application: If it be so, that all the Godly
that have gone before us have been envyed, Application of the point.
hated, traduced, nicknamed, and persecuted by wicked men, and all that come
after us shall be; let no particular member of the Church look to fair better
then the whole body: we see the Patriarchs went this way, the Prophets this
way, the Apostles this way, the Martyrs this way, this way went all the Saints
and servants of God, and do we look for an easier way? Yea, if the dearest of
Gods Children in former ages have suffered so much for Christ, been put to
such cruel deaths and torments for keeping of a good conscience; let us praise
the Lord, who has dealt with us far otherwise; and pray for good Magistrates
to whom, next under God, we owe the thanks: Yea, if our Forefathers so
willingly underwent those fiery trials, let none for shame shrink-under the
burden of an aerie trial only.

2. If the brother persecute the brother, the son, the Father, the Parent his
Child, the Hnsband his Wife the Disciple his Lord, think it not strange to be
persecuted of any; for lightly they which are not persecuted, are persecutors
themselves.

SECT. 22.
Quest. HAving proved the Continuance of this Enmity in all ages, Twenty two
signs or properties of this enmity.
now tell us what be the Signs and Properties of it.

Ans. They are either Mental, Verbal or Actual.
The first whereof are inward and secret, the two later outward and manifest.

Quest. What are the mental properties, which you call inward and secret.

Ans. They are four in number.

It being their manor 1. To envy the good Estate of the Godly. 2. To contemn
the mean Estate of the Godly. 3. To rejoice at the evil Estate of the Godly.
4. To hate them.


First, it is (...) ner of wicked men, out of Enmity to envy the virtuous and
good estate of the godly: 1 They envy the Godly.
For envy shall lead the Troop, as Judas lead the Soldiers; and it may
challenge the first place in the right hand file (as pride does in the Popes
Catalogue of the seven deadly sins) because it was the eldest and first
borne sin that ever was in the Devil, after he was cast out of Heaven, and the
first that ever he begat upon our nature, after we were cast out of Paradise;
which makes St. Austin therefore call it (as by a kind of excellency) the
Devils sin. Thus Caine envied his brother Abel, Genesis 4.5. Saul, David, 1 Samuel
18.28.29. and those unbeleeving Jews, Paul, Acts 17.13. The wicked take as
much delight to see the virtuous life of an holy man, as sore eyes do to look
upon the Sun. How contrary are good Angels and evil men? The Angels rejoice
at that, whereat these powte and stomach; they are ready to cry and burst for
Anger, at that which makes music in Heaven. Envy the Devils cogni^ance as
love is Christ's.
But why is it? These Antipodes to virtue, having lost all good themselves, are
vexed to see it in another: a true note to know the Serpents Seed by, for it is
the Devils cognizance, 1. John 3.14, 15. as Love is Christ's, John 13.35.

And as it is the very Lees of vice; so it has a punishment answerable: for by
a just judgment of God, their own malice turns back into their own bowels,
as it is Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. and slays them, as the swords of Gideons
enemies killed themselves, Judges 7.22. For that none might have cause to envy
the envious man again, but all to pity him; envy it self is a fire, which
consumes that fuel; a Worm which gnaweth that gourd; a viper, which eats
through those bowels; a Moath, which fretteth that garment wherein it is bred,
nourished and maintained; it is the consuming of the flesh, and rotting of the
bones: Prove. 14 30.

And for hereafter, if wicked men thus envy the virtuous and good estate of the
godly in this World, which is but their Hell, or at least their Purgatory; How
will it gall them, when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets and Saints of God in the Kingdom of Heaven, and themselves thrust
out of doors, and cast into the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone?

This shall make them gnash their teeth for envy, as our Savior shows, Luke
13.28. Math. 8.11.12. but how just is it with God, that this fire of envy
should be punished with the fire of Hell!

SECT. 23.
2 They contemn them which is not for (...) of ignorance
2. SEcondly, it is their manner and property to contemn the supposed mean
estate of the godly, as Samballat, Tobiah and Gershom, with the rest of that
crew, contemned Nehemiah and the Jews, Nehem. 4.1.2, 3. Thus Rabshakeh
contemned Hezekiah and his people, 2 Kings 18.19. to 36. and the Epicurean
Philosophers Paul, Acts, 17.18.

Whereas misery, with good natures, is made a loadstone of mercy; with base
minds, it is contrarily made a footstool for pride to trample on; and nothing
so midnights the soul of him that is fallen, as scorn and contempt.

But you may observe that arrogance is a weed that ever grows on a dunghill,
and from the rankness of that soil, she has her height and spreadings; for
they are but puffed minds, and frothy wits, that get so to the top, and bubble
thus above inferiors. As what makes them contemn us, but, together with
pride, their ignorance? For alass^, they take notice of our misery, not of our
happiness. Noah's virtues are not Chams admiration; but his drunkenness is his
sport. Wicked men are like those ill taught children, 2 King. 2.24. that could
upbraid Elisha with his bald head, but had not the wit to consider how God had
crowned that head with virtue and honor. O that they could but see all, that
they would but say all: as Ephialtes, when one cast him in the teeth with his
poverty, answered, Why do thou not make rehearsal of other things also, as
that I love law, and regard right? But indeed, this were to clean our faces,
and foul their own.

But let them insult for a while, they cannot sit upon so high a cogge, but may
with turning prove the lowest in the Wheel: as it fell out with Hammon, who
being now made Lackey to a despised Jew, begins to envy, where half an hour
since he had scorned; and misery, like a Vulture, must have some body to prey
upon. There is a continual vicissitude of things: The Righteous is delivered
out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead, Prove. 11.8. The wicked
shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright,
Prove. 21.18.

SECT. 24.
3. THirdly, it is their manner, to rejoice at the supposed evil estate of the
godly, 3 they rejoice at our supposed evil estate.
as the Princes of the Philistims did at Sampsons blindness and bondage, whom
they insulted over, and made their laughing stock, Judge. 16.25. Peninna at
Hannahs barrenness, especially when she went up to the house of the Lord, 1.
Sam. 1.6.7. And the Jews at the Disciples, and the rest of the Church, when
Herod vexed some, and slew others, Acts 12.1.2, 3. Wicked men feed themselves
with others adversity, as Beetles are fed with their fellows dung: and like
Flesh-flies, make the wounds of Gods children their chief nourishment: Yea,
Crocodile-like, they would, if they might, fatten themselves with the warmest
blood of godly men's lives. But most if they see us sin.


And not so only; for we have a generation, whose only rejoicing is,
Cham-like, to see another fall into some gross sin, or infirmity: Yea, as
Luther speaks, they hunger and thirst after the scandals of the godly: and if
at any time through humane frailty, they do fall into some evil, like hungry
Hogs, they muzzle in their excrements, and feast upon them, as upon dainties;
there being nothing that so glads their hearts, that so opens their mouths with
so much insolency and triumph; as what cure will they take to spread the same
abroad by a common fame: Yea, it were well, if they would not play the Curres,
and open when they are able to sp^ing no Game.

But they must needs be filthy creatures, that feed upon nothing but
corruption. To delight in men's sins, is the sport of devils: recovery from
those sins, is the joy of good men and Angels. Cham derides his Fathers
nakedness; it should have been his sorrow: he makes it his sport. But it is
ill for a man to make himself merry, with that which angers God.

SECT. 25.
4 They hate the godly.
4. IT is their manner to hate the religious, as all carnal men hate the
members of Christ, Matthew. 10.22. thus Ahab hated Eliah, as himself confessed,
1 King. 22.8. Yea, so inveterately, that there was not one Kingdom or Nation,
where he had not sent to take away his life, 1 King. 18.10. and Haman Mordecai,
which was so deadly, that he thought it too little to lay hands on Mordecai
only; Their hatred extends to the whole generation of the Godly.
wherefore he sought to destroy all the Jews, the people of Mordecai, that
were throughout the whole Kingdom of Abashuerus, Hest. 3-5, 6. For the
effecting of which, he obtained that bloody Edict, ver. 6.9. And lest it should
want success, he offered ten thousand Talents of silver into the Kings
Treasury, to have it effected. Hest. 3.9.13. And such another was cruel
Arundel, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury; who vowed and swore, he would not
leave a slip of Professors in this Land; For you must know, That their hatred
extends not to this, or that person alone, but to the whole generation of
Gods Children and people. As what says the wicked in David's time? Come, let us
cut them off from being a Nation and, let the name of Israel be no more in
remembrance. Let us take for our possessions the habitations of God, Psa.
83.4.12

And the World is no changling; for this age wants not many such Hamans and
Arundels, But they have not so much authority as malice. Though their
punishment shall be never the less.
who so hate the Children of God, that they wish, as Caligula once did of the
Romans, That they had all but one neck that so they might cut it off at a blow,
where it in their power, Mic. 3.2. Ps. 83.4

But our comfort is, they have not so much authority as malice; resembling the
Serpent Porphyrus, which abounds with poison, but can hurt none, for want of
teeth: Though their punishment shall be never the less. For as the will to do
God acceptable service, is accepted, as if it were service indeed: so the
intent and offer of wrong shall be judged for wrong, in that Court of justice.
Good and evil thoughts and desires in Gods account are good and evil works:
And so much touching the Mental properties of this enmity.

5 They murmr against the godly and God himself.
SECT. 26.
Quest. WHat are their Verbal properties?

Ans. They are Eleven in number: And are manifested.

1. In murmuring against the persons of the Godly. 2. In misconstruing of their
actions and intentions. 3. In carrying tales of them to others. 4. In
persuading others against them. 5. In scoffing at them. 6. In nicknaming them.
7. In railing on them. 8. In raising slanders of them. 9. In cursing them. 10.
In threatening of them. 11. In undermining of them by flattery.
First, ungodly men verbally manifest their enmity by murmuring against the
Children of God: as Labans sons murmured against Jacob, Genesis 31.1. The
Israelites against Moses and Aaron; Yea, against God himself; for which, the
utmost part of the Host was consumed with fire from Heaven, Number. 11.1. and
14.2, 3. And lastly, the laborers in the Vineyard against the Master of the
house, and their fellows, Matthew. 20.11, 12.

And have not we the like murmurers? O that so many Loaves and Fishes, as did
feed five thousand in the Wilderness, would but stop their mouths, who
amongst us do both vex at others plenty of grace, and their own want! that
do murmr against the godly, For being better then them selves.
even for no other cause, but that they alone should be the men in whom no
crime, or fault scandalous can justly be found: that make it their Grace, both
before and after dinner, to disgrace some Innocent.

But so it is, That the baggage World desires nothing more, then to scarre the
face that is fairer then her self: whence she takes occasion, in every
company, to ^rect the faylings of holy men very high, like Saint Paul's, for the
gaze of all; whereas they hide their good parts under ground, They have a great
advantage of the godly.
like Saint Faiths, that none may note them.

Wherein also is another disadvantage, that cannot be helped. The multitude
will sooner believe them, then our selves. Affirmations being ap^er to win
belief, then Negatives are to uncredit them: whereby ^t falls out, that Piety
is every where pusht at, an^ the religious murmured at, and clamoured against
in all places.

Their miserable condition.
If such men would know their wages: let them look, 2 Pet. 2.12. and there they
shall find, that as their tongues have walked against Heaven, so they shall be
confined to Hell: And in the mean time, Cursed is he (says the Holy Ghost)
that smites his neighbor secretly; and let all the people say, Amen, Deuteronomy.
27.24.

SECT. 27.
6 They sensure our actions and mis-consture our inteutions
2. BY Censuring their actions, and mis-construing their intentions^ as Eliab:
did David's zeal for Gods glory to be pride and malice, 1 Samuel 17.28. And those
wicked ones, his fasting and mourning to be Hypocrisy, Psalm. 35.13. to 17.
Thus Jobs friends condemned him for an Hypocrite, Job 4.6. to 11. And the
Jews, Christianity to be Heresy; and Paul, the Preacher of it, a pestilent
fellow, a mover of sedition, and maintainer of schism; yea, all the Disciples
to be deceivers, 2 Cor. 6.8.

And thus too many in our days, will definitively censure men for Hypocrites,
whom they scarce know superficially: Yea, (which is worse) only because their
works are good.

Prejudice casts a false color upon the best actions: Prejudice blindes them.
and Baseness, what it cannot attain to, it will vellicate and deprave. But
what says Sincerity? While my conscience is innocent, the Worlds suppositions
cannot make me culpable: Let me rather, with Eliah and Micah, do well, and
hear ill* then, with Ahab and Iezabel, do ill and be flattered.

The Accuser of the Brethren makes choice of wicked men, They traduce who^ they
cannot seduce
to t^aduce those whom he cannot seduce as he desires; as we may plainly see
in our Saviors example; who notwithstanding he fulfilled all righteousness,
and did all things well; for in his mouth was found no guile, nor fault in his
manners, nor error in his doctrine; Which of you (said he) can rebuke me of
sin? Yet the world traduced him for a Samaritan, a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, a
wine-bibber, an enemy to Caesar, and what not?

A Deceiver and yet true, was S. Paul's Motto, 2 Cor. 6.8, etc. And as it was
then, so it is now.

Wicked men deal with the Godly, as sometimes a lustful person will do by a
chaste woman, when he cannot take away her honesty, he will take away her
credit; brag of effecting his will with her, when yet he could never have
admittance into her company.

They condemn others, that themselves may be justified.
Bad natures, whom they cannot reach by imitation, they will by detraction: like
the Fox, what they cannot attain to, they will depresse, and seem to despise:
their cunning is to condemn others, that themselves may be justified. As
Caligula took off the heads from the Images of the gods, to set up his own: Or
as Merchants, who to raise the price of their own commodities, will beat down
the prices of others.

And have they not reason thus to do? Yes: for how is a vicious person
discredited, and made contemptible, by the virtuous life of an holy man? We
know straight lines help to show the crooked. And it is easy to guess, the
Pharaohs fat Kine made the lean ones more ill-favored. A swarthy and
hard-featured visage, loves not the company of clear beauties.

Again, They judge others by themselves
another reason is, They judge others by themselves: now they do all their
good in hypocrisy, and so thereafter judge of others. Saint Chrysostom has
given the Rule, As it is a hard thing (says he) for one to suspect another to
be evil who is good himself: so it is as hard for him to suppose another to be
good, who is himself ill. And we see it fulfilled in Nero, who verily
believed, that all men were foul libidinists, because himself was such an one.

SECT. 28.
3. WIcked men manifest their enmity against the religious, 7 They carry tales
of us to the Rulers.
by carrying tales of them unto others: as Cham carried tales to his brethren
of Noah's nakedness, his tongue was the trumpet to sound forth his Fathers
shame, Genesis 9.22. Thus Doeg carried tales to Saul of David, and Ahimelech, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10. and the Zip^ins, two several times brought tidings to Saul,
where David had hid himself, to the end Saul might slay him, 1 Samuel, 23.19, 20.
and 26.1. And those Libertines, with other suborned men against Steven, to the
Counsel of Priests, Acts 6.8. to 15.

And of this burden many amongst us are in continual travel. For how
frequently do debauched Drunkards, and incorrigible sinners (resembling their
father the Devil, who both by name Revel. 12.10. and by nature, Job. 1.7, 8,
9. is a continual Accuser of the brethren) carry tales to their fellows, of
such as will not consort with them? yea, of their faithful Ministers,
especially if he thunders in his doctrine, and lightens in his conversation,
as Gregory Nazianzen speaks of Basil? Yea, and think they do as good service
in it, as Secretaries, and Espialls of Princes, do to the State, when they
bring in bills of intelligence?

Charge us with many things but prove nothing
But do they, as they ought, with an upright mind tell both our virtues and
vices impartially, as Swetonius writes of the twelve Caesar's, and so leave the
upshot to collection? No, but rather, as the Jews did by Paul, Acts 24. charge
us with many things, as that we are pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, and
maintainers of Schism, but proving nothing, verse 13. And indeed, how should
they, when every word they speak is a slander? Or if otherwise, they look on
our infirmities, they look not on our graces, They pass over our good parts
on our repentance? No these Flies skip over all a man's sound parts, I mean
his excellencies; to fasten on a scab, or ulcer; resembling our
Prognosticators, that are more diligent to make mention of foul weather than
of fair; storms and thunder they much harp upon, but calm and serene days
pass them un-observed: whereas an ingenious nature would pass over the evil
where he finds more good; considering we are full of faults by nature; good,
not without our care and industery; for a mind well qualified, is often
beholding to the industry of the owner: and Ulysses as Homer relates, was so
applauded for the accutenesse of an ingenious mind, that men spared to object
unto him the deformity of his body.

But these contrarily, for want of matter to expect against, will coin it of
their own heads. They will coin matter to accuse us.
And that they may deliver themselves with the greater Emphasis, will affirm
as that Gymnosophist in Plutarch did, of those Orators to Alexander, That every
one of them does exceed his fellows, and swear that the matter is so clear
and manifest, that all the Town rings of him (meaning the good fellows of the
Town) and to speak truth, the parties faults are so clear and evident, that
you may see them as well in the dark, as with a candel, as appears by the
sequel. For ^re there not some godly and faithful, both Christians and
Preachers, that have been often (I say not ninety five times) accused by them,
as Aristophanes was by the Athenians, and every time found innocent? though no
thanks to their accusers, for they endeavor all they can to corrupt such as
hear them, and fore-stall their judgments against the good and goodness.

How to hear the talebearer.
O that men were so wise, as to hear the talebearer with indignation, examine
before they trust, believe his reports, if infallibly true, with
unwillingnesse, acknowledge it with grief, hide our neighbors faults with
honest excuses, and bury them in silence: for commonly it fares with the first
relator, as it does with a stone thrown into the water, which of it self
makes but one circle, but that one begets a hundred, and so both offends and
infects many others, but always prooves himself to be uncharitable. It were
good for other men if tale-bearers would consider this, but better for
themselves.

True, No music so sweet as to hear well of themselves ill of the religious.
the wise and honest are able, as so many Angels of God, to discern truth from
slander; though to the grief of many good hearts, no music can be so sweet to
the ears of others, as to hear well of themselves, ill of the Religious.

And these, as they often set the former on work, so they are resolutely
opinionated in believing of lies (as Saint Austin speaks of the
Priscillianists) whereby they supererogate of Satan.

But what is the end of these tale-bearers, The tale-bearers end.
and informers against good men? Follow them to their ends, and you shall see,
that if ever the Lord open their eyes to see this their fact, they are even in
this life rewarded with the strappadoes of an humane soul, rackt in
conscience, and tortured with the very flashes of Hell fire, and not seldom
forced to lay violent hands upon themselves, being never well, nor in their
own place, till they be in Hell, Acts 1.25.

SECT. 29.
3 They give divelish council against us.
4. IT is their manner to persuade and give devilish counsel to others, like
themselves, to persecute the godly, as Balaam gave wicked council to Balack
against the Children of Israel. when he could not be suffered to curse them,
Revel. 2.14. Th^s the Princes and Rulers did to Zedekiah the King against
Jeremiah, saying, We beseech you, let this man be put to death for thus he
weakneth the hands of the men of War, etc. Ier. 38.4. and the Jews of
Thessalonica to the people of Berea against Paul, Acts 17.13.

That the enemies of the Cross of Christ, are still accustomed to deal after
this manner with the religious, I need not demonstrate; plain things, which our
selves are daily witnesses of, need no proof. Only note their matchless
malice herein; They dazell men's eyes with false accutions.
who, that they may be sure to prevail, first dazell their friends eyes with
false accusations against us, as true and certain, as that Naboth did blaspheme
God and the King; and their associates are as sure of it, as Darius was, that
the Idol Bell did eat and drink every day forty Sheep, twelve Kakes, and six
great pots of Wine, because threescore and ten of the Priests gave it out so:
And that their mortal enmity may be taken for a zeal of the Churches good, as
Judas would have his covetousness taken for Charity, John 12.6. And the
Pharisees their Cruelty thought Piety, Matthew. 23.14. All the reproaches that
the Devil, and these his Scavengers, can rake out of the Channels, of Hell,
Their matchless malice in slandering us.
shall be flung in our faces, the worst language that has ever been dipped in
the forge, or tipped at the fire of Hell, shall be bestowed upon us; wherein they
resemble those ancient enemies of the Gospel, who clad the Martyrs in the skins
of wild Beasts, to animate the Dogs to tear them.

This evil world hating true Christians (as it did Christ) without a cause;
readily takes up Arms against the most innocent, and so clothing them with
pretended causes, to color that her hatred, (For as no man loves evil, but
under the show of good: so no man will appear to hate what is good, but under
the appearance of evil.) Truth it self is arraigned, as a deceiver: And he by
whom Kings reign, represented as an enemy to Caesar: and under such
representations to the people, he is crucified by them.

The Prelates more ready to yield their aid then the rude rabble to ask it.
Though perhaps this is more then needs, for not seldom the counseled are more
ready to yield their aid, then they are to ask it; being of Maximinus his
humor, who seeing none offer themselves, set on work certain vile persons to
accuse the Christians of heinous crimes, that so he might persecute them with
more show of reason; for that one may supply the others defects, the first
finds an head, the second a tongue, the third hands: As Ulysses may contrive,
but Diomedes must through with it: so altogether deal with the poor Minister,
or Christian, as the Soldiers did with Christ, first blind him, then strike
him, and last ask him, Who is it that smote thee? And he may answer the best
man of them, It was thou, O mine enemy, thou wast an Achitophel in the one, a
Doeg in the other, a Belial in both. And let such men know, that this their
instigation will end at last, either in anguish or confusion, tears or torment
will become their recompense.

SECT. 30.
5. IT is the manner and custom of wicked men to scoff at the righteous, 9.
They flout and scoff at the godly.
as Ishmael scoft at Isaac, Genesis 21.9. Rabshakeh at Hezekiah, and his people, 2
Kings 18.27. And the Philosophers at Paul, Acts 17.18 to 21.

And to this day the world is too full of scoffing Atheists, and mockers of
Piety. Michal was barren, yet she has too many children, that scorn holy
exercises; every household almost has some in it, if not many, of the brood of
Cham and Ishmael: so that if any one refrain from impiety, refuse to do as the
rest in all excess of riot, They so hate righteousness, that they hate men
for it.
he is made both their prey and laughing stock: Yea, if he be so bold as to
preach righteousness to them, by voice or by example, there is instantly some
Tobiah, or Sanballat, steps up to flout him. They so hate righteousness, that
they will hate a man for it, and say of good living, as Festus did of great
learning, it makes a man mad. But they cannot know who are sober, They think us
mad, we know them to be mad.
that are mad themselves. Achish and his Courtiers thought David mad, yet he
was the wisest man amongst them. Yea, as old men answer young men, You think
us fools, but we know you are not wise: so answer we these, You think us mad
that are so hot against sins, but we know you mad that are so cold for your
souls.

Dogs will bark at the Moon: and what all men commend, you have some
Thersites take delight to blast. Lot vexed himself because he saw men bad:
these, because men are good: not because Gods Law is broken, but because others
keep it better then themselves. They are zealous against all that are zealous.
But these are brinish and ill made candles, which so sparkle and spit at
others: it is a cursed zeal in these men, to malign the good zeal of all men.

But let them alone, they need no help to be miserable: They scoff at us, God
laughes at them.
for as they scoff at us, so God laughs at them, He that sits in the
Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2.4. Yea,
Judgments are prepared for these scorners, and stripes for the backs of these
fools, Prove. 19.29. God shall rain down fire and brimstone upon such scorners
of his word, and blasphemers of his people as thou art, said Mr. Philpot the
Martyr, to mocking Morgan and the rest of his persecuters.

If they smart not here, as Cham did, whose scoffing only brought his Fathers
Curse, and Gods upon that: And the two and forty children who were devoured of
wild Bears for scoffing at Elishas bald head, Their punishments.
2 King. 2.24. and Foelix, who for one malicious scoff, did nothing day and
night but vomit blood, till his unhappy soul was fetched from his wretched
carcass: And Pherecydes, who was consumed by worms alive, for giving Religion
but a nickname; a small matter if thou may be made Judge. And Lucian, who
for barking against Religion like a Dog, was by a just judgment of God,
devoured of Dogs.

For this let me tell them, No greater Argument of a foul soul
what ever the D^vil blinding them, they think there cannot be a greater
Argument of a foul soul, then the deriding of religious services: Yea, to be
a scoffer, is the depth of sin: such an one is upon the very threshold of Hell,
as being set down in a resolute contempt of all goodness.

SECT. 31.
10. They use to nickname the godly.
6. IT is their manner and property to nickname the godly, as Ahab nicknamed
Eliah, the troubler of Israel, 1 Kings 18.17. The wicked, Job and David
hypocrites, Psalm 35.13.14. Job 4.6. to 11. The Courtiers, Jeremiah an enemy to
the Commonwealth of Israel. The Jews, Paul a factions and seditious fellow,
Acts 24.14. Yea, they termed all the Disciples Sectaries, Schismatickes,
subverters of the State, etc. 1 Cor. 4.9.10.

It is the Devil that speaks in and by them.
And the same Devil, who spoke in Ahab, and those wicked ones of old, now
speaks in our loose Libertines, who nickname the conscionable, Puritanes, and
seditious persons: For do but examine who they be which cast these aspersions
upon the godly, and you shall find, that the hand of Ioab, I mean the Devil,
is in this business. Alas, poor souls! they are but set on by that subtle
Serpent, as Zebede was by her sons, Matthew. 20.20. Mark. 10.35. It is but his
heart in their lips.

And Satan has ever found it infinitely successful, Nothig has proved more
successful to Satan, then lies.
to give every vice a title, and every virtue a disgrace; for still he has
found, that the rude and unstable multitude, only look upon the vizard and
outside of things, which he pleases to put upon them, and so judge according
to appearance, not righteous judgment.

Neither does the Devil only gain by fastening reproachful nicknames upon
the religious, but his servants gain too; much like the Thief, who meeting
with a full purse, not only takes it away, but returns a stab: For in making
virtue contemptible, and in depraving the godly, they are at least upon even
ground with them, if they have not the better: For were all the world ugly,
deformity would be no monster. Among the Myconians baldness is no unseemly
thing, Wicked men think to grace themselves by disgracing the godly.
because all there are born bald: and hereupon infamous persons love to
mitigate their own shame, with others discredit. As AEsops Fox, when she had
lost her tail, would have redeemed her shame, by persuading all her
fellow-Foxes to cut of theirs; yea, by despressing the good, they may possibly
get the start of them. Even Heliogabulus, that beastly monster, thought to make
hims^^^e the sole God, and be only worsh^^pped, by banishing all other
Religions o^t of the World.

^^t let these depravers take heed, lest im^^^ting the fact of Censor Fulvius,
wh^^ untiled Iunos Temple to cover his ow^^ house, they partake of the like
judgment, run mad, and dye despairing*

SECT. 32.
11 They revile and rail on the godly. Because the Law binds their hands they
smit with their tongues.
7 IT is their manner to revile and rail on them, as Goliath reviled and rayled
on the Host of Israel, and their God, 1 Samuel, 17.45. Shimei, upon David, calling
him murderer, and wicked m^n, 2 Samuel 16.7. And likewise the mig^^y men, Psalm.
31.13. And the Jews upon Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.45.

Calumny is every good man's Lackey, which follows him wheresoever he goes;
for the Devil has his servants in every corner; and rotten Lungs can never
send forth sweet breath. If the Law bind their hands, yet they will be smiting
with their tongues: and if the Law keep them in awe for smitting on the mouth,
yet they will do what they dare,, they will smite with the mouth.

It is with these men, They speak evil of us because they cannot do evil to us.
as it was with Zoilus, that common slanderer, who being demanded why he spoke
evil of such and such, answered, because I cannot do them evil: or else,
like another Parisian Vigils, we should feel their swords, before we heard
their alarums. When the Devils hands are bound, he vomits a flood of
reproaches with his tongue Revel. 12.15. What say they? Since we cannot attain
to their virtues, let us revenge our selves with railing against them.

It is not for nothing, How fitly they are termed dogs.
that wicked men are so often is Scripture called Dogs, as Psalm. 59.6. deliver
my soul, or my darling, from the power of the Dog: and they make a noise like
a Dog, and go round about the City, Beware of Dogs, says S. Paul, Philip.
3.2. which either grin with malice, or bark with reproaches, or bite with
mischief.

But blessed be God, although some of these Dogs have teeth like swords, and
jaws like knives, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 30.14. And smite cruelly, as Jeremy
complains, Chap. 18.18. which deserve, like Shepherds Curres, to have their
teeth beaten out, Their words are to be ^lighted.
to prevent their biting; yea, and their chaps muzled, for fear of opening;
yet most of them are tooth-lesse Curres, which though they bark, yet they
cannot bite; and cowardly Curres, for if you note such an one, he seldom
unbuttons his tumoured breast, but when he finds none to oppose the bigness of
his looks and tongue.

And for such our only way is, either to slight them, as King Philip did
Nicanor in the like case; who being told by Smitichus of his evil reports and
raylings, answered, Nicanor is not esteemed by the worst in Macedonia.

Or else stop their mouths with some good turn, as AEneas, in the fiction,
cast Cerberus the hell-hound a sweet morsel, that he might not bark against
him. The door, when it has been oyled, leaves creaking; and this is good
policy: for barking Curres oft-times great mastiffs wake.

But as if the term of Dog, were of too narrow extent, Foul m^uthed men
and women are devils in the Scripture phrase.
the Scripture elsewhere calls them Devils. Saint Pau^, 2 Timothy 3.3. (as Bishop
Andrews observes from the Original) foretells, that in the latter days there
shall be men Devils, foul mouthed men, evil speakers, and 1 Timothy 3 11 he
speaks of women-devils, whose speeches are calumnious. And wherefore is the
Devil called by that name, but by reason of his foul mouth in defaming? Yea A
Calumny, says one of the Fathers, is the Devils mind in the mouth of a man,
Satan's heart in their lips.
his arrow shot by man's bow; he lends him his lies and malice, and borrows
his tongue to utter them because the Devil wants a tongue.

I close up this point with those words of the Prophet, either convert the
persons or confound the lying lips, O God, that speak against the righteous.

SECT. 33.
8. IT is their man^er to raise slanders of the godly, 12.They raise slanders
of the godly.
as those wicked men slandered Naboth, saying, he has blasphemed God and the
King, confirming the same with an oath, 1 Kings 21. Thus the wicked slandered
David, Psalm. 57.4. And the multitude John Baptist, saying he had a Devil,
Matthew. 11.18.

It is Satan's policy (because report both makes jealousies, Evil reports both
make and increase iealousies, and disable us from discerning the truth.
where there are none, and increases those that are) to abuse our ears in
hearing, our tongues in speaking, and our hearts in believing lies, to disable
us from discerning the truth.

Yea, this stratagem of raising slanders upon good men, like a huge and mighty
Polyphems, has done such service to the uncircumcised, that examples thereof
in Scripture are like moats in the Sun: and it were easy to parallel former
ages with this of ours, for well may we take up those words of the Psalmist,
Slanderers Satan's best servants
The wicked bend their bow, and make ready their arrows upon the string, that
they may secretly shoot at them which are upright in heart, Psalm 11.2.

Innocence is no shelter against evil tongues. Malice never regards how true
any accusation is, but how spiteful.

And great wits are not more ready, Great wits not apter to raise slanders then
oaths to believe them.
with the high Priests and Elders, Matthew. 28.12, 13. to raise these slanders,
then the common sort are apt to believe the same; as we see by our Saviors
example, ver. 15. And how many particular persons know, to their smart, that a
slander once raised will scarce ever dye; for coming once into the mouth of
the vulgar, true or false, like wildfire it can never be quenched; for even
death it self, which delivers a man from all other enemies, A slander once
raised never dies.
is not able to deliver him from this of the tongue. Whereas Truth has much
ado to be believed, a lie runs far before it can be stayed.

However, At least it leaves a scar of suspicion behind.
a man once wounded in his good name, is not cured without scarres of
suspicion. Yea, commonly, as a little ball rolled in the snow gathers it self
to a great lump: so the report that is but a little spark at first, proves a
great flame, by that it has past through many mouths.

But did not men's own wickedness blind them, were they not absolutely turned
fools, they would thus argue: Not he that is accused, but he that is convicted
is guilty, Wise men will examine before they believe.
as Lactantius has it. In the Chancery are many accusations they never mean
to prove: Neither does any Law condenme a man, till he comes to his answer.
Upright Cato was fifty times undeservedly indicted and accused by his fellow
Citizens, yet was every time acquitted and found innocent.

The Orator Tertullus, when he would plead against Paul, says, We have found
this man a pestilent fellow, Acts 24.5. But, if you mark it, this foolish
Tertul^us mistook the antidote for the poison, the remedy for the disease:
Indeed, he has some wit in his anger, and so have his followers in slandering
such as excel in virtue: for whereas formerly the splendour of the others
virtues has obscured the meannesse of their credit, as the lesser light of a
candle is obscured by the greater light of the Sun: so now by clouding and
depraving him and all his fellows, himself shall be judged virtuous, very
cheap, accounted a man of honesty and honor, though a Paricide or a
sacrilegious person.

And is it not good policy for a swinish drunkard, Their policy in slandering
us.
or a beastly liver to fling dirt in a holy man's face, when, first, any color
seems the fairer, when as black is by? Secondly, when (being conscious of
their own defects) by this means they draw away men's thoughts, and
consideration of the beholders, from climbing up into their faults, while they
are fixed and busied upon a new object? One color we know, being laid upon
another, does away the former, and remains it self. The thief most forward to
cry stop thief.
A Cutpurse in a throng, when he has committed the fact, will cry out, my
Masters, take heed of your purses; and he that is pursued will cry, stop
thief, that by this means he may escape unattached.

SECT. 34.
9. IT is usual with them to Curse the godly, 13. They will curse the godly.
as Goliath cursed David, 1 Samuel 17.43. And also Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.7. to 15.
Thus the Heathen cursed Israel, Zach. 8.13. And thus wicked in all ages shall
be so drunk with malice, that they shall spew out cursing and slander against
the godly, as our Savior has foretold, Mat. 5.44.

And experience proves, that not a few amongst us do steep their words in hate
and curses against the good, carrying this deadly poison, these arrows, swords,
knives, razors in their mouths, wherewith to interlace their discourse,
whether in reviling the present, or backbiting the absent.

There is a generation (pity they should be called Christians) all whose
Prayers are Curses, and all their relations lies: Or if sometimes they lend the
truth their voice, Wicked men lie when they speak the truth.
they are but false witnesses in speaking of it; for their hearts are of
another judgment. As let them say with their mouths, I believe in God, or Our
Father which art in Heaven, or God spoke these words, etc. even in this they
lie, for in their hearts they think there is no God at all: or if with their
hearts they believe, and with their tongues confess that there is a God, at
least by their works they deny him, and the power of his word. So that all the
difference between them, and very infidels, is only this, the one are infidels
in their hearts, the other are infidels in their lives, as Augustine pithily.

And what is the reason they curse us, As they belong to hell, so they speak the
language.
but this? They are the Devils best scholars, and of his highest Form; the
language of Hell is so familiar unto them, that they speak not a word of our
Country language: And indeed, how should they speak the language of Canaan,
to whom blasphemy is become the mother tongue?

Secondly, They that curse us would kill us if they durst.
they curse us because they cannot be suffered to kill us; for in heart and
Gods account they are no better then murderers; nor will it be any rare thing
at the day of Judgment, for Cursers to be indicted of murder: they would kill
us, if they durst: they do kill, so far as they can. I would be loath to trust
his hands, that bannes me with his tongue. It is easy to guess how they
would deal with us, if we were at their mercy. He that smiled on David in his
throne, curses him in his flight: Now his unsound and treacherous heart
discovers it self in a tongue full of venom, a handful of stones; and had
not David been yet too strong for his impotent Subject, he had then breathed
his last.

Prosperous success hides many a false heart, as a drift of snow covers a
heap of dung: but when that white mantle melts, the filthy rottenness will
soon appear.

They curse those that least of all deserve it.
Neither is it any sin we commit, or offense we give them, that they Curse
us. Who could have less deserved those curses, those aspersions, those stones,
then David? Had Shimei been other then a dog, he had never so rudely barked
at so harmeles a passenger. That head deserved to be tonguelesse, that body to
be headless, that thus blasphemed an Innocent, though he had been less then
the Lords Anointed.

They curse us that they may discourage us.
Again, Why would they kill our bodies, but because they could not slay our
souls? For it is soule-blood which the Serpent and his Seed thirst after, as I
shall show afterward.

But alas, if all their Curses and threats, all their aspersions and
Antichristian slanders, could flout us out of the integrity of our devotion,
when our forefathers feared not the flames, we were fearful cowards.

As for their banning of us, we have learnt from Solomon, Though they curse,
yet God will bless.
That the causeless curse shall not come, Prove 26.2. or at least, it shall not
come where the curser meant it. Yea, the Psalmist tells us plainly, That though
they curse, yet God will bless, Psalm. 109.28. And his blessing shall do us
good, while their curses hurt none but themselves: for what says the Holy
Ghost in the same Psalm, speaking of the desperately wicked, whose brand is,
that they love cursing. The words are these, As he loved cursing, How miserably
cursers shall be cursed.
so shall it come unto him; and as he loved not blessing, so shall it be far
from him. As be clothed himself with cursing, as with a raiment: so shall it
come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. Let it be unto
him, as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle, wherewith he shall be always
girded, ver. 17, 18, 19.

Hear this all ye whose tongues run so fast on the Devils errand, Ye loved
cursing, you shall have it, both upon you, about you, and in you, and that
everlastingly, if you persevere and go on. For if Christians be charged to
bless their enemies; what will be their case, that curse their friends? Yea,
if he which but curses Satan curses his own soul, as it is, Eccles. 21.27.
What does he that curses the Saints and dear children of God? Surely, their
curses shall bound back into their own breasts, as the stones, which Shimei
threw at David, did rebound upon Shimei, and split his heart; yea, and at last
knocked out his brains.

Cursing mouths are like ill made Pieces, which while men discharge at others,
recoile in splinters upon their own faces. Their words and wishes be but
whirle-winds, which being breathen forth, return again to the same place;
Cursed be he that curses thee, Genesis 27.29. Yea, he shall be cursed with a
witness, for even Christ, which came to save the world, shall say unto them at
the last day, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. Where they shall do nothing but curse for
evermore, Revel. 16.11.21. And indeed, Who should go to Hell, if cursers
should be left out? Wherefore let all those learn to bless, that look to be
heirs of the Blessing.

SECT. 35.
10. IT is their use to threaten the religious, 14.They use to threaten the
godly.
as all the men of Sodom threatened just Lot, that they would deal worse with
him then with the Angels, Genesis 19.9. Iehoram, Elisha, saying, God do so to me,
and more also if the head of Elisha shall stand on him this day, 2 Kings 6.31.
And thus Paul, before his conversion, breathed out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples, Acts 9.1, 2.

It were no living for godly men, if their hands were allowed to be as bloody
as their hearts. But men and Devils are under restraint of the Almighty.

Neither are their words more swelling, No living for the godly if their
enemies hands were allowed to be as bloody as their hearts
or their designs more lavish, then their achievements be vain, and their
execution short. Benhadad sends great words unto the King of Israel, as if it
were nothing to conquer him: but stay the proof, Benhadad flies, and Israel
pursues. Commonly they that least can do, best cavil can, and make the
greatest flourish.

Well for the innocent that the wicked cannot keep their own council.
However, it is well for the innocent, that wicked men cannot keep their own
counsels, as God fetches their thoughts out of their own mouths, many times,
even against their wills, for the good of his Children; as we may see in Esau,
when he purposed the death of Jacob; and in Saul, touching David; and in
Iezabel touching Elisha; whose threats did preserve them, whom they meant to
kill. The wisdom and power of God could have found evasions for his Prophets,
with their enemies greatest secrecy: but now they need no other means of
rescue, then their own lips. And it is a mercy (deserving thanks) from God,
They are forced to give us warning that we may prevent them.
that the lightning of anger in a cruel man's eyes, gives us warning of the
thunderbolt in his hand.

But this concerns us only, when we are threatened by the potent: in other
cases, our best way will be to stand it out: for many a foe has spoken
bravely, who in the push has made more use of his heels, then of his hands:
their threats being but like a boys squib, that only flashes, and cracks, and
stinks, but is nothing.

SECT. 36.
11. IT is their manner by subtlety to undermine the godly in talk, 15. They
will undermine us in talk that they may betray us.
that they may betray them, as Saul caused his servants to undermine David by
flattery, thereby to work his confusion, 1 Samuel 18.17. And again, verse
21.25. thus those false Prophets, and other enemies of the truth undermined
Jeremiah, seeking every way to destroy him, Ier. 18.18. to the end of the Chap.
And thus certain of the Synagogue sought to undermine Steven, that so they
might have matter whereby to inform the Council against him, Acts 69, 10.

Their chief Principle is that of Lysanders, Their cunning in this case.
Where the Lions skin will not suffice, we must add a scantling of the
Foxes. Whereupon, as intelligencers for States, mingle themselves with all
companies, but use their best art to keep themselves concealed: so do these,
you may travel with such an one as far as the Indies; and yet find the way
into his heart a farther journey. For as High-way-men, lighting into true
meaning company by the way, can talk of sincere dealing, and uprightness,
against robbery and oppression, to take off suspicion, till they spy their
opportunity: so will they have semblances of religion, pretend great love; yea
perhaps do you a real courtesy; but with the same intent that Saul gave
Michall to David, which was only to ensnare him.

Like Fowlers and Anglers, when they mean to catch and snare us, And
dissimulation
they hide their nets, and cover their hooks with the pleasing baits of
flattery, setting a sunshine countenance upon cloudy thoughts: Yea, when they
intend to murder, then speak they fairest; when deadly malice dives deepest
into their hearts, then the smoothest words floate in their mouths, as no
faces look lovelyer then the painted. They have borrowed this craft from Satan
who sets them on work.


Now this kind of undermining they have borrowed from Satan, that old Serpent,
and arch-polititian, who in the beginning uses this complement to our first
Parents, Ye shall be as gods: when his drift was, to have them devils, Genesis
3.5. Yea, he sets them on work, who never cease, either by himself, or by
his servants to tempt and undermine the people of God, 1 Pet. 5.8. especially
at such times, as they are, or should be addressing themselves to some notable
works in performing the will of God, as we may see, Ier 1.6. Ezekiel. 3.14, 15.
Nehe. 2.48.19. and 6.5, 6, 7, 10. Acts 6.9, 10. Matthew. 4.1.

But beware we trust them not, B^ware we trust them not.
for these Hypocrites never wound so deadly, as when they stroke us with a
silken ^and being like the mistaken Lantern in Eighty eight; for under
pretense of guiding, they will draw us into hazard and loss among our
enemies; and whosoever puts confidence in their words, shall find them to
resemble sinking floores, which will then fail us, when our weight is on them.
And so much of the Verbal properties of this enmity.

SECT. 37.
16 They manifest their enmity against the religious by their gestu^e.
Qu. IN the last place what are the Actual Properties?

Answ. Thirdly, wicked men actually manifest their enmity against the
Religious in seven particulars: viz. 1. By scornful gestures. 2. By
withstanding their Doctrine. 3. By combining together against the Godly. 4. By
imprisoning the Godly. 5. By striking the Godly. 6. By hurting the Godly. 7. By
killing the Godly.


First, by gesture, as Goliath against David, when he looked upon him with a
disdainful countenance, 1 Samuel 17.42. Which is a kind of brow-beating; and
other wicked ones, who made mowes, and nodded the head at him, Psalm 22.7.
Gaped upon him with their mouths, as ramping and roaring Lions, verse 13.
Gnashed their teeth at him, at public meetings, Psalm. 35.16. Shaked their
heads at him, Psalm. 109.25. Thus Job complains, That his enemies opened their
mouths against him, Job 16.10. And Isaiah, that the scoffing Idolaters gaped
and thrust out their tongues against the godly, in his time, Isai 57.3, 4. And
the Laborers in the Parable are said to have an evil eye against the Master of
the Vineyard, because he was good, Matthew. 20.15. Many will speak, that dare not
strike; and some will make mouths, that fear to speak.

Now this of gesture is a silent foe; As the tongue speaks to the ear, so the
gesture speaks to the eye.
yet upon inquisition made, I find none more guilty of the Serpents enmity,
than he, who speaks with his brow, and strikes with his eyes; who, because
his tongue cannot us^ly condemn a man, he will leave him suspected of ill by
silence, or some disdainful gesture: For, as his Ma^estie said most aptly and
elegantly, As the tongue speaks to the ear; so the gesture speaks to the
eye. And though such an one be silent for want of words, yet he is not so for
want of malice, even scoffs and nicknames, slander and cur^ing sticks in his
teeth, and only dares not freely come forth, because he is guilty of his own
faultiness: and were he not a monstrous coward, not daring to speak or act for
fear of justice, there would be no dealing with him: yet bad as he is, being
dumb, I find him incapable of a verdict, and so dismiss him to lead the
Van, which is both a punishment to himself and those that follow.

SECT. 38.
17 They will withstand and contrary the truth by us delivered.
2. IT is their manner to withstand and contrary the Doctrine which they are
commanded by God to deliver. Thus Zidkiah the false Prophet withstood and
contraried Michaia's Doctrine, 1 Kings 22.24. The Priests, Prophets, and all
the people, Ieremiahs, saying, Why have thou prophesied in the Name of the
Lord, that this house shall be like Shilo, and this City shall be desolate,
and without an inhabitant? Ierem. 26.8, 9. And thus Elimas the Sorcerer
withstood and contraried Paul and Barnabas in their preaching, Acts. 13.8.

And this is still the manner of wicked men (being better acquainted with
wrangling than reasoning, and deeper in love with strife that truth) even to
cavil against the good Word of God, They will cavil against the very word and
oppose the messengers.

They fly the light.


and oppose the messenger, and what they cannot maintain by reason, a feminine
testiness shall outwrangle.

These night-birds know right well, that where the Sun shines, there is small
place for them to appear: whence the Ministers preaching is as great a vexation
to them, as their conversation is to him: and in case he has a ^ire in his
tongue kindled with a coal from the Altar, they have a sea of water in their
hearts to quench it.

But if some one be more specially gifted in convincing of sin, A powerful
Minister most opposed.
he is sure to have treble opposition: if he molest Satan, and dispossess him
of his strong holds, Satan will molest him with a powder; all the Drunkards in
that Parish shall fall about such a Ministers ears; yea, perhaps some
neighbor Ministers that pretend gravitie and good will to God, shall more than
set them on: for virtue fares hardest oftentimes from such as should uphold
her. When Henry Zu^phen was Preacher at Breame; the Catholics sent their
Chaplains to evey Sermon to trap him in his words: but the greater part of
them that were sent to hearken, were thereby converted: and did openly witness
for him to his Adversaries teeth, Strong brains too wise to be saved.
that they never in all their life had heard the like, at which the Monks and
Cardinals were mad. The case of our Prelates, during the time of their High
Commission. None so deep in Hell, as knowing men: strong brains are commonly
too wise to be saved by the foolishness of preaching. But Paul the babbler must
be both heard and admired, before heaven can be had: yea, great Doctors must
acknowledge themselves but great Dunces, in comparison of meaner men; speaking
by the Spirit of God: as it fared with the Philosopher, when he read the first
Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, who said, This Barbarian has comprised more
s^upendious stuff in three lines, than we have done in all our voluminous
Discourses.

An humble man will never be an here^ique.
And indeed, The wisdom from above is gentle, easy to be persuaded; when
better, reason is alleged, James 3.17. as in Peter, John 13.8. First,
peremptory, but after conviction pliable. An humble man will never be an
Heretic: show him his error, he will soon retract it. Johannes Bugenhagius a
reverend Dutch Divine lighting upon Luthers Book, De captivitate Babylonica,
and reading some few pages of it as he sat at supper, rashly pronounced him
the most pestilent and pernicious Heretic that ever the Church had been
troubled with since the times of Christ: but a few days after, having
seriously read over the Book, and well weighed the matter, he returned to his
Colegioners, and recanted what he had said, affirming and proving, that Luther
only was in the light, and all the world besides in gross darkness, so that
many of them were converted by him, and won to embrace the same truth.

Thus Satan and his instruments deal like our Pirates, who will set upon rich
laden ships, but pass by those that are empty.

Nor are they to be appeased after they have once begun, Nor will they be
appeased.
for that which rashness and folly have brought forth, pride afterward and
contumacie shall maintain to the last gasp. Usually, an ill cause once
undertaken, shall be maintained, though with blood. Nay, rather than want
cause, they will now hate such a Minister, They will hate us because they have
hurt us.
because they have formerly hurt him: as many husbands hate their wives, only
because themselves have wronged them, or at least love them the less for their
own faults: all which they will defend with their tongues, though they
condemn it with their consciences.

They neither hear him themselves nor suffer others.
Which men are like those wicked Jews, Acts 13 45. who would neither believe
the Doctrine which Paul preached, nor abide that the Gentiles should be brought
to the Faith of Christ: For they not only forbear to hear such a Mini^^er
themselves, but will dehort all their familiars: in imitation of the high
Prie^^s, Scribes, and Pharisees, who in their own opinion were too good, too
wise, too holy to receive Christ into their company; and, not content to
seque^^er themselves from Christ, they disdained also that he should be
conversant with Publicans and sinners.

They add to their own reputation by det^acting from others.
Pride was ever envious and contumelious, thinking she adds so much to her own
reputation, as she detracts from others: and indeed the twinkling stars at
the approach of the Sun lose their light, and after regain it not, until
darkness be upon the deep: yea, the whiter the Swan is the more black is the
Crow that is by her.

SECT. 39.
3. THey will combine themselves together, 18 They combine together, and lay
devilish plots to destroy the godly.
and lay devilish plots to destroy the godly, as the new King of Egypt with his
people did against the children of Israel, when they perceived them to multiply
so fast, Exodus 1.9, 10. Thus the hundred and twenty Governors combined
together to work Daniels overthrow, Dan. 6. And thus Demetrius the
Silver-smith, and the rest of the crafts-men, which made gain by the silver
Temples of Diana, combined themselves together, to conspire the death of Paul's
companions, Acts 19. And when Paul was rescued by Lysias, the next day there
were more than forty of the Jews, which bound themselves by a curse, saying,
They would neither eat nor drink* till they had killed Paul; in which
conspiracy the chief Priests and Elders were likewise assistants, Acts 23.10,
14.

The Apostle says, If God be on our side, who can be against us? But Saint
Chrysostom, in opening of those words says, Nay rather, Who is not against
us, if God be with us? For, they cast their heads together, says David, with
one consent, and are confederate against God, and his secret ones, imagining
crafty counsel against them, saying, Come, Let us root them out, etc. Psalm.
83.3, 4, 5.

The manner of their consultations.
How wicked men agree in persecuting the truth, and professors thereof, we may
see, Acts 4.26, 27. and Mark 14. where even old Annas, and that wicked bench of
grey-headed Scribes and Eld^rs, are content to break their sleep to do
mischief, and make noon of midnight.

As for the manner of their consultations, they are lively expressed by the
Author of the Book of Wisdom, who brings them in, saying thus, one to
another, Come, let us lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not for our
turn, but is clean contrary to our doings: he upbraideth us with our offending
the Law: he was made to reprove our thoughts: it grieveth us also to look upon
him, for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion, he
vaunteth to have the knowledge of God, and counts us as bastards; he
withdraws himself from our ways as from filthiness; he commends the
latter end of the just, and boasts that God is his Father. Wherefore let us
see if his works be true; let us prove and examine him with rebukes and
torments; let us condemn him to a shameful death. And then gives the reason:
Such things do they imagine, for their own wickedness has blinded them, and
they do not understand the mysteries of God, neither hope for the reward of
righteousness, nor can discern the honor of the souls that are faultlesse,
Wisd. 2.12. to 23.

Qu. I, They will easily find occasion.
but what have they whereupon to ground their accusations? For the religious
man's life is commonly like Paul's, Phil. 3.6. unrebukable, and he walks in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Law, without reproof, as Zachary
and Elizabeth did, Luke 1.6.

Answ. He that studies quarrels will easily find occasion. When the Governors
were resolved that Daniel should die, they soon found pretenses. As suppose it
be a private Christian, they will lie in wait to find faults in him, and turn
good into evil, and are of so prying an observation, that they will look
farther into his actions, than the best man would willingly have them search.
Nor can you easily find the man that is not quick-sighted in other men's
faults, blind to his own.

For our serving of God shall be sufficient.
But being disappointed of their hopes, hear what they say, We shall not find
an accusation against him, he is so faithful, Except we find it concerning
the Law of his God, Dan. 6.5. And his punctual obedience to Gods Laws, and
^^icking close to the word of truth, shall serve for a need.

Or secondly, If he be a Minister, they will assemble together to hear him pray
and preach, that so they may catch something out of his mouth, whereof they may
accuse him, as the Scribes and Pharisees dealt with our Savior, Luke 11.54.
And those Governors with Daniel, wherein he shall not be able to speak so
warily, but they will find matter enough to ensnare him, as the words shall be
wrested, though indeed, to have a great audience only shall be made crime
enough: Or saving of souls.
you know when the Jews saw that a great company were at Paul's Sermon, they
were filled with envy, and fell to contradiction and blasphemy, Acts 13.45.
And the high Priests and Pharisees, when our Savior was so flocked after, said
among themselves, Perceive ye not, Behold, the World goes after him, and if we
let him thus alone, all men will believe in him, John 11.48. and 12.19. They
were like the Dog in the manger, that will neither eat hay himself, nor suffer
the Horse; yet they had a reason for it, as these have: Rome thinks that the
Gospels rising, must needs be her falling, as when the day comes, the night
must end. Indeed, opinion makes them coin that for a reason, which others will
not assent unto: yea, what is truth to these men, is error to others more wise.

And when once he is questioned, every one, like Iael to Sisera, will drive a
nail, to keep him from rising again.

O the wicked minds that many go to Church withal, They com not to be caught
by a Minister but to catch him.
and the great dangers that Ministers are liable unto, did not God mightily
support them! many of their hearers being like that Lawyer, which stood up to
tempt Christ; for they come not to be taught by him, but to catch him. In which
case, let him preach like an Angel, yea, like Christ himself, he shall speak
to no more purpose than Beda did, when he preacheed to an heap of stones. It is
well known, says Erasmus, that many points are condemned as heretical in
Luthers books, which in Austens and Bernards books are received for good and
orthodox.

But what says David? Though they have conceived mischief, and do travail with
wickedness, yet they shall bring forth a lie, Psalm. 7.14. For, the Lord
breaks their counsels, and brings their devices to naught, Psalm. 33.10. But
are taken in the snare they spread for others.
Yea, while the ungodly are whetting a knife to cut our throats. God is
whetting a sword to cut their throats. Shall the powder think to blow up the
house, and escape it self from burning? No, it is a true rule, that of evil
premises does not follow a good conclusion, but from evil seeds come evil
plants.

SECT. 40.
4. THey are very proan to imprison the godly, 19 They are proane to imprison
the godly.
cause or no cause; as Ahab commanded Michaiah to be put into the prison house,
and sed with the bread of affliction, and with the water of affliction, 1 Kings
22.27. Thus the malicious Priests procured Jeremiah to be shut up in prison,
Ier. 36.5. And thus our Savior showing what entertainment the faithful should
find in the World, foretells that wicked men shall lay hands on them, and
deliver them up to the Assemblies, and into prisons, bring them before Kings
and Rulers, for his names sake, Luke 21.12. As John Baptist, Peter, Paul, and
many other of the Apostles, were put into the common prison by Herod, and the
Synod of Priests, when they preached in Christ's Name, Acts 5.18. and 12.4. and
4.3. and 22.25. and 28.17. and 2 Cor. 11.23. And ^ presume the common people
were more glad of the Churches loss herein, than they would have been of their
own gain.

But why into prison? Why not unto death? No thanks to Satan, nor his seed,
they would destroy all. Yea, Why are not our Sanctuaries turned into Shambles,
and our beds made to swim with our bloods, but that the God of Israel has
crossed the confederacy of Balak, and their wickedness does not prosper,
their studies are the plots of our ruin, and the best they intend, is the
destruction and overthrow of Religion, or the religious, or both.

Not for any crime.
Again, Why these, and a thousand more in all ages shut up in prison? What was
their delinquencie? Even this. They were too good, too holy to be endured. What
was it but Joseph's goodness, that brought him to the stocks and Irons? And so
of Michaiah, Jeremiah, the Apostles, and all the Saints in succeeding Ages.

And to speak truly, But to prevent further dispute.
this is a deep point of policy in our Adversaries: for when all their
arguments fail, by this means they get the better, and withal prevent
further dispute. In the mid^ of their anger they use this discretion, Stand not
to argue, le^^ thou be overcome, and let the accused plead what he can for his
own innocence: the Wolf would answer the Lamb, Indeed thy cause is better
then mine, but my teeth are better then thine, I will devour thee: So the
Devil puts off the Fox, and puts on the Lion.

Again, And other the like reasons.
we know the Moon has so much the less light, by how much it is nearer the
Sun; yea, so long as the Sun shines above the Horizon, the Moon is scarcely
seen. And we use to say of Homer, that the dazzling beams of his Sun makes
all other Poets, like little Stars, loose their light.

This made Dionysius, when he could not equal Philoxenus in Poetry, nor match
Plato in discourse, condemn the one to the stone-quarries, and sell the other
as a slave into the I Will of Agina. And out of like consideration, have the
wicked always dealt with the godly, even as Julian the Apostate did by our
Savior, who took down his Image in contempt, that he might set up his own in
the same place, and have the people worship it, which he knew they would never
do, so long as the other was reverenced.

SECT. 41.
20 Their usual way of confuting is with fists.
5 THey often manifest their enmity against the Religious by striking them, as
Zedikiah, the false Prophet, struck Michaiah on the cheek, 1 King. 22.24. thus
Pasher struck Jeremiah, Ier. 20.2. And the Princes also, Chap. 37.15. And thus
Ananias the high Priest caused Paul to be smitten on the mouth, Acts 23.2. and
the Jews whipped him five times with forty stripes save one, and others beat him
with rods, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.

And thus our rough adversaries of Rome stopped our Martyrs mouths, and refuted
them, not with reasons, nor by Law (for the Law has no power to strike the
virtuous) but with fists.

Their Arguments are all steel and iron.
When Politicians Rhetoric fails, Carters Logic must do the feat. Their
arguments are all Steel and Iron, they speak dagger points: As Ioab discoursed
with Amaza in the fifth Rib. So Zedikiah disputed with the Prophet a word and a
blow; yea, a blow without a word; for he smote him first, and spoke to him
afterward.

Every false Prophet is like Julius the second, who threw Saint Peter's keys
into the river Tiber, protesting, that thenceforth he would use and help
himself with Saint Paul's sword.

And in case they cannot have their wills, they resemble Achillis, who is
fained to eat his own heart, because he might not be suffered to fight.

SECT. 42.
6 IT is usual with them to hurt and maime the godly: 21 They will hurt and
maime the godly
as the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel would have served those
true hearted Spies, for seeking to appease the tumult, and speaking well of the
Land of Can^a^, had not the glory of the Lord appeared in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, Numb. 14.10. Thus the Philistims put out Sampsons eyes, when they
had bound him, Judge. 16.21. and thus the Jews of An^iochia and Ico^^m hurt
Paul, when they ^toned him, and drew him out of the City, supposing he had
been dead, Act. 14.19. Neither have succeeding ages wanted Alexanders, who
have done much hurt to Gods people: for not seldom when reason and railing
failed, have they come to plow-mans Logic, Gunpowder arguments, open
violence, taking up swords to strike, or stones to cast at us, though they
incur by it the danger of the Law. Whereas religion makes wild beasts civil;
Atheism, and Impiety makes of wise meu beasts and ^ools. How many have been
known, like him in Esop, who willingly lost one eye, that his fellow might
loose both. Their malice makes them like beasts or ^^ocks


Yea, whereas the drift of such an ones preaching, in case he be a minister, is
to make them like him, in whose name they preach: contrarily, the very word of
God, by accident, makes them degenerate into stocks and stones: for hearing
but their sins laid open, and the judgment due thereunto, they become so
stupid and in sensible of reason, that now, maugre all admonition, the quarrel
must end in blood: Yea, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not
meet that he should live, Acts 22.22.

SECT. 43.
7 ANd lastly, 22 usual with them to murder the Saints.
It is their manner out of Enmity to slay the godly, as Doeg slew Ahimeleck and
the re^t of the Prie^s, even fourscore and five persons, and Nob the City of
Priests, whom he smote with the edge of the sword, both man and woman, child
and suckling, at Saul's command, 1 Samuel 22.19. Thus Iezabel slew all the
Prophets of the Lord she could find, 1 Kings 18.4. And Herod, all the male
children that were in Bethlehem, and all the coasts thereof, from two years old
and under, that he might make sure work with Christ, Matthew. 2.16. And thus
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Gods own people, chosen out of all the World,
used to make such havoc of their own Prophets, that out Savior bemoaning her
case, cries out, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, etc. Matthew. 23.37.

And thus it fares with the Saints and servants of God at this day, Instead of
arguments they take up arms.
in such places where wicked men may have their wills. Whereas those Romish
Doctors are appointed for the saving of many, they are all for destruction:
like rash Empiricks, they can cure no way; but by letting of blood; and
hereupon they turn their Massing into massacring; the School into a Camp;
Arguments, into Arms; teaching all their Proselytes dismal conclusions: as it
has been no rare thing, for some of their Priests in Queen Mary's reign, when
in arguments they have found the weakness of their pens, to fall to their
pen-knives: In^^ead of arguments they take up arms; and instead of zeal and
the spiritual word, they use fire and the sword; yea, treasons, are their best
reasons; the Spanish Inquisition, is their Grammar; fire and faggot their
Rheitorick; Fleet and fetters, their Log^ck; The Canons roar, their Music;
poisoning, their physic; Yea, their very building of the Church, is by blowing
up of commonwealths; and instead of fighting for God, they fight against God
and his Leivtenant. They are savage and bloody.


And if at this day they catch but a Protestant in their net, it is a miracle
if ever he escapes death, without making shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience. For if we will not obey them rather then God, they have a Law by
which men ought to dye, a Law like Draco's, written with blood, and sealed with
death. Of which their savage proceeding, there are many reasons to be rendered.

First, Of which five reasons.
they must do the works of their father the Devil: he is a murderer, and so
his children are given to blood, John 8.44. 1 Reason.


Secondly, 2 Reason.
that their deeds of darkness may not come to light Vriah must be put to
death, least David's adultery be discovered, and himself disgraced. A living
Curre you know, will do more harm then a dead Lion: and it is a sure rule,
that of Eggs fried in the Pan come no ill Chickens. 3 Reason.


Thirdly, the wicked through malice seek by all means to cut off the godly,
because their sinful and wicked lives are reproved by their godly
conversation: neither can they follow their sins so freely as they would, nor
so quietly, without detection or check. Now if Abels good works reprove Caines
evil deeds, let Caine but take away the cause, kill Abel, and the effect shall
not follow.

4 Reason.
Fourthly, whereas the godly are too hard for them in disputing: take Steven for
an instance: they will be even with him, by casting of stones, stop his mouth
with brick-bats, fetch arguments from the Shambles; and this they are sure will
do, when all other hopes and helps fail. So they make their party good, if
not with arguments of reason, yet with arguments of steel, and Iron. But this
is a very hard way of confuting.

5 Reason.
Fifthly, their glory and credit with the World is ecclipsed, by suffering these
which excel in virtue, This made Adrian and Nero to kill all such as ecclipsed
their glory by any demerit: and Mercine, you know, was murdered of her
fellows, because she did excel the rest in beauty. Thus Herod, thought he
could not be King, if Christ should reign. Yea, as though he had been of the
race of the Ottamans, he thought he could not reign, except the first thing
he d^d, he killed all the males in Bethlehe,m from two years old and under:
and the Pharisees that they should be despised, if Christ were regarded.

And so much of the actual properties of this Enmity.

SECT. 44.
Q. IN how many of these kinds did our Savior himself suffer (whose example
hitherto you have omitted) in his own person of the Jews, Our Savior suffered
two and twenty ways of ungodly men.
his Contrymen and Kinsfolk; yea, of the Chief Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, who were Teachers and Expounders of the Law, and which sat in Moses
Chair?

Answ. In every one of the 22. for as touching the Mental Properties.

1 They Envied him, 4 Mental Properties
Matthew. 26.15. 2 They Contemned him, Matthew. 12.24. and 13.55. 3 They Rejoiced
at him in his misery and distress, Matthew. 27.29. 4 They Hated him, John 7.7.
2. Touching the Verbal.
11 verbal Properties.
1 They Murmured against him, Luke 15.2. 2 They Misconstrued his actions and
intentions, Matthew. 11.19. 3 They Carried tales of him, Mat. 12.14 4 They Gave
devilish counsel against him, Matthew. 27.20. 5 They Scoft at him, Matthew 27 42. 6
They Nicknamed him, Matthew. 13 55. 7 They Railed on him, Luke 23.39. 8 They
Slandered him, Matthew. 28 13. 9 They Cursed him, Gal 3 13. 10 They Threatened
him, John 11.53. 11 They Undermined him in talk, that they might accuse him,
Matthew. 22.15.
3. Touching the Actual.
1 They Used disdainful gestures before him, 7 Actual Properties.
Matthew. 2^.29.39. 2 They Withstood and contraried his Doctrine, Luke 5.21.
Matthew. 9.34. 3 They Combined together, and laid plots to destroy him, Matthew.
12.14. 4 They Took him prisoner, Mat. 26.57. 5 They Smote him, Luke 22.64. 6
They Hurt and wonnded him, Matthew. 27.29. John 19 34. 7 They Put him to death,
even that cursed death of the Cross, Matthew. 27.3^.
That the Scriptures might be fulfilled which says, And thou shall bruise his
hell; for all that he suffered was but in his Humanity, and so no more than the
bruising of his heel.

And why all this? Not for any evil they found in him; for their own words are,
It was for his zaale purity and holiness.
He has done all things well, Mark 7.37. He has done, such was his power;
all things, such was his wisdom: well, such was his goodness: and yet
crucified, and abused every way he must be. It was indeed for his zeal, purity,
and holiness, and because his life and practice was clean contrary to theirs,
his Doctrine too powerful and pure for such carnal hearts to embrace or
endure. So that it is plain, and all men may see, who are not dead in sense,
how it would fare with us, might our enemies, the same Seed of the Serpent have
their wills.

SECT. 45.
Several uses of their enmity.
Q WHat Uses may this serve for, which has been spoken touching the properties
of this enmity, and our Saviors suffering?

1 Use.
Answ. First, by this taste of it is fruits learn we to detest them all.

2 Use.
Secondly, it may serve to inform every man, whether he be of the Serpents
Seed, a child of the Devil, as he came into the world, To inform us whether
we be children of the devil or members of Christ.
or regenerate, and so become of the Woman's Seed, a Child of God, and Member
of Christ: for as our Savior says, speaking of false Prophets, By their
fruits ye shall know them: so I of the Seed of the Serpent, and children of the
Devil, By these 22 fruits of enmity you shall know them, as well as you shall
know the life by breathing, or the day by it is light. Wherefore all ye that
read, reflect and cast your eyes on these Examples, which are such lively
Emblems and Representations of your selves, if you be the Serpent's Seed, and
yet in your sins. Yea, let it make you tremble; for know assuredly, that if
this spawn of enmity, formerly spoken of, remain in you; if any of these ^ayes
you persecute Christ in his Members, or but hate the good, because they will
not be so evil as you are, you have not cast off this serpentine quality, which
you drew from the loins of old Adam; but it is an infallible sign, that you
are of the Serpents Seed, children of the Devil, enemies to God, and all
goodness, the brethren of Cain, yea, Cain himself in another person, and
without repentance, your portion shall be with Cain, and the rest of that
cursed Crew.

Comfort for such as suffer.
On the other side, does any conscionable Christian find himself hated and
persecuted by ungodly men for well-doing, for Christ's sake, for Religion and
righteousness sake? Let him be comforted; for it is a manifest sign, and a
notable strong evidence, that he is of the Woman's Seed, regenerate and borne a
new, the Child of God, a Member of Christ's mystical Body, and an Heir of
eternal Life.

Thirdly, these Examples being written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of
the world are come, may inform the Godly what they are to expect from the
world: Shall any hope to be free from suffering, or t^^^ke it a strange thing,
when he does suffer for well-doing, when our Savior Christ himself suffered so
much as he did, being the only begotten Son of God, 3 Use.
full of grace and truth? Let non look to fare better than Christ.
No, the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: If
they have persecuted Christ, they will persecute you also, John 15.20. If they
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his
household? Matthew. 10.25. Yea, senseless were it once to think, that the same
enmity which spared not to strike at the Head, will forbear the weakest and
remotest Limb.

Wherefore arm thou us, O God, with an expectation of that evil which we
cannot avoid, yea, make thou us as strong, as Satan and his instruments are
malicious, and then let them do their worst.

And so much of the Kinds and Properties of this enmity.

SECT. 46. The Causes.
Q WHat are the Causes, 11 Cause^.
why wicked and ungodly men thus hate, and persecute the religious?

Answ. The Causes being diverse, may yet be reduced to three Heads, for either
they be Causes in regard of God his Justice. Mercy. Wisdom. Power.
Satan his permitted Malice. Subtlety. Strength.
Men Wicked. Godly.



And these we might further branch, subdivide and distribute into Cause^
Internal, Material, Formal, Natural. Artificial.

External, Efficient. Properly. Improperly, Meritorious. Instrumental.

Final.



And those are either 1. Next: or, Remote.
2. By themselves: or, By accident.
3. Sufficient: or, Insufficient.



But the time would be too short, o^ this Treatise too long, if I should speak
of every one: yea, talking Fabius would be tired, before he could relate half
of what is requisite to be spoken of each; for they require whole Volumes:
besides, Instructions, if they exceed, are wont, as nails, to drive out one
another.

Q1. Then select out the Principal, I mean, such as in regard of our
edification, are most behoovefull for us to know. And least the pages should
still grow, as fish, into a multitude, garble your notions, and give us only
the marrow of the matter.

Answ. The Causes best deserving our discovery, and the worlds notice, I take
to be Eleaven 1. Contrariety, 2. Ignorance, 3. Separation, 4. Speaking of
Truth, 5. Infidelity, 6. Example of the multitude, 7. The preaching of some
Ministers, 8. The scandalous lives of some Professors, 9. Flocking after
Sermons, 10. Misprision, 11. That they may have more company here in sin, and
hereafter in torment.


1 The contrariety of their natures.
First, a main Cause why wicked men hate and persecute the godly, is the
contrariety of their natures.

Q1. How contrary are they?

Answ. As contrary and opposite one to the other, as are God and the Devil;
for the one are Children of God, All true believers* the children of God.
2 Cor. 6.18. Gal. 3.26 John 1.12. And partake of the Divine Nature, 2 Peter
1.4 Being begotten, James 1.18. And borne a new of God, John 1.13. 1 John 3.9
By the immortal seed of the Word, James 1.18. And the Spirit's powerful
working with it, John 3.5, 8. whereby they are become like God in holiness, 1
Peter 1.15. And not children only, but heirs also, even the heirs of God,
and heirs annexed with Christ, Romans 8.17. being his brethren, Romans 8.29.
Members of his B^dy, 1 Cor. 12.27. Bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,
Ephesians. 5.30. having his Spirit dwelling in them, Romans 8.9 to witness with
their spirits, that they are the Children of God, verse 16. And being Temples
of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 6.19.

And the other are the Seed of the Serpent, All natural men children of the
Devil.
and Children of the Devil, and so partake of his nature, 1 John 3.8, 10, 12,
14 Acts 13.10. John 6.70. and 8.4^. and 14.30. and 16.11. Matthew. 13. 38*39. 2
Cor 4 4. 2 Timothy 2.26. Genesis 3 15. and 5.3. Ephesians. 2.1. to the end, and 5.14. 1
Cor. 15.22. Romans 5.12.18. Titus 3.3. to 8. 1 Peter 2.9, 10, 25. John 3.3.5 6.
which being so, they must needs be very contrary, and if contrary, no marvel
they should so ill agree, although God had not proclaimed an enmity between
them.

Impossible the good and bad should agree.
For there can be no amity, where there is no sympathy; no reconciling of the
Wolf and the Lamb; the Winds and the Sea; no neighborhood, no alliance, no
conjunction is able to make the cursed* Seed of the Serpent, and the blessed
seed of the Woman ever agree: for Fire and Water, Light and Darkness, Heaven
and Hell are not more contrary.

One blood, one belly, one house, one education could never make Cain and Abel
accord, Jacob and Esau, Isack and Ishmael at one: yea, though they be Man and
Wife, Parent and Child, yet if they be not like, they will not like, 2 Cor.
6.14, 15. And indeed, what is the corporal sympathy to the spiritual antipathy?
Can there be such a parity between the Parent and the Child, the Husband and
the Wife, as there is a disparity between God and Satan? No certainly,

SECT. 47.
A Wicked man can agree with all that are wicked, Natural men can agree with
any so they be not Religious.
be they Papists, or Turks, or Atheists, profane and loose persons, civil or
moral men, for all these agree with him in blindness and darkness: as who
feels the smart of their tongues, or hands? not the Idolater or vile person,
not the professed Atheist, the Canker-fretting Arminian, or State-betraying
Jesuit: for with all these they are Hail fellow, well met: but with sincere
Christians and Practicers of piety, he can never agree: the religious shall be
sure of opposition, because their light is contrary to his darkness; grace in
the one is a secret disgrace to the other.

Yea, Yea differ they in other thngs they will join against the Godly.
let wicked men be at never so much odds one with another, yet they will
concur and join against the godly: as for Example, Edom and Ishmael, Moa^
and the Hagarens, Gebal and Ammon, Amalek and the Philistims, the men of Tire
and Assure had each several gods; yet all conspired against the true God Psalm.
83 5. to 9. Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses; but both
against Judah. He^od and Pilate two Enemies, will agree, so it be against
Christ: they will fall in one with another, to fall out with God. The Sadduces,
Pharisees, and Herodians were Sectaries of diverse and adverse Factions, all
differing one from another; and yet all these join together against our
Savior, Matthew. 22. The Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Cilicians and
Asians, differ they never so much, will join in dispute against Stephen, Acts
6.9. Herod neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews Herod, yet both are agreed to
vex the Church.

I cannot think of a sitter Emblem of a natural man, than Lime, which agrees
well with all things that are dry, and of it is own nature; but meeting with
Water, a thing directly opposite, it breaks, burns, ^welles, smokes,
crackles, skips, and scatters: so Nature will give a man leave to be any thing,
save a sound Christian, and agree with all others, ^e their conditions never so
contrary, provided they agree in the main, are all Seed of the same Serpent.
But let the natural man meet with one that is Spiritual, they agree lik heat
and cold: if one stays, the other flies; or if both stay, they agree like two
Poisons in one stomach, the one being ever sick of the other, be they never
so near allied. As how many a Wife is so much the more hated, Many Wives,
Children and Servants hated for being religious.
because a zealous Wife? How many a Child less beloved, because a religious
Child? How many a Servant less respected, because a godly Servant? And no
marvel; for though they dwell in the same house, yet they belong to two
several Kingdoms; and albeit they both remain upon earth, yet they are
governed by two several Laws, the ones Burguship being in Heaven, Philip.
3.20. And the other, being a Denizon, belonging to Hell: as Irish-men are
Dwelle^s in Ireland, but Denizons of England, and governed by the Statutes of
this Kingdom.

SECT. 48.
Hatred for religion, the most bitter and implacable
NEither is this of theirs an ordinary hatred, but the most bitter, exorbitant,
unlimited, and unplacable of all others. No such concord, no such discord,
faith one of the learned, as that which proceeds from Religion. My name, ^aith
Luther, is more odious unto them, then any thief, or mur^herer: as Christ was
more detestable to the Iewer then Barrabas. Behold, says David, mine enemies,
for they are many, and they ^ate me with a cruel hatred, Psalm. 25.19. yea, so
cruel, that it makes their teeth gnash, and their hearts burst again, Act.
7.54. which made the Truths adversaries give Saint Paul stripes above measure,
2 Cor. 11.2, 3. And the Heathen Emperors to devise such cruel tor^ures, for
all those which but professed themselves Christians.

agreement in some points does but advance hatred the more.
Yea, agreement in some points, when there are differences in the maine, does
but advance hatred the more: Witness the Reign of Queen Mary, and the
Butchery over al France of above two hundred thousand Protestants; besides the
many thousands of late years: Yea, ask from East to West, from one Pole to
the other; search all Records under Heaven, if ever there was the like of the
intended Powder Plot.

You cannot anger a wicked man worse, We cannot anger them worse then to do well
than to do well: Yea, he hates you more bitterly for this, and the credit you
gain thereby, than if you had cheated him of his Patrimony, with your own
discredit. But that there is no hatred so virulent and bitter, as that which is
occasioned by virtuous living, and professing of Christ's Name; our Savior
himself proves copiously, Matthew 10. Luke 21.

SECT. 49.
Quest. WHerein consists their unlikenesse and contrariety? Wherein this
contrariety consists.


Answ. Chiefly, in four particulars; though indeed there be more differences
between the Children of God and the Children of the Devil, than there are
between men and beasts.

First, they exceedingly differ in their judgments touching Wisdom. They
differ in their judgments.
1 Cor. 1.18.20, 23. and 2.14. and 4.10. Luke 6.27. to 36. Acts 26.24. Wisd.
5.4. Genesis 41.8. Job 5.13. Prove. 28.11. 1 Touching Wisdom.
Ier. 4.22. 1 Cor. 3.19. Exodus 1 10. Josh. 9.4. Titus 3 9. Prove. 10. ver. 18.
Romans 16. ver. 19.

2 Touching happiness.
Happiness, Luke 6.26. and 8.13. Ia. 4.4. Mark. 16.16. Job. 3.16, 18. and 8.34,
36. Romans 6.16.18.22. Psalm. 2.3, 4. and 10.3. and 21.4. 2 Timothy 2.26. Mal. 3.15.
Revel. 3.17. 1 These. 5.3.

3 touching fortitude.
Fortitude, Prove. 28.1, 2. Rev. 13.6, 7. and 12, 13, 17 Mar. 13.9. Acts 7.52.
Mat. 10.28. Gal. 4 29. Ioh. 16.2.

4 touching sin.
Sin, Luke 16.15. Prove. 13.19. Mark 7.5, 11, 12, 13, Luke 7.33, 34. Matthew.
7.14. 1 Pet. 4 18 Psalm. 35.13.16.

5 touching holiness.
Holiness, Acts 26.9. Exodus 8.26. 1 Cor. 4.10. and 2.14. Prove. 13.19. Psalm.
14.1 Ier. 44.16. to 19. Yea, they are of a reprobate judgment touching actions
and persons Isa. 5.20. and so speak, think and do all by contraries, like
Heliogabalus who wore shoes of Gold, and Rings of Leather. Or the Blackmoores
who judge of beauty by contraries. Wherefore read their words as Scholars do
Hebrew, backward, and you have the meaning: for instance do they call thee
Puritan as nothing more frequent in their mouths, understand by it Saint for a
Christian indeed (as thou art) is a Puritan in the Devils language, and a
Christian in name only (as such an one is) is an Atheist in Gods language.

Secondly, They no less differ in their Passions and affections of Love,
Secondly* they differ in their passions and affections.
Psalm, 119.57, 72, and 17, 14.

Fear, Prove. 28.1, 2. 1 Timothy 4.1. Romans 2.14, 15.

Anger, Acts 7.52. to 60. and 5.30. to 34. Prove. 12.10. Rev. 18.19, 20.

Joy, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Ioh. 3.15. Mat. 11.19. And the like, which for brevities
sake I forbear.

Thirdly they differ no less in practice, Thirdly, they differ in their
practice.
and this breeds many quarrels: as what more common than for all sorts and
kinds of men to hate, scorn, persetute, reproach, Wicked men persecute the
godly for being better then they.
revile, accuse, slander and condemn the Religious, because their own works
are evil and wicked, and the others good, holy, and righteous. Wherefore slew
Caine his brother, says Saint John, but because his own Works were evil, and
his brothers good? 1 Ioh. 3.12. Why was Joseph accused of his Mistress for an
adulterer, and thereupon committed to prison, but because he would not be an
Adulterer like her? Genesis 39. Yea, it was his party-colored Coat, composed
of all kinds of graces and blessings that formerly procured his Brethrens hate.
And what is it that Jobs Wife expostulates with him about, but his integrity?
As if she took it ill, that he took it no worse: his patience made her
impatient. Wherefore was holy David, Of which many examples.
as himself complains, almost in every Psalm Had in derison, hated,
slandered, reviled, contemned and made a proverb and song of the Drunkards,
and other wicked men which sat in the gate? but because he followed the things
which were good and pleasing unto God and in him part his trust? Psalm. 11.2.
and 22.6, 7, 8. and 37.14. and 69.10, 11, 12. And lastly (for I might be
endless in the prosecution of this.) Why were all the just, in Solomon's time,
had in abomination and mocked of the wicked, but because they were upright in
their way, and holy in their conversation, Prove. 29.27. Or those numberless
Martyrs, whose souls Saint John saw under the the Alter ( Rev. 6.9.) killed,
but for the Word of God, and for the testimony which they maintained? And the
Master himself? not for any evil as themselves are forced to confess, Mark
7.37. which examples sufficiently prove, that all wicked men are like the women
of Lemnos, who when they had every one slain their husbands and kinsmen,
exiled Hypsipyle the Kings daughter, for that she alone saved her Father alive.
That great Dragon the Devil, and these his Subjects, make war and are wroth
with none but the woman, and the remnant of her Seed, which keep the
Commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, Revel. 12.17. All
was quiet at Ephesus before Saint Paul came thither: but then there arose no
small strife about that way* Acts. 19.23. etc. A Wolf flys not upon a painted
sheep; we can with delight look upon the picture of a Toa^^ It is your active
christian, that is most spighted, and persecuted.

SECT. 50.
The same applied.
BUt to apply this to our selves. I would feign know, whether the power of
godliness, the sincere profession of the name of Christ, according to the Vow
which we made in Baptism, all kind of purity and holiness, does not live in
persecution among us, as Protestants do in Spain? Is it not a capital crime
to be virtuous? Is not the name of an honest man, who makes conscience of his
ways, grown odious? Is not circumspect walking, the zeal of Gods glory in
promoting the best things, frequent hearing of Sermons, singing of Psalms holy
conference, brotherly admonition, etc. counted a vice, and that vice called
Puritanisme? And must not he who is called a Puritan, be derided, hated,
persecuted, slandered and laughed to scorn? how many may complain with Jeremy,
that because they live a godly life themselves, and call upon others to do the
same, they are cursed of everyone, and counted contentious? Ier. 15.10. It
faring with Professors, as it did with Caius Selius: of whom the Heathen were
wont to say, that he was a good man, but he was a Christian. Yea, let but a
spark of fervent devotion break out in a Family, Where Christ comes there will
be opposition.
all the rest are up in clamors; as when Bells ring disorderly, every man is
ready with his bucket to quench the fire; disgraced he must be for a Puritan,
but only by Laodiceans. Indifferency strives to dash zeal out of countenance,
The reason is, wheresoever Christ comes, there will be opposition. When Christ
was borne, all Jerusalem was troubled, and Herod cut the throats of all the
children in Bethlehem: so when Christ is borne in any man, the soul is in an
uproare, and Satan with his instruments are ready to kill in him every good
motion, though it be never so little a Babe.

That which the Ancients did chiefly admire (goodness) we do most of all
contemn: Nothing more contemned then goodness.
for is not the godly man more despised for his godliness, then the wicked for
his wickedness? Are not the members of Christ more hated, and worse entreated
by us, then the limbs of the Devil? What suppressing and disgracing is there
of Hels, and Romes chiefest adversaries, under the aspersion and pretense of
Puritanisme.

Whereas if the same men, would but bear them company in their sins, be
drunk, swear, temporise, contemn holiness, mispend their time, haunt
Play Houses and Tavernes, play the good fellows, and do as the rest do, they
should have the approbation and good word of the greatest number; yea, if they
would not be precise in their actions, nor reprove others for their evil
courses; Would we accompany them in evil, their malice would cease.
if they would not speak against pluralities, Non-residents, lazy and
good fellow Pastors, who either starve or quite neglect, or else mis-leade
their flocks; if they would but be profane and wicked, and make no bones of
sin, their malice would cease, and we should not have a Puritan in all the
World.

SECT. 51.
AS let me appeal from their tongues to their hearts, We may appeal to
themselves who are the honester men.
and from their mouths to their consciences, whether this be not the greatest
cause of their quarrel, We refuse to pledge them in their wicked customs. Or
we will not break Gods Law, to conform to theirs. It faring between us and
our adversaries; as between Socrates, and the Athenians: who said unto them in
his apollogie, I love, and embrace you, O Athenians* but yet I will obey God
rather than you. Yea, may not all see (saving such as the Prince of darkness
has blinded) that those for the most part, whom the World speaks so basely
of, are before men, in respect of any scandalous offenses or open crimes,
unblamable, and may say with the Lamb, whom they follow, Which of you can
rebuke me of sin, though with Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. they think themselves the
worst of sinners? And do not their adversaries know, that the men whom they
term Puritans, are honester men, and more righteous than themselves, as
Pharaoh was forced to confess touching Moses? Exodus 10.16, 17. They think not
as they speak.
And Saul touching David? 1 Samuel 26.21. Yea, I know they are persuaded well of
them, even when they speak most to the contrary, though I expect not they
should use them thereafter. We know Pilate judged Christ guiltless, but yet he
put him to death. And Festus acknowledged that Paul was without crime, yet he
left him in prison. I dare say Tertullus knew that he lied, when he called
Paul a Pestilent fellow: his conscience could not choose but answer him, Thou
lie in thy throat Tertulus, Paul is an honester man than thy self. And must
not these men's consciences tell them, that the same they accuse so, are in
their lives the most unreproveable of the Land? Yea, I will appeal to their
greatest adversaries, whether the Protestant at large, or those who are called
Puritans, be of the purest Religion, and most reformed to the Primitive Church?
For not seldom are wicked men's judgments forced to yield unto that truth,
against which their affections maintain a rebellion* And yet, as if they would
stamp Gods Image on the Devils dross, and the Devils Image on Gods silver,
they justify those actions and persons, which God condemns, and condemn those
which he justifies.

True these enemies to holiness spare not to cast asper^^ions on us, They
asperse us out of policy.
else how should they work their wills? How should Naboth be cleanly put to
death, if he be not first accused of blasphemy? 1 Kin. 21.13. and the like of
Joseph, Eliah, Jeremiah, Susanna, Paul, Stephen, and our Savior Christ himself
But if you mark it, they are as guilty of the crimes whereof they be accused,
as Joseph was, in forcing of his Mi^tris, or as Naboth and the rest were, of
those things which were laid to their charge.

I speak not of those monsters, those white Devils who make Religion a
stalking Hor^e to villainy. I know too many dishonor God, by wearing of his
livery. But what was Satan to the children of God, Job 1.6. though he thrust
himself into their company? Or what wise man will tax all the Apostles because
one was a Judas. To tax all for the faults of a few, is only the art of a fool.
To argue, because some are so and so, therefore the rest are alike, is a
saplesse reason, only becoming a fool. An argument, that deserves rather
laughter, than belief.

Yet most men are (...) fools, Most m^n fools and beasts.
or rather brute beasts, led with sensuality, and made to be taken and
destroyed, as Saint Peter speaks, who because they love to speak evil of the
way of truth, 2 Pet. 2.2.12. If they see but an hipocrite discover himself,
they not only harden themselves in their sins, and, as it were, break their
own necks at this stumbling block, being Satan's trap, set on purpose to catch
their blind souls in, but condemn all the rest of his profession to be such
as he is, save that they dissemble their hypocrisy more closly and cunningly;
which is as equal and ^u^t, as it was for Simeon and Levi to murder all the
Sechemites for the offense only of Hamors Son. But as all are not thieves that
Dogs bark at; so all are not hypocrites which they term so. But admit there
were more than there are: the faults of many, should not make us uncharitable
to all: Nor the goodness of some, make us credulous of the rest.

SECT. 52.
INdeed, as all our enemies are not alike witty, The Character of a malicious
scoffer.
so they are not alike malicious, for some transcend this way, as Doeg did the
rest of Saul's servants another way, you shall know such an one by these few
marks; his hatred is so inveterate and universal, that he spends all his
wits in frothy scoffs, and invectives against the whole people of God? and as
if the door were not wide enough except he set open all the windows, and break
down the walls to let in this infectious air, his tongue scrues something
against the religious into all discourses; and when his own invention fails,
it shall be supplied with what he has heard: for as the Papists never found
any error spued out by the Ancients, but they have licked it up,
superstitiously to abuse the same: so he never hears of any scoff, slander,
or devilish invective formerly devised, but he licks it up, that he may spit
it out again in the face of some Professor, or on the other side poison those
with whom he does converse; being to his company like a mad dog, that so biteth
every one he meets, that they become mad too, and as apt to bite others as
himself; or in case he meets with another like himself in wit and malice, it
may be said of them, as Diogenes spoke of two ill conditioned women, when he
saw them talking, See how the viper and the Aspe are changing poison. And
nothing so tickles the spleen, or glads the heart of such, as that discourse
which may most shame profession, disgrace Relion, and dishonor God. But, O
that ever those tongues, which dare call God Father, should suffer themselves
thus to be moved and possessed by that unclean spirit! Or that ever the church
should own such for her children. In the Primitive times, the Church would have
denied her blessing to such a Son, that should have thought himself
disparaged by serving Christ, and wearing of his livery, although he had not
scoft at others: How strangely wicked men gull themselves
yet this man flatters himself that he is a Christian; yea, you cannot beat him
from it, but that he is as good a Christian as the precisest, and shall go to
Heaven as soon. But let him that reads, consider whether it be not a fearful
thing, to lend to Satan the heart for devinng, the tongue for uttering, and the
ear for hearing of calumnies, and all this to disgrace the grace of God in his
children, and make it fruitless to themselves and others. O impiety to be
abhorred: Such sport on earth is only sport for the Fiends in Hell, and let
them look to it, for such joys may chance to cost them eternal mourning; yea,
certainly, if the infernal Tophet be not for them (in case they repent not) it
can challenge no guests; for I may well say unto such an one, Many sinners have
done wickly, but thou surpassest them al; thine is such a superlative, such a
soul murdering sin, that no other sin can parallel it.

SECT. 53.
BUt thou have plenty of excuses to pacify thy blinded and benumbed conscience:
Some of the^ excuses.
Yea, thou want not some carnal reasons to make it good, as an easy
in^ention may put false matters into true Sylogismes: And amongst the rest,
thou would not have men singular: wherefore that they may have less zeal
and more temper, thou seek to allay their heat with frumps, and scoffs, and
taunts, and jeeres; as how often do we hear remiss professors strive to
choke all forward holiness and zeal by commending the golden mean? For
carnal men (who cleave as close to custom, and example of the greatest
number, as clay to a Cart Wheel) think every one exorbitant, that walks not
after their rule, Singularity our great and grevious crime.
1 Pet. 4.4. As the Sodomites thought of Lot, Genesis 19.9. the hundred and twenty
Governors of Daniel, Dan. 6.11. and the Caldeans of Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego, Dan. 3.10. to 30. Daniel of all Darius his servants was so bold as to
pray three times a day, not in contempt of the King of Babilons decree, but in
zeal and obedience to the God of Heavens command: the Governors ^^ranging at
it, accuse him, and say, this Daniel which is of the captivity, regards not
thee O King, nor the Decree which thou have signed; but does so and so:
wherefore command we pray thee, that he be cast into the Lions den, for no
decree, nor statute which the King establishes may be altered, Dan. 6. Again,
what disorder is this that I hear of you, To obey God rather than men great
disorders
says Nebuchadnezzer to Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego: will you not serve my
Gods, nor worship the golden Image that I have set up, Dan. 3.14. who answered
no, be it known unto thee O King, we are not careful to answer thee in this
matter: they were all as stiff as if they had eaten a stake, and they could
not bow to an Idol: as the godly have been in all ages, not being able to
wheel with the times. Yea, they that truly fear God are usually as immovable
as the Sun in its course, because they think, and speak, and live by rule, and
not by example, and hold themselves as fast tied, as if they had the oath given
them, which the (...) solemnly presented to their Judges, (...) to sw^rve from
t^eir consciences wh^^ ^^mmand soever they should (...) themselves to the
contrary (...) strictness is a great eyesore (...) men: who hate singularity,
almost as they do sanctity, which makes them so cry it down.

Common protestants can be of any religion.
And no marvel, for these men, and so all Protestants at large, so scorn to be
singular, that they will conform to any Religion the State shall establish:
yea, should they be commanded to worship a Calfe with the Israelites, Exodus
32.4. or a golden Image with the Chaldeans, Dan. 3.7. They would instantly do
it; as the times of Queen Mary, witness: Good honest men, let them enjoy
their communities; peace, and plenty: any Religion shall serve their turn.
They are as indifferent as Doctor Kitching, who being Abbot, was first the
Popes sworn Servant: then an half Papist, King Henry having cast off the
Pope: a Protestant under Edward the sixth: a down right Papist with Queen
Marie: And a Parliament Protestant again, when he took the Oath of Supremasy
under Queen Elizabeth. Of whose faith I take most Protestants at large to be;
For let them hear of a change in Religion, it shall never a whit trouble them:
What cares a stupefied worldling, for the removal of our Candlestick? What is
it to him if the superstition, and blindness of Popery did over-shadow the
Land? and turn day into night: It is nothing to him, if he can but see to get
money. Light or darkness, Scripture or tradition, the King or the Pope, Christ
or Antichrist, are all one to him; to hear a Sermon, or see a Mass, he likes
them both alike.

Perhaps they may think better of themselves; Yet none think better of them
selves.
and until they be put to it, resolve stoutly: but a temporaries Religion, and
flashes are but like Conduites running with wine at the coronation: that will
not hold, or like a land flood, that seems to be a great Sea, but comes to
nothing.

Now these are the men (if you observe them) that cry out so against
singularity: which imputation, together with their extolling the mean, is a
cunning discouragement, How Satan plays the S^phister.
but it is the Devils Sophistry; for the mean of virtue, is between two
kinds, not between two degrees: it is a mean grace, that loves a mean
degree of grace.

Yet this is the only staff, with which the World beats all that are better
then themselves. Discresion eats up devotion.
What will you be singular? Or are you wiser then all? Or what is this but want
of discretion? And to speak truth, that which worldly men call discretion,
eats up all true wisdom: Their discretion and moderate stayednesse, devoures
all true honesty, and goodness. But shall Lot* leave his righteousness for
such an imputation of singularity? Or shall he not depart Sodom, because the
whole City thinks it better to stay there still? Shall Noah leave building the
Arc, and so himself, and his whole household perish, because all the World
else thinks him hairebrained? Or must the name of a Puritan, dishearten us
from the service of God? No, but as Saint Paul said in his Apollogy, Acts
24.14. after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my
Fathers: so we in this case, After the way which profane men call
Puritanisme, let my soul desire to serve Jesus Christ.

SECT. 54.
Ob. I Grant (will the more moderate worldling say) in such cases wherein the
word of God is express, singularity is not lawful only, but laudable: But
(which makes my spleen rise) they will not conform to things indifferent

Answ. Goodmen may differ in many things; yet agree in the main,
A seduced heart deceives thee in so saying, why else do thou cast the same
aspersions, upon such as are conformable.

But admit they only are thorns in thine Eyes* do thou well to hate all that are not of thy own judgment, or that have tenderer consciences then thy
self? No, for honest and good men may differ in opinion, not only in things
trivial, but in matters of great moment; provided they agree in the
fundamental articles of the Catholic faith, and yet may, and ought to
continue brotherly love and communion, as members of the same mystical body:
as many examples witness, both of eminent Christians, and Fathers of the
Church: as also our Saviors words, who speaking of the fundamental points,
penneth the league thus, He that is not with us, is against us, but o^ points
not fundamental thus, He tha^ is not against us, is with us. Wherea^ these
differ from thee (if thou be a true Protestant as thou would be thought
to be) in nothing material, for there is a vast difference, A vast difference
between another discipline, and another Doctrine.
between another discipline, and another doctrine: and they little differ, that
agree in matter. Only their consciences are not so large as thine: and thou
think those things indifferent, which they cannot assent unto though they
take more pains to satisfy and inform themselves then thou do. But admit
they be things of an indifferent nature, That indifferent to one, that is not
so to another,
even actions of indifferency, when once they are felt to trench upon the
conscience, lay deep obligations upon the soul, even whiles they are most
slighted by careless hearts: there being no less difference in consciences,
then stomachs, of which some will digest the hardest meats, and turn over
substances not in their nature edible, whiles others surfeite of the lightest
food, and complain even of dainties.

And indeed, ^o be scrupulous (...) ill sign.
every gracious heart is in some measure scrupulous, and finds more safety in
fear then in presumption: And certainly, in cases of a doubtful and
questionable nature, it is ever good to take the surest side, and which draws
nearest to probability. Many things are of so questionable a nature, In cases
of a doubtful nature, we should take the surest side.
that much may be said on either side: Now if I choose that side, on which I am
sure I shall not sin, I deserve to be excused, rather then censured; if I use
them it is possible I may sin, it may be they are not sinful: yet I am not so
sure of it that I shall not sin if I use them, as I am sure I shall not sin,
nor break any of Gods Commandments if I do not use them. This I may be bold to
build upon, He that sails amongst Rocks, it is possible he may escape
splitting, but he is not so sure to keep his Vessel safe, and whole, as he
that sails in a clear Sea, where no Rocks are at all.

SECT. 55. they would ^^our us ou^ of our faith

Qu. But to speak really, and as the truth is, why do they use all these
discouragements?

An. Their only aim is, to make us square our lives according to their Rule;
as that Gya^t did proportion the bodies of all his guests, to the bed of his
Harlot; Yea, if they would give their tongues liberty to acquaint us with their
hearts and consciences, they must needs confess, that they use that odious
nickname (devised by Satan himself) for no other end, but to slout men out of
their faith and holy profession, and to bring the very truth of Religion, and
power of godliness into contempt and scorn.

And indeed, whom not heroical in fortitude (the case standing as it does)
would it not discourage and beat back to the world? And effect the same did not
God support us,
But thanks be given to God, his Spirit herein so hardneth and steeleth his
servants, that their faces are like flint, and themselves like brazen walls,
and defenced Cities, though otherwise soft in affection, and true professors of
meekness.

Yea, undoubtedly, he must be more then man (that is, To be a Christian
requires fortitude.
more spirit then flesh) that can contentedly make himself contemptible to
follow Christ, be pointed at for singularity, endure so many base and vile
nicknames, as are every where cast upon the conscionable (for there is scarce a
house, but is haunted with these kind of spirits, familiars, visible and
carnal Devils, soule-murtherers) have his religion ^udged Hypocrisy; his
Christian prudence, cra^t and policy; his godly simplicity, silliness his
zeal, madness* his punctual obedience to Gods Laws, rebellion to Princes*
his contempt of the world, ignorance: his godly sorrow, dumpishnes, etc. For
these and the like as unseasonable fro^s, nip all gracious offers and
beginnings in the bud, and as much as in them lies, with Herod labor to kill
Christ in young professors Yea, the censures and scoffs of these Atheists and
Worldlings, like the blasts of Rams-hornes before the walls of Jericho, lay all the strength of a young beginners virtues level at one utterance: yea, it is
the only Remora and greatest cause of arrest, if any look heavenward, Good
men will hold their profession though they lose their lives.
that makes them recoyle.

True, a wise man will not be scoft out of his money, nor a just man be flouted
out of his faith* Yea, like John Baptist, he will hold his profession, though
he loose his head for it. If Christ have but once possessed the affections,
there is no dis-possessing him again. The league that Heaven has made, Hell
wants power to break. If the sweet doctrine of Christ be once gotten into the
heart, it cannot be got out again by all the torments which wit and cruelty
can devise, as we see in the Martyrs.

If we cannot concoct evil words, we would nev^r endure blows.
Neither would he ever endure a blow, who cannot concoct a foul word. He that
is discouraged and made return with an Ishmaelitish persecution of the tongue:
how would he endure a Spanish Inquisition, or those Marian times? He that is
so frighted with a squib, how would he endure the mouth of a Cannon? But to
proceed.

For a man to be scoft out of his goodness, To be scoft out of our goodness
how rediculous
by those that are lewd, is all one, as if a man that sees should blindfold
himself, or put out his eyes, because some blind wretches revile and scoff at
him for seeing: or as if one that is sound of limbs, should limpe, or maime
himself, to please the Criple, and avoid his taunts. For my part, I had rather
live hated of all men for goodness, then be beloved of al for vice; and rather
please one good man, then content a thousand bad ones; his single authority
being sufficient to countervaile the disdain of a whole Parish of sensualists.

Yet experience shows, The most will do as he most to,
That diverse are content to be misled with the multitude, rather then be an
object of their scorn and derision. Yea thousands hold it the best and safest
way, in differences of religion, without further question, to take the stronger
part; that so doing as the most do, they may have the fewest to find fault
with them, and al through base cowardlinesse. Which bashful devil never leaves
a great many, so long as they live; whereby with the rich man, Luke 16. they
never think of heaven, Satan gets more by subtilty than by violence.
till tormented in the flames of hell.

Whereas Satan formerly assaulted the Church by violence, now he does it by
deceit: and certainly the devil gets more by such discouragements, and the
reproaches that are cast upon religion, then he did formerly by fire and
Faggot; for then the blood of the Martyrs was found to be the seed of the
Church, others (Phoenix-like) springing out of their ashes, whereas now
multitudes of souls are scoft out of their religion by wicked men. But I grieve
to see how they wrong themselves, in thus wronging others: for in that wicked
men do so mock and deride such as are in love with heavenly things, it is hard
to say whether they do most offend in hindering the honor of God thereby, or
their neighbors welfare, or their own salvation.

Some will better abide a stake than others a mock.
Alas, some men will better abide a stake, then some others can a mock.
Zedikiah was willing to hearken to the Prophets council, but that this lay in
his way, the Chaldeans would mock him, Ier. 38.10. it was death to him to be
mocked. A generons nature is more wounded with the tongue, than with the hand:
yea, above hell there is not a greater punishment, then to become a Sannio, a
subject of scorn: as Sampson, I doubt not, found. Alcibiades did profess,
That neither the proscription of his goods, nor his banishment, nor the wounds
received in his body, were so grievous to him as one scornful word of his
enemy C^esiphon.

Thou think not tongue-taunts to be persecution, Tongue-taunts in G^ds
account is per^ecution.
but thou shall once hear it so pronounced in thy bill of indictment, Ishmael
did but flout Isaac, yet Saint Paul says, he persecuted him, Gal. 4.29. God
calls the scorning of his servants by no better a name, then persecution. And
what ever thou conceivest of it, let this sault be as far from my soul, as my
soul from hell.

And thus you see, That nothing but goodness is the whet^^on of their malice;
None but the desperately wicked will malice an other for goodness.
which being so, are not we heathenish Christians? What honor of Christ is
there among us, where Religion makes one contemptible? Is this Christian-like?
Such men may be Christians in show, or name, but they are devils indeed
(however they flatter themselves) resembling the high Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, who called themselves the Church: while they went about to kill the
head of the Church: who the same night that Christ instituted the Sacrament,
and consulted how to save them, did consult how they might destroy him: yea,
let any indifferent stander by, judge whether thou be not bottomlessely ill,
who do malice goodness in others, who art displeased with us, because we
please God, and murmurest like the Scribes and Pharisees at the same things,
whereat the Angels rejoice: for none but a Caine, or a Devil in condition,
will envy, because his own works are evil, and his brothers good. They are
desperately wicked, that cannot endure so much as the sight of godliness: as
he was fearfully idle, that Seneca speaks of, whose sides would ache to see
another work: Neither could thou do so if the Devil were not in thine
heart. And so much touching the third difference between the seed of the
Serpent, and the seed of the woman.

SECT. 56
4 They are wroth with us becu^se we fare better then they
4 FOurthly, as they hate and persecute the godly, because they do well: so
likewise, because they fare well, and are accepted before them. As why was
Caine wroth with his brother Abel, and after slew him, as affirms the holy
Ghost, but because, The Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering: but
unto Cain and his offering, he had no respect? Genesis 4.4, 5. Why did Esau hate
Jacob, and purpose to kill him, but because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him? Gen 27.41. Isaacs blessing bred Esaus hate. Again,
Wherefore did the Philistines and Abimelek envy Isaac, Of which many examples.
stop up his wells, and banish him from them, but because the Lord so
abundantly blessed Isaac, as appears, Genesis 26 12. to 18. Wherefore did Joseph's
brethren hate him, not being able to speak peaceably unto him, and after sell
him into Egypt, but because his father more favored him, and they feared he
should reign over them? Genesis 37.4. If Joseph be his fathers darling, he is his
brethrens eyesore. Wherefore did Saul persecute David, and pursue after him
from place to place to take away his life, but because he was so praised and
preferred of the people before himself, and, The Lord was with David, and
prospered him in every thing he took in hand, 1 Samuel 18.12, 13, 28, 29. David's
success is Saul's vexation: yea, he finds not so much pleasure in his
Kingdom, as vexation in the prosperity of David. And lastly, (for I pass by
the elder brothers envy in the Parable against his younger brother, when his
father so royally entertained him at his return, Luke 15.28. which is meant of
the Jews envying the Gentiles conversion; and many the like instances.) Why
was Eliab wroth with his younger brother, 1 Samuel 17.28. but because he should
be more exalted? And I doubt me, whether David's brethren were more glad, that
Goliath was slain, or angry that he was slain by their brother: The good man's
honor, the envious man's torment.
for envy is sick, if her neighbor be well; and the good man's honor, is the
envious man's torment: as it fared between Haman and Mordecai as hereafter the
glory of Christ shall add to these reprobates confusion, when they are driven
to confess, This is he, whom we once had in derision.

SECT. 57.
Application first to unhollowed Ministers.
BUt to apply what has been collected out of the Word. See whether these
examples suit not with some, and not a few in our times. As,

First, why do a sort of Ministers (none of the best) I mean such as live ill
and viciously, or preach ill and unprofitably, or both live ill, and preach
ill, malign, hate and traduce, yea, promote against such as preach more
faithfully and powerfully, and live more holily and unblameably, but because
God honors their Ministry with the conversion of souls, and their words are
with such power, that the people flock after them, as they were wont after
Christ* while in the mean time themselves are neglected and dis-esteemed,
being as they suppose far greater scholars (for if a Minister preach
profitably, they will give it out he is no scholar, neither can they do Satan
a greater pleasure) and their Sermons more elaborate, for they will be as long
in the conception and breeding of them, as an Elephant is of her young; which
being borne only amazeth the hearers, and makes them at their wits end with
admiration, their own bosoms will tell them, that I speak truth.

They cry up practice to cry down preaching
Again, why do these men inveigh and preach against preaching? As, what needs
so much preaching, say they (and all stupefied sensualists) it was never a good
world, since so many Lectures were set up: there was more love, and charity,
and plainedealing among our forefathers (they mean in time of Popery) who
were only verst in the Lords Prayer, Creed, and ten Commandments; one Sermon
well remembered, and put in practice, is better then ten; yea, quoth a Minister
in the pulpit, that preached ( himself) once in six weeks, that he might
silence his Parishioners, who complained for want of their daily food, you will
find this Sermon more then you will be able to practice this two months; and
no question, spoke out of feeling; for he having lived already above five ages,
could never yet put those five words of his text into practice, viz. Repent and
believe the Gospel. But the reason of this their murmuring is easy: Carnal
worldlings cry up practice, to cry down knowledge, as you may see by their own
practice: even as cunning Papists will extol Saint James, only to disparage
Saint Paul.

This point would be further applied, This sore will not endure rubbing.
but let conscience do it; for it is a sore that will not endure rubbing:
only this, if any man be vexed at his brother, because he fares better, and is
better accepted, because he is favored and respected of God and good men,
while himself is neglected and disesteemed of both; much more, if he belch
out his spleen against the religious, because they are praised and preferred
before himself; let him know, that this could not be if he were not full of
the venom of the serpent, Psalm. 112.10. Pro. 14.30.

SECT. 58.
SEcondly, Application thereof to the rabble.
this may be applied to people of the looser sort. As, why do their hearts
rise against every holy man they see? as some stomachs, rise at sweetmeats.
Why do all drunkards and vicious livers hate the religious, and so belch out
their enmity and spleen against them, in raising and spreading of slanders as
they do; but although, partly to rescue themselves from contempt, and procure
a contrary esteem, by putting a foul and ugly vizard upon virtue, and decking
up vice in a gorgeous and comely attire; yet chiefly, because they are precious
in Gods sight, his peculiar, and chosen people out of all the world, the
children of God, and members of Christ, temples of the holy Ghost: yea,
chiefly, because they partake of the Divine Nature, and are one with the Father
and the Son? John 17.14, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 6.18.

This is the eyesore of our enemies and let envy look herself blind.

And so much of the first Cause.

SECT. 59.
A second cause is ignorance
Quest. WHat is the second Cause, why ungodly men hate and persecute the
religious?

Answ. Their ignorance of God, of Christ, and the Scriptures.

Quest. How is that proved?

Answ. By Testimonies, Examples, Reason, and our own Experience.

1. First, Proved 1. by testimonies.
by Testimonies: They shall hate and persecute you, yea, they shall
excommunicate and kill you for my Names sake, says our Savior to his
Disciples, because they have not known the Father, nor me, John 16.2, 3. and
15.21. And again they are an offense unto us, because they understand not the
things which are of God, but the things which are of men, Matthew. 16.23. And are
deceived, because they know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God,
Matthew. 22.29. Luke 19.42.

2. Secondly, by Examples and Reason. This the Apostle confesses to have been
the cause of his persecuting the Church, 2 By examples.
1 Timothy 1.13. Who so soon as he was enlightened with the saving knowledge of the
truth, changed his note, with his name, and preached that faith, which before
be persecuted, Its worth the noting, how he was no sooner informed, but he was
reformed. Now if we look upon him as Saul, we shall see what we are by
generation; if we look upon him as Paul, we shall see what we are, or should
be, by regeneration. Neither is it strange, that the world through ignorance,
should hate and persecute the members of Christ: for upon the same ground, they
even crucified Christ himself, Father forgive them, says he of his
murderers, for they know not what they do. And why have the Kings of the
earth, in all ages banded themselves together against the Lord, and against his
Christ, Psalm. 22. But because they knew him not. John 15.21. For if the Princes
of this world had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, as
the holy Ghost speaks, 1 Cor. 2.8.

Wicked beholding to the godly for their lives.
Alas poor ignorant souls, they did but imitate Oedipus: who killed his Father
Laius King of Thebes; and thought he had killed his enemy. And what do the
Cavaliers now, in killing the Saints? But as if one with his Hatchet, should
cut off the bough of a tree; upon which he stands. For they are beholding to
the Religious, for their very breath. Neither is their great plot, any other
piece of policy; then as if the Sodomites, should make have to turn out Lot
and his Family: that fire and brimstone may make have, to destroy them. For as
when Noah, and his Family were once entered the Arc, the Flood came and
destroyed the first World, Genesis 7.11, 13. So the number of Christ's Church being
accomplished fire shall come down to destroy the second World, at which time,
the Devil and all Reprobates shall be laid up in hell.

Oh the wickedness, Malignants as witless as wicked.
and witlesnesse of our Malignants! Methinkes the Parliament, may justly twit
their unnatural Country: as Themistocles once did his Athenians, with these
words: Are ye weary of receiving so many benifits by one Assembly. And
certainly if ever it shall be dissolved without their consent, (which God forbid)
it would fair with the causers of it, (men's eyes being opened) as it did with
the Authors of Socrates his death: which I find thus reported.

After that Socrates was put to death at Athens; Arastophones rehearsed a
Tragedy of his, concerning Palamides: at the hearing whereof, the people were
so moved: that they presently fell upon the Authors of Socrates his death, and
drew them forth to punishment.

But to return, to what we intend: If we consider it rightly, we shall find,
that ignorance is the cause of all sin. Sin indeed at the first was the cause
of ignorance, but now ignorance is the cause of sin: Swearing, and lying, and
killing, and stealing, and whoring abound, says the Prophet, because there is
no knowledge of God in the land, Hos. 4.1.2. It is a people that do err in
their hearts. says God, why? because they have not known my ways, Psalm.
95.10.

SECT. 60.
3 THirdly, Experience proves, that none are so far transported with a mad
and supertitious zeal against the religious, 3 By experience.
as the rude rabble who can yield no other reason, or confession of their
faith, if they be asked, then this, that they are no Puritans, or that they
hate a Puritan from their souls; when as the devil himself, who hates the
Puritan they mean, most of any, can make as good a confession of his faith as
this. For who are the greatest censurers, and the violentest opposers of
goodness, are not the ignorant fry, who have more rage than reason and the
more fottish still, the more insolent.

As reprove one of them for swearing, The more ignorant the more malicious.
or drunkenness, or unjust dealing, or for profaning the Lords day, for
Atheism, and the like, you are sure to be branded with the odious title of
Puritan, yea you are factious, and schismatic, if ye will not be drunk,
and every whit as lewd as they are.

It is worth a large smile, to observe what a clamor the blundering rabble
will make against the people of God, if one in their company but mention the
word Puritan, or tell them how scrupulous and precise such an one is. O what a
number of sharp and deadly arrows will each of them shoot, both at the good and
goodness, maugre all admonition! For each being stung with the Gad-slie of
mis-governed zeal, as Paul was before he knew Christ, they presume to affirm
with incredible impudence, accompanied with invincible ignorance, that there
are not worse men in the world then the religious.

Wherein it is hard to say, whether ignorance or malice, do more abound:
whether it be more out of the strength of will, or weakness of judgment.

It is the nature of ignorant and carnal men (that walk after the flesh in
the lusts of uncleanness, They allwaies make the worst construction of things
whom Saint Peter calls bruit beasts, led with sensuality) to speak evil of
the things they understand not 2 Pet. 2.12. Especially in judging acts of zeal
and piety, their opinion still lights upon the worst sense, like them in the
second of the Acts, who mocked the Apostles when they were filled with the holy
Ghost, and hearing them speak languages, which they understood not, cried out,
These men are drunk with new wine.

Until we be borne again, we are like Nicodemus who knew not what it was to
be born again, John 3.4. Until we become zealous our selves, we are like
Festus, who thought zeal madness, Acts 26.24. Until we be humble our selves,
we are like Michal, who mocked David for his humility, and thought him a fool,
for dancing before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.16. Yea, to such as shall perish, or are
for the present in a perishing condition, all religion seems foolishness, 1
Cor 1.18.

ignorance causes su^pition su^pition hatred, etc.
And thus you see in gross, that Ignorance is a main cause of hatred and
persecution. We shall more clearly discern how it comes to be so, if we note
The Root, Ignorance, The Stem, Suspicion, or Jealousy, The Sap, Hatred, The
Fruit, Persecution.
severally, and apart; for ignorance causes. Suspicion; and Suspicion, Hatred;
and Hatred, Persecution. But I cannot stand upon these.

SECT. 61.
Qu. IF Ignorance be such a general cause of hatred and persecution, Ob. That
great scholars and wisemen do the same, answered.
as you have shewre, What is the reason, that so many great Scholars and wise
men do also hate and persecute the godly?

Ans. Great scholars they may be, and wise men also, in the worlds esteem,
but in the maine, and in Gods account they are nothing so: for admit they have
enlightened heads, sufficient to leave them without excuse, yet because they
withhold the truth in unrighteousness, and do not glorify God with their
knowledge, neither are thankful, but become vain in their imaginations, their
foolish hearts are darkened; and so while they profess themselves to be wise,
in changing the truth of God into a lie, they become fools, and express it, by
thus hating God and his children, Romans 1.18.21.22.25.30. So that Ignorance is
the cause even in them also.

Their actions prove them ignorant.
And indeed if they were wise, they would foresee the torments of hell, and
prevent them, as Bernard speaks. Or if they knew God, they would keep his
commandments, for hereby, says Saint John, is it known that we know God, if
we keep his Commandments, 1 John 2.3. but he that says I know him, and yet
keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and there is no truth in him, Ver. 4.
Yea these have sworn to keep the commandments, and to deny the world, and
yet are not content with their own disobedience, unless they cast aspersions
upon them that obey.

The first part of conversion is to love them that love God.
Again thirdly, if they knew Christ, they could not but love him; and loving
him, they must needs love his members, not persecute them; for it is the very
first part of our conversion, to love them that love God, 1 John 3.14. and
4.7.8. and Joh. 13.35. But so many as are enemies to the cross of Christ, show
that they never knew God in Christ.

As for their wisdom and learning; you must know that men may be ^xquisitely
wise, and incomparably learned in the worlds opinion, and yet very fools in
Gods account, 1 Cor. 3.19. As sharp-eyed as Eagles in the things of the earth,
and yet as blind as Beetles in the matters of heaven. And knowledge consists
not so much in the quantity, as in the quality: not in the greatness, but in
the goodness of it. For as a little precious stone is of more worth then many
other stones of greater bulk: so one drop of wisdom guided by the fear of
God, is more worth then all humane learning. One spark of spiritual,
experimentiall and saving knowledge, is worth a whole flame of secular wisdom
and learning. One scruple of holiness, one dram of faith, one grain of grace,
is more worth then many pounds of natural parts.

But learning and grace do not always keep company together. Many that have a
depth of knowledge are not soule-wise.
Yea, O Lord, how many are there, that have a depth of knowledge, yet are not
soule-wise! That have a Library of Divinity in their heads, and not so much as
the least Catechism in their consciences? no rare thing for men to abound in
speculation, and be bar^en in devotion: to have full brains, and empty hearts;
clear judgments, and defiled affections; fluent tongues; and lame hands: Yea,
you shall hear a flood in the tongue, when ye cannot see one drop in the life.

For example, I might instance in Balaam, Examples of many wise in the worlds
esteem, but fools in Gods account.
whom the holy Ghost styles a fool, 2 Peter 2.16. And Judas Mat. 27.3, 4, 5.
And Paul, before his conversion, who (even while he was a persecuter like
these men) was eminent among the Pharisees for wit and learning, but a very
Idiot among the Apostles. And lastly, the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who
were matchless for their wisdom and learning, as wanting nothing, that either
nature or Art could enrich them withal: With God the greatest sinner is the
greatest fool, and he most wise, that is most religious.
yea, and they were chiefly learned in the Scripture, Gods Oracles, which will
make a man wise, or nothing: and yet our Savior (who could not be deceived)
calls them four times in one Chapter blind, and twice fools, Mat.
23.16.17.19.24.26. Because they wanted faith and holiness, which are the
sinews and nerves, yea the soul of saving knowledge, inlivening, feeding and
strengthening the same; for in the dialect of the Scripture, a fool is a
natural man, and a wise man, a man sanctified.

Alas! God regards not lip-learning, and tongue-wisdome, and braine-knowledge,
except it ceize upon the heart also, and lead captive the affections to the
government of the Gospel, whereby we are changed and transformed into new men,
after the image of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.12. Ephesians. 4.20. to 25. Col. 3.10. except we
digest our knowledge into practice, God regards not brain knowledge, except it
seize on the heart also.
and employ our wisdom to his glory that gave it, our neighbors good, and the
furthering of our own salvation: For with him wickedness is folly, and the
greatest sinner is the greatest fool: and he most wise, that is most
religious, and that offends least, Prove. 1.7. Job. 28.28. Prove. 9.10.12. and
11.3. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Hosea 14.9. James 3.13.17. 2 Timothy 3.15. And he that is truly
wise, thinks that to be wisdom, and folly, which God thinks so.

Neither is that worth the name of knowledge which may be heard only, and not
seen. Good discourse, is but the froth of wisdom; the pure and solid substance
of it, is in well framed actions. What says the Scripture? Keep the
Commandments of God, and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding
before God and men, Deuteronomy. 4 6. And again, He that is a wise man and endued with
knowledge, will show it by his conversation in good works, James 3.13. For,

SECT. 62.
Rightly a man knows no more then he practices.
RIghtly, a man knows no more then he practices. It is said of Christ, 2 Cor.
5, 21. that he knew no sin, because he did no sin: in which sense, he knows
no good, that does no good. And certainly, they who wander in the bypath of
sin and error, declare themselves ignorant of the right way of salvation, Romans
3.17.

Saving knowledge of the truth works a love of the truth known; it is an
uniforme consent of knowledge and action, Job 28.28. He only is wise, says
Solomon, that is wise for himself, Prove. 9.12. He whose conscience pulls all
he hears and reads to his heart, and his heart to God; who turns his
knowledge to faith, his faith to feeling, and all to walk worthy of his
Redeemer he; that subdues his sensual desires and appetite to the more noble
faculties of the soul, Saving knowledge described.
Reason, and Understanding, and makes that understanding of his serve him, by
whom it is, and does understand; he that subdues his lust to his will; submits
his will to reason, his reason to faith; his faith, his reason, his will,
himself, to the will of God, this is practical, experimental, and saving
knowledge, to which the other is but a bare name or title. For, what is the
notionall sweetness of honey, to the experimental taste of it? It is one
thing to know what riches are, and where they be; and another thing to be
master of them. It is not the knowing, but the possessing of them, that makes
rich. What says one? No more then the knowledge of goodness, makes one to be
named a good man; no more does the knowledge of wisdom only, cause any person
properly to be called a wiseman. And certainly, that wisdom and learning is
little worth, which nothing profits the owner of it, either to virtue or
happiness. These things if ye know, happy are ye if ye do them, John 13.17.
So that he is the best Scholar, that learnes of Christ obedience, humility,
etc. He the best Arithmetician, that can add grace to grace. He the best
learned, that knows how to be saved. Yea, all the Arts in the world are
Artlesse Arts to this.

That the meanest believer knows more then the profoundest naturian.
But alas! Natural men are so far from being thus learned, that not one of
them does really, and by his own experience know the chief Points of
Christian Religion; such as are, Faith, Repentance, Regeneration, the Love of
God, the Presence of the Spirit, the Remission of sins, the Effusion of
Grace, the Possession of heavenly Comforts; he knows not what the peace of
Conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost is, nor what the communion of Saints
means; he knows not what it is to have a certain and experimental feeling,
with a continual proof of Gods favor, in the whole passage of a man's life,
and practice, etc. Prove. 24.7. when every of these are easy and familiar to
the meanest and simplest believer.

SECT. 63.
Object. In what sense the word ca^ worldly men wisemen.
BUt the Word of God in diverse places calls worldly men wise men; yea ascribes
the greatest wisdom and knowledge to the wicked.

Answ. Its true, but in what sense? Do ye not perceive, that God either speaks
it in a holy derision? as, Genesis 3.22. is to be understood: Or else he speaks
it in the person of the wicked, calling it wisdom, because worldly men deem it
so: as in another place, he calls preaching, the foolishnes of preaching,
because the wicked esteem preaching but foolishness: and as Christ calls the
Pharisees just, because they justified themselves, Luke 15.7. Or thirdly, he
means the wisdom of the flesh, or of the world; and that is as much, as if he
had said in other words, foolishness: for the wisdom of the world is
foolishness with God, and no less then twelve times infatuated by the wisdom
of God in one Chapter, 1 Cor. 2.

What knowledge! is peculiar to the godly, and what common to them with
Hipocrits.
But to make it more plain, that no natural man is a wise man, we must know
that there is a speculative knowledge in the brain common to hypocrites with
Gods children, Heb. 6.4. And there is a spiritual and heavenly wisdom, a
practical, experimental and saving knowledge in the heart, which keeps a man
from every evil way, Prove. 2.12. peculiar to the godly alone, Ephesians. 4.8. and
5.8. The natural man, says Paul, perceives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him: but the spiritual, who have the mind
of Christ, understand all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14,
15, 16. And again, We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery; even the hid
wisdom, which none of the princes of this world have known, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8.
See 1 Thessalonians. 5.4, 5. Whence it is, that natural men are said to be in
darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Matthew. 4.16. whereas the regenerate are called, Children
of the light, and of the day, 1 Th^ss. 5.4, 5. Luke 1.79.

Which comparison is very emphaticall. For as the Soul, is the lamp of the
body; and (...) Reason, of the Soul; and Religion, of Reason; and Faith of
Religion: so Christ is the light and life of faith. Whence it follows, that as
mere sense is incapable of the rules of reason: so reason is no less
incapable of the things which are supernatural. And as to speak, is only
proper to men: so to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven is only proper
to believers. Sense is a mere beasts; reason, a mere man's; Divine knowledge
is only the Christians.

Now if it be asked, Natural men want both the light of the spirit, and the eye
of faith.
Why a natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God? Saint Paul,
in the place before quoted, answers; He cannot know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. For if they be spiritually discerned, how
should they discern them, that have not the Spirit? For as no man can see the
Sun, but by the light of the Sun: so no man can know the secrets of God, but by
the revelation of God, 1 Cor. 12.8. Mat. 16.17. To know the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, we must have hearts* eyes and ears sanctified from above,
Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. Psalm. 111.10. Luke 24.45. John 15.15. Rom, 8.14, 15.

No attaining supernatuaral kuowledg by any natural means.
Neither is spiritual and ^^avenly wisdom the fruit of time and study, as the
natural is. It is not eloquence, nor Logical demonstrations, that can make us
capable of it. We cannot attain to supernatural and celestial knowledge, by
any natural and terrestrial means. No learning, nor experience will serve to
know that great mystery of godliness, and hid wisdom, spoken of, 1 Cor. 2.6,
7, 8, 10, etc. to know the riches of the glory of Gods inheritance in the
Saints, to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, etc. Ephesians. 1.17,
18. and 3.19. Because this wisdom descends from above, James 3.17.

SECT. 64.
Saving knowledge given to none but good men.
2 SEcondly, As none can attain to this precious grace of saving knowledge,
except it be given them from above: so, it is a jewel of such worth, that God
gives it to none but his children the godly, and such as he knows will improve
their knowledge to his glory. The servant (says Christ, meaning the ungodly
man) knows not his masters will, Of which many instances.
but I have called you friends (speaking to his Apostles, and in them, to all
that are converted) for all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made
known unto you, John 15.15. Surely, says Solomon, to a man that is good in
his sight, God gives wisdom and knowledge, Eccles. 2.26. Intimating, that he
does not so to the evil man. The Wise, that is, the godly, says Daniel, shall
understand, but none of the wicked shall have understanding, Dan. 12.10. A
scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not; but knowledge is easy to him that
will understand. Pro. 14.6. that is, to him that will be bettered by his
understanding. Wicked men understand not judgment, but they that seek the
Lord, understand all things, Prove. 28.5. and 3.32. They which observe the
Commandments, have a good understanding, says David, Psalm. 111.10. the rest
have an ill understanding, and a vain; an understanding, like that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, which was enough to condemn them, but not to save them.

Such as are delivered up to counsels, and brought before Rulers, and Kings in
defense of the Gospel: are straightly charged by our Savior, Divine assistance
in time of trial.
neither to premeditate, or take thought before hand how, or what to answer:
because the holy Ghost shall teach them in that very hour; what they ought to
say, or rather, the holy Ghost shall speak in them, Mark. 13.9.11. Luke 12.11,
12. And which of the Martyrs did not find the same verified? Alice Drivers,
being a poor man's daughter; and brought up at the Plow: in defense of Gods
truth, and in the cause of Christ at her examination; put all the Doctors to
silence; so that they had not a word to say, but one looked upon another.
Indeed Bonner thought, he had non-plust a plain fellow with his Sophistry
about the real presence: But he answered him to the purpose, My Lord (quoth
he) I cannot so well dispute for the truth, as you can against it: but I can
burn for the truth, which you will never do. And did it, a good argument to
prove, that he knew truth from falsehood, better than the Bishop.

The same further amplified.
Thus as no man can see God, and live: so no man can see Christ, who is God,
sitting at the right hand of his Father in heaven, so long as he lives a mere
natural man, 1 Cor. 2.14. God will not power new wine, but into new vessels,
Matthew. 9.17. Christ is said to have expounded all things to his Disciples
apart, to show, that if we will have Christ to teach us, we must go apart
from the world. If any will do Gods will, says our Savior, he shall know the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or no, John 7.17. So that no man can learn
this doctrine, but he that does it: as no man could learn the Virgins song, but
they that sang it, Revel. 14.3. Yea, if the fear of the Lord, as Solomon
speaks, is the beginning of wisdom, how should they have wisdom, that have
not the fear of the Lord? All unrepentant sinners are enemies to God, servants
to Satan: now we men, do not tell our secrets to enemies; neither will an
Artificer teach another man's servant his trade: but the righteous are Christ's
friends, and brethren, and sisters, and father, and mother, between whom there
is a kind of familiarity, so that he makes them of his counsel, His secrets,
says Solomon, are with the righteous, Pro. 3.32. And again, Psalm. ^^.14. The
secrets of the Lord are revealed to them that fear him, and his Covenant is to
give them understanding.

They that would have this talent must resolve to improve it
See this in Abraham's example, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?
says God, Genesis 18.17. As if this were an offense in God, if he should tell the
righteous no more then he tells the wicked.

Be^ides, What should he do with a talent, that will not improve it? And let a
wicked man know never so much he is resolved to be never the better man. And
they that are unwilling to obey, God thinks unworthy to know: which is but
equity.

The way to obtain true wisdom.
Indeed, if they will put off, concerning their former conversation, the old
man, with his corruptions, and deceiveable lusts, and be changed, by the
renewing of their minds and by putting on the new man, which after God is
treated in righteousness and true holiness, Ephe. 4.20. to 25. Col. 3.10. 2
Cor. 5.17. 1 John 4.7. Then they shall see what the good and acceptable, and
perfect will of God is, as Saint Paul, and our Savior Christ shows, Romans 12.2.
Matthew. 5.8. For God in the person of wisdom has made a general promise to
all that will serve him, Prove. 1. If thou will turn, says God, at my
correction, I will power out my heart unto thee, and make thee understand my
words, Verse 23. But else, they shall blindly go on in persecuting Christ and
his members, perhaps to the killing of his Prophets, and think also that they
do God good service, John 16.2.3. For as they like not to retain God in their
knowledge, says the Apostle, so God shall give them over to vile affections,
and to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. And because they will not receive the
truth in love, that they might be saved, therefore God shall send them strong
delusions, that they might believe lies: that all they might be damned, which
believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10.11.12.

And is it not just with God, to say, they would none of Christ, let them
welcome Satan and Antichrist?

SECT. 65.
Quest. WHat instruction from the premises? Instruction from the premises. 1.
For all natural men.


Ans. As it ought to stop all wicked men's mouths: so it may both serve for
direction and comfort to the godly, and to inform all.

First, If it be so, that all natural men are incapable of divine and
supernatural knowledge, that they are blind touching spiritual things: let
not any carnal wretch hereafter dare to speak evil of the things, actions
and persons, which are out of the reach of his capasity, but silently suspend
his judgment, until he is better informed. For as it pertains not to the
rusticke to judge of Letters, so it belongs not to natural men to judge of
spiritual things. And in matters of sensure, nothing but a certain knowledge
should make us give a certain judgment; and in the mean time, confess, that
Joseph may know his brethren although they know not him. He which is
spiritual, discerns all things; yet he himself is Judged of no man, 1 Cor.
2.14. that is, of no natural man.

2 For such as speak evil of the way of truth,
2. Let those that have used to speak evil of the way of truth, learn to
kick no more against the pricks, lest they bring the same curse upon
themselves, that those did, which brought up an evil report of the holy Land,
viz. that, As they never entered into the terrestrial Canaan: So these never
enter into the Celestial. Yea, put case they shall think to do God good
service in it: for there is a way. says Solomon, that seems right to a man,
but the issues thereof are the ways of death Pro. 14.22.

As many shall think, When they do worst they think they do well.
they do God good service, in putting his children so death, Ioh. 16.2. even
that Monk thought no less, who poisoned Henry the seventh Emperor of Germany
with the sacramental bread. And so did the Powder Traitors, intending to blow
up the whole State. Maximinian thought, the blood of christians would be an
acceptable sacrifice to his Gods. So Francis the second of France; And Phillip
the second of Spain: thought of the Lutherans blood in their dominions. In the
sixth council of Toledo it was inacted; that the King of Spain, should suffer
none to live in his dominions that professed not the Roman Catholic Religion:
Whereupon King Philip having hardly escaped shipwreck, as he returned from the
Low Countries said: he was delivered by the singular providence of God, to root
out Lutheranisme; which he presently began to do; prosessing that he had
rather have no Subjects then such. In which opinion many depart: But as men go
to a Lottery, with heads full of hopes: but return with hearts full of
blankes; so will it one day fare with these men.

3 For Gods people.
3 If all who deride and persecute the godly, are ignorant persons, as has been
proved: then let not Gods children be discouraged, maugre all slander and
opposition; nor think the worse of themselves, if such reproach them never so.
The Corinthians exceedingly slighted Paul, he was this and he was that; But
what says Pa^l? With me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of
you, 1 Cor. 43.3, 4* Alas! the best of them ^aw no more than Saint Paul's
outside; the grace of his heart, the raptures of his soul, the ravishing
delights of the inward man, and the like spiritual privileges, more glorious
than the states of Kingdoms, were to these sensualists as a covered mess. And
indeed, natural men are as ^it to judge of spiritual matters, as ^^^nd men
are fit to judge of colors. We know Little child^e^ will often laugh at wise
men when they are about serious and necessary affairs and business, which
notwithstanding is not an argument of the unworthines of the things they laugh
at, but of the folly of them which laugh. Will the Mercha^t be discouraged,
because his wine pleases not a sick man's palate; when those that are in health
commend it, and himself knows it to be good? Much less cause have we to be
discouraged, having more certainety to rely upon. Our enemies have Sense,
Reason, and Experience to confirm their judgments; but we have them, with an
advantage of three infalliable witnesses, Gods word, and Spirit, and Faith.
Wherefore henceforward let us take our Saviors Council, and seek to justify
our judgments to the children of Wisdom, of whom she is justified; and not to
fools, by whom she is daily crucified. Neither let any think the better of
such whom they extol, for the blind eat many a fly.

4 This shows that they suspect much, A fourth Use.
because they know little, as Children in the dark suppose they see, what they
see not. They complain, like the Owl, of the glory of the Sun, when the fault
is in their own eyes, They are blind, yet the misery is, they see not that they
are blind; and therefore believing that they see, they accuse others of
schism, when indeed themselves are only guilty of prejudice; as a blind man
running against one that sees, calls him blind that did not shun him. They
are like Harpast, a blind woman in Seneca's family, who would not be persuaded
that she was blind; but found fault with the house wherein she was, as being
over dark.

A fifth use.
5. If none are truly wise, but such as have past the second birth, it gives us
to understand that the regenerate (for the most part) sleep nigh half their
time in ignorance, that the wicked are never awake. And if this Wisdom
comes down from the Father of lights, and that we cannot have it, except God
vouchsafe to give it us; It may teach us to be humble, Ioh. 42.6. And not like
the Ape, that is proud of his Masters Jacket. Heavenly notions grow not in us,
we spin them not out of our own breasts: And thankful; for it they be given,
let us not forget the giver.

A sixth use.
6. If all natural men are like blind Sampson without his guide, not able
without the Holy ^hosts direction to find out the pillars of the house, the
principles of faith, let us not wonder that they swerve so much from the godly,
in their judgments and practice. Is it any strange thing, to see a blind man
stumble and fall? Yea, let us condole all their disasters, and drop some
tears, in pity and compassion for their great and grievous misery.

7. And lastly, A seventh use.
If with God one spark of spiritual experimental and saving knowledge be of
more worth than all secular Wisdom, and Learning; then strive we for that
knowledge which will make the knower blessed. Let us so be learned; that we may
be saved. Let us not in our hearing, and reading, and communication, do as
little children, that look only upon the Babyes in a book, without regard to
the matter therein contained: but like men in years, have more respect to the
pith and solidity of the matter, than to the phrase; and to the profit of our
souls than the pleasing of our senses. And so much of the second cause.

SECT. 66.
Quest. WHat is the third cause, why ungodly men hate and persecute the
Religious? The third cause is unbeleefe. Proved,


Answ. Their infidelity and unbelief.

Quest. How does that appear?

1 By testimonys.
Answ. I will demonstrate it beyond denial.

Why do the Heathen rage, says David, and the people murmr, the Kings of
the Earth band themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together, against the
Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bands, etc. Psalm.
2.1. to 4. but this they think always, there is no God, God is not in all
their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. And again, They break in pieces thy people, O
Lord, and afflict thine ^eritage, etc. the reason follows, they say the Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, Psalm. 94.5, 6, 7. And
what says our Savior to the Jews, Ye seek to kill me, because my Word has
no place in you, John 8.37. that is, they believed not what he^ spoke, nor the
Scriptures which testified of him.

2. By examples.
If ye will see it in Examples, look 2 King. 18.35. Dan. 3.15. Exodus 5.2.

Or if in the New Testament, see Acts 17. where the Holy Ghost makes a decision
between such as did, and such as did not believe; Paul, when in the Synagogue
he disputed with them, by the Scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ
must have suffered, risen again, etc. for says the Text, So many of the Jews
as believed, and of the Grecians and chief women as feared God, joined
themselves in company with Paul and Silas. But those that believed not, moved
with envy, took unto them certain Vagabonds, and wicked fellows, with the
multitude, and made a tumult in the City, and assaulted the house of Jason,
drawing out him, and as many of the brethren as they could find, and brought
them before the people, and the heads of the City, crying; These are they which
have subverted the State of the world, and they all do against the decrees of
Caesar, etc. And lastly, look but 1 Timothy 1. you shall hear Saint Paul most
ingenuously confessing, I was a blasphemer, a persecuter, and an opposer of
Christ, and his members; but I did it ignorantly, through unbelie^e, v. 13.

Now they which think, all whatsoever is written in Scripture, of God, of
Christ, and of His Kingdom of Grace here, and glory hereafter, to be but a
fable: as that impious Pope did, who was not ashamed blasphemously to boast
what he had gained by Fabula de Christo: And all Machivillian Atheists, who
think Religion to be but a Politic device, to keep men in awe, do; whose
number is greater than is supposed. These, I say, must needs think them mad
and foolish, who lose thereby either profit, or pleasure, and use them
accordingly.

SECT. 67.
Men think they believe, but do not.
TRue, this might seem an absurd position, if I should presume upon an Appeal
to their own blinded consciences; for they think, they believe in God, and
the Scriptures, as well as the precisest: and so did those Jews, John 5. which
persecuted Jesus, and sought to slay him, think they believed Moses writings:
but it is plain, they did not, by Christ's answer to them, who knew their
hearts better than themselves: his words are, Had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me, for he wrote of me: but if ye believe not his writings, how
should ye believe my words? ver. 46, 47, And again, Ye have not my Fathers
Word abiding in you, for whom he has sent, him ye believe not, Ver. 38, 39.
So bring these, that persecute any of Gods Children for well doing, to the
trial, and their own consciences shall testify before God, that they neither
believe the Old Testament nor the New.

For did they believe that the godly are unto God as the Signet upon his right
hand, Evidences of men's unbeleife.
Jer. 22.24. Zach. 2.24. Yea, as the Apple of his own eye. Zach. 2.8. and that
whatsoever wrongs and contumelies are done to his Children, he accounts as done
to himself, Psalm. 44.22. and 69.7, and 74.4, 10, 18, 22, 23, and 83.2, 5, 6,
and 89, 50, 51, and 139, 20. Prove. 19.3. Romans 1.30 and 9.20, Matthew. 10.22. and
25.45. Luke 21.17. 1 Samuel 17.45. Esaias 37.4.22, 23.28. and 45.9. and 54, 17.
Act. 5.39. and 9.4, 5. Job 9.4. 1 Thessalonians, 4.8. John 15.18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25.
Number. 16.11. 1 Samuel 8.7. They durst not hate, revile, slander, deride,
nicke-name and persecute them, as they do.

The woeful reward of Persecutors.
More particularly, did they really and indeed believe God, when he says in his
word, that whosoever shall offend one of those little ones, that believe in him,
it were better for him rather that a Milston were hung about his neck, and that
he were cast into the sea, Mark 9 42. That he will destroy them for ever, and
root them out of the Land of the living, whose tongues imagine mischeife, and
are like a sharp Razer, that cutteth deceitfully, loving to speak evil, more
than good, Psalm. 52.2. to 5. That he will confound such as persecute his
Children, and destroy them with a double destruction, Jer. 17.18* Yea, that he
will render unto their enemies seven fold into their bosom, their reproach,
wherewith they have reproached the Lord, Psalm. 79.12. In fine, that he will
rain upon them snares of five and brimston, with storms and tempests, Psalm.
11.6. and after all, cast them into a furnace of fire, where shall be wailing
and guashing of teeth, for evermore: when the just, whom they now despise,
shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father: They durst not do as
they do to the godly. Yea, if they did believe but that one place, 2 Kings
2.24. Where God caused two and forty little Children to be devoured of wild
Bears, only for nick-naming Elisha, they durst not nickname the religious as
they do.

Indeed God does not always, Why Persecutors are not punished here
nor often so eminently punish Persecutors in this life as here it fared with
these children: or as it did with Lucian, who for barking against religion like
a dog; was by the just judgment of God devoured of dogs, Or as it did with
Nighti^gall, parson of Crondall in Kent: who was struck dead in the Pulpit,
while he was belching out his spleen against Religion and Goodness. Or as it
did with Stephen Gardener: who would not sit down to dinner, till the news
came of the good Bishops burnt at Oxford. But then came out rejoicing, and
saying to the Duke of Norfolk; Now let us go to dinner: but it was the last
that ever he are, for it. Or as it fared with Arundal Archbishop of
Canterburys: and Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester in their times: who
putting to silence, both the word of God and those that purely preached it:
were themselves put to silence, and so smitten in their tongues that they could
not swallow their meat, nor speak for a good space before they died. True some
flagitious persons God punishes here: least his providence; but not all, least
his patience, and promise of a general judgment should be called in question.

But they bless themselves and think to speed as well as others.
But, alas! they are so far from believing wha^ God threatens in his word,
against these sins; that they bless themselves in their hearts, saying, we
shall have peace, we shall speed as well as the best, although we walk
according to the stubburnnesse of our own wills; so adding drunkenness to
thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Yea, they prefer their condition before other men's, who
are so abstemious, and make Conscience of their ways; even thinking, that
their God deceives them with needless fears and scruples, as once Rabshekab
would have persuaded the Jews, touching their trust and considenec, 2 Kings
18.22, 25, 30, 32 33 35.

Did men believe the word they durst not live as they do.
Yea, how ^'st possible, that any wicked man should believe what is written of
God in the Scripture, especially touching his justice, and severity in
punishing sin, with eternal destruction of body and soul? For did they really
and indeed believe God, when he says, that his curse shall never depart from
the house of the swearer, Zac. 5. They durst not swear, yea and forswear as
they do; much less durst they take a pride inoathing of it, resembling Ballio
the baud in Plautus, who was not ashamed, but even proud of Carting. Yea, which
is worse, reprove a swearer, and he will swear the more to spite you: Which
were not possible; if believing God, they did not, what in them lies, give
themselves over to the Devil.

Again, did they believe, that neither fornicacors, nor Idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor thieves, nor murderers, nor drunkards, nor swearers, nor
raylours, nor liars, nor covetous persons, nor extortioners, nor unbelevers,
nor no unrighteous men shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; but shall have
their part in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death, 1 Cor. 6 9, 10. Revel. 21.8 they durst not continue in the
practice of these sins, without fear, or remorse, or care of amendment. Did
they believe that except their righteousness do exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.20. And that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. with many the like, it were impossible they should live as they do.
Yea, if they did in good earnest believe, that there is either God, or Devil,
Heaven, or Hell, or that they have immortal souls, which shall everlastingly
live in bliss, or woe, and receive according to that they have done in their
bodies, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5.10. they could not but live
thereafter, and make it their principal care, how to be saved.

Natural men fear visible powers but not the invisible God.
But, alas! they believe what they see, and feel, and know; they believe the
Laws of the Land, that there are places and kinds of punishment here below,
and that they have bodies to suffer temporal smart, if they transgress; and
this makes them abstain from murder, felony, and the like: but they believe
not things invisible, and to come; for if they did, they would as well, yea,
much more, fear him that has power to cast both body and soul into hell, as
they do the temporal Magistrate, that has only power to kill the body: They
would think it a very hard bargain, to win the whole world, and lose their
own souls, Luke 9.25.

But, alas! if visible powers were not more feared than the invi^ble GOD, and
the Halter more than Hell (natural men being like beasts, that are more
sensible of the flash of powder, than of the Bullet) the World would be
over-runne with outrage: Whereas now, even the worst of the Serpents seed, by
reason of Authority, are kept in a mean between Devils and Christians; so
living like beasts because they think they shall die like beasts, without any
answer for ought they have either acted, or left undone.

SECT. 68.
TRue, None so confirmed in Atheism but fear in time of danger.
they do not always, nor at any time altogether, think there is no GOD, or
judgment to come. Not always, for though at present they think their villainy
is uns^ene, because it is unpunished, according to that in the Psalms, The
wicked thinks there is no Go^, and the reason follows, his ways always
prosper, Psalm. 10 4, 5 yet none as Plato speaks, are so confirmed in
Atheism, but some great danger will make them fly to the aid of a Divine
power. Extremity of distress will send the prophanest to God: as the drowning
man stretches out his hand to that bough, which he contemned whiles he stood
safe on shore: Even Sardanapalus who for all his bold denying of God, at every
hearing of thunder was wont to hide his head in a hole.

Yea, in their greatest jollity, even the most secure heart in the world has
some flashes of fear, that seize on them like an Arrest of Treason; for
conscience cannot but sometimes look out of it self, and see what it would
not.

At least on their death beds they con^esse a God.
At least, on their death beds they would give all the world to be sure what
the Scripture speaks of Hell were not true; though all their life they
supposed it but a fable. How often do those ruffians, that deny God at the
Tap-house, preach him at the Gallows: and confess that in sobriety of spirit,
which they oppugned in wantonness. And not seldom are the most lethargized
consciences so awakened ere they go to Hell, that, Spira-like, they depart
desolate and desperate in, and into hellish horrors.

Prosperity does so tympanize men's souls, and entranse them from themselves,
that they forget they had a Maker. Who is God? says Pharaoh. There is no God,
says Nebuchadnezar. What God can deliver out of my hand? Vengance makes wi^e
whom sin makes foolish.
says Rabshakeh. I am God, says Alexander. But Nebuchadnezer found there was
a God. Pharaoh found what that God was. Rabshakeh found, to his cost, that
there was an Almighty God, able to deliver in the Valleys* as well as on the
hills. Alexander found he was not as he supposed, and confessed that he knew
himself mortal by two things, viz. Sleep* and Lust. And so it shall fare
with these in the end. They that would stultizare in culpa, shall be forced
sapere in poena. Vengeance shall make them wise, whom sin has made, and left
foolish.

At least, in hell they shall know there is a righteous Judge, that will reward
every man according to his deeds* and confess, that what they once vainly
imagined, was but imagined. There may be Atheists on earth, Atheists on earth
but none in hell.
there are none in hell.

A Pope of Rome being on his death bed, said, Now comes three things to trial,
which all my life I have made doubt of: Whether there be a God, a Devil, and
whether the soul be immortal: It was not long ere he was fully resolved with
a vengeance. And so shall you, O ye fools, when that hour comes, though ye
flatter your selves for the present, like that desperate Pirate, who when
(ransacking and rifling a bottom) he was told by the Master, that though no Law
co^ld touch him for the present, he should answer it at the day of judgment;
replied, Nay, If I may stay so long ere I come to it, To consider before it
prove too late.
I will take thee, and thy Vessel too. Nothing more certain than death.
Amongst Laws, some are antiquated, as that of divorce: some changed, as that
of Circumcision: some dispensed withal, as that of the Sabbath (in cases of
necessity, Matthew. 12.1. to 14.) but this statutum est, that all shall dye, and
come to judgment, it is neither antiquated nor changed, nor dispensed withal.

And as nothing is more certain than death: so nothing more uncertain than the
hour thereof: thy pulse may leave beating, before thou can fetch thy breath.

Wherefore think not, as Lot's Sons in Law, that we speak in jest: least you
feel the fire and wrath of God in earnest.

SECT. 69.
2 SEcondly, The most grounded Atheism h^th a m^xture o^ bele^fe.
nor at any time do they altogether think there is no God, etc. For as the
best faith is but like the twilight, mixed with some degree of darkness and
infidelity: so the most grounded Atheism, is mixed with some degree, either of
belief or doubting. What says David, The fool has said in his heart there
is no God: in his heart he has said it, but in his heart he never believed
it: No fool ever thought it peremptorily; he would fain have it so: he cannot
believe it so: it is an opinion which he suggests to his heart, not which his
heart suggests to him: and this makes him fearful to dye, and to dye fearfully.

Tully speaking of Metrodorus, an Atheist in his time, says, Nec quemquam
vidi, qui magis ea timeret, quae timenda esse negaret. They that make a flout
of Hell, Affirmant mihi and tibi, non sibi; noctu, non interdiu; their mouths
tell us so, Atheists would give all they have to be sure there were no hell.
their hearts do not tell their mouths so. No hell I dare say, if there were a
general collection made throughout the whole world, that there might be no
judgment day, these men would be none of the backwardest. Yea, if they had as
many Provinces, as Ahasuerus had, they would give an hundred and six and twenty
of them to be sure of it. The consciences even of wicked men can never be so
charmed, or overruled, either by arguments, or the temptations of Satan, that
they can let go the sense of a Godhead. We are all borne Idolaters, and choose
rather to adore the Sun, the Moon, yea the meanest of all creatures, rather
than not acknowledge a Deity. You may sooner get a Conscience to believe all
the fables in the Popish legend, or Turkish Alcaro^, than that this universal
frame is without a mind. -- Prima est haec ultio, quod, se
Iudice, nemo nocens absolvitur --


So that to say truly, They do and yet do not believe a God, etc.
they do not, and yet they do believe there is a God, and a Hell: for when
they admit conscience into their council, they do believe: but because they
would rather not believe it, they stifle Conscience, stop their own ears, and
flatter their hearts with the contrary opinion: Like as it fared with the
Philistims of Ashdod, 1 Samuel 6. who when they had stood out that sore judgment
seven months, and brought upon their god Dagon, and the whole Country, a very
great destruction, and perceived, that all which were guilty of keeping and
profaning the Arc, suffered in the judgment, and only they; at last could
bring forth this conclusion, Peradventure it is God's hand that smote us; yet,
it may be, it is but a chance that has hapened unto us, Ver. 9.

Wherein it is evident, they did half believe, and no more; Their consciences
told their hearts there was a powerful God, to revenge the profaning of his
Arc; but their hearts were very loath to give assent thereunto: and so fares it
with these, when they wrong and persecute his Children, Or they may be likened
to those untoward Israelites, Exodus 16. Who did in part believe God, when he
told them, If they reserved of the Manna until morning, it should stink; and
that if they went to gather it on the Sabbath, they should find none, who
would have thought it foul scorn, if one should have told them, they believed
no such thing: for all they had seen so many Miracles, yet it is apparent, they
did but half believe him: for what else made them try whether he spoke true
or no, after they were flatly forbidden? ver. 20. or,

Lastly, they are like the unbeleeving Jews, Their convicted consciences shall
but witness against their unbeleefe.
who considering the Oracles that CHRIST spoke, and the Miracles which he
wrought, were forced to testify both these of him (for all they hated him)
never man spoke as this man does; and We never saw it on this fashion: yet this
have ye seen, and believe not, says our SAVIOR John 6. 36. They saw, they
heard, they wondered, they were convinced, yet they believed not: therefore
their own eyes in seeing; their own ears, in hearing; their own hearts, in
wondering; their own convicted reasons shall but witness against their
unbeleefe, Ioh. 16.9.

And indeed, Men may doubt, but the devils believe a judgment to come.
if they did not in some part believe a Judgment to come, they should be worse
than the very Devils themselves: there is no Hell, Quis Daemonum hoc asseret?
What Devil will so affirm? They know it, and feel it, Why (say the Legion to
Christ) art thou come to torment us before the time, Matthew. 8.29. And shall not
men tremble to deny, what the Devils confess? says Chrysostom.

Wherefore believe it peremptorily, ^ ye fools and mad men; yea believe it,
and avoid it, and by believing to purpose, ye shall avoid it: otherwise, if ye
will give more credit to your deceitful hearts, Fire and b^imstone shall
confute all Athe^sts.
than to what the Word speaks as Eve believed the word of the Serpent, Adam the
word of Eve, both before the Word of God, God will leave you to be confuted by
fire and brimston; if you will not believe what is written, you shall feel what
is written.

SECT. 70.
They that believe not the threa^s can yet pre^ume upon Gods mercy.
Ob. BUT here it will be objected, That the wickedest man that lives, presumes
upon Gods mercy in Christ, and thinks he shall be saved, as well as the ^heife
upon the Cross; yea, he will prove by Scripture, that at what time soever h^
repents, his sins shall be pardoned, Ezech. 18.21, 22. Yea, there is scarce a
man on earth, but he thinks to go to Heaven.

Answ. True, the flesh prophesies prosperity to sin; yea life, and salvation,
as the Pope promised the Powder Traitors; and to this the Devil sets his
s^ale: whe^^upon while prosperity lasts, they can turn the grace of God into
want^n^esse, and even apply Christ's Passion, as a warrant for their
licenciousnesse; and take his death, as a license to sin; his Cross, as a
Letters Pattent to do mischeife.

Yea, the Devil and sin so infatuates and besots them, The devil and sin do
infatuate and besot the wicked.
that they think to have part in that merit, which in every part they have so
abused; to be purged by that blood which now they take al occasions to
disgrace; to be saved by the same wounds, which they swear by, and so often
swear away; to have Christ an Advocate for them in the next life, when they are
Advocates against Christ in this; and that Heaven will meet them at their last
hour, when all their life long they have galloped in the beaten road toward
Hell.

The Devil makes large promises, and persuades his, they shall have what they
desire; yet ever disappoints them of their hopes, as he did our first Parents:
Diabolus mentitur, ut fallet; vitam pollicetur, ut perimat, A carnal heart is
flint to God, wax to the Devil.
says Saint Cyprian.

But all one, their carnal hearts shall be flint unto God, wax to the Devil,
who blows this presumption into them; whereby they believe the promises, let
go the threatenings: You shall die, says God, is heard, but You shall not die,
says the Devil, is believed, as it fared with Eve, when she eat the forbidden
fruit. Yea, they believe the promises, that they shall have them; but they
believe not the precepts, to do them; nor the threatenings, that they shall
suffer them, for their not believing and disobedience; which shows, that they
truly believe neither. Yea, this makes it plain, that either they believe there
is no God at all, or else that God is not just, and true, nor speaks as he
means in his word; which is worse: Carnal men believe the promises but not
the precepts nor threats
or if they do believe that he is a just and true God, they believe also that
they shall be punished (as he threatens) for their provoking of him; and they
provoke him, that they may be punished; which is worst of all. So that take
them in the best sense, they are but like David's fool, which says in his
heart there is no God, and lives thereafter: which is never a whit strange, for
it is usual with them to think there is no God, for whom it would make that
there were none: what we would have to be, we are apt to believe.

I confess, it is hard for men to believe their own unbelief in this case:
they that be most dangerously sick, Hard for men to believe their own
unbelief.
are least sensible of their own sickness; much more hard to make them
confess it; for he whose heart speaks Atheism, will confess with his
tongue, that he believes there is a God, and that he is just, and true, and
that every tittle of his Word is equally ^rue: which being granted, this must
necessarily follow, that God will as well punish the disobedient, as reward the
obedient; which in another fit they are apt enough, yea too forward to believe.

For it is Satan's method, Wicked men either presume or despair.
first to make men so senseless, as not to feel their sins at all; and then
so desperate, that they feel them too much: in the first fit men live as if
there were no Hell: in the last they die as if there were no Heaven; for wicked
men are altogether in extremes; at first they make question whether this or
that be a sin, at last they apprehend it such a sin, that they make question
whether it can be forgiven: either God is so merciful, that they may live how
they list; or so just, that he will not pardon them upon their repentance.

SECT. 71.
BUt to prevent after claps, let this point be argued in the Court of thy
Conscience: say, whether thou art guilty, or not guilty. He that believes the
promises of God, to be true, believes also the commands and threatenings, and
thereupon fears God, Notes of trial touching belief and unbelief.
and makes conscience of sin; otherwise, if thou be as it were a dead man,
continuing under the burden of notorious crimes, without sorrow, or fear, or
remorse, or care of amendment, Ephesians. 2 1. If thou art of a reprobate judgment
touching actions, and persons, esteeming good evil, and evil good, if the Devil
has so bewitched thee, that thou preferrest Hell to Heaven, and blamest those
that do otherwise: if, Ishmael-like, thou mockest; or, Cham-like, thou scoffest
at the religious, or usest bitter jests against them, Psalm. 1.1. Ephesians. 5.4. If
thou raisest slanders of them, or furtherest them being raised, Psalm. 4.2 and
31.18 and 35.20. As the Red Dragon, Rev. 12. cast a flood of water out of his
mouth, after the Woman, when he could not reach her with his claws, verse 15.
Or any way opposest them; for the opposition of goodness, gives thee the title
of wickedness, which alone is the enemy thereof, and shows that thou art a
Soldier of the great Dragon, who goes out to make War with that blessed Seed,
which keep the Commandments of God, Rev. 12.17. These or any one of these, show
that thou have neither part nor fellowship in the Christian belief* that thou
art an Infidel, yea an Atheist, which is a higher degree of infidelity, and
that thou do no way differ from an Heathen, but only in the saying of a
Pater noster, a Creed, and, it may be, the ten Commandments: neither have thou
any more of a conscience, than fear, which fear also arises more from the power
of the Magistrate, than from the Omnipotency of a God.

But to make thy self confess this, H^w men may examine themselves
examine thy belief by thy life; for infidelity is the bitter root of all
wickedness, and a lively Faith the true Mother of all goodness. Indeed if
pride, sw^aring, profaning of the Lords Day, drunkenness, adultery, contempt
of Religion and all goodness were fruits of Faith, then the World were full of
Believers; but Faith purifieth the Heart, Acts 15.9. and works by love, Gal
5.6. Consumes our natural unnatural corruptions, and sanctifies the whole man
th^oughout, 1 These. 5.23. Acts 26.18 So that our Faith to God is seen in our
faithfulness to men: Show me thy faith by thy works, says S. James, that is,
thy invisible belief, by thy visible life: Men would never do as they do if
they thought they should be called to an account.
for the hand is the best Commentary of the heart. What a man does, I am sure
he thinks: not always what he speaks. Men may say they believe the Word, but
certainly they would never speak as they speak, think as they think, do as
they do, if they thought that their thoughts, words and deeds, should ever come
to judgment.

If men believed that Heaven were so sweet, and Hell so intolerable, as the
word makes them, they would be more obedient upon earth; the voluptuous would
not say, with Esau, Give me the pottage of pleasure, take who will the
Birthright of grace here, and glory hereafter; the Covetous would not say,
Take you Heaven, let us have money. I Will clear it by a similitude.

Most men believe not an hell proved undeniably.
If a Physician should say unto his Patient, here stands a Cordial, which if you
take will cure you; but touch not this other Vial, for that is deadly Poison,
and he refuses the Cordial, to take the Poison; in this case, who can choose
but conclude, that either he believed not his Physician, or preferred death
before life? But go on.

If men but believed, that God always beholds them, they durst not sin. No
Thief was ever so impudent, as to steal in the very face of the Judge. O God,
let me see my self seen by thee, and I shall not dare to offend thee. Again,
if men believed, that there is a place of Darkness, they would fear the works
of Darkness. If Lot's sonnes-in-Law had believed their father, when he told
them the City should suddenly be destroyed with fire and brimstone, and that
by flying they might escape it, they would have obeyed his counsel. If the old
World had believed, that God would indeed, and in good earnest bring such a
Flood upon them, as he threatened, they would not have neglected the opportunity
of entering the Arc, before it was shut up, and the windows of Heaven opened:
much less would they have scofft and flouted at Noah, while he was building
it: so if you did firmly believe what the Scripture speaks of Hell, you would
need no entreaties to avoid it: yea, cast but your eyes upon that fiery gulf
with a full persuasion of it, and sin if you dare* You love your selves well
enough to avoid a known pain, we know that there are Stocks and Bridewells,
and Goales, and Dungeons, and Racks, and Gibbits for Malefactors, and our very
fear keeps us innocent: were your hearts equally assured of those hellish
torments, ye could not, ye durst not continue in those sins, for which they
are prepared: yea, if you did truly believe a hell, there would be more danger
of your despair, than of your security.

Yea, had you but so much of an historical faith, Did men believe what God
has already inflicted on the Angels old World Sodom etc. they would not live
as they do.
as to believe the Scriptures, touching what God has already inflicted upon
sinners; as, upon the Angels, the old world, Sod^me and Gomorrah, Pharaoh and
the Egyptians, Nadab and Abihu, Chora, D^than, and Abyram, with their 250
Captains, and many thousands of the Children of Israel, together with the
whole Nation of the Jews, Hammon and Balaam, Saul and Doeg, Absolon and
Achytophell, Ahab and Iesabell, Senacherib and Nebuc^adnezar, the two Captains
and their fifties, Herod and Judas, Annanias and Saphirah, with a world of
others.

Much more, if you did believe how severely he has dealt with his own
Children, when they sinned against him. viz. with Moses, and Aaron, and Eli,
which were in singular favor with him; yea, with David, a man after his own
heart, and that after his sin was remitted; it were impossible but you would
fear to offend so Jealous a God: for thus you would argue, If God be so just
and severe to his own children, who were so good and gracious; how shall I, a
wicked and ungracious servant, that never did him a piece of good service all
my days, look to be dispensed withal? If the godly suffer so many, and
grievous afflictions here; what shall his adversaries suffer in hell? If
Sampson be thus punished, shall the Philistims escape? If the righteous shall
scarcely be saved, were shall the ungodly and sinner appear? as the Scripture
speaks: 1 Pet. 4.18. For thou can not Imagine, that he will deal after a
new and extraordinary way with thee, and so break the Course of his so Just,
and so long continued proceedings.

SECT. 72.
Admonition to bew^r before it proves too late.
WHerefore dally no longer with your own souls. Are ye Christians in earnest?
Do ye believe the word? or do you not? if ye do not ye are worse than the
Devil: f^r the Devils bel^eve and tremble; they have both faith and fear,
whereas thou have neither fear nor faith. If you be Christians, there is an
hell in your Creed: if there be an hell, How dare you tear Heaven with your
bla^phemies, and bandie the dreadful Name of God in your impure mouths, by
your bloody o^thes and execrations? How dare you ex^rcise your saucy wits in
profane s^offes at religion, and disgrace that blood, whereof hereafter you
would give a thousand worlds for one drop? It is no light or slight offense,
to contemn the brethren of the Son of God: but thou fightest against the very
graces of Gods Spirit, wherever they appear? and notwithstanding thou did
vow in thy baptism, to fight under Christ's banner, against the world the flesh
and the Devil, and to continue his faith^ull soldier and servant unto thy
lives end* as good reason, since he laid down his life to redeem thee, and
has ever since protected and provided for thee; for a very Dog will fight for
his master that feeds him: thou contrarily take part with the world, the
flesh and the Devil, his mortal enemies, and take up arms to fight against
Christ.

Again, Fruits of Atheism wherewith the land abounds.
if there be an hell, and but a tithe of them Christians, who call themselves
so; what means our grinding of faces, like edged tools, and our spilling of
blood, like water? What means our racking of rents, our detention of wages,
our incredible cruelty to servants, our enclosing of Commons, engrossing of
commodities, our griping exactions, with streining the advantages of
greatness, our inequall levies of legal payments, our spightfull suites,
griping usury, our bouzing and quaffing, our bribery, perjury, partiallity, our
sacrilege, simonaicall contracts, and soule-murther, our scurr^ profaneness,
cousoning in bargains, breaking of promises, perfidious underminings, pride,
luxury, wantonness, contempt of Gods Messengers, neglect of his Ordinances,
violation of his days, etc? When if the Word of God be true, we need no other
ground of our last and heaviest doom, than ye have not given, ye have not
visited etc. Mat. 25.41. to 46* Certainly, if the tithe of us be Christians,
If a tithe of us are Christians then there are milions of Christians in hell.
which call our selvrs so, there are abundance of Christians in hell: For what
eyes can but run over, to see for the most part, what lives men lead? There
was a woman much spoken of in some parts of this Land, that lived in a
professed doubt of the D^ity, yea, even after Illumination and Repentance, she
could hardly be comforted; she often protested, that the vicious and offencive
life of a great learned man, in the Town where she dwelt, did occasion those
damned doubts in her mind. And we read that Linacre reading upon the New
Testament the fif^h sixth and seventh Chapters of Saint Matthews Gospel, and
comparing those rules with Christians lives, he threw down the book, and
burst forth into this protestation, Either this is not God's Gospel, or we are
not Christians. Let any man look upon the lives of most men, and then say,
whether the argument be not without all exceptions.

Or let any compare Christians, that live now under Christian Governors: How
far we come short of Primative Christians
with those that lived formerly, under Heathan Persecutors; and it will force
them to confess the same. Athenagoras told the Emperor, in the Primitive
times: that there was not one of the Christians evil manured; unless it were
such as dissembled themselves Christians for some by, and sinister ends. And
Tertullian says of the Christians in his time: non aliunde noscibiles quam de
emendatione vitiorum. And Chrysostom speaks of many in his days, whose
lives were angelical, they so walked up to their principles.

It is the abstract of Religion, to imitate him whom we worship: neither are we
worthy to be called Christians, except we be like him in works: We are not
like Christ, except we do whatsoever God commands, and suffer whatsoever he
inflicts: Now we are naught at doing, but when it comes to suffering, we are
gone: it is the happiness of these cold times, that we are not put to the hot
fire, for trial of our faith and love: if the Wheel should turn, which the
mercy of God forbid, how many would turn from Christ, rather than burn for
him? Most men can be of any religion which proves they are truly of none.
Alas! the greatest number are like Orbilius the Grammarian, who not only
forgot the Letters of his Book, but even his own name: for they not only forget
what is written in Christ's Gospel, but they forget also that they are
Christians, and can be of any religion, for a need which shows their hearts
are truly of none. True, Gods seed is sown, but the Devils fruit comes up:
and, like the Jews we bring Christ Vinegar, when he thirsts for Wine. But what
a shame? What a prodigy is this? We are bound to praise GOD above any Nation
whatsoever, (for what Nation under Heaven in^oyes so much light, or so many
blessings as we?) above any creature, for all the creatures were ordained for
our sakes: and yet Heaven, Earth and Sea, all the Elements, all the Creatures
obey the Word of God; only men, for whom they were all made, ingratefully
rebel against it.

How Gods goodness aggravates our wickedness.
The which, as it mightily aggravates our unthankfulness; so when time comes,
it will gall our Consciences to death. Yea, when we shall consider, that Christ
has removed so many evils from us, and conferred so many good things upon us,
that they are beyond thought, or imagination; and that our recompense of his
love, has been only to do that which he hates, and hate those whom he loves:
it will make us speechless (like him in the Gospel, who wanted his wedding
Garment) as neither expecting mercy, nor daring to ask it: for know this, that
thy own Conscience will once sting thee, like an Adder, to think what Christ
has given, and what he would have forgiven thee, if thou would but have
repented: to think how often thou have been invited to Heaven, how easily thou
might have escaped Hell, how often Christ by his Ambassadors offered thee
remission of sins, and the Kingdom of Heaven freely, if thou would but
believe and repent, and how easily thou might have obtained mercy in those
days, how near thou wast many times to have repented, and yet did suffer the
Devil and the World to keep thee still impenitent, and how the day of mercy is
then past, and will never dawn again.

Men's eyes will be opened on their deathbeds or in hell.
For the same Devil that now shuts your eyes, and labors to keep you blind,
during the presumption of your Life, will open them in the desperation, that
shall wait on you at death, or in Hell: as it fared with the rich man, who when
he was in Hell, lift up his eyes to Heaven; but never before, Luke 16.23. Those
scorching flames opened them to purpose: sin shuts up men's eyes, but
punishment opens them. Satan seldom lets us see our folly, till we be plunged
into some deep extremity; but then he writes it in capital Letters, and pines
it on our foreheads; like one riding to the Pillory: especially on our
deathbeds, he shows us all our sins, in multiplying glasses.

That subtle Siren, with Orphean a^ers; and dexterous warbles: leads us to the
flames of hell, and then derides us with contempt, and triumph. Like a cunning
courtezan; that dallies the Ruffian to undo himself; and then paies him with
a fleere and scorn.

SECT. 73.
BUT I hope I have said enough, and that thou art convinced in thine own
Conscience, that hitherto thou have been a mere Atheist, and that through
Atheism, thou have hated, reviled, and persecuted the godly: If not, Truth is
as much Truth, when it is not acknowledged, as when it is.

Now if thou do confidently, Good council for Scoffers.
and without peradventure believe what the Scripture speaks of God, Heaven,
Hell, etc. If thou beleevest the threatenings and precepts, as well as the
promises, and if thou bear any love to thine own soul, Break off thy sins
by repentance, and oppose the good no longer: give no credit to the flesh, or
the Devil, which prophe^^e prosperity to sin; but believe God and the
Scripture, which manifestly proves, that every man shall be judged according
to his works, Revel. 12.13. and 22.12. Make not Christ a boulster for sin, nor
Gods mercy a warrant for thy continuance in an evil course. Be not therefore
evil, because he is good, least like the foolish builder, thou come short
of thy reckoning; for Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil, John
3.3.8, 9, 10. And not to be a Patron of sin; and there is mercy with God that
he might be feared, not that he might be despised, blasphemed, etc. Psalm.
130.4. Yea, know this and write it in the Table-booke of thy memory, and on the
table of thine heart, that if God's bountifullnesse and long suffering toward
thee, does not lead thee to repentance; it will double thy doom, and increase
the pile of thy torments: for every day, which does not abate of thy reckoning,
will increase it, Qui numerat dotes, numerat dies; and thou by thy hardness
and impenitency, shall but treasure up unto thy self wrath against the day of
wrath, and the declaration of the ^ust judgment of God, Romans 2* 4, 5, 6.

And so much of the third Cause.

SECT. 74.
THere are Eight other Causes (as they make them) why they thus hate and
persecute us. eight other causes of hatred and persecution.


The first is, Speaking of Truth, 1 Speaking of truth.
for which see 1 King. 22.8.17.23, 24.26.27. Ier. 11.19. and 26.8, 9.11. and
36.23.26. and 38.4, 5, 6. Amos 5.10. Mark 6.16. to 29. Act. 16.19. to 25. and
17.5.6.7.13. and 18.11.12, 13. and 19.26. to 34. and 21.27, 28.30.31. and
22.22, 23. and 23.1, 2.12, 13.14. Gal. 4.16. 2 misprision


The second is, Misprision, for which see Act. 24.14. and 26.9.10.11.24. 1
King. 18.17, 18. Psalm. 14. 1 Ier. 44.17, 18, 19. Wisd. 5.4. Matthew. 7.14. and
13.55, 56, 57. and 28, 15. Mark. 5.39.40. and 7, 5, 8.9. John 2.19, 20.21. and
3.3.4. and 7.15.23, 24. and 8.15.57, 58, 59. and 9.16 and 16.2. Act. 2.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11, 12, Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Corinthians. 1.18. to 29. and 2.7, 8, 10,
11.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and 3.18, 19, 20. 2 Timothy 2.26. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Revel.
3.17. 3 Example of the multitude.


The third is, Example of the multitude, touching which read Genesis 19.4. to 12.
Numb. 14.2, 3, 10. and 16.1, to 4. Matthew. 27.20.25, 27, 39, 49. Act. 19.24 to
30.

4 separation.
The fourth is, Separation, for which look Genesis 39.12. to 21. Psalm. 26.4.5. and
101.7. and 119.63.115. Prove. 5.8. and 23.20. Ier. 15.19. Wisd. 2.16. Ioh, 15.19
1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 5.7. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.14. 1 Pet. 4.4. Rev. 18.4.

5 The preaching of some Ministers.
The fifth is, The preaching of some Ministers, for which see Ier. 5.31. and
8.11. and 23.13.14, 15, 16, 17.21, 22, 26, 27.31, 32. Ezekiel. 22.25, 26, 28. Mat.
9.34. Mar. 13.22. Ioh. 5.43. Act. 13.8. and 20.29.30. Romans 16.17, 18. 2 Cor.
2.17. and 11.13.14.15. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3.8. 2 Pet. 2. chapter and 3.3.

6 The scandalous lives of some professors,
The sixth is, The scandalous lives of some Professors, for which see Genesis
9.21.22. and 12, 18, 19. and 19.33, 35, 36. and 20.2.12.16. and 34.13, 14, 15,
16.25, 26. to 31. 1 Samuel 2.12. to 18. 2 Samuel 12.14. Mat. 7.15. and 18.7. and
23.3.14 23, 24, 25, 27. and 26.14, 15, 16.70.72.74. and 27.5. 7 Flocking after
sermons.


The seventh is, Flocking after Sermons for which look Ioh. 11.48. and 12.19.
and 6, 2. and Acts 13.45. Matthew. 4.24, 25. and 15, 30. Mar. 3.10. and 8.1. and
10.1, 2. Luke 5.15. and 6.17, 18, 19. That they may have more company here in
sin, and hereafter in torment


Eighthly, the final Cause is, that they may have more company here in sin,
and hereafter in torments. For which turn to, Psalm. 35.4, 7, 12. and 40.14.
and 56.6 and 59.2, 3. Matthew. 23.13, 15. Luke 11.52. John 11.48. and 12, 10, 11.
and 15.19. Act. 26.11. 1 Pet 4.4. Revel. 12.17. and 13, 15.

But they are all so prolix, Conclusion.
and yet so unmeete to be abbreviated, that if I should handle them, and make
of all but one Volume, they would so swel the heap, that not a few would be
deprived of the whole. He will buy a Manual, or Enchiridion, that will not
buy, a Commentary: and he will read a Curranto, that will not read a
Chronicle History. Yea, it may happen to meet with Patients so desperate: that
although they acknowledge it is of absolute necessity for them to be informed
touching these things, yet having Queasie stomachs; if they see their Potion
big, as well as bitter: will resolve to suffer, yea, to dye rather than take
it.

That will be swallowed by morsells, and easily disgested: which being taken
all at once, will not only cloy, but surfeit.

Wherefore I have divided the whole into parts; of which five are already
published Viz. The Cure of Misprision Complete Armory against evil society
Characters of the kinds of Preaching. Sin Stigmatized. The Victory of Patience.


FINIS.
Imprimatur, John Downeham.


