THE Whole Duty OF A CHRISTIAN: OR, The Character of a true Believer, that
walks in some measure answerable to the Gospel, his Christian profession, and
the millions of Mercies he has received. In reading whereof reflect upon your
selves, and see what comparison there is between that you are, and what you
should be: and then with blessing from above, it will much further you in your
way to Heaven: for therefore are we Christians in name only* because we think
our selves Christians indeed, and already good enough*

2 COR. 13. 5.

The second Impression much enlarged

By R. Y. of Roxwell in Essex.

CHAP. I.
GOod works, and good instructions, are the generative acts of the soul; out of
which spring new posterity to the Church and Gospel. And it is both a happy and
pleasing harmony. when saying and doing go both together. But examples are more
prevalent for the most part then precepts, and acts are better expressions then
words. Precepts show us what we should do, but examples show us how we may do
it; and that what is enjoined may be done of us, because they have been done of
others like our selves. Example is a living and efficacious Sermon; easily
persuading what we intend, while it proves what we persuade to be feasible.
Besides, Examples give a quicker and deeper impression upon men's spirits then
arguments. And he persuades unto virtue most, who lives best. Yea cer^ainly a
speechless life has more force in it, then a lifelesse speech* For a
Christian conversation, is of the Scriptures, the best, truest, and plainest
Comment or Exposition.

2. Or should it be questionable in some cases, yet deeds are ever of more
power then words, and practice more prevalent then precepts with the multitude:
who as they are more taken with, so they are better able to judge by the sight
of the eye then by the hearing of the ear. When the Orthodox and Arian Bishops
contended about the faith, Iovinian could say, Of your learning I cannot so
well judge, or of your subtle disputations; but I can observe which of you
have the better behaviors. Good works are unanswerable Syllogismes, invincible
demonstrations: And it is natural for men to follow the Law of fact, before
the Law of faith; a visible pattern rather then a mere audible doctrine. Men
are readier to live by sense and ^ight then by faith only: Yea the want of
sight, causes not seldom the want of faith, as we find it fared with Thomas,
Joh. 20. 25.

3. Men are apt to carp against what the Minister speaks, though he bring the
Word for his warrant; but the Beauty of Holiness has often stolen away the
hearts of the gainsayers, and won their affections even against their wills.
Religion has a truth and a power in it: people will never believe the truth of
a doctrine in our mouths, where they see not the power thereof in our lives.
Nor can it be denied, but that words are of more efficacy and authority when
deeds follow. But take some instances whereof we have ample experience. And
first observe how it fares between Pastors and their people; for from the
Pastors example they all take fire, as one torch lights many.

Pastors are the glass, the scool, the book,
Where peoples eyes do learn, do read, do look.
Every private Christian ought to be a common line in Christianity; but the
Minister is or should be as a set copy of sanctification to the rest.

The learned Preachers words, though plain,
To plain men truth may preach:
But Pastors pious practice does,
A holy life them teach.
4. And so on the contrary: All men like sheep are prone to go astray. but if
the bellweather or leading sheep takes a vagary, all the flock will follow him.
We are apt to be led by precepts, but are easily overled by evil presidents,
even following our guides until we have lost our selves: which occasions the
holy Ghost to use that Proverb; Like Priest, like people, Hose. 4. 9. Isa. 24.
2.

That doctrine is divine indeed;
That by good works proves words:
More harm do ill examples breed;
Then good words, good affords.
5. And the like of Governors: the facts of eminent persons become examples;
those ex^mples Laws:

Unto the ex^mple of the King;
The world does frame in every thing.
Augustus a learned Prince, filled Rome with scholars, Tyberius filled it with
diss^mblers, Constantine with Christians, Julian with atheists: Let Jeroboam
only set up Calves in Dan and Bethel, the poople are presently down on their
knees; yea every one like beasts in herds will go a lowing after them: Yea if
Saul do even kill himself, his Armor-bearer will do the like: The Leaders
example is a Law to the followers. Whence it has ever been the dangerous
policy of Satan, to assault principal men both in Church and Commonwealth,
knowing the multitude (as we say of Bees) will follow their master.

6. And the same might be shown of Parents and Masters: We are led by whom we
are fed, without any respect to him that feeds both them and us. A sick head
makes a distempered body; a blind eye endangers all the other members, etc.
whereas piety in a Parent or Master, like Aarons ointment, runs down to the
skirts of his family, Psalm. 133. 2. Whence that usual phrase of the holy
Ghost, The man believed with all his household, Joh. 4. 53. Acts 16, 33, 34.

7. But that those whom precepts do not so effectually move, are not seldom
induced by examples; will best appear by the induction of particular instances.
We read, that more infidels were won to the Christian faith, by the virtuous
and holy lives of the primitive Christians, then by the doctrine which they
taug^t: they made the world to read in their lives, that they did believe in
their hearts: and caused the Heathen to say, This is a good God, whose servants
are so good. Yea as ^ozomen observes, the devou^ life of one poor captive
Christian maid, made a King and all his family embrace the Christian faith.
Cicilia likewise a poor virgin, by her virtuous life and gracious behavior in
her martyrdom, was the means of converting four hundred to Christ And we read
that St Albon receiving a poor persecuted Christian into his house; by only
observing his holy devotion and unblameable life, was so much affected
therewith, that he became both an earnest professor of the faith, and in the
end a glorious Martyr for the faith, All which considered, namely (...) never
shine so much, as when they are lively engraven or (...) in some eminent
person: I have thought good to reduce (...), or almost all the Evangelicall
Precepts, into a particular and familiar example, that so it may serve not only
for a set copy of sanctification, but as a fit person or pattern for each man's
imitation and incitation. You may suppose him another Nathaniel, in whose heart
there is no guile, Joh. 1. 47. Or another Samuel, who was able to acquit his
sincerity before God and man, 1 Samuel 12. 3. Or another Job, an upright and just
man, Job 1. 1. Or another Jonathan, 1 Samuel 23. 16, 17. Or Eli^zer, Genesis 15. 2.
who could rejoice in others welfare, by whom themselves were deprived of great
honor and reve^ues: Or one that does unto all others, as he would have others
do unto him, Matthew. 7. 12.

CHAP. II.
1. THis Christian indeed, this true Believer is one, that God (of his free
grace and good pleasure) has chosen, and elected to eternal life before the
foundation of the world; and whom Christ has redeemed with his pr^cious blood.

2. He is effectually called, and become a new Creature by regeneration, being
both begotten and born anew of God by the immortal s^ed of the Word, and the
Spirits powerful working with it. And without this new birth there is no being
saved, as our Savior himself affirms, John 3. 5.

3. He is industrious after the means of grace, loves to hear Christ's voice,
and delights in it, as finding a sweet relish therein; is able to know when
Christ speaks, and when the tempter; he receives the Word not as the word of
men, but as it is indeed the Word of God, with all readiness; for he resists
not as the wicked do, but obeys Christ's call; which works in him mightily:
for he finds it by experience quick, and powerful, and sharper then any two
edged sword; piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow; and to the discerning of the very thoughts, and the
most secret intents of the heart.

4. His heart is circumcised, or rather God takes away the stony heart out of
his flesh, and gives him a new heart; in which he writes his Law, and puts a
new spirit into him, ^v^n his own Spirit; causing him to walk in his statutes,
and keep his ordinances so as to do them.

5. God sheds his love abroad in his heart by the holy Ghost, who witnesses to
his conscience, that he is become the child of God; whereby he has union, and
communion with Christ; partakes of the divine nature, and becomes like God in
holiness.

6. He is brought out of darkness into mavelous light, has his eyes opened
to see the wonders of Gods Law; and that vail, or curtain which before was
d^awn over his heart (2 Cor. 3. 15, 16.) taken away, and is turned from the
power of Satan unto God.

7. He is ashamed of his former conversation, bewailes, and mourns bitterly
(...) sins, actual and original, of omission and commission, sec^et as (...)
known; lesser, as well as greater: yea, as well for the evil which cleaves to
his best works, as for his evil works; being more grieved for offending so good
a God, then for that it does, or might bring him shame, or punishment in this
life, or in h^ll.

8. He now finds that the Law is spiritual, binding the heart as well as the
hands; to which holy and just rule he brings all his thoughts, words and
actions; and so sees himself out of measure sinful, as being guilty of all
manner of concupiscence; having broken every one of those righteous precepts (
Exodus 20.) more times and ways then he has hairs on his head; not b^ing
able of himself to think a good thought: for that all the powers of his soul,
and members of his body, are who^ly, and originally corrupted.

9. He sees himself as guilty of Adams sin (being in his loins,) as any Heir
is liable to his Fathers debt; and esteems it the Mother, and Nurse of all:
finding it like the great wheel in a clock, that sets all the wheels on moving,
while it seems to move slowest; and therefore hates and bewails it, as the most
foul, hateful, secret, deceitful, and powerful evil.

CHAP. III.
1. VVHereupon finding himself in a lost condition, and confessing that he has
deserved all the plagues of this life, and of that which is to come; and
groaning under the burden of sin, utterly dispairing of all help in himself:
he is solicitously careful in the use of the means, to attain faith in the
promise of Gods merey made in Christ, finding no rest until he get some
assurance, vehemently hungring and thirsting after, and earnestly praying for
the pardon of sin, waiting on the Lord with patience.

2. He humbly, unfainedly, and freely confesses all his sins so far ^s he is
able, with the several circumstances which aggravate the same, to his own
shame and Gods glory.

3. He will take a holy revenge on himself, even to the denying of his own
reason and affections, his credit, carnal friends, profits, pleasures, and
whatever else might hinder: and by restoring goods or moneys evil gotten,
though it were long since, and when he was a servant; in case he be able.

4. He unfainedly desires to forsake all sin, as being in some measure dead
to it, Christ (by his Spirit) having freed him from the power and dominion
thereof, and in part abolished it; at least he so parts from all iniquity, and
hates every false way, that no one sin does reign in him: for when he does
commit any evil, it is full sore against his will, as being led captive to it
by the strength of Satan's temptations and his own corruptions; for he never
commits it freely and willingly, and with full consent: he allows not of the
evil he does, no he will not premeditately, and in times not utterly deserted,
do the least evil that the greatest good may come of it: neither is there any
sin he knows by himself (were it formerly never so pleasing to him) but he
desires as heartily, that he might never commit it, as that God should never
impute it. He likewise ha^es sin thoroughly and universally, and therefore is
thoroughly grieved for the abominations that are done by others; to the
dishonor of God, and slander of religion, or the ruin of men's souls.

5. Nor does he only abhor and depart from evil, but he cleaves unto that which
is good: he is not only dead to and made free from sin, but as he has once
been the servant of sin, so he becomes the servant of righteousness: and as he
has been isntrumental to Satan, so he will now be as active to serve Christ;
and be as fruitful in good works, as he ha^h fo^merly been in evil works.

6. He is conformed to the Image of Christ, and is led by the Spirit; walks in
newness of life, lives holily, justly and unblameably, for now he walks not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit, and brings forth the fruits of the
Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5. 22. so that he is changed and renewed in every part,
power and faculty: his understanding is enlightened, his mind renewed, his will
changed, his affections sanctified, etc. and he who thinks he believes, and
finds not a pa^pable change in his judgment, affections and actions, does but
deceive himself.

CHAP. IV.
1. HE goes often and upon all occasions unto God in prayer, in which lies all
his strength; yet not as his, but as it is the intercession of Gods own Spirit
in him, poured out in the Name of Christ, and according to his will: for being
truly sensible of his sins and wants, ^e chiefly prays for the pardon of
sin, the effusion of grace, and for the assistance of Gods Spirit: that he
may more firmly believe, more soundly repent, more zealously do, more patiently
suffer, and more constantly persevere in the practice and profession of every
duty. Nor does he for the most part fall into prayer without meditation and
preparation; nor utter words without dev^^on and affection; nor without some
assurance and persuasion, that God will hear and grant his requests: yea, he
mostly takes no^ice of his enlargements in prayer, and of the success
afterward, and is accordingly thankful or humbled; not that he measures Gods
hearing his suit by his present answer, or his present answer by his own sense;
he will pray (at least in some poor measure) at all times, striving against
deadness of spirit and distractions, as an heavy burden.

2. He hears the Word with attention, minds, observes, and remembers it
carefully; receives and applies whatsoever precept or promise is spoken out of
the Word, as spoken by God to himself in particular; is astonished at the
^eepnesse of Gods wisdom, power and goodness; seriously meditating upon the
the Nature, Attributes, Word and Works of God: he lays it up in his heart,
ponders on it in his mind, and practices it in his life: neither will he
approach unto the Lords Table, without due examination and preparation.

3. He is enligtned with the saving knowledge and hid things of the Gospel; and
to see truth from error, good from evil; together with his own wretched nesle
by sin, and the riches of Gods free grace and mercy in Christ toward his own
soul; he is not ignorant of the Principles of Religion, as most aged people
are; but is able and ready to give a reason of ^he hope that is in him.

4. He loves and longs after a powerful and searching Ministry above all
earthly treasures, as finding a greater necessity of spiritual then corporal
food; and therefore will take any pains, or be at any cost, or suffer any
disgrace to enjoy it.

5. He is never offended at any wholesome truth, be it never so untoothsome, but
affects that Ministry most which most lays open and rebukes his own sin;
even therefore coming to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest. When
he hears his own sins spoken against, he does not apply the same unto others,
as is the manner of too many; nor is he wise to defend the evil he does, but
loves to be admonished; nor will he after warning and conviction from the Word,
go on in an evil way, because his principal care is to be saved.

6. He will not mock his admonisher, scoff at the means to be saved* nor make
himself merry with his own damnation, as the desperately wicked do. He turns
not his back upon any truth, nor flies from any instruction; he hates not the
light: yea he loves that Minister best, that most makes manifest the secrets of
his heart; as knowing that God is in him of a truth. He will not refuse a
Pardon because he dislikes the Messenger. Indeed he least regards those
Ministers that the world admires, as well weighing what St John says, 1 Ioh.
4. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them: we are of God, he that knows God hears us; he that is not of
God hears not us: hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of
error, ver. 5, 6.

7. He will not plead against God, nor ask a reason of his actions; if he meets
with hard Scriptures, he runs not into error, not is offended, but suspends
his judgment, and blames his own blindness: you may know him from an unbeleever
by this, he is wise to defend the truth when he hears it spoken against, but
never argues against it; whereas the unbeleever (being prompted by Satan) can
most subtly argue against the truth, though he has not a word to speak for
it; yea, he thinks it religion enough if he can but dispute against the
religious, which is a manifest sign of a wicked man. Briefly, he neither carps
nor frets against a faithful Minister, nor seeks to entrap him, or pervert
what he delivers, but prays for him, and is ready to speak in his defense.

8. He has an high estimation of the Ministers, and means by which he was
converted, and finds more sweetness in the Gospel then in any thing else in
the world.

9. Spiritual judgments, (as a famine of the Word, the blindness of men's
minds, hardness of their hearts, etc.) he accounts more woeful then any
judgment the world can be sensible of.

10. He is not of a reprobate judgment, in thinking good evil and evil good;
neither has he a base esteem of Gods people and their ways, as it fares with
our scoffing adversaries, who look upon zeal and holiness with the devils
spectacles; nor so far from being holy himself that he hates holiness in
others, or so stupidly sottish as the rude rabble, who will profes^e that they
love Christ, yet hate all such as any way resemble him. He will take heed of
persecuting the godly either with hand or tongue; and as he will not condemn
the j^st, so he will not justify the wicked, nor favor them.

11. He is so far from taking offense when none is given, that he will not be
offended when offenses come; as at the scandalous lives of professors, or at
the multitude of heresies that are daily broached, though they grieve his very
soul; but when strange things happen, he makes a wholesome construction thereof.

CHAP. V.
1. HE prays for the enlargement, and rejoices at the progress of the Gospel,
and in the common good of the Church; and so at the graces or good success of
any member in particular, and will be some way isntrumental for Christ,
praying for and earnestly desiring the salvation of others; and likewise
endeavoring to win all he can to Christ; rejoicing no less when any good
thing is done by others, then if himself did it. He highly respects all such as
any way promote the Gospel, and is thankful to them.

2. He is willing to be at cost to serve the Lord, will freely administer
carnal things, where he partaketh of spiritual things; and counts the same as
a due, not as a benevolence: yea, he thinks it most just, that they who preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel; and that as freely as men of other
Callings: which sign or character shows, a world of men that profess
themselves Christians to be but counterfeits.

3. He believes impartially the whole Word of God, threats and precepts as well
as promises; and things above the reach of reason, as well as what experience
has made plain to him; he feels the power and efficacy of Gods Word and
Spirit, persuading his conscience, that his sins are pardoned in Christ, and he
in favor with God; so that he can truly apply Christ, and all his benefits and
promises unto his own soul; trusting in him, and casting himself only upon him
for pardon and salvation.

4. He has a sweet and sanctified peace in his conscience, arising from the
assured forgiven^sse of his sins, a sound and strong joy in the Lord, and in
his Word through believing; not seldom the holy Ghost inwardly setting to Gods
privy seal, by sudden refreshings falling like the dew upon his heart, and
establishing his soul before the Lord, especially after holy duties; yea, his
hope (as being built upon Gods word and promises) fills him with such joy
unspeakable, that is makes him rejoice even in tribulation.

5. He sometimes loses the efficacy, feeling and comfort of faith, but the
seed and habit of faith always remains. He is often and grievously assaulted
with fears and doubtings, but in the issue he always gets the conquest, and is
the more as^ured for having been so much assaulted, and does so much the more
strive to make his calling and election sure, and to be assured of future
happiness^ after this his earthly pilgrimage.

6. Or, if he have but a weak faith, yet it is sound, against which the very
gates of hell shall never prevail, for he never utterly falls away from the
grace of God, but perseveres in the truth, and in well doing to the end; and
therein finds also a blessed thriving, and gracious progress in true holiness.

7. He is perfectly justified by the blood of Christ, freed from the rigor of
the Law, and in some good measure from the spirit of bondage; is often in
combat between the flesh and the spirit, but the spirit in the end ever gets
the upper hand.

CHAP. VI.
1. ANd as he believes in his heart, so he is not ashamed of the cross of
Christ, but will profess ^he truth boldly in all estates, and in times of
suffering, and publish what Christ has done for his soul, to Gods glory and
the comfort of others: yea, if called to it, he will (God assisting him) lay
down his life for Christ and the Gospel, and rejoice also that he is counted
worthy.

2. Neither is he high-minded, but more fears the want of grace, then confides
in what he has, for he works out his salvation with fear and trembling; and
trusts not in the least to his own strength, but is ever jealous and
suspicious, lest his heart should deceive him; but he resolves by Gods grace,
not to use any unlawful means, nor yield to any thing against the truth, for
the avoiding of what he fears, be it burning at a stake; as knowing and being
fully persuaded, that all things shall work together for the best unto him. And
indeed the fear of God, (which is his continual guardian) keeps him in some
measure from the fear of death, and terror of the world; for he fears not them
that can only kill the body, in any degree like him, that after he has killed
can cast both body and soul into hell. Nor does he grutch to los^ a temporal
life, when in lieu thereof he shall obtain an eternal Crown of glory.

3. He is wonderfully inflamed with the love and estimation of God and of
Christ, especially upon the ret^rn of his prayers, or the obtaining of some
mercy; the which he shows by his hating of evil, and by his constant obedience
and the delight he has in keeping of God* Commandments, and by his
willingness to be at cost or suffer for him. Neither is he so in love with the
world or any thing in it, as that it shall diminish his love to God; yea he so
loves and longs for Christ's appearing, that he may be united to him and enjoy
his presence, that his daily prayer is, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

4. Again, He entirely loves, and highly esteems Gods people, not out of any
carnal or sel^ ends, but for their graces, the truths sake, and because they
are born of God: more loving and hono^ring the poor that w^lk uprightly, then
they that pervert their ways though they be rich, and loving them best that
serve God most: He is prone to justify them, and speak in their defense when
he hears them reviled, slandered or contemned by wicked and ungodly men, though
he incur their displeasure by it.

5. He does not estrange himself from the people of God in their misery, but is
ready to minister unto them when they stand in need, and use any means for
their relief. He will solicit great ones in their behalf, and in Christ's cause,
though he endanger himself thereby: and can be as earnest a suitor at the
throne of Grace for others that are in distress, as for himself, even
thirsting and studying how he may do them most good, as participating and being
touched with compassion, and having a fellow-feeling both of the misery and
felicity of others, as one member has of another, especially of the Churches,
as a member has of the whole body. Neither can he rejoice in his own peace and
welfare, while the Church and people of God are in distress, whose welfare he
prefers before his own.

6. He delights in the Saints company above all others, as finding an heavenly
sweetness in their conference and society, where every ones words do savor of
grace and wisdom; and when in every company he shall either do good or receive
good.

7. And as he loves and delights in holy company, so he loathes evil company:
neither will he have any fellowship with the workers of iniquity, or be in
league with the wicked, as Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Scoffers, etc.
but avoid all needless society with them.

8. He rejoices when the righteous are exalted, and grieves when the wick^d
bear rule. He is no enemy to reformation, but earnestly desires the same, and
furthers it all he can.

CHAP. VII.
1. HE mak^s conscience of sanctifying the Sabbath and sees that all under him
do the same: He will not give liberty to his servants upon the Lords day to do
what they list.

2. He reforms his family, and s^ts up Gods Worship therein, per^orming the
duties of Prayer, reading, repeating, etc. and instructing his children and
servants.

3. He is zealous to admonish, reclaim and reduce such as go astray; and to
save those among whom he lives, out of duty and thankfulnes^e to God and his
Redeemer, and out of love to them.

4. He is ha^ed of the world for goodness, and suffers some way for Christ; at
least, he is evil spoken of for well doing, and rejoices therein, or in
whatsoever he suffers; well considering, that all his sufferings in this life
are not worthy that glory ^e shall enjoy in the next.

5. His graces and goodness gains him more enemies, and breeds him more
danger, then vice and wickedness does another man: but he is more pleased then
displeased at it, for he knows by the worlds hating of him, that he is not of
the world, but that Christ has chosen him out of the world: and that he some
way discovers the worlds treasons and deceits. He knows also that to be the
worlds friend, is to be Gods enemy; yea he esteems it an honor to be evil
spoken of by evil men (because when a thing is best they will like it least:)
and a grace to be disgraced for Christ, who was far^e more disgraced for him.
Besides, the single approbation of one wise experimental Christian, is enough
with him to countervail the disdain and dislike of a whole Parish of
sensualists; and an ounce of credit with God, more worth then a talent of men's
praises. And how little is that man hurt, whom malice condemns on earth, and
God commends in Heaven? If he cannot avoid their malice and evil words; he will
be sure not to deserve them, which is much at one upon the matter: for as the
best confutation of their slanders, is (not by our great words, but) by our
good works: so his conscience knowing him innocent, like a constant friend
takes him by the hand, and cheers him against all his miseries. However, he
will not in the least wrong his conscience, to avoid the imputation of
singularity. The scoffs of Atheists shall not beat him off from his profession:
No, is he does well, has Gods word for his warrant, and glory for his aim,
nothing can daunt or discourage him. Neither the threatenings of fire, nor the
fair and large promises of cunning and cruel adversaries; neither pain nor
loss can make him shrink from Christ; much less the censures and scoffs of
lewd persons. The conscience of good intentions, let their success be what it
will; is both a sufficient discharge, and comfort to his generous mind.

CHAP. VIII.
1. HE will first labor to inform, and then hearken to and obey the voice of
conscience together with the motions of Gods Spirit; consider another case by
his own, and in a good measure do to all others as he would have others do by
him.

2. He is just and upright in his dealings, and desires to pay every one his
due: he will (...) borrow without care to pay again, as do the wicked, for
which they are branded by the holy Ghost, Psalm. 37. 21. He will not detain
wages or workmens hire (a crying sin that this City groans under:) He is
faithful to such as put him in trust: if a servant, he purloyns not, nor
deceives in going to market: nor did ever any but hypocrites pretend care of
piety toward God, and yet be unmercifull and unjust to men: yea, it is Devil
like, and double damnation, to pretend piety and intend villainy, Matthew. 23. And
indeed, our faith in Christ is best seen in our faithfulness to men; our
invisible belief by our visible life. And would thou know whether thou art a
Believer or no? this will infallibly inform thee: thy faith in the Commands
will breed obedience, in the threatenings fear, in the promises comfort. O that
all hypocritical profess^^^ would try themselves by this touchstone, and
consequently either be what they seem (real Christians,) or seem as they are
(none of Christ's,) so should they not shame Religion by professing it; whereas
now, they make the way of truth evil spoken of: yea, for their sakes the name
of goodness is blasphemed all the day long, and an ill reporr taised upon them
that serve God in truth: yea, they have made our savor to stink in the eyes of
all the people, and put a sword into the hands of profane men to slay us, as
woeful experience shows: for by reason of such, how do the devil and his limbs
triumph over the religious! yea, the Saints are not only reproached, the truth
disgraced, and Religion it self scandalized; but this gives occasion to others
to blaspheme God, and to doubt whether all Divinity be not mere Policy, and the
Scriptures a Fable, whereby millions are so hardened, that they even protest
against their own conversion: which being so, if you either love God or his
people, if you either care for other men's souls or your own, remove this
stumbling block, and no longer deceive your selves; for though he that is not a
true Christian may be just, yet he that is not just cannot possibly be a true
Christian.

3. And as he is just in getting, so he is neither profuse in spending, nor
backward (according to his ability) in releeving Christ's members for his sake,
but will give back a considerable part of all he has to God; and acknowledge,
that he is only a Steward (not an Owner) of what he does possess.

4. He is not sordidly covetous, nor given to filthy lucre: for the covetous
person is an Idolater, and has no inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of
God, and therefore cannot possibly be a Believer: nor do we read of one godly
person in the whole Bible, that was covetous. He is contented with things
necessary, and desires not great matters: for if he have food and raiment, he
will therewith be content: considering how they that will needs be rich, fall
into temptations and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition and destruction: and that the desire of money is the
root of all evil; which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. He will neither defraud nor
oppress his brother in any matter: he will not deal unjustly in line, in
weight, or in measure. He lusts not after forbidden fruit, nor coveteth that
which is another. He will not remove his neighbors Land mark, nor conceal any
Deeds or Writings that make for his neighbors advantage. If his neighbor
suffer prejudice or loss in any thing belonging to him, through his or his
servants means, he will make him recompense to the full. In case his Cattle
break into his neighbors ground, and eat his corn or grass; he will
willingly, and without compulsion satisfy for the damage. He will not detain
the poor workmans hire until the morning, least his family should want bread
for the present. He loves Justice in the least things, and desires rather to
buy what he would have, then that it be given him: choosing to eat his own
bread, and to drink water out of his own cistern. He hates gifts, least they
should corrupt his judgment and make him partial. Nor is he legally just, or
conscionable according to the Statute only, but piously just. If his conscience
tells him, that he has any way prejudiced his neighbor, though there be none
to witness against him; though it be unknown to the party himself that suffers
the damage, he will make him satisfaction, and never think he merits by it. If
he find any thing, he ^oth desires and endeavors to find out the owner, that
he may restore it. He will not take advantage from his neighbors poverty or
simplicity, to oppress or cosen him. He will not compound with Creditors, for
ten shillings ^n the pound, when he is able to pay all. He will not take an
enemies goods, or the goods of an Heathen; though it be beyond the Line;
without making satisfaction, or re^urning a valuable consideration; though the
Laws of the Land will bear him out in it: yea although he have Letters of
Markq, for his warrant, unless there be some other cause. If he make an oath
or promise, though to his and Gods enemy, and to his great disadvantage; he
will faithfully perform it, and not violate the same. Before he uses the
extremity either of Law or of Arms, he offers conditions of peace; and before
he will fall to blows, he will try what reason will do, soundly examine the
cause, and hear what the party can say for himself: and after that, he will
rather suffer and yield some part of his right, then do wrong, contend or go to
Law. For he will not do all he may, least evil men speak ill of him, or insult,
as they are very prone to do, by reason of their spite at religion. Lastly, he
seldom but gets the victory; yea it is rare if he be vanquished, either in going
to Law or making war; because he never undertakes war or suit without just
cause, and to a good intent. Yea it is rare also, if this be not the issue: the
less he covets the more he has; and the less he thirsts after these
temporal things, ^he more he cove^s spiritual things.

5. Neither love nor hatred shall rob him of his judgment, or make him
partial. He will neither esteem father, nor, mother, nor wife, nor child, so
as to disobey God in the least for their sakes. He will not wrong his children
by a former wife, to give that which is due unto them, unto the children of a
second wife: but he will make his firstborn Heir, and give him a double
portion of all that he has. If his son be stubborn and disobedient, a rioter
and a drunkard; he will not nourish him in it, but inflict due punishment upon
him according to his demerits. He will not seek to save a murderer from death;
least he make the whole Land guilty of blood. No, be it his own son, least in
saving him from a temporal shame and punishment, he should bring upon him an
eternal: and in liew of saving his body, he should destroy his soul. Besides,
he will rather his own child shall be destroyed, then God dishonored, and his
Law not executed. It matters not to him what others would do, nor what all the
world says; if they bring not a written word, they prevail nothing: he will go
on in his uprightness, and not shame to be singular: as more fearing Gods
anger then the worlds scorns. Neither custom nor example of his forefathers
will he follow, without or against the written word. No, he will not follow
Paul himself, any farther then he follows Christ. He remembers how vain,
ignorant and sinful his former conversation (which he received by the
traditions of his fathers) was: and thinks it too much to continue still
therein. Nor will he take encouragement from the Saints falls, to do the like:
but they shall serve him as Sea-marks, to make him beware. Indeed when things
are of a doubtful nature, he will take the surest (not the strongest) side,
and which draws nearest to probability: and where the Law written does cease,
he will observe that which is allowed by the practice and custom of the godly
and religious.

CHAP. IX.
1. HE is neither Drunkard nor Glutton, he neither tarries long at the Wine,
nor goes often to it, as is the custom of too many; indeed, whether they are
Christians or no I cannot easily be satisfied.

2. He is no Health-drinker; for he abhors drunkenness, as the root of all
evil, and rot of all good, and scorns the reputation of good fellowship. He is
none of those that Peter speaks of; who have eyes full of adultery, and that
cannot cease to sin: that gaze upon every fair face, and lust after every
beautiful woman. He will not be caught, nor yield to the embraces of a Harlot:
though her lips drop like an hony-combe, and her mo^th be smoother then oil;
though she offers her self in the streets, and lies in wait for him at every
corner. Yea he is wise enough to consider that it may not be a woman, but the
devil in the likeness of a woman as some have thus been cheated.

3. He denies ungodliness and worldly lusts, and lives soberly and chastely in
this present world, keeping the members of his body holy; for if he has not
the gift of continency he will marry his speech is not lewd, or obscene, nor
uses he any lascivious behavior, nor does ^e take liberty to gaze upon
b^^utifull women.

4. It is not his manner to curse be he never so much provoked, neither will he
take the Name of God in vain, but reverently use his Titles in his Talk: much
less will he swear by his Name, except upon urgent occasion, and being
lawfully called to it before a Magistrate: least of all dares he swear by or
invocate that which is no god; ^amely by any creature or Idol, which carnal
men ignorantly call petty oaths: No, but as he will not swear, so he fears an
Oath.

5. He will speak the truth from his heart, and not willingly and premeditately
either lie or equivocate, much less will he allow himself in it or seek to
defend it; for such as will do so, have not as yet past the second birth.

6. In bearing witness he will speak the whole truth impartially, without
fearing or favoring either party, that is, as well what makes for the
Defendant though an enemy, as for the Plaintiff being his friend or Master:
neither will he conceal a wicked device, when by revealing the same it may be
prevented.

7. He loves, and fears, and bel^eves, and serves the Lord, and seeks his
glory, and the good of others in every thing; at least, he desires and
endeavors so to do. He will omit no opportunity of doing good, nor do evil
though he has opportunity. He remembers his Vow in Baptism, and is careful to
^erform what he then promised: and so far as he comes short of his duty, ^o far
forth he will be humbled. He tempts not to evil, but draws all he can to
goodness. He will behave himself honestly and unblameably before those among
whom he lives: that he may not dishonor God, nor offend either those that are
within, or those that are without. He will never sufter base thoughts of God to
find harbor in his heart, deal he never so harshly with him; being more prone
to complain of his sin then of his punishment: for he will turn his eyes
inward, and read his sin in his punishment: and instead of murmuring for the
few things he wants, be thankful for the many things he enjoyes. Whereas
others that are unbeleevers, will do something for God; when it makes for their
own ends, he will suffer for him, and hold out in his works where Satan dwells
and keeps his throne. And what they do for fear of the Law, he does for love of
the Gospel. As who are Believers indeed, is only known where the power of
godliness is in contempt; where a Christian in name only, will scoff at a
Christian indeed: for in such times, many will superstitiously adore the
Crucifix, that are enemies to the Cross of Christ: and worship the dead Saints
in a cold profession, while they worry the living in a cruel persecution. For
Christ is stoned by many that are called Christians, though no otherwise then
the Heathen Images are called gods. But the Believer, as he will not go on in
an evil way, though flattered by never so good success: so he will not be
discouraged in a good way, though he meets with ill success, because he is
more careful to please God then men. Nature is like glass, bright but
brittle: the resolved Christian like gold, which if we rub it, or beat it, o^
melt it; it will endure the teast, the touch, the hammer, and still shine more
orient. A true Believer having once acknowledged the way of righteousness,
will not after turn from the holy Commandment: Li^^ the dog that returns to his
vomit, or the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. Again, he will
not come to his ends by unlawful means; he seeks not to Witches, Wisards or
Southsayers in his distress, or to be resolved of his doubts: but to Gods Word
and Ministers, and to God himself by prayer: and in praying to him, he desires
not outward blessings so much as Gods blessing upon them; he desires not so
much food and raiment, as that God will give them power to nourish, warm and
comfort him, knowing that except that be granted, they cannot of themselves do
it. And so of riches, wisdom, etc. He desires not so much a great estate as a
contented mind. He desires not riches, that he may lay it out on his
pleasures; yea, he knows that God will not give if he abuse his gifts. And as
he prays for Gods blessing, so he neglects not to use the means. When he has
attained his end, or receives any mercy, whether it be riches or other gifts,
victory or the like; he ascribes not the praise thereof to his wisdom or
industry, but wholly and only to the free mercy of God in Christ.

CHAP. X.
1. HE is not implacable, nor will he revenge himself on an enemy, though he
has power in his hand to do it, but sh^ts his ears and heart in this and other
cases, against Satan's temptations: yea, upon the least change, he can forgive
him as heartily as he desires God should forgive him: yea, he loves and wishes
well, and can willingly do good to them that do evil to him; even desiring his
greatest enemies conversion, together with his prosperity. He rejoices not at
another fall, but is grieved both for their sins and miseries: nor is he
grieved at any ones good, especially at his gifts, and the graces of Gods
Spirit in him.

2. Through the study of virtue and Christian prudence, he makes the servile
passions of his mind (fear and anger,) subject to the more noble faculties of
his soul, reason and understanding. As appears in the provocation of an enemy;
for let him be injured, he will both forbear and forgive: well considering,
that it is the glory of a man to pass by an offense: and that it is greater
fortitude to overcome his own passions, then to vanquish a City. Wherefore,
instead of returning like for like, he will pacify his enemy with mild words
and gentle behavior: which may be resembled to Milk that quenches wildfire,
or Oil that quenches Lime which by water is kindled: and thinks it enough for
one to be angry at a time. He is not like our Ru^^ians and sons of Belial,
who when they are displeased with others, will fly in their Makers face, and
tear the Name of their Savior in pieces: even swearing away their part in that
blood which must save them if ever they be saved. Nor like our Gallants, whom
the Devil has so blinded and bewitched, that they will contend for the way,
and strive for the wall even to the death: and kill one another, as though
either of their honors were of more worth, then both their souls. Or admit one
get the victory, miserable is that victory wherein thou overcomest thine enemy;
and thy passions, yea the Devil in the mean time overcomes thee: perhaps thou
slayest his body, but the Devil slayes thy soul. Nor like those fools you see
walking in Westminster Hall, that like two Cocks of the game, peck out one
another eyes to make the Lawyers sport. No says he, why should I vex my self,
because another has vexed me? Or why should I do my self a shrewd turn,
because another would? And admit carnal reason shall allege to him, that his
enemy is unworthy to be forgiven: rectified reason will answer, but Christ is
worthy to be obeyed, who has commanded me to forgive him. And well may I bear
with him, when his Maker bears with me: and forgive him, when Christ has
forgiven me much more. Nor can any repute him a coward for this his humble
patience: the true coward is your Hotspur, that fears the blasts of men's
breath, and not the fire of Gods wrath: that trembles at the thought of a
Prison, and yet fears not hell fire. But the Believer is as bold as a Lion if
his cause be good: yea to speak rightly, there is no such coward, none so
valiant as the Believer: without Gods warrant he dares do nothing, with it any
thing. He fears none but the displeasure of the highest, and runs away from
nothing but sin. Indeed he more fears the least sin then the greatest
torment; as may be seen in the Martyrs that noble Army. But he is so far from
fearing an impotent enemy, that he fears not death it self: no not the Day of
Judgment, 1 John 4. 17. Luke 21. 25, to 29. yea he is so strong withal, that
he is able to prevail with God, Genesis 32. 26, 28. Exodus 32. 10. And overcome the
world, the flesh, and the Devil, 1 John 2. 14. and 5. 4. Gal. 5. 24. and all
this by his faith, patience and prayer: and not seldom does he overcome his
enemy too by well-doing: for he lives so well, that his backbiting adversaries
are either put to silence, or constrained to praise God, and speak well of him.

3. He has learnt (from Gods dealing with him) to be merciful, as his
heavenly Father is merciful* even to his beast. Nor do any that resemble God
or Christ, (but Satan and Antichrist, as pa^taking of the Devils nature) sport
themselves in Bear-baiting, Dog, or Cock-fighting, hunting of tame Ducks, and
the like: or if so, they are not well verst in Christianity: as for such as are
cruel to their servants, I marvel how they can expect that their master in
Heaven should be merciful to them: and certainly, should they be deprived from
ever having the help or benefit of servants, (as good Queen Elizabeth once
served a Butcher and his wife, for their cruelty to a poor Girl they kept)
they would in a short time learn ^o be both wi^^r and better.

CHAP. XI.
1. HE is not the worse or prouder, for prosperity or outward blessings, but
the better and more thankful for them: he is bettered also by affliction, and
makes a gain of his losses; and being in distress, as he prays ^or
deliverance, so he is accordingly thankful when delivered: yea, he will make
vows, and so promise amendment, that he is as careful to perform the same
when he is delivered, which a wicked man never does.

2. He seeks God in all he does, and acknowledges him in all he either receives
or suffers: he observes the several passages of his Providence, acknowledging
all things to be ordered thereby, and that it extends to the least hair on
his head: has a comfortable experience of his disposing all to work for the
best unto him; admires the same, and his goodness therein, and is accordingly
thankful for it: yea he keeps a Record or Register of Gods special mercies
and deliverances, and of his own often and great provocations, and not seldom
meditates thereon: neither does he murmur when he wants any thing, as most of
our ignorant poor do, whose whole life, language and religion, is naught else
but a continued act of muttering and murmuring: perhaps they want many things
for their bodies, because they slight whatsoever is of^ered them for their
souls; and because God the giver is not in all their thoughts excep^ to
blaspheme him, and to spend his Day in the devils service, for they never mind
how God has appointed it his Market Day for their souls: now these brutish
Animals are very sensible if they want never so little, and for that they
murmur; but they enjoy millions of mercies which they never cordially give
thanks for: and I wish they were often put in mind, how many thousand
Israelites were destroyed in the wilderness, only for that grievous sin of
murmuring, though their streights and extremities were far greater; but as good
blow in the dust as speak to these. And as they have no reason, so they will
hear none, only such as truly fear God know that he owes them nothing; yea,
whatever they enjoy on this side hell, they think themselves unworthy of it.

3. He honors and obeyes his Parents, and God accordingly prospers him, and
prolongeth his days. If they stand in need, he will nourish and maintain them,
as they did him in his need. If a servant, he serves his Master in singleness
of heart, as unto Christ, not with eye-service, but out of conscience. And the
Lord is with him, and prospers all he takes in hand; gives him such favor in
his Masters sight, that he trusts him with all he has. Yea the Lord blesses
his Master, and all ^he family fares the better for his sake. He will not be
charitable with his Masters goods, nor wastfull with his Parents. If a Master,
he uses his servants so, as considering that himself is a servant to a greater
Master. To a good servant he is kind and liberal: and having staid long with
him, and done him good and faithful service, he will at the end of his years,
not only make him free, but give him a bountiful reward, answerable to the
good service he has performed; and by this he is more enriched. He will not
bid his servants tell lies, or being at home to say he is abroad. He loves not
to rail, or speak evil of Magistrates; as being sent of God, for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

4. He is not glad of pretenses against obeying the Magistrates command, but
will obey Authority as the Ordinance of God; and ^e subject more out of
conscience then fear, as placed by God over him: and to all their Laws, if they
cross not Gods Law; for otherwise he will lose his liberty, part with the
right hand of profit, and the right eye of pleasure; yea, lose his life rather
then a good conscience, and sin against God; for he will not disobey God to
obey great ones. In choosing them, he will have respect to their piety and
fitness; and not to wealth, favor or any other either private or base ends.

5. Whereas many love peace but regard not truth; and others ar^ all for truth
without caring for peace; he together with truth, loves, and studies, and
labors to have a lawful peace with all men, and so seeks it, that he will
suffer rather then do wrong: and to avoid offense, he will be overruled in
indifferent things; as Christ gave him an example, when he paid Pole Money.

6. If a Magistrate, he will not be partial in any cause, nor will he either
for fear or favor do any thing against the truth; or give sentence against his
conscience, or use his power in favor of the wicked; but be just in showing
mercy, severe to the evil, cherishing and protecting the good.

7, If a Minister, he will not preach to please but to profit: nor will he dare
to serve at the Altar without being holy.

8. He is faithful to his friend, for his love extends to his soul: he will
speak of his faults to his face, of his virtues behind his back. The deep and
devilish plots of wicked Politicians never enter into his thoughts, because
the fear of God keeps them out. Or if they offer to intrude themselves, they
have not the least admittance: for he (so far forth as he can) refrains all
dispute with sin, Satan or his instruments.

9. He is no Neuter when Gods cause is in question, but he will help the Lord
against the mighty. He imployes himself in some lawful calling, he lives not
idely. He will not company with wicked persons, for fear of being infected by
them: nor join in Marriage either with Idolaters or profane persons, least he
should learn their customs. Nor give his children in marriage to them for the
same reason. He is careful to preserve his childrens chastity: and therefore
he will in due time provide fit matches for them. Be he Parent, Master or
Magistrate, he will think it no disparagement to his greatness, if Christ's
Ambassador shall as he is bound, require him to give some testimony that he is
a Christian, before he intrudes himself to the Lords Table. Yea, he will as
Christ has commanded him, be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in
him, though in the presence of others that are not so rich, ancient or learned
as himself, though he was never in so many years examined: and in deed none but
proud and ignorant persons, will stand upon comparisons in Gods worship; for
pretend they what they will, the genuine reason is, they are ashamed to make
known their ignorance.

CHAP. XII.
1. HE is not rashly censorious, but judges of things, actions and persons,
(not as they are in the worlds repute, but) as they are in Gods account, and as
he in his Word allows or condemns them; he censures none for things
indifferent, but you must ^e able to allege the violation of some Law, much
les^e will he m^ck o^ despise a man for his poverty or any natural defect: as
for judging another thoughts to be evil when he cannot tax his life, or making
ill constructions of good actions, or sleighting and disparaging them, or
thinking the worse of a man for having of a tender conscience, he utterly
abhors. He is not easily suspicious without just cause, neither will he
willingly wrest men's words, or misconster their meanings, but take their
sayings and doings in the best sense. He will ^ot hearken to tal^-bearers, nor
is he apt to believe an evil report without good ground, neither will he
condemn a man without hearing him speak. He never determins of any ones final
esta^e be he never so wicked, well knowing, that God may change his heart in a
moment: neither will he conclude one to be a wicked, man, or an hypocrite for
appearances, or moates, or some sudden eruptions or common infirmities, or for
sins before conversion, or for this or that single act of gross impiety,
when the main tenor and course of his life besides is a continual current of
honesty and goodness; though he may suspend his good opinion in case of some
unexpected misdemeanour, or for lesser evils, either affected or often
repeated. He is tenderhearted, and can bear with the infirmities of the weak,
and is ready to cherish them that are cast down. He does not expect a full
grow^h of Grace in the Cradle of a man's conversion; yea, he yields the best
Christians (in this their state of imperfection) their graynes of allowance, as
our Savior did to his Apostles.

2. He will neither backbite others, nor give ear to backbiters of others.
Neither lend Satan his tongue to utter, nor his ears to hear, nor his heart to
believe lies and slanders. He will not les^en his own credit, by traducing one
that wrong him: he will not lessen his own shame and blame, by traducing one he
has wronged; as too many do. He wonders not so much at another ingratitude to
him, as at his own unthankfulness to God. He will pardon many things in
others, which he will not tolerate in himself. He will neither arrogate to
himself, nor derogate from another: neither vilify other men's doings, nor over
highly prize his own. He will not condemn, censure or slight that which ^e
understands not. To find gall in a Pidgion, a knot in a Bulrush, where is
none, is none of his humor. In relating an enemies words, he will neither add
to them, nor diminish from them. The faults of a few, shall not make him
uncharitable to all; nor the goodness of many, make him credulous of the rest.
He envies none for doing, or faring, or being better esteemed then himself.

CHAP. XIII.
1. HE is more knowing then the men of the world; for as he has the light of
the Spirit, and the eye of faith above them, so the Word of Christ dwells in
him plentifully in all wisdom and spiritual understanding: and he increases
daily in the knowledge of God, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
because God reveals himself to him in a great measure as to his friend.
Besides, his knowledge is about the best things; and one drop of soul wisdom
and saving knowledge, guided by the fear of God, is more worth then all humane
learning. And to this knowledge, unbeleevers are mere strangers. Yea be they
never so wise and learned in other things, they have only the theory of this
wisdom; they can prattle of it by roat, but they know not what it is by effect
and experience. Yea if a man want faith, holiness, the love of God, and the
Spirit of God to be his teacher; he shall not be able really, and by his own
experience, to know the chief points of Christian Religion; such as are faith,
repentance, regeneration, the love o^ God, the presence of the Spirit, the
remission of sins, the effusion of grace, the possession of heavenly
comforts: nor what the peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost is; nor
what the communion of Saints means; when every one of these are easy and
familiar to the meanest and simplest Believer. And the reason is, the Believer
digests his knowledge into practice, and imployes it to the glory of the giver,
his neighbors good, and the furthering of his own salvation. He is neither
ungrounded in the Principles of Religion, nor unconscionable in the practice.
Each Book or Sermon, both increases his knowledge and lessens his vices. Yea
he will pick something out of every thing, and gather honey from the self same
thing that others will poison. Another hating the truth shall make him love it
the more; for he i^ instructed both by similitude and contrariety. Whereas let
the unbeleever know never so much, he is resolved to be never the better: and
they who are unwilling to obey, God thinks unworthy to know. Whence it is also,
that as what the Believer does is good for the matter, so he will do it well
also for the manner: and in all his actions observe, whether his ends be good
or evil; for he will do good actions with good intentions; and not be moved
unto them by ba^e end, as is the unbeleever. Nor is he puffed up either with
his knowledge or parts; well knowing that he is ignorant of many things, for a
few that he understands; and that he falls short of others in what he most
excells. Nor will he build upon his knowledge, but in cases doubtful he will
advise with others: Yea he will submit to the better advice, even of his
inferior or maidservant.

2. He is not erroneous in his judgment, he neither affects curiosity nor
singularity; which is the foolish ambition of unblest understandings. But he
wholly applies himself to those things which God has revealed in his Word; and
to the confirmation of received truths; which is the meekness and humility of
the best judgments; and so is wise according to sobriety. Nor does he so cry
up Justification, as to cry down and quite overthrow Sanctification. He reads
and hears with an h^n^st and good heart: and to the end only that he may know
savingly, believe rightly and live religiously; and God gran^s his desire in
all the ^hr^e. He is resolved to do Gods Will, therefore God gives him to know
the Doctrine, wh^^her it be o^ God or no. Neither will he give heed nor lend
his ^ar to the i^^ising words of false Propherts, or spirits of (...); who
speak ly^s (...), as having their consciences burned with an (...) iron. None
can b^g^ile him with their sleights and (...) craftiness wh^r^by they lie in
wait to deceive; for his hear^ is stablished with grace. He is not wavering,
nor carried about with every wind of Doctrine, which vain talkers and
deceivers of minds daily vent; because he is rooted and stablished in the
faith. He avoides all profane and vain bablings; all foolish and unlearned
questions which are endless; all strife about words, which is to no profit:
all Jewish fables and commandments of men, and genealogies; which breed vain
janglings, rather then godly edification which is by faith; all brawlings and
contentions about the Law, as being unprofitable and vain. He will not be
spoiled through Philosophy or great shows of learning. He doteth not about
froward disputations, and things that engender unto more ungodliness: as well
knowing, that the words of these false Apostles and teachers of lies fret like
a Canker, poison men's judgments, and pervert their simple and superstitious
hearers: but rather studies to have a good conscience and faith unfeigned.
Whereas it is the portion of all rotten hearted and hypocritical Professors*
to be given up to error and to believe lies. In brief, he will entertain
nothing which is contrary to wholesome Doctrine, and not according to the
glorious Gospel of the blessed God. Yea if there be any that err concerning
the truth, or having a show of g^dlinesse deny the power of it, he turns away
from such. Again, he is not for Paul, nor Apollos, nor C^phas, but for all that
bring the Word for their warrant. And those who will not suffer wholesome
Doctrine, but having their ears itching, do after their own lusts get them an
heap of Teachers, turning their ears from the truth, being given unto fables,
are far from being of his mind. He is none of those that creep into hous^s,
and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts;
that subvert whole families, by walking in craftiness and handling the Word
deceitfully; and that teach things which they ought not for filthy lucres sake,
even delighting themselves in their deceivings: that beguile unstable souls by
promising them liberty, and are themselves the servants of corruption, being
men of c^rrupt minds, that resist: the truth, and are reprobate concerning the
faith. He will reject him that is an Heretic, after once or twice admonition;
knowing that he who is such, is perverted, and sins, being damned of his own
self. He is no causer of division or dissension in the Church.

CHAP. XIV.
1. BUt he wins many to the truth, for he is charitable, wis^es all good and
happy like himself; and accordingly proves a means of bringing many to Heaven,
and that two ways: First, whereas others by their evil example, are a means to
destroy many; he by his good example, is a means to save many. For he is
upright and sincere hearted to God and man. He is none of those that profess
God with their words, and with their works deny him. He is not double-tongued;
but as he thinks in his heart, so he speaks with his mouth; and as he is led by
his conscience, so his conscience is led by truth. In fine, he is known from
another man, only by the holiness and uprightness of his life and
conversation. Yea all may read in his life, that he believes in his heart: and
are forced to say, This is a good God, whose servant is so good: or, This is a
good, holy and operative Religion; that th^s changes and transforms men into
new Creatures. For his life is like a precious and sweet perfume; whose savor
spreads it self, and is pleasant to all that come near. Yea, he sowes those
good works that remain to posterity, and are reaped by succession; and he shall
be happy in making others so. But secondly, as the wicked draw all they can to
Hell by their allurements and subtle persuasions; so he draws all he can to
Heaven, by his admonitions and sweet compellations. He loves the soul of his
Neighbor, and therefore he will tell him of his faults, and the Judgments of
God due unto the same. Yea rather then let one go headlong to destruction, he
will violently pluck him out of the fire; for he has not only zeal, but
courage to do good t^ he is not lukewarm, nor will he suffer discretion to eat
up his devotion, as it fares with common professors. For he had rather hazard
the censure of some, then hinde^ the good of others. Yea rather then be guilty
of other men's sins by his cowardly silence, he can afford to be despised, and
thought out of his wits by the world; reputed a fool, and pointed at in the
streets. For he prefers Gods favor before all the worlds; and his glory before
his own credit. Not that he wants wit, or deserves contempt; for his zeal is
mixed with discretion, and he makes knowledge the pilot of his devotion: but
his love to God is such, as he cannot bear with them that are evil. His
righteous soul is vexed with seeing, and hearing the uncleanly conversation of
their unlawful deeds. Yea it cuts his very heart to hear Christ so wounded
with oaths, blasphemies and reproaches, who is the life of his life, and soul
of his soul. And his love to sinners also, for his zeal against them, is a
sweet compound of love and anger: for though he hates the vices of a wicked
man, yet he loves his person: he can chide him sharply, and yet at the same
time pray for him heartily. Whereby he not seldom save^ his brother, for he
finds favor in the sight of God, and prevails with him for things hard to be
obtained. As when ^tevens prayer prevailed for persecuting Paul, and our
Saviors prayer for his murderers.

2. He has low and mean thoughts of himself; therefore the Lord makes him
excel, and shows his strength by him. He abhors to think himself better then
others, because God blesses him more with outward blessings, or has bestowed
more inward gifts and graces upon him then upon others: well knowing that God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. He is not lifted up, nor
cast down with men's flatteries or slanders. He forgets his good deeds, and
therefore God remembers them: he remembers his evil deeds, therefore God
forgets them. He is not envious, nor given to stri^e; but of a meek and quiet
spirit; peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated. He affects rather
plainness then pomp: and will rather refuse places of honor, then eagerly
pursue after them. He never stands so secure, but he will take heed least he
fall: and prefers an humble fear, before a presumptuous confidence. He makes
conscience of small sins, least they should prove wedges to greater. When he is
tempted to evil, the fear of God keeps him innocent. And it is alwai^^ in his
mind, that God sees all things, and is ever beholding him. He will neither
deny, nor deminish, nor justify his sin, nor shift it off to others. If he
have fallen in^o an evil, he will beware of doing it the second time; well
knowing that there is no laying hold of the Promises, without making conscience
of and obeying the Precepts.

CHAP. XV.
1. SO you have (in part) seen; how he loves, and fears, and serves the Lord,
and seeks his gl^ry and the good of others: but (which is very observable)
shall I show you how the Lord bles^eth him in every thing he takes in hand, or
that does befall him? I pray observe the severals, and then if you be not yet a
Believer, you will neglect no means, indeavouror opportunity to obtain such a
blessed condition* the particulars are many, i will mention a few only. First if
he be in prosperity, as he shall be sure to have plenty of all outward things,
if God sees that it would be good for him; so that he shall lend to others, but
shall not borrow himself. He will be accordingly thankful, and as God blesses
him more or less, so will he do good; and the more rich, the more rich will he
be in good works, and the more ready to distribute and communicate. For he is
pitiful, and ready to show mercy where is need; and to defend, rescue and
deliver the oppressed, out of the hands of their enemies and oppressors, if he
have power and opportunity to do it. And by reason of his bountifulness to the
poor, he becomes more rich, so that he is not more ready to pray for blessings
in his want, then he is to give thanks for them being obtained. And be he never
so rich, he is not high minded; neither does he trust in uncertain riches, but
in the living God. For in his prosperity he forgets not his former low
estate; but is ever medi^ating upon, and admiring the Lords goodness toward
him. Yea he sets a Memo^andum upon every remarkable mercy, that he may not
forget it: and admires that God should set his delight and love upon him, and
choose him above many others: and this makes him strive to surpass others in
his love and service to God again. Whereas unbeleevers, when they are waxed fat
with the good blessings of God, they will spurn with the heel, and forsake God
that made them: not once regarding the strong God of their salvation, but
provoke him with strange Gods and other abominations: but it fares not so with
the Believer, neither does he so requite the Lord. And as he is thankful to
the Author, so likewise to any that he shall make isntrumental for his good:
thinking himself bound to remember and requite good turns.

2. Secondly, if he falls into adversity or any kind of distress; he knows it
is sent of the Lord in love, and to do him good, and to give him occasion of
rejoicing afterward. He w^^l considers, that scarce any thing more proves us
his, then his stripes: that stripes from the Almighty, are so far from
arguing his displeasure, that contrarily there are few better tokens and
pledges of his adoption and love: and that they are bastards and not sons who
are without correction. And so it is, that as many as God loves, he rebukes and
chastens. And as it is sent for his good, so it does him good: crosses in his
estate, diseases in his body, maladies in his mind, are medicines to his soul:
the impairing of the one, is the repairing of the other. His sin dies with
his fame, or with his health, or with his peace, or with his outward estate.
Yea it both lessons his sins, and increases his graces: for God sends him
afflictions both for his instruction and reformation, to scout away the rust of
corruption, and to try the truth of his sanctification; for the increase of his
patience, and the exercise of his faith, and the improvement of his zeal, and
to provoke his importunity, and to double his obligation; to greaten each other
grace, and to augment his glory. Again, he inflicts a less punishment to avoid
a greater: and by smarting in his body, state or name, he is saved from
smarting in his soul. He is chastened that he may be converted, not confounded:
his worser part, to wit his body, state or name is impoverisht; that his better
part, that is, his soul may be saved in the day of Judgment. But see it in
some particulars, as first how it makes him humble and thankful: for he not
only calls to mind his own unworthiness of the least mercy he still injoyes;
and how he has provoked the giver; (for he is ever meditating of what Christ
has done and suffered for him, and how he has provoked Christ:) but he also
compares what he suffers, with what he might have suffered; arguing thus with
himself, He that has taken this from me, might have taken more: he that
afflicts me for a time, could have held me longer: he that has touched me in
part, could have stricken me in whole: he that laid this upon my body, has
power to lay a greater rod both upon my body and soul, without doing me the
least wrong. And so goes on, I was born a child of wrath, and whereas God
might have left me in that perishing condition and chosen others, he has of
his free grace adopted me and left others. And this makes him cry out, O the
depth! as a mercy beyond all expression: saying further, O my soul, thou have
nor room enough for thankfulness! And the truth is, if we could but seriously
think upon our deliverance from hell fire, it alone would be thought cause
enough to make us both patient and thankful, though the things we now delight
in be taken from us. And sure I am, nothing can be too much to endure for those
pleasures in Heaven which shall endure for ever. O that we could keep fast in
our memories but these two things! and upon all occasions make use of them; and
consider withal, that the least mercy is beyond our best merit. And no better
remedy for impatience, then to cast up our receipts, and compare them with our
deservings. But secondly, Gods corrections are his instructions; his lash^s
lessons, his scourges schoolmasters, his chastisements advertisements to him;
by feeling of smart he learns to decline the cause. Yea, this has taught him
to fly from the works of darkness at a great distance: and to consider as well
the bitterness of what will follow, as the sweetness of a momentary pleasure;
and so cleared his sight, that he can now discern sin in all he thinks, and
speaks, and does; for he is ever bewailing his wants and weaknesses; the
hardnes^e of his heart, want of faith, etc. Thirdly, it abundantly increases
his joy and comfort: for admit Satan and the world should deprive him of all
outward comforts at once; yet God at the same time will supply the want of
these, with comforts far surpassing and transcending them: as first, the
assurance of the pardon of sin alone, is able to clear all storm^ of the
mind: it teaches misery, as sickness, poverty, famine, imprisonment, infamy,
etc. even to laugh; for then let death happen, it matters not: when a
malefactor has sued out his pardon, let the Assizes come when they will, the
sooner the better. But to this is added the peace of conscience, the marrow of
all comforts, otherwise called the peace of God, which passes all
understanding, and surpasses all commending; for never did man find pleasure
upon earth, like the sweet testimony of an appeased conscience reconciled unto
God, cleansed by the blood of the Lamb, and quieted by the presence of the
holy Ghost. As the Martyrs felt, who even clapped their hands for joy in the
midst of the flames; and were even ravished before they were permitted to dye:
so great, and so surpassing all expressing is the peace and comfort of a good
conscience. Again thirdly, Affliction brings with it the company of God
himself; I will be with you in tribulation, says God, Psalm. 91. 15. As when
those three were cast into the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. there was presently a
fourth came to bear them company, and that was God himself, ver. 23, to 27. and
his presence makes any condition comfortable, were a man even in hell it self.
See more Acts 13. 52. And as his sufferings abound, so his consolation also
abounds, 2 Cor. 1. 5. Indeed the unbeleever laughs more, but that laughter is
only the hypocrisy of mirth: they rejoice in the face only and not in the
heart: nor can it be solid comfort, except it has his issue from a good
conscience; whereas Gods Word teaches, and a good conscience finds, that
even the tears of those that pray, are sweeter then the joys of the Theater.
But this is not all, for according to the t^ibulations laid upon him and borne
by him, shall the retribution of glory be proportioned. I might go on, and show
how it makes him pitiful and compassionate to others: evils have taught him
to bemone all that affliction makes to groan; and sundry the like which I may
not here stand upon. And this is enough to show, that affliction in general
makes much for his advantage: now see how he is a great gainer by each
particular cross: As

CHAP. XVI.
1. FIrst, Let him fall into poverty, or have his goods and lands confiscate,
this shall not hurt but do him good also: for he will not by sin releeve his
wants; poverty shall not constrain him to steal. He will not tell a lie (God
assisting him) though you would give him an house f^ll of god. Whereas let
unbeleevers fall into the like condition, that they may maintain themselves,
they will lie, deceive, steal, prostitute their chastity, sell their
consciences? and what not. Nor will he murmur or repine against his Maker, but
bear it patiently and cheerfully; where^a unbeleevers will not only murmur an^
grievously complain; but if God do not answer them in every thing, they will
take pleasure in nothing: yea they will slight all his blessings, because in
one thing he crosses them. And as he will not be the worse, so he will be much
the better for it; for as he grows poor in temporals, he will grow rich in
spirituals: his wants kill his wantonness, his poverty checks his pride, etc.
It shall stir him up to prayer, wean him from the love of the world, approve
his sincerity, increase his faith, spiritual wisdom, patience, and the like;
so that let his enemies take all, so long as they cannot take Christ and Gods
fatherly providence from him, he is well enough. But that is not all, for
whatsoever the parts withal, be it house, or Land, or any thing else, it is but
as seed cast into the ground; for he shall receive for it an hundredth fold more
in this world, and in the world to dome life everlasting, Mark 10. 29, 30. But

2. Secondly, Let him be cast into Prison and bonds, God will do him good by
this also; even the prison shall prove a means of his spiritual enlargement,
and he shall more freely enjoy the presence of his God. It shall make him with
Paul and Sylas, sing Psalms for joy at midnight: yea, he shall with that
Scottish King in Mortimers hole, learn more of Christ in a short time, then
abroad he could in many years. And lastly, it shall teach him for ever after,
to remember them that are in bonds, as if he were bound with them; and them
which suffer adversity, as if he suffered the same things with them.

3. Thirdly, Let his enemies slander him, God will clear his innocence; let
them curse him, the Lord will do him good even for their cursing; let them
despise and disparage him, the Lord will so much the more honor him before the
people: yea, the same men that formerly slighted and rejected him* shall be
forced to seek and sue unto him. Let an enemy scoff at him for a fault, he will
be the better for it to his dying day. His very scoffs bring him both to the
knowledge, and likewise to the amendment of his faults. His being slighted
shall quell his ambition and vain glory, and likewise exercise and improve his
other graces. In fine, his enemies by their evil tongues, shall beget in him a
good and holy life.

4. Fourthly, Let there be never so many plots laid to destroy him, he is in
perpetual safety: for the Lord not only gives his Angels a charge over him, to
keep him in all his ways; but himself is ever at hand to deliver him and keep
him as the apple of his eye, so that all his enemies are not able to do him
hurt; for God is his help, and strength, and deliverer; yea, God by his
providence disposes of things so, that what in appearance, and what they
contrived to be the means of his hurt, turns to his great good; and what they
intended for his destruction, becomes the only means of his preservation.
Again, the Lord is more specially present with him, when he is in the greatest
danger; that he may fight for him against his enemies, and give him victory
over them; that he may sustain him when he faints, and crown him when he
overcomes; that he may be exact in taking notice of his sufferings, count his
wanderings, put his tears into his bottle, and enter all into his Register. Nor
is the Believer more patient to put up wrongs, then God is ready to revenge
them and right him: and the reason is, Christ takes what is done to him, or any
one of his members, as done to himself. And indeed he that despises,
traduceth, or any way wrongs him for his goodness; his envy strikes at the Image
of God in him; by whose Spirit he both speaks and acts. And to murmur against
any of Gods Mes^engers (as thou art apt enough to do,) is to murmur against God
himself that sent them: take notice of this you that carry an aching tooth
against every godly man you know. Neither shall Sorcery or Witchcraft have the
least power to do him hurt. In a word, there cannot so much as an hair fall
from his head, without the special appointment of his heavenly Father, who
will suffer nothing to befall him, but what shall make for his servants benefit
and his own glory: for admit God gives his enemy leave and power to kill him,
he shall not hurt but pleasure him, as I shall show when I come unto it.

5. Fi^thly, Neither sickness* nor old age can hurt him: his fingers pain
makes him not forget the health of his whole body; one days or weeks
sickness, makes him not forget many years health. He is not so sensible of a
present distress, nor so ungrateful for favors past, as not to remember many
years enjoyments, more then one weeks misery. Yea, he considers that it is in
great love that God thus visits him: that he deals mercifully with him, least
he should fall from him and despair; that he beats him, least he should grow
proud and forget him, and so peris^* Besides, he finds by experience, that as
every other affliction rubs off some rust, melts off some dross, strains out
some corruption, etc. so also that sickness cuts the very throat of all his
vices; be it pride, lust, covetousness or the like; for the very worst Fever
can come, does not more burn up his blood then his lust; and together with
sweating out the surfits of nature, at the pores of the body, he weeps out the
sinful corruption of his nature, at the pores of his conscience. And indeed
God scourges his flesh, to this end only, that his spirit may be saved in the
day of Jesus Christ. And the like of old age; his soul waxes, as his body
waineth, and he is wisest to prescribe, when his bones and sinews are weakest
to execute.

CHAP. XVII.
1. SIxthly, Suppose he is in distress of conscience, and at the very brink of
despair, expecting nothing but hell and damnation; suppose God hides his face,
and seems to have utterly forsaken him, and to reject his prayers; yea suppose
the terrors of God fight against him, and the Arrows of the Almighty stick so
fast in him, (...) the venom thereof has drunk up his spirit, so that in his
own apprehension God is become his mortal enemy, as it fared with Job, yet all
this is for his good, and shall do him good: yea this extreme severity of God
argues favor; for nothing more usual then for God to work joy out of fear,
light out of darkness, and to bring to the Kingdom of Heaven by the gates of
hell, and thus he deals with his dearest darlings. When he meant to bless
Jacob, he wrestles with him as an adyersary, even till he lamed him: when he
meant to prefer Joseph to the Throne, he threw him down into the Dungeon: and
to the Golden chain about his neck, he laded him with Iro^ ones about his
legs. Nor would Christ cure Lazarus, till after he was dead, buried, and stunk
again: no question to teach us, that we must be cast down by the Law, before we
can be raised up by the Gospel; and become fools before we can be truly wise.
Nor has he cause to fear, be his case never so desperate; for God will measure
his patience* and make it proportionable to his suffering, and equal his
strength to his temptations: his grace shall be sufficient for him at the
least, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Phil. 1. 29. and he that made the Vessel, knows her
burden, and how to ballast her. The Bush, which was a type of the Church,
consumed not all the while it burned with fire, because God was in the midst of
it. The Anchor lies deep and is not seen, yet is the stay of all. The Bladder
blown, may float upon the flood, but cannot sink nor stick in filthy mud,
Sin, Satan and the world may disturb him, but they can never destroy him: his
head Christ being above, he cannot be drowned; there can be no disjunction,
unless he could be plucked from his arms that is Almighty, for his life is hid
with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. Besides, if he suffers much, it shall not be
long; if he suffers long it shall not be much: if his sorrows be sharp they
are the shorter. Grievous and sore trials last but for a season, 1 Pet. 1. 6. a
little while, Ioh. 16. 16. yea but a moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For a moment in mine
anger, says God, I hid my face from thee, for a little season, but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, Isa. 54. 8. Weeping may abide
for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30. 5. And it is ever seen,
that his joy both succeeds and exceeds his sorrow; that his sadness ends in
gladness, and his sorrow in singing: and the more grievous his exigent, the
more glorious his advancement. But the last (which is the best) gain of all, he
grows more holy then ever: for like the Vine, he brings forth the more and
better fruit, for paring, and ^^uning, and bleeding; and though his outward man
perish, yet his inward man is renewed daily: even as a Lamb is much more
lively and nimble for shearing; these very tempestuous showers, bring forth
spiritual flowers and herbs in abundance.

2. Seventhly, Let judgments be i^^licted upon the wh^le Land, they shall not
touch him nor his family, he shall be singled out for mercy: Or if they do,
they shall be so sanctified, that they shall rather pleasure then hurt him. As
if the Corn be cut down with the weeds, the one shall be carried into Gods barn
as Lazarus was, the other cast into the fire like Dives: yea, every stroke in
the judgment shall be a monitor, and serve as a Sermon to him: when he sees
another struck he takes warning; for he will be put unto duty even by the
shadow of the wand.

3. Eighthly, The strictest and severest Laws if they be not contrary to Gods
Law, have not power to smite him: for he does those things unbidden, which
others can scarce do being compelled. Yea, the Law protects him against his
enemies, who fear the Jayl more then they fear Hell; and stand more upon their
silver, or their sides smarting, then upon their souls. Good Magistrates also
are the breath of his nostrils and protect him, while they take vengeance on
them that do ill. Yea they are the Ministers of God for his wealth, and bound
to see him righted, when he receives wrong in his person, goods or good name.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. NInthly, His very sins and infirmities by Gods grace do work his good, and
he is by much the better for them, for he will from hence grow more holy. Yea,
he gains strength by every fall: for hence issues deeper humiliation, stronger
hatred of sin, fresh indignation against himself, more experience of his
hearts deceitfulness, renewed resolutions until sin be brought under: it
makes him more earnest with God by prayer, to keep a more careful watch over
himself; to pity others more, and censure them less when they offend or are
overtaken: to rest wholly upon the assistance of Gods Spirit, and to a^cribe
all glory to him, of whom whatsoever he has he holds. True, his offending God
brings much misery upon him, and God seems to have left him, and to reject his
prayers and humiliation: but at length, and so soon as the poor soul cease to
do ev^^, and learns to do well, the Lord repents him of the evil; and not
only delivers him, but returns with the greater interest of joy and felicity.
Indeed the Lord lets him know what it is to lose his favor, and makes him tugg
hard by prayer, and to persevere a long time in kn^cking and asking: but at
length he will be sure to give him what he desires, or that which is better for
him; for the prayer of faith, from the knees of humility and a broken heart,
will conquer even the Conqueror. Indeed, the case may be such that he cannot
pray, or not to purpose; as in time of sickness, by reason of the extremity of
pain: but then he can send to the Congregations, and entreat them to pray for
him. Besides, all his former prayers and meditations, do serve to aid him in
his last straits, and meet together in the center of his extremity; yielding
though not sensible relies, yet secret benefit to his soul. Yea (which is best
of all) he has the benefit of Christ's intercession in Heaven, and of the
prayers of all the Saints on earth.

2. Tenthly, The malice of Satan shall make much for his good: for if Satan be
sent to buffe^ him as he did Paul, or to winnow him as he would have done
Peter, it is that he may not be exalted: his malice shall prove the occasion of
much good to him, as it did to the incestuous Corinthian: or if God lets him
loose upon him as it did upon Job, it shall but advance the glory of God,
manifest this Believers patience, occasion his own shame, etc. so the Devil
shall be over-shot in his own bow, and wounded with his own weapon. And so it
is, that to all whom God has any interest in, this Scorpion shall prove a
medicine against the sting of the Scorpion. For though he aim at despair and
destruction, yet God ayms* at humiliation and conversion, yea at consolation
and salvation: and when the sinner is sufficiently humbled, Satan shall be
cashiered; that Horse-leach shall be taken off, when he has sufficiently
abated the vicious and superfluous blood; so that he shall be healed by
wounding, exalted by humbling: Satan shall help him to the destruction of his
flesh (his corruption,) and the edification of his soul.

3. Eleventhly, Death, the last and strongest enemy of all, shall do him the
greatest good of all. He may be killed, but he cannot be hurt nor conquered:
for even Death, that Fiend, is to him a friend: like the Red Sea to the
Israelites, that put them over to the Land of Promise, whiles it drowned their
enemies. It is his bridge from woe to glory, for dying he sleeps, and sleeping
he rests from all the travels of a toylsome life, to live in joy and bliss for
evermore. It is to him the end of all sorrows, and the beginning of his
everlasting joys, the cessation of all trouble, a Superse^eas for all
diseases, the extinction of sin, the deliverance from enemies, a rescue from
Satan, the quiet rest of the body, and infranchisement of the soul.

CHAP. XIX.
A description of Heaven and Hell, so far as may be collected from the Word,
according to the best Expositors.
1. THus as the unbeleever and disobedient is cursed in every thing, and
wherever he goes, and in whatsoever he does: Cur^ed in the City, and cursed
also in the field; cursed in the fruit of his body, and in the fruit of his
ground, and in the fruit of his Cattle: Cursed when he comes in, and cursed
also when he goes ou^: cursed in this life, and cursed in the life to come; as
is at large expressed, Deuteronomy. 28. So the Believer that obeyes the voice of the
Lord, shall be blessed in every thing he does wherever he goes, and in
whatsoever befalls him: as God promises in the former part of the same
Chapter, and as I have proved in the eleven foregoing Sections. Yea, God will
bless all that belong unto him, for his children and posterity, yea many
generations after him shall fare the better for his sake: yea the very place
where he dwells, perhaps the whole Kingdom he lives in. Whereas many, yea
multitudes, even an whole Army, yea his childrens children, unto the third and
fourth generation, fare the worse for a wicked man and an unbeleever. Besides,
his prayers shall profit many; for he is more prevalent with God, to take away
a judgment from a People or a Nation, then a thousand others. And he counts it
a sin to cease praying for his greatest and most malicious enemies; though
they like fools, would (if they durst or were permitted,) cut him off, and all
the race of Gods people; which is as if one with his hatchet should cut off the
bough of a Tree upon which he stands. For they are beholding to Believers for
their very lives: yea it is for their sakes, and because the number of Christ's
Church is not yet accomplished, that they are out of hell. But to go on, as all
things ( viz.) poverty, imprisonment, slander, persecution, sickness, death,
temporal judgments, spiritual dissertions, yea even sin and Satan himself)
shall turn together for the best unto those that love God, as you have seen. So
all things shall turn together for the worse unto them that hate God; as all
unb^leevers do, Romans 1. 30. Io^. 15. 18. even the mercy of God, and the means
of grace, shall prove their bane and inhance their damnation; yea Christ
himself, that only summum bonum, who is a Savior to all believers, shall be a
just revenger to all unbeleevers: and bid the one, Depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Which shall be an
everlasting departure, not for a day, nor for years of days, nor for millions
of years, but for eternity; into such pains, as can neither be expressed nor
conceived, Jude 6. 7. Rev. 20. 10. Mat. 3012. Heb. 6. 2.

2. Wickedness has but a time, a short time, a moment of time: but the
punishment of wickedness is beyond all time; There shall be no and of plagues
to the wicked man, Prove. 24. 20. Their worm shall not die, neither shall their
fire be quenched, Isa. 66. 24.

3. Neither is the extremity of pain inferior to the perpetuity of it; it is a
place full of horror and amazedness; where is no remission of sin, no
dismission of pain, no intermission of sense, no permission of comfort; its
torments are both intolerable and interminable: and can neither be endured nor
avoided when entered into, Rev. 19. 20. and 20. 14. and 18. 6. Mat. 25. 30. 2.
Pet. 2. 4. Heb. 10. 27. Jude 6.

4. The plagues of the first death are pleasant, compared with those of the
second: For mountains of sand were lighter, and millions of ^ears shorter, then
a tithe of these torments, Rev. 20. 10. Jude 7. It is a death which has no
death; it has a beginning, it has no ending, Mat. 3. 12. Isa. 66. 24.

5. The pain of the body, is but the body of pain, the anguish of the soul, is
the soul of anguish: For should we first burn off one hand, then another, after
that each arm, and so all the parts of the body, it would be deemed
intolerable, and no man would endure it for all the profits and pleasures this
world can afford; and yet it is nothing to that burning of body and soul in
hell: Should we endure ten thousand years torment in hell, it were grievous;
but nothing to eternity: Should we suffer one pain, it were miserable enough;
but if ever we come there, our pains shall be for number and kinds, infinitely
various, as our pleasures have been here; every sense and member, each power
and faculty both of soul and body, shall have their several objects of
wretchedness, and that without intermission, or end, or ease, or patience to
endure it, Luke 12. 5. and 16. 23. Matthew. 3. 12. and 5. 22. and 23. 33. Yea the
pains and sufferings of the damned, are ten thousand times more then can be
imagined by any heart under heaven, and can rather (through necessity) be
endured, then expressed. It is a death never to be painted to the life 5 no pen
nor pencill, nor art nor heart can comprehend it, Matthew. 18. 8, 9, 10. and 25.
30. Luke 16. 23, 24. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Isa. 5. 14. and 30. 33. Pro. 15. 11.

6. Yea were all the land paper, and all the water ink, every plant a pen, and
every other creature a ready writer, yet they could not set down the least
piece of the great pains of hell fire.

7. Now add eternity to extremity, and then consider hell to be hell indeed.
For if the Ague of a year, or the Colic of a month, or the Rack of a day, or
the burning of an hour be so bitter here; how will it break the hearts of the
wicked, to feel all these beyond all measure, beyond all time; yet is all this
truth, save that it comes far short of the truth; this is much, it is not
near all. For as one said, Nothing but the eloquence of Tully could
sufficiently set forth Tully's eloquence: So none can express these everlasting
torments, but he that is from everlasting to everlasting.

8. Now what heart would not bleed to see men run headlong into these
tortures, that are thus intolerable? Dance hood-winked into this perdition? O
that it were but allowed to the desperate ruffians of our days, that swear and
curse, drink and drab, rob, shed blood, etc. (as if heaven were blind and deaf
to what they do) to have but a sight of this hell! How would it charm their
mouths, apale their spirits, strike fear and astonishment into their hearts?
Yea the Church and they would be better acquainted, which are now perpetual
strangers. For I cannot think they would do thus, if they did but either see or
foresee, what they shall one day (without serious and unfeigned repentance)
feel; O that men would believe and consider this truth! and do accordingly.

CHAP. XX.
1. THus, I say, shall they be bid Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc.
while on the contrary the same Christ shall say unto the other, Come ye blessed
of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from before the foundation
of the world, Matthew. 25. 34. Which Kingdom is a place where are such joys, as
eye has not seen, nor ^ar heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to
conceive* 1 Cor. 2. 9.

2. A place where shall be no evil present, nor good absent, Heb. 9. 12. Matthew.
6. 20. In comparison whereof all the Thrones and Kingdoms upon earth, are less
then the drop of a bucket, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. Mat. 5. 19. Isa. 66.
1. Yea, how little, how nothing are the poor and temporary enjoyments of this
life, to those we shall enjoy in the next, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

3. Do thou desire beauty, riches, honor, pleasure, long-life, or what ever
else can be named? No place so glorious by creation, so beautiful with
delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation, nor so
durable for lasting, Heb. 12. 22. 1 ^ct. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Romans 9. 3. and 8.
18. There are no estates but inheritances, no inheritances but Kingdoms, no
houses but Palaces, no meals but s^a^ts, no noise but music, no rods but
Scepters, no garments but Robes, no seats but Thrones, no coverings for the
head but Crowns, Romans 8. 17. Titus 3. 7. Heb 9. 15. Matthew. 25. 31, 34. 2 Timothy
4. 8. Gal. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 9, 10. Mark 10. 23, 24, 25. Rev. 7. 13, 14, 15. Our
condition there will be so joyful, that look we outwardly, there is joy in the
societ^, Heb. 12. 22. if inwardly, there is joy in our own felicity, 1 Cor. 2
9. Look we forward, there is joy in the eternity, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Mark 10. 30. So
that on every side we shall be even swallowed up of joy, Isa. 35. 10. and 51.
1^. Matthew. 25. 23. and 18. 10. Heb. 12. 2. 22. Psalm. 16 11.

4. As O the multitude and fullness of these joys! so many, that only God can
number them; so great, that he only can estimate them; of such rarity and
perfection, that this world has nothing comparable to them, 2 Cor. ^2. 2, 4.
There is no death nor dearth, no pining nor repining, no fraud, sorrow nor
sadness, neither tears, nor fears, defect nor loathing, Rev. 7. 16, 17. and 21.
4. Heb 9. 12.

5. There shall be no sorrow, nor pain, nor Complaint; there is no malice to
rise up against us, no misery to afflict us; no hunger, thirst, wearisomnesse,
temptation, to disquiet us, Matthew. 6. 19, 20. Heb. 9. 12. There, O there! one
day is better then a thousand; there is Rest from our Labors, Peace from our
Enemies, Freedom from our Sins, etc. Job 3. 17. Heb. 4. 3, 9, 10, 11. Rev. 14.
13. Heb. 9. 12, 15.

. 6. The Eye sees much, the Ear hears more, the Heart conceives most: yet all
short of apprehension, much more of comprehension; of those pleasures:
therefore it is said, Enter thou into thy Masters joy; For it is too great to
enter into thee, Matthew. 25. 23. As O the transcendency of that Paradise of
pleasure! where is joy without heaviness, or interruption; peace without
perturbation; blessedness without misery: Light without Darkness; health
without sickness; beauty without blemish; abundance without want; ease without
Labor* Satiety without Loathing; Liberty without Restraint; Security without
Fear; Glory without ignominy; knowledge without ignorance; Eyes without Tears;
Hearts without sorrow; Souls without Sin: where shall be no evil heard of to
affright us, nor good wanting to cheer us: For we shall have what we can
desire* and we shall desire nothing but what is good, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. Esaias 66. 1.
1 Kings 8. 27. Mark 10. 21. Luke 18. 22. 1 Pet. 5. 10. Ioh. 4. 36. and 10: 28.
Matthew. 25. 46.

. 7. In fine, (that I may darkly shadow it ou^, since the lively representation
thereof is merely impossible) this Life eve^lasting is the perfection of all
good things: For Fullness is the perfection of measure; and everlastingnesse
the perfection of Time, and infiniteness the perfection of Number: and
immutability the perfection of State; and immensity the perfection of Place;
and immortality the perfection of Life; and God the perfection of all: who
shall be all in all to us; Meat to our taste, beau^y to our Eyes, perfumes to
our smell, Music to our Ears: And what shall I say more? but as the Psalmist
says, glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, Psalm. 87. 3. see
Revel. 4. 2, 3. and 21. 10. to the end.

. 8. But alas such is man's parvity, that he is as far from comprehending it, as
his Arms are from compassing it, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Heaven shall receive us, we
cannot conceive Heaven: Do you ask me what Heaven is says one? when I meet you
there, I will tell you: For could this Ear hear it, or this Tongue utter it, or
this Heart conceive it; it must needs follow, that they were translated already
thither, 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. Yea, a man may as well with a coal, paint out the Sun
in all his splendour: as with his pen, or tongue express, Or with his Heart
(were it as deep as the Sea) conceive the Fullness of those Joys, and
Sweetness of those pleasures which the Saints shall enjoy at Gods right hand
for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. in thy presence, is the Fullness of Joy; and at thy
right hand, are pleasures for evermore: For quality they are pleasures; for
quantity, fullness; for Dignity, at Gods right hand; for Eternity, for
evermore. And Millions of years, multiplied by millions, make not up one minute
to this Eternity, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Joh. 10. 28.

CHAP. XXI.
. 1. BUt for the better confirming of this so important a truth; in these
Atheistical times: See some reasons to confirm it: As First, if the Sun which
is but a creature, be so bright and glorious; that no mortal Eye can look upon
the brightness of it! how glorious then is the Creator himself? or that light
from whence it receives its light, If the frame of the Heavens, and Globe of
the Earth be so glorious; which is but the Lower House, or rather the Footstool
of the Almighty, as the Holy Ghost phraseth it, Isa. 66. 1. Matthew. 5. 35. Act.
7. 49. how glorious and wonderful, is the Maker thereof, and the City where he
keeps his Court? Or if Sinners, even the worst of wicked men, and Gods enemies;
have here in this earthly pilgrimage, such variety of enjoyments to please
their very senses; as who can express the pleasurable variety of objects for
the sight, of meats, and drinks to satisfy and delight the taste; of Voices,
and melodious sounds to recreate the hearing; of sents, and perfumes provided
to accommodate our very smelling; of recreations and sports to bewitch the
whole man: And the like of Honor, and profit, which are Idols, that carnal men
do mightily dote upon, and take pleasure in: (though these earthly, and bodily
joys are but the body, or rather the dregs of true joy,) what think we must be
the soul thereof? viz. those delights and pleasures, that are reserved for the
Glorified Saints, and Gods dea^est darlings in Heaven, Again

. 2. Secondly, If natural men find such pleasure and sweetness; in secular
wisdom, lip-learning, and brain knowledge; For even mundane knowledge has such
a show of excellency in it; that it is highly affected both by the good and
bad; As O the pleasure! that rational men take therein; It being so fair a
Virgin, that every clear eye is in love with her, so rich a pearl that none but
Swine do despise it; yea among all the Trees in the Garden, none so takes with
rational men as the Tree of knowledge: (as Satan well knew, when he set upon
our First Parents) insomuch that Plato thinks, in case wisdom could but
represent it self unto the Eyes; it would set the heart on fire with the love
of it: And others affi^m, that there is no less difference between the
Learned, and the Ignorant; then there is between the living and the dead; or
between men and Beasts: And yet the pleasure which natural, and moral men take
in secular, and mundane knowledge and learning; is nothing comparable, to the
pleasure that an experimental Christian finds in the Divine, and supernatural
knowledge of Gods Word: which makes David and Solomon prefer it before the
honey, and the honey comb for sweetness; and to value it above thousands of
gold and silver; yea before pearls and all precious stones for worth: How
sweet then s^all our knowledge in Heaven be? for here we see but darkly, and as
it were in a Glass, or by Moon light; but there we shall know, even as we are
known, and see God, and Christ in the face, 1 Cor. 13. 1^,

. 3. Thirdly, If mere Naturian^ have been so taken with the love of Virtue;
that they thought if a virtuous soul, could but be seen with corporal eyes; it
would ravish all men with love, and admiration thereof, yea if the very worst
of men, Drunkards, Blasphemers and the like; though they most spitefully scoff
at, and backbite the people of God; yet when they know a man sincere, upright,
and honest; cannot choose but love, commend and honor him in their hearts; as
it fared with Herod touching John, and King Agrippa touching Paul.

. 4. Or rather if Gods own people, are so ravished with the graces, and
privileges which they in joy upon earth* as the assurance of the pardon of
sin; the peace of a good conscience, and joy of the Holy Ghost; which is but
glorification begun: what will they be, when they shall enjoy the perfection of
glory in Heaven? As see but some instances, of their present enjoyments here
below: First, if we were never to receive any reward, for those small labors
of love, and duties we do to the glory of God, and profit of others; we might
think our selves sufficiently recompensed in this life; with the calm, and
quietness of a good conscience; the honesty of a virtuous and holy life: That
we can do and suffer something for the love of Christ, who has done and
suffered so much to save us: That by our w^rks the majesty of God is magnified;
to whom all homage is due, and all service too little: For godliness in every
sickness is a Physician, in every contention an Advocate^ in every doubt a
School man, in all heaviness a Preacher, and a comforter unto whatsoever
estate it comes; making the whole life as it were a perpetual Halelujah. Yea
God so sheds his love abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, that we are in
Heaven, before we come thither. Insomuch, that as the fire flies to his
Sphere, the stone hastens to the Center, the River to the Sea, as to their end
and rest; and are violently detained in all other places: so are the hearts of
Gods people, without their Maker and Redeemer, their last end and eternal rest
and quietness, never at rest: like the needle touched with the loadstone,
which ever stands quivering and trembling, until it enjoyes the full and
direct aspect of the Northern pole. But more particularly,

. 5. How does the assurance of the pardon of sin alone, clear and calm all
storms of the mind? making any condition comfortable, and the worst and
greatest misery to be no misery.

To be delivered of a Child, is no small joy to the mother: but to be delivered
from sin, is a far greater joy to the soul. But to this we may add the joy of
the Holy Ghost, and the peace of conscience; otherwise called the peace of God
which passes all understanding. These are privileges, that make Paul happier
in his chain of Iron, then Agrippa in his chain of gold: and Peter more merry
under stripes, then Caiapha^ upon the Judgment seat. And Stephen the like
under that shower of stones. Pleasures are ours, if we be Christ's: Whence those
expression^ of the Holy Ghost, The Lord has done great things for us, whe^^of
we rejoice. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye Righteous, and shout for joy
all ye that are upright in heart. Let all that put their trust in thee rejoice,
let them even shout for joy. Rejoice evermore, and again I say rejoice rejoice,
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our conscience. Your hearts shall rejoice, and your Joy shall no man take
from you etc. So that it is a shame for the faithful, not to be joyful: and
they sin, if they rejoice not, whatever their condition be. The Eunuch no
sooner felt the pardon of sin, upon his being baptized into the faith of
Christ, but he went on his way rejoicing* Act. 8. 39. He then found more sollid
joy, then ever he had done in his riches, honors, and great Places under
Candises Queen of the Ethiopians. At the same time when the Disciples were
persecuted, they are said to be filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost, Act.
13. 52. And as their afflictions do abound, so their consolation abounds also,
2 Cor. 1. 5. For the^e are comforts, that will support and refresh a Child of
God in the very midst of the flames; as the Martyrs found: for mauger all their
persecutors could do, their peace and joy did exceed their pain: as many of
them manifested, to all that saw them suffer.

. 6. Now as the Priests of Mercury, when they eat their figgs and honey; cried
out, O how sweet is truth! so if the worst of a Believers life in this world be
so sweet; how sweet shall his life be in that Heavenly Jerusalem? and holy
City? where God himself dwells. And where we shall reign with Christ our
Bridegroom, and be the Lambs wife? which City is of pure gold like unto clear
glass, the walls of Jasper, having twelve foundations garnished with all
manner of precious stones; the first foundation being Jasper, the second
Saphir; the third a Calsedony, the fourth an Emerald, the fifth a Sardonix, the
sixth a Sardius, the seventh a Chrisolite, the eight a Beril, the ninth a
Topas, the tenth a Chrisophrasus, the eleventh a Iacinth, the twel^th an
Amathist; having twelve Gates of twelve pearls; the street thereof of pure gold
as it were transparant glass: In the midst of which City, is a pure River of
the water of life clear as Crystal; and of either side the Tree of life; which
bears twelve manner of fruits, yielding her fruit every month; the leaves
whereof serve to heal the Nations; Where is the Throne of God, and of the
Lamb; whom we his servants shall for ever serve, and see his face, and have
his Name written in our foreheads. And there shall be no night, neither is
there need of the sun, neither of the noon to shine in it: for the glory of God
does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Into which nothing that
defiles shall enter; but they alone which are written in the Lambs Book of
life. As is expressed, Revel. 21. and 22. Chapters. The holy Ghost speaking after
the manner of men, and according to our slender capacity: for otherwise no
words can in any measure express the transcendency of that place of pleasure.

Only here we have a taste, or earnest penny, one drop of those divine
dainties, of those spiritual, supernatural, and divine pleasures* reserved for
the Citizens of that Heavenly Jerusalem; some small smack whereof we have even
in the barren desert, of this perilous peregrination: God letting out as it
were, a certain kind of Manna, which in some sort refreshes his thirsty
people, in this wilderness; as with most sweet honey, or water distilled from
out the Rock. As what else are those Jubilees of the heart, those secret, and
inward joys which proceed from a good conscience, grounded upon a confident
hope of future salvation? As what else do these great clusters of grapes
signify? but the fertility of the future Land of Promise.

. 7. True it is, none can know the spiritual joy, and comfort of a Christian,
but he that lives the life of a Christian, Joh. 7. 17. as none could learn the
Virgins song, but they that sang it, Rev. 14. 3. No man can know the peace of a
good conscience, but he that keeps a good conscience: no man knows the hid
manna, and white stone, with a new name written in it; but they that receive
the same, Rev. 2. 17.

The world can see a Christians outside; but the raptures of his soul, the
ravishing delights of the inward man, and joy of his spirit for the remission
of his sins, and the infusion of grace, with such like spiritual privileges;
more glorious then the States of Kingdoms; are as a covered mess to men of
the world.

But I may appeal to any man's conscience, that has been softened with the
unction of grace, and truly tasted the powers of the world to come: To him that
has the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost; in whose soul
the light of grace shines: whether his whole life be not a perpetual halelujah;
in comparison of his natural condition. Whether he finds not his joy to be like
the joy of Harvest? or as men rejoyee when they divide a spoil, Isa. 9. 3.
Whether he finds not more joy in goodness, then worldlings can do, when their
wheat, wine, and oil abounds, Psalm. 4. 7. and 53. 17. Yea he can speak it out
of experience, that as in profane joy, even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful: so in godly sorrow, even in weeping the heart is light and cheerful.
The face may be pale, yet the heart may be calm and quiet. So S. Paul, as
sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Our cheeks may run down
with tea^es, and yet our mouths sing forth praises. And so on the contrary,

Where O God there wants thy grace;
Mirth is only in the face. 2 Cor. 5. 12.
Well may a careless worlding laugh more; as what will sooner make a man
laugh, then a witty jest: but to hear of an Inheritance of an hundred pounds a
year, that is fallen to a man; will make him more solli^ly merry within. Light
is sown to the righteous, and joy for the upright, Psalm. 97. 11. My servants
says God shall sing, and rejoice: but they shall weep, etc. Isa. 65. 14.

. 8. Indeed we are not merry enough, because we are not Christians enough:
because sin is a cooler of our joy, as water is of fire. And like the worm of
Jonah his Gourd; bites the very root of our joy; and makes it wither. Yea sin
like a damp, puts out all the lights of our pleasure* and deprives us of the
light of Gods countenance, as it did David, Psalm. 51. 12. and 4. 6.

So that the fault is either, First, in the too much sensuality of a Christian;
that will not forge^ the pleasures of sin, or the more muddy joys and
pleasures of this world; which are poisons to the soul, and drown our joys: as
Bees are drowned in hon^y, but live in vinegar. Men would have spiritual joy,
but withal they would not part with their carnal joy: Yet this is an infallible
Conclusion, there is no enjoying a wordly Paradise here, and another hereafter.

. 9. Or secondly, the fault is in the ta^te, not in the meat; in the folly of
the judgment, not in the pearl: when a grain of corn is preferred before it. To
taste spiritual joys, a man must be spiritual: for the Spirit relisheth only
the things of the Spirit; and like loves his like. Between a spiritual man,
and spiritual joys; there is as mighty an appetite and enjoying; as between
fleshly meat, and a carnal stomach. Therefore the want of this taste and
apprehension, condemns the world to be carnal; but magnifies the joys
spiritual, as being above her carnal apprehension. Or

. 10. Thirdly, herein lies the fault; few feel these joys in this life;
because they will not crack the shell, to get the kernel: they will not pare
the fruit, to eat the pulpe; not till the ground, to reap the harvest. They
fly the Wars, and thereby lose the glory of the victory. They will not dig the
craggy Mountain, to find the mine of gold. Not prune the vine, therefore enjoy
not the fruit. They fly moritification, and therefore attain not the sweet
spiritual consolation; which ever attends the same. And so much for the
Reasons, The Use may be four fold.

. 11. First, are the joys of Heaven so unspeakable and glorious? how then
should we admire the love, and bounty of God; and bless his name, who for the
performance of so small a work; has proposed so great a reward? And for the
obtaining of such an happy state, has imposed such an easy task.

. 12. Secondly, who would not serve a short apprentiship, in Gods service here?
to be made for ever free in glory. Yea, who would not be a Philpot for a
month, or a Lazarus for a day, or a Stephen for an hour; that he might be in
Abraham's bosom for ever? Yea what pain can we think too much to suffer? what
little enough to do? to obtain eternity for this incorruptible Crown of glory
in Heaven, 1 Pet. 5. 4. where we shall have all tears wiped from our eyes.
Where we shall cease to sorrow, cease to suffer, cease to sin. Where God shall
turn all the water of our afflictions; into the pure wine of endless, and
unexpressible comfort. Yea had Queen Eliz^^eth but foreknown, whiles she was in
Prison, what a glorious reign she should have had for forty and four years
aft^r it: she would never have wished her self a Milk-Maid, as she was often
heard to do. But certainly nothing ^an be too much to endure, for those
pleasures which shall endure for ever.

. 13. You shall sometimes see an hired servant, venture his life for his new
Master; that will scarce pay him his wages at the years end: and can we suffer
too much for our Lord and Master; who gives every one that serves him not
fields, and vineyards, as Saul pretended, 1 Samuel 22. 7, etc. nor Towns and
Cities, as Cicero is pleased to boast of Caesar; but even an hundred fold more
then we part withal here in this life; and eternal Mansions in Heaven
hereafter, Joh. 14. 2.

S. Paul says, Our light affliction which is but for a moment; causes us a
far most excellent, and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. where note
the incomparable, and infinite difference between the work, and the wages:
light affliction, receiving a weight of glory; and momentary affliction,
eternal glory. Suitable to the reward of the wicked, whose empty delights, live
and dye in a moment; but their unsufferable punishment, is interminable and
endless. Their pleasure is short, their pain everlasting; our pain is short,
our joy eternal. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, James 1. 12. a Crown without cares,
without rivals, without envy, without end. And nothing we suffer here, can be
compared; either to those woes we have deserved in Hell; or those joys we are
reserved to in Heaven. Think we then but upon those two places; and the
remembrance there of is enough, to raise up our souls from our selves; and
make us even contemn, and slight what ever our Enemies are able to do: as our
Forefathers did the flames.

And what though thy sufferings be never so sad?

The gain with hardness, makes it far less hard.
The danger is great, but so is the reward.
The sight of glory future, mitigates the sense of misery present. As Jacobs
service seemed the lighter, by having his beloved Rachel always in his eye.
The poor Traveller thinking on his Inn, goes on more cheerfully. And the
Bondsman, by calling to mind his year of Iubilee. So that if we droop at
present, it is for want of considering the future.

Wherefore eye not the stream thou wadest through:
But the firm land thou tendest too.
Compare the seed time with the Harvest: look up from the root to the fruit.
Lazarus was for a time extreme miserable; what then? his sores and sorrows
soon ceased, but his joys shall never cease: his pain did soon pass, his joy
shall never pass away. Again

. 14. Thirdly, How is it possible? he should dote upon these transitory things
below; that but seriously thinks upon what is reserved for us in Heaven? As O
the folly and madness of those; that prefer Earth, yea Hell to Heaven, time to
eternity, the Body before the Soul; yea the outward estate before either soul
or body. These are the worlds Fools; who care not what their end is; so their
way may be pleasant. Mere Children, that prefer an Apple before their
Inheritance! Besotted sensualists; that see not how their present pleasures
soon vanish like smoke. That consider not how this life of ours; if it were not
short, yet it is miserable; and if it were not miserable, yet it is short. That
suffer themselves to be so bewitched, with the love of money; and their hearts
to be riveted to the earth; to be so inslaved to their lust, to make gold their
god, and commodity the stern of their consciences. For else the one would fly
from present sinful pleasures, with as great zeal; as now they seek after them.
Neither would the other like Judas sell Christ for thirty pence; who is not to
be valued with many millions of worlds: did they but seriously think of those
treasures of wisdom and riches, Col. 2. 3. that will never fade, those comforts
that are everlasting. They would not be such fools, as to better their
estates, by making themselves worse: nor impoverish their souls, to enrich
their bodies. Much less would they sell both soul and body, to purchase a
great estate: which when gotten, they have not power to partake of. For such is
their sottishness, they never think that dear, which stands them in no less
price then their own souls. For in them is that fulfilled; Nihil cuique se
vilius: the vilest, basest, and cheapest thing we have, we hold our selves.

. 15. Yet no wonder; for this is the misery, that notwithstanding God has set
life and death, Heaven and Hell before us; and given us our choice: Offering
Heaven to all that will confide in, serve and obey him: threatened Hell, in case
we forsake him; to serve sin and Satan: few men have faith to believe either.
Yea being fleshly, not having the spirit: they can believe nothing, but that
they are led to by sense. Otherwise, did men but really believe either of
these: they would not instead of obeying Christ's Gospel, make the World only
their god, and pleasure or profit alone their Religion.

Men fear a Iayl, more then they fear Hell: and stand more upon their silver,
or sides smarting; then upon their souls: and regard more the blasts of men's
breath; then the fire of Gods wrath: and tremble more at the thought of a
Sergeant, or Baily; then of Satan, and everlasting perdition. Else they would
not be hired, with all the worlds wealth, multiplied as many times as there be
sands on the Sea shore; to hazard in the least, the loss of those everlasting
joys before spoken of. Or to purchase, and plunge themselves into those
caselesse, and everlasting flames of fire and brimstone in Hell: there to try
body and soul, where shall be an inumerable company of devils, and damned
spirits to affright and torment them; but not one to comfort, or pity them.

. 16. But O the madness of these men! that cannot be hired to hold their
finger for one minute, in the weak flame of a farthing Candle; and yet for
trifles, will plunge themselves body and soul, into those endless, and
infinitely scorching flames of Hell fire.

If a King but threatens a Malefactor to the Dungeon, to the Rack, to the
wheel; his bones tremble, a terrible palsy runs through all his joints: but
let God threaten the unsufferable tortures of burning Topheth; we stand
unmoved, undaunted. And what makes the difference? the one we believe as
present, the other is as they think uncertain, and long before it comes, if
ever it do come. Otherwise it could not be; since the soul of all sufferings,
are the sufferings of the soul: Since as painted fire, is to material; such is
material, to Hell fire. And yet if fire be but cried in the streets: we run and
bestir our selves, how to quench it; or at least how to avoid it. O that men
would believe the God of truth! (that cannot lie) touching spiritual, and
eternal things, but as they do these temporary, and transitory. O that thou!
who art the sacred Monarch of this mighty frame! would give them hearts to
believe at least thus much; That things themselves are in the invisible World,
in the World visible but their shadows only. And that whatsoever wicked men
enjoy here; it is but as in a dream; their plenty is but like a drop of
pleasure, before a River of sorrow and displeasure: And whatsoever the godly
feel, but as a drop of misery, before a River of mercy and glory. That though
thou the great, and just Judge of all the world; come slowly to Judgment: yet
thou will come surely. As the Clock comes slowly, and by minutes to the s^r^ak:
yet it strikes at last: That those are only true riches, which being once had,
can never be lost. That Heaven is a Treasure worthy our hearts, a purchase
worth our lives: That when all is done, how to be saved, is the best plot. That
there is not mention of one, in the whole Bible; that ever sinned without
repentance; but he was punished without mercy. For then there would not be a
Fornicator, or Profane person as Esau; who for a portion of meat, sold his
inheritance, Heb. 12. 16. Then they would not be of the number of those; that
so doted upon purchases, and Farms, and Oxen; that they made light of going to
the Lords Supper, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20. Nor of the Gadarens mind; who preferred
their Hogs before Christ. Then would they know it better to want all things;
then that one needful thing: whereas now they desire all other things, and
neglect that one thing which is so needful. They would hold it far better and
in good sadness, to be saved with a few, as Noah war in the Ark: then in good
fellowship with the multitude, to be drowned in sin, and damned for company.
Nor would they think it any disparagement to their wisdoms; to change their
minds, and be of another judgment to what they are.

. 17. Wherefore my Brethren; let me beseech you, not to be such Atheists, and
fools, as to fall into hell before you will fear it: when by fearing it, you
may avoid it; and by neglecting it, you cannot but fall into it. What though it
be usual with men, to have no sense of their souls; till they must leave their
bodies: yet do not you therefore leap into Hell, to keep them company. But be
persuaded to bethink your selves now: rather then when it will be too late,
when the Drawbridge will be taken up; and when it will vex every vein of your
hearts, that you had no more care of your souls.

CHAP. XXII.
. 1. FOurthly and lastly, these things being so; how does it concern all, to
see that they are Believers? Would thou then have it fare so with thee?
Would thou have thy very poisons turned into cordials? thy terrors, changed
into pleasures? and thy greatest evils made beneficial unto thee? Would thou
be loosed from the chains of thy sins, and delivered from the chains of
plagues? Would thou have the same Christ, with his precious Blood to free
thee, that shall with his Word sentence others? As who would not, except Satan
has strangely bewitched him? If thou would, I say, then learn of this
Believer, imitate him in what has been declared, and what I shall further
rehearse touching his knowledge, belief, and life; for I have only brake the
thread of my Discourse, to let in this use in way of a Parenthesis; and now I
return to finish or complete the foregoing Character, for thereunto may be
added as follows.

. 2. He cannot hear God blasphemed or dishonored without being moved thereat,
yea, he is as heartily vexed for any dishonor done to him, as for any disgrace
offered to himself. He has an holy care and endeavor in all places and
companies, to walk so as he may win glory to God, honor his profession, and
give no offense or occasion to the enemies of God to speak evil of him; he
acknowledges all good to come from God, and that all glory is to be given to
him; and accordingly endeavors to honor and serve him with his riches,
wisdom, and what other gifts or abilities he has; neither is he dumb in
publishing his praise, nor backward to justify him in his Judgments. He will
not worship an Image, or God in the Image; he seldom sells things tending to
Idolatry, or any other sin, or uses lots in sporting. He fears God, and fears
sin, and this dispelle^^ in him all other false, fond, and foolish fears, which
others that are void of the fear of God, are grievously and perpetually
perplexed withal; as namely, he fears not that his serving of God will prove
his undoing, he neither fears nor observes the flying of Fowls, the signs of
Heaven, the sight of a live Snake, the crossing of an Hare, the croaking of a
Raven, the screeching of an Owl, the howling of a Dog, the dreaming of Gardens,
green Rushes, or dead friends; to eat an Egg in Lent, or flesh on a Friday
never racks his conscience; whether the Crow cries even or odd in a morning, or
whether he leaves the cross on his right or left hand as he goes; whether it
be Childermas Day or not, when he takes a Journey, or undertakes any business,
or whether the Saltseller falls from or toward him, it is all one to him; nor
does stumbling at a threshold presage any evil to him at all; he never crosses
his breast, nor sprinckles his face when he is to go abroad, nor nails
Horse-shooes at his door, and yet speeds never the worse; neither old Wives,
nor Stars are his Counselors; a Night-spel is none of his guide, nor Charms
his Physician; Erra Pater is no part of his Creed; neither wears he Ammulets,
or Paracelsian Characters about his neck, you shall never hear him talk of
luckey handsel, and Fortune to him is an ass; Buggs never fright him, nor
Fai^ies pinch him, neither will he put confidence in any such superstitious and
devilish ^opperies, as the ignorant and superstitious do; no, he will not be
beholding to the King of Hell for a shooe^ye.

. 3. He seeks the good, and to preserve the peace of the place he lives in, and
can comfort himself with this* that in his very Calling and public
employments, his aim and endeavor is not more at profit or credit then at the
glory of God, and good of others; he has an humble and public spirit;
delights in doing good offices, and is active to pleasure others, and can make
him self a servant to all that stand in need of him.

CHAP. XXIII.
. 1. NOr is he partial in his obedience, but universal, making conscience of
every duty, and all that God commands; the first Table as well as the second,
and the second as well as the first; framing his will to Gods Will in every
thing, even laboring to be perfect, and holy, as his Father in Heaven is; and
to imitate Christ, be conformed to his likeness, and to be holy as he was in
all parts of his conversation; and that at all times and in all companies; as
conscientious alone and in private, where God only sees him, as if his greatest
enemy, or all the world did behold him; he has a spirit without guile, and is
more desirous to be good then so accounted, and more seeks the power of
godliness then the show of it; and therefore keeps a narrower watch over his
very thoughts then any other can do over his actions, and is accordingly
grieved for them. He makes conscience of the smallest things required or
forbidden in the Word; and is as careful to shun the very occasions of sin, or
least appearances, or first mo^ions of sin as actual sin it self; not daring to
gratify Satan in committing the least sin, or neglect God in omitting the
smallest precept.

. 2. He does not serve God by the precepts of men, not fear his displeasure for
breaking their traditions; neither does he think himself sanctified by outward
performances, as do our Formalists and Protestants at large, who stand more
upon circumstance then substance, and upon outward privileges then inward
graces, but he serves God in spirit, according to Christ's Gospel, for he lives
and believes, and hears, and invocates, and hopes, and fears, and loves, and
worships God in such manner as his Word prescribes, without addition or
deminution; neither does he follow the examples of the greatest number, or the
greatest men, or the greatest Scholars, because Christ has plainly told him,
That few of either sort (compared with the multitude) shall be saved; of which
small number he strives to be.

. 3. All which he performs with cheerfulness, being ever willing and ready to
do good; and in ^incerity and simplicity, with a single heart, without by-ends,
as loving righteousness and mercy, and doing good duties merely out of love to
God and goodness, and because God commands them that he may be glorified, and
others edified thereby; yea he would do what he is able out of love to Christ,
though himself should never have credit nor benefit by it here, nor hereafter;
earnestly desiring grace that he might more honor him, and grieving that he
can perform no be^ter service to so good a Master. He will not (as too many
most sordidly do) take liberty to sin, because God is merciful, and forbeares
to execute judgment speedily; or defer his repentance, because the Thief upon
the Cross was heard at the last hour: but he will even therefore the more fear
him because he is merciful; and therefore be holy, because he is not under the
Law, but under grace.

. 4. And lastly, having thus done, and performed his utmost, not to merit by
it, but to express his thankfulness to him that has done, performed, and
suffered so much for him; he confesses himself an unprofitable servant, and
that in all he comes far short of performing his duty; yea, he acknowledges,
that it were just for God eternally to condemn him. Well may he be comforted by
the graces which God has given him, as an earnest penny of those eternal
Mansions in Heaven; but he will not be exalted by them because they are not his
graces, but the Graces of God in him, and wrought by his Spirit: yea, he so
abhors to attribute or ascribe ought to doing, that he counts his very
righteousness no better then filthy rags, ascribing every good thought, word,
and action which proceeds from him to Free Grace, for he looks back to the rock
out of which he was hewn, and is not only humbled thereby, but forced with an
holy admiration to wonder at the mavelous and extraordinary change which God
has wrought in him, and also instructed to trust only to Christ's obedience,
in whom only our good works are accepted, and for whom alone they are
rewarded. To shut up all, he endeavors so to live as if there were no Gospel,
and so to dye as if there were no Law.

CHAP. XXIV.
. 1. Only it remains that you look your selves in this Glass, and ^ry your
selves by this touchstone, for though others may give a shrewd guess, yet the
Mother knows best whether the Child be like the Father or no; and the signs of
Salvation are to be sought in our selves, as the cause in Jesus Christ; our
Justification is to be proved by the fruits of our Sanctification, and though
faith alone justifies, yet justifying faith is never alone, but ever
accompanied with spiritual graces, the beauties of the soul, and good works the
beauty of graces; yea, they are as inseparable as the root and the sap, the Sun
and its light; and as Fire may be discerned by heat, and life by motion, so a
man's faith may be discerned by the fruits of it. Nor can any one be deceived
except he desires to deceive himself, for every particular man is either the
Child of God, or the Child of the Devil, as Chrysostom has it, for there is
not a mean betwixt them; and there be more differences between the Children of
God, and the Children of the Devil, then there are between Men and Beasts,
whereof I have named not a few; for whatsoever you may find the one (herein set
forth) to speak, think, or do, the other does the contrary; and to have the
true Character of an unbeliever you need but read this Chracter of a true
Believer backward, understand all by the rule of contraries and be satisfied; I
speak this to Naturians only, for the regenerate man knows the one to be so
by what he is, and the other by what he has been; neither is there one of all
these signs or characters but each experienced Christian finds it in some
degree written in his heart, as his conscience can bear me witness. And would
you know whether you belong to Christ? This will inform you, you will (by help
from above) endeavor to bring into captivity every thought and thing to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. 1 John 2. 4* but so have not you in the
least so long as you love not, or any way oppose the people of God; for the
very first part of conversion is, to love them that love God, 1 Ioh. 3. 10. yea
in reason, if the Image of God by faith were repaired in thee, thou could
not but be delighted with those that are like thy self. And what says S. John,
He that pretends interest in God, or Christ, and keeps not his Commandments,
is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 Ioh. 2. 4. and in the third Chapter
and eighth Verse he affirms plainly, That all wilful Sinners are the Devils
servants. And indeed, let men flatter themselves, or pretend what they will, it
cannot be denied but the fruit tells best the name of the Tree; the
conversation above all shows who carries the bridle of the will, whether God
or Satan: and did not men purposely shut their eyes, and stop their ears, and
harden their own hearts, least they should see, and hear, and so be converted,
as our Savior himself speaks, Metth. 13. 15. they could not but know that the
whole Bible beats upon this: It is Saint Paul's everlasting rule, Romans 6. 16. Ye
are his servants to whom ye obey. And Saint Peter's infallible Doctrine, 2 Pet.
2. 19. Of whom a man is overcome, unto him he is in bondage. And Saint John's,
In this are the Children of God known, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever
does not righteousness is not of God, but of the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 8, 10. And
after this manner does our Savior reason with the Jews, Ioh. 8. 33, to 48.
See then whose Commands ye do, Gods, or Satan's; if Satan's, then says Saint
John, Let no man deceive you through vain words, for he only that does
righteousness is righteous, and he that does unrighteousness is of the devil,
1 Ioh. 3. 7, 8. wherefore if thou art a common Drunkard, or a continual
Swearer, or an usual companion of Harlots, or an accustomary Deceiver, or a
frequent ^landerer of thy Neighbor, or an open and common Sabbath-breaker, or
can thou boast of thy sin and mischief, or defend it? If thou make no
conscience of Praying in thy Family; if thou call evil good, and good evil;
if thou hate thy Brother for doing that which is good, as Cain did Abel; if
Ismael-like thou mockest, or Cham-like thou scoffest at the religious, or usest
bitter jests against them, though it be under the notion of Roundheads,
Puritanes, Sectaries, Black-coats, or the like; if thou raisest slanders of
them, or furtherest them being raised; if thou do rejoice at the secret
infirmities of the godly, or open scandals of Hypocrites; if thou do carp and
fret against the Word, refusing to heart it, or withstandest the preaching of
it; if being a Minister thou disgracest or r^vilest the godly in thy preaching,
so making sad the hearts of the righteous, or justifi^st the wicked, so
strengthening them in their evil courses by preaching unto them peace: if thou
have a base esteem of Gods people and their ways, and think the worse of a
man for scrupling small matters; if thou make Religion a cloak for villainy,
if thou do borrow, or run in debt without care to pay again; if thou
delightest in cruelty, if thou take no care to provide for thine own Family;
if thou had rather the wicked should bear rule then the godly: if thou art an
enemy to reformation, if thou had rather disobey God then displease great
ones: if thou desire peace without any respect to truth; if thou do allow
thy self in the practice of any known gross sin, if thou take liberty to sin
because God is merciful, and forbears to execute judgment speedily; if thou
do not believe all things to be ordered by Gods providence, and in particular
acknowledge him in all thou either receivest or suffer; if thou murmurest
when thou want any thing, without ever thinking of the many things thou have
beyond thy desert; if thou can hear God blasphemed and dishonored, without
being moved thereat; if the scandalous lives of Professors, or the multitude of
Heresies that are daily broached make thee think, and speak evil of the way of
truth; if thou did never see thy self out of measure sinful, as being many
ways guilty of the breach of every of the Commandments in particular, and so
in a lost condition, utterly despairing of all help in thy self, acknowledging
that thou have deserved all the plagues of this life, and of that which is to
come; if thou art not as well troubled for original guilt, for sins of
omission, for the evil which cleaves to thy best works, and for thy very
thoughts, as for thy actual and manifest evil deeds; if thou have made vows,
and promised amendment when the rod was on thy bac^, but never cared to perform
the same when thou were released; if thou art not industrious after the means
of grace; if thou love not to hear Christ, voice; if thou find not the
Word more quick, and powerful, and sweet, and efficacious then any other
writings; if it; and the Spirit going along with it has not brought thee out
of darkness into mavelous light, in comparison of thy former darkness; if
thou art ignorant of the principles of Religion in the midst of so much light
and means, and can not yield a reason of the hope that is in thee; if thou
do not find a manifest change in thy judgment, affections, and actions from
what they were by nature; if the old man has not changed with the new man;
worldly wisdom with heavenly wisdom, carnal love for spiritual love, servile
fear for Christian and filial fear, idle thoughts for holy thoughts, vain words
for holy and wholesome words, fleshly works for works of righteousness, etc. as
if thou were cast into a new mould, even hating what thou formerly lovedst, and
loving what thou formerly hatedst; if thou art not ashamed of thy former
conversation; if thou have not been often and grievously assaulted with fears
and doubtings, and often in combat between the flesh and the Spirit, the
Spirit getting the better; if thou do not more fear the want of grace then
confide in what thou have; if thou are not jealous lest thy heart should
deceive thee; yea, if thou art not hated of the world, and evil spoken of for
well doing, thou art the Devils servant, and not as yet one of that small
number whom Christ has chosen out of the world to believe in his name; for
these, or any one of these signs sufficiently brand thee for a wicked man.

CHAP. XXV.
. 1. BUt least any weak Christian should think himself unsound, and so none of
Christ's, because he falls short of this description of a true Believer, and
finds wanting in himself, perhaps many of the former signs or evidences herein
set forth; or should be discouraged by reason of his many and great failings,
together with the weakness of his faith and love, as for the most part the
true Christian is as ^earful to entertain a good opinion of himself, as the
false is unwilling to be driven from it; let such an one take special notice in
the first place, that there are three sorts of true and sound Christians, as
the Apostle Saint John makes the distinction, 1 Ioh. 2. 12, 13. the first sort
are babes in Christ, viz. such as are new born, or but weakly qualified with
the graces of Gods Spirit. A second are strong men, as having the gifts of the
Spirit lively, and in power: The third are Fathers, such as have had long
experience in the powerful practice of Christianity, and been long exercised in
all kinds of well doing. This done:

. 2. Secondly, let him know, That as God requires no other obedience in the
best then Evangelical, so he looks not for the same measure and degree of grace
from Bubes, and strong men, or from strong men and Fathers, for God accepts
of every man according to the grace he has received, be it more or less, 2
Cor. 8. 12. as is manifest by that Parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25. 20. ^o
24. yea, what Father or Master will not from his young and newly weaned Child,
or sick and weak servant, accept of the will for the deed? and shall not God
much more, who is both the Father of mercies, and the Author of mercy and
compassion in others? Yes undoubtedly; as let it be granted, that thy knowledge
is still small, thy faith weak, thy charity cold, thy heart dull and hard, thy
good works few and imperfect, and all thy zealous resolutions easily hindered
and quite overthrown with every small temptation, yet God that works in us
both the will and the work will accept the will for the work; and that which is
wanting in us, Christ will supply with his own righteousness; he respects
not what we can do so much as what we would do, and that which we would perform
and cannot, he esteems it as though it were performed; thus he takes an
heart desirous to repent and believe for a penitent and believing heart,
whereas take away the will and all acts in Gods sight are equal. Well might I
doubt of my salvation, says Bradford, feeling the weakness of my faith, love,
hope, etc. if these were the cause^ of my salvation, but there is no other
cause of it, or of Gods mercy, but his mercy. Again,

. 3. Thirdly, you are to observe that as Nature so Grace rises by many degrees
to perfection, we grow in grace and saving knowledge, as a child does in
statu^e and understanding, until we attain to glory, which is grace perfected;
yea, grace in its growth is but like the change of a man's hair from black to
gray, or the growth of a Tree, which is not accomplished in a month, or a year,
but in many years we not perceiving how.

. 4. Fourthly, consider also that the best have their fail^ngs, as had Abraham,
Iacoh, David, Peter, etc. you have heard of the patience of Ioh, says Saint
James, and have we not heard also of his fits of impatiency? Yes, but it
pleased God mercifully to overlook that; and so of Asah, who had diverse, and
those no small faults, yet with one breath does God report both these; the high
places were not removed, and nevertheless Asahs heart was perfect; so our
failings be not wilful, though they be many and great, yet they cannot hinder
our interest in the promises of God; an honest and sincere heart bears out many
errors in the eye of mercy, God will not see weaknesses where he sees truth;
yea, if we hate our corruptions, and strive against them, they shall not be
counted ours: It is not I, says Paul, but the sin that dwells in me, Romans 7.
20. And indeed were it not so, what would become of us? for the work of grace
though it does not suffer Christians to live as they list, yet it does not
enable them to live as they would; it is not so broad as to allow of
corruption, nor so narrow but it will permit of corruption.

. 5. But fifthly, least the former considerations should not serve, answer me
ingeniously to these questions:

Do thou not find that the Word and Spirit has wrought an apparent change in
thy judgment, affections, and actions to what they were formerly? Is not Christ
thy greatest joy, sin thy greatest sorrow, and grace the prime object of thy
desires? Art thou not careful in the use of the means, to attain faith in the
promise of Gods mercy made in Christ? Do thou not love God, and the people of
God; yea, art thou not prone to speak in their defense when thou hear them
reviled, and contemned by wicked and ungodly men? Do thou not rejoice when
the righteous are exalted, and grieve when the wicked bear rule? Do thou not
desire and pr^y for the salvation of others? Is it not grievous to thee to hear
God blasphemed, and dishonored? Do thou not make conscience of sanctifying
his Sabbaths? Art thou not as conscientious alone, and in private where God
only sees thee, as if thy greatest enemy, or all the world did behold thee?
Do thou not make conscience of evil thoughts* grieve for thy
unprofitablenesse under the means of grace, for the evil which cleaves to thy
best actions, and for sins of omission? When thou do any thing amiss do
thou not accuse thy self? if any thing well, do thou not give all the praise
to God? Whatever thou enjoyest on this side Hell, do thou not think thy self
unworthy of it? Do thou not more fear the want of grace then con^ide in what
thou have? Art thou not evil spoken of for well doing? Do thou not love zeal
and devotion in others? Thou art not of a reprobate judgment, touching things,
actions, and persons, accounting good evil, and evil good, nor do thou
think the worse of a man for having of a tender conscience: Thou art not so
offended when offenses come as to think the worse of the way of truth, yea,
when strange things happen do thou not make a wholesome construction thereof?
If so, my soul for thine thou art a true Believer, and not an hypocrite,
whatever thy failings be; yea, if thou should find but a few of these
signs in thy self, thou need not much fear thine estate, for a few Grapes
will show that the plant is a Vine, and not a Thorn; yea, where there is any
one grace in truth, there is every one in their measure: if thou art sure thou
have love, I am sure thou have faith; for they a^e as inseparable as fire and
heat, life and motion; and so of other graces.

6.. But sixthly, for I will go yet further with thee; suppose nothing that I
have hitherto said will satisfy thee, and that thou will not acknowledge any
of these graces to be in thee, yet still thy case may be good enough: for a
Christian in times of spiritual distemper and desertion, is as one in a
swound, in which case the soul does not exercise her functions, he neither
hears, nor sees, nor feels, yet she is still in the body: Christ is as the Sun
to our souls, and we are like Elementary bodies; which lighten and darken, cool
and warm, die and revive; as the Sun presents or absents it self from them.
Whence it comes to pass that we have so much crying out in horror of
conscience, I am damned, I am damned; yea, it is a wonder to see how many truly
humbled sinners, who have so tender consciences, that they dare not yield to
the least vill for the worlds goods, and refuse no means of being made better;
turn every probation into reprobation, every dejection into rejection; and if
they be cast down they cry out, they are cast away; but in such distempers a
man is not a competent Judge in his own case, as in humane Laws there is a
nullity held of words and actions extorted, and wrong from men by fear; because
in such cases a man is held not to have power, or command in some sort of
himself. A troubled soul is like troubled water, we can discern nothing
clearly in it; wherefore in such cases a man must call to remembrance the times
past, and how it has been with him formerly, as David did, Psalm. 77. 2, to 12.
and likewise Job, chap. 31. Thus must thou do, and then if ever thou had true
faith wrought in thy heart it can never be clean extinguished; and so of love
and godly sorrow, for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, as
it is, Romans 11. 29. I the Lord change not. Mal. 3. 6. And the weakest ^aith, if
true, though it be not the like strong, yet it is the like preciou faith to
that of Abraham's, whereby to lay hold and put on the perfect righteousness of
Christ; yea, the truth of grace, be the measure never so small, is always
blessed with perseverance; and if grace but conquer us first, we by it shall
conquer all things else, whether it be corruptions within us, or temptations
without us; yea, to speak rightly, thou art the better to be thought of, and
the less to be feared for this thy ^ear, for no man so truly loves, as he that
fears to offend: and good is that fear which keeps us from evil acts, yea, as
a bleeding wound is better then that which bleeds not, so thy very complaint of
sin springing from a displeasure against it shows, that there is something in
thee opposite to sin, viz. that thou art penitent in affection, though not in
action; even as a Child is rational in power, though not in act; neither was
the Centurion ever so worthy as when he thought himself most unworthy; for all
our worthiness is in a capabl^ misery.

7.. But here by the way observe one caution, as the Pl^ister must not be less
then the s^re, so the tent must not be bigger then the wound. Though the
grievousnesse of our sins should increase our repentance, yet they should not
diminish our faith, and assurance of pardon and forgiveness. Because the Law
is not more a Glass to show us our ^ins, then the Gospel is a Fountain to wash
them away; wherefore cast not both thine eyes upon thy sin, but reserve one to
behold the remedy; look upon the Law to keep thee from presumption and upon the
Gospel to keep thee from despair; this is both a sweet and an even course. But
as an empty Vessel close luted, though you throw it into the midst of the Sea,
will receive no water, so all pleas are in vain to them that are deafned with
their own fears; for as Mary would not be comforted with the sight and speech
of Angels, no not with the sight and speech of Jesus himself, till he made her
know that it was Jesus; so until the Spirit of God sprinkleth the conscience
with the blood of Christ, and sheds his love into the heart; nothing will do,
no Creature can take off wrath from the conscience, but he that set it on;
wherefore the God of peace give you the peace of God, which passes all
understanding, yea, O Lord, speak thou music to the wounded conscience,
thunder to the seared; that thy Justice may reclaim the one, thy mercy relieve
the other, and thy favor comfort us all with peace and salvation in Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. 26.
1.. The comfort of what has been said in these seven last Sections, is
intended and belongs to weak Christians, troubled consciences, and those that
would fain do better; but let no unbeliever, impenitent, or profane person
meddle with it, for all such are to know that their very best services, as
praying, and fasting, and receiving, and giving of Alms, etc. (because they
are not done in faith, and obedience to the Word, and that God may be glorified
thereby) are no better in Gods account then if they had slain a Man, or cut off
a Dogs neck, or offered Swines blood, or blessed an Idol, as himself affirms,
Isa. 66. 3. Nor will God accept of any action, unless it flows from a pious
and good heart, sanctified by the Holy Ghost; yea, civil honesty severed from
true piety, humility, saving knowledge, sincere love to God, true obedience to
his Word, justifying faith* a zeal of Gods glory, and a desire to edify and
win others, God will neither accept nor reward, but account of their moral
virtues as of shining or glistering sins; because they spring from pride,
ignorance infidelity, self-love, and other such carnal respects, as many
examples prove, namely, Cains sacrificing, 1 John 3. 12. the Jews fasting, I^a.
58. those reprobates preaching in Christ's name, and casting ont Devils, Matthew.
7. 22, 23. and the like, whose outward works were the same which the godly
perform; and what says Austine most excellently, There is no true virtue where
there is no true Religion; and that conscience which is not directed by the
Word, even when it does best does ill, because it does it not in faith,
obedience, and love.

2.. Secondly, let them know, that being out of Christ, they are bound to keep
the whole Law, Gal. 5. 2, 3. or stand liable to suffer the penalty thereof for
not keeping it; for though this be the condition of the New Covenant, Believe
and thou shall be saved; yet all that they have to trust unto is, Do this and
live, Romans 10. 5. and cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. And I wish
that they would seriously think of it, and what need they have of Christ, whom
they rather persecute then obey his Gospel in love.

3.. Indeed let them get a true lively and justifying faith; Put ye off,
concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupted through the
deceivable lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your minds; and put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true ^olinesse,
Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. and then Christ, and all his benefits and promises will
belong unto you, but not before; in the mean time you are in your blood, Ezekiel.
16. 6. and have to answer not only for your original guilt, but for every
thought, word, and action of yours from your infancy, Matthew. 9. 12, 13. Luke 1.
53. Gal. 5. 1, to 7. enough to starde you, if you be not stark dead.

CHAP. 27.
1.. But perhaps thy heart and conscience is not only Sermon, but
Thunder-proof, and then nothing will do good upon thee (the case of all
incorrigible ones) yea most men now adays are judgement-proof; and let them be
never so clearly convinced from the Word that they are in a dangerous
condition, all thoughts thereof presently pass away like the sound of a Bell
that is rung; or if not, Satan can furnish them with an evasion, be the case
what it will: amongst many of his delusions I will mention two of the
principal, and which I hold to be the strongest bars to keep men out of Heaven
that can be named.

The first is this, Never regard (will he say to a poor soul) what a few (...)
^^^^holy Precisions say, when every one does so and so; or every on^ is of this
or that judgment; yea, do not such and such the like, who are wiser, and
greater, and better men then your self? They are of another mind, neither do
they trouble themselves so much about Religion, and yet they look to speed as
well as the precisest; yea, will he say, Do ye not see many Ministers and great
Pro^essors of Religion, who pretend it is good being religious and holy, and
press others to it, that do only pretend it, for they live as loosely, and
deal as unjustly as any other men; and they are not ignorant of what they do,
and this you may be sure of, that if they did speak as they think they would do
as they speak; therefore what should ye be so singular, will ye be wiser then
all your friends or neighbors; yea, then ninety and nine parts of the
Kingdom? What a mad conceit were this? then yields the poor soul, and counts
it a pleasure too that he is seduced, and by this kind of Sophistry Satan
prevails with millions; yea, I have ever noted that this one artlesse
persuasion of others do so, prevails more with the world then all the places of
reason; but this plea or argument is not more common and taking then it is
so^tish and dangerous, if it be well look into; for besides that it is Gods
express charge, Thou shall not ^ollow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2.
and Saint Paul's everlasting rule, ^ashion not your selves like unto this world,
Romans 12. 2. Our Savior Christ has plainly told us, That the greatest number
go the broad way to destruction, and but a few the narrow way which leads
unto life, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. And Saint John, That the number of those whom
Satan shall deceive, is as the sands of the sea, Revel. 20. 8. and 13. 16. Isa.
10. 22. Romans 9. 27. yea, that the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 ^ohn 5.
19. whereas those whom Christ has chosen out of it, and that believe the
Gospel, are but a little flock and few in number, Luke 12 32. Revel. 3. 4. Isa.
53. 1. Romans 10. 16* 2 Cor. 4. 4. which testimonies have proved true in all
former Ages; there could not be found eight righteous persons in the old
world,, for one was an impious Cham, all Sodom afforded not ten; Eliah could
say, I only remain a Prophet of the Lord, but Baals Prophets are four hundred
and fifty, 1 Kings 18. 22. And Micha complains of the multitude of the wicked
in his time, and small number of the faithful, Micha. 7. 2. Behold, says
Isaiah, I and the Children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and
wonders i^ Israel, Isa. 8. 1. 8. so few and ra^e that they were gazed upon as
monsters. And what says the Lord himself, Though the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved, Isa. 10.
22. Rom, 9. 27. Neither has it been otherwise since the Gospel, the whole City
went ou^ to send Christ packing, not a Gadaren was found that either dehorted
his ^ellow, or opposed the motion, Matthew. 8. 34. When Pilate asked, What shall
be done with Jesus? all with one consent cried out, Let him be crucified,
Matthew. 27. 22. there was a general shout for Diana for two hours together,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians; not one man took Paul's part, Act. 19. 34. yea,
the Jews told Paul that his Sect was every where spoken against, Acts 28. 22.
yea, all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and ^^nd receive the mark
of the Beast in their foreheads, Rev. 13. 16. so that number is but an ill
sign of a good cause; or rather it is the best note of the worst way.

2.. Secondly, nor will any wise man think his actions ever the mo^e
warrantable for that he does as the greatest, richest, and noblest of the Land
do; for Not many noble are called: but (as Paul speaks) God has chosen the
base things of the world, and things that are despised, to confound the mighty,
1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. And has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith,
James 2. 5. yea, be ^illeth the hungry with good things, whereas he sends
away the rich empty, Luke 1. 52, 53. Neither is this the manner of his donation
only, but of his acceptance also, for God esteems more of virtue clad in
rags, then of vice in velvit; he tespects a man not for his greatness, but for
his goodness; not for his birth, but for his New Birth; not for his honor,
but for hi^ holiness; not for his wealth, bu^ for his wisdom: The righe^ous,
^aith Solomon, is more worthy then his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. and, Better is
the poor that walks uprightly, then he thas perverteth his ways, though he
be rich, Prove. 28. 6. and thus the Bereans are reputed by the Holy Ghost, More
noble men then they of Thessalonica, because they received the word with all
readiness, and searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so which
Paul preached, Act. 17. 11. Whence it is that David thought it not so happy for
him to be a King in his own house, as a Doorkeeper in Gods house; that godly
Constantine rejoiced more in being the servant of Christ, then in being
Emperor of the whole world; that Theodosius the Emperor preferred the title
of Membrum Ecclesiae before that of Caput Imperii, professing that he had
rather be a Saint and no King, then a King and no Saint; yea, Ignatius said, he
had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch. Besides, experience proves greatness,
nobility, and riches, to be a most deceitful rule to walk by; for, the Kings
of the earth ^and themselves, and the Princes are assembled together against
the Lord, and against his Christ, Psalm. 2. 2. And in 1 King. 20. 16. we read of
no less then two and thirty Kings in a cluster that were every one drunk; and
elsewhere, that a thousand of the chief Princes of Israel committed
fornication, and were all destroyed for their labor in one day, Numb. 25. 9. 1
Cor. 10. 8. yea, of twenty Kings of Judah which the Scripture mentions, we read
of but six that were godly, and of eighteen Kings of Israel, all but two are
branded by the Holy Ghost for wicked, and yet this Nation was Gods peculiar and
chosen people out of all the world; and lastly, when the Rulers sat in
counsel against Christ, none spoke for him but Nicodemus, Joh. 7. 50, 51. All
which shows; that it is neither a good nor a safe way to imitate other men's
examples, be they never so rich, never so great; or if we sin together, we
shall be sure to perish together; as when those three and twenty thousand
Israelites committed fornication after the example of the chief Princes, they
were every one destroyed, both leaders and followers, Numb. 25. 9. 1 Cor 10. 8.
and as when those other Cities followed Sodoms Just, they were all consumed
with Sodoms fire, Jude 7.

3.. But thirdly, admit thou could allege for thine excuse, that thou do
but as most of the wife, learned, and greatest Scholars in the Land do, yet all
were one, this could not excuse thee; for first, Not many wise men after the
flesh are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
c^nfound the wise, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 29. yea, the preaching of Christ crucified
was foolishness to the wise Sages of the world, 1 Cor. 1. 23. It pleases God
for the most part to hide the mysteries of salvation from the wise and learned,
and to reveal them unto babes, Matthew. 11. 25. Luke 10. 2^. yea, the saving
knowledge of Christ is hid to all that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3. but if once men
abuse their knowledge and learning to Gods dishonor, and comply with Satan and
the world against the Church (as how many Scholars in all ages of the world
have resembled Trajan, who was endued with great knowledge and other singular
virtues, but defaced them all by hating Christianity, and opposing the power of
godliness) in this case he takes that knowledge which once they had from
them, as he took heat from the fire when it would burn his children, Dan. 3.
27. I will destroy the tokens of the Soothsayers (says God) and make them
that conjecture sooles; I will turn the wise men backward, and make their
knowledge foolishness, Isa. 44. 25. And again, He takes the wise in their own
craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish, Job 5. 13. And
justly are they forsaken of their reason, who have abandoned God, yea, most
just it is, that they who want grace should want wit too, for which read 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Thus I might go on and show, that we may not imitate the
actions, nor follow the examples of the best and holiest men in every thing
they do, though we have some plausible reasons for our doing so, and also good
and holy intentions in our so doing, or if we do, that we may go to Hell
notwithstanding.

CHAP. 28.
1.. But you will say, if neither custom of the greatest number, nor of the
greatest men, nor of the greatest Scholars, nor of the best and holiest men,
though we have reason for our doing it, and good intentions in the doing of it,
is a sufficient warrant for our actions, but that all these are crooked and
deceitful guides; then what may be a safe guide, and an infallible rule in all
cases to steer by, and square all out actions?

I answer; As a Rule directs the Artificer in his work, and keeps him from
erring, so does Gods lord direct the religious in their lives, and keep them
from erring. The right way is the signified Will of God, and whatsoever swerves
from, or is repugnant to the right, is wrong and crooked; Law and Precept is a
straight line, to show us whether we do mis-believe or mislive, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Ephesians. 2. 20. Gal. 6. 16. John 5. 39. And it has ever been the care of
Christians to stick close to the written Word, having always and in all cases
an eye thereunto; and without this written Word, a man in the world is as a
Ship on the Sea without a guide; yea, he that lives without making this his
rule, he who sets not the Dial or Clock of his life by this Sun, he who
directs not his course in walking by this North Pole, or Load-star, but by
the wavering, uncertain, and moveable stars of custom, example, reason, and
good intentions, sails without a C^mpasse, and may look every minute to ^e
swallowed up in the Ocean of sin and judgment; nor will any that have grace in
their hearts make custom, example, or the badnesse of the times a cloak to
excuse their conformity in evil courses, but rather a spur to incite them to
be so much the more careful not to be swayed with the common stream; and happy
is that man who makes another vices steps to climb to Heaven by, as it fared
with righteous Lot; and so does every wise and good man, as why should they not
make this use of the corruptions of the times, when even the mud of the world
by the industrious Hollander is turned to an useful fuel? If the Air be
generally infectious, had we not need to be so much the more strict in our
Diet, and careful in the use of wholesome preservatives? Nor is singularity in
such cases only lawful but lawdable, when vice grows into fashion,
singularity is a virtue; and when sanctity is counted singularity, happy is he
that goes alone, and resolves to be an example to others; yea, most happy is
he that can stand upright when the world declines, and can endeavor to repair
the common ruin with a constancy in goodness; that can resolve with Joshua,
Whatever the world does, yet I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh, 24. 15.
It was Noah's happiness in the old world, that he followed not the worlds
fashions; he believed alone when all the world contested against him, and he
was saved alone when all the world perished without him. It was Lots
happiness, that he followed not the fashions of Sodom. It was Abraham's
happiness, that he did not like the Chaldeans; Daniels happiness, that he did
not like the Babylonians. It was good for Job that he was singular in the Land
of Vz; good for Nicodemus, that he was singular among the Rulers, as now they
all find to their great comfort, and exceeding great reward; yea, it was happy
for Re^ben, that he was opposite to all his Brethren; happy for Cale^ and
Joshua, that they were opposite to the rest of the Spies; happy for the Jews,
that their customs were diverse, and contrary to all other people, though Haman
was pleased to make it their great and heinous crime, Ester 3. 8. Happy for
Luther that he was opposite to the rest of his Country, and no less happy
shall we be, if with the Deer we can feed against the wind of popular
applause; if with the Sturgion or Crab-fish we can swim against the stream of
custom and example; if with Atticus we can cleave to the right, though losing
side; or if we do not, we shall miss of the narrow way, and consequently fail
of entering in at the strait Gate, for the greatest part shuts out God upon
Earth, and is excluded from God elsewhere, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. And indeed, if
Jesus Christ and his twelve Apostles be on our side, what need we care though
Herod and Pontius Pilate, and all the Rulers, and the whole Nation of the Jews,
together with a world of the Romish Faction be against us? and certainly if
thou were not a fool, thou would hold it better to be in the small number of
Christ's little flock which are to be saved, then in the numerous herds of those
Goats that are de^^^^ated to destruction: and so much for answer to Satan's
first plea or objection. But,

CHAP. 29.
1.. Secondly, he has a worse and more dangerous delusion then this. For if he
see a man convincd that he is nothing so as he ought to be, (that he may keep
him still impenitent) he will say unto him, Trouble not thy self with these
things; do thou not know that God is merciful, and that Christ came into the
world to save sinners? witness the Thief upon the Cross who was heard, and
saved by him at the very last hour; and upon this ground a world of men in a
carnal presumption go on to destruction, without ever bethinking themselves;
for say they, Let the worst that can come, repentance at the last hour, and
saying, Lord, have mercy upon me, will make all even, otherwise God is not so
good as his word; who ^aith, At what time soever a sinner repents, etc. But
let the argument be well scanned, and this will be ^ound as sottish, deceitful,
and dangerous as the other; wherefore that Satan, (who is always a liar) may
not by his cunning delusions gull you of your souls, and plunge you into
everlasting horror; consider with me in the first place, that as God is
merciful, so he is also just, and true, and speaks as he means in his Word;
yea, he is truth it self, and his Word is the ground and touchstone of all
truth; wherefore If any spirit or an Angel from Heaven cross the written Word,
we are to hold him accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Now we shall find, that salvation
is not more promised to the godly (in any part of the Bible, Old Testament or
New then eternal death and destruction is threatened to the wicked, as you may
see, John 5. 28, to 47. Heb. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. and 29. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10. Gal. 5. 21. Revel. 21. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Ier. 16. 13. Matthew. 7. 13, 14.
and 25. 34, 41. James 2. 13. I John 3. 6. Luke 13. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 18. yea, God
has sufficiently manifested his justice and severity already in punishing sin,
and pouring vengeance upon those that have provoked him, as upon the Angels,
our first Parents* and all the race of Mankind; upon the old world* upon
whole Monarchies and Empires, upon whole Nations, Cities and Families, upon
diverse particular persons, as upon Pharaoh, Nada^, and Abihu, Chora, Dathan and
Abiram with their 250 Captains, and many thousand of the Children of Israel,
upon Hamam and Balaam, Saul and Doeg, Absalom and Achi^ophel, Aha^ and Iezabel,
S^enacharib and Nebuchadnezzar, the two Captains and their fifties, Herod and
Judas, Ananias and Saphira, with a world of others; yea, how severely has he
dealt with his own children when they sinned against him? viz. with Moses, and
Aaron, and Eli, who were in singular ^avour with him; yea with David, a man
after Gods own ^eart, and that after his sin was remitted; and lastly, with his
own Son, that no sin might go unpunished, which may make all impenitent persons
tremble; for if God were so just and severe to his own Son, that nothing would
appease him but his death on the Cross, how can the wicked his enemies look to
bespared? and if Gods own Servants, who ar^ as dear and near to him as the
apple of his own eye, or as the signet on his right hand, suffer so many and
grievous afflictions here, what shall his adversaries suffer in Hell? But
because thou shall have nothing to object, will thou believe Christ himself,
whom thou think came to save ^ll indifferently* if thou wile, turn but to
Matthew. 25. and he will tell thee, that at his coming to J^dgement he will as
well say to the disobedient, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels; as to the obedient, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom of heaven prepared for you from the
foundation of the world, verse. 34, 41. Again, lest any should be
over-confident, he tells all men plainly, that the gate of heaven is so strait
that few shall find it, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. and that many shass s^ek to enter
thereat, and shall not be able, Luke 13. 24. And that many are ca^^ed, (viz. by
the outward ministry of the Word) but ^ew chosen, Ma^th. 20. 16. and 22. 14.
Sad predictions for such as apply Christ's Passion as a warrant for their
licentiousness, not as a remedy; and take his Death as a license to sin, his
Cross as a Letters Patent to do mischief. O that men would seriously think
upon these Scriptures, together with that, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. where the
Apostle tells us, that the Lord Jesus shall come the second time in flaming
fire, to render vengeance unto them that know him not, and that obey not his
Gospel, 1 Pet. 4. 18. where the Holy Ghost tells us, that even the righteous
shall s^arcely be saved. And Deuteronomy. 29, 19. to 29. where God tells us expressly,
that he will not be merciful unto such as flatter themse^ves in an evil way;
but that his wrath and jealousy shall smoke against them, etc. and that if we
will not regard nor hearken unto him when he calls upon us for repentance, he
will not hear nor regard us, when in our distress and anguish we shall call
upon him for mercy: but even laugh at our destruction, and mock when our ^ear
comes, Prove. 1. 24. to 33. and that he will recompense every man according to
his works, ^e they good or evil, Revel. 20. 13. and 22. 1^. Romans 2. 6. Ezekiel.
7. 4, 8, 9. and 9. 10. and 11. 21. and 16. 43. but this is the misery, and a
just plague upon our so much formality and profaneness under our so much
means of grace, there be very few men that make not the whole Bible, and all
the ^ermons they hear, yea the checks of their own consciences, and the motions
of Gods Spirit utterly ineffectuall for want of wit and grace to apply the same
to themselves; but to go on.

2.. Secondly, we shall find that though Christ in the Gospel has made many
large and precious promises, yet there are none so general which are not
limited with the condition of faith, and the fruit thereof un^eigned
repentance, and each of them are so tied and entailed, that none can lay claim
to them but true Believers which ^epent, and turn from all their sins to serve
him in holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. and 5.
9. Mark 16. 16. John 3. 36. Isa. 59. 20. Neither was it ever heard that any
ascended into Heaven without going up the stays of obedience and good works,
that any have attained unto everlasting life without faith, repentance and
sanctification, for even the Thief upon the Cross (whom you ignorantly
allege) believed in Christ, and showed the fruits of his faith in
acknowledging his own sin, reproving his fellow, and confessing our Savior
Christ even then when his Apostles denied and forsook him, in calling upon his
name, desiring, and confidently trusting by his means and merits to have
everlasting life. And indeed, the very end of Gods electing, and of Christ's
redeeming us was, That we might ^e holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. Matthew. 19. 17. and
therefore he binds it with an Oath, That whomsoever he redeemeth out of the
hands of their spiritual enemies, they shall worship him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their lives, Luke 1. 70. to 76. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
they therefore that never came to be holy were never chosen, never redeemed;
other Scriptures to this purpose are many, see only, Tit. 2. 12, 14. 1 Pet. 2.
24. Matthew. 19. 17. nor ought any indeed to call upon Christ, or once to name
him with their mouths, except they depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Neither
does the Thiefes example make any whit for the comfort of procrastinators; for
First, we read not that ever he was outwardly called until this very hour;
Secondly, though there was one saved at the last hour that none might despair,
yet there was but one that none should presume; and millions who had less
iniquity have found less mercy. Thirdly, the Thiefes conversion was one of the
Miracles, with the glory whereof our Savior would honor the ignominy of his
Cross. Again, Fourthly, the Thief was saved at the very instant of time when
our Savior triumphed on the Cross, took his leave of the world, and entered
into his glory. Now it is usual with Princes to save some heinous Malefactors
at their Coronation, when they enter upon their Kingdoms in triumph, which
they are never known to do afterward, which circumstances being rightly
considered, together with the wonderful change so suddenly wrought in him, as
I showed before, his example will yield little encouragement to men of thy
condition; nor was his sudden conversion ever intended in Gods purpose for a
temptation, and yet by Satan's policy working upon wicked men's depraved
judgments, and corrupt hearts in wresting this Scripture, it has proved (by
accident) the loss of many thousand souls, and take heed it prove not thy
^ase; to which end let not Satan any longer bewitch you, so to think upon Gods
mercy, as in the mean time to forget that he is also just and true; and so much
for answer to those two objections, which Satan finds more prevalent then all
the rest he is able to invent.

CHAP. 30.
1.. Now to wind up all with a word of exhortation, if thou be convinced,
and resolvest upon a new course, let thy resolution be peremptory and constant,
and take heed thou harden not again, as Pharaoh, the Philistines, the young man
in the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did. Resemble not the Iron which is no longer
soft then it is in the fire: be not like those that are Sea-sick, who are much
troubled while they are on Shipboard, but presently well again when they are
come to shore; for that good (says Gregory) will do us no good which is not
made good by perseverance. If with these premonitions the Spirit shall
vouchsafe to stir up in thine heart, any good motions and holy purposes to obey
God, in letting thy sins go, quench not, grieve not the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
return not with the Dog to thy vomit, lest thy latter end prove sevenfold
worse then thy beginning, Matthew. 12. 43, 45. As it fared with Julian the
Apostate, and Iuda^ the traitor. O it is a fearful thing to receive the grace
of God in vain; and a desperate thing being warned of a Rock, wilfully to cast
our selves upon it! Neither let Satan persuade you to defer your repentance,
no not an hour, lest your resolution proves as a false conception which never
comes to bearing; for as ill Debtors put off their Creditors, first one week,
then another, till at last they are able to pay nothing, so deal delayers with
God. Besides, death may be sudden, even the least of a thousand things can kill
thee, and give thee no leisure to be sick.

2.. Secondly, or if death be not sudden, repentance is no such easy work as
to be put off to sickness; and though true repentance be never too late, yet
late repentance is seldom true; and indeed there is small hope of repentance
at the hour of death, where there was no regard of honesty in the time of life,
and Millions are now in Hell who thought they would repent hereafter; not being
wise enough to consider that it is with sin in the heart as with a tree planted
in the ground, which the longer it grows, the harder it is to be plucked up;
or a nail in a post, which is made faster by every stroke of the Hammer: As
what says the Holy Ghost, Can the Black Moor change his skin, or the Leopard
his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.
23.

3.. Thirdly, or suppose after many years spent in the service of sin and Satan
thou art willing to relinquish thy lusts, and offer to God thy service and best
devotions at the last gasp, will he accept of them? No, he has expressly told
us the contrary, Prove. 1. 24* to 32. yea, is it likely that God will accept of
thy dry bones when Satan has sucked out all the marrow? That he will give his
heavenly and spiritual graces at the hour of death, to those who have
contemned them all their life? Yea, is it not most just and equal if God will
not be found of those that were content to lose him? If he shut his ear against
their prayers calling to him for pardon, that stopped their ears against hi^
Voice calling upon them for repentance? The Lord has made a promise to late
repentance, not of late repentance; if thou convertest to morrow thou art sure
of grace, but thou art not sure of to morrows conversion; if in any reasonable
time we pray he will hear us, if we repent he will pardon us, if we amend our
lives he will save us; but for want of this timely consideration Dives prayed,
but was not heard; Esau wept, but was not pitied; the foolish Virgins knocked,
but wore denied: and so thousands have cried unto God at the hour of death, and
found no repen^ance, but they died as they lived, and went from despair unto
destruction. Wherefore, as you tender the good of your own soul, set upon the
work presently; provide with Joseph for the dea^th to come; and with Naob in
the days of thine health build the Ark of a good Conscionce against the floods
of sickness; imitate the Ant, who provides her meat in Summer for the Winter
following; yea, do it while the yerning bowels, the bleeding wounds, and
compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive you; whiles ye have
health, and life, and means, and time to repent; and make your peace with God.
As you tender (I say) the everlasting happiness and welfare of your almost
lost and drowned soul, as you expect or hope for grace or mercy, for joy and
comfort, for Heaven and salvation, for endless bliss and glory at the last;
as you would escape the direful Wrath of God, the bitter Sentence and Doom of
Christ, the never dying sting and worm of Conscience, the tormenting and
soul-scorching flames of Hell, and everlasting separation from Gods bli^full
presence, abjure, and utterly renounce all wilful and affected evil. To which
end;

4.. In the next place, be diligent to hear Gods Word powerfully preached,
which is the sword of the Spirit, that kills our corruptions, and that
unresistable Cannon-shot, which beats and battereth down all the strong holds
of u^n and Satan.

5.. Thirdly* ponder and meditate seriously on Gods inestimable love toward
us, who has not spared to give his only beloved Son out of his bosom to die
for us, and to purchase thereby every good thing we do enjoy either for soul or
body, even to the least bit of bread we eat; and this will make thee (if thou
have any ingenuity) to direct all thy thoughts, speeches and actions to his
glory, as he has directed thy eternal salvation thereunto, and often force
thee to break out into this or the like expression, What shall I render unto
thee, O Lord for all thy benefits? but love thee my Creator, and become a new
creature.

6.. Fourthly, consider that the Lord beholds thee in all places, and in
every thing thou do; even as the eyes of a well-drawn Picture are fastened on
thee which way soever thou turnest; yea, consider him as a just judge, who will
not let sin go unpunished, and this will make thee keep a narrower watch over
thy very thoughts then any other can do over thine actions.

7.. Fifthly, if thou wilc be safe from evil works, avoid the occasions at
least if thou wilc keep thy self from iniquity, have no fellowship with the
workers of iniquity, for it is not more hard to find virtue in evil company
then to miss vice; They were mingled among the Heathen (faith the Psalmist)
and what follows, they learned their works, Psalm. 106. 35. yea, how soon was
peter changed, with but comning into the High Priests Hall; and the like with
David and Solomon, which made David to say so soon as he had considered it,
Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity, for I will keep the Commandments
of my God, Psalm. 119. 115. knowing that he could not do the one without the
other. And indeed, the choice of a man's company is one of the most weighty
actions of our lives, for our future well or ill-being depends on that
election, and many a man had been good that is not, if he had but kept good
company.

8.. Sixthly and lastly, but chieftly and principally, omit not to pray for the
assistance of Gods Spirit, otherwise thy strength is small; yea, except God
give thee repentance, and remove all impediments that may kinder, thou can no
more turn the self then thou could at first make thy self; We are not
sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak, least of all to do that
which is good, 2 Cor. 3. 5. John 15. 4, 5. we are swift to all evil, but to
any good immovable; wherefore beg of God that he will give you a new heart,
and when the heart is changed, all the members will follow after it, as the
rest of the Creatures after the Sun when it arises; importune him for grace,
that thou may firmly resolve; speedily begin, and continually persevere in
doing, and suffering his holy Will; desire him to inform and reform thee so,
that thou may neither mis-believe nor mislive; to regenerate thy heart,
change and purify thy nature, subdue thy reason, rectify thy judgment,
^e^orm and strengthen thy will, ^enue thy affections, and beat down in thee
whatsoever stands in opposition to the Scepter of Jesus Christ; no^ forgetting
that prayer is the key of Heaven, as Ambrose calls it.

And now for conclusion, if thou receivest any power against thy corruptions,
forget not to be thankful, and when God has the fruit of his mercies, he will
not spare to sow much where he reaps much. Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding to strive after those graces, wherewith a (...) Believer
is qualified; and whereof I have given you a Copy in the foregoing Character.

FINIS.
WE have perused this Treatise, and approving it to be very pithy, pious, and
profitable, We allow it to be printed and published.

John Downame. Thomas Gataker.

THe Reader may think it strange, that the Proofs are not alleged in some part
of this Character: but they were found to ^e so many in number, that the very
pointing to them would have taken up near as much room as the matter it self;
and so have doubled the charge, which in these times could not be afforded:
Besides, few use to turn to every Scripture; and every sanctified heart is a
Comment upon all that is herein delivered.

London, Printed by R. and W. Ley^^urn. 1653.


