A CHRISTIAN Library, OR, A Pleasant and Plentiful Paradise Of Practical
Divinity, in 37. TREATISES Of sundry and select Subjects, purposely Composed to
pluck Sinners out of Satan's snares, and allure them into the glorious Liberty
of the Gospel.

By R. YOUNG of Roxwel in Essex, Florilegus.

LONDON, Printed by M. I. and are to be sold only by James Crumpe, in Little
Bartholomews Well-yard, 1660.

To the worthy Author, and to the Ingenuous Reader.
SIR,
THe accurate Florist, who makes it his delight to study flowers, is not more
taken with their dress, their marks, their varieties, rich above Solomon in his
royalty; nor more pleased with every line in that his sweet Library, then your
Reader will be in his perusal of this Christian Library, which here you put
into his hand; not great in bulk, for so neither are precious stones or jewels,
which are rich in substance, and of high esteem for their oriency. Few men are
Masters of so excellent an Alembick, for extraction of quintessences and
spirits, whereby you have given a Supersed^^s or Writ of ease to your Reader,
from searching and surveying the whole Garden where these flowers grow, by
transplanting them into one kn^t, where they are presented as a sweet nosegay.
I wish you such diligent Bees as may sit upon your flowers, and depopulate your
garden; he that sucks Poison from any Rose here, does but show himself to be a
Spider by so doing.

READER,

These ten Treatises being like ten small Cornfieldsd now laid together (as it
were) within one hedge, have thereby put off that name; wherewith while they
went single, malevolent spirits, might be ready to asperse, by calling them
Pamphlets; a name rather due to Books of trivial matter, than small stature,
and in them, and every of them, the mower may fill his hand, and he that
gathers sheaves, his bosom with practical Divinity which has the
pre-eminence above Polemical and controversal as the planting and pruning of
the trees of the Garden has above the keeping of the Mound, or mending of the
Hedge. I know a hungry appetite, is better content with Barley loaves and ^oor
fishes, then a disdainful Palate with Quails and Manna; but I need make no such
apology for this Book, where the meat is savoury, and the cookery artificial
by a rare mixture of sweet and profitable; let thy walk therefore be in this
Paradise, from the trees whereof thou may gather fruit for meat, maintaining
thy spiritual life in the whole duty of a ^hristian; or for Medicine in the
cure of thy Diseases, Drunkenness, Swearing, Unthankfulness, Deceitfulness of
Heart, or for the arming of thy self with disswasives against Scoffing and
Derision* or from some of them twigs to whip the Mammonist out of his Idolatry
[ the love of money] or Apples of Gold from the tree of life; and under some of
them thou shall hear two Advocates pleading the cause of their two clyents, the
Pasteur, and the Poor; the one for shutting of the mouth that sends forth
unsavory eructations; the other for opening the close hand that is almost dried
up. And all the trees breathing forth sweet perfumes as the smell of a Field
which the Lord ha^h blessed In short, If thou do but taste the fruit of one of
these trees, thy appetite will be pr^voked thereby, toward another, and the
pleasantness of the way will make the forget the length of thy journey.

Thy servant in the service of Christ, Richard Vines.
London, Lawrence, fury, June 16. 1655.
To the READER.
READER,
SO many and excellent are the Helps that God affords to this unworthy Nation
for to enlighten dark souls, and for recovering of revolted sinners unto God,
that if any after all th^s be Blinded and Rebellious, they will be the most
unexcusable and most miserable people in the World. By how many voices, and
with what holy skilful Oratory, and with what earnest and incessant Importunity
does the God of Mercy call upon sinners to Repent? Who is then in the obscurest
Corner of England, that may not hear the Word of Life, or that may not read the
Scriptures, and the excellent Writings of the Servants of Christ, if they have
ears to hear, and eyes to see, and are but willing and diligent for their own
good? what a precious mercy is it, that every Booksellers shop, and every
Market almost, and a^l the quarters of the Land do so abound with wholesome and
excellent Books, declaring the way to everlasting Happiness? What abundance of
such Helps are ready at hand for the Recovery and salvation of any sinner that
is but wi^ling to read and consider them? It was not so with us in the dark
times of Popery; nor is it so in other Nations: What pity is it after all
this, that there should be so many ignorant ea^thly mi^ds? so many Drunkards
and sensnal Wretches; so many ung^dly prayerless Familyes among us, as there
are? Are men resolved to destroy themselves? Do they love damnation? Do they
Hate their own souls, as well as holiness, and the Holy God? Why else do they
madly shut their ears, despise their Teachers, go on in a worldly and wicked
life, and unthankfully refuse the Helps that are offered them. Among others,
the Author of these ten Treatises, an ancient and faithful Servant of Christ,
though not of the Tribe which waits at the Alta^ has enriched this Nation
with many of his Labors, which though he own bu^ as Collections, yet may you
read many Book before you find from whence they are collected. I have formerly
with much delight read his excellent Books, calle^ The Cure of Prejudice, The
Victory of Patience, and some others full of useful pertinent matter, delivered
in a style more quic^ and smart, more accurate and adorned, then is ordinarily
t^ be found: And finding that these do savor of the same Inge^nuity and
Diligence, and contain such necessary and seasona^ble advice, I recommend them
to thy careful perusal and consideration. What a cure is here for the Swearer?
Another ^o^ the Drunkard? Another for the Covetous? What a Key to un^lock the
Rich Man's Chests, and enrich himself by Giving to the Poor, if men will but use
them? What Consideration^ are here to shame the Reproachers of Godliness, and
to encourag^ the weak against their reproaches? The unsanctified Formalis^ is
here stripped bare; The Ministry is Patronized, and usurpers and Intruders
sharply reprehended, by an Impartial pen; less liable to Accusations of
Self-seeking, then our own in the eyes of the Contentious would have seemed.
Reader, if thou thankfully make use of the Helps that are offered thee by this
servant of Christ, who willingly lays out his time and labor* and estate,
for thy spiritual benefit; As thou will encourage such faithful endeavourers of
thy good, so will thou have thy self the everlasting consolation, and may see
that blessed face of God* and enjoy that felicity which thy sin would deprive
thee of. This is the desire of him that would gladly be.

A further of thy Salvation, Rich. Baxter.
London, December. 21. 1654.
The several Treatises contained in the several Parts of this Christian
Library, are these:
A Leaf from the Tree of Life, wherewith to heal the Nation. A sovereign
Antidote against all Grief. A short and sure way to Grace and Salvation. A
small Map of the many Protestants and few Christians in England. A serious and
pathetical Description of Heaven and Hell. A hopeful way to cure that horrid
sin of Swearing. An experimental Index of the Heart. Apples of Gold from the
Tree of Life. Armor of proof against the Worlds envy, scoffs, and r^proaches.
Characters of the kinds of Preaching. Complete Armor against evil Society:
First and second Part. Cordial Counsel. God's goodness, and Man's ingratitude.
God's goodness, and England's unthankfulness. Good counsel seldom well taken.
Good report from bad men no mean disparagement. Preparation to Conversion. The
Drunkards Character; with an Addition. The Arraignment of Covetousness and
Ambition: First and Second Part. The benefit of Affliction. The Victory of
Patience. The whole duty of a Christian. The natural man anatomized. The cure
of Misprision, or Mistake. The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, etc.
The Pastors Advocate. The Poors Advocate: First and Second Part. The odious,
despicable, and dreadful condition of a Drunkard. The Blemish of Government.
The Shame of Religion. The Disgrace of mankind: with offer of help to drowning
men. The Impartial Monitor, about following the fashions. The Impartial and
Compassionate Monitor, about hearing of Sermons. The seduced soul reduced. The
trial of true wisdom, with how to become wise indeed. The prevention of
Poverty, and cure of Melancholy. The second part of the Pastors Advocate, or
the proof of a good Preacher. Si^ remaining parts of the Poors Advocate. An
infallible way to become happy here, and hereafter.
A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE against all Grief.

AS ALSO The benefit of Affliction; and how to Husband it so, that the weakest
Christian (with blessing from above) may be able to support himself in his most
miserable exigents.

TOGETHER WITH The Victory of Patience. Extracted out of the choicest Authors,
Ancient and Modern, both Holy and Humane. Necessary to be read of all that any
way suffer Tribulation.

The fourth Impression.

By R. Young, of Roxwell in Essex, Florilegus.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution,

2 Timothy 3.12. LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for James Crump, in Little
Bartholmews Well-yard, 1654.

Courteous Reader,
IN the perusal of this Treatise (which as the Author has enlarged and
refined it, is become a new Work) thou shall find such variety of useful
matter, laid down in an accurate and methodicall way, and embellished with such
Ornaments of delightful illustration; that it will be hard to say, whether the
Authors Reading and pains, or thy Profit and Delight will exceed: But the Ear
tries Words, as the Mouth tastes Meat, Job 34.3. Only read it (without
prejudice) and the Work will sufficiently praise it self; if either Matter or
Manner, Argument or Art can do it.

Thomas Westfield. D.D. Daniel Featly. D.D. Samuel Slater.

TO THE READER.
NO Humane Action can be framed so perfect, but it shall have some
delinquencies; to prove that more were in the Comprisor: and it is almost as
easy to find faults, as to make them. His bodily presence (say they) it mean,
and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.10. To (...) the inconveniences of a
House built, is nothing: but to lay the Plo^ well at first, requires the Pate of
a good Contriver. All (...) can do well, till they come to doing: But there is
a further distance from nothing to the least thing in the World, then between
it and the greatest.

All public actions are subject to diverse, and uncertain interpretations;
for a great many heads judge of them, and men's censures are as various as their
palates, John 7. Our writings are as so many dishes; our Readers, Guests: Books
are like faces; that which one admires, another slights. Why? Some will
condemn what they do as little understand as they do themselves: Others, the
better a thing is, the less they will like it. They hate him (says Amos) that
rebukes in the (...), and they abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5.10.
You know Herod's festered Conscience could not endure John Baptists plaster of
truth; A ^alled back, loves not the curry-Combe; A deformed Face, loathes the
true (...). Yea, as nothing is more bitter then Honey to him that has the
Jaundise, so nothing more hateful to the desperately wicked, than good
Counsel: with Balaam, they grudge to be stayed in the way to death, and fly
upon those that oppose their perdition. And how should they other then
miscarry, who have a Pirate (the Flesh) for their guide? So that if a man
should observe the Wind of Applause, he should never Sow, or regard the
Clouds of Aspersion, he should never Reap. But I had rather hazard the Censure
of some, then hinder the Good of others: wherefore I have added to the former
selected flowers, as many more, whence any sedulous^ ^ee may load himself with
Honey.

To fore-relate their variety, and several worths, were to imitate an Italian
Host, meeting you on the way, and promising beforehand, your fare and
entertainment: wherefore let it please you to see and allow your Cheer. Only,
in general: my Book is a feast, wherein wholesomeness strives with
pleasantness, and variety with both. Each Chapter is a several dish; (...) full
of notable sayings and examples (for that is the meat) by which a man may not
only become more eloquent, but more wise; not alone, able to say well, but to
do well: for quaint and elegant Phrases on a good subject, are baits to make an
ill Man virtuous. Pithy Sentences, curious Metaphors, witty Apophthegms, sweet
similitudes, and Rhetorical expressions (which Aristotle would have, as it were
sprinkled in the most serious discourses) are to the mind, as Music to the
body; which (next to sleep) is the best recreation. Or as pleasant and
delectable Sauce, which gives a more savorie taste to wholesome and profitable
Divinity. And thou shall find but few here which are not both sinewy, and
sharp: mucrones verborum, pointed speeches, either; fit to teach, or forcible
to persuade, or sage to advise and forewarn; or sharp to reprove, or strong to
confirm, or piercing to imprint.

But alas! most Men regard not what is written, but who writes; value not the
Metal, but the Stamp, which is upon it. If the Man likes them not, nor shall
the matter. To these, I say little, as they deserve little: and turn my speech
to all that reserve themselves open, and prepared, to receive each profitable
instruction, and continual amendment: to the Ingenuous Reader, that sucks
Honey from the self same flower which the Spider does poison; wishing him to
conne that out of this Treatise, which he did not know before; and well note
what speaks to his own sin: And perhaps he may, in this short journey make more
true gain, then Solomon's Navy did from Ophin, or the Spanish Fleet from the
West Indies; for in so doing, he shall greatly increase his knowledge, and
lessen his vites. In ^ few days he may read it, and ever after, be the better
for it.

But me thinks I am too like a careless Porter; which keeps the guests
without doors, till they have lost their stomachs; wherefore I will detain you
no longer in the Porch, but unlock the door, and let you in.

THE BENEFIT OF AFFLICTION, and how to husband it so, that (with blessing from
above) the weakest Christian may be able to support himself in his most
miserable Exigents.
CHAP. 1. Why the Lord suffers his children to be so traduced, and persecuted,
by his and their enemies: and first, That it makes for the glory of his power.
IN the former Sin stigmatized.
Treatise, I have proved that there is a natural enmity and a spiritual
Antipathy between the Men of the World, and the children of GOD; between the
seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman. And that these two Regiments
being the Subjects of two several Kings, Satan and Christ, are governed by
Laws opposite and clean contrary each to the other; whereby it comes to pass,
that grievous temptations and persecutions do always accompany the remission
of sins: That all men (as Austine speaks) are necessitated to miseries, which
bend their course toward the Kingdom of Heaven. For godliness and temptation
are such inseparable attendants on the same person, that a man's sins be no
sooner forgiven, and he rescued from Satan, but that Lion fomes and roares, and
bestirs himself to recover his loss. Neither can Gods love be enjoyed,
without Satan's disturbance. Yea, the World and the Devil therefore hate us,
because God has chosen us. If a Convert comes home, the Angels welcome him
with Songs, the Devils follow him with uproar and fury, his old acquaintance
with scorns and obloquie; for they think it quarrel enough that we will no
longer run with them to the same excess of riot. 1 Pet. 4.4. That we will no
longer continue miserable with them: they envy to see themselves cashiered, as
persons infected with the plague, will scoff at such of their acquaintance, as
refuse to consort with them as they have done formerly.

It is not enough for them to be bad themselves, except they rail at, and
persecute the good. He that has no grace himself, is vexed to see it in
another: godly men are thorns in wicked men's eyes, as Job was in the Devils;
because they are good, or because they are deerly beloved of God: If a man's
person and ways please God, the world will be displeased with both: If God be
a man's friend; that will be his enemy, if they exercise their malice, it is
where he shows mercy: and indeed he refuses to be an Abel, whom the malice of
Cain does not exercise (as Gregory speaks;) for it is an everlasting rule of
the Apostles, He that is born after the flesh, will persecute him that is born
after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. not because he is evil, but because he is so much
better then himself, 1 John 3.12. Because his life is not like other men's, his
ways are of another fashion. Wisdom 2.15.

I have also The Cause and Cure of Prejudice.
showed the Original, continuance, properties, causes, ends, and what will be
the issue of this enmity; and therein made it plain, that as for the present
they suit like the Harp and the Harrow, agree like two poisons in one stomach
the one being ever sick of the other: so, to reconcile them together, were to
reconcile Fire and Water, the Wolf and the Lamb, the Winds and the Sea
together; yea, that once to expect it, were an effect of frenzy, not of hope.

It remains in the last place, that I declare the Reasons why God permits his
dearest children so to be afflicted. The godly are so patient in their
sufferings. With other grounds of comfort and Uses: and first of the first.


The Reasons why God suffers the same, are chiefly sixteen; all tending to his
glory, and their spiritual and everlasting good, benefit and advantage: for the
malignity of envy (if it be well answered) is made the evil cause of a good
effect to us; God and our souls are made gainers by another sin.

The Reasons and Ends which tend to Gods glory are three; 1 It makes for the
glory of his Power, 2 It makes for the glory of his Wisdom, 3 It makes much for
his glory, when those graces which he has bestowed upon his children, do the
more shine through employment.


It makes for the glory of his power: Moses having declared in what manner the
Lord permitted Pharaoh to oppress the children of Israel, more and more, still
hardening his heart; shows the reason of it in these words, That I may multiply
my miracles and wonders in the land of Egypt, That I may lay my hand upon
Pharaoh, and bring out mine Armies, even my people by great judgments, that my
power may be known, and that I may declare my Name throughout all the World,
Exodus 7.3, 4. and 9.16.

When that multitude of Ammonites and Moabites came to war against Iehosaphat
and the children of Israel, intending to cast them out of the Lords
inheritance, and utterly destroy them, to the dishonor of God; the Lord by
delivering them from that sore affliction, gained to himself such honor and
glory; That (as the Text says) the fear of God was upon all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, when they heard that the Lord had fought so against the enemies of
Israel, 2 Chronicles. 20.19. The judgment was upon some, the fear came upon all; it
was but a few men's loss, but it was all men's warning, 1 Cor. 10.11. When the
Lord brought again the Captivity of Sion, (says the Psalmist) then said they
among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for them, Psalm. 126.1, 2.

God provides on purpose mighty adversaries for his Church, that their
humiliation may be the greator in susteining, and his glory may be greater in
deliverance: yea, though there be legions of Devils* and every one stronger
then many legions of men, and more malicious then strong; yet Christ's little
Flock, lives and prospers. And makes not this exceedingly for our Makers, for
our Guardians glory?

Gods power is best made known in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. And our
deliverance is so much the more wondered at, by how much the less it was
expected. Impossibilities are the best advancers of Gods glory; who not seldom
hangs the greatest w^ights upon the smallest wiers, as he does those bottles of
Heaven, (being of infinite weight and magnitude) in the soft air (where no man
can make a feather hang) and the massy substance of the whole Earth and Sea
upon nothing, Job 26.7, 8. Yea, the whole frame of the Heavens, have no other
Columns or Supporters to lean upon, than his mighty and powerful Word, Genesis
1.6, 7, 8. For what we least believe can be done, we most admire being done;
the lesser the means, and the greater the opposition, the more is the glory of
him who by little means does overcome a great opposition: yea, it is greater
glory to God to turn evils into good by over-mastering them, than wholly to
take them away.

Now, if thy very enemies thus honor thee; how should thy friends (bought with
thy precious blood) glorify thee? But the sweetest of Honey lies in the
bo^tom. I pass therefore from the first to the second Reason.

CHAP. 2. That it makes for the glory of his Wisdom.
2 SEcondly, it makes for the glory of his mavelous and singular Wisdom, when
he turns the malice of his enemies to the advantage of his Church. I would
(says Paul) ye understood, brethren, that the things which have come unto me,
are turned rather to the furthering of the Gospel: So that my bonds in Christ
are famous throughout all the judgement-hall, and in all other places; insomuch
that many of the brethren in the Lord, are emboldned through my bonds, and dare
more frankly speak the Word, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. The Apostles imprisonment was
not the Gospels restraint, but enlargement.

In all other cases, a gentle resistance heightens the desire of the seeker: in
this; the strength of opposition, meeting with as strong a faith, has the same
effect.

Again, how admirably did the Lord turn the malice of Joseph's brethren when
they sold him into Egypt! And that devilish plot of Haman against Mordecai and
his people to the good of his Church in general, and of Joseph and Mordecai in
particular? Genesis 45.8, 11. Hester 9.1, 2, 3. Their plots to overthrow Joseph
and Mordecai, were turned by a divine Providence to the only means of
advantaging them. And herein was that of the Psalmist verified, Surely the rage
of man shall turn to thy praise, Psalm. 76.10. He who can do all things, will do
that which shall be most for his own honor: And it is not so much glory to God
to take away wicked men, as to use their evil to his own holy purposes; how
soon could the Commander of Heaven and Earth, rid the World of bad members? But
so should he lose the praise of working good by evil instruments: it suffices
that the Angels of God resist their actions, while their persons continue.

Yea, as in the Creation, out of that confused Chaos, he drew forth this
orderly and adorned World: so still out of Satan's Tragedies and Hurliburlies,
he brings forth sweet order and comeliness: for God (many times) works by
contrary means: as Christ restored the blind man to his sight, with clay and
spittle; he caused the Israelites to grow with depression, with persecution to
multiply, Exodus 1.12. The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church:
Persecution enlarges the bounds of it; like as Palms oppressed, and Camamile
trod upon, mount the more, grow the faster.

Yea, it is admirable to consider, how the Gospel grew, maugre all the adverse
blasts, and floods which the billows of Earth, and bellows of Hell could blow
or pour out against it in those sanguinary Persecutions: The more we are cut
down by the sword of Persecution; the more still we are, says Tertullian, of
the Christians in his time: Yea, the sufferings of one, begat many to the love
of the truth: we read that Cicilia a poor Virgin, by her gracious behavior in
her Martyrdom; was the means of converting four hundred to Christ. The
spectators made contrary constructions, to what their Persecutors intended:
witness Iustine Martyr, Who when he saw the Christians suffer such great things
so cheerfully, said; Surely these men have more in them then the men of the
World: they have other principles: and thereupon enquired what manner of people
they were, and so came to embrace the truth. Whence Master John Lindsey, a
friend to Bishop Bettoune, upon the burning of Master Patrick Hamilton; said to
him: My Lord, if you burn any more; let them be burnt in hollow Cellars: for
the smoke of Master Hamilton has infected as many as it blew upon (Master Knox
in his History of Scotland.) And as touching Iulians in particular, Italy never
more abounded with Students, then when he had shut up all the School-doors, and
turned Learning into exile.

And so on the contrary, the very means which wicked men use, to establish
their own power, proves (by Gods providence) the only means of their ruin.
Those Babel-projectors would build themselves a Tower, whose top should reach
unto Heaven, lest they should be scattered abroad: which act of theirs proved
the only cause of their being scattered and dispersed all the World over, Genesis
11.4, 8. Joseph's brethren sold him into Egypt, that so they might prevent his
reigning over them; but God made it the only means of his reigning over them.
Genesis 37.20, 36. Pharaoh and his deep Counselors would deal wisely in
oppressing the Israelites, lest they should multiply and get out of his Land;
but by this they multiplied the more, and got out the sooner, even to the ruin
of him and his Country. Exodus 1.9, 10, 11, 12. The chief Priests and Pharisees
would most wisely put Christ to death, lest all men should believe in him. John
11.47, 48, 53. When thereby chiefly all came to believe in him. For, says he,
when I am lifted up from the Earth: I will draw all men unto me. John 12.32.
And not seldom does the Lord thus turn the deepest counsels of Haman and
Achitophel into foolishness. Witness the Prelates, and caetera, Oath.

He that could prevent our sufferings, by his power, does permit them in his
wisdom, that he may glorify his mercy in our deliverance, and confirm our
faith by the issue of our distresses.

It Is as easy for God to work without means, as with them; and against them,
as by either: but assuredly it makes more for the Makers glory, that such an
admirable harmony should be produced out of such an infinite discord. The World
is composed of four Elements, and those be contraries: the Year is quartered
into different Seasons: the mind of man is a mixture of disparities, as joy,
sorrow, hope, fear, love, hate, and the like: the body does consist and is
nourished by contraries; how diverse even in effect as well as taste (wherein
variety hits the humor of all) are the Birds and Beasts that feed us! And how
diverse again are those things that feed them! How many several qualities have
the Plants that they brouze upon! Which all mingled together; what a well
tempered Sallad do they make!

Thus you see; that though faith be above reason, yet is there a reason to be
given of our faith. Oh what a depth of wisdom may lie wrapped up in those
passages, which to our weak apprehensions may seem ridiculous.

CHAP. 3. That the graces of God, in his children, may the more shine through
employment.
3 THirdly, it makes for Gods glory another way, when those grace which he
has bestowed upon his children, do the more shi^ through employment, and are
the more seen and taken notice ^ by the World: surely if his justice get such
honor by a Pharaoh; much more does his mercy by a Moses: now Abraham's faith,
Jobs patience Paul's courage and constancy, if they had not been tried by the
fire of affliction; their graces had been smothered, as so many lights under
Bushel, which now (to the glory of God) shine to all the World: Yea, no^ only
their virtues, but the gracious lives of all the Saints departed, d^ still
magnify him even to this day, in every place we hear of them, an^ move us
likewise to glorify God for them: wherefore happy man tha^ leaves such a
president, for which the future Ages shall praise him, and praise God for him.
And certainly, if God intends to glorify himself by his graces in us; he will
find means to fetch them forth into the notice of the World.

Who could know the faith, patience and valor of Gods soldiers, i^ they
always lay in Garrison, and never came to the skirmish? Wherea^ now they are
both exemplary, and serve also to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
1 Pet. 2.15. Yea, without enemies, valor and fortitud^ were of no use. Till we
have sinned, Repentance either is not, or appear^ not: Neither is patience
visible to others, or sensible to our selves, till we are exercised with
sufferings: whereas these virtues in time of misery and exigents, shine as
stars do in a dark night. And what more glorious, than with Noahs' Olive Tree,
to keep our branches green under water? Or with Aarons Rod, to bring forth ripe
Almonds, when in appearance we are clong and dry? Or with Moses's Bush, not to
consume though on a ligh^ fire.

One Jupiter set out by Homer the Poet, was worth ten set out by Phidia^ the
Carver, says Philostratus; because the former slew abroad through all the
World, whereas the other never stirred from his Pedistal at Athens: so at
first, the honor and splendor of Jobs integrity was confined to Uz, (a little
corner of Arabia) yea, to his own Family; whereas by means of the Devils
malice, it is now spread as far as the Sun can extend his beams, or the Moon
her influence; for of such a Favorite of Heaven, such a Mirror of the Earth,
such a wonder of the World, who takes no^ notice? Who could know whether we be
vessels of gold or dross, unless we were brought to the Touchstone of
temptation? Who could feel the odoriferous smell of these Aromatical Spices, if
they were not pounded and bruised in the Mortar of affliction? The Worlds
hatred and calumny to a^ able Christian, serves as bellows to kindle his
devotion, and blow off the ashes, under which his faith lay hid; like the Moon,
he shines clearest in the night of affliction: If it made for the honor of
Saul and all Israel, that he had a little Boy in his Army, that was able to
encounter that selected great Giant, Goliath of the Philistims, and overcome
him; how much more does it make for Gods glory, that the least of his adopted
ones should be able to encounter four enemies?

The World, 1 John 5.4. The Flesh, Gal. 5.24. The Devil, 1 John 2.14. and The
Death, Romans 8.36, 37.
The weakest of which is 1 The Flesh, 2 The World.


Now the Flesh being an homebred enemy, a Dalilah in Samsons bosom, a Judas
in Christ's company, like a Moath in the garment bred in us, and cherished of
us: and yet always attempting to fret and destroy us: and the world a foreign
foe, whose Army consists of two Wings, Adversity on the left hand Prosperity on
the right hand
Death stronger then either, and the Devil stronger than all; And yet that the
weakest child of God only through faith in Christ (a thing as much despised of
Philistims, as David's ^^ing and stone was of Goliath) should overcome all these
four^ wherein he shows himself a greater Conqueror, then William the
Conqueror; yea, even greater then Alexander the Great, or Pompey the Great, or
the Great Turk: for they only conquered in many years a few parts of the World:
but he that is born of God, overcomes the whole World, and all things in the
World, 1 John 5. And this is the victory that overcomes the World, even our
faith, Verse. 4. And makes not this infinitely for the glory of God? Yea, it
makes much for the honor of Christians. For, art thou born of God? Have thou
vanquished the World, that vanquisheth all the wicked? Bless God for this
conquest. The King of Spains overcomming the Indies was nothing to it. If Satan
had known his afflicting of Job, would have so advanced the glory of God:
manifested Jobs admirable patience to all Ages: made such a president for
imitation to others: occasioned so much shame to himself; I doubt no^ but Job
should have continued prosperous and quiet: for who will set upon his Adversary
when he knows, he shall be shamefully beaten? This being so, happy are they
who when they do well, hear ill: but much more blessed are they, who live so
well, as that their backbiting Adversaries seeing their good works, are
constrained to praise God and speak well of them.

CHAP. 4. That God, suffers his children to be afflicted and persecuted by
ungodly men, that so they may be brought to repentance.
NOw the Reasons which have chiefly respect to the good of his children in
their sufferings, being thirteen in number; are distinguished as follows: God
suffers his children to be afflicted by them. 1 Because it Brings them to
repentance. 2 Because it Works in them amendment of life. 3 Because it Stirs
them up to prayer. 4 Because it Weans them from the love of the World. 5
Because it Keeps them always prepared to the spiritual combat. 6 Because it
Discovers whether we be true believers, or Hyprocites. 7 Because it Prevents
greater evils of sin and punishment to come. 8 Because it makes them Humble.
9 Because it makes them Conformable to Christ their head. 10 Because it
Increases their Faith. 11 Because it Increases their Joy and Thankfulness. 12
Because it Increases their Spiritual Wisdom. 13 Because it Increases their
Patience.


First, the Lord suffers his children to be vexed and persecuted by the wicked,
because it is a notable means to rouse them out of careless security, and
bring them to repentance; He opens the ears of men (says Elihu) even by
their corrections, that he might cause man to turn away from his enterprizo,
and that he might keep back his soul from the pit, Job. 33.16, 17, 18. The
feeling of smart will teach us to decline the cause: Quia sentio poenam
recogit^ culpam, says Gregory the Great: punishments felt bring to my
consideration sins committed. Those bitter sufferings of Job toward his latter
end, made him to possess the iniquities of his youth, Job 13.26. whereby (with
Solomon's Eves-dropper, Eccles. 7.21, 22.) he came to repent of that whereof he
did not once suspect himself guilty: it made him not think so much of what he
felt, as what he deserved to feel: in like manner, how do the clamours of
Satan, our own consciences, and the insulting World: constrain us to possess
even the sins of our youth? There needs no ^ther art of memory for sin but
misery.

Satan's malice not seldom proves the occasion of true repentance, and so the
Devil is overshot in his own Bow, wounded with his own weapon. I doubt whether
that Syrophenician had ever enquired after Christ, if her daughter had not been
vexed with an unclean spirit; yea, whether the Devil had been so effectually
cast out, if he had with less violence entered into her. Mark 7. Our afflictions
are as Benhadads best Counselors, that sent him with a cord about his neck to
the merciful King of Israel. The Church of God under the Cross is brought to a
serious consideration of her estate, and says, Let us search and try our ways
and turn again to the Lord: Lam. 3.40. Manasses also the King of Judah that
horrible sinner, never repented of his Idolatry, Murder, Witchcraft, etc. till
he was carried away captive to Babel, and there put in chains by the King of
Ashur. But then (says the Text) he humbled himself greatly before the God of
his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. Yea, read his confession, (for he speaks most
feelingly) and you shall see, that the prison was a means of his spiritual
enlargement. Even Vipers being lasht, cast up all their poison.

The body that is surfetted with repletion of pleasant meats; must be purged
with bitter pills: and when all outward comforts fail us, we are willing to
befriend our selves with the comfort of a good conscience, the best of
blessings. Affliction is the Hammer which breaks our rockie hearts. Adversity
has whipped many a soul to Heaven, which otherwise prosperity had coached to
Hell: was not the Prodigal riding post thither, till he was soundly lasht home
again to his Fathers house, by those hard-hearted and pittiless Nabals, which
refused to fill his belly with the husks of the swine? And indeed seldom is
any man thoroughly awakened from the sleep of sin, but by affliction: but, God
by it, as it were by a strong purge; empties and evacuates those supe^fluities
of malice, envy, pride, security, etc. wherewith we were before surcharged.
For as Alloes kills worms in the stomach: or as frost, and cold destroys
Vermin, so does bitter afflictions; crawling lusts in the heart.

The Serpents enmity may be compared to the Circumcision-knife which was made
of stone: unto Rubarb which is full of Choler, yet does mightily purge Choler:
or to the sting of a Scorpion, which though it be arrant poison, yet proves an
excellent remedy against poison. For this, or any other affliction when we are
in our full career of wordly pomp and jollity; pulls us by the ear, and
makes us know our selves: My wants (says one) kill my wantonness: my poverty
checks my pride: my being slighted quels my ambition and vain glory. And as for
sickness; it cuts the throat of vices: Many, says Saint Augustine, have been
wickedly well, that have been innocently and piously sick. Yea, I may call it
the sum of Divinity, as Pliny calls it the sum of Philosophy; for what
distressed or sick man was ever lascivious, covetous, or ambitious! He envies
no man, admires no man, flatters no man, dissembles with no man, despises no
man, etc. That which Governors or friends can by no means effect, touching our
amendments a liltle sickness, or trouble from enemies will (as Saint
Chrysostom observes.) Yea, how many will confess, that one affliction has
done more good upon them, then many Sermons? That they have learned more good
in one days or weeks misery, than many years prosperi^ could teach them?
Untouched estates, and touched consciences, seldom dwell together: and it is
usual for them that know no sorrows to know no God: repentance seldom meets a
man in jollity, but in affliction the heart is made pliable and ready for all
good impressions.

True, if gentleness would serve, we should not smart; for God like a good
Chyrur^ion, first strokes the arm, before he opens the vein: he sends for us by
his Ambassadors of the Ministry, yet we come not: Let him fi^e our field, as
Absalom did by Ioab; we come presently: Or perhaps he afflicts another, to
fright us: as great men's children are corrected, by seeing others whipped: or as
Apolonias would tame Lions by beating Dogs before them. For as God preaches to
us, no less in his judgments than his Word; so when he strikes offenders; he
would warn the standers by: and a wise man sees himself fallen, or beaten in his
neighbor. Yea, generous and ingenuous spirits, desire to be taught, abide not
to be forced. It is for Tyrants to compel: for Asses to be compelled, says
Erasmus. A good natured Horse, says Seneca, will be governed even by the
shadow of the wand: whereas a resty jade will not be ordered by the spur.

But if his Word will not rule us; (as many, till God come with a strong hand
will hold their corruptions as fast as Pharaoh the Israelites) his Rod shall:
or if his Rod will not yet serve; his sword shall be drencht in our gall, and
bathed in our blood, Deuteronomy. 32.41.42. Or if we escape for a time; yet our
preservation from one judgment is but our reservation to seven more, Levit.
26. Yea, he will send a succession of crosses, seven more, and seven more, and
seven to that; to the conversion of his own and the confusion of his enemies,
Verse. 14, to 39. when singing will not still the Child; the Rod must. Hard
knots, must have hard wedges: strong affections; strong afflictions: great
corruptions; great calamities to cure them.

So that God (through thy stubbornness) is forced to let loose Satan and wicked
men upon thee, lest thou should sleep in security till thou did sleep in
death eternally, even for thy good: And affliction is but the shepherds Dog,
(as Chrysostom speaks) to fetch us into Christ's fold: perhaps by barking
only; and then we are more scared than hurt: perhaps in his mouth; and then
the poor sheep thinks he will surely worry it: but he is taught to fetch only,
and therefore gripes not, but only carries and delivers it to his Master. When
children have done a fault; Mothers use to fright them with Bull-beggers: the
child thinks surely they will have him, but the Mother has a double policy,
viz. to make them hate the fault, and love them the better: for they run to the
la^ to hide them, and then will she make her own conditions. And so the very
end which God aims at in setting those Adders upon thee, is that thou
should turn thine Eyes inward, that thou may see for what thou suffer:
pry narrowly into thine own forepast actions; which if thou do, an hundred to
one thou will find sin, it may be, this very sin, the cause of thy present
affliction: and until thou do sift and try thine own heart for this Achan;
and find out which is thy Isaac, thy beloved sin; look for no release: but
rather that thy sorrows should be multiplied, as God threatened Eve.

Wherefore lie thou on thy face, said God to Joshua? Israel has sinned, up,
search diligently, etc. Josh. 7.10, 11. What evil have thou done, said the
Mariners to the distressed Prophet, that this evil is come upon us? Let every
such Jonas reflect upon himself, and say, What evil have I done? What sin have
I committed or admitted? or what good have I omitted or intermitted? be it but
one single sin, whether spiritual pride, or railing upon honest men in an
handsome Language, or the like, and having found out the cause, grieve for it,
turn from it. One flaw in a Diamond takes away the luster and the price: one
man in Law may keep possession: one Puddle, if we wallow in it, will defile us;
one piece of Ward-land makes the Heir liable to the King: one sin keeps
possession for Satan as well as twenty: one poison-full Herb amongst many good
ones may put death in the pot; and so take away the goodness from the rest, as
if there were none in it, wholesome.

Besides, how were the Angels in heaven punished for one fault? Achan for one
sacrilege? Miriam for one slander? Moses for one unbelief? Ananias for one
lie? Ely for his Indulgence only? David for his love to Bathsheba only, etc.
wherefore look to it, for if we spare but one Agag, it may cost us a Kingdom:
and such a Kingdom as is far better than the Kingdom of Saul, 1 Pet. 1.4.

Neither say of thy sin, as once Lot of Zoar; Is it not a little one? for
though men may, yet God will not wink at small faults, especially in his own. A
little prick being neglected, may fester to a gangrene. As what is a mountain
of Earth but an accumulation of many little dusts? or what is a flood, but a
concurrence of many little drops? a small leak will sink the Vessel unstopt;
whereas a great one will not do it, if well kalked. The weakest Instrument, be
it but a Bodkin, can pierce the flesh and take away the life unarmed; whereas
Armor of proof will even beat off Bullets. Besides, whereas our greatest
goodness merits not the least glory, our least wickedness deserves great
pain. The wages of sin (small or great) is death, Romans 6.23. bad work, sad
wages.

Wherefore let his correction bring forth conversion; cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purge your hearts ye double-minded, Jam. 4.8. Not your hands only
with Pilate, but your hearts with David; yea, and your eyes too, with Mary
Magdalen, if it be possible, (though dry sorrow may be as good as wet) whose
eyes were a Laver, and hair a Towel, to wash and wipe the feet of Christ.
Humble thy self like the Ninevites, Jonah 3.6. Who put sackcloth upon their
loins, and ashes on their heads, as those that had deserved to be as far under
ground, as they were now above it. An humble submission is the only way to
disarm Gods indignation, and be rid of his Rod, 1 Pet. 5.6. By such a course as
this Jacob appeased that rough man Esau: Abigale diverted David from his bloody
purpose: the Syrians found favor with Ahab, that nonesuch; as the Script^re
styles him: 1 Kings 20.32, 33. Sin brings judgment, and only Repentance
preventeth it: Thy sin has kindled the fire of Gods wrath, and only Repentance
is as water to quench this fire.

King Edward the First riding furiously after a servant of his that had
displeased him, with a drawn sword in his hand, as purposing to kill him,
seeing him submit, and upon bended knee, sue for his life, not only spared
him, but received him into favor: Go thou and do the like: be thou but
thoroughly sorry for thy sin, my soul for thine, God will be thoroughly
satisfied; yea, grow better by it, and God will love thee the better for it: As
Lovers are wont to be best friends after falling out: for as bones out of
joint, joined again are stronger then before: so when God and we are reconciled
by repentance, his affections are stronger to us then before. The repenting
Prodigal received such tokens of favor as his elder brother, who never brake
out into that Riot; never did. And whom did Christ honor with his first
appearance but Mary Magdalen? and the Angel, but Peter? Go, says he, and tell
his Disciples and Peter that he will go before you into Galilee, Mark 16.7.
Though Peter had sinned above the rest, yet repenting he is named above the
rest.

Otherwise* Contrition without reformation (which is but like the crouching of
a Fox, that being taken in a snare looks lamentably, but it is only to get out)
will not prevail with God; he will never leave pursuing thee, till the traitors
head be thrown over the wall.

None so lewd but will seem conformable, when apprehended: or if they Riot in
the Goal of their durance; yet when the Sessions comes, they begin to be a
little calm: put off their disguises of dissoluteness, and put on some
modesty, and semblance of humiliation; yea, then they change their apparel,
their garbes, their looks and all to appear civil. Or let the Fox be chained up
he will no more worry the Lambs: Pharaoh could relent when he felt the plagues;
but when they were over, so was his repentance: but what says the Scripture?
He that confesses and forsakes his sin shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13.
Confession and confusion of sin must go together: yea, there must be a
parting with the right Eye in regard of pleasure, and the right Hand in regard
of profit. As for example, have thou swallowed some unlawful gain, and would
thou pacify God and thy Conscience? Vomit it up again by restitution: for
where is no restitution of things unjustly gotten, their sins shall never be
forgiven, as Saint Augustine speaks, Non tollitur peccatum, nisi restituitur
ablatum. For repentance without restitution, is as if a thief should take away
thy purse, ask thee pardon, say he is sorry for it, but keeps it still; in
which case, thou would say, he did but mock thee. But Pallas with all the
graces may call Briareus with his hundred hands to bind this Jupiter; and all
in vain. Wherefore I proceed. The skilful Surgeon, when he is lancing a
wound, or cutting off a limb, will not hear the patient, though he cry never
so, until the cure be ended; but let there be once a healing of thy errors,
and the plaster will fall off of it self; for the plaster will not stick on
when the sore is healed. If the Fathers word can correct the child, he will
fling away the rod, otherwise he must look to have his eyes ever winterly. Thus
as the two Angels that came to Lot, lodged with him for a night, and when they
had dispatched their errand, went away in the morning: So afflictions which are
the Angels or the Messengers of God, are sent by him to do an errand to us; to
tell us, we forget God, we forget our selves, we are too proud, too
self-conceited, and such like: and when they have said as they were bid, then
presently they are gone. Why then complainest thou, I am afflicted on every
side? Like a child that cries out of his shoe, when the fault is in his foot:
or the sick patient who faults his bed when he should his back. Why groanest
thou under thy burden, and cryest out of unremedied pain? Alas, thou repentest
not; trouble came on this message, to teach thee repentance, give the messenger
his errand, and he will be gone.

But if thou refusest to be reformed, thou hate to be healed. Alas, every
Cain will groan under the penalty, whereas a David will grieve for the
iniquity: but the one trembles as a slave, whereas the other fears as a son:
and he that mourns for the cause of his punishment, shall mourn but a while; but
he that mourns only for the punishment, and not for the cause, shall mourn for
ever. The soul cannot live while the sin lives; one of the two must die, the
corruption or the Person; but Repentance is a Supersedeas, which dischageth
both sin and sorrow, moving God to be merciful, the Angels to be joyful, Man to
be acceptable, and only the Devil and his to be melancholy.

True, God does not merely (though mainly) smite and chastise his children for
sin, without any other respect; all his afflictive acts, are not punishments;
some are for the benefit of the creature, whether for probation or purgation,
or reformation: and for the praise whether of his divine power, or justice, or
mercy, as appears by our Saviors words, touching him that was born blind,
John 9.3. For though his Parents had sinned in themselves, and the man had
sinned in his first Parents; yet it was not the guilt of either, that was
guilty of this blindness* and the like we may collect from Jobs example.
Nevertheless, sin is still the Original; as when the head aches, and the members
are sick, the fault is in the stomach. For this cause, says the Apostle, (of
the believing Corinthians) many are weak, (by lingering diseases) many sick,
(by sharp and grievous maladies) and many sleep (are dead outright) 1 Cor.
11.30. Hence our so many diseases, miseries, maladies, troubles without,
terrors within; it is this thief in the Candle that wastes us: this Fly in the
Box that corrupts us: this traitor in the heart, that betrays and exposes us
to all perils. In which regard it was a sound and savoury reply of an English
Captain at the loss of Calice, who when a proud Frenchman tauntingly demanded,
When will you fetch Calice again? answered, When your sins shall weigh down
ours. What, says Saint Hierom, in the like case? by our sins are these
Infidels made strong; and therefore a mean to lessen our punishment is, to
lessen our sins. Yea, even Achaior a very Ammonite could say thus to
Holofernes, Enquire if this people have offended their God: otherwise all our
warring will come to nothing: and Vespasian the like: who when he had conquered
Jerusalem, refused to have the Crown set upon his head, saying: I, indeed, am
the rod in Gods hand, but it is their sins only, that has subdued them.

And it is very rare in this case, if there be not some Achan in the Army, some
Sheba in the Town, some Jonas in the Ship, some distemper in the soul, disorder
in the life, that God would have removed and remedied: as for instance; Jonas,
how came he into the Whales belly? Was it not his own undutifulness? David,
whence came all his troubles by Absalom, Amnon, Adonijah? Was it not his
fondness and indulgence? And so of Eli. Jacob, what might he thank for all his
afflictions (whereof God gave him not a draught, but made him a diet-drink: so
that he had scarce a merry day, for one trouble or another:) whom had he to
thank for it? Did he not thrust his own feet into the stocks by that threefold
lie of his uttered in a breath to get the blessing?

Wherefore, if thou love thine own ease, deal freely and ingenuously with God
and thine own soul; for sin and punishment are inseparable companions, and go
tied together with chains of Adamant, as the Poet speaks, like individual
twins, they are born together, live together, are attended one by the other, as
the body by the shadow: where sin is in the Saddle, there punishment is on the
Crupper; whence it is, that the Hebrews have but one and the same word for them
both.

Objection. But thou have repented and resolvest to be reformed.

Answer. Many in time of distress have strong resolutions and promise fair,
even a Candle as big as a Mast: but trouble being over; one of ten in the pound
were well: which proves; they never truly repented. Yea, in stead of being
better, they grow worse, like one that falls into a relapse from an Ague, to a
burning Fever, which peradventure would be thy case, if God should now release
thee: at least thou may fear it: for, to seek unto God only in affliction,
is suspicious, and such seekers commonly are rejected with scorn, Proverbs
1.24, to 33. Indeed, if thou shall persevere (when thou art released) in doing
that which now thou purposest; it is infallible sign, thy repentance is sound:
otherwise; not.

CHAP. 5. That it serves to work in us amendment of life.
2 SEcondly, the malice of our enemies serves to work in us amendment of life.
Every affliction sanctified, rubs off some rust, melts off some dross,
strains out some corruption, etc. which done, we rise out of trouble, as
Christ rose out of the grave: for when the gold is fined, the fire shall hold
it no longer. The outward cold of affliction does greatly increase the inward
heat and fervor of the graces of God in us. Indeed no chastisement (says the
Author to the Hebrews) for the present seeme^ to be joyous, but grievous: But
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are
thereby exercised, Heb. 12.11.

We are dunged with reproaches, that we may prove a richer soil for grace, as
Nazianzen speaks, (alluding to the parable of the Fig Tree,) God beats us, that
he may better us: he hedgeth us about with thorns, that he may keep us within
compass, lest we break over into Satan's pastures: which indeed will fat us but
to the slaughter. Yea, he pricks us with goads, that he may let out our ill
humors: and happy thorns or lancets of tribulation are those, which open a
vein for sin to gush out at.

God strips the body of pleasure to cloth the soul with righteousness, and
oftentimes strengthens our state of grace by impoverishing our temporal
estate: for commonly the more prosperity, the less Piety. The poor (says
Christ) receive the Gospel, though the rich are more bound. It was an
observation of Tacitus, that raising of the fortune did rarely mend the
disposition: only Vespasian was changed into the better. Yea, if it make us not
worse, it is a wonder: Evagrius gives it as a high praise of the Emperor
Mauritius, that in the height of all his Majesty, he retained his ancient
Piety. We serve God, as our servants serve us: of which many have too good
clothes, others too much wages, or are too fine fed to do work; as ^sops Hen
being over-fed, was too fat to lay: or perhaps too many under them; as a
Gentleman having but one servant, thought him over-burdened with work, and
therefore took another to help him: but having two, one of them so trusted to
the others observance, that oft-times, they were both missing, and the work not
done; then he chose a third; but was worse served them, then before: whereupon
he told his friend, When I had one servant, I had a servant; when I had two, I
had but half an one: now I have three, I have never an one. Few men can digest
great felicity: Many a man has been a loser by his gains, and found that, that
which multiplied his outward estate, has abated his inward, and so on the
contrary, David was never so tender, as when he was hunted like a Partridge, 1 Samuel 26.20. Jonah was at best, in the Whales belly. Stevens face never shone so
fair, as when he stood before the Council, Acts 6.15. Whilst the Romans had
wars with Carthage and enemies in Afric, they knew not what vices meant in
Rome.

Now if the winter of the one is found to be the spring of the other, and the
corruption of prosperity the generation of piety; who will esteem those things
good which make us worse, or that evil, which brings such gain and sweetness?
Before I was afflicted (says David) I went astray, but now I keep thy
commandment, Psalm. 119.67. These evils do press us, but it is to God and to
holiness. Yea, how much lower our afflictions weigh us down on Earth, so much
the more earnestly our affections mount up to Heaven.

An Egg will swim in s^lt water, but sink in fresh: so we. King David among so
many public and private calamities and disasters, kept his head above water,
and stood upright in his heart to God: But King Solomon his son, even sunk in
the midst of delights and pleasures. Too much rankness lays the Corn: and
Trees over-laden with Fruit, are their own ruin. Happy was he, John 9. in
being born blind, whose gain of bodily sight made way for the spiritual, who
of a Patient became an Advocate for his Savior, who lost a Synagogue and found
Heaven, who by being abandoned of sinners, was received of the Lord of glory:
God rarely deprives a man of one faculty, but he more then supplies it in
another. The defect of corporal sight, has not seldom mended the memory: for
what is taken from one sense is divided amongst the rest. When Zachary was
dumb, John Baptist the voice was a breeding. Hannibal had but one eye: Appius,
Claudius, Timelon, and Homer were quite blind; So was Mulleasses King of
Tunis, and John King of Bohemia* but for the loss of that one Sense, they were
recompensed in the rest, they had most excellent memories, rare inventions, and
admirable other parts. Or suppose he send sickness; the worst Fever can come,
does not more burn up our blood than our lust; and together with sweating out
the surfets of nature, at the pores of the body; we weep out the sinful
corruption of our nature at the pores of the conscience: Yea, the Author to
the Hebrews says of Christ himself, that though he were the Son, yet (as he
was man) He learned obedience by the things which he suffered. Heb. 5.8. As in
humane proceedings, Ill manners beget good Laws; so in Divine; the wicked by
their evil tongues beget good and holy lives in the godly: Whence Plutarch
advises us so circumspectly to demean our selves as if our enemies did always
behold us. Nothing sooner brings us to the knowledge and amendment of our
faults, then the scoffs of an enemy: which made Philip of Macedon acknowledge
himself much beholding to his enemies (the Athenians) for speaking evil of him,
for (says he) they have made me an honest man, to prove them liars: even
barren Leah, when she was despised became fruitful.

So that we may thank our enemies, or must thank God for our enemies: Our souls
shall shine the brighter one day for such rubbing: the cold wind cleanses the
good grain: the hot fire refines the pure gold. Yea, put case we be gold; they
will but try us: If Iron; they will scowre away our rust.

I say not that a wicked heart will be bettered by affliction: for, in the same
fire that gold is made bright and pure; d^oss is burnt and consumed: and under
the same flail that the grain is purged and preserved; the husks are broken and
diminished. Neither are the Lees therefore confounded with the Wine, because
they are pressed and trodden under the same press or plank; but I speak of
affliction sanctified, and of the godly.

Yet let not the wickedest man be discouraged, for as when Christ called the
blind man; the Disciples said, Be of good comfort, he calls thee: so I may
say to thee that art burthned with any kind of affliction; Be of good comfort,
Christ calls thee, saying, Come unto me by repentance and amendment of life,
and I will ease thee of thy sins and sorrows, here and hereafter; only as the
blind man threw away his garment and followed Christ, so do thou answer him, I
will forsake my sins and follow thee. For if God, like a prudent Prince, makes
offers and fames of war; it is but to mend the conditions of peace.

But, farewell, I am for the already resolved; to whom I say, if the needle of
affliction be drawn through us, by reason of wicked men's malice; it is but to
convey with it the thread of amendment: and their worst to the godly, serves
but as the thorn to the breast of the Nightingale, the which (if she chance to
sleep) causes her to warble with a renewed cheerfulness* For as blows make
balls to mount, and lashes make Tops to go, which o^ themselves would fall: so
with their malice we are spurred up to duty, and made persevere in it, for
commonly (like Tops) no longer lasht, no longer we go. Yea, these very
tempestuous showers bring forth spiritual flowers and herbs in abundance:
Devotion (like fire in frosty weather) burns hottest in affliction. Virtue
provoked, ads much to it self: With the Ark of Noah, the higher we are tossed
with the flood of their malice; the nearer we mount toward Heaven. When the
waters of the flood came upon the face of the earth, down went stately Turrets
and Towers; but as the waters rose, the Ark rose still higher and higher. In
like sort, when the waters of affliction arise; down goes the pride of life,
the lust of the eyes; In a word all the vanities of the World. But the Ark of
the soul arises as these waters rise, and that higher and higher, even nearer
and nearer toward Heaven.

I might illustrate this point by many observable things in nature: We see
Well-waters arising from deep Springs, are hotter in Winter then in Summer,
because the outward cold does keep in, and double their inward heat: And so of
man's body, the more extreme the cold is without; the more does the natural heat
fortify it self within, and guard the heart: The Corn receives an inward heat
and comfort from the Frost and Snow which lies upon it: Trees lopt and pruned
flourish the more, and bear the fuller for it. The Grape when it is most
pressed and trodden, makes the more and better Wine: The drossie gold is by
the fire refined; Winds and Thunder clears the Air: Working Seas purge the
Wine: Fire increases the sent of any Perfume: Pounding makes all Spices smell
the sweeter: Linen when it is buckt, and washed, and wrung, and beaten becomes
the whiter and fairer: the Earth being torn up by the Plough, becomes more rich
and fruitful. Is there a piece of ground naturally good? Let it lie neglected;
it becomes wild and barren: yea, and the more rich and fertile it is of it
self, the more waste and fruitless it proves for want of Tillage and
Husbandry. The Razor, though it be tempered with a due proportion of Steel, yet
if it pass not the Grindstone or Whetstone, is never the less unapt to cut;
yea, though it be made once never so sharp; if it be not often whelted, it
waxes dull. All which are lively emblemes of that truth which the Apostle
delivers, 2 Cor. 4.16. We faint not, for though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed daily. Even as a Lamb is much more lively and nimble for
shearing. If by enmity and persecution (as with a knife) the Lord pareth and
pruneth us; it is, that we may bring forth the more, and better fruit: and,
unless we degenerate; we shall bear the better for bleeding: as Anteus, every
time rose up the stronger, when Hercules threw him to the ground: because he
got new strength, by touching of his Mother.

O admirable use of affliction! health from a wound; cure from a disease: out
of grief, joy: gain out of loss: out of infirmity, strength: out of sin
holiness: out of death life: yea, we shall redeem something of Gods dishonor
by sin, if we shall thence grow holy. But this is a harder Riddle then Sampsons
to these Philistims.

CHAP. 6. That it stirs them up to Prayer.
3 THirdly, because they quicken our devotion, and make us pray unto God with
more fervency: Lord (says Isaiah) in trouble they will visit thee: they poured
out prayers when thy chastening was upon them, Isay 26.16. In their affliction
(says Hosea) they will seek thee diligently; Hosea 5.15. That we never pray so
feelingly, fervently, forcibly, as in time of affliction, may be seen in the
examples of the children of Israel, Judges 3.9, 15. Elisha, 2 Kings 6.18,
Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19.15, 16. Stephen, Acts 7.59, 60. And lastly, in Iehosaphat,
who being told that there was a great multitude coming against him from beyond
the S^a, out of Aram; it follows, That Jehosaphat feared, and set himself to
seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judeah: Yea, they came out
of all parts, and joined with him to enquire of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.3, 4, 13.

Neither does it make us alone which suffer; earnest in prayer, but it makes
others also labor in prayer to God for us, 2 Cor. 1.10, 11. Acts 12.5, 12. As
what true members participate not some way of the bodies smart? It is only a
Nero can sit and sing while Rome burns. Whence we are taught to pray in the
plural number, Our Father: and certainly he cannot pray or be heard for
himself, that is no man's friend but his own. No prayer without faith, no faith
without Charity, no Charity without mutual intercession. But I proceed, Crosses
are the files and whetstones, that set an edge on our Devotions, without which
they grow dull and ineffectual. Jonah sleeps in the Ship, but prays hard in the
Whales belly,

Prayer is the wing of the soul, wherewith it flies to Heaven, as meditation is
the Eye wherewith we see God. But our hearts are like flint-stones, which must
be smit^en ere they will send out these sparks of devotion. Christ never heard
of the Canaanitish woman, until her daughter was miserably vexed with a Devil:
but then she comes to him, and does not speak, but cry: need and desire have
raised her voice to an importunate clamor. The God of mercy is light of
hearing, yet he loves a loud and vehement solicitation: not to make himself
inclinable to grant; but, to make us capable to receive blessings. And indeed
the very purpose of affliction, is, to make us importunate: he that hears the
secret murmurs of our grief, yet will not seem to hear us till our cries be loud
and strong: as Demosthen^s would not plead for his Client till he cried to him,
but then answered his sorrow. Now I feel thy cause.

Prayer is as an arrow, if it be drawn up but a little; it goes not far: but if
it be p^ll'd up to the head; flies strongly, and pierces deep: if it be but
dribled forth of careless lips; it falls down at our feet: the strength of our
ejaculations, sends them up into Heaven, and fetches down a blessing. The
Child has escaped many a stripe by his loud crying: and the very unjust Judge
cannot endure the widows clamor: So unto fervent prayer, God will deny
nothing. Whereas heartless motions do but teach us to deny, Fervent suites
offer violence both to Earth and Heaven. So that if we ask and miss, it is
because we ask amiss: we beat back the flame, not with a purpose to suppress
it, but to raise it higher, and to diffuse it. We stop the stream, that it may
swell the more, and a denial does but invite the importunate, as we see in the
Canaanitish woman, Matthew. 15. Our holy longings are increased with delays: it
whets our appetite to be held fasting: and whom will not Need make both humble
and ^loquent? If the case be woeful, it will be expressed accordingly: the despair
of all other helps, sends us importunately to the God of power; but while money
can buy Physic, or friends proc^re enlargement; the great Physician and
helper, is not sought unto, nor thoroughly trusted in. It is written of the
children of Israel, that so soon as they cried unto the Lord; he delivered them
from their servitude under Eglon King of Moab: yet it is plain, they were
eighteen years, under this bondage, undelivered, Judges 3.14, 15. Doubtless,
they were not so unsensible of their own misery, as not to complain sooner then
the end of eighteen years: the first hour they sighed for themselves: but now;
they cried unto God. They are words, and not prayers; which fall from careless
lips; if we would prevail with God, we must wrestle; and if we would wrestle
happily with God; we must wrestle first with our own dullness. Yea, if we felt
our want, or wanted not desire; we could speak to God in no tune but cries:
and, nothing but cries can pierce Heaven. The best men's zeal is but like a fire
of green wood, which burns no longer than whiles it is blown. Affliction to
the soul is as plummets to a Clock, or wind to a Ship: holy and faithful
prayer; as oars to a Boat: And ill goes the Boat without Oars, or the Ship
without wind, or the Clock without plummets. Now, are some afflicted in
reputation? as Susanna was: others; in children? as Eli: some, by enemies? as
David: others by friends? as Joseph: some, in body? as Lazarus: others, in
goods? as Job: others, in liberty? as John. In all extremities, let us send
this messenger to Christ for case; faithful and fervent prayer: if this can but
carry the burden to him, he will carry it for us, and from us for ever.

Neither can we want encouragement to ask: when as the sick of the Palsy but
asked health, and obtained also forgiveness of sins: When Solomon but desired
wisdom, and the Lord gave him wisdom, and honor, and abundance of wealth:
When Jacob asked but meat and clothing, and God made him a great rich man,
When Zacheus desired only to have a sight of Christ, and was so happy as to
entertain him into his house, into his heart, yea, to be entertained into
Christ's Kingdom.

We do not, (yea, in many cases, we dare not) ask so much, as God is pleased to
give: Neither do thou o Savior measure thy gifts by our petitions, but by
our wants, and thine own mercies.

True, if the all-wise God shall foresee that thou would serve him as the
prodigal son served his father, who prayed but till he had got his patrimony,
and then forsook him, and spent the same in riot, to the givers dishonor; as
too many use the Ocean of Gods bounty, as we do the Thames; it brings us in all
manner of provision: clothes, to cover us: fuel; to warm us: food; to nourish
us: wine; to cheer us; gold to enrich us; and we in recompense soil it with our
rubbish, filth, common shoares, and such like excretions: even as the Cloud
that is lifted up and advanced by the Sun; obscures the Sun. In this case, he
will either deny thee in mercy, as he did Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. and our
Savior himself, Matthew. 26.39. or grant thee thy request in wrath, as he did a
King to the Israelites, and Quails wherewith he fed their bodies; but withal
sending leanness into their souls, Psalm. 106.15. And well does that child
d^serve to be so served, who will lay out the money given him by his father; to
buy poison: or weapons, to murder him with. Wherefore let thy prayers not
only be fervent, but frequent: for, thy wants are so. And be sure to ask good
things to a good end: and then, if we ask thus according to Gods will in
Christ's Name; we know that he will hear us, and grant whatsoever petitions we
have desired, 1 John 5.14, 15.

CHAP. 7. That it weanes them from the love of the world.
4 FOurthly, our sufferings wean us from the love of the world, yea, make us
loath and contemn it; and contrariwise, fix upon heaven with a desire to be
dissolved. Saint Peter, at Christ's transfiguration, enjoying but a glimpse of
happiness here, was so ravished and transported with the love of his present
estate, that he breaks out into these words, Master, it is good for us to be
here; he would fain have made it his dwelling place: and being loath to depart;
Christ must make three tabernacles, Mat. 17.4. The love of this world so makes
us forget the world to come, that, like the Israelites, we desire rather to
live in the troubles of Egypt, then in the Land of Promise. Whereas S. Paul
having spoken of his bonds in Christ, and of the spiritual combat;
concludes, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of
all, Phil. 1.22, 23. Yea, it transported him to Heaven before he came thither:
as Mary was not, where she was, but, where her desire was, and that was with
Christ. Prosperity makes us drunk with the love of the world, like the
Gadarens, who preferred their swine before their souls: or him in the Parable,
that would go to see his farm^, and lose Heaven: or the Rich Glu^ton, who never
thought of Heaven, till he was in Hell: and thousands more, who if they have
but something to leave behind them, it is no matter whether they have any thing
to carry with them.

But, as sleep composeth drunkenness; so the cross will bring a man to himself
again: for when the Staff we so nourish to bear us, becomes a cudgel to beat
us: when we find the world to serve us, as the Jews did Christ, carry us up to
the top of the hill, and then strive to throw us down headlong: Luke 4.29. When
the mind is so invested with cares, molested with grief, vexed with pain, that
which way soever we cast our eyes, we find cause of complaint; we more loath
the World than ever we loved it, as Amnon did his sister Tamar: yea, when life
which is held a friend, becomes an enemy; then death which is an enemy becomes
a friend, and is so accountted: as, who, having cast An^hor in a safe Road;
would again wish himself in the storms of a troublesome Sea?

Yea, in case we have made some progress in Religion, and found a good
conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ, (the marrow of all comforts,)
and resolved with Joseph, to forsake our coat rather than our faith: yet if the
World make new offers of preferment, or some large improvement of profits and
pleasures; we begin to draw back, or at least we know not whether to choose:
like a horse that would, and yet would not, leap a ditch. And after a little
conflict, having half yielded to forsake that with joy, which cannot be kept
but with danger; we resolve thus. The same God, which has made my crosses
cheerful; can as well make my prosperity conscionable. Why then should I refuse
so fair an offer? but alas, having made choice; it is not long, ere these
pleasures and honou^s, these riches and abundance; prove as thorns, to choke
the good seed of Gods Word formerly sown in our hearts: as it is, Matthew. 13.22.
For, prosperity to Religion, ^s as the Ivy to the Oak, it quickly eats out the
heart of it: yea, as the Missel^o and Ivy (sucking by their straight embraces
the very s^p that only gives v^getation from the roots of the Oak and
Hawthorn) will flourish when the Trees wither; so in this case, the corruption
of the good is always the generation of the evil: and so on the contrary,
crosses in the estate, diseases of the body, maladies of the mind, are the
medicines of the soul: the impairing of the one, is the repairing of the other.

When no man would harbor that unthrift son in the Gospel; he turned back
again to his Father, but never before. Lais of Corinth while she was young,
doted upon her Glass, but when she grew old and withered; she loathed it as
much: which made her give it up to Venus. When Satan is let loose upon us to
show us our sins, and the danger we are in; then farewell profit, farewell
pleasure, treasure, and all, rather then I will endure such a rack, such a hell
in my conscience.

Whereas, if we should only hear of misery, or read what is threatened in the
Word: though it might a little fright us; it would never amend us. Birds are
frighted at first, with the Husbandmans scarcrowes: but after a while,
observing that they stir not; are bold to sit upon them, and defile them.

Thus as harmonious sounds are advanced by a silent darkness; so are the glad
tidings of salvation. The Gospel never sounds so sweet, as in the night of
persecution, or private affliction.

When Virtue came down from Heaven (as the Poets feign) rich men spurned at
her, wicked men abhorred her, Courtiers scoft at her, Citizens hated her: and
being thrust out of doors in every place; she came at last to her sisters,
poverty and affliction: and of them; found entertainment. When it ceased to be
with Sarah, after the manner of the World; she conceived Isaac: so when it
cease to be with us after the manner of the Worlds Favorites; we conceive
holy desires, quietness, and tranquillity of mind, with such like spiritual
contentments. Yea, we make faith our only option: whereas before; we kept open
house for all vices, as the States are said to keep open house for all
Religions: or if not; it fares with piety as with holy water, every one
praises it, and thinks it has some rare virtue in it; but, offer to sprinkle
them with the same; they shut their eyes, and turn away their faces: and no
marvel, for we never taste this Manna from Heaven, until we leave the leaven of
this Egypt.

Now, better the body or estate perish, then the soul: though we are too
sensual to consent unto it, Plus Pastor, in vulnere gregis sui vulneratur. The
loss of a graceless child, cannot but grieve the father, though the father him
self were in danger of mischief by that child: as David mourned for Absalom,
that would have cut his throat. True prosperity is hearty meat, but not
digestible by a weak stomach: strong wine; but naught for a weak brain: The
prosperity of fools destroys them, Proverbs 1.32. So that all temporal
blessings are, as they hit: but if the mind do not answer, they were better
mist. The more any man has, the more cause he has to pray, Lord, lead us not
into temptation: for we cannot so heartily think of our home above, whiles we
are furnished with these earthly contentments below; but when God strips us of
them straightwayes, our mind is homeward. Whiles Naomies husband and sons were
alive, we find no motion of her retiring home to Judah: let her earthly stays
be removed; she thinks presently of removing to her Country: a delicious life,
when every thing about us is resplendent and contentful, makes us that we have
no mind to go to Heaven: wherefore as a loving mother, when she would wean her
child from the dug; makes it bitter with Wormwood or Aloes: so deals the
Lord with us, he makes this life bitter unto us by suffering our enemies to
persecute and oppress us; to the end we may contemn the World, and transport
our hopes from Earth to Heaven: he makes us weep in this veil of misery, that
we may the more eagerly long for that place of felicity, where all tears shall
be wiped from our eyes. Our wine (says Gregory) has some gall put into it,
that we should not be so delighted with the way, as to forget whither we are
going. And this is no small abatement to the bitterness of adversities, that
they teach us the way to Heaven: for the less comfort we find on earth, the
more we seek above, and the more we esteem the best things: and we are very
ungrateful, if we do not thank him for that which so overcomes us, that it
overcomes the love of the world in us.

Experience shows, that in Countries where be the greatest plenty of fruits,
they have the shortest lives, they do so surfeit on their abundance. Sicily is
so full of sweet flowers, if we believe Diodorus Siculus, that dogs cannot hunt
there: and it is questionable, whether the enjoying of outward things, or the
contemning of them; be the greater happiness: for, to be deprived of them, is
but to be deprived of a Dye, wherewith a man might either win or lose,: yea,
does not a large portion of them many times prove to the owner, like a
treacherous Dye indeed, which flatters an improvident Gamster with his own hand
to throw away his wealth to another? Or to yield it the uttermost; gold may
make a man the richer, not the better; honor may make him the higher, not the
happier: and all temporal delights are but as flowers, they only have their
month, and are gone; this morning in the bosom, the next in the Besome. The
consideration whereof, made the very Heathen Philosophers hate this world
though they saw not where to find a better. Yea, it made Themistocles so under
value transitory things in comparison of virtue, that seeing rich Bracelets of
precious stones lie in his path, he bade his friend take them up, saying, Thou
art not Themistocles. And indeed it is Heaven only that has a foundation,
Earth has none: God has hanged it upon nothing: and the things therein are
very nothing.

Nothing feeds pride, nor keeps off repentance so much as prosperous advantage.
It Is a wonder to see a Favorite study for ought but additions to his
Greatness* God shall have much ado to make him know himself. The cloth that
has many stains must pass through many larthers. If Musk has lost its
sweetness, there is no way to recover it, except you fling it into the sink
among filth. No less then an odious leprosy will humble Naaman, wherefore by
it the only wise God thought meet to sauce the valor, dignity, renown,
victories, of that famous General of the Syrians. If I could be so uncharitable
as to wish an enemies soul lost, this were the only way, let him live in the
height of the worlds blandishments, for how can he love a second Mistress that
never saw but one beauty, and still continues deeply inamoured on it? Why is
the Lapwing made an Hieroglyphick of infelicity? but because it has a little
Coronet upon the head, and yet feed^ upon the worst of excrements. The Peacock
has more painted Plumes, yet is the Eagle accounted the Queen of Birds,
because she flies nearest heaven. We often see, nothing carries us so far from
God, as those favors he has imparted to us. It Is the misery of the poor; to
be neglected of men: it is the misery of the rich; to neglect their God. The
Badger being wounded with the prickles of the Hedghog his invited guest, whom
at first he welcomed and entertained in his Cabin, as an inward friend,
mannerly desiring him to depart in kindness, as he came; could receive no
other answer then that he for his own part found himself very well at ease,
and they that were not, had reason to seek out another seat that might like
them better. It is but a fable, yet the moral is true, perspicuous, profitable.
Many shall one day repent, that they were happy too soon. Many a man cries out,
Oh that I were so rich, so healthful, so quiet, so happy, etc. Alas, though
thou had thy wish for the present, thou should (perhaps) be a loser in the
sequel. The Physician does not hear his Patient in what he would, yet hears
him in taking occasion to do another thing more conducible to his health. God
loves to give us cools and heats in our desires: and will so allay our joys,
that their fruition hurt us not: he knows that as it is with the body touching
meats, the greater plenty, the less dainty; and too long forbearance causes a
Surfeit, when we come to full food: So it fares with the mind touching worldly
contentments; therefore he feeds us not with the dish, but with the spoon, and
will have us neither cloyed nor famished. In this life, mercy and misery, grief
and grace, good and bad, are blended one with the other; because if we should
have nothing but comfort, Earth would be thought Heaven: besides, if
Christ-tide lasted all the year, what would become of Len^? If every day were
Good Friday, the World would be weary of Fasting* Secundus calls death a sleep
eternal, the wicked man's fear, the godly man's wish. Where the conscience is
clear; death is looked for without fear, yea, desired with delight, accepted
with devotion: why? it is but the cessation of trouble, the extinction of sin,
the deliverance from enemies, a rescue from Satan, the quiet rest of the body,
and infranchizement of the soul. The Woman great with child, is ever musing
upon the time of her delivery: and has not he the like cause, when Death is
his bridge from woe to glory? Though it be the wicked man's shipwreck, it is the
good man's putting into harbor: And hereupon finding himself hated, persecuted,
afflicted, and tormented by enemies of all sorts; he can as willingly leave the
World, as others can forgo the Court: yea, as willingly die as dine; yea, no
woman with child did ever more exactly count her time. No Jew did ever more
earnestly wish for the Iubile, No servant so desires the end of his years, No
stranger so longs to be at home; as he expects the promise of Christ's coming.
It is the strength of his hope, the sweet object of his faith, in the midst of
all sorrows; the comfort of his heart; the heart of all his comforts; the
encouragement of his wearied spirits; the common clausule; the continual
period, and shutting up of his Prayers: Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Whereas the Worlds Favorites go as unwillingly from hence, as boys from the
midst of a game. Neither has the Rich man so much advantage of the poor; in
enjoying, as the poor has of the Rich, in leaving. True, Rich men may also
learn this slight: for, the way to grieve less, is to love less. And indeed,
what should thou do in case thou see that the World runs not on thy side,
but give over the World, and be on Gods side? Let us care little for the World
that cares so little for us. Let us cross sail; and turn another way: let us go
forth therefore out of the Camp, bearing his reproach; for we have no
continuing City, but we seek one to come, Heb. 13.13, 14.

CHAP. 8. That it keeps them always prepared to the spiritual combat.
5 FIfthly, the Lord permits them often to afflict and assail us, to the end
we may be always prepared for tribulation: as wise Mariners in a calm, make
all their tackling sure and strong; that they may be provided against the next
storm, which they cannot look to be long without: Or as experienced Soldiers
in time of peace, prepare against the day of battle; and so much the rather,
when they look every day for the approach of the enemy. They (says Socrates)
that set sail into a calm Sea in a fair quiet weather, have, notwithstanding,
all instruments and materials ready, which may be of use in a tempest: so he
that enjoyes a prosperous and happy estate, if wise, does even in that time
prepare for the harder and more cross occurrents: and so much the rather,
because a great calm presageth a sudden storm. The people of Laish being rich
and wanting nothing* grew careless and secure: and being secure, and
mistrusting nothing; they were smote with the edge of the sword, and had their
City burnt, Judge. 18. The way to be safe, is, never to be secure. The walls of
a City that are not repaired in peace, will hardly be mended in a siege.
Alexander having set his Army in battel-array, and finding a Soldier then
mending his Arms; cashiered him; saying, That was a time of dealing blows, not
of preparing weapons.

We are oft-times set upon, to the end that we may continually buckle unto us
the whole Armor of God, prescribed by Paul, Ephesians. 6.13, to 19. That we may be
always ready for the battle, by walking circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, Ephesians. 5.15. Therefore redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Verse. 16. For as those that have no enemies to encounter them cast their armor
aside and let it rust, because they are secure from danger; but when their
enemies are at hand, and sound the Alarm, they both wake and sleep in their
armor, because they would be ready for the assault: So, if we were not often
in skirmish with our enemies; we should lay aside our spiritual armor: but
when we have continual use of it; we still keep it fast buckled unto us; that
being armed at all points, we may be able to make resistance, that we be not
surpised at unawars.

Neither would it be good for us at present, if we had not these enemies to
stand in awe and fear of; but much more inconvenient in diverse respects: as
wise Scipio (that mirror of wisdom) told some, who with no small joy avouched
that the Commonwealth of Rome was now in safe estate, seeing they had
vanquished the Carthaginians, and conquered the inhabitants of Pontus: Neither
would he for that only reason have Carthage destroyed; because it should hinder
Rome from sleeping. Yea, God himself would have the Hitlites, Gargesites,
Amorites, Canaanites, Peresites, Hivites, and Iebusites (strong and warlike
Nations,) to be in the midst of Israel; lest Israel should sleep in sin, and
want matter for exercise, fight, and conquest. Here may be felicity, with
security: never; with safety. The time when the envious man did sow his seed,
was, whilst men were in bed. No servants more orderly use their masters
talent, then those that ever fear their Masters sudden return. No Houshoulder
more safe, than he who at every watch suspects the Thieves entering. Sampson
could not be bound, till he was first got asleep: Would thou not be
overcome? be not secure. Fly from the works of darkness at a great distance,
and consider as well the bitterness of what will follow, as the sweetness of a
momentany pleasure: not unlike a Sir Thomas Moor.
great personage of this Land, who said to his Lady, (offering him a bribe in
behalf of a suppliant) Gentle Eve, I will none of your Apple: Yea, in vigilance
and watchfulness, imitate the Nightingale which sleeps with her breast upon a
thorn for fear of the Serpent which continually studies her ruin. We would not
willingly a Tempest should take us without our Cloaks. Seneca reports of
Caesar, that he did quickly sheath the sword, but he never laid it off: the
sight of a weapon discourages a Thief. While we keep our Iavelins in our hands,
we escape many assaults, so that a Christians resolution should be like King
Alfrids.

Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas,
Si modo victus eras, ad crastina bella parabas.
If we conquer to day, let us fear the skirmish to morrow.
If we be overcome to day, let us hope to get the victory to morrow.
An assaulted City must keep a careful watch, or it will not long hold out:
Yea, the provident Fen-man mends his banks in Summer, lest his ground be
drowned in Winter. And we must so take our leaves of all afflictions, that we
reserve a lodging for them, and expect their return. And so much the rather,
because what has been long expected falls the easier: and evils
precogitated, strike ^ut weakly.

CHAP. 9. How it discovers whether we be true Believers or Hypocrites.
6 SIxthly, that we may experimentally know our selves, and be known of others;
whether we be true Believers, or Hypocrites.

First, our selves: diverse play Alexander on the Stage, but few or none in the
Field. Many can suffer Martyrdom in speculation, who, being put to it; cannot
concoct a foul word. We are all valiant Soldiers, till we come to fight:
excellent Philosophers; till we come to dispute: Good Christians; till we come
to master our own lusts: but, it is opposition that gives the trial, when
corruptions fight against the graces, and cause Argent to seem more bright in
a sable field. Many, while wealth lasts, are very honest men and square
dealers, at least seem so: yea, they will maintain that all hardness is to be
endured, rather then Conscience violated, or God offended: but fall they into
poverty, and then that they may maintain themselves; they will lie, deceive,
steal, prostitute their Chastity, sell their Consciences, and what not. Even
Hazael before he met with an opportunity, could say, What? is thy servant a
dog? And Balaam could brag, Though thou would give me thine house full of
gold, I would not, etc. Yet when it came to the trial, he did as bad for
little or nothing: but, a man is indeed, what he is in trial. If with the
Pome-citron, Limon, and Orenge-tree, we are always green and fruitful, Summer
and Winter: if our souls shall like of Christ for a suitor, when we find no
other Ioynture but the Cross; we are sure we are Christians.

2. That others may know us. A Soldier is best known in the front of a Battle:
A Pilot in a storm: a nimble active man in a Race: and a Champion in the lists.
How well the strings of an instrument are tuned and set, is best known when
they are touched by the hand of a skillful Musician. There must be differences
amongst you, (says Saint Paul) that the approved may be known, 1 Cor. 11.19.
For, as Thrashing separates the straw: and Winnowing; the chaff from the Corn:
So Persecution separates the Hypocrite from the company of believers, Luke
22.31. When a serving-man follows two men walking together, we cannot tell
which is his master till they part: so when the Gospel and outward prosperity
go together; it is hard to judge which is most respected. Our Churches are full
(blessed be God:) but, come we not to please others, as the Poet made his
Plays? or, as Simon Magus was christened for company? or, is it not more for
fear of the Law, then for love of the Gospel? It is a great question, until
persecution arising because of the Word, puts it out of question: but then is
that of Claudius Taurinensis more then verified, They worship the dead Saints
in a cold profession, while they worry the living in a cruel persecution: so
that if the Bramble had been the King of Trees; the Vine could not have met
with worse usage.

We all call our selves Christians? Why? it is an honorable thing to be so
accounted: but who are such; is known only where the power of godliness is in
contempt: Where (as Saint Augustine speaks) a Christian in name will scoff at a
Christian indeed: for Christ, (says Nazianzen) is stoned by many that are
called Christians, though no otherwise then the Heathen Images are called gods,
as Iustine Martyr notes: or, as another has it; many superstitiously adore the
Crucifix, that are enemies to the Cross of Christ.

That Child (says old Simeon, meaning Christ) is appointed for a sign to be
spoken against, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened, Luke 2.34, 35.
O how wicked men manifest their hatred and enmity against God and his people,
so soon as Persecution arises, because of the Word* Yea, it would put a wise
man into an ecstasy; to think how profane men in such times will rail upon
those, whom one day they will wish they had imitated; as Justin Martyr speaks.

But it is well enough: for, by this means, both the malice of Satan and the
World are better known and avoided. Demetrius the Silver-smith resisted Paul,
perhaps not so much for great Diana's sake, as the little Silver Shrines by
which his gain came in. The carnal Capernaites followed Christ while he fed
them, John 6.26. Pamachius an Heathen could say to the Pope, Make me a Bishop,
and I Will be a Christian.

Aygolandus (the better to make his peace with Charles the Great) would become
a Christian, and be baptized: But when he came to the Court, where he saw at a
table in a room, thirty poor people, (in mean habits, and at ordinary fare,)
which the Emperor told him were the Servants of God; he replied, That if God
kept his servants so poorly, he would be none of his servant. Judas can be
content to bear the cross, so he may bear the bag: but, Job will trust in God,
though he kill him, Job 13.15. and David in deepest distress or desertion, will
hang on still, Psalm. 43.5. Now, who will not say, Give me the Bird that will
sing in Winter, and seek to my window in the hardest frost?

There is no trial of friendship but in adversity: he that is not ashamed of my
bonds, not daunted with my checks, not alienated with my disgrace; is a friend
for me: one dram of that man's love, is worth a world of inconstant formality:
But, that friend is fals-harted, who observes me only for his own ends; like
those the Philosopher speaks of, who were not his friends, but friends to his
wealth: or like him in Clemens, not his, but his riches kinsman. For these
Wasps that make such Music about the Gally-pot, show, it was but the Honey
they came for. And even the most hoggish Gadarens will worship Christ, during
the spring-tides of Gods favors: not when they enjoy the light of his
countenance, but when his steps drop fainess, and their Corn and Wine
increases.

But alas, they are but bad works that need rewards to crane them up withal:
for neither pain nor loss, much less, the censure of lewd persons; will trouble
a well planted mind.

An Hypocrite, like a fresh-water-souldier, may be Sea-^ick in a calm: but, the
sincere Christians stomach endures all weathers: great changes never change
him: Neither the Kings favors, or honors, nor the Lions den, could make
Daniel lose one dram of his integrity. Neither the preposterous affection of
the Lycaonians, when they would deifie Paul and Barnabas: nor their devilish
rage, when they go about to stone them; could procure either to yield one hairs
breadth: and so of all the Martyrs; (that noble Army) whom neither the
threatenings of fire, nor the fair and large promises of their cunning and cruel
adversaries; could cause them to shrink from Christ.

Affliction tries whether a man has grace in his heart or no. Set an empty
Pitcher (the resemblance of a wicked man) to the fire; it cracks presently;
whereas the full (which resembles the Child of God) will abide boiling: Gold
embroidered upon Silk, if cast into the fire; loses his fashion, but not his
weight; Copper loses his fashion and weight also. Persecution is the sword
whereby our Solomon will try which is the true natural mother, which, the
pretended. Afflictions are the waters where our Gideon will try whether we are
fit Soldiers to fight the battle of Faith. A faithful Wife (said Bradford) is
never tried so to be, until she be assaulted; nor a faithful Christian so
approved, till proved by affliction. Peace and prosperity hides many a false
heart, as the Snow-drift covers an heap of dung: but when affliction like
Simeons sword, pierces through the soul; then the thoughts of many hearts are
discovered: then it appears plainly, that the love of Gods children was not
meretricious, nor their obedience mercenary.

Many a man will do for another, that will not suffer for him: slight Stuff
will shrink when it comes to wet^ing: counterfeit coin will prove dross when it
shall be rubbed on the test, or cast into the crusible. Behold, (says the
Angel to the Church of Smyrna) it shall come to pass that the Devil shall cast
some of you into prison, that you may be tried, Revel. 2.10. Strong drink
tries the brain, and hard meat; the stomach. Gold and Silver are tried in the
fire: men; in the furnace of adversity. As the furnace proves the Potters
Vessel; so do temptations try men's thoughts, Eccles. 27.5.

None but a regenerate heart can choose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin. An easy importunity will
persuade Orpah to return from a mother in law, to a mother in nature: from a
toilsom journey, to rest: from strangers, to her kindred: from a hopeless
condition, to likelihoods of contentment. A little entreaty will serve to move
nature to be good to it self; but, to persist in actions of goodness, though
tyranny, torment, death and hell stood in our way; this is that conquest which
shall be crowned with glory. Nuture is like Glass, bright, but brittle: the
resolved Christian, like Gold, which if we rub it, or beat it, or melt it, it
will endure the test, the touch, the hammer, and still shine more orient, For
Virtues, like the Stars, shine brightest in the night; and fairest, in the
frost of Affliction.

But this is not all: for affliction will try and make known the truth and
measure of each grace in particular. A temptation is like a question, that
examines; what is in a man: As Balaam was tried and examined; whether he feared
God, or loved the world most; when Balak told him, am not I able indeed to
promote thee to honor. And Joseph no less, when in the arms of his tempting
Mistress: but, the one; basely yields, and is cashiered for an hypocrite; the
other comes off with an holy scorn, and God seals him chaste, with a probatus
est.

2 Again secondly, Affliction is a notable means, to try whether we have faith
or not. The house built upon the sand carries as good a show as the house built
on the Rock; and in a clear Sunshine day glisters as gallantly: but, the
winds and tempests, when they are up, will quickly show the difference.
Nothing is more easy then to trust God, when our Barnes and Coffers are full;
And to say, give us our daily bread, when we have it in our Cubbords: But, when
we have nothing, when we know not how, nor whence, to get any thing; then to
depend upon an invisible bounty; This is a true and noble act of faith.

3 Thirdly and fourthly; what our wisdom and humility is. Plato being demanded
how he knew a wise man; answered; When being rebuked, he would not be angry:
and being praised; he would not be proud. Our disposition is never well known,
until it be crossed; nor did Proteus ever change shapes, till he was
straightned and held fast. Magistracy and misery will soon show what manner of
men we be: either will declare us better or worse then we seemed. Indeed
Prosperity (says one) best discovers vice, but Adversity does best discover
Virtue: but he that is not good in both estates, would not be excellent in
either: he who cannot bear honor with moderation, cannot bear contempt, with
patience: whereas a true Moses can be a moderate favorite at Court: and, a
well-contented Shepherd in the field, can turn and apply himself to any
condition, and therewith be content, as Saint Paul was, Phil. 4.11.

5. Fifthly; what patience we have: The Sea, when it is calm weather, is as
still and quiet, as any river: but let the winds once arise, and you shall
soon see a difference; then appears nothing but raging and foaming out mire and
dirt. And that we are indeed, which we are in temptation: for, can we not abide
a drawing plaster, to drain away corrupt blood, and humors? much less can we
find ease in cutting off joints and members, and pulling out eyes: which
Repentance must do.

6 Sixthly, a man is made known whether he be feeble or strong by the
provocation of an enemy: even calm tempers when they have been stirred, have
bewrayed impetuousness of passion. And indeed, how shall a man show his
strength unless some burden be laid upon his back? Now, he that overcomes his
own anger (says Chilo) overcomes a strong enemy: but he that is overcome by
it, is a White-liver (says Hermes) for wrath proceeds from feebleness of
courage, and lack of discretion, as may appear in that, Women are sooner angry
then men: the sick sooner then the healthy: and old men, sooner then young.
Again, it is nothing to endure a small trial or affliction: every Cock-boat can
swim in a River, every Sculler sail in a calm, every man can hold up his head
in ordinary gusts, but when a black storm arises, a tenth wave flows, deep
calls unto deep: Nature yields, Spirit faints; Heart fails; Whereas grace is
never quite out of heart; yea, is confident when hopes are adjourned, and
expectation is delayed.

7 Again, seventhly: How excellently was Jobs sincerity made known by Satan's
malice, when he brought forth those Angelical words! What? shall we receive
good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Job 2.10. When he stood like a
Center unmoved, while the circumference of his estate was drawn above, beneath,
about him: when in prosperity; he could say, If my mouth has kissed my hand: and
in adversity; The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the Name of the
Lord; he was not so like the wicked as they are like Dogs, that follow the
meat; not the man.

8 Again, eighthly: God suffers us to suffer much, more especially to cry our
perseverance, which is a grace so good and acceptable, that without it, there
is nothing good, nor acceptable. The Spaniel which fawneth when he is beaten,
will never forsake his Master: and Trees well rooted will bear all storms: The
three Children walked up and down in the fiery flames praising God: And a Blade
well tried deserves a triple price. How did the Church of Pergamus approve her
self! Yea, how was she approved of God which has the sword with two edges;
when she held out in her works, even where Satan dwelt and kept his Throne! I
know thy works (says God) and that thou keep my Name, and have not denied
my faith, even in those days when Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain among
you, where Satan dwells; yea, where his Throne is; and where some maintain
the Doctrine of Balaam and the Nicolaitans, and teach that men ought to eat
things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication, etc. Revel. 2.13, 14.

But, how can I lay down my life for Chriss, when I cannot for his sake quietly
digest a few reproachful speeches? he will scarce hear blows for him; that
will now quietly put up, and digest ill words.

Finally: Affliction, and Persecution, is both a Whet-stone, and a Touchstone
to each particular grace: It humbles the spirits of the repentant, tries the
faith and patience of the sincere Christian; but hardens the hearts of the
ungodly: for, wicked men grow worse after affliction, as water grows more cold
after an heat; yea, like some Beasts; they grow mad with baiting: if crosses or
losses rush in upon them; they fall to the language of Jobs wife, Curse God and
die: or to that of the King of Isreal's messenger, Why should I serve God any
longer? 2 Kings 6.33.

CHAP. 10. That it prevents greater evils of sin, and punishment to come.
7 SEventhly: the Lord by this evil of Chastisement for sins past; preventeth
the evils of sin, and greater punishments for the time to come. The Lord (says
Elihu) corrects man, that he might turn away from his enterprise, and that he
might keep back his soul from the pit, and that his life should not perish by
the sword. Job 33.17, 18. This salt does not only preserve from corruption; but
also eat out corruption. We are chastened of the Lord, (says the Holy Ghost)
that we might not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. If we be not
chastened here; we shall be condemned hereafter: Erring souls be corrected that
they may be converted: not, confounded. If Paul had not been buffetted by Satan
and wicked men; he had been exalted out of measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. Pride is so
dangerous a Poison, that of another poison there was confected a counterpoison
to preserve him from it: God would rather suffer this chosen Vessel to fall
into some infirmity, th^n to be proud of his singular privileges. Lest I
should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of Revelations; (there
was the poison of Pride insinuating it self) I had a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me; There was the counterpoison or antidote which
did at once make him both sick, and whole.

And this is no unusual thing with God, who in mercy does so use the matter,
that he cures one sin by another: how many proud men have been healed, by the
shame of their uncleanness? how many furious men by a rash bloodshed? and so in
many other cases: one Devil being used for the ejection of another

Yea, we gain strength by every new fall: for hence issues deeper humility,
stronger hatred of sin, fresh indignation against our selves, more experience
of the deceitfulness of our hearts, renewed resolutions until sin be brought
under, etc. 2 Cor. 7.11. The Lord sets some messenger of Satan and our lusts
together by the ears, as the Egyptians against the Egyptians: that while two
poisons wrestle, we may live. But, my purpose is to speak of affliction: not;
sin. Bodily sickness (says Saint Gregory) cleanses away sins committed, and
curbeth and hinders those, that in health might have been committed. The flesh
indeed is nourished by softness, but the spirit; by hardness: that is fed by
delights and pleasures; this grows by bitterness. And hereupon when a
Religious man (as Ruffinus relates) prayed John the Anchorite, to free him of a
certain Ague; he answered him, truly thou desire to have a very necessary
companion cast out of doors: for, says he, as clothes are washed with soap; so
is the mind purified by diseases. And the same may be averred of all kinds of
crosses: For, is it not commonly seen, that the pleasures of the body are the
poisons of the soul? heap riches and honors upon an evil man: you do but
minister wine to him that has a Fever, says Aristotle: Honey to one
oppressed with choler: and meat; to one troubled with morbus Cephaliacus,
which, increases the disease, says Plutarch. For as Noah was drunk with his
own wine; so the cup of prosperity has intoxicated many a soul: and God has
no worse servants in our Land, then they that can live of their Lands, and care
for nothing else.

Commonly, where is no want; is much wantonness. And as we grow rich in
temporals, we grow poor in spirituals. Nabal cannot abound, but he must surfeit:
Tertullus cannot be eloquent, but he must turn the edge of his wit against the
Gospel. Many cannot have beauty, but they must love their faces more then their
souls. We use Gods blssings, as Iehu did Iehorams messengers: David; Goliahs
sword: We turn them against their owner and giver: and fight against Heaven
with that health, wealth, wit, those friends, means, mercies that we received
thence: abusing peace, to security: plenty; to ease: promises; to presumption:
gifts; to pride: for commonly, so much the more proud, idle, secure, wanton,
scornful, impenitent; by how much the more we are enriched, advanced, and
blessed. And it is just with God to make us know what we had, by what we want;
But I proceed:

The enjoyment of the Worlds peace might add to my content; but, it will
endanger my soul: how often does the recovery of the body, state, or mind,
occasion a Relapse in the soul? Turn but the Candle, and, that which keeps me
in, puts me out. The younger brother shall not have all his portion, lest he run
Riot. All the life of Solomon was full of prosperity, and therefore we find,
that Solomon did much forget God; but the whole life of David had many enemies,
and much adversity: and therefore we see by his penitential Psalms, and others,
that David did much remember God: And indeed if God did not often visit us, we
should serve him as the women of Tartary do their husbands: who marry, if they
be absent but twenty days. But the fire of correction, eats out the rust of
corruption. And as Vinegar with its sharpness, keeps flowers from corrupting:
so their malice keeps our souls from festering. Bees are drowned in Honey, but
live in Vinegar. Now if sweet meats breed surfets, it is g^od sometimes to
taste of bitter: it is good somewhat to unlade when the Ship is in danger by too
liberal a ballast. I will tell you a Paradox: (I call it so because few will
believe it, but it is true) many are able to say, they have learned to stand;
by falling: got strength; by weakness. Tho burnt Child dreads the fire: and a
broken bone well set, is faster ever after. Like Trees, we take deeper root; by
shaking: And like Torches, we flame the brighter for bruizing and knocking. God
suffered Satan to spoil Job of his substance, ^ob him of his Children, punish
him in his body; Yet mark but the sequel well; and you shall find, that he was
crossed, with a blessing. As the Physician, in making of Treacle or Mithridate
for his Patient, uses Serpents, Adders, and such like poison, that he may
drive out one poison with another; Even so our spiritual Physician is pleased
to use the malice of Satan, and wicked men, when he tempereth us the cup of
affliction, that hereby he may expel one evil with another; Yea, two evils with
one; namely, the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment; and that both
temporal and eternal.

Perhaps this biting plaster burns thee, but it heals thee. He suffers us
to be afflicted, because he will not suffer us to be damned; such is the
goodness of our heavenly Father to us, that even his anger proceeds from mercy;
he scourges the flesh, that the spirit, may be saved in the day of Jesus
Christ, 1 Corinthians 5.5. Yea, Joseph was therefore abased in the dungeon,
that his advancement might be the greater. It is true, in our thoughts we often
speak for the flesh, as Abraham did for Ishmael, O that Ishmael might live in
thy sight! No, God takes away Ishmael and gives Isaac: he withdraws the
pleasure of the flesh; gives delight to the soul: crossing us in our wills, that
he may advance our benefit. As it fared with Manasses, whose Chain was more
profitable to him then his Crown. The man sick of a burning Fever, cries to
his Physician for drink; he pities him, but does not satisfy him he gives him
proper Physic, but not drink. A man is sick of a Pleurisy; the Physician lets
him blood, he is content with it; the arm shall smart to ease the heart. The
cov^tous man has a pleurisy of riches: God lets him blood by poverty: let him
be patient; it is a course to save his soul.

But we are so sensual, that no reason can prevail: We are sorry to lose the
proper cause of our sorrow: we are like whining children, that will not stay
until their Milk be cold; but must have it, though they be scalded with it.
Yea, it fares with many, as with the Mother of Nero: let them be damned, so
they may be dubbed. But our Heavenly Father will do us good; though we desire
the contrary: Wherefore if he scourge us any way; so we bleed not: on till we
bleed; so we faint not: or till we even faint, so we perish not; let us be
comforted: for if the Lord prune his Vine, he means not to root it up: if he
ministers Physic to our souls; it is because he would not have us die in our
sins: all is for salvation. What if Noah were pent up in the Ark; since he was
safe in it: what if it were his Prison; since it was his Fort against the waters.

I might illustrate the point, and make it plain by sundry and diverse
comparisons. We know one nail drives out another: one heat; another: one cold;
another: yea, out of admirable experience I can witness it, that for most
constitutions, there is not such a remedy for a cold in the head, or extreme
tenderness, as a frequent bathing it (especially the temples) with cold water;
I can justly say, I am twenty years the younger for it. Yea, one sorrow drives
out another: one passion; another: one rumor is expelled by another: and
though for the most part, contraries are cured by contraries; yet, not seldom
will Physicians stop a lask with a purge: they will bleed a patient in the
Arm; to stop a worse bleeding at Nose. Again, in some Patients they will
procure a gentle Ague; that they may cure them of a more dangerous disease.
Even so deals God with us: he often punishes the worser part of man (says
Saint Hierome,) That is, the body, state, or name; that the better part, (to
wit) the soul, may be saved in the day of judgment. Neither are chastisements
any whit less necessary for the soul; then medicines are for the body: many a
man had been undone by prosperity; if they had not been undone by adversity:
they had perished in their souls; if they had not perished in their bodies,
estates, or good names. It is probable, Naamans soul had never been cleansed;
if his body had not been leprous: but, his leprous flesh brought him to a white
and clean spirit: and though affliction be hard of digestion to the natural
man; yet the sheep of Christ know; that to feed upon this salt Marsh; is the
only preservative against the Rot: the experienced Christian knows, that it is
good for the soul, that the body is sometimes sick: and therefore to have his
inward man cured; he is content his outward man should be diseased: and cares
not so the sins of his soul may be lessened, though the soars of his flesh be
increased. It is better (says Saint Hierome) to have a sick stomach, then a
grieved mind. Yea, he desires with Saint Austine, that God will send him any
plague, rather then the plague of the heart.

And why is it not so with thee? I hope thou desire thy souls safety above
all; and thou know, the stomach that is purged, must be content to part with
some good nourishment, that it may deliver it self of more evil humors. Of
what kind soever thy sufferings be; it is doubtless the fittest for thy souls
recovery; or else God (the only wise Physician) would not appoint it. Now who
would not be willing to bleed, when by that means an inveterate sickness may
be prevented? Yea, it is a happy blood-letting which saves the life: which
makes Saint Austine say unto God; Let my body be crucified, or burnt, or do
with it what thou will; so thou save my soul. And another: let me swim a River
of boiling brimstone; to live eternally happy: rather then dwell in a Paradise
of pleasure; to be damned after death.

CHAP. 11. That it makes them humble.
8 Eighthly, that we may have an humble conceit of our selves, and wholly depend
upon God. We received the sentence of death in our selves (says the Apostle)
because we should not trust in our selves, but in God, who raises us up from
the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. When Babes are afraid; they cast themselves into the
arms and bosom of their Mother. A Hen leading her chickens into the Sun; they
fall a playing with the dust, she may cluck them to her long enough, they will
not come: But when they see the Kite, then they come without calling* and so it
fares with Gods children, till afflictions come. The Prodigal never thought of
his Father, till he wanted husks: The hemorrhoisse never made out to Christ,
till all her money was gone. The widow that is left alone trusts in God,
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.5. who while she had an husband, leaned too much
upon him. The poor man depends not upon the relief of others, until he finds
nothing at home. Till our means is spent, we are apt to trust in uncertain
riches; but after, in the Name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.12. As a bore himself bold
upon his forces, as being five hundred and fourscore thousand strong: till he
was over-matcht with an Army of a thousand thousand Ethiopians: this made him
cry, Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, 2 Chronicles. 14.

God crosses many times our likeliest projects, and makes the sinews of the
arm of flesh to crack; that being unbottomed of the creature; we may trust in
the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17.

The people of Laish, because they wanted nothing, would have business with no
man, Judge. 18.7. Where is no want, is much wantonness: and to be rich in
temporals; hastens poverty in spirituals. The Moon is never eclipsed, but in
the full: but the fuller she is, still; the more remote from the Sun. I thought
in my prosperity (says David) I shall never be moved, But thou did hide thy
face, and I was troubled, Then turned I unto thee, etc., Psalm. 30.6, 7, 8. It
is high time to humble them, that do not find themselves to stand in need of
God.

When a stubborn Delinquent, being committed, was no whit mollified with his
durance, but grew more perverse then he was before; one of the Senators said to
the rest, Let us forget him a while, and then he will remember himself: Loving
Spaniels, the more they are beaten; the more tractable, and gentle do they
appear, and apply themselves more diligently to their Masters call.

The Heart is so hot of it self, that if it had not the Lungs as Fannes to blow
wind upon it, and kindly moisture to cool it; it would soon perish with the
own heat: and yet when that moisture grows too redundant, it again drowns the
Heart. Who so nourishes his servant daintily from his Childhood; shall after
find him stubborn. In prosperity we are apt to think our selves men good
enough, we see not our need of God: but let him send the Cross; it confutes us
presently, and shows us our nothingness. Even Saint Paul was sick of this
disease: he began to be puffed up until the Messenger of Satan was sent to take
him down, 2 Corinthians 12.7. And Saint Peter, Matthew 26.33. Though all men
should forsake thee; yet I will never forsake thee; bravely promised: but,
Peter, the same night, swear I know not the man; cowardly answered. It is one
thing to suffer in speculation, and another; in practice.

It is a wonder to see, how the best men may be mistaken in their own powers:
When our Savior propounds to James and John, Are ye able to drink of the cup
that I shall drink of? And to be baptized with the Baptism that I shall be
baptized with? Out of an eager desire of the honor, they are apt to undertake
the condition: and answer accordingly, We are able, Matthew. 20.22. But, alas
poor men! no thanks to them that they were able to run away, (as they did) when
their Master was apprehended. For, God must give us his daily bread to feed us,
and his daily breath to quicken us, or we quickly perish: yet how common is it
for men to brag and crack of what they can do! yea, one that has but a wooden
head, and a leaden heart: how will he help it out with a brazen face, and a
golden hand! for, being as great in pride, as he is small in desert: he will
keep a do in an audacious masterliness, as if with Simon Magus he would bear
down all with large proffers. But this cannot be so pleasing to nature, as it
is hateful to God. Neither can there be a worse sign of ensuing evil, then for
a man in a carnal presumption to vaunt of his own abilities. How justly does
God suffer that man to be foiled; purposely, that he may be ashamed of his own
vain self-confidence!

When a great Prelate durst write, Ego et Rex meus, I and my King, the King
subscribed in Act, Ego et servus meus, I and my slave: and quickly took down
the main Mast of his Ambition: so will God do by all proud men, and make them
know, that all their worthiness is in a capable misery: which he can soon*do:
for let him but make our Purses light, our hearts will soon grow heavy: at
least, let him with that deprive us of his other blessings: we become as dust,
coagulated, and kneaded into Earth by tears. And certainly, if God own such a
man, he will quicken his sight with this Copris: Yea, he will leave him to
himself, and let him fall into some foul sin, as he did Peter: And Saint
Augustine is peremptory that it has been profitable for proud men, to fall
into some gross offense; for they have not lost so much by their fall, as they
have got by being down. It is better to be humble under sin, then be proud of
grace. Of the two, to be a Pharisee, is worse, then to be a Publican: to be
proud of good Endowments, is worse then to have neither pride nor good
Endowments. Yea, in this case; the party is not only bettered, but others learn
Humility thereby: for who can do other then yearn, and fear; to see so rich and
goodly a Vessel split, as David or Solomon was!

Again, it makes us pitiful, and compassionate to others: They (said Sophocles)
are usually the most compassionate to others, who have suffered miseries
themselves. And what says that Tyrian Queen? Evils have taught me to bemoan;
all that affliction makes to groan.

And lastly, the Devil hereby is cheated, who if he cannot beat us down to sin;
will blow us up with pride: he will undermine us; if he cannot overthrow us:
like a most cunning Wrestler, who, if he cannot crush a man to the ground with
plain strength; he will lift him up, that he may give him the greater fall.

And nothing does more advantage Satan then Pride: for first, a man shall never
be a Proficient, that thinks himself already sufficient. Secondly, when he can
poison our good works with Pharisaism; he makes us by over-valuing them; to
lose them,

Confidence in God, does only support us: without him we are like Vines
unpropt, which on the Earth do crawle, And suppose a man is exempt from many
vices; yet, he is not beholding to himself for it: Lord, says Saint Augustine,
thou have forgiven me those sins which I have done, and those sins which only
by thy grace I have not done: they were done in our inclination to them, and
even that inclination needs Gods mercy, and that mercy he calls pardon. If we
escape temptation; it is his mercy: if we stand in temptation; it is his mercy:
if our wills consent not; it is his mercy: if we consent, and the act be
hindered, it is his mercy: if we fall and rise again by repentance; all is his
mercy. Neither are we sufficient of our selves, to think, much less to speak,
least of all, to do that which is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. We have no good. we do no
good; but we may, we must thank grace for it: which is all in all. Ye can bear
no fruit (says our Savior) except ye abide in me: John 15.4. Yea, more
expressly, without me can ye do nothing, Verse 5.

So that we cannot put too much trust in him, not too little in our selves. O
God, let me ever be humbly dejected in the sense of mine own insufficiency: let
me give all the glory to thee, and take nothing to my self, but my infirmities;
lest it fare with me, as it did with that Armenian, Tigranes by name, who being
encamped upon a Hill, with four hundred thousand men, and discovering the Army
of the Romans, being not above fourteen thousand marching toward him: made
himself merry with it, saying, Yonder men are too many for an Embassage, and
too few for a Fight: when before the Sunset, he found them enough to give him
the chase, with infinite slaughter. And pride seldom speeds better: especially
if Hezekiahs heart be lift up, God will pull him down again.

By this time we see, that there is danger in being without dangers: that
self-confidence is pride without wit: that the best minds troubled yield
inconsiderate motions: that as water violently stirred sends up bubbles; so the
vanities of our hearts, and our most secret and hidden corruptions (as dregs in
a glass) show themselves when shaken by an injury, though they lay hid before.
And so the pride of man is beaten down, as Job speaks, Job 33.17. The sharp
water of affliction quickens our spiritual sight. So proud are we by nature,
that before we come to the trial, we think that we can repel the strongest
assault, and overcome all enemies by our own power; but when we feel our selves
vanquished and foiled by every small temptation, we learn to have a more humble
conceit of our own ability, and to depend wholly on the Lord: as is set down,
Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 13.3. to the end. We esteem our Inches, Else; till, by trial
of evils, we find the contrary: but then alas, how full of feebleness is our
body: and our mind of impatience? If but a Be sting our flesh, it swells: and
if but a tooth ache; the Head and Heart complain. How small trifles make us
weary of our selves? What can we do without thee? Without thee, What can we
suffer? If thou be not (O Lord) strong in our weakness; we cannot be so much
as weak; we cannot so much as be. Yea, self-conceit, and desire of glory, is
the last garment that even good men lay aside: Pride is the in most coat which
we put on first, and which we put off last; but sore affliction will make us
give all to him, of whom whatsoever we have, we hold. And we cannot ascribe too
little to our selves, nor too much to him, to whom we owe more then we can
ascribe.

Are we then molested with this guest? and would we be rid of him? return we
when we smart, to him that smites us, and not think to gain by standing out:
The Bird in the gin, the Fish upon the hook, the faster she strives, the firmer
she sticks. The Child under his Fathers rod, the more he struggles, the more
stripes he gets.

God will not give his over, till he has broken their stomachs, and made them
kiss that rod, which the wicked bite: so, adding impatience to their
impenitence, and passive disobedience to their active. And when he has brought
us to this, the greater submission, the more grace: if there be one hollow in
the valley lower then another, thither the waters gather. And the more lowly we
are in our own eyes, the more lovely we are in Gods: the more despicable in our
selves, the more acceptable in him. O that we could be but as lowly, as we are
unworthy. If then I be not humbled enough, let me want the peace or plenty I
have: and so order my condition and estate, that I may want any thing, save my
self.

CHAP. 12. How it makes them conformable unto Christ their head.
NInthly, that we may be conformable to Christ our head, and like our elder
Brother, who was consecrated through afflictions, reviled, buffetted, spit
upon, crucified, and what not? For the Scribes were against him, the Pharisees
against him, the Rulers banded themselves against him, the Atheists against
him, Herod and all the spiteful and envious Jews against him: whose birth was
mean, whose life was contemptible, and whose death was ignominious. Yea, his
Palace was a Stable: his Courtiers; Beasts: his Chair of State; a Manger: his
Royal robes; a few rags: No Bells ring, no Bonefires proclaim his brith through
the populous streets: no great Ladies came to visit his Mother. And answerable
to his ingresse into the world; was his progress in it; and his egresse out of
it. And we must suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him, Romans
8.17. When the Jews offered Jesus, Gall and Vinegar, he tasted it, but would
not drink: he left the rest for his Church, and they must pledge him. Whosoever
(says our Savior) bears not his cross, and comes after me, cannot be my
Disciple, Luke 14.27. For hereunto are ye called, says Saint Peter, For Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, 1
Peter 2.21. Again, The Disciple (says Christ) is not above his Master; but
whosoever will be a perfect Disciple shall be as his Master, Luke 6.40. Yea,
Saint Paul made this the most certain testimony and seal of his Adoption h^re,
and glory ^fterwards; his words are these, having delivered, that the spirit of
God hears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God: and
^^^ving added, If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God,
and heirs annexed with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may
also be glorified with him; making suffering as a principal condition annexed;
which is as if he had said, it is impossible we should be glorified with him,
except we first suffer with him, Romans 8.16, 17. Whereupon having in another
place reckoned up all privileges which might minister unto him occasion of
boasting; he concludes, that what things were gain unto him, those he
accounted loss for Christ, that he might know the fellowship of his
sufferings, and be made conformable to his death, Phil. 3.10.

So that as he bare his cross, before he wore his crown, and began to us in
the cup of his Fathers displeasure: so we must pledge him our part, and fill up
that which is behind of his sufferings, Colos. 1.24.

Whence the Church (which is mystical Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12.) is called Gods
threshing-floor, Isa. 21.10. A Brand taken out of the fire, Zach. 3.2. compared
to Noah's Ark, which was tossed to and fro upon the waves; to Moses Bush burning
with fire, Exodus 3.2. to the stones of the Temple, which were first hewn in the
Mountain, before set in the building: And set forth by that white Horse in the
Revelation; that is ever followed and chased by the Red: Apoc. 6.2, 4. by the
sacrifices of the Law, which were to pass the fire, ere accepted, Romans 12.1.

So that there is no Heaven to be had without touching upon Hell coasts: as the
Calendar tells us, we come not to Ascension-day, till the Passion-week be past.
Suffering is the way to reigning: Through many tribulations must we enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, Acts 14.22.

And indeed, who would not be ambitious of the same entertainment, which Christ
himself had? Godfrey of Boloigne refused to be crowned in Jerusalem with a Crown
of Gold, because Christ his Master had in that place been crowned with a Crown
of Thorns. It was told a poor Martyr in Queen Mary's days for a great favor
forsooth; that he should put his leg in the same hole of the Stocks that John
Philpot had done before. And yet thy sufferings, as they are nothing to what
thy sins have deserved; so they are nothing to what thy Savior has suffered:
for he endured many a little death all his life long, for thy sake; and at
length, that painful and cursed death of the cross. To say nothing of the soul
of his sufferings, which his soul then suffered, when he sweat clo^s of blood
in the Garden.

Now why must we pledge our Savior, and sill up the measure of his sufferings?
Not, that Christ's sufferings are incomplete: nor, to satisfy Gods justice for
sin; for, that is done already, once for all; by him who bare our sins in his
body on the Tree: the just suffering for the unjust, and indenting for our
freedom; as the Articles of Agreement fi^ly and fairly drawn out by himself
declare, John 3.15, 16. and 18.8. And Gods Acquittance, which we have to show
under his own hand, Mat. 3.17.

Neither does God afflict his Church for any delight he takes in their trouble:
for he afflicts not willingly, Lament. 3.33. Ier. 31.20. Isa. 63.9. Nor yet to
show his sovereignty, Isai. 45.9. Romans 9.29, to 24.

Nor, lastly, is it merely for his own glory, without any other respect: but
out of pure necessity, and abundant love to us; as, the Reasons both before and
after, show.

Again, by suffering; we become followers of our Brethren, who went before us.
Brethren, (says Saint Paul) ye are become followers of the Churches of God,
which in Judea are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same
things of your own Contrymen, even as they have of the Jews, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14*
It was the lot of Christ, and must be of all his followers, to do good, and to
suffer evil. Wherefore let us be exhorted in the words of Saint Peter, to
rejoice in suffering, forasmuch as we with all the Saints, are partakers of
Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, we may be glad and
rejoice, 1 Pet. 4.13.

And what greater promotion can flesh and blood be capable of, then a
conformity to the Lord of glory? Christ wore a Crown of Thorns for me; and
shall I grudge to wear this Paper-cap for him? said John Husse, when they put a
Cap upon him that had ugly Devils painted on it, with the Title of Heresy.
Never did Neck-kerchief become me so well as this Chain (said Alice Drivers)
when they fastened her to the Stake to be burnt. And what said a French Martyr,
when a Rope was pur about his fellow? Give me that Gold Chain, and dub me a
Knight of that Noble Order.

CHAP. 13. That it increases their faith
10 TEnthly, because the malice of our enemies serves to increase our faith for
the time to come, when we consider how the Lord has delivered us formerly God
has delivered me (says Paul) out of the mouth of the Lion, (meaning Nero) and
he will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly
Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. When Saul tells David, Thou art not able to go
against this great Philistine to fight with him, for thou art a boy, and he is
a man of war from his youth; What says David, Thy servant kept his fathers
Sheep, and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a Sheep out of the
flock, and I went out after him and smote him, and took it out of his mouth,
and when he rose against me, I caught him by the beard; and smote him, and slew
him: so thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear. Therefore, (mark the
inference) this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them; Yea, (says
he) the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of Lion, and out of the paw of
the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hands of this Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.33,
to 37. Observe how confidently he speaks.

That Tree is deepest rooted in the Earth, which is most shaken by the winds;
and they weak usually, that are planted in pleasant Valleys: so the Tree of
Faith the more it is shaken with the violent storms of trouble, the faster it
becomes rooted by patience. Alexander being trained up in huge and mighty
enterprises; when he was to fight with men, and beasts, haughty enemies and
huge Elephants; said, Lo, a danger somewhat equivalent to my mind. He can
never be a good Soldier, that has not felt the toil of a battle: Ease and
plenty made Hannibal say, he brought men into Campania; but carried women out
again. Yea, the more deliverances David had; the greater was his faith: for,
after the Lord had delivered him often out of extreme exigents, namely, from
this great Goliath, the cruelty of Saul, the unnatural insurrection of Absalom,
and the unjust curses of Shimei, he was able to say, I trust in God, neither
will I fear what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56.4. And in Psalm. 3. I will not
be afraid for ten thousand of the people that should beset me round about,
Verse. 6. And in Psalm. 18.29. By thee I have broken through an host, and in thy
Name I will leap over a wall. His experience had made it so easy to him, that
it was no more then a skip or jump. We men indeed therefore shut our hands,
because we have opened them; making our former kindnesses arguments of sparing
afterward: but contrarily, God therefore gives, because he has given; making
his former favors arguments for more: It is David's only argument, Psalm. 4.
Have mercy upon me (says he) and hearken unto my prayer, Why? Thou have set me
at liberty, when I was in distress, Verse. 1. I might likewise here show from 2 Chronicles. 20.29. Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. how the delivering of some increases the
faith of others: but I pass that.

That we may live by faith, and not by sense; he first strips us of all our
earthly confidence, and then gives us victory, and not before: lest he should
be a loser in our gain, his help uses to show it self in extremity: he that can
prevent evils, conceals his aid till dangers be ripe, and then he is as
careful, as before he seemed connivent. Daniel is not delivered at the
beginning of his trouble, he must first be in the Lions den, and then he finds
it. Those three Servants, Dan. 3.26. are not rescued at the Ovens mouth: in the
Furnace; they are. That is a gracious and well tried faith, that can hold out
with confidence to the last: Like Abraham, who is said to hope against hope,
Romans 4.18. which, with God, is a thing much set by: Yea, such he accounts his
Champions, and Worthies. Whence it is, many are trained up in trouble all their
days, as it fared with David: for as a Bear came to David after a Lion: and a
Giant; after a Bear: and a King after a Giant: and Philistines; after a King:
and all to make him more hardy and confident in his God; so, when they that are
intended for Christ's Champions, have fought with the Devil, and their own
lusts; they shall fight with envy: when they have fought with envy, they shall
fight with poverty: when they have fought with poverty; they shall fight with
infamy: when they have fought with infamy; they shall fight with sickness: and
after that; with death. Like a Labourer that is never out of work: and this not
only proves; but mightily, improves their faith: And indeed, till we have been
delivered out of a lesser trouble; we cannot trust God in a greater. Resembling
that peasant, who would trust God upon the Land; but not upon the Sea: where
should be but an inch-bord between him and death.

To hear a man in his best health and vigor, to talk of his confidence in God,
and assurance of divine favor; cannot be much worth: but if in extremities, we
can believe above hope, against hope; our hope is so much the more noble, as
our difficulties are greater. For Iairus to believe that his sick daughter
should recover; was no hard task: but Christ will scrue up his faith to believe
she shall again live, though he sees with his eyes she is fully dead. When we
are in heavy Agonies, and feel a very hell in our conscience; then to apprehend
mercy: when with Jonas in the Whales belly, we can call upon God in faith, and
see one contrary in another; in the very depth of Hell; Heaven: in the very
midst of Anger; Love: When with the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. we can pick
comfort out of the reproachful name of Dog: and when nothing but war appears in
Gods face; then by faith to pierce through all the thick clouds, and behold the
sweet sunshine of Gods favor, and grace in Christ; Heb. 11. 1. we are
believers indeed.

And he, says Saint Bernard, is to be reputed constant whose mind takes
fresh courage in the midst of extremities: Like the Palm Tree, which grows so
much the higher and stronger, and more fruitful; by how much the more weight it
has hanging upon it.

Not that the strongest faith is free from doubting: for, let a man look down
from the top of the strongest steeple, admit the Battlements be bresthigh, and
he is sure he cannot fall; yet a kind of fear possesses him. And well is it
for us, that our assurance is mixed with doubting: Since the one makes us live,
as though there were no Gospel: the other; to die, as if there were no Law.

The Lion seems to leave her young ones, till they have almost killed
themselves with roaring and howling, but at last gasp she relieves them,
whereby they become the more courageous. When the Prophet could say, Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee; instantly follows (and not till then) the Lord
heard me: the Lord saw him sinking all the while, yet lets him alone till he
was at the bottom. Every main affliction is our Red Sea, which while it threats
to swallow, preserves us: now when it comes to a dead lift, (as we say) then to
have a strong confidence in God; is thankworthy. Hope in a state hopeless, and
love to God under signs of his displeasure, and heavenly mindedness in the
midst of worldly affairs and allurements, drawing a contrary way; is the chief
praise of faith: to love that God who crosses us, to kiss that hand which
strikes us, to trust in that power which kills us; this is the honorable proof
of a Christian: this argues faith indeed. What made our Savior say to that
woman of Canaan, o woman, great is thy faith! but this; when neither his
silence, nor his flat denial could silence her? Matthew. 15. It is not enough to
say, God is good to Israel, when Israel is in peace and prosperity, and neither
feels nor wants any thing: but God will have us believe that he is good, when
we feel the smart of the rod, and at the same time, see our enemies (the
wicked) prosper. It best pleases him when we can say boldly with Job, Though
he kill me, yet will I trust in him, When our enemies are behind us, and the
Red Sea before us, then confidently to trust upon God; is much worth. When we
are in the barren Wilderness almost famished, then to believe that God will
provide Manna from Heaven, and water out of the Rock; is glorious: when with
the three Children, we see nothing before us, but a fiery Furnace; to believe
that God will send his Angel to be our deliverer, this is heroical, Dan. 3.20.
And those which are acquainted with the proceedings of God, well know; that,
cherishing ever follows stripes, as cordials do vehement evacuations, and the
clear light of the morning; a dark night: yea, if we can look beyond the cloud
of our afflictions, and see the sunshine of comfort on the other side of it;
we cannot be so discouraged with the presence of evil, as heartened with the
issue. Cheer up then, thou drooping soul, and trust in God, whatever thy
sufferings be; God is no tyrant, to give thee more then thy load: and admit he
stay long, yet be thou fully assured he will come at length. In thee do I trust
(says the Psalmist) all the day: He knew that if he came not in the Morning,
he would come at Noon: if he came not at Noon, he would come at Night: at one
hour of the day or other he will deliver me: and then, as the Calm is greater
after the Tempest then it was before; so my joy shall be sweeter afterward
then it was before; The remembrance of Babylon will make us sing more joyfully
in Sion. If then I find the Lords dealing with me to transcend my thoughts; my
faith shall be above my reason, and think, he will work good out of it, though
I yet conceive not how.

CHAP. 14. That it increases their joy and thankfulness.
11 BEcause our manifold sufferings and Gods often delivering us, does increase
our joy and thankfulness, yea, make after-blessings more sweet; By this we have
new Songs put into our mouths, and new occasions offered to praise the Author
of our deliverance. When the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion; (says
David in the person of Israel) we were like them that dream, (meaning the
happiness seemed too good to be true) Then were our mouths filled with
laughter, (says he) and our tongues with joy, the Lord has done great things
for us whereof we rejoice, Psalm. 126.1, 2, 3, 4. And how could their case be
otherwise; when in that miserable exigent, Exodus 14. they saw the Pillar remove
behind them, and the Sea remove before them, they looking for nothing but
death? Is any one afflicted? I may say unto him as that Harbinger answered a
Nobleman complaining that he was lodged in so homely a Room; You will take
pleasure in it, when you are out of it: For the more grievous our exigent, the
more glorious our advancement. A desire accomplished delights the soul, Prove.
13.19. We read how that lamentable and sad Decree of Ahashuerus, through the
goodness of God, was an occasion exceedingly to increase the Jews joy and
thankfulness, insomuch that (as the Text says) the days that were appointed
for their death and ruin, were turned into days of feasting and joy, and
wherein they sent presents every man to his neighbor, and gifts to the poor,
Esther 9.17, 22, to 28. And this joy and thankfulness was so lasting, that the
Jews cease not to celebrate the same to this day. Gods dealing with us is often
harsh in the beginning, hard in the proceeding, but the conclusion is always
comfortable. The joy of Peter and the rest of the Church was greater after he
was delivered out of Prison by the Angel, Acts 12. And the joy of Judith and
the rest of Bethulia, when she returned with Holofernes head; then if they
never had been in distress, Judith 13. The Lord deprives us of good things for
a time, because they never appear in their full beauty, till they turn their
backs and be going away. Again, he defers his aid on purpose to increase our
desires before it comes, and our joy, and thankfulness when it is come: to
inflame our desires, for things easily come by, are little set by: to increase
our joy, for that which has been long detained; is at last more sweetly
obtained: What (think we) did he that was born blind think, when his eyes were
first given him* How did he wonder at Heaven and Earth, the strange and goodly
varieties of all the Creatures, and chearfulnes of the light! every thing did
not more pleas, then astonish him. Lastly, our thankfulness: for, suddenly
gotten; suddenly forgotten: hardly gotten; hardly forgotten: Philoxenus was
wont to say, it will taste sweeter, if it cost me sweetly. We love that dearly,
that cost us dear. As Mothers love their children, more tenderly then Fathers;
because they stood them in more, Abraham's child at an hundred years of age,
was more welcome then if he had been given at thirty: And the same Isaac had
not been so precious to him, if he had not been as miraculously restored, as
given; his recovery from death made him more acceptable: The benefit that comes
soon and with ease, is easily contemned: long and eager pursuit endears any
favor: The Wise men rejoiced exceedingly, to find the Star: The Woman to
find her piece of Silver: The Virgin Mary, to find her and our JESUS: CHRIST,
always returns with increase of joy: He may absent himself for a time, but he
intends it only as a preparative; to make us relish that sweet food the better:
he may keep us fasting, but it is on purpose, that our trial may be perfect,
our deliverance welcome, our repentance glorious* Yea, the delivering of some,
increases the joy of others, and causes them to praise God for, and rejoice
in their behalf that are delivered, Acts 12 14. We never know the worth of a
benefit so well, as by the want of it: want teaches us the worth of things
most truly. Contraries are the best Commentaries upon each other, and their
mutual opposition; is the best exposition. Oh how sweet a thing is peace to
them that have been long troubled with wars and tedious contentions! The
thunder of the Cannon, is the best Rhetoric to commend it to us. How sweet is
liberty to one that has been long immured within a case of walls! A very Bird,
never chants it so merrily, as when she is is got loose into the open air,
having been long encaged. How dear a jewel is health to him that tumbles in
distempered blood! For then only we begin to prize it, when we have lost it.
Let a man but fast a meal or two, o how sweet is brown bread! though it would
not down before. Yea, when Darius in a slight, had drunk puddle water, polluted
with dead carcaces; he confessed never to have drunk any thing more pleasant: the
reason was, he always before used to drink ere he was a thirst. We are never so
glad of our friends company, as when he returns after long absence, or a
tedious voyage. The nights darkness makes the light of the Sun more desirable;
and brings of it Letters of commendations. A calm is best welcome after a
tempest, etc.

Yea, what serves others sorrows for, but to increase our joy and thankfulness?
Thou have eyes; ask the blind, whether that be not a blessing? Thou have ears,
ask the deaf, whether that be not a great blessing? Thou have a tongue; what
thinks the dumb of that? Thou have feet, hands, health, liberty, life, reason,
etc. is all this nothing? Yea, others bleed; we sleep; others beg, we abound:
others starve, we surfeit: others groap in the dark, our Sun still shines: and
shall not we rejoice and be thankful? Bless (says our Savior) when ye are
cursed: and shall not we bless, when thus blessed? Yet woe is me, we forfeit
many of Gods favors, for not paying that easy Rent of thankfulness: like
those nine, Luke 17.12, to 19. we are more apt to pray, then to give thanks:
because we are more sensible of our own wants, then of Gods glory. We can open
our mouths when we want any thing, either to pray, or at least to murmur: and
why should not our thanksgivings, be as frequent as our blessings are? The
L^pers voice was not more loud in his suit, then in his thanks. It were happy
for us Christians, if we could but learn of this Samaritan.

And thus we see, that good things then appear of most worth, when they are
known in their wants: When we have lost those invaluable comforts which we
cannot well be without; the mind has time to recount their several worths:
and the worths of blessings appear not till they are vanished.

No wonder then that our estates and conditions are so variable, like the face
of the Heavens, or the Sea; or like the weather about Michaelmass, which is now
fair, and presently again foul; or rather the hard Winter, which for one fair
Sunshine day, has oftentimes ten, ^oul: For God sees that it is very good for
us: for as seeds that are deepest covered with snow in Winter, flourish most in
the Spring, or as the wind, by beating down the flame, raises it higher, and
hotter: and as when we would have some fires flame the more; we sprinkle water
upon them: even so when the Lord would increase our joy and thankfulness, he
allayeth it with the tears of affliction: misery sweetneth joy; yea, the
sorrows of this life shall (like a dark veil) give a luster to the glory of the
next; when the Lord shall turn this water of our earthly afflictions into that
wine of gladness, wherewith our souls shall be satiate for ever. We deceive our
selves to think on earth, continued joys would please; Plenty of the choicest
dainty is no dainty. When Pearls grew common at Rome, they wore them on their
shoes, and they had much ado to save themselves out of the dirt, as Tertullian
speaks. Nothing would be more tedious then to be glutted with perpetual
jollities: were the body tied to one dish always, though of the most exquisite
delicates that it could make choice of; yet after a small time, it would
complain of loathing and satiety: and so would the soul; if it did ever Epicure
it self in joys. I know not which is the more useful: Joy I may choose, for
pleasure; but adversities are the best for profit: I should without them want
much of the joy I have. Well then, art thou vexed, persecuted, and afflicted by
some cruel and malicious Saul? and is it grievous to thee for the present? Why,
that which has been hard to suffer, is sweet to remember: at last our Songs
shall be louder then our cries.

CHAP. 15. How it increases their spiritual Wisdom.
12 OUr sufferings make us teachable, and increase in us spiritual Wisdom. He
delivers the poor in his affliction, and opens their ear in trouble, Job
36.15. And again, He opens the ears of men, even by their corrections, Job
33.16. We are best instructed, when we are most afflicted. Paul's blindness took
away his blindness, and made him see more into the way of life, then could all
his learning at the feet of Gamaliel. And what says Naaman upon the cleansing
of his Leprosy? Now I know there is no God in all the Earth, but in Israel. O
happy Syrian that was at once cured of his Leprosy, and his misprision of God.
The prodigal son regarded not his Fathers admonition, so long as he enjoyed
prosperity: when we smart not; we believe not: and God is not feared; till
felt: but that which makes the body smart, makes the soul wise. It is good for
me (says David) that I have been afflicted: that I may learn thy Statutes. We
grow wise by evils, whereas prosperity besots us. Even to lose is some ways
profitable; it makes a man wary. Yea, St. Basil calls want and penury, the
inventor of all Arts: And St. Augustine, the Mistress of all Philosophy. The
best wisdom is dearest bought: Algerius the Martyr could say out of experience,
he found more light in the dungeon, then without in all the World.

The Scottish King, prisoner in Mortimers hole, learnt more of Christ, then in
his Palace he could all his life. Gaspar Olevianus a Germane Divine says, I
never learned how great God was, nor what the evil of sin was, to purpose; till
this sickness taught me. There is a great deal of difference, says Luther,
between a Divine in outward pomp; and a Divine under the cross: neither could
he understand some Psalms, till he was in affliction: the Christs-cross is no
letter, yet it taught him more learning then all the letters in the row. The
cross opens men's eyes; as the tasting of honey did Ionathans. Yea, what will
not affliction teach us when even the savagest Beasts are made quiet and
docible with abating their food, and rest, or by adding of stripes?

That Beef-brain'd Fellow in Scaliger, had his ear bored with thunder: when
nothing else would do it. Yea (says Molineus) Bonifacius his silly reasons for
the Popes Supremacy, did well enough, being propounded with a sword in the
hand. Even as the Clay with Water, and the Iron with fire, are made pliable and
apt to receive impression from the workman; even so when we are soaked in the
floods of sorrow, and softened in the fire of affliction, we are aptest to
receive the impression of Gods Law into our hearts, when he speaks unto us by
his Ministers. If the Lord breaks us in pieces with the Plough of his Justice,
then let the Seedsmen (his Ministers) sow the seed of his Word; we shall
receive it through the surrows of our ears, into the ground of our hearts, and
grow up in wisdom, and saving knowledge. Or when the hard heart is grown'd to
powder between the upper and the nether Millstone of the two Tables; it will
see, and embrace that counsel, which before it slighted. We hear, and read
much, of the corruption of our natures, odiousness of our sins, necessity of a
Savior, sweetness of Gods love in Christ, etc. but we never fully apprehend
these things, or taste how good the Lord is, till some sharp affliction comes.
A man knows not where his house is ill covered t^ll Winter: Crosses are like
pinching Frosts, that will search us: we learn to know our selves by that w^
suffer.

Yea, Affliction so brings down our stomachs, that we can see even matter of
thankfulness, where our former pride sound matter of complaining. And that
which formerly had no more taste then the white of an Egg (viz. the glad
tidings of the Gospel) is now such a spectacle of unspeakable mercy, as
ravisheth our souls with admiration.

Many a good word is even spilt upon us, till God sets it on with his Rod:
Naomi will not look home-ward, nor we Heavenward, till the Almighty have dealt
very bitterly with us. Zippora falls presently to circumcizing her son, when
she sees her husbands life lies upon it.

Were it not for temptations, we should be concealed from our selves: like the
enchanted Ass in Lucian, which returned to his proper shape again when he saw
himself in a Looking-glass. So long as we prosper, like those wives in Jeremy,
Chap. 44.17, 18. We judge of things by their events, and raise our confidence
according to the success we have: and so bless our selves, without being blessed
of God; like the Thief that applauded himself for merciful, because he had
never killed any; and yet rather then lose a Ring, he would cut off the
Travelers finger; but strong affections will give credit to weak reasons. O
how blind and partial are we, before affliction has humbled us! even so
stupid, that Narcissus-like, we are enamoured of our our own shadows: bragging,
we discharge a good conscience, when indeed we discharge it quite away: and
this righteousness in opinion, is almost the only cause of all unrighteousness.

Before want came, poverty was more contemptible then dishonesty: but now, it
is disgraceful to none except Fools and Knaves. Then we could censure things
indifferent, and pass by heinous crimes: now we are able to distinguish them,
and so, judge righteous judgment. Before trouble came, we were either
ungrounded in the principles of Religion, or unconscionable in the practice and
by virtue of our mother-wit, could post and pass sin from our selves, unto some
other; as Adam laid the fault upon Eve his wife, she upon the Serpent, and the
Serpent upon God, Or excuse, or extenuate it: which (says Fabius) is to double
it.

As for original corruption, that never troubled us, which now we bewail as the
Mother, and Nurse of all the rest: thinking it worthy our sighs, yea, of our
tears, and not without need: it being the great wheel in the Clock, that sets
all the wheels a moving: while it seems to move slowest. Though not one of a
hundred takes it sufficiently to heart: as not seeing the evil of it. But
never did any truly and orderly repent, that began not here: esteeming it the
most foul, and hateful of all, as David, Psalm. 51.5. and Paul crying out of it,
as the most secret, deceitful, powerful evil, Romans 7.23, 24. And indeed, if we
clearly saw the foulness, and deceitfulness of it, we would not suffer our eyes
to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber, until a happy change had wrought these
hearts of ours, (which by nature are no better then so many Sties of unclean
Devils) to be habitations for the God of Jacob.

Apt we were to measure our own good by another want of it, and to sco^f at
others infirmities: but now; other men's sins shall rather be the subjects of
our grief, then of our discourse. Before fear of the law; shame of men, and
such like base ends bare the greatest sway with us: yea, to please men, we
could be like certain Pictures, that represent to diverse beholders, at diverse
stations, diverse forms: but now it is enough to regulate our thoughts, words
and actions, that God sees: and indeed where are brains; there needs no more.
We read that Paphnutius converted Thais, and Ephron another famous Strumpet
from uncleanness, only with this argument; That God sees all things in the
dark, when the doors are fast, the windows shut, the curtains drawn.

Before, too much devotion was made an argument of too little discretion: and
mischief called virtue; when it was happy in the success: as with the Papists,
the ostentation of the prosperity of their estate, is the best demonstration of
the sincerity of their Religion: yea, and think also they have clipped the wings
of prosperity (as the Athenians did the wings of Victory) that she cannot fly
away. Before; we thought drinking and jovial company, the best receipt to drive
away sadness: but now, nothing like living well, as an Heathen has confessed.
Once we thought Earth Heaven; but now we apprehend the World, and glory thereof
to be (like a beautiful Harlot) a Paradise to the eye, a Purgatory to the soul.

Yea, he that before was indifferent in nothing but conscience, and no cause so
bad, but he would undertake it for gain, or glory; and think it well done: As
Satan prevails chiefly by deception of our reason, whereby we mistake virtue
for vice, and vice for virtue: wherein he imitates Hannibal, who having
overcome the Romans, put on their Armor, and so his Soldiers being taken for
Romans, won a City by that policy: and to this purpose, what stone so rough,
but he can smooth it? What Stuff so pitiful; but he can set a gloss upon it?
Like a Bear, he can lick into fashion, the most misshapen and deformed lump: or
like a Dog, heal any wound he can reach with his tongue: yea, what golden
Eloquence will he whisper in our ear? What brazen impudence? What subtle
shifts? What quaint qnircks? What cunning conveyances? What juggling, shuffling,
and packing will he use, to make any sin feazable? (like the Hare, which if she
dare not trust to her speed, she will try the turn;) and so on the contrary to
discourage us in good; showing each thing as it were in triangular Glasses
among the Optics, which will represent a way so foul, so deep, that it is
impassable; as if it were all covered with Tapistry. But as he pleads now with
Eloquence, so when he sees his time, he will speak with Thunder. Even such a
man I say now, has his eyes opened to discern good and evil, when God speaks,
and when Satan; for Gods chastisements are pills made on purpose, to clear the
sight: and virtue if it be clearly seen, moves great love and affection as
Plato speaks. Yea, when to our cost, we can ( Adam-like) see good from evil
clearly; the subtle Serpent can deceive no longer: whereas before, we were
easily deceived, and led away with the multitude, into innumerable errors. Yea,
if the fish did know of the hook, or the bird did but see the net, though they
have but the understanding of fishes, and birds; yet they would let the bait
alone, fly over the net, and let the Fowler whistle to himself.

Thus Gods corrections, are our instructions: his lashes, our lessons: his
scourges, our schoolmasters: his chastisements, our advertisements. And
commonly the soul waxes, as the body wayneth, and is wisest to prescribe, when
the bones and sinews are weakest to execute: neither do we hereby become wise
for our own souls good only, but affliction makes us wise and able to do others
good also that are in any the like affliction. Blessed be God (says Saint
Paul) which comfort us in all our afflictions, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1.4. Yea, the whole Church, and every
particular member thereof have their wisdom and knowledge improved, even by
their greatest enemies. If Arrius and Sabellius had not vexed the Church; the
deep mysteries of the Trinity had not bin so accurately cleared by the
Catholic Doctors. Subtle Arguments well answered, breed a clear conclusion:
Heresy makes men sharpen their wits the better to confute it; as Wormwood
though it be bitter to the taste, yet it is good to clear the Eyes: yea,
further, the very storms of persecution make us look to our Tackling; Patience:
and to our Anchor; Hope: and to our Helm; Faith: and to our Card; the Word of
God: and to our Captain; Christ: whereas security, like a calm, makes us forget
both our danger and deliverer. Experience is the best Informer, which makes
Martin Luther say, When all is done: tribulation is the plainest and most
sincere Divinity. And another, most emphatically (showing that knowledge is in
many respects cumulative, as well as original; like water, that besides his own
springhead, is fed with other springs and streams) That, Prayer, Reading,
Meditation, and Temptations; make a Divine. So that to be altogether exempt
from misery, is a most miserable thing.

CHAP. 16. How it increases their Patience.
13 BEcause the malice of our Enemies makes for the increase of our patience,
We rejoice in tribulation, says Saint Paul, knowing that tribulation brings
forth patience, Romans 5.3. My Brethren, says Saint James, count it exceeding
joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing that the trial of your faith
brings forth patience, Jam, 1.2, 3 Thus the malice of our enemies does both
prove and improve our patience: see it exemplified in Job and David, whose
practice does most excellently confirm this point; you know Job was not so
miserable in his afflictions, as happy in his patience, Job 31.35, 36, 37. And
David after he had been so many years trained up in the School of affliction,
and exercised with continual sufferings from innumerable Enemies of all sorts;
became a wonder of patience to all succeeding ages: as take but notice of his
carriage toward Shimei, and you will say so; when this his impotent subject
cursed and cast stones at him, and all his Men of War: called, him Murderer,
wicked man, etc. he was so far from revenging it (when he might so easily) or
suffering others; that you shall hear him make that an argument of his
patience, which was the exercise of it: Behold my son (says he) which came
forth of my bowels, seeks my life, how much more now may this Benjamite do
it? 2 Samuel 16.11. The wickedness of an Absalom may rob his Father of comfort,
but shall help to add to his Fathers goodness: it is the advantage of great
crosses, that they swallow up the lesser. One man's sin cannot be excused by
another: the lesser; by the greater: if Absalom be a Traitor, Shimei may not
curse and rebel; but the passion conceived from the indignity of a stranger,
may be abated by the harder measure of our own.

Indeed in the provocation of Nabal; he had his lesson to seek: but even that
slip made him stand the faster afterward. And Paul being taken upon the sudden,
reviled Gods High Priest: but he soon checked himself for it, Acts 23.3, 5. A
weak heart faints with every addition of succeeding trouble, perhaps is like
that Maid in Scaliger, who swoonded at the sight of a Lilly: but the strong
recollects it self, and is grown so skilful that it bears off one mischief with
another. As in the Fable, When the new and old Cart went together; the new made
a creaking noise under the load, and wondered at the silence of the old: which
answered, I am accustomed to these burdens, therefore bear them, and am quiet:
So, what a degree of patience have some men attein'd unto? What a load of
injuries can some Christians digest, that have been frequent in sufferings, and
long exercised in the School of affliction? Not that they bear them out of
baseness or cowardliness, because they dare not revenge; but out of Christian
fortitude, because they may not: they have so conquered themselves, that wrongs
cannot conquer them. Nay, we read of some Ethnicks that could say this of
themselves. When Alcibiades told Socrates, that he could not suffer the
frowardness and scolding of Xancippe, as he did: Socrates answered, but I can,
for I am accustomed to it. And we read, that Aristides after his exile, did not
so much as note them that were the cause of his banishment, though he were now
advanced above them. Yea, Diogenes rather than want exercise for his patience;
would crave alms of dead men's statues: for, being demanded why he did so, he
answered, That I may learn to take denials from others the more patiently. Now,
if we can therefore suffer, because we have suffered; we have well profited by
our afflictions otherwise not.

To show that there is nothing so hard and difficult, but may be atte^n'd to by
use and custom; give me leave to clear it by some familiar instances. We know
the custom of any hardship (whether it be labor, cold, or the like) makes it
easy and familiar: you shall have a common Labourer work all day like a Horse,
without once sweating, or being weary: Let a Scholar or Gentleman, but dig one
quarter of an hour; you must give him leave to take breath all the day after:
The face that is ever open, yea, the eye that is twice as much open as shut, is
able perpetually to endure the coldest wind can blow; when as the rest of the
parts would complain of the least blast that is cold: Let him that is next
neighbor to the Belfrey, tell me, whether Ringing does so molest his silent
sleep now, as formerly. Yea, the fall of the River Nilus, which makes a new
commer stop his ears; to the natural inhabitants, is not so much as heard. At
Milton, near Sittingborn in Kent, is (or lately was) one William Allen a
Tailor, that eats between thirty and forty grains of Opium every day, the tithe
whereof would kill him that is not accustomed thereunto; neither can he sleep
(no, not live) without it: he began but with one grain, and so increased the
quantity, as the operation and quality of it decreased. But this is nothing,
for you have slaves in the Turkish galleys, that will eat near an ounce at a
time, as if it were bread. Neither, in my judgment, is it less rare for men to
drink a pottle or a gallon of the richest old Canary every day, as is usual
with some of our Sack-drinkers, and Good-fellows; without the least
inflammation: it has no other operation in them than a cup of six has with
me, or has had with them in diebus illis.

To conclude, as that Girl which Aristotle writes of, being nursed with poison
in her infancy, lived with it after, as we do with meat: and as that young
woman at Cullen in Almain, who was frequently seen picking Spiders off the
wall, and eating them, digested the same into nourishment, as Albert an
eyewitness affirms. And as Mithridates, by his accustomed eating of poison,
made his body unpoisonable. So the Godly, notwithstanding they are by nature as
a wild Ass-colt, as Zophar speaks, Job 11.12. Yet, by their frequent and
accustomary suffering of injuries, these wild Asses are made tame, and the
ablest to carry burdens of any creature: yea, though they were once as fierce
and cruel as Wolves, Leopards, Lions and Bears; and as mischievous as Aspes
and Cockatrices; yet Christ will so change their natures, partly by his Word,
and partly by his rod of affliction, that they shall now be as apt to suffer
evil, as they have been to offer it: What else means the Prophet? when he tells
us that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid, and
the Lion with the Calfe, so that a little child shall lead them: that the Cow
and the Bear, and the Lion and the Bullock shall eat straw together, that the
sucking child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child
shall put his hand upon the Cockatrice hole, Isa. 11.6. and so forward.

And so you see, that according to the ancient Proverbial speech, Use makes
perfectness; and that custom is not unfitly called a second, or new nature.
Would thou then attein to an unconquerable patience, and be able to undergo
great trials hereafter? accustom thy self to a silent suffering of thy present
and smaller griefs, tongue-provocations, and the like. If, with Milo, thou
shall take up a Calf, some small cross; and enjoin thy self to carry the like
every day a little; in process of time thou shall be able to carry an Ox, the
strongest and biggest affliction can come. For nothing is miserable, says
Seneca, which once custom has made natural. Familia^rity even with Lions,
takeh away the fear of them: and the being used t^ Tempests, gives heart and
courage to endure them: whereas any new disaster is tedious and irksom to the
unexperienced: but hard occurrences fall heavy upon them, for that the yoke is
most cumbersome to a tender neck.

An end of the first Part; fitted, and parted for the penurious: who usually
offer for a considerable Book; the price of a Ballad.
The Second and Third follows: for their sakes; that are more generous and
ingenious.
Page 15. line 40. for them read then. Page 49. line 35, for repentance read
recompense.

THE VICTORY OF PATIENCE: Extracted out of the choysest Authors Ancient and
Modern; both Holy and Humane. Wherein are a multitude of rare Examples,
necessary to be read of all that any way suffer Tribulation.
The Fourth Impression.
By R. YOUNG Florilegus.
Imprimatur, THO. GATAKER.

HAving shown in the former Part, the several Reasons, why God suffers the
best of his Children to be afflicted; with the manyfold benefits and advantages
they make thereof. I shall in this second Part, show the Reasons, why the godly
are so patient in their sufferings.

Reasons of Patience.
CHAP. XVII. That the godly are Patient in suffering of wrongs, because
innocent.
NOw that some may be persuaded to make this use of their sufferings, and that
we may also put to silence the ignorance of others; ( foolish men who are
mistaken in judging of this matter, supposing it a base thing to suffer
injuries unrevenged) see the Reasons which deservedly make Gods children so
patiently to suffer wrongs that the men of the world never dream of: And how,
through the study of virtue and Christian prudence, they make the servile
passions of their minds ( fear and anger) subject to the more worthy faculties
of their souls, reason and understanding.

We bear their reproaches and persecutions patiently, Either in regard of Our
Selves. Our Enemies. Our Selves and our Enemies. Our Enemies and Others. GOD.
CHRIST and the Saints.


In regard of our selves, 1 Because We are innocent. 2 Because It is more
laudable to forgive, than to revenge. 3 Because Suffering is the only way to
prevent suffering. 4 Because Our sins have deserved it, and a far greater
affliction. 5 Because Our sufferings are counterpoysed and made sweet, with
more than answerable blessings. 6 Because Our patience brings a reward with it.


First, They bear the slanders and reproaches of wicked men patiently, for that
they are false, and so appertain not unto them. Socrates being rayled upon, and
called by one all to naught, took no notice of it; and being demanded a reason
of his Patience, said, It concerns me not, for I am no such man. Diogenes was
wont to say when the people mocked him, They deride me, yet I am not derided; I
am not the man they take me for. This reason is of more force from the mouth of
an innocent Christian. If a rich man be called poor, or a sound Christian, an
hypocrite; he slights it, he laughs at it, because he knows the same to be
false, and that his Accuser is mistaken; whereas, if a Beggar be called
bankrupt; or a dissembler, hypocrite; he will wince and kick, and be most
grievously offended at it. Yea, as soars and ulcers are grieved, not only at a
light touch, but even with fear and suspicion of being touched; so will an
exulcerate mind, says Seneca. And as small letters offend bad eyes; so least
appearances of contradiction will grieve the ill affected ears of guilty
persons, says Plutarch. For, let men's tongues, like Bells, give but an
indefinite, and not a significant sound, they imagine them ^o speak and mean,
whatsoever their guilty consciences frame in the fancy, and whisper in the
ear: which are those evil surmises of corrupt minds, the Apostle taxes, 1 Timothy 6.4. When like Caius the humanist, one thinks every word spoken, tends to
his disgrace; and is as unwilling to bear, as forbear reproaehes. But where the
conscience is clear, the case is altered. Marius was never offended with any
report that went of him, because if it were true, it would sound to his praise;
if false, his life and manners should prove it contrary. And indeed, the best
confutation of their slanders, is not by our great words, but by our good
works. Sophocles being accused by his own children, that he grew Dotard, and
spent their Patrimonies idly; when he was summoned, did not personally appear
before the Magistrates, but sent one of his new Tragedies to their perusal,
which being read, made them confess, This is not the work of a man that dotes.
So against all clamours and swelling opprobries, set but thine innocence and
good life, thou need do no more. 'That body which is in good health, is
strong, and able to bear the great storms and bitter cold of Winter, and
likewise the excessive and intemperate heat of the Summer; but with a crazie
and distempered body, it is far otherwise: Even so, a sound heart, and clear
conscience, will abide all trials: in prosperity it will not be lifted up in
adversity, it will not be utterly cast down: whereas, the corrupt heart and
festered conscience, can endure nothing; even a word, if it be pleasing, puffs
him up with pride; if not, it swells him with passion. A guilty conscience (like
Glass,) will sweat with the least breath, and like a windy iustrument, be put
out of tune with the very distemper of the air: but when the soul is steeled
with goodness, no assaults of evil can daunt it. I more fear what is within me
(says Luther) then what comes from without: The storms and wind without, do
never move the Earth; only Vapors within, cause Earthquakes, Jam. 4.1. No
greater sign of innocence when we are accused, than mildness, as we see in
Joseph, who being both accused and committed for forcing his Mistress,
answered just nothing that we can read of, Genesis 39.17, 18. And Susanna, who
being accused by the two Elders of an heinous crime (which they alone were
guilty of,) never contended by laying the fault upon them, but appeals unto God
whether she were innocent or no. (The History of Susanna, Verse. 42.43.) And
Hannah, whose reply to Ely (when he falsely accused her of druukennesse) was no
other, but, Nay my Lord, count not thine Handmaid for a wicked woman, 1 Samuel
1.15, 16. Neither is there a greater Symptom of guiltiness, than our breaking
into choler, and being exasperated when we have any thing laid to our charge;
witness Cain, Genesis 4 9. That Hebrew which struck his fellow, Exodus 2.13, 14.
Saul, 1 Samuel 20.32, 33. Abner, 2 Samuel 3.8. Ioroboam, 1 King. 13 4. Ahab, 1
King. 22.27. Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.19. Herod the
Tetrarch, Luk 3.19, 20. The men of Nazareth, Luke 4.28, 29. The Pharisees Joh.
8.47, 48. And the High Priests and Scribes, Luke 20.19, 20.

Sin and falsehood are like an impudent strumpet, but innocence and truth will
veil themselves, like a modest Virgin, 2 Pet. 2.18. The more false the matter,
the greater noise to uphold it: Paul is nothing so loud as Tertullus: The
weakest cause will be sure to forelay the shrewdest counsel, or the lowdest
Advocates: Error has always most words, like a rotten house, that needs most
props and crutches to uphold it. Simple truth evermore requires least cost,
like a beautiful face, that needs no painting; or a comely body, which, any
decent apparel becomes. We plaster over rotten posts, and ragged walls;
substantial buildings are able to grace themselves. So that as sparks flying
up, show the house to be on fire, and as corrupt spittle shows exulcerate
lungs; so a passionate answer argues a guilty conscience. Why does the Hare use
so many doublings? but to frustrate the sent of the Hounds. And this is one
reason why the former are compared to Sheep and Lambs (Emblems of innocence)
which being harmed, will not once bleat, and the latter unto Swine, which will
roar and cry if they be but touched. But to leave these Swine, and return to the
men we were speaking of.

A good Conscience is not put out of countenance with the false accusations of
slanderous tongues: it throws them off, as St Paul did the Viper* unhurt.
Iunocence and patience are two Bucklers sufficient to repulse and abate the
violence of any such charge; the Brestplate of Righteousness; the brazen wall
of a good conscience, fears no such Canons. The Conscionable being railed
upon, and reviled by a foul mouth, may reply as once a Steward did to his
passionate Lord* when he called him Knave, etc. Your Honor may speak as you
please, but I believe not a word that you say, for I know my self an honest
man. Yea, suppose we are circled round with reproaches, our conscience knowing
us innocent, like a constant friend, takes us by the hand and cheers us against
all our miseries. A good spirit, will be, as Simon to Christ, its
Crosse-bearer. A just man says Chrysostom, is impregnable, and cannot be
overcome: take away his wealth, his good parts cannot be taken from him, and
his treasure is above: cast him into prison and bonds, he does the more freely
enjoy the presence of his God: banish him his Country, he has his
conversation in Heaven: kill his body, it shall rise again: so he fights with a
shadow that contends with an upright man.

Wherefore, let all who suffer in their good Names, if conscious and guilty of
an enemies imputations, repent and amend: if otherwise, contemn them; own them
not so much, as once to take notice thereof. A wicked heart, is as a barrtll of
powder to temptation; let thine be, as a River of water. Yea, seeing God
esteems men as they are, and not as they have been, although formerly thou have
been culpable; yet now thou may answer for thy self, as Paul did for
Onesimus, Though in times past I was unprofitable, yet now I am profitable: and
oppose to them that sweet and divine sentence of sweet and holy Bernard, Tell
me not, Satan, what I have been; but, what I am, and will be. Or that of Beza
in the like case; Whatsoever I was, I am now in Christ a New Creature: and that
is it which troubles thee, I might have so continued long enough ere thou
would have vexed at it, but now I see thou do envy me the grace of my
Savior. Or that Apothegme of Diogenes to a base fellow, that told him he had
once been a forger of money; whose answer was, It Is true, such as thou art now,
I was once; but such as I am now, thou will never be. Yea, thou may say, by
how much more I have formerly sinned, by so much more is Gods power and
goodness now magnified. As St Augustine hearing the Donatists revile him for
the former wickedness of his youth; answered, The more desperate my disease
was, so much the more I admire the Physician. Yea, thou may yet strain it a
peg higher, and say, the greater my sins were, the greater is my honor: as,
the Devils which Mary Magdalen once had, are mentioned for her glory. Thus, if
we cannot avoid ill tongues, let our care be, not to deserve them, and it is all
one as if we avoided them. For, how little is that man hurt, whom malice
condemns on earth, and God commends in Heaven! Let the World accuse me, so long
as God acquits me, I care not.

CHAP. XVIII. That it is more laudable to forgive, than revenge.
2. BEcause it is more generous and laudable to forgive, than revenge.
Certainly, in taking revenge, a man is but even with his enemy; but, in passing
it over, he is superior to him: for it is a Princes part to pardon: yea, quoth
Alexander, there can be nothing more noble, than to do well to those that
deserve ill. And St Gregory, It is more honor to suffer injuries by silence,
than to overcome them by answering again. Princes use not to chide* when
Ambassadors have offered them undecencies, but deny them audience; as if
silence were the way royal to correct a wrong. And certainly, he enjoyes a
brave composedness, that seats himself above the flight of the injurious claw:
Like the Emperor Augustus, who though of a most tenacious and retentive
memory, would forget wrongs, as soon as they were offered: Or Agathocles,
Antigonus, and Caesar, who being great Potentates, were as little moved at
vulgar wrongs, as a Lion at the barking of Curres: yea, the Orator gives it as
a high praise to Caesor, that he could forget nothing but wrongs, remember
nothing but benefits; and who so truly noble as he that can do ill, and will
not?

True, It is not rare to see a great man vex himself at the neglect of a
peasant, but this argues a poor spirit: A true Lion would pass it by, with an
honorable scorn. You Will confess then it is Princely to disdain a wrong: and is
that all? No, forgiveness, says Seneca, is a valiant kind of revenge: and
none are so frequent in pardoning as the courageous. He that is modestly
valiant, stirs not till he must needs, and then to purpose: Like the Flint, he
has fire in him, but it appears not, until you force it from him: Who more
valiant than Ioshna? and he held it the noblest victory, to overcome evil with
good: for the Gibeonites took not so much pains in coming to deceive him; as
he, in going to deliver them. And Cicero more commends Caesar for overcoming
his own courage in pardoning Marcellus, than for the great victories he had
against his other enemies. Yea, a dominion over ones self is greater then the
Grand Signiory of Turkey. For as the greatest knowledge, is truly to know thy
self; so the greatest conquest, is to subdue thy self. He is a wise man that
can avoid an evil, he is a patient man that can endure it, but he is a valiant
man that can conquer it. And indeed, for a man to overcome an enemy, and be
overcome by his own passions, is to conquer a petty village with the loss of a
large City. What says a Father? Miserable is that victory wherein thou
overcomest thine enemy, and the Devil in the mean time overcomes thee: thou
slayest his body, the Devil thy soul Now we deem him to have the honor of the
war, that has the profit of it. But as an Emperor said of the means
prescribed him to cure his Leprosy (which was the blood of Infants) I had
rather be sick still, than be recovered by such a medicine: so will thou in
this case, if thou have either bowels or brains.

Yea, if the price or honor of the conquest be rated by the difficulty; then
to suppress anger in thy self, is to conquer with Hercules, one of the Furies:
To tame all passions, is to lead Cerberus in chains: and to endure afflictions
and persecutions strongly and patiently, is with Atlas to bear the whole World
on thy shoulders, as says the Poet.

It is no shame to suffer ill, but to do it: to be evil, we are all natural
disposed: to be holy and good, is the difficulty. Yea, every beast and vermin
can kill: it is true prowess and honor to give life and preserve it. Yea a
beast being snarled at by a cur, will pass by as scorning to take notice
thereof. I, but is it wisdom so to do? Yes, first, the ancient received
opinion is, that the sinews of wisdom* are slownesse of (...) None more wise
then Solomon, and he is of opinion, That it is the glory of a man to pass by
an offense, Prove. 19.11. We fools think it ignominy and cowardice, to put up
the lie without a stab: a wrong, without a challenge: but Solomon, to whose
wisdom all wise men will subscribe, was of another judgment; and to this of
Solomon, the wisest heathen have set their seal: Pittacus the Philosopher
holds, That, pardon is better than revenge, inasmuch as the one is proper to
the spirit, the other to a cruel beast. And Demosthenes being reproached by
one, answers, I will not strive with thee in this kind of fight; in which he
that is overcome is the better man. But, how Socrates, whom the Oracle of
Apollo pronounced the wisest man alive, and all the rest of the Philosophers
approved of it, both by judgment and practice; we shall have occasion to relate
in the reasons ensuing. No truer note of a wiseman than this; he so loves as if
he were to be an enemy, and so hates as if he were to love again. We know a
spark of fire falling upon a solid body, presently goes out, which falling upon
combustible matter kindles and burns: Now as with fire, the light stuff and
rubbish kindles sooner than the solid and more compact; so, anger does sooner
inflame a fool than a man composed in his resolutions. This the holy Ghost
witnesses, Eccles. 7. Be not thou of a hasty spirit to be angry; for anger
rests in the bosom of fools, verse. 9. So much fury, so much folly: the more
chasing, the less wisdom.

Some have no patience to bear bitter scoffs; their noses are too tender to
endure this strong and bitter Wormwood of the brain. Others again like tyled
houses, can admit a falling spark unwarmed; it may be coals of Juniper, without
any danger of burning: Now, what makes the difference? the one has a good
headpiece, and is more solid, the other are covered with such light, dry straw,
that, with the least touch they will kindle and flame about your troubled ears:
and when the house is on fire, it is no disputing with how small a matter it
came. I confess, I find some wise men extremely passionate by nature, as
there is no general rule but admits of some exceptions: Even God himself, had
particular exceptions, from his general Laws: as the Cherubims over the Ark,
was an instance against the second Commandment: the Israelites robbing the
Egyptians against the eight: the Priests breaking the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.5.
against the fourth: and Phineas killing Zimry, against the sixth, Numb. 25.8.
And these, as they are more taken with a joy, so they taste a discontent more
heavily: In whom Choler like fire in stubble is soon kindled, and soon out: for
they are stung with a Nettle, and allayed with a Dock: being like Gunpowder,
to which you no sooner give fire, but they fly in your face. And they say these
hot men are the best natured: but I say; then the best are naught: And it is a
strange fit that transformes a wise man (with Apulcius) into an Ass; yea, a
Tiger. And others again, none of the wisest, who are free from being affected;
And as they never joy excessively, so they never sorrow inordinately; but have
together less mirth and less mourning; like patient Gamsters, winning and
losing, are all one. But for the most part, it is otherwise. Yea, ^^^atience is
the Cousin german to frenzy. How often have we heard men that have been
displeased with others, tear the Name of their Maker in pieces?

And lastly, This of all others is the most divine and Christian-like revenge;
witness our Savior Christ, who by death, overcame death; as David cut off the
head of Goliath, with his own sword: and even then tryumphed over his enemies,
when most they seemed to triumph over him, Col. 2.15. And the Martyrs, who are
said by the holy Ghost, to overcome the great Dragon, that old Serpeut called
the Devil and Satan, in that they loved not their lives unto the death, Rev.
12 11. Their conquering was by dying, not by killing: and, can the back of
Charity now bare no load? are the sinews of Love grown so feeble? And holy
David, who when he had Saul at his mercy, in stead of cutting off his head, as
his servants persuaded him, only cut off the lap of his garment, and after
thought that too much also. And at another time, when the Lord had closed him
into his hands, finding him asleep in the Fort, in stead of taking away his
life, as Abishai counseled him, he took away his Spear, and in stead of taking
away his blood from his heart, he takes a pot of water from his head. That this
kind of revenge for a man to find his enemy at an advantage, and let him
depart free, is generous and noble, beyond the capacity of an ordinary man: you
may hear Saul himself confess, 1 Samuel 24.17, to 23. Again, when the King of
Syria sent a mighty Host to take Elisha, and the Lord had smote them all with
blindness, and shut them into Samaria; what does the Prophet? slay them? No:
indeed the King of Israel would fain have had it so, his fingers itcht to be
doing: but Elisha commanded bread and water to be set before them, that they
might eat and drink, and go to their Master, 2 King. 6.22. So a Christian truly
generous, will omit no opportunity of doing good: nor do evil, though he have
opportunity: for to may, and will not, is the Christians laud.

Which yet is not all, for besides that it is the most generous, noble,
valiant, wise, divine and Christianlike revenge, to pass by and forgive
injuries; our Savior Christ, in whom is the fountain of all wisdom and
knowledge, as all the senses are in the head, Zach. 4.12. allows none for
magnanimous, but such as together with forgiving, bless those that curse them,
and do good to such as hurt them, Matthew. 5.44. The case of Moses, Steven, and
many others; as I shall show in Chapter 31. which is true generosity indeed.
But how contrary is the opinion of the World, to the judgment of God, and the
wisest of men concerning valor! For, should the greatest and gravost Divine in
the Land preach this; our impatient Gallants would not believe, but that it
consists in a brave revenge, and that an humble patience is an argument of
baseness, and that every wrong or disgraceful word, is quarrel just enough
to shed blood. And lest there should want offenses, or they give place unto
wrath, as the Apostle advises, Romans 12.19. they will strive for the way, or
contend for the wall, even to the death: which proves them to be as wise as a
wall, for they come short of the wisdom of beasts. Pliny tells us of two
Goats ( Mutianus being an eyewitness) which meeting on a straight and narrow
bridge, that the one could not pass by the other* nor turn aside to return
back again: neither made his way by overturning the other, but the one lay
down, that the other might go over him. I pray God their too much turning to
the right hand before man, cause them not to be set at Christ's left hand, with
those Goats which are destined to everlasting fire. But certainly, if they
amend not their course, God shall condemn them for invading his office, for
vengeance is his, and that they call courage, he shall judge outrage.

Woe is me, into what unhappy times are we fallen, and how has the devil
blinded and bewitched our Gallants; that the wretchedest and basest cowardice,
should ruffle it out in the garb of valor; while the truly valiant pass for,
and are reputed cowards. And how great is the corruption of man's heart, which
is not ashamed of things shameful; and yet ashamed of things wherein they
ought to glory. Is this courage, to kill one another for the wall? as though
either of their honors were of more worth then both their souls. Yea, suppose
they overcome, is not this power of theirs the greatest infirmity? for whether
they thus die or kill, they have committed murder; if they kill, they have
murdered another; if they die, they have murdered themselves: Surviving,
there is the plague of conscience: dying, there is the plague of torments: if
they both escape, yet it is homicide, that they meant to kill. O that they
would take notice of this, and lay it to heart!

But what is the reason of this their mistake? what makes them judge Job a fool?
and count David a coward? for their humble patience? this is the difference;
there was the faith, and patience of the Saints; here is the infidelity, and
impatience of sinners, whom the Devil has bewitched, to glory in their shame;
or in plain English, a reprobate judgment is the only cause: for with them,
every virtue is counted a vice, and every vice a virtue, as their own words
witness: in nicknaming each vice and grace with opposite titles. But as when
it was objected to a Martyr, that his Christ was but a Carpenters son; he
answered, yea, but such a Carpenter as built Heaven and Earth: so we grant, we
are Cowards, as they term us, but such cowards as are able to prevail with
God, Genesis 32.26, 28. Exodus 32.10. And overcome the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, 1 John 5.4. Gal. 5.24. 1 John 2.14. which is as much valor and victory
as we care for.

CHAP. XIX. That suffering is the only way to prevent suffering.
3. BEcause suffering is the only way to prevent suffering? Revenge being one
of those remedies, which, not seldom, proves more grievous than the disease it
self. When once Xantippe, the wife of Socrates, in the open street plucked his
cloak from his back; and some of his acquaintance counseled him to strike her:
he answers, You say well; that while we are brawling and fighting together,
every one of you may clap us on the back and cry; Hoe, well said, to it
Socrates: yea well done Xantippe, the wisest of the twain. When Aristippus was
asked by one in derision, where the great high friendship was become, that
formerly had been be^ween him and Aeschi^es? he answers, It is asleep, but I
will go and awaken it; and did so, lest their enemies should make it a matter
of rejoicing. When Philip of Macedon was told that the Grecians spoke evil
words of him, notwithstanding he did them much good, and was withal counseled
to chastise them; he answers, Your counsel is not good, for if they now speak
evil of us, having done them good only; what would they then if we should do
them any harm? And at another time, being counseled either to banish, or put
to death one who had slandered him; he would do neither of both, saying, It was
not a sufficient cause to condemn him: and for banishing, it was better not to
let him stir out of Macedoneia, where all men knew that he lied; then to send
him among strangers, who not knowing him, might admit his slanders for truth:
better he speak where we are both known, then where we are both unknown. And
this made Chrysippus, when one complained to him, that his friend had
reproached him privately; answer, Ah, but chide him not, for then he will do as
much in public. Neglect will sooner kill an injury, than Revenge. These
tonguesquibs, or crackers of the brain, will die alone, if we revive them not:
the best way to have them forgotten by others, is first to forget them our
selves. Yea, to contemn an enemy, is better then either to fear him, or answer
him. When the Passenger gallops by, as if his fear made him speedy, the Cur
follows him with open mouth and swiftness: let him turn to the brawling Cur,
and he will be more fierce; but let him ride by in a confident neglect, and the
Dog will never stir at him, or at least will soon give over and be quiet.
Wherefore, when aspersed, labor as the eclipsed Moon, to keep on our motion,
till we wade out of the shadow, and receive our former splendour. To vex other
men, is but to prompt them how they should again vex us. Two earthen pots
floating on the water, with this Inscription, If we knock, we crack; was long
ago made the Emblem of England and the Low Countries. When two friends fall
out, if one be not the wiser, they turn love into anger and passion, passion
into evil words, words into blows; and when they are fighting, a third
adversary has a fair advantage to insult over them both. As, have you not
sometimes seen two neighbors, like two Cocks of the Game pick out one another
eyes, to make the Lawyers sport; it may be kill them? As while Judah was hot
against Israel, and Israel hot against Judah, the King of Syria smote them
both. At least Satan that common and arch enemy will have us at advantage. For
as vain men delight when two Dogs, or two Cocks are a fighting, to encourage
and prick them forward to the combat: Even so does Satan deal with us;
Controversies, like a pair of Cudgels, are thrown in by the Devil, and taken
up by malcontents, who baste one another while he stands by and laughs. And
we cannot please the Devil better: for as the Master of the Pit often sets two
Cocks to fight together, unto the death of them both; and then after mutual
conquest, suppeth perchance with the fighters bodies: Even so, says Gregory,
does the Devil deal with men. He is an enemy that watches his time, and while
we wound one another, he wounds and wins all our souls. Thus, like the Frog and
the Mouse in the Fable; while men fight eagerly for a toy; the Kite comes (that
Prince, and chief Foul that rules in the air,) and snatcheth away both these
great warriors. Or, like two Emmets in the mole hill of this earth, we fight
for the mastery; in mean while comes the Robin-red breast and picks both up,
and so devours them. But on the other side, by gentleness we may as much
pleasure our selves. It is said of Aristides, when he perceived the open
scandal which was like to arise, by reason of the contention sprung up between
him and Themistocles, that he besought him mildly after this manner: Sir, we
both are no mean men in this Commonwealth; our dissension will prove no small
offense unto others, nor disparagement to our selves: wherefore good
Themistocles, let us be at one again; and if we will needs strive, let us
strive who shall excel other in virtue and love. And we read of Euclides, that
when his Brother (in a variance between them) said, I would I might die if I be
not revenged of thee; he answered again, Nay, let me die for it, if I persuade
thee not otherwise before I have done: by which one word he presently so won
his Brothers heart, that he changed his mind, and they parted friends. Mild
words, and gentle behavior may be resembled to Milk, that quenches Wildfire;
or Oil, that quenches Lime which by water is kindled. And this was David's way
of overcoming, 1 Samuel 24. He whose Harp had wont to quiet Saul's frenzy, now by
his kindness does calm his fury, so that now he sheds tears instead of blood:
here was a victory gotten, and no blow stricken. The King of Israel set bread
and water before the host of the King of Syria, when he might have slain them,
2 King. 6.23. What did he lose by it? or, had he cause to repent himself? No,
he did thereby so prevent succeeding quarrels, that as the Text says, the
bands of Aram came no more into the Land of Israel; so every wise Christian
will do good to them that do hurt to him, yea bless and pray for them that
curse him, as our Savior advises: neither is he a fool in it, for if grace
comes (and nothing will procure it sooner than prayers and good examples)
though before they were evil enemies; now they shall neither be evil, nor
enemies. It was a witty answer of Socrates, who replied when one asked him, why
he took such a man's bitter railing so patiently,; It is enough for one to be
angry at a time. For if a wise man contend with a foolish man, says Solomon,
whether he be angry, or laugh, there is no rest, Prove. 29.9. whereas gentle
speech appeaseth wrath, and patience bridleth the secret prattling of mockers,
and blunteth the point of their reproach. Had not Gideon, Judge. 8. learned to
speak fair as well as to smite, he had found work enough from the swords of
Joseph's sons: but his good words are as victorious as his sword: his
pacification of friends, better than his execution of enemies, Verse. 2, 3.

As it is not good to flatter or lie, no more is it in some cases, to speak the
truth: we know the Ass and the Hound in the Fable, were both killed by the Lion;
the one for hi^ slattery in commending the sweetness of his breath; the other
for his plain dealing, when he affirmed, it had an ill savor; whereas the Fox,
by pretending he could not smell, by reason of a cold he had got, saved his
life.

Rage is not engendered, but by the concurrence of cholers, which are easily
produced one of another, and born at an instant. When the stone and the steel
m^ets, the issue engendered from thence is fire; whereas, the sword of anger
being struck upon the soft pillow of a mild spirit, is broken. The shot of the
Cannon hurts not Wool, and such like yielding things; but that which is hard,
stubborn, and resisting. He is fuller of passion than reason, that will flame
at every vain tongues puff: A man that studies revenge, keeps his own wounds
green and open, which otherwise would heal and do well. Anger to the soul, is
like a coal on the flesh, or garment; cast it off suddenly, it does little
harm; but, let it lie, it frets deep. Wherefore says one, their malice shall
sooner cease than my unchanged patience. A small injury shall go as it comes; a
great injury may dine or sup with me, but none at all shall lodge with me; for
why should I vex my self, because another has vexed me? That were to imitate
the fool that would not come out of the Pound, saying, They had put him in by
Law, and he he would come out again by Law: or Ahab, who because he could not
have his will on Naboth, would be revenged on himself. As the madman tears his
own hair, because he cannot come at his enemies: Or Thamar, who defiled her
self, to be revenged of her Father in law Judah. Or little children, who one
while forbear their meat, if you anger them; another time, if you chance to
take away but one of their gugawes, amongst many other toys which they play
withal, will throw away the rest, and then fall a puling and crying outright:
Or the Hedg-hog, which having laden himself with Nuts and fruits, if but the
least Filberd chance to fall off, as he is going to disburden them in his
storehouse, will fling down all the rest, in a peevish humor, and beat the
ground for anger, as Pliny writes: Or Dogs, which set upon the stone that has
hurt them, with such irefull teeth, that they hurt themselves more than the
thrower hurt them; and feel greater smart from themselves, than from their
enemy: which makes Archelaus say, it is a great evil, not to be able to suffer
evil: And a worthy Divine of ours, I will rather suffer a thousand wrongs than
offer one; I will suffer an hundred rather than return one; I will suffer many
ere I will complain of one, and endeavor to right it by contending: for, says
he, I have ever found, that to strive with my superior, is furious; with my
equals, doubtful; with my inferior, sordid and base; with any, full of
unquietness. Satyrus, knowing himself choleric* and in that whirty of mind
apt to transgress; when he but suspected ill language from any, he would stop
his ears with wax, lest the sense of it should cause his fierce blood to sees
in his distempered skin, And good reason; if not for wisdoms sake, yet for a
man's own bodily healths sake: For the Emperor Nerva, by passionate anger got a
Fever that killed him. And the Emperor Valentinianus died by an eruption of
blood through anger. And Vinceslaus King of Bohemia, in his rage of choler
against his Cup Bearer, fell into a Palfie that killed him. Again, Caesar,
although he could moderate his passions, having in that civil garboyl
intercepted a Packet of Letters written to Pompey from his Favorites, brake
them not open but burnt them immediately. And Pompey committed those Letters to
the fire before he read them, wherein he expected to find the cause of his
grief. Both upon wise and mature ground, that they might not play booty against
themselves, in furthering an enemies spite. And certainly if we well consider
it, we shall meet with vexations enough that we cannot avoid if we would never
so fain. We need not (like Cercion in Suidas) wrestle, or (with foolish Pannus)
go to law with every man we meet. And yet some (as if they did delight to vex
their own souls, like the Ethiopians, who, as Diodorus relates, lame themselves
if their King be lame) will be very inquisitive to know what such a one said of
them in private: but had they as much wit as jealousy, they would argue thus
with themselves, Small injuries I would either not know, or not mind; or,
knowing them, I would not know the Author; for by this I may mend my self and
never malice the person.

I might go on, and show you, that Greece and Asia were set on fire for an
Apple: That, not a few have suffered a sword in their bowels, because they
would not suffer the lie in their throats: As, how few of these Salamanders who
are never well but when they are in the fire of contention, are long lived?
Like Xenophilus, who as Pliny reports lived a hundred and five years without
sickness: Whereas the Raven, the Elephant, the Heart and the Dove, which have
no gall [Patient Christians] one of them outlive many of the other. And lastly,
I might show, that if we ^uffer not here with patience, we shall suffer
hereafter with grief; for the wages of anger is judgment, even the judgment
of hell fire, Mat. 5.22. But two and twenty yards is enough for a piece.

CHAP. XX. That they bear injuries patiently, because their sins have
deserved it, and a far greater affliction.
4. HE suffers his enemies reproaches and persecutions patiently, because his
sins have deserved it, and a far greater affliction. David felt the spite
of his enemies, but he acknowledges his sin to be the cause, (2 Samuel 16.11.)
and God the Author, Psalm. 39 8. From which consideration he draws this
inference; I should have been dumb, and not have opened my mouth, because thou
did it, Verse. 9. and so goes on: Remove thy stroke from me, for I am
consumed by the blow of thine hand, Verse. 10. Whatsoever is the weapon, it is
thy blow. Whence it has always been the manner of Gods people, to look up
from the stone to the hand which threw it; and from the effect, to the cause.
What says Joseph to his envious brethren that sold him into Egypt? Ye sent
not me hither, but God, Genesis 45.8. And Job being robbed by the Sabeans, they
being set on by Satan; does not say, the Devil took away, or the Sabeans took
away, but the Lord has taken away, Job 1.21. And David speaking of his son
Absoloms treason, I was dumb and said nothing; why? because it was thy doing,
Psalm. 39.9. And what, think you, was the reason our Savior Christ held his
peace and answered nothing, as the Text says, but suffered his enemies, the
Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, and Pilate, to revile him, and crucify
him? but to approve the equity and justice of God the Author thereof: for,
although it were blasphemy to say he was a sinner; yet taking upon him the
sins of the whole world, he knew those sins had deserved as much, and
therefore he is silent, Mat. 26.62, 63. It is true, other reasons are given, as
that he answered nothing, because it was now his time to suffer, not to do; his
work was now to be crucified, and not to be dignified: or, as another, he spoke
not a word to Herod, because Herod had taken away his voice in beheading John
Baptist; but this without doubt was the main reason. Even in like manner it is
with the truly gracious; they being wronged, do not suffer rage to transport
them, as it does beasts to set upon the stone or weapon that has hurt them,
like little Children, who if they fall, will have the ground beaten: their
false grief is satisfied with feigned revenge. But, they look higher, even to
God that occasioned it. Or if they be angry, they turn their malice from the
person which punishes them, to the sin by which and for which he came to
have leave and power to punish them; and to themselves, for committing such
sins. The cause of their suffering does more vex them, than the things which
they suffer: and they grieve more for the displeasure of God, than for the
stripes of his displeasure. It is not the punishment, but the cause of it,
makes them sorrowful: And indeed, to speak home to every man's conscience, why
are we patient or impatient? it is worth the noting, when sin lies light,
then reproaches and contempt lie heavy, whereas if we truly feel the weight of
sin; all indignities will be as nothing. Or thirdly, In case they do return
an answer, it is after the manner of Epictetus, who would not deny the sins his
enemy taxed him with; but reproves his ignorance rather in that being
unacquainted with the infinity of his crimes, he lays only two or three to his
charge, whereas indeed he was guilty of a million. Or as Latymer was wont; who
rejoiced when any objected indiscretion against him in his Sermons: saying he
knew by that, that they could not object against the matter it self. Or
according to Philip of Macedon his example, who would not punish Nicanor,
although he openly spoke evil of him; saying, when he heard thereof, I suppose
Nicanor is a good man, it were better to search whether the fault be in us, or
no: so no sooner shall an holy man's enemy accuse him of hypocrisy, pride,
passion, covetousness, etc. but he will go to God, and accuse himself, and
complain, I am so indeed; yea with Paul, I am the chief of all sinners, I am
more vile than his terms can make me, and I much marvel my punishment is no
greater then to hear a few ill and bitter words. And indeed one would think
whatsoever is not pain nor sufferance (or admit it be pain and sufferance,) so
long as it is not a curse but a cross, may well be born without grumbling.
What said that Gentleman in Athens to his friends? when Ashuerus came and took
away half his plate, as he was at dinner with him, they admiring that he was
not a whit moved thereat; I thank God, quoth he, that his Highness has left
me any thing.

Yea, suppose we lose all we have; our goods are furthest off us: and if but in
these we smart, we must confess to find favor.

Or admit, they hurt our bodies, or kill us, which they may soon do if God but
give leave; for our life (even the best of us) is but like a bubble, which
boys blow up in the air, and presently again blow into mere air. Caesar goes
an Emperor to the Senate, is brought a Corpse home again. What ever, I say,
befalls us, this would be our meditation; he that afflicted me for a time, could
have held me longer; he that touched me in part, could have stricken me in
whole: he that laid this upon my body, has power to lay a greater Rod both
upon my body and soul, without doing me the least wrong.

That all crosses and curses, temporal, spiritual and eternal, even from the
pains of the damned, to the very Itch, as Moses sets down, Deuteronomy. 28.27. are
deserved, and come not upon us against equity ( equity I say in respect of God,
not in respect of men; they come from a just Author, though from an unjust
instrument,) And that sin is the ground of all our griefs, the source of all
our sufferings, wickedness the root of our wretchedness: that we are
disciplined, is from our defects; is a truth undeniable appears plainly: for,
first God affirms it, Deuteronomy. 28. Isa. 57.17. Hos. 13.9. Jer. 30.15. and 4.18.

Secondly, His servants confirm it, 1 Chronicles. 21.17. Isa. 64.5. Dan. 9.7, 8,
etc. Lam. 1.5, 8. and 3.39, etc. Ezra 9.13. Luke 23.41.

Thirdly, Good reason makes for it, sinful men smite not their dogs, much
less their children, without a cause: and shall we think the just God will
smite without just cause? his judgments (says a Father) are sometimes secret,
always just. No misery had ever afflicted us, if sin had not first infected
us.

What Is the reason we all die? it could not be in justice if we had not all
sinned; and so, of all other evils: even sickness originally proceeds from
sin, and all weakness from wickedness: one man languisheth of a
Consumption, another labors of a Fever, a third is rackt with the Gout, a
fourth swollen with the Dropsy, a fifth has his soul let out with a sword; every
one has a several way to bring him to the common end, death: but, sin is
the universal disease, Death passed upon all, for all have sinned, Romans 5.12.
James 3.2. Yea as we brought a world of sin into the world with us; so since,
each man has broken every one of Gods ten Laws, ten thousand times, and ten
thousand ways: which is far from a privative holiness, in reforming that
which is evil, and a positive holiness, in performing that which is good,
Ephesians. 4.22, 23. and every sin helps: for as original sin is the original cause
of death, so actual sins hasten it.

But to conclude in general, that sin is the cause we suffer, is not
sufficient: for commonly no judgment comes from God, but, some particular
provocation of man went before it: the hand of Divine Justice seldom makes us
smart, without some eminent cause foregoing: therefore, David seeing a famine
in the Land, inquires for the particular provoking sin, 2 Samuel 21.1. so when we
suffer, our question should be, What have we done? yea, what have we done in
the same kind? for, oftentimes we may read our sin in our punishment, as it
fared with Adonibezeck, Judge. 1.7. and many other mentioned in Scripture. Sodom
was burnt with fire unnatural, as they burned with lust unnatural. Absoloms
chief pride lay in his hair; and that became his halter. Solomon dividing Gods
Kingdom, had his own Kingdom divided. David has slain Vriah with the sword,
therefore the sword shall not depart from his house. Dives would not give
Lazarus a crum, Lazarus shall not bring Dives a drop. Judas was the instrument
of his Masters death, he shall be the instrument of his own death. Proud
Bajazet vows to imprison Tamberlaine in an Iron Cage, and carry him about the
world in triumph: But, Tamberlaine having conquered that bragging Turk, carried
and carted him through all Asia; to be scorned of his own people. For instance,
Is any one censured, reviled and persecuted of lewd men, for being religious?
Let him reflect upon his life past, and happily their revilings and
persecutions will bring to his remembrance, that he himself, before his
conversion, has likewise censured, reviled or persecuted others: It may be his
natural, spiritual or political parents, in some kind or other: as who can
plead innocence herein? and he that is not humbled for his sin, is not yet
justified from his sin. Yea, so often as thou remembrest thy sin^ without
grief, so often thou repeatest those sins by not grieving. Dion of Syracusa
being banished, came to Theodorus Court a suppliant, where not presently
admitted, he returned to his companion with these words: I remember I did the
like when I was in the like dignity: He called his deeds past to a new
reckoning. So when thou receivest an injury, remember what injuries thou have
offered: look not to be exempt from the same wrongs which thou have done; for
he that does wrong, may well receive it: we may well suffer patiently, when we
know we suffer justly. To look for good, and to do bad, is against the Law of
retaliation.

Or secondly; Is any one wronged in his good name, without giving the least
cause of scandal, either at present or heretofore, which troubles him above
measure? let him nevertheless reflect upon himself, and perhaps he shall find
the cause lie lurking in his own bosom: as thus it may be, thou have not
defamed thy neighbor; but have thou not delighted to hear others speak evil of
him? Have thou been tender of his reputation, and as much as thou could
vindicated his good name?

Or thirdly, Does not a proud heart make thee over- apprehensive of the wrong?
Does not the injury seem great to thee, because thou seem great to thy self?
If so; be but little and lowly in thy own eyes, and the wrong will seem less:
for no man can sweetlier put up disgraces from others, than he who has first
learned to despise himself. Yea, this Straw-diadem hurts none, but the proud
and impatient: for, suppose thou find here but hard fare, and as ill dressed;
a poor hungry humble soul will down with all, well enough.

Or fourthly, Has not self-conceitednesse broken thy credit? probably, if thou
would think worse of thy self, thou should be better thought of: But
commonly all is well while we are well esteemed; yea, with many, their
reputation is more cared for, than their God. Neither would he be censured for
sin, that fears not to be damned for it. If this has been thy case;
henceforward, let it trouble thee more to do a fault, than to hear of it: and
when thou art evil spoken of by another; call thy self to account before him:
it may be thou deservest it; be more sorry that it is true, than that it is
known.

Or lastly, Admit men charge thee wrongfully, and thou can not find out thy
sin by thy punishment; yet know, that what thou suffer is most just in
respect of God who is the Author; and who does not always punish sin in kind:
As for example, how many Murders have been punished in a mutinous word? the
tongue in some rash language, has scourged the iniquity of the hand. One has
done many robberies, escaped many searches, at last when all has been
forgotten, he has been hanged for accessory to a Theft he never knew:
Suspected felony has often paid the price of an unknown Rape. And they that
have gone away with unnatural filthiness, have yet clipped often their days with
their own Coin: so that still Gods judgments are just, even when man's may be
unjust: which in all cases would be acknowledged, as the godly ever do.
Mauricius that good Emperor, when he, his wife and his five sons were taken,
his wife and sons put to death, and himself waiting for the like fatal stroke,
could conclude thus; Just art thou, O Lord, in all thy ways, and holy in all
thy works, as it is in the Psalms. And a Martyr, when he was burning at a
stake; Welcome flames, my sin has deserved more than here I can be able to
suffer. And certainly, they are angry with Heaven for justice, that are angry
with them for injustice. Wherefore, if thou have been heretofore so simple as
to return like for like; henceforward, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and say
with Job, Once have I spoken, but I will answer no more; yea twice, but I will
proceed no further, Job 40.4, 5 I will not so much consider how unjust man is
that gives the wrong, as how just God is, that guides it. And this would be
our meditation in all other cases; namely, to think whose hand strikes, whether
by a Plurisie, or a Fever, or a Sword, or whatever the Instrument be; and to
conclude the blow is Gods, whatsoever, or whosoever is used as the weapon. Yea
it comes not without our desert, for God is just: nor shall be without our
profit, for God is merciful. And he that does not argue thus, comes short of
the very Heathen. For Socrates could tell the Athenians, when they condemned
him to die, that they could do nothing but what the gods permitted, and nature
had before ordained. And in common reason; can a Clock go without a weight to
move it? or a Keeper to set it? No.

Now this being premised, namely, that we endure nothing from our enemies, but
that we have justly deserved from God: Yea, that we are more beholding to our
greatest enemies, touching the knowledge of our selves, than the best friends
we have; how should we not with David, refuse to revenge our selves, in case
any wicked Shemei, rayl, curse, or cast stones at us, have we never so much
power and opportunity to do it? Yea, admit some Abishai would do it for us, how
should we not say, Let him alone, suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden
him, 2 Samuel 16.11.

Again secondly, If we make this use of our sufferings; what more preciou^ than
the reproaches of an enemy? for thereby we shall sooner and more plainly hear
of our faults, than by a friend; although neither in a good manner, nor to a
good end. We have great need (quoth Diogenes) of faithful friends, or sharp
enemies: Every one has use of a Monitor: but friends in this kind, are so
rare, that no wise man would willingly forego his enemy at any rate. Wherefore
says one, He shall be no friend to me, that is a friend to my faults, and I am
no friend to my self, if I think him my enemy that tells me of them.

CHAP. XXI. They are Patient, because their sufferings are counterpoysed and
made sweet with more then answerable blessings.
5. HE bears the Cross patiently, because it is counterpoysed and made sweet
with more than answerable blessings. Satan and the world may take many things
from us, as they did from Job, viz. health, wealth, outward peace, friends,
liberty, credit, etc. but they can never take God from us, who gives all: and
at the same time supplies the want of these, with comforts far ^urpassing,
and transcending them. And therefore in the midst of misery we say with Job,
Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Quest. But with what comforts does the Lord supply our losses?

Answ. The assurance of the pardon of sin alone, is able to clear all storms
of the mind: it teaches misery, as sickness, poverty, famine, imprisonment,
infamy, etc. to laugh: not by reason of some imaginary epicycles, but by
natural and palpable reasons. Yea, let death happen, it matters not: When a
Malefactor has sued out his pardon, let the Assizes come when they will, the
sooner the better.

But, to this is added the peace of conscience (the marrow of all comforts,)
otherwise called the peace of God, which passes all understanding, and
surpasses all commending: and never did man find pleasure upon earth, like
the sweet testimony of an appeased conscience, reconciled unto God, cleansed by
the blood of the Lamb, and quieted by the presence of the holy Ghost. Yea,
had thou (who most dotest upon the world) but these comforts, thou would
not change them for all that Satan once offered to our Savior, and are now
accepted by many. O good life (says an Ancient Father) what a Joy art thou in
time of distress! And another, Sweet is the felicity of that man, whose works
are just, and whose desires are innocent: though he be in Phaleris Bull. For
these are privileges which make Paul happier in his chain of Iron, than
Agrippa in his chain of Gold, and Peter more merry under stripes, than Caiphas
upon the Iudgment-seat: and Steven the like: For though he was under his
persecutors for outward condition, yet he was far above them for inward
consolation. Neither had wealthy Craesus so much riches, in his coffers, as
poor Job had; in his conscience. Yea, how can he be miserable, that has Christ
and all his merits made sure to him; that has his Name written in Heaven, yea,
that is already in Heaven! for, where our desires are, there our selves are.
And the heavenly-minded live not so much, where they live, as where they love;
that is to say* in Christ: Surely, his soul must be brim full of brave
thoughts, that is able to refresh himself with this Meditation, God is my
Father, the Church my Mother, Christ the Judge my elder Brother and Advocate,
the holy Ghost my Comforter, the Angels mine attendance; all the Creatures
mine, for use, the stock of the Churches Prayers mine for benefit; the world
mine June; Heaven my home; God is always with me, before me, within me,
overseeing me; I talk with him in Prayer, he with me in his word, etc. Sure if
these be the accustomed meals of a good soul, it cannot choose but keep natural
heat from decaying, and make it happy.

But behold yet a greater privilege; These comforts do not only support and
refresh us, and so supply our losses in common calamities; but even in the
midst of tortures and torments, which otherwise were intolerable: The natural
man's stomach cannot (of all enemies) endure hunger: yea a prison, where he must
always lie under hatches, makes him all amort: but worthy Hawks could clap
his hands for joy in the midst of the flames. And Vincentius (as Luther
reports) made a sport of his torments, and gloried, when they made him go upon
hot burning coals, as if they had been Roses. And another that I read of, say;
My good friends, I now find it true indeed, he that leaves all to follow
Christ, shall have in this world centuplum, a hundred fold more; I have it in
that centuplum peace of conscience with me at parting. And this made Ignatius
say, he had rather be a Martyr then a Monark: Nor did he ever like himself,
before he was thus tried: for when he heard his bones crush between the wild
beasts teeth, he said, now I begin to be a Christian. And Anaxarchus being laid
along in a Trough of stone, and smitten with Iron sledges by the appointment of
Nicocreon the Tyrant of Cyprus, ceased not to cry out, strike smite and beat;
it is not Anaxarchus, but his vail you martyr so. And a Child in Josephus,
being all rent to death with biting snippers at the commandment of Antiochus,
could cry with a loud, assured, and undaunted voice; Tyrant, thou losest time,
lo I am still at mine ease: what is that smarting pain? where are those
torments which whilome thou did so threaten me withal? my constancy more
troubles thee, than thy cruelty me. And how many more of those Martyrs in Queen
Maryes Reign, were even ravished, before they could be permitted to die? so
great, and so passing all expressing, is the peace and comfort of a good
conscience.

Now as the Priests of Mercury when they eat their figgs and honey, cried out,
O how sweet is truth! so if the worst of a Believers life in this world, be so
sweet; how sweet shall his life be in Heaven! but I Will hold you no longer in
this.

A man that has his sins pardoned, is never completely miserable, till
conscience again turns his enemy: whereas on the contrary; take the most happy
worldling that ever was, if he have not his sins pardoned, he is completely
wretched (though he sees it not:) suppose him Emperor of the whole world, as
Adam, when he was in Paradise, and Lord of all; what did it avail him so long
as he had a tormentor within, a self-condemning conscience? which told him,
that God was his enemy, and knew no other then that hell should be his
everlasting portion? Certainly this like a damp, could not choose but put out
all the lights of his pleasure, so that Paradise it self was not Paradise to
him: which is the case of all wicked men, be they never so great, never so
seemingly happy.

True; wicked men think the godly less merry, and more miserable than
themselves: yea some, that mirth and mischief are only sworn brothers, but this
is a foundationlesse opinion. For first, no man is miserable, because another
so thinks him. Secondly, Gods word teaches, and a good conscience finds,
that no man can be so joyful as the faithful, though they want many things
which others may have. St Austin before his conversion, could not tell how he
should want those delights, he then found so much contentment in: but after,
when his nature was changed, when he had another spirit put into him; then he
says, O how sweet is it to be without those former sweet delights! Indeed,
carnal men laugh more, but that laughter is only the hypocrisy, of mirth:
they rejoice in the face only, and not in the heart, as the Apostle witnesses
2 Cor. 5.12. or as another has it, Where O God there wants thy grace,
Mirth is only in the face.


Yea, their own consciences bear me witness, as that Spanish Judge well
considered; who when a murder was committed in a tumultuous crowd of people,
bared all their bosoms, and feeling upon their breasts, discovered the guilty
Author by the panting of his heart. And Tully who makes it an argument of
Roscius Amerinus Innocence, that he killed not his Father, because he so
securely slept. Yea, as in profane joy, even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful; so in godly sorrow, even in weeping, the heart is light and
cheerful. The tears of those that pray, are sweeter than the joys of the
Theater, says St Augustine; for our cheeks may run down with tears, and yet our
mouths sing forth praises; the face may be pale, yet the heart may be quiet
and cheerful: so St Paul, as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor.
6.10. Neither can it be solid comfort, except it has his issue from a good
conscience. Indeed we therefore are not merry enough, because we are not
Christians enough.

Now if all our sufferings are thus counterpoysed, and exceeded with blessings;
have we any cause to be angry and impatient? What says Job? Shall we receive
good at the hand of God, and not evil? He was content to eat the crust with
the crumme. Indeed his wife (like the wicked,) would only have fair weather,
all peace and plenty, no touch of trouble: but it is not so with the godly, who
have learnt better things. Who will not suffer a few stripes from a Father, by
whom he receives so much good, even all that he has? Diogenes would have no
nay, but Antisthenes must entertain him his Scholar, insomuch that Antisthenes,
to have him gone, was forced to cudgel him: yet all would not do, he stirs
not, but takes the blows very patiently; saying, Use me how you will, so I may
be your Scholar and hear your daily discourses, I care not. Much more may a
Christian say unto God, Let me enjoy the sweet fruition of thy presence; speak
thou peace unto my conscience, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation, and
then afflict me how thou please, I am content* yea, very willing to bear it.
Yea, if we well consider the commodity it brings, we shall rather wish for
affliction, than be displeased when it comes, Col. 1.24. For, it even brings
with it the company of God himself: I will be with you in tribulation, says
God to the disconsolate soul, Psalm. 91.15. When Sidrack, Mishack, and Abednego,
were cast into the fiery furnace, there was presently a fourth came to bear
them company, and that was God himself, Dan. 3.23, to 27. And his presence
makes any condition comfortable, were a man even in hell it self. Yea, as when
St Paul was rapt up to the third Heaven; he was so ravished with the joy
thereof, that he knew not whether he had his body about him or not, 2 Cor.
12.2. Whether in the body, or out of the body I cannot tell, God knows. So
Gods presence so ravisheth the soul, that while a man suffers the greatest
pain, he knows not whether he be in pain or no. Yea God is not only with them,
to comfort them in all their tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4. but in them: for at the
same time when the Disciples were persecuted, they are said to be filled with
joy, and with the holy Ghost, Acts 13.52. And as our sufferings in Christ do
abound, so our consolation also abounds through Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. And
lastly, he does comfort us according to the days we are afflicted, and
according to the years we have seen evil, Psalm 90.15. So that a Christian gains
more by his losses and crosses, than the happiest worldling by all his
immunities: as it was said of Demosthenes, that he got more by holding his
peace, than other Lawyers did by their pleading.

And if so; our sufferings require patience with thankfulness: as it fared
with Job.

Object. But what ever others find, thy sufferings are not thus counterpoysed
and sweetened?

Answ. What Is the reason? get but the light of grace to shine in thy heart, thy
prison shall be an Heaven: thy Keepers Angels: thy chains thy glory: and thy
deliverance salvation: Grow but heavenly minded, and thou shall be able to
extract gain out of loss: peace out of trouble: strength out of infirmity: out
of tears joy: out of sin holiness: out of persecution profit: out of
affliction comfort: For godliness in every sickness, is a Physician: in every
contention, an Advocate: in every doubt, a Schoolman: in all heaviness, a
Preacher; and a comforter unto whatsoever estate it comes, making the whole
life, as it were, a perpetual hallelujah.

Besides, we look for a Crown of glory, even that most excellent and eternal
weight of glory, to succeed this wreath of Thorns: but if we are never tried in
the field, never set foot to run the race of patience, how can we look for a
Garland? Ten repulses did the Israelites suffer, before they could get out of
Egypt; and twice ten more, before they could get possession of the promised
Land of Canaan. And as many did David endure before he was invested in the
promised Kingdom: many lets came before the Temple was re-edified.

All men would come to Heaven, but they do not like the way: they like well of
Abraham's bosom, but not of Dives door. But, God sees it (...) for us to taste
of that Cap, of which his Son drank so deep; that we should feel a little
what sin is, and what his love was; that we may learn patience in adversity, as
well as thankfulness in prosperity; while one scale is not always in
depression, nor the other lifted ever high; while none is so miserable, but he
shall hear of another that would change calamities with him.

CHAP. XXII. That they are patient, because patience brings a reward with it.
6. BEcause Patience in suffering brings a reward with it. In reason a man
would forgive his enemy even for his own sake, were there no other motive to
persuade him: for to let pass many things of no small moment, as that, if we
forgive not, we can do no part of Gods worship that is pleasing to him; for we
cannot pray aright, 1 Timothy 2.8. We cannot communicate in the Sacrament, but we
make our selves guilty of Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11.27. Matthew. 5.24. We cannot
be good hearers of the Word, James 1.21. and that it makes a man captive to
Satan, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. and many the like: If ye forgive men their trespasses
(says our Savior,) your heavenly Father also will forgive you; but if you
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you
your trespasses, Mat. 6.14, 15. So he that will not be in charity, shall never
be in Heaven: And why should I do my self a shrewd turn because another would?
Yea, we desire pardon, as we give pardon; and we would be loath to have our own
lips condemn us. When we pray to God to forgive us our trespasses, as we also
forgive them that trespass against us, and do not resolve to forgive our
brethren; we do in effect say, Lord condemn us, for we will be condemned:
whereas he that does good* to his enemy, even in that act, does better to
himself. It is a sigular sacrifice to God, and well-pleasing to him, to do good
against evil, and to succor our very enemy in his necessity: but we may
perchance heap coals of fire upon the others head, Romans 12.20. though we must
not do it with an intent to make his reckoning more, but our reckoning less.

Again, Blessed is the man (says St James) that endures temptation (viz. with
patience) for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, James 1.12.
And this made Moses not only patient in his sufferings, but joyful, esteeming
the rebuke of Christ greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt: For,
says the Text, he had respect unto the recompense of the reward, Heb. 11.26.
And well it might; for whereas the highest degree of suffering, is not worthy
of the least and lowest degree of this glory, Romans 8.18. St Paul witnesses,
that our light affliction which is but ^or a moment (if it be borne with
patience) causes unto us a far most excellent and eternal weight of glory,
while we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things which are not
seen, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Where note the incomparablenesse and infinite difference
between the work and the wages: light affliction receiving a weight of glory;
and momentary afflictions, eternal glory: answerable to the reward of the
wicked, whose empty delights live and die in a moment: but their insufferable
punishment is interminable and endless: As it fared with Pope Sixtus the fifth
(who sold his soul to the Devil, to enjoy the glory and pleasure of the
Popedom for seven years) their pleasure is short, their pain everlasting: our
pain is short, our joy eternal. What will not men undergo, so their pay may be
answerable? The old experienc^^ Soldier fears not the rain and storms above
him, nor the numbers falling before him, nor the troops of enemies against him,
nor the shot of thundering Ordnance about him; but looks to the honorable
reward promised him. When Philip asked Democritus, if he did not fear to lose
his head, he answered, No: for (quoth he,) if I die, the Athenians will give me
a life immortal: meaning, he should be statued in the treasury of eternal
fame: if the immortality (as they thought) of their names, was such as strong
reason to persuade them to patience, and all kind of worthiness; what should
the immortality of the soul be to us? Alas, virtue were a poor thing, if fame
only should be all the Garland that did crown her: but the Christian knows,
that if every pain he suffers were a death, and every cross an hell; he shall
have amends enough. Why, said Ambrose on his deathbed, we are happy in this,
we serve a good Master, that will not suffer us to be losers. Which made the
Martyrs such Lambs in suffering, that their persecutors were more weary with
striking, than they with suffering; and many of them as willing to die as dine.
When Modestus the Emperors Lieutenant, told Basil what he should suffer; as
confiscation of goods, cruel tortures, death, etc. He answered, If this be
all, I fear not: yea had I as many lives, as I have hairs on my head, I would
lay them all down for Christ, nor can your master more benefit me than in this.
I could abound with examples of this nature. No matter (quoth one of them) what
I suffer on earth, so I may be crowned in Heaven. I care not, quoth another,
what becomes of this frail Bark my flesh; so I have the passenger, my soul,
safely conducted. And another, If (Lord) at night thou grant'st me Lazarus boon,
Let Dives dogs lick all my sores at noon,


And a valiant Soldier going about a Christian achievement; My comfort is,
though I lose my life for Christ's sake, yet I shall not lose my labor; yea, I
cannot endure enough to come to Heaven. Lastly, Ignatius going to his
Martyrdom, was so strongly ravished with the joys of Heaven, that he burst out
into these words; Nay, come fire, come beasts, come breaking my bones, racking
of my body, come all the torments of the Devil together upon me, come what can
come in the whole earth, or in hell, so I may enjoy Jesus Christ in the end.

They were content to smart so they might gain; and it was not long, but light
which was exacted of them, in respect of what was expected by them, and
promised to them, 2 Cor. 4.17. Neither did they think that God is bound to
reward them any way for their sufferings; no, if he accepts me when I have
given my body to be burned (says the believer) I may account it a mercy.

I might show the like touching temptations on the right hand, which have
commonly more strength in them, and are therefore more dangerous, because more
plausible and glorious. When Valence sent to offer Basil great preferments, and
to tell him what a great man he might be: Basil answers, Offer these things to
Children not to Christians. When some bad, stop Luthers mouth with preferment:
one of his adversaries answered; it is in vain, he cares neither for Gold, nor
Honor. When Pyrrhus tempted Fabritius, the first day with an Elephant, so huge
and monstrous a beast as before he had not seen, the next day with Money and
promises of Honor, he answered, I fear not thy force, and I am too wise for
thy fraud. But I shall be censured for exceeding.

Thus hope refreshes a Christian, as much as misery depresseth him; it makes
him defy all that men or Devils can do, saying, Take away my goods, my good
name, my friends, my liberty, my life, and what else thou can imagine; yet I
am well enough, so long as thou can not take away the reward of all, which is
an hundred fold more even in this world, and in the world to come, life
everlasting, Mark. 10.29, 30. As when a Courtier gave it out, that Queen Mary
(being displeased with the City) threatened to divert both Term and Parliament
to Oxford; an Alderman asked whether she meant to turn the Channel of the
Thames thither or no: if not (says he,) by Gods grace we shall do well enough.
For what are the things our enemies can take from us, in comparison of Christ,
the Ocean of our comfort, and Heaven the place of our rest? where is joy
without heaviness or interruption; peace without perturbation: blessedness
without misery: light without darkness: health without sickness: beauty
without blemish: abundance without want: ease without labor: satiety without
loathing: liberty without restraint: security without fear: glory without
ignominy: knowledge without ignorance: eyes without tears: hearts without
sorrow: souls without sin: where shall be no evil present, or good absent:
for we shall have what we can desire, and we shall desire nothing but what is
good. In fine, that I may darkly shadow it out, since the lively representation
of it is merely impossible, this life everlasting, is the perfection of all
good things: for fulness is the perfection of measure, and everlastingnesse
the perfection of time, and infiniteness the perfection of number, and
immutability the perfection of state and immensity the perfection of place, and
immortality the perfection of life, and God the perfection of all; who shall be
all in all to us: meat to our taste, beauty to our eyes, perfumes to our smell,
music to our ears; and what shall I say more? but as the Psalmist says;
Glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God: but alas such is man's
parvity, that he is as far from comprehending it, as his arms be from
compassing it; Heaven shall receive us, we cannot conceive Heaven. Do you ask
what Heaven is (says one?) when I meet you there, I will tell you; for could
this ear hear it, or this tongue utter it, or this heart conceive it; it must
needs follow, that they were translated already thither.

Now if this be so; how acceptable should death be, when in dying we sleep, and
in sleeping we rest from all the travels of a toylsome life, to live in joy and
rest for evermore! Let us then make that voluntary, which is necessary, and
yield it to God as a gift, which we stand bound to pay as a due debt says
Chrysostom: Yea, how should we not with a great deal of comfort and security,
pass through a Sea of troubles, that we may come to that haven of eternal
rest? How should we not cheer up one another? as the mother of Melitho did her
son, when she saw his legs broken, and his body bruised, being ready to
yield up his spirit in martyrdom: saying, O my son, hold on yet but a
little, and behold Christ stands by, ready to bring help to thee in thy
torments, and a large reward for thy sufferings. Or, as Jewel did his friends
in banishment; saying, This world will not last ever. And indeed we do but stay
the tide, as a fish left upon the sands.

Ob. I, but in the mean time, my sufferings are intolerable, says the
fainting soul?

Sol. It is no victory to conquer an easy and weak cross; these main evils
have crowns answerable to their difficulty, Rev. 7.14. No low attempt a
star-like glory brings; but so long as the hardness of the victory shall
increase the glory of the triumph; endure it patiently, cheerfully.

2. Secondly, As patience in suffering brings an eternal reward with it in
Heaven, so it procures a reward here also: Suffer him to curse, says David
touching Shemei (here was patience for a King, to suffer his impotent subject,
even in the heat of blood, and midst of war to speak swords, and cast stones
at his Sovereign, and that with a purpose to increase the rebellion, and
strengthen the adverse part,) but mark his reason: It may be the Lord will look
upon mine affliction, and do me good: Why? even for his cursing this day, 2 Samuel 16.12. And well might he expect it, for he knew this was Gods manner of
dealing: as when he turned Balaams curse into a blessing upon the children of
Israel, Numb. 23. And their malice who sold Joseph, to his great advantage.
Indeed these Shemois and Balaams, whose hearts and tongues are so ready to
curse and rail upon the people of God, are not seldom the very means to procure
a contrary blessing unto them; so that if there were no offense to God in it,
nor hurt to themselves; we might wish and call for their contempt, cruelty and
curses: for, so many curses, so many blessings.

I could add many examples to the former, as how the malice of Haman turned to
the good of the Jews: the malice of Achitophel, to the good of David, when his
counsel was turned by God into foolishness: the malice of the Pharisees to
him that was born blind, when Christ, upon their casting him out of the
Synagogue, admitted him into the Communion of Saints, Joh. 9.34. The malice of
Herod to the Babes, whom he could never have pleasured so much with his
kindness, as he did with his cruelty; for where his impiery did abound, there
Christ's pity did super-abound, translating them from their earthly mothers
arms, in this valley of tears, unto their heavenly Fathers bosom, in his
Kingdom of glory. But more pertinent to the matter in hand is that of Aaron and
Miriam to Moses, when they murmured against him, Numb. 12. where it is evident,
that God had never so much magnified him to them, but for their envy. And that
of the Arians to Paphnu^ius, when they put out one of his eyes for withstanding
their Heresy: whom Constantine the Emperor, even for that very cause, had in
such reverence and estimation, that he would often send for him to his Court,
lovingly embracing him, and greedily kissing the eye which had lost his own
light, for maintaining that of the Catholic Doctrine: so that we cannot devise
to pleasure Gods servants so much, as by despiting them.

And thus you see how patient suffering is rewarded, both here and hereafter;
that we lose what ever we do lose by our enemies, no otherwise than the
husbandman loses his seed: for whatever we part withal, is but as seed cast
into the ground, which shall even in this life, according to our Saviors
promise, return unto us the increase of an hundred fold, and in the world to
come, life everlasting, Mark. 10.29, 30. But admit patience should neither be
rewarded here, not hereafter; yet it is a sufficient reward to it self: for,
hope and patience are two sovereign and universal remedies for all diseases.
Patience is a counterpoyson or antipoyson for all grief. It is like the Tree
which Moses cast into the waters, Exodus 15.25. for as that Tree made the waters
sweet, so Patience sweetens affliction. It is as Larde to the lean meat of
adversity. It makes the poor beggar rich, teaches the bondsman in a narrow
prison to enjoy all liberty and society: for, the patient believer, though he
be alone, yet he never wants company: though his diet be penury, his sauce is
content: all his miseries cannot make him sick, because they are digested by
patience. And indeed, It is not so much the greatness of their pain, as the
smalnesse of their patience, that makes many miserable; whence some have (and
not unfitly), resembled our fancies, to those multiplying glasses made at
Venice, which being put to the eye, make twenty men in Arms show like a
terrible Army. And every man is truly calamitous, that supposes himself so: as
oftentimes we die in conceit, before we be truly sick: we give the battle for
lost, when as yet we see not the enemy. Now crosses are either ponderous or
light, as the Disciples or Scholars esteem them: every man is so wretched, as
he believes himself to be. The taste of goods or evils does greatly depend on
the opinion we have of them; and contentation, like an old man's spectacles,
make those Characters easy and familiar, that otherwise would puzzle him
shrewdly. Afflictions are as we use them; there is nothing grievous, if the
thought: make it not so: even pain it self (says the Philosopher) is in our
power, if not to be disanulled, yet at least to be diminished through patience:
very Gally slaves, setting light by their captivity, find freedom in bondage.
Patience is like a golden shield in the hand, to break the stroke of every
cross, and save the heart though the body suffer. A sound spirit, says
Solomon, will hear his infirmity, Prove. 18.14. Patience to the soul, is as the
lid to the eye; for as the lid being shut, when occasion requires, saves it
exceedingly; so Patience intervening between the soul and that which it
suffers, saves the heart whole, and cheers the body again. And therefore, if
you mark it, when you can pass by an offense, and take it patiently and
quietly, you have a kind of peace and joy in your heart, as if you had gotten a
victory, and the more your patience is, still the less your pain is: for as a
light burden at the arms end weighs heavier by much, than a burden of
treble weight, if it be born on the shoulders which are made to bear; so if a
man set patience to bear his cross, the weight is nothing to what it would be
if that were wanting: In a word, Patience is so sovereign a medicine, that it
cures and overcomes all: it keeps the heart from envy, the hand from revenge,
the tongue from contumely, the whole body from smart; it overcomes our enemies
without weapons: finally, it is such a virtue, that it makes calamities no
calamities.

But, what needs all this? men commonly say in necessitated sufferings, what
remedy but patience? therefore patience is a confessed remedy. Wherefore, says
one; Being unable to direct events, I govern my self; and if they apply not
themselves to me, I apply my self to them; if I cannot fling what I would, yet
I will somewhat mend it, by playing the cast as well as I can.

O that all implacable persons, who double their sufferings through long study
of revenge, would learn this lesson, and bear what they must bear patiently:
then would they find that patience can no less mitigate evils, than
impatience exasperates them. A profitable prescription indeed (may some say)
but of an hard execution! Hard indeed to an impenitent sinner, that has two
burdens on his back at once ( viz. his affliction, and his sin, which adds
weight to his affliction,) to carry them so easily, as he that has but one,
namely his affliction. Yea, it is altogether impossible to flesh and blood: for
our hearts are like the Isle Pathmos, in which nothing will grow, but on earth
which is brought from other places: If the will be ours, the good will is Gods.
Wherefore if thou art only beholding to nature, and have naught but what thou
broughtest into the world with thee, well may thou envy at it, but thou
can never imitate it; for to speak the truth, Faith and Patience are two
miracles in a Christian. A Protestant Martyr being at the stake, in the midst
of furious and outrageous flames, cried out, Behold ye Papists, whom nothing
will convince but Miracles; here see one indeed, for in this fire I feel no
more pain, than if I were in a bed of Down, yea it is to me like a bed of
Roses: and Cassianus reports, that when a Martyr was tormented by the
Infidels, and asked by way of reproach, What Miracle his CHRIST had done; he
answered, He has done what you now behold; enabled me so to bear your
contumelies, and undergo all these tortures so patiently, that I am not once
moved; and is not this a miracle worthy your taking notice of? Indeed, what
have we by our second birth, which is not miraculous in comparison of our
natural condition? It was no less than a miracle for Zacheus, a man both rich
and covetous, to give half his goods to the poor, and make restitution with the
residue, and, all this in his health. It was a great miracle, that Joseph in
the arms of his Mistress, should not burn with lust. It is a great miracle for
a man to forsake Houses, and Lands, and all that he has; you, to hate Father,
and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and his own life to be Christ's Disciple. It
is a great miracle to rejoice in tribulation, and smile death in the face. It
is a great miracle, that of fierce and cruel Wolves, Bears, Lions, we should
be transformed into meek Lambs, and harmless Doves: and all this by the
foolishness of preaching Christ crucified. Indeed they were no miracles, if
Na^uro could produce the like effects: but she must not look to stand in
competition with Grace* St Paul before his conversion, could do as much as the
proudest natural man of you all: his words are, If any other man thinks that
he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, much more I, Phil. 3.4. Yet when
he speaks of Patience, and rejoicing in tribulation, he shows, That it was
because the love of God was shed abroad in his heart by the holy Ghost, which
was given unto him, Romans 5.5. of himself he could do nothing, though he were
able to do all things through Christ which strengthened him, Phil. 4.13. Have
thou then a desire after this invincible patience? seek first to have the love
of God shed abroad in thy heart by the holy Ghost; which love of God, is like
that Rod of Myrtle, which (as Pliny reports) makes the traveller that carries
it in his hand, never to be faint or weary. Would thou have the love of God?
ask it of him by prayer; who says, If any of you lack in this kind, let him
ask of God that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall
be given him, Jam. 1.5. Would thou pray that thou may be heard? Ask in
faith and waver not, for he that wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of
the wind, and carried away, verse. 6. Would thou have faith? be diligent to
hear the word preached, for Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. Unto him
therefore that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or
think, I commend thee.

CHAP. XXIII. Because our enemies are ignorant.
2. Reasons in regard of our enemies are three. 1 Because They are ignorant. 2
Because They are rather to be pitied, than maligned or reckoned of. 3 Because
Their expectation may not be answered.


1. HE well considers the ignorance of his enemies, who being carnal, fleshly,
unregenerate, cannot discern the spiritual Objects at which they are offended.
Father forgive them (says our Savior of his enemies,) for they know not what
they do, Luke 23.34. Alas poor ignorant souls, they did but imitate Oedipus,
who killed his Father Laius King of Thebes, and thought he had killed his enemy.
Socrates being persuaded to revenge himself of a fellow that kicked him,
answered, If an Asse-had kicked me, should I have set my wit to his, and kick
him again? or if a Mastiff had bitten me, would you have me go to Law with him?
And when it was told him another time, that such an one spoke evil of him, he
replied; Alas the man has not as yet learned to speak well, but I have learned
to contemn what he speaks. Diogenes being told that many despised him,
answered; It is the wise man's portion to suffer of fools. Aristotle, being told
that a simple fellow railed on him, was not once moved, but said, Let him beat
me also being absent, I care not: we may well suffer their words, while God
does deliver us out of their hands: for if we go on in a silent consta^^y, say
our ears be beaten, yet our hearts shall be free. And this heroical resolution
had St Paul, that chosen vessel; I pass very little to be judged of you
(meaning blind sensualists:) or of man's judgment, he that judges me is the
Lord, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. and indeed, an ounce of credit with God is more worth than
a talent of men's praises. I regard not (quoth Plato) what every one says; but
what he says that sees all things: he knew well enough, that the fame which
is derived from fools and knaves is infamy. Cato was much ashamed if at any
time he had committed any thing dishonest; but else, what was reproved by
opinion only, never troubled him: Yea, when a fool struck him in the Bath; and
after being sorry for it, cried him mercy; he would not come so near revenge,
as to acknowledge he had been wronged. Light injuries are made none by a not
regarding. The ignorant multitude among the Jews said, that St John had a
Devil; and that Christ was a Glutton, and a Wine-bibber: But what says he by
way of answer? Wisdom is justified of her children, Matthew. 11.18, 19.

Let none object the Scribes and Pharisees joining with them, who were great
Scholars; for no man knows so much, but it is through ignorance that he does so
ill. Neither does our Savior enquire, what the Pharisees or Priests reputed
him; but whom say men (meaning those who minded his Doctrine) that I the son
of man am? Mat. 16.13. But this point I have handled at large in another place,
therefore to avoid a coincidence of discourse, I pass it.

If men shall hate and revile thee for thy goodness, it must needs follow,
that they are as foolish as they be ungodly: Now ye suffer fools and Idiots to
jest and play upon you; yea, you take pleasure in it: so should ye suffer these
fools gladly because ye are wise, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 11.19. And
certainly if the whole world do contemn a generous Christian, he will even
contemn that contempt, and not think it worthy a room in his very thoughts,
that common receptacle or place of entertainment. Much more if a single person,
none of the wisest, will he hear with patience, and say with Tacitus, You are
able to curse, and I to contemn: Tu linguae ego aurium sum Dominus, you are
master of your tongue, and I of mine ears. What says one advisedly? When we
are provoked to fight with women, the best way is to run away. And indeed, he
that lets loose his anger upon every occasion, is like him that lets go his
Hawk upon every bayt.

True, our Gallants that have more heart than brain, and more pride than
either, think they play the men, when they dare one another to fight: like
boys, who shall go farthest into the dirt; or vie to see who can drop most
Oaths, whereof the deepest is a winning Card in this their game of glory. But
what says Solomon? If a wise man contend with a foolish man, whether he be
angry or laugh, there is no rest, Prove. 29.9. Besides, we may apprehend it a
wrong, when it is none, if we take not heed: for those things pass many times
for wro^gs in our thoughts, which were never meant so by the heart of him that
speaks. Words do sometimes fly from the tongue, that tho heart did never
hatch nor harbor; wherefore, unless we have proofs that carry weight and
conviction with them, let not our apprehension grow into a suspicion of evil;
else while we think to revenge an injury, we may begin one; and after that,
repent our misconceptions: And it is always seen, that a good man's
constructions are ever full of charity and favor; either this wrong was not
done, or not with intent of wrong; or if that, upon misinformation; or if none
of these, rashness the fault, or ignorance shall serve for an excuse. Whence
those Noblt Emperors, Theodosius and Honorius; would not have any punished
that spoke evil of them: for (said they;) if it comes from lightness of
spirit, it is to be contemned; if from madness, it is worthy of pity; if from
intended injury, it is to be pardoned; for wrongs are to be forgiven. And
indeed, in things that may have a double sense, it is good to think the better
was intended; for so shall we both keep our friends and quietness.

CHAP. XXIV. Because they are rather to be pitied than maligned, or recko^ed of.
2. BEcause their adversaries are rather to be contemptuously pitied than
maligned or reckoned of; and that whether we regard their present, or future
estate. Concerning the present; If a man distracted (and so are wicked men
touching spiritual things) do rail on us, we are more sorry for him, than for
our selves: Yea, who will take in evil part the reproaches and revilings of a
man in his fever? or who will be angry with a Dog for barking? (and such an
one has but the mind of a beast, in the form of a man:) Let us then do the
like, in a case not unlike: and not resemble Ct^sipho the wrastler, who would
not put up a blow at the heels of an Ass, but like an Ass kicked her again.
When Julian in a mock asked Maurice Bishop of Chalcedon, why his Galilean God
could not help him to his sight; he replied, I am contentedly blind, that I
may not see, such a Tyrant as thou art. Anger alone, were it alone in them, is
certainly a kind of baseness and infirmity, as well appears in the weakness
of those Subjects in whom it reigns, as Children, Women, Old folks, Sick
folks; yea; a sore disease of the mind. Socrates bidding good speed to a
dogged fellow, who in requital of his kind salutation, returned him a base
answer; the rest of the Company railing on the fellow, were reprehended by
Socrates in this manner: If any one (quoth he) should pass by us diseased in
his body, or distracted in his mind, should we therefore be angry? or had we
not more cause to be filled with joy and thankefullnesse, that we our selves
are in better case? What need we return railing for railing? All the harm that
a common slanderer can do us with his foul mouth, is to shame himself. For his
words are like dust, that men throw against the wind, which flies back into
the throwers face, and makes him blind: for as the blasphemer wounds himself
by wounding Christ* so the rayler shames himself, when he thinks to shame
another. Neither have they power to hurt us; strong malice in a weak breast, is
but like a heavy house built upon slender crutches.

True, they conceit of their slanders as the Pope of his consures, who if he
put a Traitor into the Rabricke, he is presently a Saint in Heaven; if he
curse, or excommunicate a Christian, he must needs be enrolled in hell: but we
know their words, mere Idols, which as the Apostle witnesses, are nothing in
the world; and therefore trouble not thy self about them. What need had David
to load himself with an unnecessary weapon? one sword can serve both his enemy
and him; Goliahs own weapon shall serve to behead the Master: so this man's own
tongue shall serve to accuse himself, and acquit thee. Yea, as David had Goliath
to bear his sword for him; so thy very enemy shall carry for thee both sword
and shield, even sufficient for defense, as well as for offense.

Wherefore in these cases it has been usual for Gods people, to behave
themselves like dead Images, which though they be rayled on, and reviled by
their enemies, yet have ears, and hear not; mouths, and speak not; hands, and
revenge not; neither have they breath in their nostrils to make reply: Psalm.
115.5, 6, 7. If you will see it in an example, look upon David; he was a deaf
and dumb at reproach, as any stock or stone. They that seek after my life
(says he) lay snares, and they that go about to do me evil, talk wicked things
all the day, (sure it was their vocation to backbite and slander) but I was as
deaf, and heard not; and as one dumb, which does not open his mouth. I was as a
man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs, Psalm. 38.12, 13. This
innocent Dove was also as wise as a Serpent; in stopping his ears and refusing
to hear the voice of these blasphemous Inchanters, charmed they never so wisely.

And as their words are to be contemned by us, so are their challenges to
fight. When a young Gallant would needs pick a quarrel with an ancient tried
Soldier, whose valor had made him famous: it was generally held, that he
might with credit refuse to fight with him, until his worth shoult be known
equivalent to his: saying, Your ambition is to win honor upon me, whereas I
shall receive nothing but disgrace from you. The Goshawke scorns to fly at
Sparrows: Those noble Dogs which the King of Albany presented to Alexander,
out of an overflowing of courage, contemned to encounter with any beasts, but
Lions and Elephants: as for Staggs, wild Boars and Bears, they made so little
account of, that seeing them, they would not so much as remove out of their
places. And so the Regenerate man, which fights daily with their King, Satan,
scorns to encounter with his servant and slave, the carnal man. And this is so
far from detracting, that it adds to his honor, and shows his courage and
fortitude, to be right generous and noble.

Again secondly, The wager is unequal, to lay the life of a Christian against
the life of a Russian (and the blind sword makes no difference of persons) the
one surpassing the other, as much as Heaven, Earth; Angels men; or men beasts:
even Aristippus (being derided by a scarless soldier, for drooping in danger
of shipwreck,) could answer, Thou and I have not the like cause to be afraid:
for thou shall only lose the life of an Ass, but I the life of a Philosopher.
The consideration whereof, made Alexander (when he was commanded by Philip his
Father to wrestle in the games of Olympia,) answer; he would, if there were any
Kings present to strive with him, else not; which is our very Case: and nothing
is more worthy our pride, than (that which will make us most humble if we have
it,) that we are Christians. When an Ambassador told Henry the fourth that
Magnificent King of France, concerning the King of Spains ample Dominions;
First said he, He is King of Spain: is he so? says Henry; and I am King of
France: but said the other, He is King of Portugal; and I am King of France,
says Henry: He is King of Naples; and I am King of France: He is King of
Sicily; and I am King of France: He is King of Nova Hispaniola; and I am King
of France: He is King of the West Indies; and I, said Henry, am King of France:
He thought the Kingdom of France only, equivalent to all those Kingdoms. The
application is easy, the practice usual with so many, as know themselves
heirs apparent, to an immortal Crown of glory. And as touching their future
estate, Fret not thy self (says David) because of the wicked men, neither be
envious for the evil doers; for they shall soon be cut down like grass, and
shall wither as the green herb, Psalm. 37.1, 2. This does excellently appear in
that remarkable example of Samaria, besieged by Benhadad and his Host, 2 King.
7.6, 7. As also in Haeman who now begins to envy, where half an hour since he
had scorned: as what could so much vex that insulting Agagite, as to be made a
Lackie to a despised Jew? yea, not to mention that which followed, stay but one
hour more, the basest slave of Persia, will not change conditions with this
great favorite, though he might have his riches and former honor to boot.

I might instance the like of Pharaoh, Exodus 15.9, 10, 19. Senacherib, Isa.
37.36, 37, 38. Herod, Acts 12.22, 23, and many others; but experience shows,
that no man can sit upon so high a Cogue, but may with turning prove the lowest
in the wheel; and that pride cannot climb so high, but Justice will sit above
her. And thus are they to be contemned and pitied while they live, and when
they die.

3. After death, the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation
(says Peter) and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished, 2 Pet. 2.9. Alas, were thy enemy sure to enjoy more Kingdoms than
ever the Devil showed Christ: to be more healthful than Moses: to live longer
than Methuselah: yet being out of Gods favor, this is the end; to have his
Body lie hid in the silent dust, and his Soul tormented in hell fi^e. And upon
this consideration, when Dionysius the Tyrant had plotted the death of his
Master Plato, and was defeated by Platos escape out of his Dominions: when the
Tyrant desired him in writing not to speak evil of him, the Philosopher
replied; That he had not so much idle time, as once to think of him; knowing
there was a just God would one day call him to a reckoning. The Moon looks
never the paler when Wolves how^ against it; neither is she the slower in her
motion, howbeit some Sheepherd or Lion may watch them a good turn. Wherefore
says St Gregory, Pray for thine enemies; Yea, says St Paul, be gentle toward
all that do thee evil, and instruct them with meekness, proving if God at any
time will give them repentance that they may knrw the truth, and some to
amendment of life, out of the snare of the Devil, of whom they are taken
prisoners to do his will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Which thing himself had formerly
found of force, for with that contrary breath; I mean that one prayer which St
Steven made at his death, he was of a so made a friend, of a Saul a Paul, of a
Persecutor a Preacher, of an Imposter a Pastor; a Doctor of a Seducer, of a
Pirate a Prelate, of a blasphemer a blesser, of a thief a shepherd, and of a
Wolf a Sheep of Christ's fold.

4. And lastly, If we consider our own future estate, we have no less cause to
contemn their evil words; for it is not material to our well or ill being,
what censures pass upon us; the tongues of the living avail nothing to the
good or hurt of those that lie in their graves: they can neither diminish their
joy, nor yet add to their torment (if they find any,) There is no Common- Law
in the New Jerusalem; there truth will be received, though either plaintiff or
defendant speaks it. Yea, there shall be a resurrection of our credits, as well
as of our bodies. Nay, suppose they should turn their words into blows, and
(in stead of using their tongues) take up their swords and kill us, they shall
rather pleasure than hurt us. When John Baptist was delivered from a double
prison, of his own, of Herod's, and placed in the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, what did he lose by it? His head was taken off, that it might be
crowned with glory; he had no ill bargain of it, they did but hasten him to
immortality: and the Churches daily prayer is, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
Yea, what said blessed Bradford? In Christ's cause to suffer death, is the way
to Heaven on Horsback; which has made some even slight the sentence of death,
and make nothing of it. It is recorded of one Martyr, that hearing the sentence
of his condemnation read, wherein was expressed many several tortures, of
starving, killing, boiling, burning, and the like, which he should suffer; he
turns to the People, and with a smiling countenance says; And all this is but
one death; and each Christian may say (of what kind soever his sufferings be)
The sooner I get home, the sooner I shall be at ease, Yea, whatever threatens
to befall him he may answer it as once that noble Spartan, who being told of
the death of his Children, answered, I knew well they were all begot mortal.
Secondly, that his goods were confiscate, I knew what was but for my use, was
not mine. Thirdly, that his honor was gone, I knew no glory could be
everlasting on this miserable Earth. Fourthly, that his sentence was to dye,
That Is nothing, Nature has given like sentence both of my condemners and me*
Wicked men have the advantage of the way, but godly men of the end; Who fear
not death because they feared God in their life.

So we see the cudgel is not of use when the Beast but only barks; nay tell me
how would thou endure wounds for thy Savior, that can not endure words
for him? if when a man reviles thee thou art impatient, how would thou
afford thy ashes to Christ, and write patience with thine own blood?

CHAP. XXV. That their expectation may not be answered.
3. BEcause he will not answer his enemies expectation; in which kind he is
revenged of his enemy, even while he refuses to revenge himself. For as there
is no such grief to a Iester or Iugler, as when he does see that with all his
jests, tricks and ^ooleries, he cannot move mirth, nor change the countenances,
of them that see and hear him; so there can be no greater vexation to a wicked
and malicious enemy, than to see thee no whit grieved nor moved at his malice
against thee; but that thou do so bear his injuries, as if they were none at
all. Yea, he which makes the trial shall find that his enemy is more vexed
with his silence, than if he should return like for like.

Dion of Alexandria was wont to take this revenge of his enemies; amongst whom
there was one, who perceiving that by injuring and reviling of him he could not
move him to impatience, whereby he might have more scope to rayl; went and made
away with himself, as Brusonius reports. And Montaigne tells us of a Citizen,
that having a Scold to his Wife, would play on his Drum when she brawled, and
rather seem to be pleased with it, than angry; and this for the present did so
mad her, that she was more vexed with her self, than with him: but when she saw
how it succeeded, and that this would not prevail, in the end it made her quite
leave off the same, and prove a loving wife, that so she might overcome him
with kindness, and win him to her bow, by bending as much the other way; that
so like a prudent Wife, she might command he^ Husband by obeying. And whosoever
makes the trial, shall find, that Christian patience, and magnanimous
contempt; will in time either drain the gall out of bitter spirits, or make it
more overflow to their own disgrace.

At least it will still the barking tongue, and that alone will be worth our
labor.

Satan and his instruments cannot so vex us with sufferings, as we vex them
with our patience. It has been a torment to Tyrants, to see that they were no
way able, either with threats or promises; kindness or cruelty, to make the
Christians yield: but that they were as immovable as a Rock; it being true of
them which is but fained of Jupiter; namely, that neither Juno through her
riches, nor Mercury through his eloquence, nor Vonus through her beauty, nor
Mars through his threats, nor all the rest of the gods, though they conspired
together, could pull him out of Heaven. Neither feared they to die, knowing
that death was but their passage to a state of immortality. But to go on; you
cannot anger a wicked man worse than to do well; yea, he hates you more
bitterly for this, and the credit you gain thereby, then if you had cheated him
of his patrimony with your own discredit: nor do they more envy our grace, than
they rejoice is see us sin: For what makes God angry makes them merry. And they
so hunger and thirst after our discredit, that should we through passion but
overshoot our selves in returning like for like, or in doing more than befits
us, they would feed themselves with the report of it: for like flesh-flies, our
wounds are their chief nourishment, and nothing so glads their hearts, or opens
their mouths, with insolency and triumph.

Besides, what is scarce thought a fault in other men, is held in us a heinous
crime: When they could not accuse Christ of sin, they accused him for
companying with sinners, and doing good on the Sabbath day. When the Rulers and
Governors could find no fault in Daniel concerning the Kingdom, he was so
faithful, they alleged his praying to God, and brought that within compass
of a Praemunire, Dan. 6.4.13.

The World is ever taxing the least fault (yea no fault, or rather the want of
faults) in the best men, because one imaginary cloud in a just man, shall in
their censure darken all the stars of his graces; yea the smallest spot in
his face, shall excuse all the sores and ulcers in their bodies: so that by
answering their expectation, or by returning like for like, we shall both wrong
our selves and pleasure them; which is like the setting of a man's own house on
fire through carelessness, in which case he not only bears the loss, and
scorches himself in it, but must give five pounds to the Sheriff also, if it be
in London. So that the best answer is either silence or laughter; or if neither
of these will do, a cudgel. The best answer to words of scorn and petulancy,
says learned Hooker, is Isaacs Apology to his brother Ishmael; the Apology
which patience and silence make, (no Apology) and we have our Saviors
president for it: for when false witnesses rose up and accused him fasly before
the Priests, Scribes and Elders, it is said that Jesus held his peace: that
infinitewisdome knew well, how little satisfaction there would be in answers,
where the Sentence was determined: where the Asker is unworthy, the Question
captious, words bootlesse, the best answer is silence. Let our Answer then to
their Reasons be, No; to their scoffs, nothing. And yet, when the slanders
which light on our persons, rebound to the discredit of our profession, it
behooves us not to be silent in answering truly, whenas our adversaries are
eloquent in objecting falsely. An indignity which only touches our private
persons, may be dissembled; as Augustine replied to Petillian, P^ssumus esse in
his copiosi pariter, sed nolumus esse pariter vani. But in the other case, the
retorting of a poisoned weapon into the adversaries own breast, is laudable.

It is the weakness of some good natures (the more is the pity) to grieve and
to be angry at wrongs received, and thereby to give advantage to an enemy. But
what would malice rather have, than the vexation of them whom it persecutes? We
cannot better please an adversary, than by hurting our selves: and this is no
other than to humor envy, to serve the turn of those that malign us, and draw
on that malice, whereof we are already weary: whereas carelessness puts ill
will out of countenance, and makes it withdraw it self in a rage, as that which
does but shame the Author, without hurt of the Patient. In a causeless wrong,
the best remedy is contempt of the Author.

CHAP. XXVI. Because it is for our credit to be evil spoken of by them, and
would be a disparagement to have their good word.
3. Reasons jointly respecting our selves and our enemies are two.

1 Because it Were a disparagement to have their good word. 2 Because it Is the
greatest praise to be dispraised of them.
THese two Reasons being near of kin, in speaking of them, I will cast both
into the similitude of a Y, which is joined together at one end, brancht in the
middle. And first to join them both together.

The condemnation and approbation of wicked men, is equally profitable and
acceptable to good men: for every word they speak of the conscionable, is a
slander, whether it be good or evil: whether in praise or dispraise, his very
Name is defiled by coming into their mouths* or if this do not hold in all
cases, yet (as a Reverend Divine says) it is a praise to the godly, to be
dispraised of the wicked; and a dispraise to be praised of them: their
dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor: so that when deboished
persons speak ill of a man, especially their Minister, the worse the better;
for to be well spoken of by the vicious, and evil by the virtuous; to have the
praise of the good, and the dispraise of the bad, is all one in effect, as
Solomon shows; They that forsake the Law (says he) praise the wicked; but
they that keep the Law, set themselves against them, Prove. 28.4.

Thus much of both Reasons jointly, now of each severally; and first, That it
is a disparagement to a godly man to be well spoken of by the wicked.

When it was told Antisthenes, that such an one who was a vicious person, spoke
good words of him, he answered, What evil have I done, that this man speaks
well of me? To be praised of evil men (says Bion the Philosopher) is as
evil, as to be praised for evil doing: For such like Garlic, suck only the
ill vapors from all they come near. Out of which consideration, our Savior
Christ rejected the evil spirits testimony, which though it were truth, yet he
would not suffer the Devil to say, Thou art the Christ the Son of God, or
that holy One; but rebuked him sharply, and enjoined him to hold his peace,
Luke 4.35. No he would not suffer the Devils at another time to say, That they
knew him, Verse. 41. And good reason, for he knew that the Devils commendations
would prove the greatest slander of all. Neither would St Paul suffer that maid
which had a spirit of Divination, to say, he was the servant of the most high
God, which showed them the way of Salvation, Acts 16.17, 18. well knowing that
Satan did it to this end, that by his testimony and approbation, he might cause
them (which formerly believed his doctrine) to suspect him for an Imposter and
deceiver, and that he did his miracles by the help of some Familiar spirit. And
indeed, if the good report of wicked men, who are set on work by Satan, did not
derogate from the godly, or from the glory of God, Satan should be divided
against himself: and if Satan be divided against himself, says our Savior,
how shall his Kingdom stand? Now we know he seeks to advance his Kingdom by
all possible means, and consequently in this.

Wherefore if we enjoy any wicked man's love, and have his good word, we may
justly suspect our selves are faulty in one kind or other; for it is sure he
could not do so, except he saw something in us like himself. If every thing
were unlike him, how is it possible he should love us? Difference breeds
disunion, and sweet congruity is the Mother of love. This made Aristotle when a
Rakeshame told him, he would rather be hanged by the neck, than be so hated of
all men as he was, reply, And I would be hanged by the neck, ere I would be
beloved of all, as thou art: And Phocion, to ask, when the people praised him,
What evil have I done? It was a just doubt in him, and not an unjust in any
that are virtuous like him; which occasioned Luther to say, I would not have
the glory and fame of Erasmus; my greatest fear is the praises of men* Yea,
their reproaches and evil speeches are to me, matter of great joy. And
another, Their hatred I fear not, neither do I regard their good will.

Secondly, A wicked man's tongue, is so far from being a slander, that it
makes for our credit, to be evil spoken of by them. To be evil spoken of by
wicked men, says Terence, is a glorious and laudable thing: And another, It is
no small credit; with the vile, to have a vile estimation. As a wicked man's
glory is in his shame, so the godly man's shame (for doing good) is his glory:
and to be evil spoken of for well-doing* is peculiar to good men; as Alexander
used to speak of Kings. Yea, says Epictetus, It is the highest degree of
reputation, for a man to hear evil when be does well. And Job is of his
judgment, which makes him say, If mine adversary should write a book against
me, would I not take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto me? Yes,
I would, etc. Job 31.35, 36, 37. And who having the use of Reason (especially
sanctified) will not conclude, that Religion and Holiness must needs be an
excellent thing, because in has such enemies as wicked men, and wicked
spirits? What says that Ethnic in Seneca, in this behalf? Men speak evil of
me, but evil men: It would grieve me if Marcus Cato, if wise Laelius, if the
other Cato, or either of the Scipioes, should speak so of me, but this as much
comforts me: for to be disliked of evil men, is to be praised for goodness.

And Luther the like: I rejoice, says he, that Satan so rages and blasphemes:
It is likely I do him and his Kingdom the more mischief: whence Ierom told
Austin, It was an evident sign of glory to him, that all Heretics did hate and
traduce him. Indeed, to hear that a good man speaks evil of us (as its possible
(though rare) for him to credit a false report, and so crediting it, to report
it too) goes to the very heart, and fetches from thence tears into the eyes,
and into the mouth, words of passion and admiration: As when Caesar saw that
Brutus was one of them that helped to stab him with bodkins in the Senate
house, he cried out, And art thou there my Son! but if a hundred other men do
the same, if wise, we value it not. Why? O happy art thou, says Pious
Mirandula, who liv'st well amongst the bad; for thou shall either win them, or
silence them, or exasperate them: if thou win them thou shall save their souls,
and add to thine own glory: if thou silence them, thou shall diminish of their
torment, and prevent the contagion of their sin: if thou exasperate them
thereby to hate and traduce thee for thy goodness, then most happy; for thou
shall not only be rewarded according to the good which thou do, but much
more according to the evil which thou suffer'st. And St Peter, If any man
suffer as a Christian (that is, for righteousness sake,) let him not be
ashamed, but let him glorify God in this behalf, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16. The reason
is given by St Austin, with whom this speech was frequent, They that backbite
me, etc. do against their wills increase my honor both with God, and good men.
Alas, the durty feet of such Adversaries, the more they tre^d and rub, the more
luster they give the figure graven in gold; their causeless aspersions do but
rub our glory the brighter. And what else did Judas, touching Mary, when he
depraved her in our Saviors presence, for pouring that precious ointment on
his feet? Joh. 12. which was the only cause, that in remembrance of her it
should be spoken to her praise, wheresoever the Gospel should be preached
throughout the whole world, Mar. 14.9. O what a glorious renown did the
Traitors reproach occasion her? like as the treason of Pausanias, augmented the
fame of Themistocles.

Yea, their evil report may possibly enrich a man; A friend of mine came to
preferment by being reproached for his goodness, in the presence of a
religious Gentleman.

And this is the hurt which lewd men do to the godly, if they are godly wise
that hear them; when they think to tax, and traduce; they do in truth commend
us: and we may say of their words, as he said of good fellows, the better the
worse, and the worse the better.

Indeed, swinish men may believe their misreports, because they are Judges
which for the most part will enquire no further, but believe at first: but the
wise know their tongues to be no slander; yea, they will either smell out the
Serpents enmity in the relator, or spy out in his lies one lame leg or other;
as lies are rarely without. And indeed, if ill tongues could make men ill good
men were in a bad taking.

Now to make some use of this point: If the language of wicked men must be read
like Hebrew, backward, and that all good men do so for the most part, it being
a sure rule, that whosoever presently gives credit to accusations, is either
wicked himself, or very childish in discretion; then let us count their
slanders, scoffs and reproaches, the most noble and honorable badges and
ensigns of honor and innocence that can be: And in case we are told that any
such person does rail on us; let our answer be, He is not esteemed, nor his
words credited of the meanest believer, which understands any thing of Satan's
wiles.

Secondly, Care not to have ill men to speak well of thee, for if thou w^rt
worse; thou should hear better; if thou would be as lewd as they are, thou
should never hear an ill word from them.

Thirdly, Look not to have every man's good word, since some are as deeply in
love with vice, as others are with virtue: Besides, a man may as well draw all
the air into his mouth with a breath, and keep it; as purchase every man's good
word*

Indeed, if a man were able, and willing to be at the charge; he might stop
their mouths with money: for Philip of Macedon having given a great reward to
one that spoke evil of him, was after that highly praised by him; which made
him conclude, that it lies in our selves, and in our own power, either to be
well, or ill spoken of; but this is not a remedy of Gods prescribring: besides,
a man had better endure the soar, than be at such cost for a plaster. And thus
we see, that a man of a good life, needs not fear any who has an evil
tongue, but rather rejoice therein; for he shall be praised of Angels in
Heaven, who has, by renouncing the world, eschewed the praises of wicked men
on earth.

CHAP. XXVII. Because our enemies may learn, and be won by our example.
4. IN the fourth place, one Reason why we bear injuries so patiently, is, That
our enemies and others may learn and be won by our example, which often prevails
more than precept: As, how many Infidels were won to the Christian Faith, by
seeing Christians endure the flames so patiently? when their enemies were
forced to confess, flain they are, but not conquered. Those whom precepts do
not so effectually move, we see them sometimes induced by examples. Sozomen
reports, that the devout life of a poor captive Christian woman, made a King
and all his family, embrace the Faith of Jesus Christ. Eusebius from Clement
reports, that when a wicked accuser had brought St James to condemnation;
seeing his Christian fortitude, he was touched in Conscience, confessed himself
a Christian, and so was taken to execution with him: where, after confession
and forgiveness, they kissed, and prayed for each other, and so were both
beheaded together. In the Duel of Essendon, between Canutus and Edmond
Ironfide, for the prize of the Kingdom of England; after long and equal
combat, finding each others worth and valor, they cast away their weapons,
embraced and concluded a Peace, putting on each others apparel and arms; as a
ceremony to express the atonement of their minds, as if they made transaction
of their persons one to the other; Canutus being Edmond; and Edmond Canutus.
Wherefore in all things (says Paul to Titus) show thy self an example of good
works, Tit. 2.7. Under the general of good works is included Patience as one
main special. The servant of the Lord must not strive (says Paul to Timothy)
but must be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil men patiently,
instructing them with meekness that are contrary minded, proving if God at any
time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

And it stands to good reason, for first every Christian is, or ought to be a
crucified man.

Secondly, Love is Christ's badge, the nature whereof is to cover offenses with
the mantle of peace.

And thirdly, Religion binds us to do good unto all, even our enemies; so
resembling the Sun, which is not scornful, but looks with the same face upon
every plot of earth; not only the stately Palaces, and pleasant Gardens are
visited by his beams; but mean Cottages, neglected Boggs and Moates. And
indeed, sincerity loves to be universal, like a light in the window, which not
only gives light to them that are in the house, but also to passengers in the
street; well knowing that the whole earth, and every condition is equidistant
from Heaven, if God but vouchsafe to show mercy, in which case who would not do
his utmost. Aristippus being demanded why he took so patiently Dionysius
spitting in his face, answered, The fishermen to take a little Gudgeon, do
abide to be imbrued with slime and salt water; and should not I, a Philosopher,
suffer my self to be sprinkled with a little spittle, for the taking of a great
Whale?

The House of God, is not built up with blows. A word seasonably given, after
we have received an injury, like a Rudd^r, sometimes steers a man quite into
another course. The nature of many men is forward to accept of peace, if it be
offered them; and negligent to sue for it otherwise. They can spend secret
wishes upon that which shall cost them no endeavor: unless their enemy yields
first, they are resolved to stand out: but if once their desire and expectation
be answered, the least reflection of this warmth makes them yielding and
pliable: and that endeavor is spent to purpose, which either makes a friend,
or unmakes an enemy. We need not a more pregnant example then the Levites
father in Law, I do not see him make any means for reconciliation: but when
remission came home to his door, no man could entertain it more thankfully,
seeing such a singular example of patience and good condition in his Son.
Aristippus and Aeschines two famous Philosophers, being fallen at variance,
Aristippus came to Aeschines, and says, Shall we be friends again? Yes, with
all my heart, says Aeschines; Remember then says Aristippus, that though I be
your elder, yet I sought for peace: true says Aeschines, and for this, I will
ever acknowledge you the more worthy man; for I began the strife and you the
peace. When Iron meets with Iron, there is a harsh and stubborn jarre; but let
wool meet that rougher mettle, this yielding turns resistance into embracing:
Yea, a man shall be in more estimation with his enemy (if ingenuous) having
vanquished him this way; then if he had never been his enemy at all. Thy
greatest enemy shall if he have any spark of grace, yea, if he have either
bowels or brains, confess ingenuously to thee (as Saul once to David) Thou art
more righteous then I, for thou have rendered me good, and I have rendered thee
evil; as what heart of stone could have acknowledged less: Saul would have
killed David, and could not, David could have killed Saul and would not:
Besides the approbation of an enemy (as one says) is more then the testimony
of a whole Parish of friends or neuters. And such a conquest is like that which
Evagrius records of the Romans, namely, That they got such a victory over
Cosroes, one of the Persian Kings, that this Cosroes made a Law, That never
after, any Kings of Persia should move war against the Romans. Actions salved
up with a free forgiveness, are as not done: yea, as a bone once broken is
stronger after well setting, so is love after such a reconcilement.

Whereas by returning a bitter answer he makes his enemies case his own, even
as a mad dog biting another dog, makes him that is bitten become mad too.

But this is not all, for happily it may (and not a little) further Gods glory,
and make Satan a loser; as thus let us shake off their slanders, as Paul did
the Vip^r; and these Barbarians, which now conceive so basely of Gods people,
will change their minds, and say we are petty gods; Yea, will they say, surely
theirs is a good and holy, and operative Religion, that thus changes and
transforms them into new Creatures. The hope whereof should make us think no
endeavor too much. For if Zopyrus the Persian was content (and that
voluntarily) to sustain the cutting off his nose, ears, and lips, to further
the enterprise of his Lord Darius against proud Babylon; what should a
Christian be willing to suffer, what the Lord of Heaven and Earths Cause may be
furthered against proud Lucifer, and all the powers of darkness? But suppose
thy patient yielding produces no such effect, as may answer these or the like
hopes, yet have patience still, and that for three Reasons.

1. Seem you to forget him, and he will the sooner remember himself. 2. It often
falls out, that the end of passion is the beginning of repentance. Therefore if
not for his sake, yet at least for thy own sake be silent; and then in case
thou hear further of it from another, if ill, beware of him, but condemn him
not, until thou hear his own Apology, for, Who judgment gives, and will but
one side hear;
Though he judge right, is no good Iusticer.
Or lastly, if not for his sake nor thine own, then for Gods sake have
patience, and bear with him because his maker bears with thee.
CHAP. XXVIII. Because they will not take Gods office out of his hand.
5. Reasons in regard of God are three. The 1 has respect to his Office. 2
has respect to his Commandment. 3 has respect to his Glory.


Reason,

1. BEcause he will not take Gods Office out of his hand, who says, Avenge not
your selves but give place unto wrath, for vengeance is mine and I will repay
it, Romans 12.19. Peter speaking of our Savior Christ, says, When he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed it to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. And the Prophet
David of himself, I return not reviling for reviling, for on thee O Lord do I
wait, thou will hear me my Lord my God; meaning, If I call to thee for a just
revenge Psalm. 38.13, 14, 15. If the Lord see it meet that our wrongs should be
revenged instantly, he will do it himself; as he revenged the Israelites upon
the Egyptians: and so that all standers by shall see their fault in their
punishment, with admiration. Now I know, says Iethro, that the Lord is greater
than all the gods; for as they have dealt proudly with them, so are they
recompensed, Exodus 18.11. And as once he revenged David's cause upon Nabal; For
about ten days after, the Lord smote Nabal that he died. says the Text: and
it follows, when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be the
Lord, that has judged the cause of my rebuke at the hand of Nabal, and has
kept his servant from evil; for the Lord has recompensed the wickedness of
Nabal upon his own head, 1 Samuel 25.38, 39. And that insolent and intolerable
wrong of railing Shimei, being left to the Lord, he did revenge it; in giving
Shimei up to such a stupidity, that he ran himself wilfully upon his own
deserved and shameful death.

Or if God do it not himself by some immediate judgment, nor by the hand of
the Magistrate, yet he will see that some other shall do it, though the wronged
party be willing to put it up; as for example, Sampsons Father in Law, for
taking away his Wife, and she for her falsehood, though they were not punished
by him that received the wrong, yet the Philistims burnt both her and her
Father, Judge. 15. Again, though the Philistims were not punished by the
Timnite, or his daughter, whom they burnt with fire; yet they were by Sampson,
who smote them hip and thigh with a mighty plague, Judge. 15. From which
examples we may draw this argument, If the Lord thus revenge the cause of men's
particular and personal wrongs, much more will he revenge his own cause: for
in this case I may say to every child of God which suffers for Religion
sake, as Iehaziel by the Spirit of God said unto all Judah, the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and King Iehosaphat; The battle is not yours, but Gods, wherefore
you shall not need to fight in this battle, stand still, move not, and behold
the salvation of the Lord toward you, 2 Chronicles. 20.15, 17. Yea; it stands upon
Christ's honor to maintain those that are in his work; And Gods too, to defend
such as suffer for his sake; and he that traduceth, or any way wrongs thee, for
thy goodness; his envy strikes at the Image of God in thee, because he has no
other way to extend his malice to the Deity it self: as is apparent by these
Scriptures, which will be worth thy turning to: Psalm. 44.22. and 69.7. and
83.2, to 10. Prove. 19.3. Romans 1.30. Matthew. 10.22. and 25.45. Luke 21.17. Zach.
2.8. 1 Samuel 17.45. Psalm. 74.22, 23. Acts 5.39. Psalm. 139 20. Isa. 54.17. 1
These. 4.8. Ioh. 15.18, to 26. Numb. 16.11. Saul, Saul, says Christ, seeing him
make havoc of the Church, why persecutest thou me? I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest, Acts 9.4, 5. and Jesus was then in Heaven. Cain imbrews his hands
in the blood of his own brother, because he was better, and better accepted
than himself: God takes upon him the quarrel, and indeed it was for his sake
that Abell suffered.

Now if we may safely commit our cause, and our selves to God, in the greater
matters: much more in petty things, as are, evil words.

I but, says the weak Christian, I am so wronged, reviled and slandered, that
it would make a man speak, like Aeagles that famous wrestler, that never spoke
before in his life. Answer, There is no such necessity.

For first: Who ever was, that was not slandered?

Secondly, Let him speak evil of thee, yet others shall not believe him; or if
the evil and ignorant do, yet report from wise and good men shall speak thee
virtuous.

Yea, thirdly: Though of some the slanderer be believed for a while; yet at
last thy actions will outweigh his words: and the disgrace shall rest with the
intender of the ill. The constancy of a man's good behavior, vindicates him
from ill report.

Fourthly, There Is no cause of thy answering; innocence needs not stand upon
its own justification; for God has undertaken to vindicate it, either by
friends, as when Jonathan and Michol, both son and daughter, opposed their own
Father in his evil intents to take David's part, and vindicate his reputation,
1 Samuel 19* 4, 5, 11, 12. Or by enemies, as when Pilate pronounced him innocent,
whom he condemned to die: which shows that innocence cannot want abetters: and
when Caiaphas was forced to approve that Christ in the Chair, whom he condemned
on the Bench. And when Julian was compelled to cry out, O Galilean, thou have
overcome. And when Balaam was forced to bless those for nothing, whom he was
hired to curse. They that will speak the evil they should not, shall be driven
to speak the good they would not.

Or by strangers that stand by; as when young Daniel stepped up to clear Susanna
of that foul aspersion.

Or lastly, by himself, as he often vindicated Mary: O holy Mary, I admire thy
patient silence: thy Sister blames thee for thy piety; the Disciples
(afterward) blame thee for thy bounty and cost, not a word falls from thy lips
in a just vindication of thine honor and innocence; but in an humble
taciturnity, thou leavest thine answer to thy Savior: How should we learn of
thee, when we are complained of for well doing; to seal up our lips, and
expect our righ^ing from above! And how sure, how ready art thou O Savior to
speak in the cause of the dumb! Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and troubled
about many things; but one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen the better
part. What needed Mary to speak for her self, when she had such an Advocate?
she gave Christ an unction of thankefullnesse, he gave her an unction of a good
Name; a thing better then ointment, Eccles. 7.1. Again, the L^per praises God,
Christ praises the L^per.

True, ill tongues will be walking, but we need not repine at their insolency;
why should we answer every dog that barks, with barking again?

But admit God should omit to revenge thy cause, yet, revenge not thy self in
any case; for by revenging thine own quarrel, thou make thy self, both the
Judge, the Witness, the Accuser, and the Executioner: only use for thy rescue,
Prayer to God, and say as Christ has enjoined, Lead me not into temptation,
but deliver me from evil, Matthew. 6.13. and it suffices. Yet if thou will see
what God has done, and what he can and will do, if there be like need; hear
what Ruffinus and Socrates write of Theodosius, in his wars against Eugenius.

When this good Christian Emperor saw the huge multitude that was coming
against him; and that in the sight of man there was apparent overthrow at hand,
he gets him up into a place eminent, and in the sight of all the Army, falls
down prostrate upon the earth, beseeching God, if ever he would look upon a
sinful creature, to help him at this time of greatest need: whereupon there
arose suddenly such a mighty wind, that it blow the Darts of the enemies back
upon themselves, in such a wonderful manner, that Eugenius with all his Host,
was clean discomfited; and seeing the power of Christ so fight for his people,
was forced in effect to cry out, as the Egyptians did, God is in the cloud, and
he fights for them.

No forces are so strong as the spiritual; the prayers of an Eliah, are more
powerful than all the Armies of flesh: which made the Queen Mother of Scotland
confess, That she feared more the prayers and fasting of Mr Knox and his
assistants, than an Army of twenty thousand men.

Thus God either preventeth our enemies, as here he did; or delivers his
servants out of persecution, as he did Peter; or else, if he crowns them with
Martyrdom, as he did Stephen; he will in his Kingdom of glory, give them in
stead of this bitter, a better inheritance; pro veritate morientes, cum
veritate viventes.

Wherefore in this and all other cases, cast thy burden upon the Lord, and say
with the Kingly Prophet, I will lay me down in peace, for it is thou Lord only
that make me dwell in safety, Psalm. 4.8.

CHAP. XXIX. Because they have respect unto Gods Commandment.
2. BEcause they have respect unto Gods Commandment, who says, By your
patience possess your souls, Luke 21.19. Be patient toward all men, 1 These.
5.14. And Let your patient mind be known unto all men, Phil. 4.5. More
especially; Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the
Devil, Ephesians. 4 26, 27. From whence observe this by the way; that he which
lies down in wrath has the Devil for his bedfellow.

See, says Paul, that none recompense evil for evil unto any man, 1 These.
5.15. And again, Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness,
Romans 12.21. Yea, says our Savior, Love your enemies, do well to them that
hate you, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke
6.27, 28. And in case thine enemy hunger, instead of adding to his affliction,
give him bread to eat; if he thirst, give him water to drink; or else thou
breakest Gods Commandment touching patience; Prove. 25.21. Romans 12.20. and
consequently art in the sight of God a transgressor of the whole Law; and
stand guilty of the breach of every Commandment, James 2 10, 11. We know
the frantic man, though he be sober eleven months of the year, yet if he rage
one, he cannot avoid the imputation of madness.

Now as Gods Children should do whatsoever he commands cheerfully, and take
whatsoever he does thankfully; so God suffers such wrongs to be, that he may
exercise thy patience; and he commands thee to forgive those wrongs, that thou
may exercise thy char^ty, and approve thy sincerity: Many say, Lord, Lord;
but if you love me, says Christ, keep my Commandments. It is an idle ceremony
to bow at the Name of Jesus, except we have him in our hearts, and honor him
with our lives. Phraates sent a Crown as a present to Caesar, against whom he
was up in Arms; but Caesar returned it back with this answer; Let him return to
his obedience first, and then I Will accept of the Crown, by way of recognizance.
God admits none to Heaven (says j^stin Martyr) but such as can persuade him by
their works, that they have loved him.

And indeed, take a man that truly loves God, he will easily be friends, not
easily be provoked.

True, take him unexpectedly, he may have his lesson to seek (even he that was
the meekest man upon earth, threw down that in a sudden indignation, which in
cold blood he would have held faster than his life, Exodus 32.19.) but when he
bethinks himself what God requires, it is enough. When Teribazus a noble
Persian was arrested, at first he drew his sword, and defended himself; but
when they charged him in the Kings Name, and informed him they came from his
Majesty, he yielded presently, and willingly.

If then we will approve our selves true obedienciaries, let our revenge be
like that of Elisha's to the Aramites, in stead of smiting them, set bread and
water before them: Or like that of Pericles, who as Plutarch reports, when one
had spent the day in railing upon him at his own door, least he should go home
in the dark, caused his man to light him with a Torch. And to do otherwise is
Ammonite-like, to entreat those Ambassadors ill, which are sent in kindness
and love: for these afflictions are Gods Ambassadors, and to handle them rufly,
yea, to repine or grudge against them, is to entreat them evil. And certainly,
as David took it not well when the Ammonites ill entreated his Ambassadors, so
God will not take the like well from thee, 1 Chronicles. 19. But secondly, as the
Law of God binds us to this, so does the Law of Nature: Whatsoever you would
that men should do unto you even so do you unto them, Matthew. 7.12. Our Savior
does not say, Do unto others, as others do unto you; but as you would have
others do unto you. Now if we have wronged any man, we desire that he should
forgive us, and therefore we must forgive him. Nor would we have any man
traduce us behind our backs: therefore St Austin writ over his Table thus, To
speak ill of the absent forbear:
Or else sit not at taeble here.
Lex talionis was never a good Christian Law. If I forgive not, I shall not be
forgiven, Mar. 11.26. So to say of our Enemies, as Sampson once of the
Philistims: even as they did unto me, so I have done unto them, is but an ill
plea. For the Law of God, and the Law of Nature forbids it; and does not the
Law of Nations also? Yes, throughout the whole world: either they have no Law,
or else a Law to prohibit men from revenging themselves. Oppression or injury
may not be righted by violence, but by Law (and to seek revenge by Law, when it
is not expedient to pass it by, is lawful:) the redress of evil by a person
unwarranted, is evil.

Obj. But thou will say, The Law does not provide a just remedy in all cases of
injury, especially in case of reproach and slander, which is now the Christians
chief suffering; or if in part it does, yet he that is just cannot be quit in
one Term or two. Nay, if he have right in a year, it is counted quick
dispatch, and he is glad that he met with such a speedy Lawyer.

Ans. If thou know the remedy to be worse than the disease; I hope thou will
leave it, and commit thy cause to God; who (if thou will give him the like
time,) will clear thy innocence, and cost thee nothing.

When we have suffered some evil, the flesh, our own wisdom, like the King of
Israel, 2 King. 6.21. will bid us return evil to the doer; but the Spirit or
wisdom of God, like Elisha, opposes, and bids us return him good
notwithstanding his evil: But the flesh will reply, he is not worthy to be
forgiven: I, but says the Spirit, Christ is worthy to be obeyed, who has
commanded thee to forgive him. Now, whethers counsel will thou follow? It is
not always good to take our own counsel; our own wit often hunts us into the
snares, that above all we would shun. We often use means of preservation, and
they prove destroying ones. Again, we take courses to ruin us, and they prove
means of safety. How many flying from danger, have met with death; and on the
other side, found protection even in the very jaws of mischief, that God alone
may have the glory. It fell out to be part of Mithridates misery, that he had
made himself unpoysonable. All humane wisdom is defective, nor does the Fools
bolt ever miss: whatsoever man thinks to do in contrariety, is by God turned
to be an help of hastening the end he has appointed him. We are governed by a
power that we cannot but obey, our minds are wrought against our minds to
alter us. In brief, man is often his own Traitor, and maddeth to undo himself.
Wherefore take the Spirits and the Words direction. Render good for evil, and
not like for like, though it be with an unwilling willingness; as the Merchant
casts his goods overboard, and the Patient suffers his arm or leg to be cut
off: and say with thy Savior, Nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done.

But yet more to induce thee hereunto; consider in the last place, That to
avenge thy self, is both to lose Gods protection, and to incur his
condemnation. We may be said to be out of his protection, when we are out of
our way which he has set us: he has promised to give his Angels charge over
us, to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91.11. that is, in the ways of
obedience, or the ways of his Commandments. But this is one of the Devils
ways, a way of sin and disobedience; and therefore has no promise or
assurance of protection: we may trust God, we may not tempt him: if we do, what
seconds soever we get, Christ will not be our second. Where is no commandment,
there is no promise; if we want his word, in vain we look for his aid. When we
have means to keep our selves, Gods omnipotency is for the present discharged.
If Eutychus had fallen down out of a saucy malipert^^^^^* I doubt whether he
had been restored by St Paul, Acts 20.9. Wafts and strayes, are properly due to
the Lord of the soil: and you know what the Devil said to our Savior, Luke
4.6. which in a restrained sense is true. And therefore when one in Gods stead
rebuked Satan, touching a Virgin whom he possessed at a Theater, saying, How
durst thou be so bold, as to enter into my house? Satan answers, Because I
found her in my house: as Chrysostom delivers it. I am sure Dinah fell into
soul hands, when her Fathers house could not hold her: and Sampson the like,
when he went to Dalilah: and Jonah, when he went to Tarshish: and the seduced
Prophet, when he went beyond his Commission, set him by God: and many the like,
who left the path of Gods protection, where the Angels guard and watch, to walk
in the Devils by-way of sin and disobedience. The Chickins are safe under the
wings of their mother, and we under the providence of our Father; so long as we
hold the tenure of obedience, we are the Lords Subjects; and if we serve him,
he will preserve us. A Priest might enter into a Leprous house without danger:
because he had a calling from God so to do, and we may follow God dry-shod
through the Red Sea. Neither need we vex our selves with cares, as if we lived
at our own cost, or trusted to our own strength: but when a man is fallen to
the state of an Outlaw or Rebel; the Law dispenses with them that kill him;
because the Prince has excluded him from his Protection. Now this being our
case, say there shall happen any thing amiss, through thy taking revenge, what
may thou not expect to suffer, and in thy suffering, what comfort can thou
have? Whereas, if God bring us into crosses, he will be with us in those
crosses, and at length bring us out of them more refined. You may observe,
there is no such coward, none so valiant as the believer: without Gods warrant
he dares do nothing; with it, any thing. Nothing without it. Those says Basil
(to a great man that persuaded him to yield) who are trained up in the
Scriptures, will rather die in an holy quarrel, than abate one syllable of
divine truth. Nor would any solicit them to do ill, did they rightly know
them: for what Cicero speaks of Cato (viz. O gentle Cato, how happy art thou to
have been such an one? that never man durst yet presume, to solicit thee in
any dishonest cause, or contrary to duty) may be applied to every Believer,
rightly so styled. When the Tormentors of Marcus Areihusius (who laid to his
charge the pulling down of an idolatrous Temple) offered him his pardon, in
case he would give so much as would build it up again, he refused it; and being
further urged to give but half, he refused it: at last, being told that if he
would give but a little toward it, they would release him; he refused to give
them so much as an half penny: saying, No not an half penny; for it is as great
wickedness, said he, to confer one half penny, in case of impiety, as if a man
should bestow the whole. A good conscience being in the greatest torture, will
not give one half penny to be released, with hurt to his conscience: he scans
not the we^ght of the thing, but the authority of the Commander: and such have
no good consciences, that dare gratify Satan, in committing the least sin,
o^ neglect God in the smallest precept. The conscionable Nazarite, Numb. 6. did
not only make scruple of guzling, and quaffing whole Flagons of wine, but of
eating only an husk, or a kernel of the grape: knowing the one was as well
forbidden as the other. Will any man eat poison because there is but a little
of it? A small bullet may kill a man as well as a great one. Goliath was as much
hurt by David's little stone, as Sampson by the weight of a whole house. And Ely
died as well by falling back in his chair, as Iezabel by being thrown down from
an high window. And what says our Savior to the unjust Steward? He that is
faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he that is
unjust i^ the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16 10. He that will corrupt
his conscience for a pound, what would he do for a thousand? If Judas will sell
his M^ster for thirty pence, what would he not have done for the Treasury?

Alas, there are no sins small but comparatively: These things (speaking of
Mint and Cummin) ought ye to have done, says our Savior, and not have left
the other undone, Luke 11.42. Wherefore it is with a good and tender
conscience, as it is with the apple of the eye, for as the least hair or dust
grieves and offends that which the skin of the eyelid could not once complain
of; so a good and tender conscience is disquieted, not only with beams, but
moates, even such as the world accounts trifles; it strains not only at
Cammels, but Gnats also.

A sincere heart is like a neat spruce man, that no sooner spies the least
speck or spot on his garment* but he gets it washed or scrap't off: the common
Christian, like a nasty sloven, who, though he be all foul and besmeared, can
endure it well enough: yea, it offends him that another should be more neat
than himself. But such men should consider, that though they have large
consciences, that can swallow down any thing, yet the sincere and tender
conscience is not so wide. A strait shoe cannot endure the least pibble stone,
which will hardly be felt in a wider; neither will God allow those things in
his Children, which he permits in his enemies: no man but will permit that in
another man's Wife or Child, which he would abhor in his own. A box of precious
ointment, may not have the least fly in it; nor a delicate Garden, the least
weed, though the Wilderness be overgrown with them.

I know the blind world so blames the Religious, and their Religion also, for
this niceness, that they think them Hypocrites for it: but this was Jobs
comfort in the aspersion of Hypocrisy, My witness is in Heaven, and my record
on high. And as touching others that are offended, their answer is, Take thou O
God (who need not our sin to further thy work of Grace) the charge of thy
Glory, give us grace to take charge of thy Precepts. For sure we are, that what
is absolutely evil, can by no circumstance be made good; poison may be
qualified and become medicinal: there is use to be made of an enemy; sickness
may turn to our better health; and death it self to the faithful, is but a
door to life; but sin, be it never so small, can never be made good

Thus you have seen their fear, but look also upon their courage, for they more
fear the least sin, than the greatest torment.

All the fear of Satan and his instruments, arises from the want of the true
fear of God; but the more a man fears God, the less he fears every thing else.
Fear God, honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.14, 17. He that fears God, does but honor
the King, he need not fear him, Romans 13.3. the Law has not power to smite the
virtuous.

True, many have an opinion not wise, That Piety and Religion abates fortitude,
and makes valor Feminine: but it is a foundationlesse conceit. The true
believer fears nothing but the displeasure of the highest, and runs away from
nothing but sin.

Indeed he is not like our hot-spurs, that will fight in no cause but a bad;
that fear where they should not fear, and fear not where they should fear; that
fear the blasts of men's breath, and not the fire of Gods wrath; that fear more
to have the world call them Cowards for refusing; than God to judge them rebels
for undertaking: that tremble at the thought of a Prison, and yet not fear Hell
fire: That can govern Towns and Cities, and let a silly woman overruled them at
home; it may be a servant or a Child, as Themistocles Son did in Greece:
What I will, said he, my Mother will have done, and what my Mother will have,
my Father does. That will undertake a long journey by Sea in a Wherry, as the
desperate Mariner hoyseth sail in a storm, and says None of his Ancestors
were drowned: That will rush fearlesly into infected houses, and say, The
Plague never ceizeth on valiant blood, it kills none but Cowards: That
languishing of some sickness, will strive to drink it away, and so make have
to dispatch both body and soul at once: that will run on high battlements,
gallop down steep hills, ride over narrow bridges, walk on weak Ice, and never
think what if I fall? but what if I pass over and fall not?

No, he is not thus fearlesse, for this is presumption and desperate madness,
not that courage and fortitude which arises from faith, and the true fear of
God; but from blindness and invincible ignorance of their own estate: As what
think you? Would any man put his life to a venture, if he knew that when he
died he should presently drop into hell? I think not. But let the believing
Christian, (who knows he has a place reserved for him in Heaven) have a
warrant from Gods word; you cannot name the service, or danger that he will
stick at. Nor can he lightly fail of success. It is observed that Trajan was
never vanquished, because he never undertook war without just cause. In fine,
as he is most fearful to offend, so he is most courageous in a good cause; as
abundance of examples witness, whereof I Will but instance two: for the time
would be too short to tell of Abraham, and Moses, and Caleb, and David, and
Gideon, and Baruck, and Sampson, and Ieptha, and many others; of whom the holy
Ghost gives this general testimony; that by faith, of weak they were made
strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliants,
subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the
fire, etc. Heb. 11.22, to 35. Nor will I pitch upon Joshua, whom neither
Caesar, nor Pompey, nor Alexander the Great, nor William the Conqueror, nor
any other ever came near, either for valor or victories: but even Jonathan
before, and the Martyrs, after Christ, shall make it good. As what think you of
Jonathan, whom neither steepness of Rocks, nor multitude of enemies, could
discourage, or dissuade from so unlikely an assault? Is it possible, if the
divine power of Faith, did not add spirit and courage, making men more than
men; that two should dare to think of encountering so many thousands? and yet
behold Jonathan and his Armor-bearer put to flight, and terrified the hearts
of all the Philistims, being thirty thousand Chariots, six thousand Horsemen,
and Footmen like the sand of the Seashore, 1 Samuel 14.15. O divine power of
faith! that in all attempts and difficulties makes us more than men, and
regards no more Armies of adversaries, than swarms of flies.

A natural man in a project so unlikely, would have had many thoughts of
discouragement, and strong reasons to dissuade him: but his faith dissolves
impediments, as the Sun does dewes; yea, he contemns all fears, overlooks all
impossibilities, breaks through all difficulties with a resolute courage, and
flies over all carnal objections with celestial wings; because the strength
of his God, was the ground of his strength in God.

But secondly, To show that their courage is no less passive, than active;
look upon that Noble Army of Martyrs, mentioned in Ecclesiastical History, who
went as willingly and cheerfully to the stake, as our Gallants to a Play; and
leapt into their beds of flames, as if they had been beds of down: yea, even
weak women, and young striplings, when with one dash of a pen, they might have
been released. If any shall yet doubt which of the two (the Religious or
Profane) are most valiant and courageous; let them look upon the demeanor of
the twelve Spies, Numb. the 13th and 14th Chapters; and observe the difference
between the two faithful and true hearted, and the other ten: then will they
conclude, that Piety and Religion does not make men Cowards; or if it do* that
as there is no feast to the Churles, so there is no fight to the Cowards. True,
they are not soon, nor easily provoked; but all the better, the longer the cold
fit in an Ague, the stronger the hot sit.

I know men of the Sword will be loath to allow of this Doctrine; but truth is
truth, as well when it is not acknowledged, as when it is: and experience tells
us, that he who fears not to do evil, is always afraid to suffer evil. Yea
the Word of God is express; That none can be truly valarous, but such as are
truly religious, The wicked fly when none pursues, but the righteous are as
bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. The reason whereof is, If they live, they know by
whom they stand; if they die, they know for whose sake they fall.

But what speak I of their not fearing death, when they shall not fear even the
day of Judgment, 1 John 4.17. Have not thou O Savior bidden us, when the
Elements shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be flaming about our ears,
to lift up our heads with joy, because our redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.25,
to 29. Wherefore says the valiant Believer, come death, come fire, come
whirlewinde, they are worthy to be welcome that shall carry us to immortality.
Let Pagans and Infidels fear death, says St Cyprian, who never feared God in
their life, but let Christians go to it as travelers unto their native home;
as Children unto their loving Father; willingly, joyfully. Let such fear to
die, as have no hope to live a better life: well may the brute beast fear
death, whose end of life is the conclusion of their being: well may the Epicure
tremble at it, who with his life looks to lose his felicity: well may
ignorant and unrepentant sinners quake at it, whose death begins their
damnation: well may all those make much of this life, who are not sure of a
better; because they are conscious to themselves, that this dying life, will
but bring them to a living death; they have all sown in sin, and what can
they look to reap, but misery and vanity? sin was their traffic, and grief
will be their gain; detestable was their life, and damnable will be their
decease.

But it is otherwise with the Godly, they may be killed, but cannot be hurt;
for even death (that fiend) is to them a friend, like the Red Sea to the
Israelites, which put them over to the Land of Promise, while it drowned their
enemies. It is to the faithful as the Angels were to Lot, who snatched him out
of Sodom, while the rest were consumed with fire and brimstone. Every believer
is Christ's betrothed Spouse, and death is but a messenger to bring her home to
her Husband: and what chaste or loving Spouse, will not earnestly desire the
presence of her Bridegroom (as St Austin speaks?) Yea, the day of death to
them, is the day of their Coronation: and what Princely heir does ^^t long for
the day of his instalment, and rejoice when it comes? Certainly it was the
sweetest voice that ever the Thief heard in this life, when Christ said unto
him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. In a word, as
death to the wicked, puts an end to their short joys, and begins their
everlasting sorrows: so to the Elect, it is the end of all sorrow, and the
beginning of their everlasting joys.

The end of their sorrow; for whereas complaint of evils past, sense of
present, and fear of future, have shared our lives amongst them; death is 1. A
Supersedeas for all diseases; the Resurrection knows no imperfection. 2. It is
a Writ of ease, to free us from labor and servitude: like Moses that delivered
Gods people out of bondage, and from brick-making in Egypt. 3. Whereas our
ingresse into the world, our progress in it, our egresse out of it, is nothing
but sorrow (for we are born crying, live grumbling, and die sighing) death is a
medicine, which drives away all these, for we shall rise triumphing. 4. It
shall revive our reputations, and clear our Names from all ignominy and
reproach; yea, the more contemptible here, the more glorious hereafter. Now a
very Duellist will go into the field to seek death, and find honor. 5. Death
to the godly is as a Jail-delivery, to let the Soul out of the prison of the
body, and set it free. 6. Death frees us from sin, an Inmate that (spite of
our teeth) will ^oust with us, so long as life affords it house-room: for what
is it to the faithful, but the funeral of their vices, and the resurrection
of their virtues.


And thus we see, that death to the Saints is not a penalty, but a remedy; that
it acquits us of all our bonds, as sickness, labor, sorrow, disgrace,
imprisonment, and (that which is worse than all) sin; that it is not so much
the death of nature as of corruption and calamity. But this is not half the
good it does us; for it delivers us up, and lets us into such Joys, as eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to
conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. Yea, a man may as well with a coal, paint out the Sun
in all his splendour, as with his pen, or tongue express; or with his heart
(were it as deep as the Sea) conceive, the fulness of those joys, and
sweetness of those pleasures, which the Saints shall enjoy at Gods right hand
for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is the sullnesse of joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. For quality they are pleasures; for
quantity, fulness; for dignity, at Gods right hand; for eternity, for
evermore: and millions of years multiplied by millions, make not up a minute to
this eternity.

Our dissolution is nothing else but aeterni natalis, the birthday of eternity
(as Seneca calls it, more truly than he was aware,) for when we are born, we
are mortal; but when we are dead, we are immortal: yea, even their mortal
wounds make the sufferers immortal; and presently transport us from the
contemplation of felicity, unto the fruition. Whereas, if the corn of our
bodies be not cast into the earth by death, we can have none of this increase:
which is the reason, first, that we celebrate the memory of the Saints, not
upon their birth-dayes, but upon their death-dayes; to show how the day of our
death, is better than the day of our birth: And secondly, that many Holy men
have wished for death; as Jeremy, Job, Paul, etc. As, who can either marvel, or
blame the desire of advantage? for the weary traveller to long for rest, the
prisoner for liberty, the banished for home; it is so natural, that the
contrary disposition were monstrous.

And indeed it is our ignorance and infidelity; at least our impreparation,
that makes death seem other than advantage. And look to it, for he hardly
mourns for the sins of the time, who longs not to be freed from the time of
sin: he but little loves his Savior, who is not willing to go unto him, and
is too fond of himself, that would not go out of himself to God.

True, he that believes will not make haste, Isa. 28.16. that is, he will not
go out by a backdoor, seek redress by unlawful means: for though here he
has his pain, and in Heaven he looks for his payment, yet he will not make
more haste than good speed. Though he desires to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all, Phil. 1.23, 24. Yet he is content to live, yea,
he lives patiently, though he dies joyfully: In his wisdom he could choose the
gain of death, but in his obedience he refuses not the service of life: and it
is to be feared, that God will refuse that soul, which leaves the body before
himself calls for it; as Seneca speaks (like a Divine.)

Now, what are we to learn from this double lesson, but a twofold instruction?
(...) unsent? is death to the godly no other then the Brazen Serpent to the
Israelites? which was so far from hurting them, that contrarily it healed
them. And would thou not fear death (for to labor not to die is labor in
vain, and Kings in this are Subjects.)

First, Look through death at glory, as let but the unfolded Heavens give way
to Stevens eyes, to behold Christ in the glory of his Father; how willing is he
to ascend by that stony passage? Acts 7.56, 59.

Secondly, Fear to commit the least sin, which is forbidden by so great a
God, and suffered for by so loving a Savior.

Now God has so far forth forbidden revenge, that he has forbidden all
kind of hatred and malice; for the Law in every Commandment is spiritual,
and binds the heart as well as the hand; and to thy power thou have slain him
whom thou hate: he is alive, and yet thou have killed him, says St Augustine:
and therefore these two, hatred and murder, are coupled together as
yoak-fellowes, in that long teame of the fleshes beastly works, which draw men
to perdition, Romans 1.29. Gal. 5.21. and wherein do they differ? but as the
Father and the Son, or as Devil and evil, only in a letter. Yea, says
Christ, in the places before quoted, Love your enemies, do well to them that
hate you, overcome evil with good, etc. Luk 6.27. Romans 12.21. Be so far from
snatching Gods weapon out of his hand, that you rather master unkindnesse with
kindness.

And as this is Gods word, so hearing what the word speaks, is an ear-mark of
Christ's sheep, as witnesses the chief sheepherd, Joh. 8. He that is of God,
hears Gods word: and he is of an uncircumcised ear, and one of the Devils
Goats, that wants this mark: for he hears it not, because he is not of God,
Verse. 47. Wherefore lay it to heart, lose not the privilege of Gods
protection, by an unwarrantable righting of thy self: Do not like the Fool,
that leapt in the water, for fear of being drowned in the boat. But above all
fears, fear him, which, after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, Luke
12.5. compare the present with the future, the action with the reward; think
thou see beyond pleasing thy appetite, and doing thine own will, sin
against God; beyond that, death; beyond death, judgment; beyond judgment,
hell; beyond that, no limits of time, or torments; but all easelesse, and
endless. Thou cryest, God be merciful to me; but be thou also merciful to
thy self: Fear God, fear sin, and fear nothing; for sin is the sting of all
troubles: pull out the sting, and deride the malice of the Serpent. Yea, have
but Gods warrant for what thou go about, and then let death happen, it shall
not happen amiss; for the assurance of Gods call and protection, when a man's
actions are warranted by the Word, will even take away the very fear of death:
for, death (as a Father well notes) has nothing terrible, but what our life
has made so. He that has lived well is seldom unwilling to die; life or death
is alike welcome unto him; for he knows, whiles he is here, God will protect
him; and when he goes hence God will receive him. I have so behaved my self
(says St Ambrose to the Nobles of Millain) that I am not asha(...) Hilarion,
These seventy years and upwards, thou have served the Lord* therefore now go
forth my soul with joy, etc. Whereas he that has lived wickedly, had rather
lose any thing even his soul, than his life: whereby he tells us, though his
tongue express it not, that he expects a worse estate hereafter. How often does
guiltiness make one avoid, what another would wish in this case? Yea, death
was much facilitated by the virtues of a well-led life, even in the Heathen.
Phocion being condemned to die, and the executioner refusing to do his office,
unless he had twelve Drachmes paid him in hand; Phocion borrowed it of a
friend and gave it him: ne mora fieret morti. Again, Cato was so resolute, that
he told Caesar, he feared his pardon, more than the pain he threatened him with.
And Aristippus, as I take it (though I may be mistaken,) told the Sailors (that
wondered why he was not, as well as they, afraid in a storm?) that the odds was
much; for they feared the torments due to a wicked life, and he expected the
reward of a good one. Its a solid and sweet reason, being rightly applied. Vic^
draws death with a horrid look, with a whip, and flames, and terrors; but so
does not virtue. Whence it was that death was ugly and fearful unto Cicero;
wished for, and desired of Cato; and indifferent to Socrates.

Obj. But a violent and painful death, is by far, more terrible and
intolerable than a natural?

Answ. Seldom have the Martyrs found it so, but often the contrary: which made
them kiss the wheel that must kill them, and think the stayres of the
scaffold of their Martyrdom, but so many degrees of their ascent to glory.
Besides Elias his fiery Chariot, or they which stoned Steven, took no more from
them, than an ordinary sickness did from Lazarus; and let death any way
crumble the body to dust, the Resurrection shall restore it whole again. Indeed
if we live (and God by some lingering sickness, shall in mercy stay till we
make us ready,) we shall do well: but if we die as the Martyrs did, half burnt,
and half blown up; we shall do better. And thus much to prove that the Godly
endure reproaches and persecutions patiently, because God has commanded them
so to do.

CHAP. XXX. That they are patient in suffering of wrongs, for Gods glory.
3. THe Children of God are patient in suffering wrongs, for Gods glory; lest
Philosophy should seem more operative in her Disciples, than Divinity in hers;
lest Nature and Infidelity should boast it self against Christianity. It is a
saying of Seneca, He that is not able to set light by a sottish injury, is no
Disciple of Philosophy. And the examples before rehearsed show, that Socrates,
Plato, Aristippus, Aristotle, Diogenes, Epictetus, Philip of Macedon, Dion of
Alexandria, Agathocles, Antigonus, and Caesar, were endued with rare and
admirable Patience; whereunto I will add three other examples: Philip of
Macedon asking the Ambassadors of Athens, how he might (...) Athens that could
be, if you would hang your self; yet was not moved a jot, for all his might was
answerable to his patience: Why? he cared not so much to revenge the evil, as
to requite the good.

Polaemon was not so much as appalled at the biting of a Dog that took away
the brawn or calf of his leg; nor Harpalus to see two of his Sons laid ready
dressed in a silver charger, when Astyages had bid him to supper. And lastly,
when it was told Anaxagoras (from the State) that he was condemned to die, and
that his Children were already executed, he was able to make this answer; As
touching (said he) my condemnation, nature has given like sentence both of my
condemners and me; and as touching my Children, I knew before that I had begot
mortal creatures. But what of all this? Let every natural man know, that a
continued patience may be different from what is goodness: for as Austin well,
There is no true virtue, where there is no true Religion; neither is it a
natural meekness which proceeds from a good constitution, nor a moral
meekness which proceeds from good education and breeding; but spiritual
meekness which is a fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5.22, to 25. That is the subject
of our discourse, and will carry away the blessing.

But to give them the utmost advantage, let the virtues of all these
Philosophers be extracted into one Essence, and that spirit powered into one man
(as Zeuxis pourtraying Juno, chose the five Daughters of Croton, out of all the
Agrigentine Virgins, that from their several perfections, he might compose one
excellent and most beautiful picture:) Yet this Philosopher must be
acknowledged to fall short of a complete Christian guided by the Spirit of God.
Or if you will gather out of Histories the magnanimity of Hector, of Alexander,
of Caesar, of Scipio, and of Scaevola, put them to the rest; yet for patience
and constancy, they come not near that one president laid down in the example
of that holy man Job, and other servants of God in succeeding ages; and that in
five main particulars.

1. One notable difference between the patience of a Philosopher and a
Christian, is, They lacked a pure heart, truly sanctified by the holy Ghost,
which is the fountain of all well doing. Now if the fountain be corrupt, the
streams cannot be pure; but the best of them were but in the state of nature
unregenerate, and consequently unreconciled to God in Christ, and so enemies to
him, Romans 5.10. And our persons must first be justified and accepted of God,
before our actions can please him: as of necessity the Tree must be good,
before it can bear good fruit. Yea, says our Savior, as the Branch cannot
bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except you
abide in me, Joh, 15.4. Christian virtues are not natural; a man is no more
born with Grace in his soul, than with Apparel on his back.

Again, the best of our Works are imperfect, and mingled with corruptions; and
therefore cannot abide the examination of Gods exact justice, till they be
covered with Christ's Righteousness, and their corruption washed away with his
most precious blood Neither can those works please God, which are done without
him: for as it will be no excuse before God (...) when the matter of the work
is ill, to plead the goodness of the heart; so, neither when the heart is
naught, to plead that the matter of the work is good; as many notable examples
prove, namely the Jews urging God with their fasting, Isa. 58. and yet sent
away empty. And those reprobates, Matthew. 7. who alleadg their preaching in
Christ's Name, casting out Devils, etc. but receiving that fearful answer,
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. As also Cain, whose
outward works in sacrificing were the same with his brothers; and yet St John
says, Cains works were evil, and his brothers good; which may serve to
comfort poor Publicans, and confound all proud Pharisees, as St Austin
observes, Qui viret in foliis venit a radicibus humor.

2. As the Christian bears injuries patiently, so he does it and all other
performances in knowledge of, and in obedience to Gods Word and Commandment;
which obedience also proceeds from a true love of God, and an humble heart:
thinking when he has done that, he falls far short or performing his duty.
Whereas they had neither knowledge in, nor love to, not the least respect of
God or his word, in their bearing injuries: and therefore as God said once to
the Jews in matter of fasting, Have ye fasted to me? so he will say to them in
the matter of suffering, Have ye suffered in love and obedience to me, and my
word? No: but in love to your own credit, and other the like carnal respects.
And indeed, how can they expect a reward from God, when they have done him no
service? If in bearing with, or serving of men, we serve our selves, and seek
our selves rather than God: when we come for our reward, Gods answer will be,
Let him reward you, whom ye have served; thou servedst thy self, therefore
reward thy self, if thou will: for I never reward any service but mine own. As,
why will Christ at the latter day remember, and reward the duties of love and
liberality done to men? but because they were done for his sake, and as to
himself, Matthew. 25.40. Ye have done them unto me, there is the cause of the
reward. Whence it is, St Paul wills Christian servants, yoaked with cruel
heathenish Masters, to be obedient unto them, as unto Christ; serving the Lord,
and not men, Col. 3.22, 23, 24.

3. What ever they did or suffered, was either to purchase fame to themselves,
or to merit reward by it; their aim and end was not Gods glory, but their own
honor and glory, and virtues are to be judged, not by their actions, but by
their ends. Yea, they called virtue, Bonum Theatrale, as if a man would not be
virtuous, if he had not spectators to take notice of him: but it is false, for
virtue will be as clear in solitudine as in Theatr^, though not so conspicuous;
only it may grow more strong by the observation, and applause of others, as an
heat that is doubled by the reflection.

But, O the difference between these natural and mere moral men, and a true
Christian: the Christian loves goodness for it self, and would be holy, were
there no Heaven to reward it; he does all, and suffers all, out of sincere
affection, and a zeal of Gods glory, and the Churches good, Matthew. 5.16. to the
end his Name may be magnified, and others won and edified, 1 Pet. 2.12. as most
fit it is, that the profit being man's, the honor should be Gods. And this his
sincerity the rather appears, in that he holds out maugre all opposition,
disgrace, persecution* etc. whereas the other, like windmills, would not turn
about to do any good service, but for the wind of men's praises.

Now, it is one method to practice swimming with Bladders, and another to
practice dancing with heavy shoes. We read of some that in the Monastery
could fast whole days together with ease, but in the desert they could not
hold out until noon, but their bellies would be craving presently.

4. The one does it in faith, which only crowns good actions; for whatsoever is
not done in faith is sin, Romans 14.23. and therefore cannot please God, Heb.
11.6. the reason is this, If our best actions be not the fruits of a lively
faith, they spring from ignorance and infidelity, as herbs may do from a
dunghill. And its evident they have not faith; for how should they believe in
him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14.

And it were well if all that are mere civil and moral men, would look to the
Rock where-out their works are hewn; and to the Pit, where-out they were
dug: for God looks at no action further, than it is the work of his
Spirit, but the spirit is no where but in the sons of God, Gal. 4.6. and no
sons but by faith in Christ, Gal. 3.26. So that obedience without faith, is but
as the shell without the kernel, the husk without the corn, the carcass
without the soul, which the Lord abhors, as the sacrifice of fools, Isa. 66.3.
Whence it is, that all the virtues of the Heathen are called by Divines
splendida peccata, shining or glistering sins, sins as it were in a silken
Robe.

5. The sum of all Moral Philosophy is included in these two words, sustain,
and abstain, and a wicked man may restrain evil as do the godly; but here is
the difference, the one keeps in corruption, the other kills corruption.

6. The Philosopher, and so all civil and moral men, can forbear, the
Christian forgive; they pardon their enemies, we love ours; pray for them, and
return good for evil: and if not, we no whit savor of Heaven. For if you love
them that love you (says our Savior,) what thanks shall you have? for even
the sinners do the same (such as see not beyond the clouds of humane reason:)
But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute
you, Matthew. 5.44. Luke 6.27, 32, 33. showing that if we will ever hope for good
our selves, we must return good for evil unto others. In which words you may
note a triple injunction, one to the heart, the treasury of love; another to
the tongue, loves interpreter; the third and principal to the hand, which is
loves Factor or Almoner. Wherein our Savior seems to set man like a Clock,
whose master- wheel must not only go right within, nor the bell alone sound
true above; but the hand also point straight without: as for the motion and
setting of the wheel within, he says to the heart, love your enemies: for the
stroke and sounding of the bell above, he says to the tongue, bless them that
curse you: and for the pointing of the hand, or Index without, he says to the
hand, Do good to them that hurt you.

Now, well may natural men say^ with the wind of their natural passion^ and
corrupt affections, in rendering evil for evil, but Christ the Master and
Pilot of his Ship the Church; has charged all passengers bound for Heaven, the
Haven of their hope, and Harbor of their rest; like Paul's Mariners, Acts 27.
to sail with a contrary wind and weather, of doing good for evil: and like the
Disciples on the Lake of Genazereth, R^^ through the raging waves of their
enemies reproaches, with a contrary breath; not rendering rebuke for rebuke* but
contrariwise, to bless, 1 Pet. 3 ^^. And the better to teach us this lesson,
he practiced it himself, adding example to precept: for his word and his work,
like mercy and truth, were together; his precept and his practice, like
righteousness and peace, kissed each other: for when they in devilish malice
sought nothing but his condemnation, he in great love went about the work of
their salvation: when they shed his blood to quench their malice, he swet water
and blood to wash their souls. Yea, when the Jews were crucifying of him, he at
the same time (though the torments of his passion were intolerable,
incomparable, unconceivable) solliciteth God for their pardon, Luke 23.34. Now
his prayer could not but he efficacious, and a pardon for such murder^rs, was
no mean good turn. And this likewise is the practice of the Saints, who strive
to imitate their Master in all things which he did as man: St Steven, at the
instant, while his enemies were stoning of him, kneeled down and prayed, Lord
lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7.60. Where is one thing very
remarkable; he stood when he prayed for himself, but kneeled when he prayed for
his enemies; hereby showing the greatness of their impiety, which easily could
not be forgiven, as also the greatness of his piety. And indeed, as to render
good for good, is the part of a man; and to render evil for evil, the part of
a beast; and to render evil for good, the part of a devil* so to render good
for evil, is only the part of a Saint: Be merciful as your heavenly Father is
merciful, Luke 6.36. It were easy to abound in examples of this kind; How
often did Moses return good unto Pharaoh for his evil, in praying to, and
prevailing with God for him, to the removal of nine several plagues,
notwithstanding his cruel oppression? And David, what could he have done for
Saul, that he left undone; notwithstanding he so cruelly persecuted him, and
hunted after his life? And the like I might show in that man of God to
Jeroboam, and they that went to Heaven by that bloody way of Martyrdom, who
prayed for others, even their persecutors and murderers; an easier passage to
Heaven: Yea, Gods people account it a sin to ^ease praying for their worst
enemies, 1 Samuel 12.23.

But what do I tell them of these transcendent examples? when I never yet heard
or read of that Philosopher, which could parallel Dr Cooper Bishop of Lyncolne,
in an act of patient suffering; who, when his Wife had burnt all his Notes,
which he had been eighty years a gathering, least he should kill himself with
overmuch study (for she had much ado to get him to his meals,) showed not the
least token of passion, but only replied, Indeed wife it was not well done: so
falling to work again, was eight years more in gathering the same Notes,
wherewith he composed his Dictionary: which example, I confess, more admires
me, than any that ever I heard of from a man, not extraordinarily and
immediately inspired and assisted by the holy Ghost: and sure he that could
endure this, could endure any thing, whether in body, goods, or good name: for
of necessity there must be in that man that can patiently bear such a loss,
somewhat more than man. I know there are some men (or rather two legged Beasts)
that esteem no more of Books and Notes, than Esops Coe^ did of the Pearl he
found; and these accordingly will say, this was nothing in comparison of what
they suffer: as when once a Hotspur was persuaded to be patient as Job was, he
replied, What do you tell me of Job? Job never had any Suits in Chancery.

Yea, indeed the meanest of Christ's royal Band, for patience, puts down all
the generation of natural men; as even their enemies will confess. Consalvus
a Spanish Bishop and Inquisitor, wondered, how the Protestants had that
Commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, so indelibly printed
in their hearts, that no torture could blot it out, and make them confess, and
betray one another. And indeed, how should it be otherwise? For First, If
Moral Principles cherished and strengthened by good education, will enable the
soul against vicious inclinations; so that though some influence of the Heavens
do work upon the air, and the air upon the spirits, and the spirits upon the
humors? and these incline the temper, and that inclines the soul of a man,
such and such ways: yet breeding in the resineder sort of evil persons, will
nauch prevail, to draw them another way; what may we think of grace, and faith,
and Gods Spirit, which are supernatural? Secondly, Every Christian suffering
for Christ's sake, and for righteousness sake, has Gods mighty power to
support him, and Christ to suffer with (...), and bear a part in his misery:
whereas the natural man suffers all himself as a delinquent or malefactor;
whose guilty conscience adds weight ^o his punishment. A woman called
Faelicitas (whom St Austin much praises,) being brought to bed in the time of
her imprisonment for the truth; (and by reason of the great pains she had in
her labor, that she could not forbear scree^hing;) one of the Officers hearing
her cry out, tauntingly mocked her thus: Ah woman, if thou can not bear these
sorrows, without such cryings; how will thou endure, when thou shall be burnt,
or cut in pieces, or torn asunder! what thou now suffer, is but sport, but
the Tragedy is to follow: whom she answered; Now, said she, I suffer for my
self, and for sin; but then, Christ is to suffer in me, and I for him. And it
fell out as she said, for when she was thrown to the wild beasts, she neither
sent out schreeings, nor so much as a sigh or groan; but entertained death with
so merry and cheerful a countenance, as if she had been invited to a Feast


And thus you see in the first place, that Nature has but a slow foot to
follow Religion close at the heels, that grace and faith transcend reason, as
much as reason does sense; that patience (rightly so called) is a
Prerogative-royall, peculiar to the Saints. It is well if Philosop^y have so
much wisdom, as to stand amazed at it.

2. That it is not true Christian patience, except 1. It flow from a pious and
good heart, sanctified by the holy Ghost. 2. Be done in knowledge of, and
obedience to Gods command. 3. That we do it in humility, and sincere love to
God. 4. That it be done in faith. 5. That we aim at Gods glory (not at our
own,) and the Churches good in our sufferings. 6. That we forgive, as well as
forbear; yea, love, pray for, and return good to our enemies for their evil:
Which being so, what has the Swashbuckler to say for himself? And what will
become of him, if he repent not, who can afford no time to a^gue, but to
execute? Yea, what has the more temperate worldling to say for himself, who
has some small piece of reason for his guide? arguing thus, I would rather
make show of my passions, than smother them to my cost; which being vented and
expressed, become more languishing and weak: better it is to let its point work
outwardly, than bend it against our selves; and in reason, Tallying of i^juries
is but justice: To which I answer, it is not reason, especially carnal reason,
but Religion, which all this while has been disputed of, which is Divine and
supernatural; and that teaches how good must be returned for evil, and that
we should rather invite our enemy to do us more wrong, than not to suffer the
former with patience, as our Saviors words do imply: If (says he) they strike
thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also: If they sue thee at the Law,
and take away thy coat, let them have thy cloak also, Matthew. 5.39, 40. He
speaks comparatively, as if he should say, Rather suffer two wrongs, than do
one.

Indeed, the difficulty of the duty, the seeming danger, and want of faith in
carnal men, weakneth the force of the strongest reasons; for no more among
Ruffians, but a word and a blow; among civil men, but a word and a Writ, can
you expect. But as thrice Noble Nehemiah said to that false Belly-god
betraying-Priest Shemaiah, Should such a man as I flee? So the true Christian
will encounter all discouragements and frighting alarms thus; Should such a man
as I, fear to do that which my Master, King and Captain Christ Jesus has
commanded me, which is of more necessity than life it self?

Yea, seeing Heathens could go so far as to subdue their passions; for shame
let so many of us as would be accounted Christians, go further, even to the
mortifying of ours: or if we go not before Publicans and Sinners. in the
Kingdom of grace, Publicans and sinners shall go before us into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And seeing the duty of the Child, is the Fathers Honor, let us that
are Christians, be known from worldlings by our practice; as once the Grecians
were known from the Barbarians by their virtuous lives, as Quintus Curtius
notes. Shall a wild Olive tree, growing upon the barren mounts of Gilboa; and
nature, where neither dew of the spirit, nor rain of grace falls, bear such
fruit? and shall not to thou, a green Olivetree, in the house of God, planted
beside the waters of comfort, bring forth this fruit of the Spirit?

We see that civil honesty, severed from true piety, humility, saving
knowledge, sincere love to God, true obedience to his word, justifying faith, a
zeal of Gods glory, and desire to edify and win others, God accepts not, as
proceeding from the love of our selves, and other carnal respects, namely, to
obtain praise or profit thereby. So that to suffer as the Heathen did, without
observing other circumstances, is but to imitate that foolish Patient, who when
the Physician bade him take that prescript, eat up the paper. Wherefore do not
only subdue thy passions, but sail with that contrary breath of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 4.12. We are reviled, and we bless: and with that of St Steven, who rowed
both against wind and tide, not only through the raging waves of his enemies
reproaches, but even in a storm of stones, being as earnest to save their
souls, as they were to slay his body.

Mere Civil and moral men have speculative knowledge, if thine be saving, it
will take away barrenness and make thee fruitful in the works of obedience;
Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? we expect this of
the Earth that has only nature, and shall not God expect it of us, who have
sense to govern nature, Reason to govern sense, grace to govern reason, Jesus
Christ to govern all?

The little World Man, is so the compendium and abridgement of all creatures,
that whatsoever is imprinted with Capital Letters in that large Volume, as in
Folio, is sweetly and harmoniously contracted in decimo sexto, in the brief
text of man, who includes all: Planets have being, not life; Plants have life,
not sense; Beasts have sense, not reason; Angels have being, life, reason, not
sense; Man has all, and contains in him more generality than the Angels; Being
with Planets, life with Plants, sense with Beasts, reason with Angels: But the
believer has over and above Gods Spirit, and faith, which are peculiar
prerogatives belonging to the godly, which no man (being a m^er man) is capable
of.

Here also, if it were as orderly as pertinent, I might take occasion to show
another peculiar and proper adjunct belonging to the patience of a Christian,
which a Philosopher may sooner envy than imitate; yea, it must put him besides
his reason, before he can conceive it possible; namely, That a Christian
rejoices in his sufferings: We rejoice in tribulation (says St Paul,) knowing
that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, etc. Romans 5.3. Yea, he goes yet further and says; I am
filled with comfort, I am exceedingly joyful in all our tribulation, 2 Cor.
7.4. which is to over-abound exceedingly with joy, such an exuberation of joy,
as brake forth into thankfulness: And St James the like, saying, My brethren,
count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations; knowing that the
trying of your faith, brings forth patience: and let patience have her
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire lacking nothing, Jam. 1.3, 4.

Gods people do not only acknowledge that they suffer justly frrm God, even
when they suffer unjustly from men, as Joseph's brethren did, who were no Spies,
nor corners, as they were accused; yea, they had faithfully presented their
Moneys for their Wheat, neither had they stolen their Lords Cup? yet say they,
justly is this evil come upon us, because we have sinned against our brother,
Genesis 42.21. As a trespass being committed, perhaps thirty or forty years ago,
and no punishment till now inflicted; behold thy Creditor is now come, and thou
must pay the debt; have thou any wrong done thee? I trow not. But this is not
all (though nature will scarce acknowledge so much) for we must proceed, and
not always continue in the nethermost Form, like drones: he is not uppermost
in this School of Patience, who suffers things patiently, that must be
suffered: but he who does it willingly, cheerfully and thankefully.

Paulus Diaconus relates, how the Empress Irene being deposed from ruling, by
her own servant, said, I thank God, who of his free mercy advanced me an
unworthy Orphane to the Empire, but now that he suffers me to be cast down, I
ascribe it wholly to my sins: blessed be his Name, for his mercy in the one,
in the other for his justice. And St Iam^s being cut into pieces limb by limb,
was heard to say, God be thanked, upon the cutting off of each member or joint.
The very Heathen, says St Hierome, know that thanks are to be given for
benefits received, but Christians only, give thanks for calamities and mis^ries.

But because this path leads from the way of my intended discourse, and you
affect not to have me digress: come we to the sixteenth Reason.

CHAP. XXXI. That they may follow Christ's example, and imitate the Patience of
the Saints in all Ages.
16. Reason.

6. IN the sixth and last place, they bear the slanders and persecutions of
wicked men patiently, that they may follow Christ's example, and imitate the
patience of the Saints in all ages.

Christ also suffered for you (says St Peter) leaving you an example that you
should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. And it is written of him, that When he
was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not, 1 Pet.
2.23. He was called of his enemies Conjurer, Samaritane, Winebibber, etc. was
scoft at, scorned, scourged, crucified, and what not? yea, he suffered in every
place, in every part.

First, In every place, hunger in the desert, resistance in the Temple, sorrow
in the Garden, contumelies in the Iudgement-hall, Crucifying without the City,
etc.

Secondly, In every part, his eyes run down with tears, his temples with blood,
his ears tingled with buffetings, glowed with reproaches; they afflicted his
taste with Gall, spit in his face, pierced his head with thorns, his hands with
nails, his side with a spear: his heart was full of sorrow, his soul of
anguish, his whole body was sacrificed as an offering for sin; and yet he
suffered all for us, to the end he might leave us an example, that we should
follow his steps. Neither was it so much what he suffered, as with what
affection, willingness and patience he suffered, that did Nobilitate the merit
of his sufferings.

As touching the first, Why descended he to take our flesh? but that we might
ascend to take his Kingdom; he descended to be crucified, that we might ascend
to be glorified; he descended to hell, that we might ascend to Heaven.

Touching the second, What King ever went so willingly to be Crowned, as he to
be crucified? Who so gladly from execution, as he to it? What man was ever so
desirous to save his life, as Christ was to lose it? witness that speech, I
have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I pained till it be
accomplished, Luke 12.50? His mind was in pain, till his body and soul came to
it: And to him that dissuaded him from it, he used no other terms, than avoid,
Satan.

And thirdly, With what patience he suffered all, let both Testaments,
determine; he was oppressed and afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth; he
was brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer is
dumb, so opened he not his mouth, Isa. 53.7. His behavior was so mild and
gentle, that all the malice of his enemies, could not wrest an angry word from
him. Yea, when his own Disciple was determined to betray him; I see not a
frown, I hear not a check from him again: but what thou do, do quickly. O
the admirable meekness of this Lamb of God! Why do we startle at our petty
wrongs, and swell with anger, and break into furious revenges, upon every
occasion, when the pattern of our patience lets not fall one harsh word, upon
so foul and bloody a Traitor? When the Jews cried out, Crucify him, as before
they cried out, His blood be upon us and upon our Children; he out cries,
Father, pardon them: being beaten with Rods, crowned with Thorns, pierced with
Nayls, nailed to the Cross, bathed all his body over in blood, filled with
reproaches, etc in the very pangs of death; as unmindfull of all his great
griefs, he prays for his persecutors, and that earnestly, Father forgive
them: Pendebat, and tamen petebat, as St Augustine sweetly: O patient and
compassionate love! Ye wicked and foolish Jews, you would be miserable, he
will not let you: His ears had been still more open to the voice of grief, than
of malice: and so his lips also are open to the one, shut to the other.

Thus Christ upon the Cross, as a Doctor in his chair, read to us all a
Lecture of Patience, for his actions are our instructions: and the same that
Gideon spoke to Israel, he speaks still to us: as ye see me do, so do you: And
no man be he never so cunning, or practiced, can make a strait line, or perfect
circle by steadiness of hand, which may easily be done by the help of a Rule
or Compass: Besides, is Christ gone before us in the like sufferings? what
greater encouragement? When we read that Caesar's example (who not only was in
those battles, but went before them) yea his very Eye made his Soldiers
prodigal of their blood: when we read that young King Philip, being but
carried in his Cradle to the Wars, did greatly animate the Soldiers.
Besides, what servan^ will wish to fare better than his Lord? Is it meet that
he who is not only thy Master, but thy Maker, should pass his time in
continual travel, and thou in continual case?

When a lewd Malefactor being condemned to die with just Phocion* rayled at the
Judge, the Law, his Accusers, and looked on Death with terror and amazedness:
he thus cheered him with encouragement, Do thou grudge to die with Phocion?
so say I to thee: Do thou grudge to suffer with thy Savior? O blessed Jesus!
O thou Co-eternall Son of thine Eternal Father, why should I think strange
to be scourged with tongue or hand, when I see thee bleeding? what lashes can I
fear, either from Heaven or Earth, since thy scourges have been born for me,
and have sanctified them to me*

True, It is Satan's policy to make men believe, that to do and suffer as a
Christian, is so extremely difficult for them, that it is altogether
impossible; wherein he deals like the inhospitable Salvages of some Countries,
who make strange fires, and a show of dismal torrours upon the shores, keep
passengers from landing: But if Christ be gone before us in the like, and it is
for his sake that we smart; then we may be sure to have him present with us
(even within us by his spirit, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14.) to assist us, and prevent
our enemies; and is not he able enough to vindicate all our wrongs?

Learn we therefore from him to suffer Innocently. Patiently.


Will thou (says one) look to reign, and not expect to suffer? Why Christ
himself went not up to his glory, until first he suffered pain: Or will thou
(says Saint Cyprian) be impatient, by seeking present revenge upon thine
enemies, when Christ himself is not yet revenged of his enemies? Do thou bear
with others, God bears with thee; Is there a too much, which thou can suffer
for so patient a Lord? But to go on; will thou follow Gods example? Then note,
whereas Christ has in many particulars commanded us to follow his example; yet
in no place (says Saint Chrysostom) he infers we should be like our
Heavenly Father, but in doing good to our enemies. And therein resemble we the
whole three Persons in Trinity. God was only in the still wind; Christ is
compared to a Lamb, the holy Ghost to a Dove. Now if we will resemble these
three Persons, we must be softly, Lambs, Doves; but if on the contrary we be
fierce, cruel, and take revenge, so using violence, we resemble rather the
devil who is called a roaring Lion; and the wicked, who are termed Dogs,
Wolves, Tigers, etc.

3. To add to the precept of God, and the practice of our Savior, the example
of Gods people; they are patient in suffering of injuries, that they might
imitate the Saints in all ages. They were so, and we are likewise commanded to
follow their steps, as in all things which are good; so especially in this,
Take, my brethren the Prophets (says Saint James) for an example of suffering
adversities, and of long patience, Jam. 5.10. ^^ethren, says Saint Paul to the
Thessalonians. Ye are become followers of the Churches of God, which in Iudes
are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of your own
Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews* 1 These. 2.14. And to the
Philippians, Be ye Followers of me. Brethren, and look on them which walk so,
as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3.17. And see how he followed his Masters
example* for who, amongst us so loves his benefactors, as Saint Paul loved his
malefactors? He would do any thing (even he rased out of the book of life) to
save them that would do any thing to ^ell him. Amongst many examples recorded
for thy imitation and mine; Behold the patience of Job. Jam. 5.11. of Abraham,
Genesis 20.17, 18. of Isa^c* Chap. 26.1^. of Joseph. Chap. 3^.32, 33. who
notwithstanding his brethren hated him for his goodness, and could not speak
peaceably unto him, conspired to kill him, stripped him of his Goat, cast him
into a pit, sold him for a slave, recompensed them good for evil; when he was
armed with power to revenge: for when these his enemies did hunger, he fed
them; when they were thirsty, he gave them drink; whereas they stripped him of
his party-coloured-coat, he gave them all change of raiment; whereas they sold
him for twenty pieces of money, he would not sell them Corn, but gave it them
freely, and put their money again into their sacks: whereas they cast him into
a pit, without either bread or water, he brought them into his own lodging, and
feasted them sumptuously with delicate fare, and gave them of the best wine:
Thus he gave them a good measure pressed down, and shaken together; yea,
running over into their bosoms, of kindness for unkindnesse. And thus holy
David (...) in the steps of good Joseph, Psalm. 38.12, to 15. 1 Samuel 26.20. For
when Saul had bent his how, and made ready the arrows within his quiver, to
shoot at this upright in heart, and sweet singer of Israel: Yea, when this
Fowler hunted him like a Partridge to the mountains; so that his soul was ^ain
to ask for the wings of a Dove, that he might fly away and be at rest: Yet see
when his mortal foe was delivered into his hand in the Cave* he would not lay
hands on his enemy, nor suffer his blood-thirsty followers to fall upon him;
but only to give him notice what he could have done, cut off the lap of his
garment, and rendered him good for evil, as Saul himself confessed, 1 Samuel
24.18. Yea again, when he found him asleep in the field, he spared his life
which was in his hand; and to give him a second warning, only took away his pot
of water and his spea^. ^^ Sam. 26. And lastly of Stev^n, who when the Jews
were stoning him to death, kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, ^ay
not this sin to their charge, Acts. 7.60. A true Scholar of CHRIST: For
first, He prayed for enemies; Secondly, For mortal enemies that stoned him:
Thirdly, In hot blood, at the time when they wronged him most ^ as being more
sorry for their riot, than for his own ruin. Now what is it that we suffer,
being compared with their sufferings? Even nothing in a manner: Ye have not
(says St Paul to the Hebrews) yet resisted unto blood: we have passed (says
the Prophet) through fire and water; not fire only, as the three Children; nor
w^ter only, as the Israelites; but fire and water, all kind of afflictions and
adversities. For shame then let us pass through a little tongu-tryall, without
the least answering or repining. In which, take M^ Calvin for a pattern, who
said, Though Luther call me a Devil, yet I will honor him as a dear servant
of God.

Now all ye scoffers, behold the patience of the Saints, and stand amazed. That
which you (not for want of ignorance) esteemed base, sottish and unworthy, ye
see has sixteen solid Reasons, as so many pillars to support it; and these
hewn out of the Rock of Gods Word. Ye see the Child of God is above nature,
while he seems below himself: the vilest creature knows how to turn again; but
to command himself, not to resist, being urged, is more then Heroical. Here
then is matter worth your emulation, worthy your imitation.

Again, Behold the Reasons why God suffers you to deride, hate and persecute
his people, which are likewise declared to be sixteen in number, and those no
less weighty; of which three concern his own glory; thirteen our spiritual and
everlasting good, benefit and advantage. Yea reflect yet further you seed of
the Serpent, and see In the Cause and Cure of Prejudice, etc.
the Original, continuance, properties, causes, ends, and what will be the
issue of your devilish enmity against the seed of the Woman; And then you will
acquit the Religious with Christ and his Apostles for well doing; or confess
that you condemn Christ and his Apostles with them; as Erasmus said in his own
defense. But if of the two, you will choose to go on, and perish; your blood be
on your own heads, and not on mine; I have discharged my duty.

CHAP. XXXII. Rules to be observed touching Thoughts, Words and Deeds, when we
are wronged.
I Must needs confess (may some say) you have shown sixteen solid and
substantial Reasons of Patience, sufficient to persuade any reasonable
creature to embrace it, at least in affection; but is it therefore in all cases
necessary we suffer injuries, without righting of our selves, or being angry?

No: he that makes himself a Sheep, shall be eaten of the Wolf. In some cases
tolerations are more than unexpedient; they inspire the party with boldness,
and are as it were pullies to draw on more injuries; bear one wrong, and invite
more; put up this abuse, and you shall have your belly full of them. Yea, he
that suffers a lesser wrong, many times invites a greater; which he shall not
be long without. As how does David's patience draw on the insolence of Shimei?
Evil natures grow presumptuous upon forbearance. In good natures and
dispositions, injury unanswered grows weary of it self, and dies in a
voluntary remorse; but in those dogged stomachs, which are only capable of the
restraints of fear; the silent digestion of a former wrong, provokes a second.
Neither will a Beef braind follow be subdued with words. Wherefore mercy has
need to be guided with wisdom, lest it prove cruel to it self.

Neither does Religion call us to a week simplicity, but allows us as much of
the Serpent, as of the Dove. It is our duty indeed to be simple as Doves, in
offending them; but we are no less charged to be wise as Serpents, in
defendi^g our selves: lawful remedies have from God, both liberty in the use,
and blessing in the success; no man is bound to tender his throat to an unjust
stroke. Indeed, when the persecuted Christians complained against their
adversaries, to Julian the Emperor, desiring justice; he answered them, as
some of our scoffers may do in the like case, It is your Masters commandment
that you should bear all kind of injuries with patience. But what did they
answer? It is true, he commands us to bear all kinds of injuries patiently,
but not in all cases; besides, said they, we may bear them patiently, yet crave
the Magistrates aid for the repairing of our wrongs past, our present rescue,
or for the preventing of what is like to ensue. But to make a full Answer to
the Question propounded: There are Rules to be observed, 1 touching our
Thoughts. 2 touching our Words. 3 touching our Actions.


First, Touching our Thoughts: He that deceives me often, though I must forgive
him: yet Charity binds me not, not to censure him for untrusty; and though
Love does not allow suspicion, yet it does not thrust out discretion; it
judges not rashly, but it judges justly: it is not so sharp sighted, as to
see a moat where none is, nor so purblinde, but it can discern a beam where it
is: the same spirit that says, Charity believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.
says also, that a fool believes all things, Prove. 14.15. and Charity is no
fool: as it is not easily suspicious, so neither lightly credulous: It is
neither simple, nor subtle, as Bias spoke wisely of her; or rather not only
simple as a Dove, to think no evil, but also wise as a Serpent, to discern all
things, and see what is evil.

2. For our tallying of words, as it argues little discretion in him that does
it, so it is of as little use, except the standers by want information of thy
innocence, and his guiltiness, which gives the occasion. Wherefore in hearing
thy own private and personal reproaches, the best answer is silence; but the
wrongs and indignities offer^d to God, or contumelies that are cast upon us in
the causes of Religion, or the Church, may safely be repayed. If we be
meal-mouthed in Christ's, and the Gospels cause, we are not patient but
zeal-lesse. Yea, to hold a man's peace when Gods Honor is in question, is to
mistake the end of our Redemption, 1 Cor. 6.20. What says the Apostle? Ioyn
with patience godliness, 2 Pet. 1.6. for else, patience without godliness,
while it receives injury of man, may do more injury to God. Neither is there a
better argument of an upright heart, than to be more sensible of the
indignities offered to God, than of our own dangers. And certainly no ingenuous
disposition can be so tender of his own disgrace as the tru^ Christian is at
the reproach of his God* as we see in Moses, who when Aaron and Miriam offered
him a private injury, it is said his meekness was such, that he gave them not
a word, Numb. 12. But when the people had fallen to idolatry, and he heard them
murmur against their Maker; he spares neither Aaron, nor the people, but in a
godly fit of zeal, takes on at them; yea, breaks the Tables in pieces, Exodus
32. A meek Lamb in his own cause, a fierce Lion in Gods. Yea, it was always
his manner, to plead the peoples cause to God, with prayers and tears; but Gods
cause against the people, with sword and revenge. And thus it fared with David,
who was a man deaf and dumb, and wholly senseless at Shemei's private
reproach; when he cursed him, cast stones at him, called him murderer and
wicked man, 2 Samuel 16. But not so, at Goliahs public revilings of God, and his
Church; no, not at Michols despising his holy zeal in the public service of
God, 2 Samuel 6. In these cases, how full of life, and spirit, and holy
impatiencie did he show himself to be! And our Savior Christ, who suffered
himself to be spit upon, buffeted, crowned with Thorns, etc. without giving an
angry word; but when he saw the Tempple abused, he burned in a zealous anger
against them; took a scourge, and whipped the buyers and sellers out, saying, Ye
have made my Fathers house a den of thieves, Matthew. 21.12.13.

3. Touching our actions; whether it be in thine own cause, or in the cause of
God and Religion, thou may not be a revenger. All that private persons can
do, is either to lift up their hands to Heaven for redress of sin, or to
lift up their tongues against the sin, not their hands against the person.
Who made thee a judge? is a lawful question, if it meet with a person
unwarranted. True, Phineas in the case of Zimry and Cozby, lift up his hand,
and thrust them both through with a spear: And when Moses saw the Egyptian
smiting the Hebrew, he smote the Egyptian: but they had peculiar warrants
signed from Heaven, either by instinct, or special command, which we shall
expect in vain.

Well may we flee from danger, as Jacob fled from Esau, Moses from Pharaoh,
David from King Saul, Elias from Iezabel, Paul from the Damascens, and Christ
himself from the Jews: And expect to find comfort in our flight, even a City
of refuge; as Jacob found favor in Labans house, Moses, a rich Father-in-Law,
Elias, an Angel to feed him, Paul, spiritual brethren to comfort him; besides
the holy Ghost, the true Comforter. But the weapons of a Christian in
adversity, ought only to be patience and prayer; for as Theodoret says, If
Muentius, and Maximinian, in the heat of zeal, shall rayl on wicked Julian at a
Feast; justly may their deaths be cast upon their petulancy, but not upon their
Religion. Yea, the Council of Eleberis decreed, that if any man did take upon
him to break down the Heathens Idols, and were slain in the place, that he
should not be reckoned among the Martyrs.

Indeed, God so loves this heat of zeal, in all the carriages of his servants,
that if it transports us too far, he pardons the error of our fervency,
rather than the indifferency of lukewarmnesse: as may be seen in that act of
Moses, when being wroth with the people about the molten Calf, he brake the
Tables in pieces, Exodus 32. Nevertheless, if we shall either out of
superstition or presumption, do that we have neither calling nor warrant for
out of the Word: such our works (be our intention what it will) are but the
blind whelps of an ignorant zeal: and an unadvised zeal (when knowledge is not
made the Pilot of devotion) may be more prejudicial, than a cold remissness.
Swift horses without a skillful waggoner, and full sayls without a good Pilot,
endanger more.

Object. Every base nature will be ready to offer injuries, where they think
they will not be repaid: he will many times beat a Coward, that would not dare
to strike him, if he thought him valiant: as a Cur that goes through a Village,
if he clap his tail between the legs, and run away, every Cur will insult over
him; but if he bristle up himself, and stand to it, give but a counter-snarle,
there is not a Dog dares meddle with him.

Answ. Nevertheless, avenge not thy self, but give place unto wrath, and that
for conscience sake, Romans 12.19. If thou receivest wrong in thy person, goods
or good Name; it is the Magistrates office to see thee righted; and for this
cause ye pay also tribute. He is the Minister of God for thy wealth, to take
vengeance on him that does evil, and for the praise of them that do well:
neither does he bear the sword for naught, Romans 13.4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.14. Now in
this case, he that has endamaged me much (as you have some that will deprive
men of their possessions, and then persuade them to be content,) cannot plead
breach of charity in my seeking ^^s Restitution; and because patience without
discretion wrongs a good cause, I will so remit wrongs, as I may not encourage
others to offer them; and so retain them, that I may not induce God to retain
mine to him. Have you not seen a Crow stand upon a Sheeps back, pulling off
wool from her side? even creatures reasonlesse, know well whom they may be bold
with, that Crow durst not do this to a Wolf or a Mastiffe: the known
simplicity of this innocent beast, gives advantage to this presumption.
Meekness of spirit commonly draws on injuries, and the cruelty of ill natures
usually seeks out those, not who deserve worst, but who will bear most.
Wherefore patience, and mildness of spirit, is ill bestowed, where it exposes
a man to wrong and insultation: Sheepish dispositions are best to others, worst
to themselves I could be willing to take injuries, but I will not be guilty of
provoking them by lenity: for harmelesnesse, let me go for a Sheep; but
whosoever will be tearing my fleece, let him look to himself.

Diogenes the Stoic, teaching his auditors how they should refrain anger, and
being earnest in pressing them to patience; a waggish boy spit in his face, to
see whether he would practice that which he taught others: but Diogenes was not
a whit moved at it, yet said withal, I fear I shall commit a greater fault, in
letting this boy go unpunished, than in being angry. In some cases, for reason
to take the rod out of the hands of wrath, and chastise, may be both lawful
and expedient. The same which Aristotle affirmed in Philosophy, viz. That
choler does sometime serve as a whetstone to virtue, is made good Divinity by
St. Paul, Be angry, but sin not, Ephesians. 4.26. that is, be angry with sin
only.

For Cautions and Rules to be observed, when we appeal to the Magistrate:
First, Let it be in a matter of weight, and not for trifles.

True, thou can not be more forward to cast away thy money, than some Lawyers
are to catch it: but the Physician and Lawyer, are for necessity, not for
wantonness. What said one to a Lawyer, offering to right his wrongs, and
revenge him of his adversary, by Law? I am resolved rather to bear with
patience an hail shower of injuries, than seek shelter at such a thicket; where
the brambles shall pluck off my fleece, and do me more hurt by scratching, than
the storm would have done by hailing. I care not for that Physic, where the
remedy is worse than the disease.

Secondly, Let it be in case of necessity, after we have assayed all good means
of peace and agreement; using Law, as a Father does the Rod, full sore against
his will. As whatsoever our wrongs be, true wisdom of the spirit will send the
Apostle le^ity, as admonitions harbinger, with offers o^ peace, before she
takes out process, 2 Timothy 2.25.

Thirdly, Let not our aim and end be the hurt of our enemy; but, first, the
glory of God; secondly, the reformation of the party himself, that so he which
is overcome, may also overcome; and (if it may be) others by his example,
whereby more than one Devil shall be subdued. And thirdly, to procure a
further peace and quiet afterward; as Princes make war to avoid war: yea,
in case we see a storm inevitably falling, it is good to meet it, and break the
force.

Fourthly, Let us not be transported either with heat or hate, but begin and
follow our suits without anger, or using the least bitterness or extremity
against the person of our adversary: as Tilters break their Spears on each
others breasts, yet without wrath or intention of hurt; or as Charles the
French King made war against Henry the seventh King of England, rather with
an Olive Branch, than a Lawrell-branch in his hand, more desiring peace than
victory: not using bribery, or any other means to corrupt or hinder justice,
but to seek our own right.

Fifthly and lastly, Having used this ordinary means that the Lord has given
us for the righting of our selves, in case we find no redress; let us rest
with quietness and meekness therein, without fretting, or desiring to right
our selves by private revenge; knowing assuredly, that the Lord has thus
ordered the whole matter, either for our correction, or for the exercise of our
patience and charity; or that he will take the matter into his own hand, and
revenge our cause of such an enemy, far more severely: or for that he means to
deal far better with us, if we commit our cause to him, than either our selves
or any Magistrate could have done.

To conclude this argument in a word. If thou go to Law, Make Conscience thy
Chancery, Make Charity thy Judge, Make Patience thy Counselor, Make Truth thy
Attorney, Make Peace thy Solicitor;
And so doing, thou shall be sure to find two friends in thy suit, that will
more bestead thee, than any ten Judges; namely, God and thy Conscie^^^. God,
who being Chief Justice of the whole world, can do for thee whatsoever he will,
and will do for thee whatsoever is best: thy Conscience, which is instead of a
thousand good Witnesses, a thousand good Advocates, a thousand good Iuries, a
thousand Clerks of the Peace, and Guardians of the Peace, to plead, procure,
pronounce, record, and assure to thee that peace which passes all
understanding.

But I fear I have incited your impatiency by standing so long upon patience.

An End of the Second Part, the Third follows. Together with
London, Printed by A. M. for James Crump in Little Bartholomews Well-yard.
1654.

A handful of Nuts.
MEn no more differ from Beasts, Plants, Stones; in speech, reason, shape: then
some differ from others, in heart, in brain, in life. Nor is the Epicure more
like a swine, the Lustful person a Goat, the Fraudulent man a Fox, the
Backbiter a barking Dog, the Slanderer an Asp, the Oppressor a Wolf, the
Persecutor a Tyg^r, the Church-robber a wild Bore, the Seducer a Serpent, yea a
Devil, the Traitor a Viper, etc. 2 Timothy 4.17. Luke 13.32. Phil. 3.2. Psalm.
22.12, 13, 16, 20, 21. and 74.13, 14, 19. and 80.13. Matthew. 23.33. Dan. 7.4, 5,
6, etc. Zeph. 3.3, 4, etc. Cant. 2.15, 17, etc. then every of them is unlike
another; as the holy Ghost intimates, in comparing several men, to almost
every several Creature in the Universe.

Neither does sin and grace only make this difference, or occasion the very
Heathen Poets (usually and most fitly) to compare some men to Stones for their
hardness and insensiblenesse; (which may be understood of the Adamant stone, as
Zech. Chap. 7.12. has it) others to Plants, that only fill their Veins; a
third sort to Beasts that please their senses too; a fourth to evil Angels,
that only sin, and cause others to sin: a fifth to Good Angels that are still
in motion, always serving God, and doing good, yet ever rest. But as Menander
speaks, there is no less difference between the wise and simple, the learned,
and unlearned, then there is between men and beasts, or between the living and
the dead, as another has it.

And yet the rational does not so much excel the sensual, as the spiritual
excels the rational. For as the soul is the lamp of the body, and the reason
of the soul, and Religion of reason, and Faith of Religion; so Christ is the
light and life of Faith, Joh 1.9. and 8.12, Act. 26.18. Ephesians. 5.14. Christ is
the Sun of the soul, and the day we know with one eye does far more things
descry; then night can do with more then Argus eyes. Whence it is, that all men
in their natural condition are said to be blind and in darkness, Mat. 4.16.
and 15.14. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. and 5.8. 1 Pet. 2.9. whereas Believers are called
Children of light, and of the day, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. 1 Pet. 2.9. And as no man can
see the light of the Sun but by the benefit of the Sun, so no man can know the
secrets of God but by the revelation of God, 1 Cor, 2.11, 12, 13. Mat. 16.16,
17. To know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, we must have hearts, eyes,
and ears sanctified from above, Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. Psa. 111.10. Luke 24.45. Ioh.
15.15. Romans 8.14, 15.

No learning nor experience will serve, to know the riches of the glory of Gods
inheritance in the Saints; to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge,
Ephesians. 1.17, 18. and 3.19.

Reason and Faith are the two Eyes of the soul; Reason discerns natural
objects, Faith spiritual, and supernatural. But as mere sense is incapable of
the rules of Reason, so Reason is no less incapable of the things that are
divine and supernatural, Jer. 10.14. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. Ephesians. 5.8. And as to
speak is only proper to men, so to know the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven is
only proper to Believers, Psa. 25.14. Pro. 3.32. Amos 3.7.

Faith and illumination of the Spirit, adds to the fight of our minds; as a
prospective glass adds to the corporal fight, Mat. 16.17. 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 10,
11, 12, 14, 15, 16. Joh. 12.46.

Sense is a mere Beasts, Reason a mere Man's, Divine knowledge is only the
Christians. Some men are like the Moon at full; have all their light toward
Earth, none toward Heaven: Others like the Moon at wain, or change, have all
their light to Heaven-wards, none to the Earth: A third sort are like the Moon
in Eclipse, having no light in it self, neither toward Earth nor toward
Heaven.

Now according as men are wise, they prise and value wisdom; and endeavor to
obtain it, Pro. 18.15. like Solomon who prayed for wisdom, and Moses who
studied for wisdom, and the Queen of Sheba who traveled for wisdom, and
David who to get wisdom made the word his Counselor, hated every false way,
and was a man after Gods own heart. As O the pleasure that rational men take in
it, Prove. 2.3, 10, 11. and 10.14. Phil. 3.8.

Whereas on the contrary, brutish and blockish men, as little regard it, Prove.
1.5, 7, 13. A man desires not, what he knows not, says Chrysostom, neither
are unknown evils feared: wherefore the work of regeneration begins at
illumination, Act. 26.18. Col. 1.13. 1 Pet. 2.9.

Knowledge is so fair a Virgin, that every clear eye is in love with her: it is
a pearl despised of none but Swine. It is more true of divine wisdom, then it
was of that Grecian beauty: no man ever loved her, that never saw her; no man
ever saw her, but he loved her.

Lucian tells of an Egyptian King, who had Apes taught (when they were young)
to dance, and keep their postures with much art: these he would put into rich
Coats, and have them in some great presence to exercise their skill; which was
to the admiration of such as knew them not; what little sort of active, nimble
men the King had got: And such as knew them, thought it no less strange; that
they should be trained up to so man-like, and handsome a deportment. But a
sub^ile Fellow that was one admitted to see them; brought and threw amongst
them, a handful of Nuts: which they no sooner spied; but they presently left
off their dance, fell a scrambling, tore one another rich Coats; and to the
derision of the beholders (who before admired them,) they discovered themselves
to be mere Apes.

These ensuing Notions (which I have purposely taken; as a handful out of the
whole sack, to squander away amongst my acquaintance) are such Nuts, as will
discover not a few (who are men in appearance, their own opinion) to be as
wise, and well affected as Aesops Cock; that preferred a barley Corn, before a
Pearls or Plinies Moal, that would dig under ground with great dexterity: but
was blind, if brought into the Sun. Or Diaphontus, that refused his mothers
blessing, to hear a song: Or the Israelites* who preferred Garlic and Onions,
before Quails and Manna.

And so much for overplus to this division.
A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE against all Grief.
Extracted out of the choicest Authors, Ancient and Modern, both Holy and
Humane. Necessary to be read of all that any way suffer Tribulation. The Fourth
Impression.
By R. YOUNG, Florilegus.
Imprimatur

Thomas Gataker.

CHAP. 33. Use and Application of the former Reasons.
Use 1.
THese latter Reasons being dispatched, return we to make use of the former; for
I may seem to have left them, and be gone quite out of sight: though indeed it
cannot properly be called a digression, seeing the last of the former reasons,
was; That God suffers his Children to be persecuted and afflicted for the
increase of their Patience. First, if God sends these afflictions, either for
our Instruction, or Re^ormation, to scour away the rust of corruption, or to
try the truth of our sanctification, either for the increase of our patience,
or the exercise of our faith, or the improvement of our zeal, or to provoke our
importunity, or for the doubling of our Obligation: seeing true gold flies not
the touchstone; Let us examine whether we have thus husbanded our affliction to
his glory, and our own spiritual and everlasting good. I know Gods fatherly
chastisements for the time, seem grievous to the best of his Children; Yea, at
first they come upon us, like Samsons Lion, look terrible in show; as if they
would devour us; and as Children are afraid of their friends when they see
them masked, so are we. But tell me, has not this roaring Lion prevailed
against thy best part? Have thou kept thy head whole? (I mean) thy soul; free?
For as Fencers will seem to fetch a blow at the leg, when they intend it at the
head; so does the Devil, though he strike at thy name, his aim is to slay thy
soul. Now instead of being overcome do thou overcome? Has this Lion yielded
thee any Honey of Instruction, or Reformation? Has thy sin died with thy fame,
or with thy health, or with thy peace, or with thy outward estate? Do thou
perceive the graces of Gods Spirit, to come up, and flourish so much the more
in the spring of thy recovery, by how much more hard and bitter thy winter of
adversity has been? Then thou have approved thy self Christ's faithful
Soldier, and a Citizen of that Jerusalem, which is above: Yea, I dare boldly
say of thee, as Saint Paul of himself, That nothing shall be able to separate
thee from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.39. To
find this Honey in the Lion, more then makes amends for all former fear and
grief: and in case any man, by his humiliation under the hand of God, is grown
more faithful and conscionable: there is Honey out of the Lion: or is any man
by his temptation or fall, become more ^ircumspect after it? There is also
Honey out of the Lion, etc. For there is no Samson, to whom every Lion does not
yield some Honey; for as affliction sanctified, ever leaves some blessing
behind it, like the River Nilus, which, by overflowing the Land of Egypt,
fattens, and fills it, with flowers and fruits; so a fine wit, and a Christian
will, makes use of any thing: like the little Be, which will not off the
meanest flower, till she has made somewhat of it. Even Saul's malice shall
serve to enhance David's zeal: and the likelihood of losing Isaac, shall both
evidence and improve Abraham's love to God: or, Has the Lord made Hannah
barren? And does her adversary vex her sore, year by year; and grievously
upbraid her for it, so that she is troubled in her mind? why even that shall
make her pray, and weep sore the Lord, and make vows: yea, and when God gives
Samuel to her, she will give Samuel back again to God. Lastly, Saint Paul in
this School of Affliction, will learn in what estate soever he is, (prosperous,
or adverse,) therewith to be content: Phil. 4.11. And thou may souly suspect
thy self, if thou be not the better for thy being the worse. He is no true
born Christian who is not the better for his evils, whatsoever they be; no
price can buy of the true believer, the gain of his sins. Yea, Satan himself,
in his exercise of Gods Children, advantageth them. And look to it, if the
malice and enmity of wicked men has beaten thee off from thy profession, thou
were at the best but a counterfeit, and none of Christ's own Band. A little
faith, even so much as a grain of Mustard Seed, would be able to remove greater
mountains of fear and distrust out of thy soul; then these: for know this, that
Good men are like Diamonds, which will shine in the dirt: yea, they resemble
Glow-wormes, which shine most in the dark; or Juniper, which smells sweetest in
the fire; or Pomander, which becomes more fragrant by chasing; or Roses which
are sweeter in the Still, then on the stalk.

Use 2.
2 If the malice of our enemies, as it is husbanded to our thrift (by a divine
and supreme providence) does make so much for our advantage and benefit here,
and hereafter; as namely, that it opens our eyes no less then peace and
prosperity had formerly shut them; that nothing does so powerfully call home
the conscience, as affliction; and that we need no other art of memory for sin,
besides misery; If commonly we are at variance with God, when we are at peace
with our enemies, and that it is both hard and happy, not to be the worse with
liberty, as the sedentary life is most subject to diseases: if vigor of body,
and infirmity of mind, do for the most part lodge under one roof, and that a
wearish outside be a strong motive to mortification: if God, the All-wise
Physician, knows this the fittest medicine for our souls sickness, and that we
cannot otherwise be cured; if our pride forces God to do by us, as Sertorius
did by his Army, who perceiving his Soldiers puffed up through many Victories,
and hearing them boast of their many Conquests, led them of purpose into the
lap of their Enemies, to the end that stripes might learn them moderation.

If this above all will make us pray unto him with heat and fervency: As
whither should we fly but to our Joshua, when the powers of darkness, like
mighty Aramites, have besieged us? If ever we will send up our prayers to him,
it will be when we are beleagur'd with evils.

If true, and saving joy be only the daughter of sorrow, if the security of
any people be the cause of their corruption, as no sooner does the Holy Ghost
in sundry places say, Israel had rest; but it is added, They committed
wickedness: Even as standing waters soon grow noisome, and Vines that grow out
at large, become wild and fruitless in a small time: if it weans us from the
love of worldly things; and makes us no less enamoured with heavenly: as Zeno,
having but one flie-boat left him, hearing news that both it and all therein
was cast away, said, O Fortune, thou have done well to send me again to our
School of Philosophy: whereas if we find but a little pleasure in our life; we
are ready to do at upon it. Every small contentment glues our affections to
that we like, neither can we so heartily think of our home above, whilst we
are furnished with these worldly contentments: But when God strips us of them,
straightways our mind is homeward. If this world may be compared to Athens, of
which a Philosopher said, that it was a pleasant City to travel through, but
not safe to dwell in: If by smarting in our bodies, states, or names, we are
saved from smarting in our souls: If it was good for Naaman, that he was a
Leper; good for David that he was in trouble; good for Bartimeus that he was
blind^; if with that Athenian Captain, we should have perished for ever, in
case we had not thus perished for a while; if our peace would have lost us, in
case we had not a little lost our peace: Then refuse not the chastening of the
Lord, neither be grieved with his correction, as Solomon advises, Prove. 3.11.
And so much the rather, 1 First, because our struggling may aggravate, cannot
redress our miseries* 2 Secondly, because the Lord will be sanctified either of
us, or on us; one of the two, as Saint Anstine speaks. 3 Thirdly, because that
is little which thou suffer in comparison of what thou deservest to suffer;
for thou have deserved to be destroyed: and he that has deserved hanging, may
be glad if he escape with whipping. Besides, as David told Saul, he could as
easily have cut his throat, as he had, his coat: or as Caesar boasted to
Metellus, he could as soon make him hop headless, as bid it be done: so the
Lord may expostulate with thee, and much more.


Wherefore be patient, I say, but not without sense; be not of those Stoics, (
stocks rather you may style them) who like beasts, or rather like blocks, lie
under their burden, and account it greatest valor to make least ado, and lay
it as little as may be to heart: For if you mean to be the Kings sons, you
must bring him the fore-skins of an hundred Philistines: show him the fruit of
your former sufferings. But above all, let us not resemble the wicked; who if
affliction comes to them, receive the curse with cursing; and if the Devil
throw but one cross to them, they will take their souls and throw them again
to him, for they presently break out, either into some cursed rage, or into the
rage of cursing, or into some cursed action.

An usual thing, when men are crossed by the creatures (I might say, their own
husbands or children) to fall a cursing, and blaspheming them, to whom we may
say, as the Prophet did to Sennacherib: 2 Kings 19.22. Whom have thou
blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy self? Even against the Holy
One of Israel. Whom are you angry withal? Does the rain and waters, or any
other creature displease you? Alas, they are but servants, if their Master bid
smite, they must not forbear: they may say truly what Rabshakeh usurped, Are we
come without the Lord? Isa. 1.36.10. Yea, are we not sent of the Lord in love,
and to do you good, and to give you occasion of rejoicing afterward, if you
bear the Cross patiently, and make that use of it which others do, and the Lord
intends? Yea, Saint Paul could rejoice even in tribulation.

But alas, these are so far from rejoicing with that blessed Apostle, that they
rave in tribulation; and like some beasts, grow mad with baiting; or like
frantic men wounded, who finding ingredients prepared to dress them, tear them
all in pieces. But let us not be like them, if Satan robs us of a bag of
silver, let not us call after him, and bid him take a bag of gold also: If he
afflict thee outwardly, yet surrender not to him the inward; rail not at the
Hangman, but run to the Judge; fret not with Ioash, 2 Kings 6.33. but submit
with Hezekiah: Isai. 39.8. When Gods hand is on thy back, let thy hand be on
thy mouth: If thou be wronged, call not thine adversary to account, but thy
self, and let it trouble thee more to do ill, then to hear of it; be more sorry
that it is true, then that it is known.

Yea, neither rage at the Surgeon, as madmen, nor swoun under his hand, as
Milk-sops; but consider with whom thou have to do: The Lord, the Lord strong,
merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth,
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; and
that will by no means clear the guilty, but visit the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto the third and fourth
generation: Exodus 34.6, 7. And this (if any thing) will do: It was before the
Lord, says David, and therefore I will be yet more vile. Reproach in Gods
service, is our best preferment: the Lord so noble; the servant cannot be too
humble: even Bucephalus, that disdained any other rider, in all his trappings
would kneel down to his Master Alexander, and go away proud of his burden.

Yea, to go yet further, let us with good old Eli, (who was a good son (...)
God, though he had been an ill Father to his sons) even kiss the very rod we
smart withal; and say, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: for
whatsoever seems good to him, cannot but be good, howsoever it seems to us.
Yea, let us receive his stripes with all humility, patience, piety, and
thankfulness; resolving as that holy Martyr, John B^adford, who said to the
Queen (how much more did he mean it to the great King of Heaven and Earth) If
the Queen will give me li^e, I will thank her; if she will banish me, I will
thank her; if she will burn me, I will thank her; if she will condemn me to
perpetual imprisonment, I will thank her. A man will easily swallow a bitter
Pil, to gain health. The stomach that is purged, must be content to part with
some good nou^ishment, that it may deliver it self of more evil humors: and
the Physician knows what is best for the Patient: the Nurse better then the
Infant, what is good and fit for it. Now the Tenant is more noble then the
House; therefore why are we not more joyed in this, then dejected in the other?
since the least grain of the increase of grace, is more worth, then can be
equalled with whole pounds of bodily vexation. Yea, let us take them as tokens
and pledges of Gods love and favor, who loves his Children so, as not to make
wantons of them. They that would tame pampered Horses, do add to their travel,
and abate of their provender, as Pharaoh served the Children of Israel. Which
of us shall see pieces of Timber cut and squared, and plained by the Carpenter,
or Stones hewn and polished by the Mason, but will collect and gather, that
these are Stones and Timber which the Master would employ in some building? If
I suffer, it is that I may reign. And how profitable is that ^ffliction, which
carries me to Heaven? Oh, it is a good change, to have the fire of affliction
for the fire of Hell: Who would not rather smart for a while, then for ever?
It Is true, these Waspes, wicked men, sting shrewdly, but the Hornet, Satan,
would sting worse a great deal. And not seldom does the infliction of a less
punishment, avoid a greater.

Neither must any man think to be always free from censures, aspersions, and
wrongs, nor sometimes from faults: The very Heathen could say, It is for none
but God to feel or want nothing. Indeed, many are too apt to expect it, and
therefore can bear nothing, like Minderides, the Sybarite, who was grieved for
that some of the Rose-leaves which he lay upon, were rumpled together: But this
is to vilipend, and undervalue his kindness; to make no repute, nor reckoning
of his deepest indulgencies, whereas the contrary, approves our sincerity
beyond all exceptions. Every man can open his hand to God while he blesses, but
to expose our selves willingly to the afflicting hand of our Maker, and to
kneel to him while he scourges us, is peculiar to the faithful.

3. Use.
3. Thirdly, if the sharp sufferings, and bitter conflicts, and sore travels of
Gods children, are usually the forerunners of a joyful issue; even the happy
birth of saving repentance: and that the sharp pain of the Chirurgions cutting
them, is only to ease them of a more durable and dangerous, yea, a far heavier
pain, the stone of the heart: If while their enemies go about to rob them, they
do but enrich them; As that Sexton, who in the night went to rob a Gentlewoman,
that had been buried the day before, with a gold Ring, and having opened the
coffin, loosed the sheet, and chafed her finger to get it off, she having been
but in a swoone before: her spirits returning, she revived, and for many years
after lived comfortably. If they may be resembled to the five loaves in the
Gospel, which by a strange Arithmetic, were multiplied by Division, and
augmented by Substraction; then let none dare to flatter, or flesh themselves,
because their estate is prosperous; especially in an evil way: As it fared with
Leah, who^ we may hear thus chanting her happiness: God, says she, has given
me my reward, because I have given my maid to my husband: Genesis 30.18. when she
should rather have repented then rejoiced. And the like with Micah, Judge.
17.13. and Saul, 1 Samuel 23.7. and Dionysius, when he found the winds
favorable in his navigation, after he had despoiled the Temple of all the gold
therein. Neither let such as suffer not, censure their brethren that do, as
those three mis-judged of Job, that he was an hypocrite, and a greater sinner
then others, and God had cast him off, or else it could not go so ill with him.
Or as the Jews censured our Savior, Isa. 53.3, 4. And those Barbarians, Saint
Paul, Acts 28.4. which is to condemn the generation of Gods children, Psalm.
73.15. But rather mistrust themselves, which was the use our Savior warned
those to make of it, who told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their sacrifices, Luke 13.1, to 6.

And indeed, he is blind that judges of man's felicity by his outward
prosperity, or concludes of ones misery from his calamity: Eccles. 9.1, 2. The
Sun of prosperity shines no less upon brambles in the wilderness, then
fruitful trees in the Orchard. The cold frost and snow of adversity, lights
upon Gardens, as well as the wild waste. Ahabs and Iosiahs end, concur in the
very circumstances, the one destroys Religion. the other restores i^: yet
both shot with an Arrow. Saul and Jonathan, though different in dispositions,
yet in their deaths they were not divided. Zedekiah a wicked man, had his eyes
put out: so had Samson, the valiant Judge of Israel, and Type of Christ. Moses
and Aaron, both were shut out of Canaan, as well as the malignant spies: so that
if we judge of men's persons by their outward conditions, we must needs err.

Yea, usually God does most afflict those, whom he best affects; dealing with
his children, as the good husband deals with his Trees; those in the Garden he
is ever and anon meddling with them, either lopping off the superfluous
branches, or scraping often the moss, or paring of the root, or digging and
dunging them; so using all good means to make them fruitful: whereas he lets
them alone which grow in the Hedg-row, or Forest, till at length he comes with
his Axe, and cuts them down for the fire. He was not the best Disciple that had
the bag: and fatted ware, you know is but fitted for the shambles. God puts
money indeed (as some Hoorders do) into these earthen boxes, that have only one
chinke to let in, but none to let out, with purpose to break them when they are
full. What was Haman the better for his honor, while the King frowned on him;
or the happier for being lift up the ladder, when he was to come down again
with a rope?

And for ought thou know, (at least, if thou take not heed, for prosperity
is the more dangerous enemy of the two, and skillful to destroy,) thy
preservation is but a reservation; as it fared with Sodom and her sisters,
which were preserved from the slaughter of the four Kings, that God might rain
down Hell from Heaven upon them. And Sennacherib, who escaped the stroke of the
destroying Angel, that he might fall by the sword of his own sons, Isa. 37.37,
38. Say then, one woe, the woe of adversity, (as thou accountest it) has passed
thee, perhaps there is a second, and a third, worse; behind: Revel. 9.12, and
8.13. The Philosopher would see a man's end before he pronounced him happy. Yea,
it may be, that which thou account'st thy primest privilege, may prove to thee
a snare, and may be granted thee rather out of anger then love, as the Devil
lest Jobs tongue un-touched of all the rest, but why? in hope that therewith he
would have cursed God; or charged him with folly and cruelty: so that we may
say of prosperity, as Antigonus did of his garment; O noble, rather then happy
privilege! but of adversity, O happy rather then noble favor!

4 Use.
4. Fourthly, if Affliction be so profitable, and prosperity so dangerous as
has been shown; if it be our Isaacs use, first to feel us by tribulation, and
then to bless us; then away with those foolish queries, Why does God this, and
why that? why does he punish the innocent, and acquit the peccant? why does he
permit so many, and such notorious crimes? why is he so severe toward his own;
so gentle to others? Ask not (says Salvianus) why one is greater, another
less; one wretched, another happy? I know not Gods intent, but it is sufficient
satisfaction to me, that this is done by God. Why does a Physician give more
Wormwood, or Hellebore to this sick party, then to that? even because, either
his disease, or his constitution so requires it.

Neither let us value things as they seem, or according to sense; but rather
when we are best pleased let us be most suspicious: let us desire and choose
blessings, as he chose his friend; not him that would be plausible to his
humor for a day, but him that should be profitable to his mind during life.
Let us imitate Bees that pass over Roses and Violets, to set upon Thyme: If
crosses are not toothsome; let it suffice that they are wholesome: It Is not
required in Physic that it should please, but heal: unless we esteem our
pleasure above our health.

Experience tells us, that those things (for the most part) which are least
pleasing, are most wholesome: Rue is an herb most bitter to the taste, yet in
regard of the virtue, which is in it, we call; Herb of Grace: And Mithridate
though of all other Electuaries it be most distastful; yet of all others, it is
the most wholesome.

The world hates thee, and deals most spitefully with thee; a good sign: It
has always been the portion of good men, to suffer at the hands of evil men;
as appears both by holy, and humane Writers: as for Divine Authority, you know
how it fared with the Prophets, Apostles, and our Savior Christ himself, whose
whole life, by reason of spiteful enemies, was but one continued cross. And as
touching secular; examples are infinite; whereof a few: In Athens, we read of
wife Socrates, good Phocion, just Aristides, victorious Milliades; but how
unworthily were they dealt withal? At Rome they had Marcus Cato, the pattern
of a wise and prudent man, a lively emblem of Virtue; how was he hated, thrust
down, spit upon, stripped both of his Senatorship, and Praetorship, cast into
prison, etc. Rutilius and Camillus were both exiled. Pompeus and Cicero both
yielded their necks to their Clients: Who so often cursed by the Popes, with
Bell, Book, and Candle, as Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory? though she
outlived seven of them.

But to leave examples; and come to reason: Is it not an evident sign, that if
the world hates thee, thou art none of the World? yea, therefore it hates thee,
because thy practice shames the world; and because thou discoverest, and
opposest her treasons and deceits. Wicked men are like dogs, in condition, who
will let a man amble a fair pace, quietly: but if he gallop through the Town,
though his errand be of importance, and to the King, perhaps, they will bark
and fly at him, which is a token to them, of perdition, but to thee of
salvation: Phil. 1.28. yea, it is an evident sign, that they are of the stock
of Ishmael, and not the seed of Israel. I find many acts of deception in the
Saints; I find infirmity in those acts, but that any one of them has scoft
at, and hated another for goodness; I find not: or that have used to dispute
against it: Gregory Nazianzen, (I pray mind it seriously) told his friends;
that Julian would prove a notorious wicked man: he took such delight in
disputing against that which was good. Much less that any after regeneration,
have in this case been cruel. If we would know (says Chrysostom) a Wolf from
a Sheep (since their clothing is alike) look to their fangs, and their mouth,
if they be bloody: for who ever saw the lips of a Sheep besmeared with blood?
which being so; No matter though the gate be strait, and the way narrow, if the
end to which it leads be everlasting life.

5 Use.
5 Fifthly, if in conclusion the most malicious and damnable practices of our
worst and greatest enemies prove no other in effect to us, then did the malice
of Joseph's brethren, Mistress, and Lord to him: the first, in selling of him;
the second, in falsely accusing him; the third, in imprisoning him; (all which
made for his inestimable good and benefit;) then the malice of Haman to
Mordecai, and the Jews; whose bloody decree obtein'd against them, procured
them exceeding much joy and peace: then Balaa^s malice to the children of
Israel, whose desire of cursing them, caused the Lord so much the more to bless
them, Numbers 23. Then the Devils spite to Job, who pleasured him more by his
sore afflicting him, then any thing else could possibly have done, whether we
regard his name, children, substance, or soul; then Judas his treason against
the Lord of life, whose detestable fact served not only to accomplish his will,
but the means also of all their salvations, that either before or after should
believe in him: this should move wonder, to astonishment, and cause us to cry
out with the Apostle; O the deepness of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! Romans 11.33. O the wonderful and sovereign goodness of our God!
that turns all our Poisons into Cordials; that can change our terrors into
pleasures; and makes the greatest evils beneficial unto us, for they are evil
in their own nature, and strong temptations to sin: James 1.2. also fruits of
sin, and part of the curse, and work those former good effects, not properly by
themselves, but by accident; as they are so disposed by the infinite wisdom,
goodness, and power of God, who is able to bring light out of darkness, and
good out of evil: yea, this should tutour us to love our enemies. (We love the
medicine, nor for its own sake, but for the health it brings us) and to suffer
cheerfully whatsoever is laid upon us: for how can Gods Church in general, or
any member in particular but fare well, since the very malice of their enemies
benefits them? How can we but say, Let the World frown, and all things in it
run cross to the grain of our minds? Yet, With thee, o Lord is mercy, and
plenteous redemption: thou make us better, by their making us, worse.

Objection. But perhaps thou have not proved the truth of this by thy own
knowledge; and particular experience.

Answer. If thou have not; thou shall in due time: the end shall prove it: stay
but till the conclusion, and thou shall see that there is no cross, no enemy,
no evils can happen unto thee, that shall not be turned to good, by him that
dwells in thee. Will you take Saint Paul's word for it, or rather Gods own
word, who is Truth it self, and cannot lie? His words are, We know that all
things work together for the best, unto them that love God; even to them that
are called of his purpose, Romans 8.28. And in Verse 35, 36. after he has
declared that Gods chosen people shall suffer tribulation, and anguish, and
persecution, and famine, and nakedness, peril, sword, etc. be killed all the
day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter; he concludes with,
Nevertheless, in all these things we are more then conquerours, through him
that loved us: and so goes on, even to a challenge of our worst enemies,
Death, Angels, Principalities and Powers, things present, and to come; height,
depth, and what other creature besides, should stand in opposition. What
voluminous waves be here, for number, and power, and terror! yet they shall
not separate the Ark from Christ, nor a soul from the Ark, nor a body from the
soul, nor an hair from the body, to do us hurt. What says David? Mark the
upright man, and behold the just; for the end of that man is peace: Psalm.
37.37. Mark him in his setting out, he has many oppositions; mark him in the
journey, he is full of tribulations; but mark him in the conclusion, and the
end of that man is peace. In Christ all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3.22. How is
that? Why, we have all things, because we have the Haver of all things. And if
we love Christ, all things work together for our good; yea, for the best: Romans
8.28. And ^f all things, (quoth Luther) then; even sin it self. And indeed, how
many have we known the better for their sin? That Mary Magdalen had never loved
so much, if she had not so much sinned: had not the incestuous person sinned so
notoriously, he had never been so happy. God took the advantage of his
humiliation, for his conversion. Had not one foot slipped into the mouth of Hell,
he had never been in this forwardness to Heaven: Sin first wrought sorrow
(says Saint Augustine) and now godly sorrow kills sin; the daughter destroys
the mother: neither do our own sins only advantage us, but other men's sins
work for our good also.

Objection. But may some say, Can any good come out of such a Nazarite?

Answer. Yes, The advantage we have by Christ, is more then the loss we had by
Adam. If Arrius had not held a Trinity of Substances, with a Trinity of
Persons; and Sabellius an Unity of Persons, with an Unity of Essences; the
Mysteries of the Trinity had not been so clearly explaned by those great Lights
of the Church. If Rome had not so violently obtruded her M^rits; the doctrine
of Justification only by faith in Christ, might have been less digested into
men's hearts. We may say here, as Saint Augustine does of Carthage and Rome; if
some enemies had not contested against the Church, it might have gone worse
with the Church. Lastly, suppose our enemies should kill us, they shall not
hurt, but pleasure us: yea, even death it self shall work our good. That
Red Sea shall put us over to the Land of Promise: and we shall say to the
praise of God, we are delivered, we are the better for our enemies, the better
for our sins, the better for death; yea, better for the Devil: and to think
otherwise, even for the present; were not only to derogate from the wisdom,
power, and goodness of God, but it would be against reason; for in reason, if
he has vouchsafed us that great mercy to make us his own, he has given the
whole army of afflictions, a more inviolable charge, concerning us, then David
gave his Host, concerning Absalom; See ye do the youngman, my son Absalom no
harm. Now, if for the present thou lackest faith, patience, wisdom, and true
judgment how to bear, and make this gain of the cross; Ask it of God, who
gives to all men liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given
thee, Jam. 1.5. For every good giving, and every perfect gift, is from above;
and comes down from the Father of lights: Verse 17.

6 Use.
6 Sixthly, (for this point calling more for practice then proof, it behooves us
to be larger here, briefer there) If that which is one man's meat, proves
another man's poison; let it be acknowledged, that the fault is not in the meat,
but in the stomach: and that it is the wickedness of our hearts, and want of a
sincere endeavor, to make good use of Gods corrections, which causes him to
withdraw his blessing from them. Wherefore let it provoke us as we love our
selves, as we love our souls, through all the transitory, temporary, momentany
passages of this World; first, to strive after, and then to preserve the life
of our lives, and soul of our souls, sincerity, and inegrity.

Again, if afflictions (which are in their own nature, evil, and unto others,
strong temptations to sin) by the goodness of God, do make so much for our
advantage, and benefit here, and hereafter: If our Heavenly Father turns all
things, even the malice of Satan, and wicked men, yea, our own sins to our
good: Romans 8.28. If for our sakes, and for his Names sake, he even changes the
nature and property of each creature, rather then they shall hurt us; as it is
the nature and property of fire to burn, yet that vehement ^ire in
Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, did not burn the three servants of God. It is proper
to the Sea to drown those that be cast into it; yet it did not drown the
Prophet, in the very depth of it. It is proper for hungry ravenous Lions to
kill, and devour, yet they did Daniel no harm. And the like, when we need
their help. It is proper for the Sun to move, yet it stood still at the prayer
of Joshua: proper for it to go from East to West; yet for Hezekiahs
confirmation, it went from West to East: It is proper for Iron to sink in the
water, yet it swom when the children of the Prophets had need of it. In like
manner; It is proper for affliction to harden, and make worse, as well as for
riches and prosperity to ensnare: But as some Simples are by Art, made
medicinable, which are by nature, poisonable: So afflictions which are in
nature destructive; by grace, become preservative. And as evil waters when the
Unicorns horn has been in them, are no longer poisonable, but healthful; or as
a Wasp when her sting is out, may awaken us by buzzing, but cannot hurt us by
stinging: so fares it with affliction, when God pleases to sanctify the same,
as he does to all that love him, Romans 8.28. For of God it is, (without thanks
to Affliction, or our selves, or our sins) that we are bett^^ed by them: All
the work is thine, let thine be the glory.

But lastly, (for though we can never be thankful enough for this, yet this is
not all) that we should find him a Savior, whom our enemies find a just
revenger; That we should be loosed from the chains of our sins, and they
delivered into the chains of Plagues; That the same Christ should with his
precious blood free us, that shall with his Word sentence them.

Again, if we were by nature the Seed of the Serpent, children of the Devil,
and Subjects to that Prince which rules in the air, even that spirit which now
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. We may learn by it, to be
humble and thankful, if changed to be the woman's seed, children of God, and
members of Christ: since we were once in so vile a condition; for God found
nothing in us but Enmity, 1 Cor. 15.10. Romans 7.18, 25. We are not born, but
newborn Christians: and whereas he might have left us in that perishing
condition (being bound to none) and have chosen others; he has of his free
grace adopted us, and left others. What Is the reason? surely no reason can be
given, but O the depth! only this I am sure of, it is a mercy beyond all
expression! O my soul, thou have not room enough for thankfulness.

Wherefore let it provoke us so to love him, that we show forth the virtues,
and fruits of him that has called us, and done all this for us, 1 Peter 2.9.
But I fear we forfeit many of Gods favors, for not paying that easy rent of
thankfulness.

For conclusion, If we be the seed of the Woman, and our enemies, the Seed of
the Serpent; let us go before them in goodness, as far as God has preferred us
before them in mercy: let us be able to say of our enemies, as Job of his, I
have not suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse unto his soul, Job 31.30.
Yea, let us send down water from our compassionate eyes, and weep for them by
whom we bleed. In brief, let us hate their opinions, strive against their
practice, pity their misguidings, neglect their censures, labor their
recovery, and pray for their salvation.

CHAP. 34. That though God disposes of all their malice to his Childrens
greater good, yet they shall be rewarded according to their mischievous
intentions.
Ob. IF it be so, that the malice of wicked men makes so much for the behoof of
Gods people; and that whatsoever they do unto us, is but the execution of Gods
will, and f^ll accomplishment of his just decree; it may seem to make on their
side, and not only extenuate their evil, but give them occasion of boasting.

Ans. Although God disposes it to the good of his children, that he may bring
about all things to make for his own glory; yet they intend only evil in it,
as namely; the Dishonor of God, the ruin of men's souls (as I have proved in
the Drunkards Character) and the satisfying of their own serpentine enmity, and
thirst of revenge. We must therefore learn to distinguish betwixt the act of
God and of an enemy, as indeed Gods people do; When ye thought evil against me
(says Joseph to his brethren) God disposed it to good, that he might bring to
pass as it is this day, and save much people alive, Genesis 50.20. God had no
hand in doing the evil, but God will have a hand in the disposing of it: When
Satan and wicked men have their wills, even therein also is Gods will
fulfilled, for Gods will is the highest cause of all things, Psalm. 115.3, 4.
Yea, the holy God challenges to himself whatsoever is done in the City, Amos
3.6. but so, as neither wicked men's sins shall taint him, nor his decree
justify them: the sin is their own, the good which comes of it is Gods, the
benefit ours; He does well, in suffering to be done, whatsoever is evil done,
says Saint Augustine, and is just in their injustice. God wills the same
action, as it is a blessing, trial, or chastisement of his children, which he
hates as the wickedness of the agent: because in the same thing which they
did, there was not the same cause for which they did it. The lewd tongue, hand,
or heart, moves from God, it moves lewdly from Satan: wicked men are never the
freer from guilt and punishment, for that hand which the holy God has ^n their
offensive actions. To instance in some examples; Satan did naught touching Job,
but what the Lord upon his request gave him leave to do; what then? Did God and
Belial join in fu^filling the same act? No: sooner shall Stygian darkness
blend with light, the ^rost with fire, day with night: true, God and Satan
willed the self-same thing; but God intended good, Satan ill; Satan aimed at
Jobs, and God at his confusion. God used the malice of Pharaoh and S^imei unto
good; what then? God afflicted his people with another mind then Pharaoh, did;
God, to increase them, Pharaoh, to suppress them. The sin of Sh^meis curse was
his own, the smart of the curse was Gods; God wills that as David's
chastisement, which he hates as Shimeis wickedness. God owed a revenge to the
house of Eli, and by the delation of Doeg, he took occasion to pay it, when the
Priests were slain: It was just in God, which in Doeg, was most unjust: Saul's
cruelty, and the ^reachery of Doeg, do not lose one dram of their guilt, by the
counsel of God: Neither does the holy counsel of God, gather any blemish by
their wickedness: If it had pleased God, to inflict death upon them sooner,
without any pretense of occasion; his justice had been clear from all
imputations. Now if Saul or Doeg be instead of a Pestilence or Fever; who can
cavil? The judgments of God are not ever manifest, but are always just.
Again, the curse of the Serpent bestowed blessedness on Man; yea, our first
Parents had been less glorious, if they had not wanted a Savior. What then?
Does Satan merit thanks? No, but the contrary; for he only intended the final
ruin and destruction of them and all mankind, with the dishonor of their
Maker. Lastly, the Devil does us good in this particular case, for while he
assaults us with temptations, and afflicts us with crosses, he in effect helps
us to Crowns. Yet still no thanks to Satan, for to be charitable is more then
his meaning; it is that Divine and overruling Providence of God, which we are
beholding unto, and to him give we the thanks.

But above all, our Saviors example will most excellently distinguish the ends
of God, Satan, and wicked Men; for if we observe, Judas delivered him to death
for gain, the Jews for envy, Pilate for fear; the Devil provoked each of them
through this enmity; Christ himself, to obey his Fathers will, God the Father
in love to sinners, and for their Redemption: each furthered one and the same
thing, but to contrary ends: so when this enmity breaks forth in the wicked,
Satan has a hand in it as a malicious author; as when he entered into Judas,
and made him betray Christ, Luke 22.3. Man himself as a voluntary instrument,
as when Pharaoh hardened his own heart against the children of Israel, Exodus
9.34. God as a most righteous Judge, and avenger, as when he also hardened
Pharoahs heart, so punishing his former hardness, with further obduration,
Exodus 9.12. But how in this case? Even by permitting the seed of the Serpent,
from their own malicious inclination, to hate the seed of the Woman, not by
infusing this malice, but by with^drawing his grace when he sees it abused: he
does not infuse corruption, he does not withold the occasion; as when the
Rider gives his horse the raines, we say he puts him on.

Whence that distinction of adversities, as they come from Satan, they are
usually called temptations; as they come from Men, persecutions; as from God,
afflictions.

Now as God turned the treachery of Judas, not only to the praise of (...)
justice, mercy, wisdom, power, etc. but to the good of all believers: so he
turns this enmity of Satan and wicked men, to his childrens great advantage
(in stopping them in their courses of sin and keeping them in exercise) and his
own glory: And well may he work good by evil instruments, when every Prince and
Magistrate has the seat to make profitable instruments, as well of evil
persons, as of good: yea, when there is nothing in the world, be it gall it
self; yea, the excrement of a Dog, or the poison of a Serpent, but man's shallow
invention can find it is good for something: neither do two contrary poisons
mingled together prove mortal.

And thus you see that the will of God may be done thanklessely, when in
fulfilling the substance, we fail in the intentions, and err in circumstances.

Now, see with the like patience, how it will fare with these men in the end.
Pomponius Atticus being destined to famishment, and receiving no manner of
sustenance for many days; contrary to the intention; was freed by means of
that abstinence from a violent pain, and recovered of a disease; which
otherwise had cost him his life. Prometheus being run in with a Rapier, and
Jason receiving a great blow on the breast, each was restored to health, from
dangerous and deadly impostumes, which otherwise were thought incurable. And
this is our case, for even as that cured them, which their enemies intended
should have killed them; so this enmity of the Serpent and his Seed, cures our
souls, and makes us everlastingly happy. Yet they intending only evil in it,
or at least the satisfying of their own wicked wills, (as they know better then
I, wherein they imitate the Weesel, which does a man pleasure in destroying of
Vermin, yet only intends the satisfying of her own hunger, not his good that
keeps the house) can no way assume the least praise to themselves, nor expect
the more favor. That which is ill of it self is not to be ventured on for the
good which comes by accident. It is no privilege to be an instrument of good
by evil means: Nor can you expect to fare better without a healing of your
errors, then the Worm in the stomach, which, when it has devoured all the
matter proper for it, dies it self: or Heleborus which after it has wrought
the cure within the body, is cast up again, together with the Malady.

The Lord does often good to his Church, even by those Instruments whom for
their sins he means to cast into Hellfire. Ashur was his Rod to scourge
Israel; that done, they fell under a sharper lash themselves: Those Nations,
says God, shall serve the King of Babel seventy years, and when the seventy
years are accomplished, I will visit the King of Babel and that Nation for
their iniquities, and will make it a perpetual desolation, etc. Ier. 25.11, 12.
and 30, 16. even the greater sinners may punish the less, and prosper for a
time, Ezekiel 7. I will bring the most wicked of the Heathen, and they shall
possess their Houses, verse. 24. When iniquity has played her part, vengeance
leaps upon the Stage; the Comedy is short, but the Tragedy is longer.

We use rubbish to scour our vessels, when those vessels are cleared, we fling
away the rubbish. Bridges that help men over the stream, at last themselves rot
and sink in. When Balaams Ass had done speaking, humana voce, she lived an
Ass, and died an Ass: So when God has sufficiently afflicted the righteous,
by the rod of the wicked, he will fling the Rod into the fire which is
unquenchable, Isa. 33.1.

And it stands with the strength of reason, for if God, says Saint Gregory,
strike so smartly those whom he spares; how heavy will his blows be on them
whom he condemns; and with what severity shall Cast-awayes be p^nished, when
his own children are so visited and afflicted. If Gods own Children, who are as
dear and near to him, as the Apple of his eye, or the signet on his right hand,
suffer fo many and grievous afflictions here; what shall his adversaries suffer
in Hell? undo^btedly, when the Patient is made whole, he shall be preserved;
but the Plaster shall be thrown away: For as God does t^rn evil to good to
them that love him; so ^e turns good to evil to those that hate him.

Again secondly, if the wicked are punished for doing wrong to the wicked, much
more for wronging the just, and innocent: But we have many examples of the
former, as that of Adonibe^eck, who having cut off the Thumbs and great Toes of
Seventy Kings (...) were wicked like himself, had also hi^ his own Thumbs and
Toes cut off; Judge. 1.5.7. And Moab, of whom the Lord says, he has burnt the
bones of the King of Edom into lime, therefore will I send a fire upon Moab,
and it shall devour, etc. Amos 2.1, 2. If the greater Serpent devours the less,
there is a Dragon to devour him, therefore the enemies of Gods Church, have no
hope to escape. The everlasting punishments of the ungodly are deferred, not
remitted.

But all the evil thou do to the godly, is with thy tongue?

Answ. That Is bad enough, the Serpents hissing betrays his malice; and
Ishmael's tongue made him a Persecuter, as well as Doeg's hands; he did but
stout Isaac, yet Saint Paul says, he persecuted him Gal. 4.2^. ^ham only
scoft at Noah, yet it brought upon him his Fathers curse, and Gods upon that.
The Athenians but scoft once at Silla's wife, and it had well nigh cost the
razing of their City, he was so provoked with the indignity. And whatever thou
conceivest of i^, let this fault be as far from my soul, as my soul from Hell.
For assuredly, God will one day laugh you to scorn, for laughing his to scorn:
and at last despise you, that have despised him in us.

CHAP. 35. Other grounds of comfort to support a Christian in his sufferings.
And first, that God is specially present with his servants in their
afflictions, takes notice of their sufferings, and allayes their grief.
THis rub being removed, and the p^ssage made clear, proceed we to other
grounds of comfort which the Word of God affords in this case, for the better
upholding, and strenghtening of a weak Christian in his sufferings: Wherein,
that we may not exceed, I will select out only five, because instructions, if
they excee^^ ^re wont, like nails, to drive ou^ one another.

First, we shall bear the Cross with the more patience and comfort; if we
consider, that God is specially present with his servants in their afflictions;
takes notice of their sufferings, and allays their grief. The troubles of a
Christian are very great for number, variety, and bitterness; yet there is one
ingredient that sweetens them all, the promise of God, I will be with thee in
trouble, and deliver thee, Psalm. 91.15. And thou shall not be tempted above
thy strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. Again, fear not; for when thou passest through the
water, I will be with thee; and through the floods, that they do not overflow
thee: When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the ^lame kindle upon the^, Isa. 43.1, 2. Lo, here are promises like
Flaggons of Wine, to comfort the distressed soul. Wherefore as C^sar said to
the trembling Mariner, (...) not afraid, for thou carriest Caesar; so, O
Christian! be not afraid, for he that is in thee, for thee, with thee, that
guides thee, that will save thee, is the invincible King Iehova. And upon this
ground David was so comforted and refreshed (...) his soul, Psalm. 94.19. that
he was able to say, Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil: Why? For thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff
shall comfort me, Psalm. 23.4. Yea, our Enemies can no sooner assault us with
their tongues, but God coms in to our rescue. If ye be railed upon for the
name of Christ, (says Saint Peter) blessed are ye, for the Spirit of God
rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4.14. God is never so much enjoyed of us, as when we
are in the deep, with David, Psalm. 130.1. and when we are worst of all bestead
with Iehosaphat, a Chron. 20.12. When did Jacob see a Vision of Angels? but
when he fled for his life, making the cold earth his bed, and a stone his
pillow; or when was his heart so full of joy, as now that his head lay hardest?
When was Paul wrapped into the third heaven to hear words from Christ not fit
to be uttered, 2 Cor. 12.2.4. but as some of the learned conceive, when he
was bereaved of his sight. Stephen saw great happiness by Christ, in his peace:
but under that shower of stones, he saw heaven it self open, Act. 7. When we
are slain all the day long for his sake, with the Martyrs, then we are given
to see him with our eyes, as Job did, who till that time had only heard of him
by the hearing of the ear. Then we come to know that the Lord, he is God,
with Manasses 2 Chronicles. 33.13. and that he is our hope and strength and refuge,
and a very present help in troubles, ready to be sound of all that seek to
him, 2 Chronicles. 15.4.15. Psalm 9.9, 10, and 46.1.

The Israelites never fared so well, as when they lived at Gods immediate
finding, and at night expected their morrows breakfast from the clouds: When
they did daily ask and daily receive, their daily bread. Yea, even when they
were wandering in a forlorn wilderness, how did God as it were attend upon them
in their distress, to supply their wants? They have no guide, therefore God
himself goes before them in a pillar of fire; they have no shelter, the Lord
spreads a Cloud over them for a Canopy; are they at a stand, and want way; the
Sea shall part and give them passage; do they lack bread? Heaven it self shall
power down the food of Angels; have they no meat to their bread? a wind shall
send them inn^merable Quails; do they yet want drink, behold a hard rock
smitten wi^h a little wand; shall power them out water in abundance; have they
no supply of Apparel, their Garments shall not wax old on their backs; be
their Enemies too strong for them for want of Engines, the Walls of Ie^^cho
shall fall down before them; are their enemies yet too many and potent,
hailstones shall fall and brain them: Lamps, Pitchers, and Dreams shall get
them Victory, the Sun shall stand till in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of
Ajalon: lack they yet a Land to inhabit, the Lord will cast cut all the
inhabitants, and give them a Land which flows with milk and honey, etc.
Afflictions have this advantage, that they occasion God to show that mercy to
u^, whereof the prosperous are incapable; as we further see in Hagar, Genesis
21.17, 18, 19. And Manoah's Wife, Judge. 13.3^ to whom the Angel of the Covenant
had not been sent, if they had not been in distress.

It would not become a mother ^o be so indulgent to an healthful child, as to
a sick: and in deed some have found their outward castigations so sweetened with
the inward consolations of Gods Spirit, that they have fonud and confessed
their receipts of joy and comfort, to be an hundred fold more than their
payments, even in this present life according to that promise of our Savior,
Mark. 10.29, 30. So that a Christian is still a gainer in all his losses; yea,
he gains by his losses.

Now if we could but remember and lay to heart these promises, thus backed
with examples; when we feel the greatest assaults or pangs, how could we want
courage? But alas, most of us are like the Prophets servant, 2 King. 6. who
saw his foes, but not his friends: we are like Joseph's brethren, who saw him,
converst with him, were fed by him, yet knew him not. Like Peter, who when the
Angel brought him out of prison, and went before him; wist not that it was so,
but thought he saw a vision, Act. 12.9. Christ at his Resurrection was so
changed, that his own Disciples knew him not; much more since his ascension may
he pass by us, as he did by Job, Chap. 9.11. or meet us as he did Saul in
the way to Damascus; or walk and talk with us, as he did with the two
Disciples in the way to Emaus, Luke 24.16. or stand by us while we are seeking
him, as he did by Mary in the Garden, Joh. 20.1^. and yet we be ignorant
that it is he. Yea, he may be in us by his spirit; even whilst we feel him
not. Jacob saw him both asleep and awake, yet (says he) the Lord was in this
place, and I was not aware of it, Genesis 28.16. at least we are apt to think,
that God is removed from us, when we any way suffer calamity; as the
Israelites do but want water, and presently they cry, Is the Lord among us, or
no? Exodus 17.7. as if God could nor be with them, and they a thirst; either
he must humor carnal minds, or be distrusted.

But both his presence and love, is the same in adversity, as it is in
prosperity; our sense only makes the difference, even as a Church, Castle, or
Town, is unmovable, and keeps one place; though to us it may seem sometime on
our right hand, other while on our left: as we change our standing, sitting,
or walking. Yet if some unusual crosses disturb our peace* presently there
breaks out a voice mixed with murmuring, and despair, God has forsaken us. It
was a common complain: with David, The Lord has forsaken us; thou have cast
off, and abhorred us: why have thou forsaken me etc.? Yea, the only Son of
God came to this, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yet consider, did
God forsake either of them? he might be angry with David, more angry with
Christ, for the sins of all the world: and in their present sense, that anger
might work in them an apprehension of his forsaking them: but he did not
forsake them, nor will he forsake thee, if thou do not first forsake him*
Thou may think so, but God will not do so; but in the mean-time, how can this
be well taken? we see our wretchedness, we do not see our blessedness: No
talk of his presence, of his absence we complain. Our cowardly spirits give
him for quite gone; yet he is not far from every one of us, Act. 17.27. Yea,
this confession could Seneca make, (but like a Divine) God is near unto thee,
he is with thee, he is within thee: and surely if he had not been with these
Israelites, they had not lived; if he had been in them, they had not murmured.
We can think him absent in our want, and cannot see him absent in our sin;
yet, wickedness, not affliction, argues him gone: yea, he is then most
present, when he most chastises; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolations abound through Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5.

Again, God may be present with us, and yet we not be pleased; as the
Israelites repined for a King, when the Lord was their King: or Christ may be
with us, and yet we want something that we desire. Christ was in the Ship, and
yet (say the Apostles) we have no bread Jesus was at the Marriage, yet says
his Mother, they have no wine, Ioh. 2.3. We may want Bread and Wine, and yet
have Christ's company: but if food fail, it is because Manna is to come; if
Wine be absent, yet grace and salvation is present: if God takes away flesh,
and gives Manna; deny Sun and Moon, and gives himself, he does us no wrong.

Now why does God by his promise tie himself to be present with us more
especially in affliction? but that he may resist our enemies, sustain us when
we faint, and crown us when we overcome; but that he may be exact in taking
notice of our particular sufferings, and as David says, Count our wanderings,
put our tears into his bottle, and enter all into his Register, Psalm. 56.8.9.
All our afflictions are more noted by that God that sends them, than of the
patient that suffers them; every pang, and stitch, and gird, is first felt of
him that sends it: could we be miserable unseen, we had reason to be
heartless: but how can it be but less possible to endure any thing that he
knows not, than that he inflicted not? As he said to Manoah by an Angel,
Thou art barren, Judge. 13.3. so he says to one, thou art sick, to another,
thou art poor, to a thi^d, thou art defamed; thou art oppressed to another;
that all-seeing eye takes notice from heaven of every man's condition, no less
than if he should send an Angel, to tell us he knew it: and his knowledge
compared with his mercy, is the ^ust comfort of all our sufferings. O God! we
are many times miserable, and feel it not; thou know even those sorrows
which we might have, thou know what thou have done, do what thou please.

CHAP. 36. That all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to
pass, not by accident, chance or fortune, but by the especial providence of
God.
Section 1.
2. We shall bear the cross with more patience and comfort. If we consider,
that all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to pass, not by
accident, chance, or fortune, but by the special providence of God; who not
only decrees and fore-appointeth every particular cross, Eccles. 3.1. Romans
8.28.29. but even effects them, and brings them into execution, as they are
crosses, corrections, trialls, and chastisements: Isa. 45.7. Amos 3.6. and also
orders and disposes them; that is, limiteth and appoints the beginning,
the end, the measure, the quality, and the continuance thereof: yea* he
orders them to their right ends; namely, his own glory, the good of his
servants, and the benefit of his Church: Ier. 30.11. Genesis 50.19, 20. 2 Samuel
16.10. Psalm. 39.9. God uses them but as instruments, wherewith to Work his
good pleasure upon us. As what are our enemies, but God's Axes to cut us down,
not for the fire, but for the building: God's Masons to hew us here in the
Mountain, that we may be as the pollished corner stones of the Temple, Psalm.
144.12. Or admit the Mason pulls down the House, it is not with an intent to
destroy it, but to re-edifie it; and raise it up again in better form and
fashion. Gods scullions to scowre up the vessel of his House, that they may
be meet for the Masters use.

If then they be but as instruments, and tools in the hand of the workman; we
must not so much look to the instrument, as to the Author, Genesis 45.5. and 50
20. Well may the Priests of the Philistims doubt whether their plague be from
God, or by fortune, 1 Samuel 6.2, 9. but let a Joseph be sold into Egypt, he
will say to his enemies, Ye sent not me bither, but God; when ye thought
evil against me, God disposed it to good, that he might bring to pass as it
is this day; and save much people alive: Or (...) a David be railed upon by
any cursed Shimei, he will answer, Let him alone, for he curses, even
because the Lord has bid him curse David: who dare then say, wherefore have
thou done so? 2 Samuel 16.10. Or let a Micha be trodden upon, and insulted over
by his enemy, his answer will be no other than this. I will bear the wrath of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and
execute judgment for me: Micha 7.9. The believer that is conversant in God's
book, knows that his adversaries are in the hands of God, as a hammer, ax, or
rod, in the hand of a smiter; and therefore as the hammer, ax, or rod, of it
self can do nothing, any further than the force of the hand using it, ^^ves
strength (...) to it: so no more can they do any thing at all unto him, further
than it is given them from above; as our Savior told ^^late: Ioh. 19.11. See
this in some examples; you have Laban following Jacob with one troop, Esau
meeting him with another, both with hostile intentions; both go on till the
uttermost point of their execution, both are prevented ere the execution: for
stay but a while, and you shall see Laban leave him with a kiss, Esau meet him
with a kiss; of the one he has an oath, tears of the other, peace with both.
God makes fools of the enemies of his Church, he lets them proceed that they
may be frustrate; and when they are gone to the uttermost reach of their
teather, he pulls them back to the stake with shame. Again, you have
Senacherib let loose upon Hezekiah and his people, who insults over them
intolerably: 2 Kings 18. Oh! the lamentable and (in sight) desperate condition
of distressed Jerusalem; wealth it had none, strength it had but a little, all
the country round about was subdued unto the Assyrian: that proud victor has
begirt the walls of it with an innumerable army, scorning that such a
shovell-full of earth should stand out but one day: yet poor Jerusalem stands
alone, blocked up with a world of enemies, helpless, friendless, comfortless,
looking for the worst of an hostile fury; and on a sudden, before an Arrow is
shot into the City, a hundred fourscore and five thousand of their enemies were
slain, and the rest run away, 2 Kings 19.35, 36. God laughs in heaven at the
plots of Tyrants, and befools them in their deepest projects. If he undertake
to protect a people, in vain shall earth, and hell conspire against them.
Nothing can be accomplished in the Lower House of this world, but first it is
decreed in the Upper Court of heaven; as for example, what did the Jews ever do
to our Savior Christ, that was not first both decreed by the Father of
Spirits, and registered in the Scriptures for our notice and comfort? They could
not so much as throw the Dice for his Coat, but it was prophesied: Psalm. 22.18.
and in Psalm. 69.21. It is foretold that they should give him gall in his meat,
and in his thirst, vinegar to drink; the very quality and kind of his drink is
prophesied: yea, his face could not be spit upon without a prophecy; those
filthy excrements of his enemies fell not upon his face, without God's decree,
and the Prophets relation: Isa. 50.6. Yea, let the Kings of the earth be
assembled, and the Rulers come together; Let Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and the people of Israel, gather themselves in one league against him,
it is in vain; for they can do nothing, but what the hand of God and his
Counsel has before determined to be done: as Peter and John affirmed to the
rest of the Disciples; for their better confirmation and comfort: Act. 4.26. to
29. No, notwithstanding the Devil raged, the Pharisees stormed, Herod and
Pilate vexed, Caiaphas prophesied, all combined, and often sought to take him:
yet no man laid hands on him (until his hour was come that God had appointed):
so that by all their plots, they were never able to do him any more hurt, than
only to show their teeth, Ioh. 7.30. If we are in league with God, we need
not fear the greatest of men.

Indeed, (...) was Pilates brag to Christ, know thou not that I have power
to crucify thee ^ Ioh. 19.10. And Labans to Jacob, Genesis 31.29. I am able to do
you ^hu^^^ but they were vain cracks: for does not Pharaohs overthrow tell all
boasting Champions, that an Host is nothing without the God of Hosts. Yea,
Satan himself was fain to say unto God in Job's case, stretch out now thine
hand, etc Job 1.11. and 2.^^. True as Themistocles once said of his son, this
boy can do more than any man in all Greece: for the Athenians command the
Grecians, and I command the Athenians, and my wife commands me, and my son
commands my wife: so the Churches adversaries in some places, may boast what
their Father the Devil can do: for he commands the Pope, and the Pope
commands the Jesuits, and the Jesuits command such a King, or Emperor, Rev.
17. ver. 12.13. and that Emperor, or King, commands his Officers of State; and
they command the common people. And yet to speak rightly, even all these can do
just nothing of themselves, for he that sits in the heavens laughing them to
scorn, commands all.

Now it must needs comfort and support us exceedingly, if in all cases we do
but duly consider, that inequality is the ground of order, that superior
causes guide the subordinate, that this sublundry Globe depends on the
celestial; as the lesser wheels in a Clock do on the great one, which I find
thus expressed: As in a Clock one motion does convay,
And carry diverse wheels a several way;
Yet altogether by the great wheels force,
Direct the hand unto his proper course.


Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not?
Lamenta. 3.37. Suppose the Legions of hell should combine with the Potentates
of the earth to do their worst, they are all nothing without God: as in
Arithmetic, put never so many Ciphers together, one before another, and they
make nothing; but let one figure be added, it makes them infinite. So is it
with men and Devils; if God be not with them, they are all but Ciphers: And
yet for the praise of his glory, and the good of his Church, these enemies of
his, whether they rise or sit still, shall by an insensible ordination perform
that will of the Almighty, which they least think of, and most oppose: The
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and their Rulers, (because they knew him not, nor yet
the words of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day) have fulfilled them
in condemning him, Act. 13.27. so that as Saint Austin speaks, by resisting the
will of God, they do fulfill it: and his will is done by and upon them, even in
that they do against his will.

That even Satan himself is limited, and can go no further than his chain will
reach, we may see Rev. 20.2. More particularly; he could no^ touch so much as
Job's body or substance, no not one of his servants, nor one limb of their
bodies, nor one hair of their heads, nor one beast of their herds, b^t he
must first beg leave of God, Job 2.6. Nay Satan is so far from having power
over us living, that he cannot touch our bodies being dead; yea, he cannot
find them when God will conceal them, (witness the body of Moses): and I doubt
not, but as the Angels did want at the Sepulcher of their and our Lord: so for
his sake, they also watch over our graves: he could not seduce a false prophet,
nor enter into a Hog without license; the whole Legion sue to Christ for a
sufferance, not daring other than to grant, that without his permission they
could not hurt a very Swine.

And when he has leave from God, what can he do? he cannot go one hairs
breadth beyond his commission: being permitted, he could bring Christ himself,
and set him on the Pinnacle of the Temple, but he could not throw him down;
which even a little child might have done with permission. As the Lion, 1 King.
13, killed the Prophet, but neither touched the Ass whereon he road, nor yet
the dead carkas contrary to his nature.

True Satan could boast even to Christ himself, that all the world was his, and
all the Kingdoms thereof, but when it came to the push, he could not enter into
a very Hog, without asking him leave, and having leave given him, he presently
carried the whole heard headlong into the Sea: Why did he not so to the man
possessed? no thanks to him, he had leave for the one, not so for the other,
and therefore a whole Legion of them were not able to destroy one poor simple
man, Matthew. 8. ver. 31.32.

So that all our enemies are curbed and restrained by the divine providence of
our heavenly Father: Satan may be his Executioner, but God is the Judge, and
the Executioner cannot lay on a stroke more than the Judge appoints,

I confess Satan is so strong comparatively, and withal so crafty and
malicious, that we may with reverence and love, wonder at the mercy of God in
our delivery: But this is our comfort, first, that Spirit (as we have shown)
can do nothing without the God of Spirits. Secondly, we have the Angels aid,
as the Prophet Elisha against that bloody King, 2 King. 6.17. Lot against the
Sodomites, Genesis 19.10. Jacob against the fear of Esau, Genesis 32. ver. 24.28.
Hezekiah against Senacherib, Isa. 37.36. and England against that invicible
Navy of the Spaniards in Eighty eight. True, they appear not ordinarily, what
then? no more do the evil Angels, but the Word of God assures us it is so, the
Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and delivers them,
Psalm. 34.7. And do but thou get spiritual eyes, whereby thou mai'st see, as
with Moses, the invisible God, so the invisible Angels: do but pray as Elisha
for his servant, that thine eyes may be opened, and then thou shall see more
with thee, than against thee 2 King. 6.16* 17.

Yea, had wicked men their eyes opened, as Balaam once had, they would at every
turn see an Angel stand in their way, ready to resist what they go about, as
he did: for this is one of the noble imploiments of those glorious spirits, to
give a strong, though invisible opposition to lewd enterprises: Many a
treacherous act have they hindered, without the knowledge of the Traitor. Yea,
O! God, many are the dangers which we see, and fear* innumerable, those we
neither see nor fear. Therefore to take away all attribution to our selv^, even
when we know not thou do deliver us.

Now if it be fearful to think how great things evil spirits can do with
permission; it is comfortable to think how they can do nothing without
permission: for if God must give him leave, he will never give him leave to do
any harm to his chosen, be will never give him leave to do the least hurt to
our souls. Now as by way of concession, every greater includes the less, he
that can lift a Talent, can easily lift a Pound; so by way of denial, every
greater excludes the less. If Satan himself cannot hurt us, much less his
instruments, weak men: but for proof of this, see also an instance or two: that
a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without our heavenly Father; and that
without leave from him, our enemies cannot diminish one hair of our heads; we
have our Savior's express testimony, Matthew. 10.29.30. Let the Powder-Traytors
plot and contrive the ruin^ of our state never so cunningly and closey, let
them go on to the utmost, (as there wanted nothing but an actor to bring on
that Catholic doomsday) yet before the match could be brought to the Powder,
their artificial fireworks were discovered, their projection, prodition,
deperdition, all disclosed, and seasonably returned on their own heads: And the
like of their invincible Navy. And of Pope Alexander the sixth, who prepared a
feast for diverse Cardinals and Senators, purposing to poison them: but by the
providence of God, they escaped; and he alone was poisoned. Let Iezabel fret
her heart out, and swear by her gods, that Eliah shall die, yet she shall be
frustrate; Eliah shall be safe. Let the red Dragon spout forth floods of venom
against the Church, the Church shall have wings given her to fly away, she
shall be delivered, Rev. 12. Let the Scribes and Pharisees, with their many
false witnesses accuse Christ never so, yet in spite of malice, innocence shall
find abbettors: and rather than he shall want witnesses, the mouth of Pilate
shall be opened to his justification. Yea, let Jonas through frailty run away
from the execution and embassage of God's charge, and thereupon be cast into
the Sea, though the waves require him of the Ship, and the Fish require him of
the waves, yet the Lord will require him of the Fish: even the Sea, and the
Fish, had as great a charge for the Prophet, as the Prophet had a charge for
Niniveh: for this is a sure rule, if in case God gives any of the creatures
leave to afflict us, yet he will be sure to lay no more upon us than we are
able, or he will make us able to bear: yea, than shall make for our good, and
his glory. He has a provident care over all the Creatures, even Beasts and
Plants: and certainly we are more precious than Fowls and Flowers; yet the
Lord cares for them. Will the House-holder take care to water the herbs of his
Garden, or to fodder his Cattle, and suffer his Men and Maids to famish
through hunger and thirst? Or will he provide for his Men and Maids, and let
his own children starve? Surely, if a man provide not for his own, He has
denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel: 1 Timothy 5.8. Far be it then
from the great Hous-holder, and Judge of all the earth, not to provide for his
dear Children and Servants, what shall be most necessary for them: indeed we
may fear our own flesh, as Saint Paul did; but God is faithful, and will not
suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but will even give the issue with
the temptation, and in the mean time support us with his grace, 2 Cor. 12.9.
You have an excellent place to this purpose, Ier. 15.20, 21.

Section. 2.
Objection. But we see by experience, that God gives wicked men power often
times to take away the very lives of the godly.

Answ. What then? If we lose the lives of our bodies, it is, that we may save
the lives of our souls; and attain the greater degree of glory, Luke 9.24. and
so we are made gainers even by that loss. Now if God takes away temporal, and
gives eternal life for it, there is no hurt done us: he that promises ten
pieces of silver, and gives ten pieces of gold, breaks no promise. Peace be
unto this house, was the Apostles salutation, but it was not meant of an
outward peace with men of the world: and Christ ^aith, you shall have rest,
Matthew. 11.28. but it is rest unto your souls. Again, thou have merited a
threefold death: if thou be freed from the two worser, spiritual, and
eternal; and God deal favorably with thee touching thy natural death, he is
merciful: if not, thou must not think him unjust. Though the Devil and the
world can hurt us, as well as other men, in our outward and bodily estates: as
the Devil had power over Job in his ulcers, over his children in their death,
over Mary Magdalen that was possessed, and over that daughter of Abraham's, Luk*
13. whom he kept bound 18. years, ver. 16. yet they can do us no hurt, nor
endanger our souls; they shall lose nothing but their dross, as in Zachary
13.9. Isa. 12. Let them sluice out our blood, our souls they cannot so much as
strike; let wild beasts tear the body from the soul, yet neither body, nor soul
are thereby severed from Christ. Yea, they can neither deprive us of our
spiritual treasure here, nor eternal hereafter; which makes our Savior say,
Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell, Matthew.
10.28. The body is but the Bark, Cabinet, Case, or Instrument, of the soul; and
say it falls in pieces, there is but a pitcher broken; the soul a glorious
Ruby, held more fit to be set in the crown of glory, than here to be trode^
under foot by dirtie swine; and therefore so soon as separated, the Angels
convey her hence to the place of everlasting bliss. Alas, what can they do?
they cannot separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus, Rom, 8, 38.39.
Yea, they are so far from doing us harm, as that contrariwise we are much the
better for them; In all these these things we are more than conquerours,
through him that loved us: ver. 37. Whatsoever then becoms of goods, or lives,
happy are we so long as (like wise Soldiers) we guard the vital parts,
while the soul is kept found from impatience, from distrust, etc. Our enemy
may afflict us, he cannot hurt (...)

Objection. Nevertheless, that which I suffer, is exceeding grievous.

Answer. Not so grievous as it might have been, for he that has afflicted
thee for a time, could have held thee longer; he that touches thee in part,
could have stricken thee in whole: he that laid this upon thy body, has power
to lay a greater Rod both upon thy body and soul. Again, there is no
chastisement not grievous; the bone that was dis-jointed, cannot be set right
without pain; no potion can cure us, if it work not; and it works not, except
it make us sick: Nay, my very disease is not so painful for the time, as my
remedy: how does it turn the stomach, and wring the in trails, and work a worse
distemper than that whereof I formerly complained? neither could it be so
wholesome, if it were less unpleasing, neither could it make me whole, if it
did not ^i^st make me sick. But we are contented with that sickness which is
the way to health. There is a vexation without hurt, such is this: we are
afflicted, not overpressed: needy, not desperate: persecuted, not forsaken:
cast down, but perish not, how should we? when all the evil in a City, com^
from the providence of a good God, which can neither be impotent, nor
unme^cifull* It is the Lord, let him do what he will. Woe worth us! if evils
could come by chance, or were let loose to light where they list; now they are
overruled, we are safe. In the name of God then, let not the tall stature of
the Anakims, nor the combination of the Edomites, nor the politic counsels of
all the Achitopels and Machivillians, nor the proud looks nor the big words of
all the Amaziahs, comb^^ing themselves together, deter or dismay you. Let not
the over-topping growth of the sons of Zerviah seem too hard for you; for God
is infinitely more strong and mighty to save us, than all our enemies are to
destroy us: and he has his Oar in their Boat, he has a special stroke in all
actions whatsoever, and can easily overreach, and make stark fools of the
wisest; by making their own counsels and endeavors like Hushai's, to overthrow
those intentions which they seem to support.

As touching the continuance of afflictions, God so orders and tempereth the
same, in his merciful wisdom; that either they be tolerable, or short; either
our sorrows shall not be violent, or they shall not last; if they be not light*
they shall not be long: grievous and sore trialls last but sor a season, 1 Pet.
1.6. A little while, Ioh. 16.16. Yea, but a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. He endures
but a while in his anger, (says the Psalmist) but in his favor is life;
weeping may abide for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.5. And
this had he good experience of; for if we mark it, all those Psalms whose
first lines contain sighs and broken complaints, do end with delight and
contentment; he began them in fear, but they end in joy: you shall see terrible
anguish sitting in the door, irremediable sorrow looking in at the window,
despair bordering in the margent, and offering to creep into the text; yet
after a sharp conflict, nothing appears but joy and comfort. God loves to send
relief, when we least look for it; as Elisha sent to the King of Israel, when
he was rending his clothes, 2 Kings 5.8. Hear what the Lord thy Redeemer says
by Isaiah, For a moment in mine anger, I hid my ^a^e from thee for a little
season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee: Isa. 54.8. It
is but a little, for a moment that his anger lasts, his mercy is everlasting:
and I hid my face, never turned my heart from thee: Joseph when he lay down to
sleep, was full of care about his Wives being with child; Matt. 1.20. but he
awakened well satisfied: ver. 24, To day a measure of fine flower, is lower
rated in Samaria, than yesterday of ^ung. Although Christ's Star left the
wisemen for a time, yet instantly it appeared again, and forsook them not till
they had found Christ; which was the mark they aimed at, Matt. 2.9. Afflictions
are like running waters, which make many grounds fruitful, but tarry with none
of them. Yea, it is a rule in nature, that violent things cannot last long: The
Philosophers could observe, that no motion violent is wont to be permanent;
and Seneca concludes, That if the sickness be tedious and lasting, the pain is
tolerable; but if violent, short: and so of spiritual temptations, the which
were so vehement upon Luther, that the very venom of them drank up hi^ spirits;
and his body seemed dead; so that neither speech, sense, blood, or heat,
appeared in him; but this sharp fit lasted but for one day: so if we suffer
much, it shall not be long; if we suffer long, it shall not be much. Some
misery is like a Consumption, gentle, but of long continuance; other like a
Fever, violent, but soon over. If our sorrows be long, they are the lighter; if
sharper, the shorter. The sharp North-East wind (says the Astronomer) never
lasts three days, and thunder, the more violent the less permanent. Wherefore
cheer up thou drooping soul, if the Sun of comfort be for the present clouded;
it will er^^long shine forth bright again: if now with the Moon thou art in the
wane, stay but a little, thou shall as much increase; for as days succeed
nights, Summer, Winter; and rest travel: so undoub^edly, joy shall succeed,
and exceed, thy sorrow. Thy grief shall dissolve, or be dissolved; yea, it is
in some measure dissolved by hope for the present. The Portugals will rejoice
in soul ^eather why? because they know, fair will follow; and so may the
believer, in his greatest exigents; because God will shortly tread Satan under
our feet, Romans 16.20. Here also the distressed soul may raise comfort to
himself out of former experience; who is he that has not been delivered out
of some miserable ^^igent? which if thou have, thou may well say unto God
with the Psalmist, Thou have showed me great troubles and adversities, but
thou will r^turn and revive me, and wilt come again, and take me up from the
depth of the earth, and comfort me Psalm. 71.20.21. For God's former a^tions
are patterns of his future* he teaches you what he (...) do, by what he has
done: and nothing more raises up the heart in present affiance, than the
recognition of favors, or wonders passed: he that has found God present in
one extremity, may trust him in the next: every sensible favor of the
Almighty, invites both his gifts and our trust.

Objection. But thou will say with the Psalmist, thine enemies have long
prevailed against thee, and God seems altogether to hide his face, and to
have (...) forgotten thee* and so thou fear he will for ever, Psalm. 13.1, 2.

Answer. It is but so in thy apprehension, as it was with him; Gods d^liverance
may over-stay thy expectation, it cannot, the due period of his own counsels:
for know first, that Gods works are not to be judged of* until the fifth act.
The case deplorable and desperate in outward appearance, may with one smile
from heaven find a blessed issue: Dotham is besieged, and the Prophets servant
distressed, they are in a grievous case (as they think); yet a very apparition
in the clouds shall secure them: not a squadron shall be raised, and yet the
enemy is surprised: 2 Kings 6. here was no slackness. The Midianites invade
Israel, and are suddenly confounded by a dream, Judge. 7. Mistress Honywood,
that Religious Gentlewoman, famous for her virtues, after she had been
distressed in her mind thirty years, without feeling the least comfort, not
being able to hold out any longer, (as a wounded spirit who can bear)? flung a
Venice-glass against the ground, and said to a grave Divine that sought to
comfort her, I am as sure to be damned, as this glass is to be broken; but
what followed? the glass was not broken, but rebounded and stood upright: at
the sight whereof, she was so confirmed, that ever after to her dying day,
she lived most comfortably: much like that of Apelles, who striving to paint a
drop of foam falling from a Horse mouth, after long study how to express it,
even dispairing, flung away his Pencill, and that throw did it. How opportunely
does God provide succors to our distresses? It is his glory to help at a
pinch, to begin where we have given over; that our relief might be so much
the more welcome, by how much it is less looked for: superfluous aid can
neither be heartily desired, nor earnestly looked for, nor thank^ully received
from the hands of mercy. Besides our infirmity best sets off the glory of his
strength, 2 Cor. 12.9. Spiritual consolations are commonly late and sudden;
long before they come, and speedy when they do come, even preventing
expectation: and our last conflicts have wont ever to be the forest, as when
after some dripping rain, it powers down most vehemently, we think the weather
is changing. When he means to ease us of our burden, he seems to lay on
heavier* wherefore trust in God killing, and love God chiding, it is a good
sign of our recovery.

Section 3.
Again, in the next place thou must know, that man's extremity is God^
opportunity; well may he forbear, so long as we have have any thing else to
rely upon; but we are sure to find him in our greatest exigents, who loves to
give comfort to those that are forsaken of their hopes, as abundance of
examples witness. When had the Children of Israel the greatest victories* bu^
when they ^eared most to be overcome? 2 King. 19.35. Exodus 14. ver. 28, 29.
When was Hagar comforted of the Angel, but when her child was near famished,
and she had cast it under a Tree for dead? Genesis 21.15. to 20. When was Eliah
comforted and relieved by an Angel, with a Cake baked on the coals, and a
Cruise of Water, but when he was utterly forsaken of his hopes? 1 Kings 19.4.
to 7. When was the Sareptan relieved? it was high time for the Prophet to visit
her: poor soul she wa^ n^w making her last meal: after one mean morsel, she
was yielding her self over to death. As long as Egypts flower lasted, Manna was
not rained. When did God answer the hopes of Sarah, Rebeccah, Rachel, the wife
of Manoah, and Elisabeth, touching their long and much desired issues? but when
they were barren, and past hope of children, by reason of age, Genesis 18. Judges
13, Luke 1.6.7. When did our Savior heal the woman of her bloody issue? but
after the Physicians had given her over, and she becoming much worse, had
^iven them over, when she had spent all she had upon them: for to mend the
matter, poverty, which is another disease was super-added, to make her
completely miserable. When man's help fails, then Gods begins. When did Moses
find succor, but when his Mother could no longer hide him, and he was put
into the River among the Bullrushes? she would have given all she was worth
to save him, and now she has wages to nurse him: she does but change the
name of mother into nurse, and she has her son without fear, not without
great reward. When Israel was in so hard a straight, as either to be drowned
in the Sea, or slain by the Sword; how miraculously did God provide an evasion
by dividing the waters? When Rochel, like Samaria, had a strong enemy without,
and a sore famine within; how miraculously did God provide an evasion, by
making the tide their Purveyor, to bring them in an Ocean of shelfish? the like
of which was never known before, nor since. We read how Merline, during the
Massacre at Paris, was for a fortnight together, nourished with one egg a day,
laid by a hen, that came constantly to a haymow, where he lay hid in that
danger, When the English had lest Cales, and the Spainard was again repossest
of it; by some neglect or oversight, there was an English man left behind: but
how did Go^ provide for his escape? it is worth the remembering, he was no
sooner crept into a hole under a pair of stairs, but instantly a Spider weavs a
web over the hole, and this diverted them; for when one of them said, here is
surely some of them hid, another replies, What a fool art thou, do thou not
see, it is covered with a firm cob-web: and so past him, that in the night he
^scaped. O! Savior, our extremities are the seasons of thy aid: even when Faux
was giving fire to the match, that should have given fire to the Pow^der, which
should have blown up Men and Monuments, even the whole State together; thou
that never sleep did prevent him, and disclose the whole design: yea, thou
did turn our intended Funeral into a Festival. And why does the goodness of
our God pick out the most needful times for our relief and comfort? but
because our extremities drive us to him that is omnipotent; there is no fear,
no danger, but in our own insensibleness: but because when we are forsaken of
all succors and hopes; we are ^ittest for his redress, and never are we
nearer to help: than when we despair of help; but because our extremities give
him the most glory, and ou^ comfort is the greater, when the deliverance is
seen before it is expected His ^isdom knows when aid will be most seasonable,
most welcome: which he then loves to give, when he finds us left of all other
props. That merci^ull hand is reserved for a dead lift, and then he fails us
not; as when Abraham had given Isaac, and Isaac had given himself for dead;
then God interposeth himself; When the knife is falling upon his throat, then,
then coms the deliverance by an Angel, calling, forbidding, commending him.
When things are desperate, then look most for God's help; for then is the time,
Psalm. 119.126 Isa. 33.9.10.

And indeed, our faith is most commendable in the last act; it is no praise to
hold out until we be hard driven, but when we are forsaken of means, then
to live by faith in our God, is thought worthy of a Crown. O! wretched Saul,
had thou held out never so little longer without offering, and without
distrust, Samuel had come, and thou had kept the favor of God, whereas now
for thy unbelief, thou art cast off for ever, 1 Samuel 13.10. to 15. To shut up
all in a word, were thy soul in such a straight, as Israel was between the Red
Sea and the Egyptians; the spirits of vengeance, (like those enemies) pursuing
thee behind; Hell and death (like that Read Sea) ready to ingulf thee before;
yet would I speak to thee in the confidence of Moses, Exodus 14. ver. 13. Stand
still and see the salvation of the Lord. Thy Word O! God, made all, thy Word
shall repair all* hence all ye diffident fears, he whom I trust is omnipotent

Again Secondly, thou must know that God in his wisdom has set down a certain
period of time, within which he will exercise his children more or less; and
at the end whereof, and not before, he will relieve and comfort them again. As
we may perceive by Eccles. 3.1. Act. 7.25. Exodus 12.41. Genesis 15.13. Dan.
12.1.4.11. Ier. 25.11. Genesis 6.3. Four hundred years he appointed to Abraham
and his seed, that they should be Sojourne^s in a strange land, where they
should be kept in bondage, and evil entreated, Genesis 15. At the end of which
time, even the self same day, they returned from the land of Egypt: that was
the precise time appointed, and the self same day it was accomplished: and till
then Moses undertook it in vain. Why were they so long kept from it? the land
was their own before, they were the right heirs to it, lineally descended from
him who was the first possessor of it after the food: God will do all in due
time, that is, in his time, not in ours; if at any time the Lord deliver us, it
is more than he owes us. Let him (says Saint Augustine) choose his own
opportunity, that so freely grants the mercy. Again, he appointed that the
Jews should serve the King of Babyl^n seventy years; not a day, not an hour to
be abated, Ier 25.11. but at the end thereof, even that very night, Dan. 9. it
was accomplished; neither did Daniel, (who knew the determinate time) once pray
for deliverance, till just upon the expiration. Thirty eight years he
appointed the sick man at Bethesda's Pool, Ioh. 5.5. Eighteen years to that
daughter of Abraham, whom Christ loosed from her disease, Luke 13.16. Twelve
years to the woman with the bloody issue, Matthew. 9.20. Three months to Moses,
Exodus 2.2. Ten days tribulation to the Angel of the Church of Smy^na, Apocal.
2.10. Three days plague to David, 2 Samuel 24.13. Each of these groaned for a
time, under the like burden as thou do; But when their time which God had
appointed, was come, they were delivered from all their miseries, troubles, and
calamities; and so likewise ere long, if thou will patiently sorry the Lord's
leisure, thou shall also be delivered from thy affliction and sorrow, either
in the Morning of thy trouble, with David, Psalm. 30.5. or at the Noon of thy
life, with Job, Chap. 42.10 to 17. or toward the Evening, with Mr Glover, that
holy Martyr, who could have no comfortable feeling, till he came to the sight
of the stake: but then he cried out and (...) his hands for joy to his friend,
saying, O! Austin, he is come, he is come, meaning the feeling joy of faith,
and the Holy Ghost: Acts and monuments, Fol. 1995. Or at night with Lazarus, at
one hour or another thou art sure to be delivered, as time will determine.
Many were the troubles of Abraham, but the Lord delivered him out of all. Many
were the troubles of David, but the Lord delivered him out of all. Many were
the troubles of Joseph, but the Lord delivered him out of all. Many were the
troubles of Job, but the Lord delivered him out of all. therefore he can and
will deliver thee out of all. But if he do not, (says Shadrath, Meshach and
Abednego) yet we will not do evil to escape danger; because Christ has
suffered more for us: therefore if I perish, I perish, says Hester. Be our
troubles many in number, strange in nature, heavy in measure, much in burden,
and long in continuance; yet God's mercies are more numerous, his wisdom more
wondrous, his power more miraculous; he will deliver us out of all: Many are
the troubles of the righteous. Yea, he rises higher, and calls them millions,
for so the words may be rendered; but the Lord delivers them out of all:
Psalm. 34.19. How many? or how great soever they be? or how long soever they
continue? yet an end they shall all have: For the Lord either takes troubles
from them, or takes them from troubles, by receiving them into his heavenly
rest; where they shall acknowledge, that God has rewarded them as far beyond
their expectation, as he had formerly punished them less than they did deserve.

Objection. Oh! but my condition is so desperate, and irrecoverable, that it is
impossible I should ever get out of it.

Answ. There is no impossibility (says Ambrose) where God is pleased to give a
dispensation: But bethink thy self, is it worse with thee than it was with
those beforementioned? and yet they were delivered; Or is thy case worse than
that of Jonas in the Sea, yea, in the Whales ^elly? and yet he was delivered:
Worse than Nebuchadnezzars grazing in the Forest among beasts, even until his
hairs were grown to be like Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws?
Dan. 4.31. to 36. and yet he again reighed in Babell. Worse than Joseph's? when
he was thrown into a Pit, and left hopeless; or when sold to the Ishmaelitish
Merchants, and then cast into prison? yet after all this, his said brethren
were fain to become petitioners to him. Worse than Job when he sat scraping
his soars on the dungbill, had all his houses burnt, all his cattle stolen,
and his children slai^? yet he was far richer afterward, than before.

How rashly then have thou judged of thy Makers dealing with thee? If were more
agreeable to reason and religion, to conclude the contrary for both experience,
and reason reaches, that violent pressures, like violent motions, are weakest
at the furthest. When the morning is darkest, then coms day: yea, usually after
the lowest ebb follows the highest springtyde: And religion teaches, that if
we love God, all things, even the worst of afflictions shall so concur, and
cooperate to our good, that we would not have wanted them for any good.
Wherefore hold but fast to God, and my soul for thine, neither affliction, nor
ought else shall hurt thee. You know, while Adam was at peace with God, all
things were at peace with Adam.

Now this doctrine well digested will breed good blood in our souls, and is
especially, useful to bound our desires of release; for though we may be
importunate, impatient we may not be; stay he never so long, patience must
not be an inch shorter than affliction: If the bridge reach but half way over
the brook, we shall have but an ill favored passage. We are taught in
Scripture to praise patience, as we do a fair day at night; He that indureth
to the end shall be saved Matthew. 24 13. Whereas coming but a foot short, may
make us miss the prize, and loose the wager we run for: and then as good never
have set foot out of doors. Much the better for that light which will not bring
us to bed! perseverance is a kind of all in all, continuance is the Crown of
all other graces; and heaven shall be the Crown of continuance.

But not seldom does the Lord only release his children out of extreme
adversity here, but withal makes their latter end so much the more prosperous,
by how much the more their former time has been miserable and adverse. We
have experience in Job, You have heard, says Saint James of the patience of
Job, and what end the Lord made with him. What end is that? the holy Ghost
tells you. That the Lord blessed his latter end, more than his beginning; and
gave him twice as much as he had before: for whereas at first he had 7000
Sheep, 3000 Camels, 500 yoke of ^xen, and 500 she Asses: after his reparation
he had 14000 Sheep, 6000 Camels, 1000 yoke of Oxen and 1000 she Asses, every
one double: and whereas the number of his children remained the same they were
before, namely seven Sons, and three Daughters, the number of them were also
doubled, as the learned observe: for whereas his Beasts, according to the
condition of Beasts utterly perished; the souls of his Children were saved: so
that he had twice so many children also, whereof ten were with him on earth,
and the other ten with God in heaven. Job 42.10, to 14. And in Joseph, who was
bred up in the school of affliction from his infancy; yet, when his turn was
come, one hour changes his setters of Iron into chains of Gold; his rags into
Robes, his stocks into a Chariot, his prison into a Palace, the noise of his
Gyves into a brooch; and whereas he was thirty years kept under, he ruled in
the height and luster of all honor and glory the space of eighty years. And
one minute made in Lazarus a far greater change, and preferment. And in David,
who for a long time was in such fear of Saul, that he was forced to fly for
his life, first to Samuel, where Saul pursued him; then to Jonathan, where his
grief is doubled, then to Ahimeleck, where is Doeg to betray him; after that
he flies to Achish, King of Gath; where being discovered, he is in greatest
fear of all, lest the King should take away his life; and lastly, when he
returns to his own Ziklag, he finds it smitten, and burnt with fire, and his
wives taken prisoners, and in the midst of all his grief, when he had wept
until he could weep no more; the people being vexed, intend to stone him; so
that, as he had long before complained, there was but a step between him and
death; but mark the issue, though his heart were now not only brim full, but
ran over with grief: yet within two days the Crown of Israel is brought unto
him, and he is anointed King, 2 Samuel 1. and for the present he was able to
comfort himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. Yea, after this, when by that
foul sin of Adultery and Murder, he had brought more enemies about his ears,
(God, and men, and Devils) having once repented his ^auls, he was able to say
with confidence, O God! thou have showed me great troubles and adversities,
but thou will take me up from the depth of the earth, and increase my honor,
Psalm. 71.20, 21. He knew well enough that it is Gods use to bring comfort out
of sorrow, as he brought water out of the rock, and that cherishing was wont
to follow stripes: And indeed, how often has a Tragic entrance had a happy end?
Like that we read of Michael, who was condemned to death by the Emperor Leo,
upon a false accusation; but before the execution, the Emperor died, and
Michael was chosen in his stead. And of Mordecay, who being in the fore-noon
appointed to the Gibbet, was in the afternoon advanced next of all to the
throne, And Queen Elisabeth of blessed memory, who reigned at the same time
that she expected to suffer, and was Crowned, when she looked to be
beheaded. God loves to do by his children, as Joseph did by his Father; first,
we must have our beloved Joseph a long time detained from us, then he robbes
us of Simeon; after that, sends for our best beloved Benjamin, and makes us
believe he will rob us of all our children at once, all the things that are
dear to us: But why is it? even that when we think to have lost all, he
might return himself, and all again with the greater interest of joy and
felicity. The Lord, says Hanna, kills and makes alive; first, kills, and
then makes alive; brings down to the grave, and raises up: The Lord makes
poor, and makes rich; brings low, and exalts; he raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the Dunghill; to set them among
Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory: 1 Samuel 2.6, 7, 8. And why
all this? but that in his own might, no man might be strong. ver. 9. That
which Plutarch reports of Dionysius, (how he took away from one of his Nobles,
almost his whole estate, and seeing him nevertheless continue as jocund and
well contented as ever, he gave him that again, and as much more) is a common
thing with the Lord: and thousands can witness, that though they went weeping
under the burden, when they first carried the precious seed of repentance; yet
they still returned with joy, and brought their sheave^ with them, Psalm. 26.5.6.

Objection. But thou think thou shall not hold out, if God should long delay
thee.

Answer. If he delay thee never so long, he will be sure to support thee as
long, 1 Cor. 10.13. which is much at one upon the matter. If he suffer thee to
be sorely tempted, he will not suffer thee to be tempted above thy strength:
2 Cor. 4.8, 9, 16. His grace shall be sufficient for thee at the least, 2 Cor.
12.9. Phil. 1.29. which was Paul's answer, and it may suffice a^l suitors; the
measure of our patience shall be proportionable to our sufferings, and our
strength equalled to our temptations, 1 Cor. 10. ver. 13. Now if God do either
take away our appetite, or give us mear, it is enough.

True, a Ship of never so great a burden, may be over-laden till it sink
again; or if we shall wear away all the steel with whetting, the Tool is left
unprofitable. But my thoughts (says God) are not as your thoughts, nor my ways
as your ways, Isa. 55.8. God is no Tyrant to afflict thee unmeasurably, neither
will he draw a sword to kill flies; or call for Scorpions, when a rod is too
much. He that made the vessel, knows her burden, and how to ballace her;
yea, he that made all things, very good, cannot but do a^l things very well.
Indeed, God seems to wrestle with us, as he did with Jacob; but be supplies
us with hidden strength at length to get the better: And grace to stand in
affliction, and to gain by it, is better than freedom or deliverance. The Bush
which was a Type of the Church, consumed not all the while it burned with fire;
because God was in the midst of it. The Ship at Anchor is shrewdly tossed to
and fro, but cannot be carried away, either by waves, wind, or weather: Sin,
Satan, and the world may disturb us, but they can never destroy us: Our head
Christ being above, we cannot be drowned. There can be no disjunction,
unless we could be plucked from his arms, that is Almighty; for our life is
hid with Christ in God, Colos. 3.3. He does not trust us with our own souls
life, but hides it in his Son Jesus: because if it were in our own hands, we
should easily be tempted to sell it, as Adam did for an Apple, and Esau for a
mess of Pottage: Whereas now we are safe, for to pluck us out of his hands
that is Almighty, requires an adversary stronger than himself. Neither wants
he care; he that numbers our very hairs, what account does he make of our
souls? Nor love, for if he has bought us with his blood, and given us
himself, will he deny us any thing that is good for us?

Wherefore silence your reason, and exalt your faith, (how pressing, or
peircing so ever your sufferings be) which pulls off the vizard from his face,
and sees a loving heart, under contrary appearances. Trust the mercy of God,
which is of infinite perfection; and the merits of Christ, which are of perfect
satisfaction: and then hope will bear up thy heavy heart, as bladders do an
unskilful swimmer: Otherwise, if thou shall walk by sense, and not by faith,
2 Cor. 5.7. fear will no less multiply evils, then says would diminish them:
and thou shall resemble Bucephalus, who was not afraid of his burden, the
shadow only frighted him.

Section 4.
Objection. Although Christ in the Gospel has made many ^arge and preoibus
promises, yet there are none so general which are not limited wi^h the
condition of faith, and the fruit thereof, unfeigned Repentance: and each of
them are so tied, and entayled, that none can lay claim to them but true
believers which repent, and turn from all their sins to serve him in holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord: Heb. 12.14. Isa. 59.20. But I want
these qualifications, without which, how can I expect supportation in my
sufferings; or an happy deliverance out of them? however it fares with
believers, whom Christ has undertaken for: yea, I have such a wicked heart,
and my sins are so many, and great; that these comforts nothing concern me:
for they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, shall reap the same, Joh. 4.8.

Answer. So our sailings be not wilful, though they be many and great; yet
they cannot hinder our interest in the promises of God.

Admit thou art a great sinner, what then? art thou a greater sinner than
Matthew, or Zacheus, who were sin^ull Publicans, and got their livings by
pilling, and polling, oppression, and extortion? than Mary Magdalen, a common
strumpet; possessed of many Devils? than Paul, a bloody persecutor of Christ and
his Church? than the Thief upon the Cross, who had spent his whole life to the
last hour in abominable wickedness? than Manasses, that out-rageous sinner, and
most wicked wretch that ever was; an Idolater, a malicious Persecutor of the
truth, a defiler of Gods holy Temple, a sacrficer of his own children unto
Idols, that is, Devils; a notable witch, and wicked sorcerer; a bloody
murderer of exceeding many of the dear Saints, and true Prophets of the Lord;
and one who did not run headlong alone into all hellish impiety, but led the
people also out of the way to do more wickedly than did the Heathen, whom the
Lord cast out and destroyed? I am sure thou will not say thou art more wicked,
than he was; and yet this Manasses, this wretch, more like a Devil incarnate,
than a Saint of God, repented him of his sins from the bottom of his heart,
was received. (I cannot speak it without ravishing wonder of Gods bottomless
and never sufficiently admired mercy) was received, I say, to grace, and
obtained the pardon of all his horrible sins, and most abominable wickedness:
And are not these, and many the like examples, written for our learning; and
recorded by the holy ghost, to the end that we may gather unto our selves
assurance of the same pardon, for the same sins, upon the same repentance, and
believing.

Are thy sins great? his mercies are infinite; had thou committed all the
sins that ever were committed, yet in comparison of Gods mercy, they are less
than a mote in the Sun to all the world, o^ a drop of water to the whole Ocean:
for the Sea though great, yet may be measured; but God's mercy cannot be
circumscribed: and he both can and will, as easily forgive us the debt of ten
thousand millions of pounds, as one penny; and as soon pardon the sins of a
wicked Manasses, as of a righteous Abraham, if we come unto him by unfaigned
repentance, and earnestly desire and implore his grace and mercy, Romans 5.20.

The Tenure of our salvation is not by a covenant of works, but by a covenant
of grace; founded not on our worthiness, but on the free mercy, and good
pleasure of God; and therefore the Prophet well annexeth blessedness to the
remission of sins; Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1.

Yea, the more miserable, wretched, and sinful we are, the more (...) objects
we are, whereupon he may exercise, and show the infinite riches of his
bounty, mercy, virtue, and all sufficiency. And this our spiritual Physician
can as well, and easily cure desperate diseases, even the remediless
Consumption, the dead Apoplex, and the filthy Leprosy of the soul, as the
smallest malady, or least faintness. Yea, he can as well raise the dead, as
cure the sick, and as well of Stones as of Jews, make Abraham's children. Did he
not without the Sun at the Creation, cause light to shine forth; and without
rain, at the same time, make the earth fruitful? why then should you give your
self over, where your Physician does not? Besides, what sin is there whereof
we can despair of the remission, when we hear our Savior pray for the
forgiveness of his murderers, and blasphemers? And indeed, despair is a sin
which never knew Jesus.

It was a sweet saying of one at his death, When mine iniquity is greater than
thy mercy O God, then will I fear and despair; but that can never be:
considering our sins be the sins of me^, his mercy the mercy of an infinite
God. Yea, his mercies are so great, that among the thirteen properties of God
mentioned Exodus 34. almost all of them appertain to his mercy, whereas one
only concerns his might, and only two, his justice. Again, shall it ever
enter into our hearts, to think that God gives us rules to keep, and yet break
them himsef? Now his rule is this, Though thy brother sin against thee seven
times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, it
repents me; thou shall forgive him. The son angers his father, he does not
straight dis-inherit him, but Gods love to his people, exceeds a fathers love
to his son, Matthew. 7.11. and a mothers too, Isa. 49.15.

I hear many menaces and threats for sin, but I read as many promises of mercy
and all they indefinite, excluding none whose impenitency and infidelity
excludes not themselves: every sin deserves damnation, but no sin shall condemn,
but the lying and continuing in it.

Wherefore if our clamorous conscience, like some sharp fang'd officer, arrests
us at Gods suit, let us put in bail, two subsidue virtues, Faith, and
Repentance; and so stand the trial: the Law is on our side, the Law of grace
is with us, and this Law is his that is our Advocate; and he is our Advocate,
that is our Judge; and he is our Judge, that is our Savior; even the head of
our selves, Jesus Christ.

For the first of these; do but repent, and God will pardon thee, be thy sins
never so many, and innumerable for multitude, never so heinous for quality and
magnitude, Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18. and 33.17. Yea, sins upon Repentance are so
remitted, as if they had never been committed: I have put away thy
transgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, Isa. 44.22. and what by
corruption has been done, by repentance is undone, as the former examples, and
many other, witness. Come and let us reason together, says the Lord: though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, Isa. 1.18. yea whiter;
for the Prophet David laying open his blood-guiltiness, and his original
impurity, uses these words: Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash
me, and I shall be whiter than Snow, Psalm. 51.7.

And in reason; did he come to call sinners to repentance, and shall he not
show mercy to the penitent? Or, who would not cast his burden upon him, that
does desire to give ease? As I live, says the Lord, I would not the death of a
sinner, Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.

Section 5.
Ojection. Yea, but I cannot Repent.

Answer. In time of temtation, a man is not a competent Judge in his own case:
In humane Laws, there is a nullity held of words and actions extorted, and
wrung from men by fear: because in such cases, a man is held not to be a
freeman, nor to have power or command in some sort, of himself. A troubled
soul is like troubled waters, we can discern nothing clearly in it; wherefore
(if thou can) lay aside prejudice, and tell me in cold blood, how it fares
with thee at other times, though indeed thy words at present are enough to
convince thee: For first, thou find sin a burden too heavy for thee to
bear, which thou did not formerly; what is the reason? are thy sins more and
grea^er? No, but the contrary: for though they appear more, yet they are less;
for sin, the more it is seen and felt, the more it is hated; and thereupon is
the less. Motes are in a room, before the Sun shines, but they appear only
then.

Again secondly, the very complaint of sin, springing from a displeasure
against it, shows that there is something i^^ thee opposite to sin: viz. that
thou art penitent in affection, though not yet in action, even as a child is
rational in power, though not in act. Yea more, thou accusest, and condemnest
thy self for thy sins; and by accusing our selves, we prevent Satan; by
judging our selves, we prevent God. Neither was the Centurion ever so worthy,
as when he thought himself most unworthy: for all our worthiness is in a
capable misery; nor does God ever think well of him, that thinks so of
himelf. But to let this pass.

Are not your failings, your grief? are they not besides your will? are they
not contrary to the current of your desires, and the main bent of your
resolutions, and endeavors? Do thou determine to continue in the practice of
any one sin? Yea, do thou not make conscience of all Gods Commandments, one
as well as another; the first table, as well as the second, and the second,
as well as the first, Matt. 5.19. Do thou not grieve ^or sins of all sorts,
secret as well as known, original, as well as actual, of omission, as well as
commission, lesser, ( viz thoughts) as well as greater: yea, as well for the
evil which cleavs to thy best works, as for the evil works, Romans 7.21. and as
heartily and unsaignedly desire that thou may never commit it, as that God
should never impute it? 2 Timothy 2.19. Do thou not fear to displease him, not
so much because, he is just to punish, as for his mercy and goodness sake; and
more fear the breach of the Law, than the curse? Do thou not love rather to
be, than seem or be thought good; and seek more the power of godliness, than
the show of it? Job 1.1. If so, well may Satan, and thine own conscience accuse
thee of impenitency, and unbelief; but Christ thy Judge never. Yea, then,
notwithstanding your failings, you may say with David, I have kept thy Word,
Psalm. 18.21.22.23. for though this be not such a measure of keeping as the Law
requires; yet it is such a keeping, as God in Christ accepts: for suppose
thy knowledge is still small, thy faith weak, thy charity cold, thy heart dull,
and hard, thy good works few and imperfect, and all thy zealous resolutions
easily hindered and quite overthrown with every small temtation: yet God that
works in us both the will and the work, will accept the will for the work; and
that which is wanting in us, Christ will supply with his own righteousness: He
respects not what we can do, so much as what we would do; and that which
we would perform, and cannot, he esteems it as though it were performed:
whereas, take away the will, and all acts (in God's sight) are equal.

As the wicked sin more than they sin, in their desire, so the righteous do
more good than they do, in their will to do it. If there be a paratum cor,
though there be not a perforatum cor; a profer of blood, though no expense of
blood for the honor of Christ, it is taken for Martyrdom, as Origin testified
of one: Non ille Martyrio, sed Martyrium illi defuit. I know thy poverty, but
thou art rich, says the Spirit to the Church of Smyrna: poor in thy condition,
rich in thy affection to goodness: Facultas secundum voluntatem, non voluntas
secundum facultatem estimanda est; God esteems our charitable beneficence, not
only secundum quod habemus, but secundum quod tribuere velimus. We are
charged to forsake all houses, lands, friends, liberties, lives, for Christ;
yet many die with houses, lands, and riches, in their possession, whom Christ
receives and Crowns in Heaven, because they did part with all secundum animae
preparationem: What we would have done, shall be reckoned to us, as done; we
do it quoad conatum, though non quoad effectum? In like manner God takes a
heart desirous to repent and believe, for a penitent and believing heart;
volens and dolens, The vehement desire of godly sorrow, or a sorrow because we
cannot sorrow, goes for godly sorrow with God: so that to sigh and grieve for
what we cannot do, is to come short, and yet to do it too: for God likes the
will so well, that in his Son what we would do, is in acceptance done, 2 Cor.
8.12. which textone brings in thus: O! what an unspeakable comfort was this
cordial verse to my afflicted soul; And well it might ^^for if we hate our
corruptions, and strive against them, they shall not be counted ours. It is
not I (says Paul) but sin that dwells in me: Romans 7.20 for what displeases
us, shall never hurt us; and we shall be esteemed of God, to be what we
love, and desire, and labor to be.

The comfort of this doctrine is intended, and belongs to troubled consciences,
and those that would fain do better: but let no presumptuous sinners meddle
with it; for what have thou to do to take (I say not the childrens bread to
eat. Matthew. 15.20. but even) the least parcel of Gods Word into thy mouth?
seeing thou hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50.16.17. But if thou be a weary
and heavy laden sinner: thou may comfort thy self ^hu^: I do hateful things,
but I hate that I do; I break the Law, but yet I love the Law, as holy, just,
and good: Flesh is in me, but I am not in the Flesh: I must not fix mine eyes
only upon mine own resistance, or failings, but on God's assistance and
acceptance in his Son, by which I shall be able to leap over all walls and
impediments, Psalm. 18.29. The Law is given, that Grace may be required; Grace
is given, that the Law may be fulfilled: by us, evangelically, for us, by
Christ (whose righteousness is ours) perfectly, as Saint Augustine speaks. The
Law is a gloss to show us our spots, the Gospel a fountain to wash them away.
Wherefore cast not both thine eyes upon thy sin, but reserve one, to behold the
remedy: look upon the Law to keep thee from presumption, and upon the Gospel,
to keep thee from despair.

Can thou not aggravate thine own sins, but thou must extenuate, and call in
question Gods mercy, and Christ's all sufficiency, spoil him of his power and
glory? Though the grievousness of our sins should increase our repentance, yet
they should not diminish our faith, and assurance of pardon, and forgiveness.
As the plaster must not be less than the sore, so the ten^ must not be bigger
than the wound. It was a sweet and even course which Saint Paul took, who when
he would comfort himself against corruption, and evil actions, Romans 7.20.
then; not I, but sin dwelling in me: when he would humble himself,
notwithstanding his graces, then; not I, but the grace of God in me, 1 Cor.
15.10.

Section 6.
Objection. But I am not worthy the least mercy, I have so often abused it, and
so little profited by the means of grace.

Answer. I think so too, for if thou refusest the offe^ of mercy until thou
deservest it, woe be to thee: But if thou will take the right course; renounce
the broken reed of thine own free will, which has so often deceived thee; and
put all thy trust in the grace of Christ: The way to be strong in the Lord, is
to be weak in thy self, be weak in thy self, and strong in the Lord and
through faith thou shall be more than a Conqueror. Leav tugging and struggling
with thy sin, and fall with Jacob to wrestle with Christ ^or a blessing; and
though thy self go limping away, yet shall thou be a Prince with God* and be
delivered from Esau's bondage. But thou stand upon thine own feet, and
therefore fallest so soully: thou will like a child, go alone, and of thy self,
and therefore ge^rest so many knocks. And thou would accept of a pardon too,
if thou might pay for it: but Gods mercies are free, and he bids thee come
and buy without silver, and without price; or else he says, thou and thy money
perish. Thou would go the natural Way to work, What shall I do to inherit
eternal life? but it is impossible to inherit it by any thing that we can do;
for all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. Yea, if our doings
could have done i^, Christ dyed in vain; whereas, if Christ had not died, we
had perished, every mothers child of us, 1 Cor. 15.22. and 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
Ephesians. 2.1. Colos. 2.13. Ezekiel. 18.4. Ioh. 11.50. Romans 5.6.8. and 14.9. 1 Cor
15.3. Matthew. 18.11.

O ^ool? do thou not know that our sins are his sins, and his righteousness,
our righ^eousness: Ier. 23.6. Psalm. 4.1. and that God esteems of Faith above
all other graces, deeds, or acts of thine? as what did our Savior answer, when
the people asked him, What shall we do that we might work the works of God?
The work of God is, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, Ioh. 6.28, 29.
and yet thou talkest of thy worthiness, and thou take this for humility too,
but it is pride; for if thou would deny thy self, and be nothing in thine
own eyes, renounce thine own righteousness, and wholly and only rest on thy
Savior Jesus Christ for thy salvation; thou would not hope the more in
regard of thine own worthiness, nor yet doubt in respect of thine own
unworthiness: But thou would first be worthy, and deserve of God; and then
accept of Christ, and deserve Christ at Gods hands, by thy good works, and
graces: which pride of thine, and opinion of merit, is a greater sin then all
thy other sins which thou complainest of: and except you do abandon it, and
wholly rely upon the grace, and free mercy of God for salvation, Christ shall
profit you nothing, Gal. 2.16. and 5.1. to 7. Colos. 3.11. for nothing is
available to salvation, but faith, which works by love, Gal. 5.6. whence it
is called righteousness through faith, ver. 5. Faith is the sta^fe, whereupon
we stay our selves, in life and death; by faith we are blessed, Gal. 3.9. by
faith we rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5.2. by faith we have access unto God,
Ephesians. 3.12. by faith we overcome the world, 1 Ioh 5.4. the flesh, Gal. 5.24.
and this is the shield whereby we quench the fiery darts of Satan, and resist
his power, Ephesians. 6.16. Yea, whosoever seeks to be justified by the Law, they
are abolished from Christ, and f^ln from grace, Gal 5.4. Stand fast therefore
in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not tangled again
with the yoke of bondage. And say, Lord we are not worthy to be servants, and
thou make us sons; nay, heirs, and coheirs with thee, of everlasting glory.

Objection. I grant the Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin: but
he is just, as well as merciful, and therefore he will not acquit the wicked
Exodus 34.6.7. but reward them according to their works, Revel. 20.12.13. and
22.1^.

Answer. He will therefore pardon all thy sins, (if thou unfainedly repent and
wholly rely upon Christ for thy salvation by a lively says) because he is
just: for as the Lord cannot in justice let sin go unpunished (for the wages of
sin is death Romans 6.23. Death in the person, if not ^^ the surety; and
therefore has punished the sins of all men, either in his Son, or will
thoroughly punish them in the parties themselves) so the same justice will not
admit, that the same sins should be twice punished; once in our Savior, and
again, in the faithful: or that a debt once paid, should be required the second
time, 1 Ioh. 1.9. Now that Christ has sufficiently satisfied for all the sins
of the faithful, and paid our debt even to the utmost farthing, it is evident
by many places of Scripture, as Isa. 53.4.5. 2 Cor. ^.21. Heb. 9.26. 1 Pet.
2.24. Romans 3.25.26. 1 Ioh. 1.7.9. and sundry others.

Are we bound to perform perfect obedience to the Law? be performed it for us:
were we for disobedience subject to the sentence of condemnation, the curse of
the Law, and death of body and soul? he was condemned for us, and bore the
curse of the law; he died in our stead an ignominious death; did we deserve
the anger of God? he endured his fathers wrathful displeasure, that so he
might reconcile us to his father, and set us at liberty. He that deserved no
sorrow felt much, that we who deserved much might ^eel none: and by his wounds
we are healed, Isa. 53.5. Adam eat the Apple, Christ paid the price. In a
word, whatsoever we owed, Christ discharged; whatsoever we deserved, he
suffered; if not in the self same punishments: (for he being God could not
suffer the eternal torments of Hell) yet in proportion, the dignity of his
person (being God and Man) giving value unto his temporary punishments, and
making them of more value and worth, than if all the world should have suffered
the eternal torments of Hell: for it is more for one that is eternal to die,
than for others to die eternally. Therefore was the Son of God made the Son of
man, that the Sons of men might be made the Sons of God; and therefore was he
both God and man: lest being in every respect God, he had been too great to
suffer for man; or being in every respect man, he had been too weak to
satisfy God.

Seeing therefore our Savior Christ has fully discharged our debt, and m^de
full satisfaction to his Fathers justice: God cannot in equity exact of us a
second payment, no more than the Creditor may justly require that his debt
should be twice paid; once by the Surety, and again, by the Principal.

Again secondly, it is the Lords Covenant made with his Church, and committed
to writing, Ier. 31.34. Heb. 10.16, 17. Psalm. 32.10. Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.21,
22, 23. and 33.11. M^l. 3.17. Confirmed and ratified by his seals, the
Sacraments; together with his Oath, that there might be no place left for
doubting: for, God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise,
the stableness of his counsel; bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable
things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong
consolation, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.17.18.

And lest the afflicted conscience should object, that he entered into
covenant, and made these promises to the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men of
God; but not to such heinous and rebellious sinners, who have most justly
deserved, that God should pour out upon them the Vialls of his wrath, and those
fearful punishments threatened in the Law: All the promises made in the Gospel
are general, indefinite, and universal, excluding none that turn from their
sins by unfeigned repentance, and believe in Christ Jesus, testing on him alone
for their salvation, as appears, Isa 55.1. Ezekiel. 33.11. Mark. 16.16. Ioh. 3.14,
15, 16.36. and 6.37.40. Act. 10.43. 1 Ioh. 2.1. Neither is there any limitation
or exception of this or that sin; for be they never so grievous and manifold,
yet if we perform the condition of faith and repentance, they cannot debar us
from receiving the benefit of God's mercy, and Christ's merits, as appears,
Isa. 1.18. Titus 2.14. 1 Ioh. 1.7.9.

And therefore unless thou conceivest of God, that he is unjust in his
dealing, untrue in his Word, a covenant-breaker; yea, a perjured person, (which
were most horrible blasphemy once to imagine,) thou must undoubtedly assure thy
self, that he will pardon and forgive thee all thy sins, be they in number
never so many and innumerable; or in nature and quality never so heinous and
damnable: if then turnest unto him by unfeigned repentance, and laiest hold upon
Christ by a true and lively faith. For consider, does the Lord say he will
extend his mercy unto all that come unto him? does he invite every one? does
he say I would have all men saved, and none to perish? and do thou say, nay,
but he will not extend his mercy unto me, he will have me to perish,
because I am a grievous sinner? What is this but in effect, and at a distance
to contradict the Lord, and give the lie to truth it self.

Indeed God says not, Believe thou John, or Thomas, and thou shall be saved,
but he says, Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, which is
as good. And yet thou exceptest thy self, he excludes none; and do thou
exclude one, and that one thy self? He would have all men saved, and thou
come in with thy exceptive, All but me; Why thee? a precious singularity,
but beware of it: For whereas others that believe not the threatenings, flatter
away their souls in a presumptuous confidence; thou by not believing the
promises, wilt cast away thine, in a sullen prodigious desperateness, if thou
take not heed. For infidelity on both sides is the cause of all, of presumption
in them, of despair in thee, of impiety in every one.

But be better advised, believe the Lord who never brake his Word with any
soul. Thou will give credit to an honest man's bare word, and have thou no
affiance in the merciful promises of God, past to thee by Word, Oath, Seals,
Scriptures, Sacraments, the death of his own Son, and (I presume) the Spirits
testimony, if not now, yet at other times: take heed what thou do, for
certainly nothing offends God more, then the not taking of his Word.

Section 7.
Objection. I know well that Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness,
unto every one that believes, Romans 10.4. But I want faith.

Answer. This is the objection I expected: (for the true Christian is as
fearful to entertain a good opinion of himself, as the false is unwilling to
be driven from it). But is it so? or does Satan only tell thee so? I know it
is not so, I know that thou beleevest with some mixture of unbelief, and that
this is but a slander of Satan's; for as Satan slandereth us to God, Job 1.9.
and God to us, Genesis 3.4.5. so he slandereth us to our selves, Job 16.9. But
least thou should think I slander Satan; know, that you believe, even whiles
you complain of unbelief: for as there could be no shadow, if there were no
light, so there cannot be this fear, where there is no faith. They that know
not Christ, think it no such great matter to loose him. But if God once say,
this is my Son, Satan will say, if thou he the Son of God, Matthew. 3.17. and
4.3. That Divine testimony did not allay his malice, but exasperate it. Neither
can the happy building of, Lord I believe, stand without that column to
under-prop it, Help thou mine unbelief. And he that doubt^ not of his estate,
his estate is much to be doubted of; doubting and resolution are not meet
touch-stones of our success: a presumptuous confidence commonly goes bleeding
home, when an humble fear returns in triumph. As it fared between the
Philistims and Israel, 1 Samuel 17.10.11. The Philistims and Goliath were
exceeding confident of the victory, but Saul, and all Israel much discouraged,
and greatly afraid: yet Israel got the victory, and the Philistims with their
great Goliath were overcome, ver. 51.52. They that are proudly secure of their
going to heaven, do not so frequently come thither, as they that are afraid of
their going to hell.

As it is in this world for temporal things, so for the World to come i^
spiritual things; Cantant pauperes, lugent divites; poor men sing, and rich
men cry. Who is so melancholy, as the rich worldling? and who sings so merry a
note, as he that cannot change a groat? so they that have store of grace,
mourn for want of it; and they that indeed want it, chant their abundance. But
the hopes of the wicked fail them when they are at highest, whereas Gods
Children find those comforts in extremity, which they durst not expect.

As there is nothing more usual, than for a secure conscience to excuse when
it is guilty: so nothing more common than for an afflicted conscience to
accuse, when it is innocent; and to lay an heavy burden upon it self, where
the Lord gives a plain discharge: but a bleeding wound is better than that
which bleeds not. Some men go crying to heaven, some go laughing and sleeping
to hell. Some consciences as well as men, lie speechless before departure: they
spend their days in a dream, and go from earth to hell, as Jonas from Israel
toward Tarshish, fast a sleep. And the reason is, they dream their case is
passing good, like a man which dreams in his sleep that he is rich and
honorable, and it joys him very much, but awaking, all is vanished like smoke.
Yea, they hope undoubtedly to go to heaven, as all that came out of Egypt hoped
to go into Canaan, and inherit the blessed promises: when only Caleb and
Joshua did enter, who provoked not the Lord. And the reason of this reason is,
whereas indeed they are Wolvs, the Devil and their own credulity persuades
them that they are Lambs.

The Philosopher tells us, that those Creatures which have the greatest hearts,
as the S^t^g, the Do, the Hare, the ^oney, and the Mouse, are the most
fearful: and therefore it may be; God refusing Lions, and Eagles, the King of
Beasts, and Queen of Birds; appointed the gentle Lamb, the fearful Dove for
his sacrifices. A broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise, Psalm.
51 17. And sure I am Christ calls to him, only w^ary, and heavy-laden sinners,
Matthew. 11.28. not such as feel no want of him, Mark. 2.17. and will fill only
such with comfort, as hunger and thirst after righteousness; not such as are in
their conceit righteous enough without him, Luke 1.53. Matthew. 15.24. And yet it
is strange, (yea, a wonder) to see how many truly humbled sinners, who have so
render conscience^ that they dare not yield to the least evil, for the worlds
goods, and refuse no means of being made better; turn every probation into
reprobation, every dejection into rejection, and if they be cast down, they
cry out^ they are cast away: who may fitly be compared to Artemon in Plutarch,
who when ever he went abroad, had his ^ervants to carry a Canopy over his
head, least the heavens should fall and crush him: or to a certain foolish
melancholy Bird, which (as some tell) stands always but upon one leg, least
her own weight should sink her into the Center of the Earth; holding the other
over her head, least the Heavens should fall.

Yet be not offended, I cannot think the worse of thee; for good is that fear
which hinders us from evil acts, and makes us the more circumspect. And God
has his end in it, who would have the sins to dye, but the sinner to live.

Yea, in some respect thou art the better to be thought of, or at least the
less to be feared, for this thy fear: for no man so truly loves, as he that
fears to offend; as Salvianus glosses upon those words, Blessed is the man that
fears always: And which is worth the observing, this fear is a commendation
often remembered in holy Scriptur^^ as a special and infalible mark of God's
Children: as for example, Job (says the holy Ghost) was a just man, and one
that feared God, Job. 1.1. Simeon a just man, and one that feared God, Luk,
2.25. Cornelius a devout man, and one that feared God, Acts 10.2. And so of
Father Abraham, a man that feared God, Genesis 22.12. Joseph a man who feared God,
Genesis 42.18. The Mid-wives in Egypt feared God, Exodus 1.17. So that evermore,
the fearing of God (as being the beginning of wisdom) is mentioned as the chief
note, which is as much as to say, if the fearing of God once go before, working
of righteousness will instantly follow after, according to that of the wise
man: He that fears the Lord, will do good.

And this for thy comfort, when Mary Magdalen sorrowed, and wept for her sins,
Luke 7, 50. Christ tells her, Thy faith has made the whole: intimating, that
this weeping, this repenting faith, is faith indeed: And the like to the Woman
with the bloody issue, who presuming but to touch the hem of his garment, fell
down before him with fear and trembling, Mark 5.27. to 35. And that humble
Canaanite, Matthew. 15.22. to 29. And that importunate blind man, Luke 18.38. to
43. As if this humble, this praying faith, were only the saving faith. Neither
can thy estate be bad, for as Saint Ambrose told Monica weeping for her
seduced Son, Fieri non patest, ut filius istarum lachrymarum pereat: It cannot
be, that the son of those tears should ever perish

Wherefore lift up thy self thou timorous fainting heart, and do not suspect
every spot for a plague token; do not dye of a mere conceit: for as the end of
all motion is rest, so the end of all thy troubles shall be peace: even where
the days are perpetual Sabbaths, and the diet undisturbed feasts.

But as an empty vessel bung'd up close, though you throw it into the midst
of the Sea, will receive no water, so all pleas are in vain to them that are
deas'ned with their own fears: for as Mary would not be comforted with the
sight and speech of Angels, no not with the fight and speech of Jesus himself,
till he made her know that he was Jesus; so until the holy Spirit sprinkleth
the conscience with the blood of Christ, and sheddeth his love into the heart,
nothing will do. No creature can take off wrath from the conscience, but he
that set it on. Wherefore, the God of peace give you the peace of God which
passes all understanding. Yea, O Lord, speak thou Music to the wounded
conscience, Thunder, to the feared; that thy justice may reclaim the one, thy
mercy relieve the other, and thy favor, comfort us all, with peace and
salvation in Jesus Christ.

Section 8.
But secondly, if this will not satisfy, call to thy remembrance the time
past, and how it has been with thee formerly, as David did in thy very case,
Psalm 77.2. to 12. And likewise Job, Chapter 13. for as still waters represent
any object in their bottom clearly, so those that are troubled, or agitated,
do it but dimly, and imperfectly. But if ever thou had true faith begotten in
thy heart, Ioh. 1.13. by the ministry of the Word, Romans 10.17. Iam. 1.18.21.
and the Spirits powerful working with it, Ioh. 3.3, 5, 8. whereby thine heart
was drawn to take Christ, and apply him a Savior to thine own soul; so that
thou were forced to go out of my self, and rely wholly and only on his merits:
and that it further manifested it self by working a hatred of sin, and an
apparent change in thy whole life, by dying unto sin, and living unto
righteousness; and that thou have not since, returned to thine old sins, like
the Dog to his vomit: if it has sometime brought forth in thee, the sweet fruit
of heavenly and spiritual joy; if it has purified thine heart in some measure
from noisome lusts and affections; as secret pride, self-love, hypo^risie,
carnal confidence, wrath, malice, and the like: so that the spirit within thee
sighteth against the flesh. If thou can now say, I love the godly, because
they are godly, 1 Ioh. 3.14. and have an hungring after Christ, and after a
greater measure of heavenly and spiritual graces, and more lively tokens of
his love and favor communicated unto thee: My soul for thine, thou have given
false evidence against thy self; for as in a gloomy day there is so much light
whereby we may know it to be day, and not night; so there is something in a
Christian under a cloud, whereby he may be discerned to be a true believer,
and not, an hypocrite. But, to make it manifest to thy self, that thou art so.

Know, first, that where there is any one grace in truth, there is every one in
their measure. If thou art sure thou have love, I am sure thou have faith: for
they are as inseparable, as fire and heat, life and motion, the root and the
sap, the Sun and its light: and so of other graces. Or, do thou feel that
Christ is thy greatest joy, sin ^hy greatest sorrow; that when thou can not
feel the presence of the spirit in thy heart, thou go mo^rning,
notwithstanding all other comforts? Assuredly as that holy Martyr said, if thou
were not a wedding Child, thou could never so heartily mourn for the absence
of the Bridegroom. Thus I might go on, but a few Grapes will show that the
Plant is a Vine, and not a Thorn. Take but notice of this, and several graces
will one strengthen another, as stones in an Arch. As for example, Master
Peacock, Fellow of a House, being afflicted in conscience, (as thou art) and at
the point of despair; when some Ministers asked whether they should pray for
him, answered, By no means do no so dishonor God, as to pray for such a
Reprobate as I am: but his young Pupil standing by, said* (with tears in his
eyes) Certainly a Reprobate could never be so tender of Gods dishonor; which
he well considering, was thereby comforted and restored: when neither he with
his learning, nor any other Ministers with their sage advice, could do any good.

Again secondly, if ever thou had true faith wrought in thy heart, be not
discouraged; for as the former graces show, that thou have with Mary made
choice of that better part, which shall never be taken from thee: So this
grace of faith is Christ's wedding Ring, and to whomsoever he gives it, he
gives himself with it; we may lose the sense, but never the essence of it: It
may be eclipsed, not extinguished: Fides concussa, non excussa: The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance: as it is, Romans 11.29. Friends are
unconstant, riches, honors, pleasures, are unconstant; the world is
unconstant, and life it self is unconstant; but I the Lord change not, Malachi
3.6.

In a swound the soul does not exercise her functions; a man neither hears,
nor sees, nor feels, yet she is still in the body. The Frantic man in his mad
fits, does not exercise reason; yet he has it: he loses the use for a time,
not the habit. Yea, a sober man has not alway^ ^he use of his senses, reason,
and understanding, as in his s^eep: shall we therefore conclude that this man is
senceless, unreasonable, and without understanding? it were most absurd: for if
we have (...) but a while, our argument will appear manifestly ^als^.

Trees (and so we are fitly called) be not de^d in Winter, (which resembles
the tune of adversity) because the sap is shut up in the root; and confined
thither by the cold frosts, that they cannot show themselv^ in the production
of leaves and fruits: for by experience we know, that for the present they
live, and secretly suck nourishment out of the earth; which makes them spring
and revive again, when Summer coms: Yea, eve^ whiles they are grievously shaken
with the winds, and nipped with cold frosts, they are not hurt thereby; but
contrarily they take deeper root, have their worms and cankers killed by it;
and so are prepared, and made fit to bring forth more fruit, when the
comfortable Spring approaches, and the sweet showers, and warm Sunbeams fall
and descended upon them. Elementary bodies, lighten and darken, cool and warm,
die and revive, as the Sun presents, or absents it self from them, And is not
Christ to our souls the only Sun of reghteousness, and fountain of all
comfort? so that if he withdraw himself but a little, we become like plants
in the Winter, quite withered^ yea, in appearance stark dead: or like Trees
void both of leaves and fruit: though even then there remains faith in the
heart, as sap in the root, or as fire raked up in the ashes.

Which faith, though it be not the like strong, yet it is the like precious
faith to that of Abraham's: whereby to lay hold, and put on the perfect
righteousness of Christ. The Woman that was diseased with an issue, did but
touch, and with a trembling hand, and but the hem of his garment, and yet went
away both healed, and comforted.

Well might I doubt of my salvation, says Bradford, feeling the weakness of my
faith, love, hope, etc. if these were the causes of my salvation: but there is
no other cause of it; or, of his mercy, but his mercy. Wherefore have thou but
a touch of sorrow for sin, a spark of hope, a grain of faith in thy heart? thou
art safe enough. The Anchor lies deep, and is not seen, yet is the stay of all.

The Bladder blown, may float upon the ^^ood,
But cannot sink, nor stick in filthy mud.
But thou dreamest of a says without doubting, which some doting by boast they
have: but as no righteousness can be perfect without sin, so no assurance can
be perfect without doubting: Take the evenest balances, and the most equal
weights; yet at the first putting in, there will be some in-equality; though
presently after they settle themselves in a (...) is a cloud that often hinders
the Sun from our eyes, yet it is still a Sun; the vision or feeling of this
comfort may be sometime suspended, the Union with Christ is never dissolved.

An usual thing with believers to have their ebbing and flowing, wa^ing and
waning, Summer and Winter; to be sometimes so comfortable and courageous, that
we can say with David, Though I were in the valley of death, yet would I fear
none ill, Psalm. ^3.4. otherwhiles again so de^ded and ^^jected in our spirits,
that we are like him when he said, One day I shall die by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. Sometimes so strong in faith, that we can overcome the greatest
assaults; and with Peter, can walk upon the sw^lling waves: by and by so faint,
and brought to so low an ebb, that we fall down even in far less dangers, as
Peter began to sink at the rising of the wind, Matthew. 14.29.30. And indeed, if
the wings of our faith be clipped, either by our own sins, or Satan's
temptations, how should not our spirits lie grovelling on the ground?

Sect. 9.
But thirdly and lastly, (for I h^^^^n) suppose thou art at the last-cast, even
at the very brink of despair; and that thy conscience speaks nothing but bitter
things, of Gods wrath, hell and damnation; and that thou have no feeling of
faith, or grace; yet know that it is Gods use (and I wish we could all take
notice of it) to work in, and by contraries: For instance, in creating of the
world, he brought light out of darkness, and made all things not of something,
but of nothing; clean contrary to the course of Nature.

In his preserving of it, he has given us the Rainbow, which is a sign of
rain, as a certain pledge that the world shall never the second time be
drowned. He caused Elias his sacrifice to burn in the midst of water^ and
fe^cheth hard stones out of the midst of thin va^ours. When he meant to
blesse^ Jacob, he wrestled with him as an Adversa^y^ even till he lamed him:
When he meant to prefer Joseph to the Throne, he ^^rew him down into the
Dungeon; and to a golden chain about his neck, he la^ed him with Iron ones
about his legs, Thus Christ opened the eyes of the blind, by anointing them
with clay and spittle; more likely to put them out: And would not cure Lazarus
till after he was dead, buried, and stunk again; no question, to teach us,
that we must be cast down by the Law, before we can be raised up by the
Gospel: that we must dye unto sin, before we can live unto righteousness:
and become fools, before we can ^ee truly wise.

In the work of Redemption, he gives life, not by life, but by death, and that
a most c^^sed death; making that the best instrument of life, which was the
worst kind of death: Optimum seci^ instrumentum vitae, quod era^ pessimum
moriis genus.

In our effectual vo^ation, he calls us by the Gospel, unto the Jews, ^
stumbling block, and unto the world mere foolishness: And when it is his
pleasure that any should depend upon his goodness, and providence, he makes
them feel his anger, and to be nothing in themselves; that they may rely
altogether upon him.

Thus God works joy out of fear, light out of darkness; and brings us to the
Kingdom of heaven, by the Gates of hell: according to that 1 Samuel 2. (...) ^.7.
And wherein does thy case differ? He sends his Serfeant to (...) thee for thy
debt; commands thee and all thou have to be sold. But why? only to show thee
thy misery without Christ, that so thou (...) seck so him for mercy: for
although he hide, ^^ is futherly affections* as Joseph once did his brotherly,
his meaning is in conclusion to forgive thee every ^arthing, Matthew. ^8.26, 27.

And do thou make thy flight sufferings an argument of his displeasure? for
shame mutter not at the matter, but be silent: It is not said, God will not
suffer us to be tempted at all, but that we shall not be tempted above that
we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. And assure thy self, what ever thy
sufferings be, thy faith shall not fail to get the victory; as oil over-swims
the greatest quantity of water you can power upon it. True, let none presume;
(no not the most righteous) for he shall scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. yet
let him not despair, for he shall be saved, Romans 8.35.

Only accept with all thankfulness the mercy offered, and apply the promises
to thine own soul: for the benefit of a good thing, is in the use; wisdom is
good, but not to us, if it be not exercised; cloth is good, but not to us,
except it be worn, the light is comfortable, but not to him that will live in
darkness: a preservative in our pocket, never taken, cannot yield us health,
nor baggs of money being ever sealed up, do us any pleasure; no more will the
promises, (no nor Christ himself, that only summum bonum) except they are
applied: Yea, better there were no promises, than not applied. The Physician is
more offended at the contempt of his Physic in the Patient, than with the
loathsomness of the disease. And this I can assure thee if the blood of Christ
be applied to thy soul, it will soon sta^ch the blood of thy conscience; and
keep thee from bleeding to death, 1 Ioh. 1.7.

But secondly, instead of mourning continually as the tempter ^ids thee; rather
rejoice continually as the Apostle bids thee, 1 These. 5.16. Neither think it an
indifferent thing, to rejoice, or not to rejoice; but know that we are
commanded to rejoice, to show that we break a commandment if we rejoice not:
Yea, we cannot believe if we rejoice not; for ^aith, in the commandments
breeds obedience; in the threatenings, fear; in the promises, comfort. True,
thou think thou do well to mourn continually; yea, it is the common
disease of the innocentest souls: but thou do very ill in it: for, when you
forget to rejoice in the Lord, then you begin to muse, and after to fear, and
after to distrust, and at last to despair: and then every thought seems to be a
sin against the holy Ghost. Yea, how many sins does the afflicted conscience
record against it self; repo^ting for breaking this commandment, and that
commandment; and never repents for br^^^ing this commandment, rejoice
evermore.

But what is the reason? Ignorance^ thou think thy self poor and miserable,
and only therefore think so, because thou know not thy riches and
happiness in Ob^^st: for else thou would say with the Prophet Habbakuck, in
the want of all other things, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation, Habbak. 3.17, 18. Thou would (...) that thy name is written
in the book of life, as our Savior injoines, Luke 10.20. though thou h^dst
nothing else to rejoice in.

But it is nothing to be blessed, until we understand our selves to be so;
wherefore

Thirdly, wait Gods leisure with patience, and hold fast to him in all
pressures: Time (says Seneca) is the best Physic for most diseases, for the
body, and so likewise for the soul: if it be an afflicted conscience, waiting
Gods leisure for the assurance of his love, is the best remedy: and so in all
other cases.

Section. 10.
Ob. Bu^ when will there be an end of this long disease? this tedious
affliction? this heavy yoke of bondage? etc.

Answ. It is a sign of cold love, scarce to have begun to suffer for Christ
and presently to gape for an end. It was a far better speech of one, Lord, give
me what thou w^lt, as much as thou will, when thou will. Thou ar^ Gods
Patient, prescribe not thy Physi^ian. It is the Goldsmiths skill to know how
long his gold must be in the Crusible, neither takes he it out of that hot
bath, till it be sufficiently purified.

What if the Lord for a time forbear coming, as Samuel did to Saul; that he
may try what is in thee? and what thou will do, or suffer for him, that has
done and suffered so much for thee? as why did God set Noah about building the
Ark an hundred and twenty years, when a small time might have finished it? It
was for the trial of his patience. Thus he led the Israelites in the deserts
of Arabia forty years; whereas a man may travel from Ramesis in Egypt, to any
part of Canaan in forty days: this God did to prove them, that he might know
what was in their hearts, Deu. 8.2. He promised Abraham a son in whom he
should be blessed; this he performed not, in t^irty years after. He gave
David the Kingdom, and anointed him by Samuel, yet was he not possessed of it
in many years: (...) so much that he said, Mine eyes fail for thy Word, Psalm.
119.123. Joseph has a promise that the Sun and Moon should do him reverence,
but first he must be bound in the Dungeon. This God does to try us, for in
these exigents we show o^r selves, and our dispositions.

What says God to his people in their misery? Psalm. 75. When I see convenient
time, I will execute judgment, ver. 2. he does not say, when you think the
time convenient. Let us tarry a little the Lords leisure, diliverance will
come, peace will come, joy will com; in mean while to (...) ^^^ient in misery,
makes misery no misery.

Again secondly, he may delay his coming for other ends of greater
consequence, Martha and Mary send to Christ, as desiring him to come and
res^^re Lazarus their sick brother to health, Ioh. 11.3. expecting him without
delay, now he loved both Martha and her Sister, and Lazarus* (...)* 5. yet he
neglects coming for many days, lets him die, be put in the grave until he
stank; but what of all this? he that would not rest^re (...) Lazarus to health,
restored dead Lazarus to life; which was a grea^e^^ ^^^cy than they either did,
or durst ask. Neither did this only increase (...) joy, and thankfulness, give
them occasion ever after to believe, and (...) above and against all hope: but
it made many of the Jews believe in him, which before did no^, ver. 45.

Thirdly and lastly, he delays thee the longer, that when he coms, he ^ may
bring with him the greater recompense of reward: for he will comfort us
according to the days we have been afflicted, and according to the years that
we have seen evil, Psalm. 90.15.

Neither will he stay overlong, for behold, says he, I come quickly, and my
reward is with me; to give every man according as his works shall be, Rev.
22.12. and suffering is accounted none of the meanest works. So that the harder
the conflict, the more glorious the conquest. Wherefore hold out yet a little,
and help shall not be wanting to the combatants; nor a crown to the
conquerours. Yea, fight to the last minute, for the eye of thy Savior is upon
the; if thou faint, to cheer thee; if thou stand to it, to second thee; if thou
conquer, to crown thee; whereas no combat, no conquest; no conquest, no
triumph.

Object. But my sufferings are so great, that if they continue, I shall never
be able ^o hold out.

Answ. True, if thou trustest to thine own strength; for perseverance is the
gift of God; yea, it is he that works in us both to will and to do at his
good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. For first, man's will is a fugitive Onesimus, and God
must call home that runagate, subdue that rebel, before we can choose that
which is good. Neither when we have begun, can we continue: perficit qui
efficat, He that begun a good work in us, will perform it, Phil. 1.6. Jesus is
the founder and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2 Neither can we of our selves
suffer for him: Datur pati, it is given to us to suffer for his sake, Phil.
1.29. Without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. not parum, but nihil; But in
him, and through him, all things. I can do all things through him that
strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. In our selves we are weak Captives, in him we are
more than Conquerours, Romans 8.37. Whence it is, many sick men undergo patiently
such pressure^^ as when they were in health, they would not have believed they
could have born.

The truth of grace (be the measure never so small) ^s always blessed with
perseverance: because that little is ^ed with an everlasting spring. Yea, if
grace but conquer us first, we by (...) shall conquer all things else, whether
it be corruptions within us, or temtations without us: for as the fire which
came down from heaven in Elias time, licked up^ all the water, to show that it
came from God; so will this fire spend all our corruptions: No affliction
without, or corruption within, shall quench it. Wherefore do but thy endeavor
to hold out, I mean with patience (...) that Spirit which came in the likeness
of a Dove, will not com but (...) Dove,) and pray for divine assistance, this
sadness shall end in gladne^^* this sorrow, in singing.

But above all; pray unto God, for Prayer is the key of heaven, as (...) Austin
terms it; and the hand of a Christian, which is able to reach from Earth to
Heaven, and to take forth every manner of good gift out of (...) Lords
Treasury. Did not Elias by turning this K^y one way, lock up the whole Heaven
from raining for three years and six months; and another while by turning the
same Key of prayer, as much another way, in the turning of a hand, unlock all
the doors and windows of heaven, and set them wide open, that it rained, and
the earth brought forth her fruit.

Yea, as all Samsons strength lay in his hair, so all our strength lies in
Prayer: Prayers and tears are the Churches Armor, Prayers and patience her
weapons; and therefore when Peter was imprisoned by cruel Herod, the
congregation joined their forces to pray for him; and so brake his chains, blew
open the Iron Gates, and fetched him out, Act. 12.4. to 18. Arma Christianorum
in adversis, alia esse non debent quam patientia, and precat^^ says Salmeron.

Yea, prayer is so powerful, that it commands all things in Heaven and
Earth: It commands all the four Elements, Air, Iam. 5.17.18. Fire,
Ecclesiasticus 48.3. Dan. 3.27. Water, Exodus 14.21. and 15.25. Earth, Number.
16.31.32.33. Nay, the Prayer of one devou^ man, is able to co^quer an host of
enemies in battle, Exodus 17.11. What shall I say? it has made the Sun stand
still in the Firmament one while, go back another; fetch fire and hailstones
from heaven, thrown down the walls of Jericho, subdued Kingdoms, stopped the
mouths of Lions quenched the violence of fire, etc. Yea, Prayer is so potent,
that it raises the dead, 1 King. 17.21. overcomes Angels, Genesis 19.22. casts
our Devils, Matthew. 17.21. and that which is yet more wonderful, overcomes
him that cannot be overcome; and mastereth even God himself: for does not the
Lord say to Moses, let me alone? And Moses would not let him alone, till he
had obtained his petition, Exodus 32.10.14. And again to Jacob, wrestling with
him, let me go: and Jacob would not let him go, until he had prevailed, Genesis
32.16.

Wherefore, Pray upon all occasions and that without doubting: say not to God,
as the Leper said to Christ, If thou will, thou can make me clean: for he
both can, and will, as that very text, Matthew. 8.2, 3. proves. Yea, I would to
God we were but so willing, as he is, for he desires to be desired: Neither
has he his own will, except we have ours. Christ does ask no more of us, but
only that we would vouchsafe to ask him. True, the fainting heart that has
waited some time, may with the Psalmist mutter out some such speech, as this,
Has God forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77.9. But if he forgets any of his,
he has lost his old wont* for who can nominate one that ever came to Christ
with any lawful suit, that received a repulse? Who ever asked any thing of him
which was profitable for him to receive, and did not obtain his suit? Did not
the sick ever receive their health? The lame, their limbs? the blind their
fight? Did ever any sinner implore the forgiveness of his sins, which did not
receiv full remission and pardon? Yea, did not this our gracious King and
Redeemer, prevent his poor miserable subjects with his grace, in giving, before
^hey had the grace to ask; or more then they desired? The sick of the Pal^^^
asking but cure of his disease, received not only that, but the remission of
his sins also* Matthew. ^. Zacheus desired but to see his face, he became his
guest; and gave him salvation to boot, Luke 1^. The Woman of Samaria requested
but elementary and common water, he offered unto her the water of life, Ioh.
4. The people followed him to be fed by miracle with corporal food, he
offered unto them the bread of life, Ioh. 7. The poor blind man desired but his
bodily sight, Christ illuminated the eye of his soul, Ioh. 9.

Neither has honors changed manners with him, as is usual amongst men; for
he is a God immutable in goodness, and without change, or shadow of turning,
Iam. 1 17. so that if thou speak, he will hear; and answer thy suit in
supporting thee: so that thou shall be sure to persevere, and hold out unto
the end.

Section 11.
Object. But I have no evidence of divine assistance, nor can I pray for it to
purpose.

Answ. We have the presence of Gods Spirit, and grace many times, and feel it
not; yea, when we complain for want of i^, (as Pilate asked Christ what was
truth, when the truth stood before him). The stomach finds the best digestion,
even in sleep, when we least perceive it; and whiles we are most awake, this
power works in us, either to further strength, or disease, without our
knowledge of what is done within; and on the other side, that man is most
dangerously sick, in whom nature decays without his feeling, without his
complaint. To know our selves happy is good; but woe were to us Christians, if
we could not be happy, and know it not. As touching Prayer, every one is not
so happy as S^even was, to be most fervent when they are most in pain; yea,
many in time of sickness (by reason of the extremity of pain) can hardly pray
at all: whence Saint James wishes us in affliction, to pray our selves; but in
case of sickness, to send for the Elders: that they may, as those in the
Gospel, offer up the sick person to God in their prayers, being unable to
present their own cas^, Iam. 5.13.14.15. Yea, it were miserable for the best
Christian, if all his former Prayers and Meditations did not serve to aid him
in his last straights, and meet together in the Center of his extremity;
yielding, though not sensible relief, yet secret benefit to the soul: whereas
the worldly man in this case, having not laid up for this hour, has no
comfort from God, or from others, or from himself.

Besides, thou art happy in this, there is not the poorest and meanest of Gods
Children, but as he has the benefit of Christ's intercession in heaven, Romans
8.34. Ioh. 16.26. so has he also the benefit of the Prayers of all the Saints
on Earth: we have the graces and gifts, each of other in common.

Yet, because thine own Prayer is most proper; and seeing it is the minds
Ambassador t^ God, and never fails of success, if it be fervent* (as if our
prayers want success, they want heart, their blessing is according to their
vigor) pray that thou may pray better: If thy Leg ^^e be^^^m^d, go upon it a
little, and it will come to it self again. To which if thou join fasting, thou
shall do well; for prayers are made ^at with fasting, as Tertullian speaks:
Yea, pray often, though thy prayers be the shorter; weak (...) which cannot
digest large (...), feed (...), and l^^tle. O! (says holy Bernard most
sweetly), How often have thou (meaning prayer) found me lamenting, and
despairing; and lest me rejoicing, and triumphing!

And what though thou can not power out thy soul in a flood of words: The
Woman diseased with an issue of blood, said but within her self, she did not
speak to be heard of others, and yet Christ heard her, and answered her
request, Matthew: 9.21.22.

The Lord esteems the will for the deed, and the affection for the action;
Man sees the countenance, God the heart; man the deeds, but God the meaning.
Have thou but thoughts and desires, and can thou only express them with
sighs and groans? these speechless words, or rather no words, but a few poor
thoughts, conceived aright, pass all the flowing eloquence of Demosthenes and
Tully, yea, Tertullus, and all the Orators that ever were in the world; for
this matter is not expressed with words, but with groanings; and these
groanings are from the blessed Spirit. A Father delights more in the stammering
of his little Child, than in the eloquence of the best Orator.

Neither is hearty prayer in our own power, but it is the gift of God, which at
sometimes in plentiful measure he bestows upon his children, and at other
times again he pulls back his liberal hand: that by the want thereof, we
may leern to ascribe the glory and praise of this grace to the giver, who
works in us the will and the deed: which praise otherwise, in pride of heart,
we would arrogate unto our selves, as being in our own power. Also that we
may more highly esteem it, and with more joy and diligence use it, when we have
it bestowed on us.

If it be asked why God reckons so highly of a few sighs, and groans? and why
the prayers of the faithful are so powerful? it is, because they be not
ours, but the intercession of Gods own Spirit in us, powered out in the name of
Christ, his own Son, in whom he is ever well (...) for, as for us, we know
not what to pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us,
with sighs which cannot be expressed, Romans 8.26. It is the Spirit whereby we
cry Abba Father, ver. 15. Gal. 4.6.

Now if thou would have the Spirits assistance, and be heard of God, when
thou make supplication to him; do not (as too many do) fall into prayer
without preparation, and utter a number of words without devotion or affection:
for no marvel, if we ask and miss, when we thus ask amiss, I^^. 4.3.

Neither do as Children, which never look after their Arrow; but like Daniel,
Dan. 9. take notice of thine inlargements in prayer, and of thy success after.

Nor only pray, and no more, for to pray, and to do nothing else, is in effect
to do nothing less. But let your Prayers be ushered in, by Meditation, and
(...) by zealous devotion, and then believing that you shall receive whatsoever
you ask in Christ's name* and according to his will, 1 John 5. ^^ John ^6.23.
God will be (...) to give you that you desire, 1 John 5.14.15. Mark 11.23.24.
or that which is better for you* (...) And suppose thou art not presently
heard: yet continue asking still, as Peter continued knocking till the door was
opened: for after an ill harvest we must sow, and after denials we must woo
God. Yea, if it be possible with the Woman of Canaan, let delays, and seeming
denialls increase the strength of thy cries. And commonly they be earnest
suits which issue from a troubled soul, like strong streams in narrow
straights, which bear down all that stands in their way. Nothing so strong as
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, for it overcame the roaring Lion; yet the
Prayer of Faith, from the knees of humility, and a broken heart, will conquer
even that Conqueror, Matthew. 15.28.

And thus you see that nothing can befall us without the sorciall appointment
of our good God, who not only takes notice of our sufferings, but sweetneth
them with his presence, takes our part, stints our enemies, and so orders the
whole, that our grief is either short or tolerable; and that though he is
oftentimes harsh, in the beginning, and progress, and late in coming; yet he
coms on the sudden, and is always comfortable, in the conclusion. And lastly,
that if he defer his help, it is on purpose that our trialls may be perfect,
our deliverance welcome; our recompense glorious. And may not this comfort thee?

CHAP. 37. That stripes from the Almighty, are special tokens and pledges of
his adoption and love.
3 We shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort; if we consider,
that stripes from the Almighty are so far from arguing his displeasure, that
contrarily there are no better tokens and pledges of the Adoption and love: As
many (says God) as I love, I rebuke, and chasten, Rev. ^.19. My Son (says the
Author to the Hebrews, out of Solomon's Proverbs) Despise not the chastening of
the Lord, neither saint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loves,
he chasteneth; and he scourges every son whom he receives. If you endure
chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons: for what son is it
whom the Father chasten^th not? If therefore ye be without correction,
whereof all are partakers; then are ye bastards, and not sons, Heb. 11.5. to
13. Prove. 3.11.12. He is a Thistle, and not good Corn, that comes not under
the flail. Yea, what use of the grain it self, if it pass not the edg of the
sickle, the stroke of the flail, the wind of the Fan, the weight of the
millstone, the heat of the oven.

Many a man's fellicity drives him from God; and where happiness domineereth,
virtue is commonly banished* And does not experience show, that fear and joy,
sweet and sour, sharp and flat, one with another, do better than either alone*
for if you be too ^a^sh, you make the (...) a fool; if ^oo fond^ a wanton. The
bridl^^ governs the horse, the (...), hi^; the weight upon (...) Jack ^o, the
(...) the (...): The sayls give the speed, the (...) to the (...) of the (...)
upon God (...) to us our favors and crosses in an equal balance; and so
tempers out sorrows, that they may not oppress; and our joys, that they may not
transport us. Each one has some matter of envy to others, and of grief to
himself.

Thou dealest mercifully with us, lest we should fall from thee, and despair;
thou beatest us, lest we should forget thee, and so perish, (says Saint
Austin) He that knows our frame, knows we are best when we are worst, and
live holiest when we are miserablest: wherefore by affliction he separates
the sin, that he hates, from the sinner, whom he loves; and we are by much
the better for this scouring. It is the wont of Fathers to hold in their
Children, when they suffer the children of bondmen to go at large, and do as
they list; yea, when diverse children are playing the wantons, if we see a man
take one from the rest, and whip him soundly; we conclude that alone to be his
Child. Yea, wise and discreet Fathers will force their Children earnestly to
apply themselves to their study, or labor; and will not let them be idle,
although it be holy day: yea, constrain them to sweat, and oftentimes to weep,
when their Mothers would set them on their laps, and keep them at home all day
in the shadow, for burning their white. Jacob is bound Apprentice, while
profane Esau rides a hunting: of Elkanah his two wives, Hanna was in more
esteem with God, yet barren, and Peninnah less, yet she was fruitful 1 Samuel
1. They were all gross inconsequences; for Gedeon to argue Gods absence by
affliction, his presence by deliverances, and the unlikely-hood of success, by
his own disability, Judge. 6.13.15. (It is no argument, that Christ is not in
the Ship: because tempests, and storms arise.) The valiant man was her^ weak:
weak in faith, weak in discourse; for rather should he have inferred Gods
presence upon their correction; for wheresoever God chastises, there he is;
yea, there he is in mercy; nothing more proves us his, than his stripes; he
will not bestow whipping, where he loves not: fond nature indeed, thinks God
should not suffer the wind to blow upon his dear ones, because her self makes
this use of her own indulgence; but none (out of the place of torment) have
suffered so much, as his dear Children. If he had said we are Idolaters,
therefore the Lord has forsaken us, because we have forsaken him; instead of,
the Lord has delivered us unto the Medianites, therefore he has forsaken us;
the sequel had been as good, as now it is faulty; for sins, not afflictions,
argue God absent: Yea, commonly, the measure of our sufferings is according to
the measure of grace in us, and Gods love to us; He is a chosen vessel unto
me (says God to Ananias touching Paul;) therefore he must suffer great
things for my sake, Act. 9.15.16. Job, for a righteous and upright man, had no
fellow; by the testimony of God himself, Job 1.8. Yet the next news we hear of
him, Job is afflicted in his Sons, in his substance, in his body; from the
crown of the head, to the soal of the foot. Saint Austin, when God called him,
was far more assaulted by Satan, than Alippius; because God had endued him with
greater learning and gifts, and intended him an instrument of bringing more
glory to his Name. And lastly, as Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. so he was anointed with the oil of sadness
above his fellows: as was his back, so was his burden,; as were his parts, so
were his passions, and his strokes, answerable to his strength.

Never any have had so bitter draughts upon earth, as those he loves best: and
that of Saint Austin, is a sure rule, whom God smites not, he loves not: If
he do not think thee worthy of his Rod, he will never think thee worthy of his
Crown. Yea, where he uses not the Rod, he means to use the Sword. Never was
Ierusalems condition so desperate, as when God said unto her, My fury shall
depart from thee, I will be quiet, and no more angry. Ezekiel, 16.42. Thus not to
be angry, was the greatest anger of all. Never were the Jews more to be
pitied, than when their Prophet delivered these words from the Lord, Why should
ye be stricken any more? Isa. 1.5. Not to ^e afflicted, is to be forsaken:
And as the sick man is in small hope of his life, when the Physician gives him
over; so his soul is in a desperate case, whom God forbeareth to chastise for
his sins. As many there be, who never knew what any sorrow meant, unless it
were such as Amnons, such as Ahabs, when they are crossed in their corruptions,
curbed in their lewd courses, or restrained of their wicked wills. But let them
take it for a fearful sign of some sore judgment to come: Saint Ambrose,
Bishop of Millain, as Paulinus relates, took into a Rich man's house as he
traveled, who, that he might bid him thoroughly welcome, entertained him both
with great cheer, and courteous discourses: and amongst other matters, told of
his continued happiness, and that he never suffered any ill all his days, but
had all things as he would; and happiness so flowing in upon him, that he
knew not what calamity meant: which conference did so startle Saint Ambrose,
that presently he took his leave, telling his company that he feared to stay
in that place, which never felt any disaster; and was no sooner gone thence, but
suddenly the house fell down, and proved a grave to all her inhabitants.
Polycrates, King of the Samians, never felt any ill all his life, his hopes
never fell short of his expectation, he could not wish for the thing which was
not fulfilled; what he willed, he did: Yea, having but once a King of
excellent rarity that fell into the water, this loss was recovered; for the
Fish was taken which had swallowed it, and was presented to Polycratus: but at
length all this his happiness epilogized in a gallows. None more happy than
great Pompey all his life, yet at last he was made to drink his own blood by
the hands of the Executioner. Who but Andronicus, Emperor of the East for many
years? but at length he was set upon a scabbed Chamelt, with a Crown of Onions
platted on his head, and in great mockery car^ied in triumph through the City.
And dots not sacred Writ certify, how Haman, whose command ere while almost
reached to Heaven, was instantly adjudged by the King to the Gibbet; while
Mordecai who was condemned to the ^alter, was all of a sudden made second in
the Kingdom.

Nevertheless, as Haman rejoiced in his pre^^rment to the (...), Ban^^^t, which
was the (...) way to his destruction: so, many (...) only argument of Gods
love, and that they are in favor with him, because they prosper in all their
ways: which would make a wise man the more suspicious, for, (as Seneca that
wise Roman says) he that has been longest happy, shall at length have his
portion of misery; and who so seems to be dismissed* is but deferred.

And commonly their change is not more doleful, than sudden; for as it often
happens, that in very fair weather a storm does arise: and as I have read of
certain Trees, which on Monday have been growing in the Forest, and before
Sunday following, under sail on the Sea: so the same hour has seen the knee
bowing to the head; and again, the head stooping, and doing reverence to the
knee, as every age gives instance: for else I might muster up a multitude of
examples for proof of the point* Or in case it seems better, yet it is worse
with them when their life and happiness* shall end together: as it fared with
Belshazzar, who was sitting at a Feast (...)ly, while on a sudden, Death came
like a Voyder to take him away. And Pope Adrian, who when he was to dye; brake
out into this expression: Oh my soul, whither art thou going? thou shall never
be merry again.

Neither are men of this world, whose bellies God fills with his hid
treasure, upon occasion of their outward prosperity, only apt to be brought
into a fools Paradise, of thinking themselves to be the special darlings of
God: but even the godly themselves have oftentimes their eyes so dazzled, with
the outward glittering and flourishing estate of the wicked, that thereupon
they are ready to say of them, The generation of Gods children, as it fared
with David, Psalm. 73.15. But these are not sober thoughts, yea, they are rather
the dreams of men, drunk with the love of the World: for although it be as
common a phrase, as it is foolish, when any great matter falls to a man, O he
is made! yet experience proves, that it rather marr^ than makes him; for not
seldom do men possess riches, as sick men do fevers, which indeed rather
possess them. And certainly, if riches were such pearls, as most men esteem
them, it is not likely the Lord would cast them to sub Swine, as mostly he
does: If such happy things, he would not throw them to such Dogs. As what
says Luther of the whole Turkish Empire? it is but a crum of bread, which the
master of the house, throws to his Dogs. And the truth is, what men think
most pleasing, (viz. to have their wills, and their lusts granted) is most
plaguing, Psalm. 81.12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they
walked in their own counsels; so that the greatest temtation, is to be without
temtation: and the greatest affliction, not to be afflicted, 2 Cor. 12.7.

Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, because of some sore affliction,
and your weak knees, Heb. 12.12. and know, that the worst of temporal
afflictions, are an insufficient proof of divine displeasure: yea, that stripes
from the Almighty, are tokens of his love, and seals of his Sonship.

Yea, since he that has most grace, commonly complains of most discomfort,
confess that the palate is but an ill Judge of the favors of God: as it is in
great love no doubt, however it be taken, that the tender Father medicines his
Child for the Worms, gives him Aloes, or the like: the Child cries, and
sputters, and kecke^, as if it were poisoned, yet still the Fathers love is
never the less: say it be bitter, yet bitter poisons bring sweet health, and
who will not rather take a vomit, then hazard life? In the Sweating sickness in
England, their friends would stand by them and strike them over the faces with
sprigs of Rosemary, to keep them awake: the poor souls faint, and full of pain,
would cry out you kill me, but yet they must do it, or else they killed them
i^deed: for all that slept, dyed. Look we (says Saint Ambrose) wi^h the eyes
of our body, upon Lazarus estate, and we think it miserable; but, if with the
eyes of the mind, it will be otherwise; for how did the Angels do by him? but
as Nurses are wont to do by their little children, all the day long they carry
them about in their arms, and at ni^ht they lay them down in their beds to ^est.

But the supernatural works of God, when we look upon them with our own eyes,
are subject to a dangerous misprision; the Sunbeams, to whom we are beholding
for our sight, if we eye them directly, blind us. Miserable men! we are ready
to suspect truths, to run away from our safety, to be afraid of our comforts,
to mis-know our best friends.

We usually think it a great sign of God displeasure, when he ruins our
estate, and brings us to nothing; when he in his wisdom knows, that these
riches would shipwreck the soul, were they not cast overboard: and his love
only forces him to it. A Mother seeing her little Son brustled at by
Turcki-cocks catches him up, and strippeth him of his red coat, at which those
Ei^des are offended; the child cries for his coat, but she regarding his good,
lets him weep, but satisfies him not. And the like of Enemies, we think
our selves mightily wronged by them: But God finds it to fare with us, as it
does with the Oak, which gains by the maims and wounds given it, and thereupon
spreads out thicker than before. Whence it is, God suffers them to live, and
domineer, as some Countries suffer Ravens, enacting Laws to prohibit the
killing of them; that they may devour the Carrions, which else would corrupt
the air. And so in all other trials: for, be the root of this tree never so
bitter, yet the fruit is pleasant. Well may we catch a maim as Jacob did, but
such a blessing come withal, that we would not (if wise) be without it. Say
it be a sore and fiery citall, yet better this fire to purge us, than Hell
fire to burn us. But all the skill is in making men see this; wherefore he
that opened the eyes of Paul, open ours.

But furthermore, as not to be afflicted, argues an absolute defect of
goodness; so if our troubles be light and few, it is because we are weak and
tender* for therefore God imposes no more upon us, because he (...) we can
bear no mo^e* The Physician will not suffer a milke-so^ to see his vein opened,
but makes him wink or look another way: The Master gives not to his sick
servant strong meats, as he does to the rest, but more dainty ^ar^; not
because he is worthier than the rest, but because he is (...) and in greate^
need. The skillful Armour^r tries not an ordinary Piece with musket shot. The
wise Lapidary brings not his softer stones to the Stithy.

So that freedom from affliction is not a sign of potency, but of impotency.
Wherefore, when I am stronger, I will look for more; when I am a vessel fit
for this strong and new wine, I shall be filled with it; but not before, Mark
2.22.

Indeed, the calling of God never leaves a man unchanged, nor does he employ
any in his service, whom he does not enable to the work he sets them about.
Will any make choice of a weak Champion? no more will God: he will either find
us fit, or make us fit to discharge the place he puts us in; as when he
called Saul to be a King, he gave him a Kings heart, 1 Samuel 10.9 And when he
called the Apostles to that function, he gave them gifts answerable; so when
he calls any to suffer for him, be it Martyrdom; he gives them the courage
of Martyrs, as the times of Queen Mary, witness. But yet for the most part he
^rains us up by degrees; (as we eat diverse things by morsels, and easily
digest them; which if we should eat whole, would choke us) and does not make us
fit to undergo great matters on a sudden. We must learn to fence in the
School, before we fight in the Field; and with wooden weapons men learn to
fight at the sharp; we must encounter with some beasts or other, (I mean
unreasonable men) before we fight with that fearful Goliath, death. And
indeed, if we do not learn to give entertainment to smaller crosses, the
harbingers, messengers and servants of death; how shall we be able to
entertain the Lord and Master, when he comes? Wherefore, as Iehoram said to
Iehu, when he marched furiously; Come thou peaceably? As if he should say,
if thou come peaceably, march as furiously as thou wilt^ so let us say unto
God, provided, thy afflictions and chastisements be directed to us as
messengers of peace, and love; let them march toward us as furiously as thou
please, but in any case, let us not be without correction: for as Mariners
at Sea, find, that of all sto^ms, a Calm is the greatest; so we; that, to be
exempt from misery, is the most miserable condition of all other.

Object. But thou fear that G^d has not pardoned thy sins, and this makes
him so severe against thee.

Answ. Many time^ after the remission of the sin, his very chastisements are
deadly; as is clear by David's example: and Lots, who had a sharp misery clap on
the heels of a sweet mercy: for he that was so beloved of God, that he saved
a whole City, could not save his own Spouse.

When God delivers us from destruction, he does not secure us from (...)
affliction. Grace was never given us for a Target against external evils*
Though we be not condemned with the world, yet we may be chastened in the
world. Neither the truth nor strength of Jobs faith could secure him from the
outward and bodily vexations of Satan, against the inward and spiritual, they
could, and did prevail: so no repentance can assure us that we shall not smart
with outward affliction: that can prevent the eternal displeasure of God; but
still it may be necessary, and good, we should be corrected: our care and
suit must be, that the evils which shall not be averted, may be sanctified.

CHAP. 38. That Christ and all the Saints are our Partners, and partakers with
us in the Cross; yea, our sufferings are nothing in comparison of theirs.
4 We shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort, if we consider
that Christ and all the Saints are our partners, and partakers therein; yea,
thy sufferings are nothing in comparison of what others have suffered before
thee. Look upon righteous Abel, thou shall see his elder brother Cain had
dominion and rule over him by Gods appointment, Genesis 4.7. Yea, in the next ver.
thou shall see him slain by his brother: After him look upon Noah, a most
calamitous person as ever lived, as the Chronologer computes him: as for Lot,
he had his righteous soul vexed from day to day. Look upon Job. thou shall see
that miseries do not stay for a mannerly succession to each other, but in a
rude importunity throng in at once, to take away his children; substance,
friends, credi^, health, peace of conscience, etc. leaving him nothing but his
wife, whom the Devil spared on purpose to vex him, as the Fathers think: so
that in his own apprehension, God was his mortal enemy; as hear how in the
bitterness of his soul he complains of his Maker, saying, He teareth me in
his wrath, he hates me, and gnasheth upon me with his teeth, he has broken
me asunder, taken me by the neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up
for his mark: his Archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins
asunder, and does not spare to pour out my gall upon the ground, he breaks me
with breach upon breach, and runs upon me like a Giant, Job 16. Now when so
much was uttered, even by a nonesuch for his patience; what may we think he
did feel, and endure? Look upon Abraham, thou shall see him forced to forsake
his Country, and Fathers house, to go to a place he knew not, to men that knew
not him; and after his many removes, he meets with a famine, and so is forced
into Egypt, which indeed gave relief to him, when Canaan could not; showing,
that in outward things, Gods enemies may fare better than his friends: yet he
goes not without great fear of his life, which made it but a dear purchase;
then he is forced to part from his brother Lot, by reason of strife and debate
among their Heardsmen* after that; Lot is taken prisoner, and he is constrained
to wage War with four Kings at once, to rescue his Brother; then Sarah his
wife is barren, and he must go childlesse, until (in reason) he is ^ast hope:
when he has a Son, it must not only die* (...) himself must slay him. Now if
that bosom wherein we all look to rest, was assaulted with so many sore trials,
and so diverse difficulties, is it likely we should escape? Look upon Jacob,
you shall see Esau strive with him in the womb, that no time might be lost;
after that you shall see him ^lie for his life from a cruel Brother, to a cruel
Uncle; with a (...) goes he over Jordan, alone, doubtful, and comfortless;
not like the son of Isaac. In the way he has no bed, but the cold earth; no
pillow, but the hard stones; no sheet, but the moist ai^; no Canopy, but the
wide Heaven: at last he is come far to find out an hard friend, and of a
Nephew becomes a servant; after the service of an hard Apprenticeship, has
earned her whom he loved; his wife is changed, and he is not only disappointed
of his hopes; but forced to marry another against his will, and now he must
begin another Apprenticeship, and a new hope, where he made account of
^ruition: all which fourteen years he was consumed with heat in the day, with
frost in the night: when he has her whom he loves, she is barren: at last,
being grown rich, chiefly in wives and children, accounting his charge, his
wealth, he returns to his Fathers house, but with what comfort? Behold, Laban
follows him with one troop, Esau meets him with another^ both, with hostile
intentions: not long after, Rachel, the comfort of his life, dies; his
children, the staff of his age, wound his soul to death (...) proves
incestuous, Judah adulterous, Dina is ravished, Simeon and (...) are
murtherous, Er and Onan are stricken dead, Joseph is lost, Simeon imprisoned,
Benjamin (his right hand) endangered, Himself driven by famine in his old age,
to die among the Egyptians; a people that held it abomination to eat with him:
And yet before he was born, it was, Jacob have I loved, and before any of this
befell him, God said unto him* Be not afraid, I am with thee, and will do thee
good, Genesis 28.15. And did so, even by these crosses, for that is my good (says
the Proverb) that does me good. Now what Son of Israel can hope for any good
days, when he hears his Fathers were so evil? It is enough for us, if when we
are dead, we can rest with him in the Land of Promise. Again, hear what David
says of himself* Thy arrows s^ck fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore,
Psalm. 38.2. And see what cause he had so to say; what were these Arrows? To let
pass those many that Saul shot at him, which were sharp and keen enough: and
those other of Doeg, when he slew fourscore and five of the Priests, and the
whole City of Nob, both man and woman, child and suckling, for showing him
kindness: Likewise Shim^i ^ carriage toward him; also his distress at Ziglag,
and those seventy thousand which perished by the Pestilence, upon his numbering
the people, and the like. First, Nathan tells him from the Lord, that the sword
should never depart from his house^ and that he would raise up evil against
him out of his own l^ins: here were as many Arrows as words. Again, the child
which he had by Bathsheba was no sooner born, but it died, there was another
Arrow: Tama^ his daughter being marriageable, was deslowred by his own Son
Amnon: there was two mo^e: Amnon himself, being in drink, was killed by Absalom
at a Feast; there was another: This Absalom proves rebellious, and rises in
A^ms against his own Father, and makes him fly beyond Jordan, there was one
more: He lies with his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel, there
was another: And how much do you think, did these Arrows wound the Kings heart,
and ^ierce his very soul? Lastly, lock upon Lazarus, though Christ's bosom
f^iend? Ion. 11. thou shall see him labor under a mortal disease, etc. though
many soul^ were gained to the Gospel, and cured by his being sick: Si amatur
(says Saint A^^in) quomod^ infirmatur.

Thus it were easy to show the like of Joseph, Jeremy, Daniel, John Baptist,
Peter, Paul, and all the generation of Gods Children, and servants* For as the
Apostle gives a general testimony of all the Saints in the Old Testament;
saying, That some endured the violence of fire, some were (...), others were
tried by mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprsonments; some stoned, some
hewn in sunder, some slain with the sword, some wandered up and down in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented; some
forced to wander in Wildernesses, and Mountains, and hide themselves in Dens,
and Caves of the earth, being such as the world was ^ot worthy of, Heb. 11. So
Ecclesiastical History gives the like general testimony of all the Saints in
the New Testament, and succeeding ages; for we read that of all the Apostles,
none dyed a natural death save only Saint John, and he also was banished by
Domitian to Pathmos: and at another time, thrust into a Tun of seething Oil at
Rome; (...) Tertullian, and Saint Jerome do report. As for other believers,
there was such a multitude of them suffered Martyrdom for professing the
Gospel; whereof some were stoned* some crucified, some beheaded, some thrust
through with spears, some burnt with fire, and the like; (for we read of
twenty nine several deaths they were put unto) that Ecclesiastical History
makes mention of, two thousand which suffered the same day with Nicanor. And
after that, in the time of the Ten persecutions, were such an innumerable
company of innocent Christians put to death, and tormented; that Saint Jerome,
in his Epistle to Chromatius and Heliodorus, says, There was not one day in
the whole year, unto which the number of five thousand M^rtyrs might not be
asc^ibed* except only the first day of January, who were put to the most
exquisite deaths and torments, that ever the wit or malice, of Men or Devils
c^uld invent to inflict upon them. Since which time, the Turk and the Pope
have acted their parts in shedding the blood of the Saints, as well as the Jews
and Roman Empeours, as appears in the Book of Acts and Monuments, and Rev. 17.
where the holy Ghost has foretold, that the Whore of Babylon should fight with
the Lamb, and they that are on his side, called, and chosen, and saithfull,
until she were even drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus; which in part was fulfilled in England, under the Reign
of Queen Mary: when in one year a Hundred seventy six persons of quality were
burnt for Religion, with many of the common sort, and in France, where before
these late bloody Massacr^^, there were two Hundred Thousand which suffered
Martyrdom, about Transubstantiation. And it is well known, that our Savior
Christ's whole life, even from his Crad^^ to his Grave, was nothing else but a
continued act of suffering; yea, he was the person, upon whom, as upon one
Center, all our sorrows met: He that had all, possessed nothing, except the
punishment due to our sins, which lay so heavy upon him for satisfaction; th^^
it pressed his soul as it were to the nethermost ^^ll, and made him cry (...)
in the anguish of his spirit, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? So
that there is nothing befalls ^^s, b^^ has befaine our betters before us: and
to be free from crosses and affl^^tion^, is the privilege only of the Church
triumphant. For, qui non est Crucianus, non est Christianus, says Luther:
there is not a Christian, that carries not his Cross. It is only Heaven, that
is above all winds, storms and tempests: Nor has God (says Bernard) cast man
out of Paradise; for him to think to find out another Paradise in this world.

Now the way not to repine at those above us, is to look at those below us; we
seldom or never see any man served with simple favors. It is not for every one
to have his soul sucked out of his mouth with a kiss, as the Jews tell of Moses.

It is a great word that Zazomen speak of Apollonius, that he never asked any
thing of God in all his life, that he obtained not. This is not our Paradi^e,
but our Purgatory; not a place of pleasure but a Pilgrimage; not a Triumph, but
a Warfare: We cannot say of this world as Tully reports of Sir acuse in
Sicily, and others of Rhodes, that not one day passes in which the Sunshines
not cl^a^ly on them. Yea, we shink he speeds well, that lives as it were,
under a perpetual Equinoctial, having night and day equal, good and ill
success in the same measure: for these compositions make both our crosses
tolerable, and our blessings wholesome We that know not the afflictions of
others, call our own the heaviest; every small current is a torrent, every
brook, a River; every River a Sea: we make our selves more miserable than we
need, than we should, by looking upon our miseries in a multiplying glass; we
measure the length of time, by the sharpness of our afflictions, and so make
minutes seem hours, and days months. If we be sick, and the Physician
promises to visit us tomorrow with his best relief; with what a tedious longing
do we expect his presence? Our imagination makes every day of our sorrows
appear like Joshua's day, when the Sun stood still in Gibeon. The Summer of our
delights is too short: but the Winter of our affliction goes slowly off. We
are so sensible of a present distress, and so ungrateful for savours past,
that we remember not many years health so much, as one days sickness: it is
true, former meals do not relieve our present hunger, but his cottage of ours
ruins straight, if it be not new daubed every day, new repaired. What then?
shall to-days Ague, make us forget yesterdays health? and all Gods former
favors? if he do not answer us in every thing; shall we take pleasure in
nothing? Shall we slight all his blessings, because in one thing he c^osseth
us, whereas his least mercy is beyond our best merit? But if we think of our
deliverance from the fire of Hell; ^his is cause enough to make us both p^tient
and thankful; though the trifles we^ delight in be taken from us. Lord take
away what thou please for thy glory and my good, so long as thou savest me
from the fire of Hell, and thy everlasting wrath. Neither is there a better
remedy for impatience, than to cast up our receipts, and to compare them with
ou^ deserving^ if thou look upon thy suffering^, thou shall find them far
easier than thy sins have deserved; nothing to what thy fellow Saints, and
Christ, thy elder brother has suffered before thee: at a Lions den, or a fiery
furnace, not to turn t^ile, were a commendation worthy a Crown: do but compare
thy own estate with theirs, and thou shall find cause to be thankful that
thou art above any, rather than of envy or malice, that any is above thee, to
domineer and insult over thee. Yea, compare thine own estate with thine
enemies, thou shall see yet greater cause to be thankful; for if these
temporary dolors which God afflicts his people with, are so grievous to thee;
how shall thine and Gods enemies (though they suggest to themselves that God is
all mercy, as if he wanted the other hand of his justice) endure that
devouring fire, that everlasting burning? Isa. 33.14. Psalm. 68.21. Does he make
bloody wayls on the backs of his Children? and shall bastards escape? does he
deal thus with his Sons; what will he do with his Slaves? cannot all the
obedience of his beloved ones bear out one sin against God, as we see in
Moses, David, Zachary, etc. Where will they appear that do evil, only evil,
and that continually? The meditation whereof may be of some use to thee:
Thales being asked how adversity might best be born? answered, By seeing our
Enemies in worse estate than our selves.

CHAP. 39. That the more we suffer here (so it be for righteousness sake) the
greater our reward shall be heareafter.
5 FI^thly, we shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort; if, with
Moses, we shall have respect unto the recompense of reward, which is promised
to all that (notwithstanding what they shall suffer) persevere in well doing.
Great are our trials, but salvation in heaven will one day make amends, when we
shall have all tears wiped from our eyes, when we shall cease to grieve, cease
to sorrow, cease to suffer, cease to sin; when God shall turn all the water of
our tears, into the wine of endless comfort; Yea, when our reward shall be so
much the more joyous, by how much more the course of our life has been
grievous.

First, see what promises are made to suffering; Blessed are they which mourn,
says our Savior, for they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they
which suffer persecution for righteousness, for theirs is the Kingdom of
heaven, ver. 10. They that suffer here for well-doing, shall be Crowned
hereafter for well-suffering. Blessed shall you be when men revile you, and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake, fasly.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, ver. 11.12. And
nothing we suffer here, can be compared either with those woes we have
deserved in Hell, or those joys we are reserved to in Heaven.

When Ma^cus Marcellus, who was the first that saw the back of Hanniball in the
field, was asked how he durst enter into battle with him* he answered, I am
a Roman born, and a Soldier, and by him I shall make my ^^own everlasting:
How much more should the hope of life immortal, w^^ch is the life of our lives
mortal, whet our sorti^ude, and encourage us in the Christian warfare? And so
it has done with thousands: Origin was so earnest to suffer with his Father,
when he was but sixteen years of age, that if his Mother had not kept his
clothes from him, he would have run to the place where his Father suffered; to
profess himself a Christian, and to have suffered with him: which was a common
thing with the Martyrs, making all have, lest they should miss of that noble
entertainment.

Yea, it has not only been common for men in a bravado, to encounter death
for a small flesh of honor; but you shall see a hired servant venture his life
for his new master, that will scarce pay him his wages at the years end: And
can we suffer too much for our Lord and Master? who gives every one that
serves him, not Fields and Vineyards as Saul pretended, 1 Samuel 22. Nor Towns
and Cities, as Cicero is pleased to boast of Caesar: but even an hundredfold
more than we part withal in this life, and eternal mansions in Heaven, John
14* 2. Therefore Bazil, when he was offered money and preferments to tempt
him, answered: Can you give me money that can last for ever? and glory that may
eternally flourish? And certainly nothing can be too much to endure, for those
pleasures which endure forever. Yea, if the love of gain makes the Merchant
refuse no adventures of Sea: if the sweetness of honey makes the Bears break in
upon th hives, contemning the stings; Who would not get heaven at any rate, at
any cost or trouble whatsoever? But to go on, Behold, says God, it shall come
to pass, that the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be
tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days, yet fear none of those things
which thou shall suffer. For be but thou faithful unto death, and I will give
thee the Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. And again, Blessed is the man that endures
temtatation; for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life, Jam. 1.
ve^. 12. A Crown without cares, without rivals, without envy, without end.

Now if you consider it, The gain with hardness makes it far less hard*
The danger's great, but so is the reward.


The sight of glory future, mitigate; the sense of misery present: For if Jacob
thought not his service tedious, because his beloved Rachell was in his eye;
what can be thought grievous to him, that has Heaven in his eye? Adrianus
seeing the Martyrs suffer such grievous things: he asked why they would endure
such misery, when they might (by retracting) free themselves? to which one of
them aleadged that text, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. the nameing
whereof, and seeing them suffer so cheerfully, did so convert him; that,
afterward he became a Martyr too.

Lastly (not to enlarge my self, as I might in promises of reward) Whosoever
shall forsake Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife,
or Children, or Lands, for my name sake; he shall receive an hundredfold more,
and shall inherit everlasting life Matthew. 19.29. This is ^ treasure worthy our
hearts, a purchase worth our lives. Wherefore, eye not the stream thou wadest
through, but the firm Land thou tendest to.

And indeed, who is there that shall hear these promises, and compare the
seed-time with the Harvest; look up from the root to the fruit, consider the
recompense of the reward: and will not choose rather to suffer adversity with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season, Heb. 11.25.
Who will not be willing to suffer with Christ, that he may also reign with
him? 2 Timothy 2.12. Who will not suffer these light afflictions which are but for
a moment, when they cause unto us a far more excellent end eternal weight of
glory? 2. Cor. 4.16.17. Was Lazarus for a time extreme miserable? he is now in
Abraham's bosom. Yea, blessed Lazarus, thy sores and sorrows soon ceased, but
thy joies are everlasting. Now me thinks if thou but considerest that thy pain
will shortly pass, but thy joies shall never pass away; it should prove a
notable sovereign Cordial to strengthen thee; not only against reproaches
which attend thy profession, but even against fire and faggot. Who would not
be a Philpo^ for a month, or a Lazarus for a day, o^ a Stephen for an hour,
that he might be in Abraham's bosom for ever? nothing can be too much to
endure, for those pleasures which endure for ever.

It is true, If in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men
the most miserable, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15.19. But thou must
consider, that as this life is our Hell, and the wickeds Heaven, Ioh. 16.20. So
the next life shall be their Hell, and our Heaven, ver. ^1.33. Prove. 16.4. As
Dives was in Abraham's bosom, when Lazarus was in torments; so Lazarus was in
Abraham's bosom, when Dives was in torments, Luke 16. ver. 23.25. And herein
we fare no worse, than Cstrist; Did not his Spirit pass from the Cross, into
Paradise? Did not he first descend into He^l, and then had his ascension?
Suppose thy sufferings be great, what then? Assure thy self, that every pang
is a prevention of the pains of Hell, and every respite, an earnest of Heavens
rest; and how many stripes do thou esteem Heaven worth? It is true, flesh and
blood is so sensual, that it feels a little pain in the finger, a great deal
more than the health of the whole body. But let us better consider on it, and
behold at once the whole state of a Christian, we shall see his peace exceed
his pain; yea, we shall see both the torments present, and the glory
following. Hope makes absent joies, present; wants, plenitudes; and beguiles
calamity; as good company does, the way. The poor traveller, in thinking of his
Inn, goes on more cheerfully, and the bond man, in calling to mind the year of
Iubilee. When the Apprentice calls to mind that his years of covenant will now
shortly expire, and then he shall have his freedom confirmed; the very
remembrance thereof makes many labor some works seem more light, and less
grievous unto him: neither does he afterward repent it. Did it ever repent
Jacob, when he came to inherit his Fathers blessing, that he had endured a
long exile, and tedious bondage? Or Joseph, when he was once made Ruler in
Egypt, that he had formerly been sold thither, and there imprisoned? and he
had never been a Courtier, if he had not first been a prisoner: Or did it
repent the Israelites when they came to inherit the Land of promise, that they
had formerly been forty years passing through a forlorn wilderness. Or which of
Gods servants did ever repent that they had passed the apprentiship of their
service here, and were now gone to be made free in glory? If so, let us do and
suffer cheerfully, patiently, courageously, what God imposes upon us: knowing
that after we have swet and smarted but six days at the utmost, then comes
our Sabbath of eternal rest, which will make a mends for all; knowing that
death ends our misery, and begins our glory, and a few groans are well bestowed
for a Preface to an immortal joy. Let then our eyes be continually on the
joys which follow, and not on the pain which is present; the pain neglected and
unregarded cannot be very discomfortable.

But that there is reward promised to those which suffer in Christ's cause, is
not all, for our reward shall be answerable to our sufferings: the greater our
sufferings are here, the greater shall our reward be hereafter* Matthew. 16.27.
The deluge of calamities may assault us, but they shall exalt us. By our
crosses sanctified, weight is added to our Crown of Bliss, for according to the
measure of our afflictions, God weighs unto us of his graces, that we may
be able to bear them, and according to the measure of our graces, he
proportioneth our glory, and future happiness. Suffering for the Gospel is no
inferior good work, and every one shall be rewarded, though not for, yet
according to his works, Psalm. 62.12. Romans 2.6. Rev 22. ver. 12. The Apostles
tell Christ, we have left all and followed thee, Matthew. 19.27. Christ tells
them, when I sit on my Throne, ye shall sit on Thrones with me, ver. 28. They
that turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars in the Kingdom of
heaven, Dan. 12.3. And they that suffer Martyrdom, shall be clothed with long
white Robes, and have Palms in their hands, Rev. 6.9.11. Now, there be three
sorts of Martyrs, Re and intention; intention, non re; re, non intention: in
both deed and intention, as was Saint Steven; in intention, not deed, as was
Saint John; in deed, not in intention, as were the innocents. But, where the
conflict is more hard, the conquest obtained shall be more glorious: for as
Chrysostom speaks, According to the tribulations laid upon, and born by us;
shall our retribution of glory be proportioned. And persecutors (says Bernard)
are but our Fathers Goldsmiths: working, to add pearls to the Crowns of the
Saints.

Yea, ever where more work is done, there more wages is given; and when the
sight, or conflict is sharper, and the victory harder, the glory of the triumph
is greater, and the Crown of reward more glorious. Whence it was that those
Saints in the Old Testament, which were racked and tortured, would not be
delivered, or accept of their enemies fair offers, to the end they might
receive a better resurrection, and a more glorious reward; Heb. 11.35. Neither
would we wish our work easier; or our burden lighter, if we looked up to ^he
recompense of reward: for it may be well applied here, which was misapplied in
the trial of that holy man Ioh, We do not serve God for nothing. Though we
must (...) him merely for reward, as hirelings, nor for fear as servants; but
as children, for love.

O that (when we suffer most) we would but meditate and look upon, with the eye
of faith, the fullness of those joies, and sweetness of those pleasures, which
(having once finished our course) we shall enjoy at Gods right hand for
evermore: Psalm. 16.11. being such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
has entered into the heart of man to conceive: 1 Cor. 2.9. For certainly the
remembrance thereof, would even raise up our souls from our selves, and make us
contemn and slight what ever our enemies could do; as it did our
forefathers: much more to slight reproaches, which are such bug-bears to a
great many. And no marvel, if that which has made so many contemn fire and
faggot, make us contemn the blasts of men's breath.

But I hope enough has been said, in showing that our enemies in stead of
robbing, enrich us; and in lieu of hurting, pleasure us; since they greaten our
graces, and augment our glory; since if the conflict be more sha^p, the Crown
will be more glorious. Wherefore if our trials be small, let us bear them with
patience, which makes even great burdens easy; if they be great and
grievous, let us bear them patiently too; since great is the weight of glory
that ensues them: whereas no suffering, no reward; yea, if we be not chastned
here, we shall be condemned h^reafter, 1 Cor. 11.32. And whether had you rather
rejoice for one sit, or always? you would do both, which may not be; you would
be both Dives and Lazarus, have happiness both here and hereafter: pardon me,
it is a fond covetousness, (...) idle singularity to affect it: What, that you
alone may fare better than all Gods Saints? That God should strew Carpets for
your feet only, to walk unto your Heaven; and make that way smooth for you,
which all Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Confessers, and Christ himself
have found rugged, and bloody? Away with this self-love, and come down you
ambitious sons of Zebedee; and ere you think of sitting near the Throne, be
contented to be called unto the Cup. Now is your (...): Let your Savior see
how much of his bitter petion you can pledge; then shall you see how much of
his glory he can afford you. In all Feasts, the coursest meats are tasted
first: be content to drink of his Vinegar and Gall, and after you shall drink
new wine with him in his Kingdom. Besides, without some kind of suffering,
how shall your sincerity be approved? Even nature is (...) and cheerful whiles
it prospers, but let God withdraw his hand; no sight, no trust: The mother of
Micha, while her wealth lasts, can dedicate a good part of her silver to the
Lord, but now she has lost it, she falls a cu^sing, Judge. 17.1, 2, 3.
Cataline, whiles poor, had many seeming (...), but having feathered his nest,
you could hardly say, whether he was most lavish of his money, or of his
modesty. But to be equally good in a prospe^ous, and adverse condition, deserves
praise: When our resolution and practice is like that Maids in Plutarch, who
being set in the Market to be sold, when a Chapman asked her, Will thou be
faithful, if I buy thee? said; Yea, that I will, though you do not buy me.

We all are (...) weary of receiving, soon weary of att^nding; we are ready to
shrink from Christ, so soon as our profits or pleasures shrink from us: But if
with the Needle of the Compass, in the midst of tempestuous weather, we remain
always unmovable, and stayed upon one point; it is a sign the Loadstone of
the Gospel has changed our hearts; and we are governed by Christ, as the
Needle is by the North Pole. Wherefore if God should not frame ou^ward things
to thy mind, do thou frame thy mind to endure with patience and comfort what
he sends; and this will be an Odor smelling sweet, a Sacrifice acceptable and
pleasant to God: yea, herein thou shall approve thy self with David, a man
after God's own heart; and ^ou know, that as David was unto God according to
his heart, so was God unto David according to his.

CHAP. 40. Application of the former grounds.
ANd so you have the residue of the grounds of comfort, it remains that I
should apply them: For this Doctrine, though it be better understood then
practiced, as Cassandra was better known than trusted: yet being both known,
applied, and duly trusted to, will (like the Sun) not only delight our
understandings with its contemplation, but also warm and quicken our
affections. Wherefore, is there any weak Christian so white-liver'd with
Nicodemus, that the reproaches and Persecutions which attend his profession,
make him ashamed of Christ, or cause him to think that it is in vain to serve
the Lord: whereby he is frighted out of the narrow way that leads to life?
Let him draw near, for I chiefly direct my speech unto him: Are afflictions and
persecutions so necessary and profitable, as has been showed? Does not God
only gain glory by our suffe^ings? but do they also bring us to repentance,
and amendment of life? stir us up to prayer, wean us from the love of the
world, keep us always prepared for our enemies assaults, discover whether we
are sincere or no, make us humble, improve all Christian graces in us? Is God
more specially present with us in afflictions? Cannot our enemies diminish one
hair of our heads, without God's special leave and appointment? Has he
promised that we shall not be tempted above our strength? Are these stripes the
chiefest tokens and pledges of God's love and adoption? Were none of his
children ever exempted from the like? And lastly, shall our momentany
sufferings be rewarded with everlasting glory? Yea, shall our glory be
increased, as our sufferings have been more? Then let them serve as so many
restoratives to thy fainting spirit; yea, Lift up thy hands which hang down,
and strengthen thy weak knees, Heb. 12.12. For, I suppose thy fainting and
drooping is from fear, and thy fear from doubting, and thy doubting from
unbelief, and thine unbelief chiefly from ignorance of these things: and whence
is thine ignorance of these, but this? Thou have never been conversant in the
book of God; or if thou have, thou did never seriously ponder these
Scriptures which have formerly been rehearsed: for had thou seriously
considered them, thou would not have dared to make that an occasion of grief
and prejudic^, which the Spirit of God makes the greatest cause of joy and
confirmation that can be. For, what can be spoken more express, direct, and
significant? What demonstrations can be given more sollid? What Fortifications
or Bulwarks so strong and safe against the affronts of Satan, and the World?
Thou say thou art persecuted for well-doing, and therefore think it a
strange thing. God says it is, and ever has been common to all his children*
not Christ himself excepted.

Take notice of these things, (for it is the God of all truth and blessedness
that speaks them) and apply them to thy self, as if they were particularly
spoken to thee by name; even as when twenty be in a room, where is a fair
well-drawn picture; every one thinks the picture looks upon him* and have not
more modesty or manners (in leaving those dishes for thy letters) than will do
thee good. Be not like a Monkey which looking in a glass, thinks he sees
another Monkeys face* and not his own: And know withal, that it is no small
sin even to doubt, when we have God's command and warrant to secure us.

Thou think thy self miserable; God says, thou art blessed: Thou say,
thou art hated of the world; God says, thou art beloved of Christ; who has
chosen thee out of the world: Thou think it a shame to be reproached; God
says, It is thy glory: Thou grievest at it; God says, thou have great cause
to rejoice; for it shows thee to be born of God, thine enemies to be the seed
of the Serpent. Thou say, that all things go cross with thee; God says,
That all things shall work together for the best; it may be the increase of thy
temporal happiness: however, that it shall be for the improvement of thy
graces here, for the advancement of thy glory hereafter. Thou think it a
sign of displeasure; God says, it is to thy Enemies, a token of perdition, but
to thee, of salvation: Thou think thy self near forsaken; God says, The
spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon thee: Thou say, thou shall one day
perish; God says, that neither things present, nor things to come, shall ever
be able to separate thee from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Thou think the Lord does not hear thee, because he does not presently
answer thee in the things that thou requirest: I tell thee, it were ill for the
best of us, if we were permitted to be our own choosers: Let Peter have his
desire, and his Master shall not die; so Peter himself, and the whole world had
been lost. In unfit supplications we are most heard, when we are repelled: our
God often times does answer our prayers with merciful denials, and most
blesses us in crossing our desires. We may ask either bad things to a good
purpose; or, good things to a bad purpose; or, good things to a good purpose,
but in an ill season. Now, if we ask what is either unfit to receive, or
unlawful to beg, it is a great favor of our God to be denied: granting is not
always the effect of love; if so, then had Paul been less loved then Satan:
Satan begged but once, and had his paier granted, concerning Job: S. Paul
begged thrice that he might not be buffeted, yet was denied: Satan begged his
shame; who envied his success? Saint Paul that freedom from temptation, which
would have been worse bad then wanted: yea, if granting were always an effect
of love; then was our blessed Savior less loved than Satan; for the Lord
would not let the Cup of his Passion pass from him upon his earnest prayer,
which he made as he was Man. But you must know, that denials in some cases are
better than grants: the Lord will not take away the body of sin from us upon
our earnest prayers, yet he grants us that which is equivalent; viz. Grace to
subdue our corruptions; and withal takes away the occasion of pride, which is
better: for certainly he is more supported of God, that has grace given him to
conquer a temptation; as had the Martyrs, in being able to suffer those
tortures; than another who is excused to fight.

Again, we must not measure God's hearing of our suit, by his present answer;
or his present answer by our own sense: touching the first, Zachary a long time
failed of a Son for all his Prayer; but when he had even forgot that Prayer, he
had a Son; the Angel brings him good news, Luke 1.13. Thy Prayer is beard: When
did he make this Prayer? Nor lately; for then he was grown old, and had given
over all hope of a child: so that his request was past over many years, and no
answer given.

The like example we have in Hannah, who pouring out her soul before the Lord,
in the trouble of her spirit; God did not immediately tell her by revelation
that she should conceive a Son, but he gave her for the present, faith; which
did work in her joy, and peace of conscience: for (says the text) she looked
no more sad; and when she had waited his leisure a certain time, The Lord
remembered her with a Son, 1 Samuel 1. There is nothing between God and thee, but
time; prescribe not his wisdom, hasten not his mercy, now his grace is enough
for you, his glory shall be more than enough hereafter. Tarry a little the
Lords leisure, deliverance will come, peace will come, joy will come; thy tears
are reserved, thine hunger shall be satisfied, thy sorrow shall be comforted:
In the mean while to be patient in misery, makes misery no misery: while we
consider that when a little brunt is once past, troubles will cease, but joies
shall never cease.

Wherefore, let us never give over, but in our thoughts knit the beginning,
progress, and end together; and then shall we see our selves in Heaven, out of
the reach of all our enemies.

2. To prove that we are not to judge of Gods answering our prayers, by our
own sense; I need but to instance the woman of Canaan, (as what can speed well,
if the prayer of faith from the knees of humility succeed not?) and yet behold,
the further she goes, the worse she fares; her discouragement is doubled with
her suit: It is not good (says our Savior) to take the childrens bread, and
cast it to dogs; here was cold comfort: yet stay but a while, he clears up his
brows, and speaks to her so comfortably, that 'twere able to secure any heart,
to dispel any fears. O Savior! how different are thy ways from ours, when
even thy severity argues favor! The trial had not been so sharp, if thou had
not found the faith so strong, if thou had not meant the issue so happy: It
is no unusual thing for kindness to look sternly for the time, that it may
indear it self more, when it lists to be discovered.

It was cold comfort that the Cripple heard from Peter and John, when he begged
of them an alms; Silver and gold have I none: but the next clause, rise up and
walk, made amends for all. O God! we may not always measure thy meaning by thy
semblance; sometimes what thou most intendest, thou show least: In our
afflictions thou turn'st thy back upon us, and hidest thy face from us, when
thou most mindest our distresses. So Jonathan shot the arrows beyond David,
when he meant them to him: So, Joseph calls for Benjamin into bands, when his
heart was bound to him in the strongest affection; so, the tender mother makes
as if she would give away her crying child, whom she huges so much closer in
her bosom. If thou pass by us whiles we are struggling with the tempest, we
know it is not for want of mercy, thou can^st not neglect us: Oh let not us
distrust thee! if thou come, it is to relieve us; if thou staiest, it is to
try us; howsoever, thy purpose is to save us. Surely God will work alone, and
man must not be of his counsel. Wherefore many times he deals with wicked men,
as Eutrapilus sometimes did with his subjects; who when he was minded to do a
poor man a mischief, would give him abundance of wealth; whereas contrarily his
children find themselves crossed with a blessing. Possidonius tells us of Austin,
that when there was wait laid for his life; through God's providence he mist
his way; whereby his life was preserved, and his adversaries disappointed. As
when Isabel Queen of England was to repasse from Zealand into her own Kingdom,
with an Army, in favor of her Son against her Husband, she had utterly been
cast away, had she come unto the Port intended, being there expected by her
enemies: but Providence, against her will, brought her to another place, where
she safely landed. Yea, this I have seen, two men striving for the way, one
receiving a switch over the face, draws his Rapyer to kill the other; but by a
providence, in making the offer, his saddle swaied to the horse-belly; whereby
in all likelihood, the one was saved from killing, the other from hanging: for
before he could make after him, he was rid a mile. And have not some been
detained (by a violent storm) from coming home, whereby they have been exempt
from feeling the down-full of their house? Sure I am the letting fall of my
Glove in the dark, once proved a means of saving me from drowning; while
another stepping before me, found the danger to his cost. And indeed, how
infinitely should we entangle our selve^, if we could sit down and obtain our
wishes! Do we not-often wish that, which we after see would be our confusion;
because we ignorantly follow the flesh, and blinded appetite, which looks on
nothing but the shell and outside; whereas God respects the soul, and
distributeth his savor for the good of that, and his glory? It is an argument
of love in the Father, when he takes away the Child's knife, and gives him a
book. We cry for riches, or liberty, or peace; they are knives to cut our
fingers: therefore God gives us his Word, the riches of verity, not of vanity:
He gives us that glorious liberty to be the Sons of God, he gives us that
peace which the world cannot give, nor take away, wherefore let the Christian
understand, God his Physician, Tribulation his physic; being afflicted under
the medicine, thou criest, the Physician hears thee, not according to thy will,
but thy weal; thou can not endure thy malady; and will thou not be patient of
the remedy? No man would be more miserable, than he that should cull out his
own ways: What a specious show carried Midas his wish with it, and how did it
pay him with ruin at last? Surely I have seen matters fall out so
unexpectedly, that they have tutored me in all affairs, neither to despair, nor
to presume; not to despair, for God can help me; not to presume, for God can
cross me: One day made Marius Emperor, the next saw him rule, and the third
he was slain of his Soldiers. Well then, if with Paul thou have besought the
Lord often, that thy present affliction might depart from thee, and can not
be heard in the thing which thou desire; know that thou art heard in that
which is more conducible to thy profit: and consequently rejoice more in that
thy petition is denied, than if it had been granted. This was the use which
Saint Paul made of Gods denial, and he knew what he did, though he had as much
to boast, and rejoice of, as any one living: yet, says he, of myself I will
not rejoice, except it be, of mine infirmities: that is, afflictions,
reproaches, persecutions, inward temptations, fears, distrust, etc. But in
these I will very gladly rejoice. Why? That the power of Christ may dwell in
me: Note his reason, he had heard God say, that his power was made perfect
through weakness, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. Neither had he only cause to rejoice in his
infirmities, but all God's people have the same cause to rejoice; for, what the
spirit of comfort speaks in this, and in all the former places reci^ed, do
equally belong to thee for thy consolation, with all the regenerate; for
whatsoever was written afore-time, was written for thy learning and mine, that
we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4.
And accordingly, will a good hearer apply to himself whatsoever is written in
the Word; for as the stomach sends the strength of the meat into every member
of the body: so we should send to the eye, that which is spoken to the eye; and
to the ear, that which is spoken to the ear; and to the tongue, that which is
spoken to the tongue; and to the hand, that which is spoken to the hand; and so
to the heart, and every faculty and member of soul and body: if we hear
comfort, we should apply it to fear; if we hear a promise, we should apply
that to our distrust; if we hear a threatening, we should apply that to our
presumption; and so fill up the gap still where the Devil would enter. And
indeed, had it not been for this Aqua coelestis, David had surely fainted in
his affliction, Psalm. 27. ver. 13. and 119.72. but this good Word from heaven
fetch him again, when he was ready to sink* and indeed, if Moses and the
Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles will not comfort us in this case, then
as Abraham told Dives in another case, nothing will persuade, nor prevail.
Believe thou the former Seriptures spoken by Christ, and his Apostles? I know
that thou believe, with some mixture of unbelief; and art almost persuaded,
not only to do, but to suffer cheerfully for well-doing. But why do thou not
altogether believe, that it is a blessed and happy thing thus to suffer? Mat.
5.10, 11, 12. That thou have great cause to rejoice and be glad that thou art
counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name? Acts 5.41. Thou see it is
not for nothing that David acknowledges, It was good for him that he was
afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. that Job blesses the time that ever he was corrected,
Job 42. That Jeremy prayed for correction as a good thing, Ier. 10.24. That a
whole Church voted the same, Lam. 3.27. It is not for nothing that Christ
says, Blessed and happy are ye when men revile you, and persecute you: That
Saint James says, Count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse
temptations, James 1.2. It is not for nothing that Saint Paul says, I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
anguish, for Christ's sake, etc. 2 Cor. 12.10. That Peter and John, when they
were beaten and imprisoned, departed from the Council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's name, Act. 5.41. For, even bearing
the Cross with Christ, is as great a preserment in the Court of Heaven, as it
is in an earthly Court for the Prince to take off his own Roab, and put it on
the back of one of his servants; as you may perceive by the Lord's speech to
Paul, Act. 9.15, 16. and 23. ver. 11. and our Savior Christ's words to his
Apostles, Ast. 1.8. yea, to suffer for Christ (says Father Latimer) is the
greatest privilege that God gives in this world: and the story of Job is a
book-case to prove it: for did not God by him, as sometimes a Schoolmaster with
his Pupil, who when he has polished and perfected a good Scholar, brings him
sorth, provokes adversaries to set upon him with hard questions, and takes a
pride to see the fruit of his own labors. And in the wars, to have the
hottect and most dangerous services imposed upon them by their General, is
accounted the greatest honor: neither will he confer the same upon any, but
the stoutest and most valiant. This Rod of the Lord (like Ahasuerus his
Scepter) is never stretched forth toward any of his, but in great love and
favor. It is like the kiss, which Cyrus, in Xenophon, gave to Chrysanthas,
which was accounted a greater and more special savor, than the Cup of gold
which he gave to Artabazus: Which being so, let us in this particular, imita^e
the Muscovitish women, who will not think their husbands love them, unless
they chastise them; and the Indians, who are ambitious to be burnt with them;
and the Thracians, who are proud to wear their scarrs. Moses esteemed the
reproach of Christ greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.25,
26. And the Apostles esteemed it a grace, to be disgraced for him: and shall we
grumble, or think much at it? No: in the greatest extremity of straights, let
us acknowledge it a favor, and give him thanks: and so much the rather, for
that it is more acceptable to God, to give him thanks once in adversity, then
six hundred times in prosperity, as a grave Divine well observes: and indeed, it
is the sum of all Religion to be thankful to God in the midst of miseries.

True, it is hard for Job, when the terrors of God fight against him, and the
arrows of the Almighty stick so ^ast in him, that the venom thereof has drunk
up his spirit, Job 6.2, 3, 4. to think it a special favor and dignity, but so
it was, being rightly considered. It was hard for Joseph's brethren to hear him
speak roughly unto them, take them for spies, accuse them of theft, and commit
them to prison, Genesis 42.30. and think, it is all out of love; much more hard
for Simeon to be culled out from the rest, and committed to ward, while his
brethren are set at liberty, Verse. 24. and yet it was so; yea he loved him
best, whom he seemed to favor least: yet, such is the infirmity of our
nature, that as weak eyes are dazzled with the light which should comfort them,
so there is nothing more common with God's Children, than to be afflicted with
the causes of their joy, and astonished with that which is intended for their
confirmation. Even Manoah conceivs death in that vision of God, wherein alone
his life and happiness did consist: Judge. 13.22. And the Shepherds, Luke 2.
who were sore afraid, when the Angel of the Lord came to bring them good
tidings of great joy to all people* viz. their Saviors Birth, which was Christ
the Lord, Verse. 9.10. But what has been the answer of GOD always to his
children, in such their ecstasies, but his? Fear not, Gideon, Judge. 6.23. Fear
not, Joseph, Mat. 1.20. Fear not Zachary, Luke 1.12, 13. Fear not Abraham, for
I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1. Fear not, Paul, for
I am with thee, and no man shall lay hands on thee to do thee hurt, etc. Acts.
18.9, 10. the words are often repeated (as Pharaohs dreams were doubled) for
the surenesse. Yea, to the end, that we should be fearlesse in all our
sufferings, so long as we suffer not as evil doers, 1 Pet. 4.15. Fear not, as
one well notes, is the first word in the Annunciation of Christ's Conception;
and the first word in the first Annunciation of his Birth: and the first word
in the first Annuuntiation of his Resurrection, and almost the last words in
his last exhortation, a little before his death, are, Let not your hearts be
troubled, and be of good comfort, strengthening his followers, and sweetning
his Cross by diverse forcible reasons, Luke 21. Mark. 13. And the words of
dying men have ever been most emphatical, most effectual. Nay, more than all
this, if yet thou will not be comforted, look but Ioh. 16.20. and thou shall
have thy Savior assure thee by a double bond: His Word I say, Verily, verily,
I say unto you. His Oath I say, Verily, verily, I say unto you.
that though for the present you do fear, and sorrow, and weep, yet all shall
be turned into joy, (...) that joy shall no man be able to take from you, v. 22.

And so much of the Patience of the Woman's seed. Innocence of the Woman's seed.
Felicity of the Woman's seed.


If you will see the Malice of the Serpents seed: Subtilty of the Serpents
seed: Misery of the Serpents seed:


Read the three foregoing parts; viz. The canse and cure of Ignorance Error.
etc. The cure of Misprision. Characters of the kinds of preaching.


The last whereof, sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholome^ Well-yard.

A twofold PRAYER for the Morning and for the Evening, as also another to be
said at any time.
Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon them that know thee not, and upon the
families that call not on thy name.

Psalm. 145.18. Romans 10.12. The Lord is nigh and rich unto all that call upon
him in truth.

Isa. 65.24. Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking I
will hear.

Jer. 33.3. Call unto me and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty
things, which thou know not.

1 John 5.14. If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

Joh. 16.23. Mat. 21.22. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
believing, he will give it you.

Psalm. 55.17. Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I pray.

A PRAYER for the Morning. O Lord prepare our hearts to Pray.
O Most glorious LORD GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST our most merciful and loving
Father; in whom we live, and move, and have our being; in the multitude of thy
mercies we desire to approach unto thee, from whom all good things do proceed;
who know our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in asking. It is
true, O Lord, if we should consider only our own unworthiness, and how we have
heretofore abused thy goodness and long-suffering toward us; we might rather
despair with Judas, and like Adam run from thee, then dare to approach thy
glorious presence. For we confess, O Lord, to the shame and confusion of our
own faces, that --

-- as we brought a world of sin into the World with us, and deserved to dye
so soon as we began to live; so ever since that thou have spared us, we have
done nothing but add sin unto sin, as thou have added mercy to mercy: For
we have been no less rebellious unto thee, then thou have been beneficial
unto us. We do daily and hourly break all thy commandments, adding unto that
our original corruption which we were conceived and borne in, all manner of
actual transgressions, by sins of Omission, sins of Commission, sins of
Ignorance, sins of Knowledge, sins against conscience; yea, sins of
Presumption and Willfulness, and that in thought, word, and deed. We have
sinned against thy Law, and against thy Gospel, against thy mercies, and
against thy judgments, against the many warnings, and the abundance of means,
afforded by thee to reclaim us, against the spirit of grace continually
knocking at the doors of our hearts, with infinite checks and holy motions, Our
ears have been always open to the Tempter, shut unto thee; we have abused our
eyes to wantonness, our mouths to filthynesse, and our feet have been swift
to all evil, slow to ought that is good.

And as we have committed one sin on the neck of another, so we have
multiplied, and many times repeated them, by filling often into the same
wickedness, whereby our sins are become for number, as the sands of the Sea,
and as the Stars of Heaven.

Yet (...)

Yet most most merciful Father, being that thou have given thy Son, and thy Son
himself for the ransom of so many as shall truly repent, and unfainedly believ
in him, who has for our sakes fulfilled all righteousness; yea, suffered on
the Cross, and there made full satisfaction for the sins of all thine Elect.

And seeing thou have appointed Prayer, as one special means for the obtaining
of thy grace, unto which thou have annexed this comfortable promise, that where
two or three be gathered together in thy Name, thou will be in the midst of
them, and grant their requests; and since our Redeemer has assured us, that
whatsoever we shall ask thee in his name, thou will give it us:

We are emboldened to sue unto thee our God for grace, that we may be able to
repent and believe.

Wherefore for thy promise sake, for thy Sons sake, and for thy great Names
sake, we beseech thee send down thy holy Spirit into our souls, regenerate our
hearts, change and purify our natures, subdue our reason, rectify our
judgments, strengthen our wills, renew our affections, put a stop to our
madding and straying fancies, beat down in us whatsoever stands in opposition
to the Scepter of Jesus Christ; and enable us in some measure, both to
withstand that which is evil, and perform that which is good and pleasing in
thy sight.

Yea give us repentance never to be repented of, and possess our souls with
such a dreadful awe of thy Majesty, that we may fear as well to commit small
sins as great ones considering that the least sin is mortal without our
repentance, and thy mercy: as well fear to sin-in secret as openly, since
thereis nothing hid from thee: as well condemn our selves for evil thoughts
as evil deeds, considering that the Law is spiritual, binding the heart no
less then the hands; as well abstain from the occasions of sin, as sin it
self; and consider that it is not enough, to abstain from evil, unless we
hate it also, and do the contrary good.

And now O Lord, since thou have safely brought us to the beginning of this
day, we beseech the to defend, and dierct us in the same: and as thou have
blessed us in our lying down, and in our rising up, so protect and prosper us in
our going forth, and in our coming home: shield and deliver us from the snares
of the Hunter, who lies in wait for our souls; and is continually laboring
our everlasting destruction. And no less arm us against the allurements of the
world, wherein we shall meet with many provocations, and temptations: and that
we may not lead our selves, nor be led into temtation; give us wisdom to beware
of men, even of associating our selves with the vicious, like Joseph: lest
otherwise with David, we be drawn to dissemble: or with Peter, to deny thee:
for sin is of a catching, and infectious quality: and our corrupt hearts are
like tinder, which will kindle with the least spark: especially O Lord, keep us
from yielding to their solicitations, or following their customs, of drink^ing,
swearing, slandering, and making the worst construction of things: of mocking,
and scoffing at religion, or the religious: let not custom and example any
whit prevail with us, without, or against thy written Word; lest we miss of
the narrow way, which alone leads unto life: only give us wisdom, and
grace, to look upon thy Sons whole life: and see how he would speak, and do,
before we speak or do anything, and then having thy word for our warrant, and
thy glory for our aim; let no censures, nor flowts of any discourage us.

Finally, good Father we beseech thee, enable us so to walk in thy fear; that
in mirth we be not vain, in knowledge we be not proud, in zeal we be not bitter;
instruct us by thy Word direct us by thy Spirit, mollify us by thy grace,
humble us by thy, corrections, win us by thy benefits, reconcile our nature to
thy will; and teach us so to make profit of everything, that we may see thee in all things, and al things in thee.

And in these our prayers we are not mindful of our selves alone, but
forasmuch as thou have commanded us to pray one for another; as being the
members of one and the same mystical body: we beseech thee to bless thy
whole Church Universal, wheresoever dispersed, and howsoever distressed, or
despised, far and wide over the face of the whole earth: and vouchsafe unto thy
Gospel such a free and effectual passage, that it may sound throughout all
Nations. Yea, we humbly pray thee, let it convert and reclaim the Turks, Jews,
Infidels, Indians, Atheists, Epicures, Heretics, and Schismatics. Prevent all
plots, and projects against the Kingdom of thy Christ: let thy Word and Spirit
alone, bear rule in all places. Extend thy tender mercy O Lord, to all
Protestants beyond the Seas; to all Christians under the Turks, or other
Infidels: strengthen all such as suffer for thy cause, and let thy presence
with them counterpoyse whatsoever is laid upon them, and enable them to
continue constant in thy faith and truth to the end. More particularly, be good
unto that part of thy Church planted here amongst us, in this sinful Land, and
indue us with thy grace as thou have already with other blessings; that they
may not rise up hereafter in judgment against us* be propitious to the
Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty. Bless the Tribe of Levi, all Ministers of
thy Word and Sacraments; let their lips, O God, preserve knolewdg, and their
lives righteousness; and for ever bless thou their labors: increase the
number of those that are faithful and painful; and reform, or remove such as
are either scandalous, or idle: and for a constant and continual supply of
their mortality, bless all Schools of learning, and good literature;
especially the Universities. Remember in much mercy all that are afflicted,
whether in body, or in mind, of in both; whether in conscience, groaning under
sin; or for a good conscience, because they will not sin: and as thou make
them examples to us, so teach us to take example by them, and learn wisdom by
thy hand upon them.

These, and all things else which thou know we stand in need of, we humbly
crave at thy merciful hands, and that for the alone worthiness, and
satisfaction of thy son* and the honor of our only Redeemer, and Advocate
Jesus Christ: to whom with thee O Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be given as
is most due, all praise, glory, and dominion, the residue of this day, and for
evermore. Amen.

A PRAYER for the Morning. O Lord prepare our hearts to Pray.
O Most glorious LORD GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST our most merciful and loving
Father; in whom we live, and move, and have our being; in the multitude of thy
mercies we desire to approach unto thee, from whom all good things do proceed;
who know our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in asking. It is
true, O Lord, if we should consider only our own unworthiness, and how we have
heretofore abused thy goodness and long-suffering toward us; we might rather
despair with Judas, and like Adam run from thee, then dare to approach thy
glorious presence. For we confess, O Lord, to the shame and confusion of our
own faces, that --

-- as our first Parents left us a large stock of sin, so we have improved
the same beyond measure* O that we could have so improved that stock of grace
which we have received from thee! But whereas thou gave us as large a
portion, we suddenly lost it. We were created indeed by thee, after thine own
image, in righteousness, and holiness, and in knowledge of the Truth: But alas!
now our understandings are so darkened and dulled, our judgme^ts so blinded, our
wills so perverted, our affections so corrupted, our reason so exiled our
thoughts so surprised, our desires so entrapped, and all the faculties and
sunctions of our souls so disordered, that we are not sufficient of our selves
to think, much less to speak, least of all to do ought that is good. And yet
usually like Bladders, we are not more empty of grace, than we are blown up
with pride: whereby with Laodicea, we not once see our own spiritual misery and
nakedness; but think we are rich and good enough, as wanting nothing; when as
scarce any spark of grace yet appears in us. Yea, so far have we been from
loving and serving thee, that we have hated those that do it, and that for
their so doing. And so far have we been from performing that vow which we made
to Christ in our Baptism, when we took his pressemony to be his Soldiers, and
serve him in the field of this world, against his and our enemies; that we have
renounced our vow made to him, and fled from his standard; yea, fought for
Satan and the World, seeking to win all we could from Christ, by tempting to
sin, and by persecuting such as were better then our selves; so that all our
recompense of thy love unto us, has been to do that which thou hate, and to
hate those whom thou love. Yea, we cannot deny but we have persecuted thee
with Paul, denied thee with Peter, betrayed thee with Judas, and crucified thee
with those cruel Jews.

Now Lord it being thus with us, how can we expect that thou should hear our
prayers, and grant our requests? yea, how can we look for other at thine
hands, then great and grievous, yea, then double damnation? as most justly we
have deserved.

Yet most most merciful Father, being that thou have given thy Son, and thy Son
himself for the ransom of so many as shall truly repent, and unfainedly believ
in him, who has for our sakes fulfilled all righteousness; yea, suffered on
the Cross, and there made full satisfaction for the sins of all thine Elect.

And likewise knowing, that mercy pleaseath thee, and that the sole perfection
of a Christian, is the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and the
not-imputation of his own unrighteousness.

We are emboldened to sue unto thee our God for grace, that we may be able to
repent and believe.

Wherefore for thy promise sake, for thy Sons sake, and for thy great Names
sake, we beseech thee send down thy holy Spirit into our souls, regenerate our
hearts, change and purify our natures, subdue our reason, rectify our
judgments, strengthen our wills, renew our affections, put a stop to our
madding and straying fancies, beat down in us whatsoever stands in opposition
to the Scepter of Jesus Christ; and enable us in some measure, both to
withstand that which is evil, and perform that which is good and pleasing in
thy sight.

And because every day which does not abate of our reckoning, will increase it;
and that by procrastinating, we shall but heap unto our selves wrath against
the day of wrath: Good Lord, suffer us not, we beseech thee, to defer our
repentance, lest the custom of evil makes it altogether unalterable in us: or
lest we dye before we begin to live: or lest thou refusest to hear us another
day, calling upon thee for mercy: because we refuse to hear thee now, calling
to us for repentance.

Wherefore if we be not yet converted, let this be the happy hour of our
conversion; that as our bodies are risen by thy power, and providence from
sleep, so our souls may daily be raised from the sleep of sin, and the
darkness of this world; that so we may enjoy that everlasting light, which
thou have prepared for thine; and purchased with the blood of thy dear Son, our
Savior Jesus Christ.

Give unto us, we beseech thee, a true, lively, and justifying faith, whereby
we may lay hold upon those gracious promises, which thou have made unto us in
him; and wherewith we may vanquish all our spiritual adversaries. Seal up unto
us the assurance of our salvation, by the te^stimony of thy blessed Spirit.
Give to us thy servants, that wisdom which descends from above, that we may
be wise unto our eternal salvation: so shall our hearts (instead of a
Commentary) help us to understand the Scriptures, and our lives be an
Exposition of the inward man. Give us grace, to account all things in this
world even as dross, and dung, that we may win Christ Jesus; and Heaven and
happiness by means of him. Give us single hearts, and spirits without guile,
that we may love goodness for it self, and more seek the power of godliness,
then the show of it; and love the godly for thy sake: and because they are
godly. Grant that in the whole course of our lives, we may do unto all others,
as we would that they should do unto us: considering, that whether we do good
or evil, unto any one of thy members, thou take it as done unto thy self.
Discover unto us all our own sins, that we may not be so forward to censure
others, as we have been heretofore. Give us patience to bear thy Fatherly
chastisements, which through thy grace sanctifying them to us, become both
Medicines to cure us, and Antidotes to preserve us from the sickness of sin:
considering, that all the afflictions of this life, are not worthy those joys
which shall be revealed unto us.

And as we are suitors unto thy Majesty, for these thy blessings spiritual: so
likewise we humbly beg at thy merciful hands, all necessaries appertaining to
our temporal welfare: beseeching thee to bless us in our persons, with
health, strength, and liberty: in our estates, with sufficiency, and the right
use of it; considering that if we spend what we have upon our own lusts, we
may ask, but we shall not receive: in our good names, with an unreproveable
report: and so bless and sanctify unto us all the things of this life, that
they may be furtherances of us in the way to a better.

And seeing that it is in vain for us to labor, except thy blessing go along
with it: neither can our endeavors succeed well except thou prosper them:
bless every one of us in our several places and callings, and so direct us in
all we shall take in hand, that whatsoever we do, may tend to thy glory, the
good of others, and the comfort of our own souls: when we shall come to make
our final account unto thee for them.

These, and all things else which thou know we stand in need of, we humbly
crave at thy merciful hands, and that for the alone worthiness, and
satisfaction of thy son* and the honor of our only Redeemer, and Advocate
Jesus Christ: to whom with thee O Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be given as
is most due, all praise, glory, and dominion, the residue of this day, and for
evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening, which would be performed before Supper, and not when
we are more prone to sleep, then to pray.
O Eternal, Almighty, and incomprehensible Lord God; who art great and
terrible, of most glorious Majesty, and infinite purity: Creator, and Preserver
of all things, and Guider* and Governor of them being created: who fillest
Heaven and Earth with thy presence, and art every where at hand to receive, and
hear the prayers of all that repair to thee in thy Christ.

Thou have of thy goodness bestowed so many, and so great mercies upon us,
^ha^ we know not how to express thy bounty herein. Yea, we can scarce think
of any thing more to pray for, but that thou would continue those which thou
have bestowed on us already: yet we cover still, as though we had nothing, and
live as if we knew nothing of all this thy beneficence.

Thy blessings are without number, yet our sins strive with them which shall be
more: if we could count the numberless number of thy Creatures, they would not
be answerable to the number of thy gifts; yet the number of our offenses which
we return in lieu of them, are not much inferior thereunto. Well may we
confess with Judas, we have sinned, and there stop; but we cannot reckon their
number, nor set forth their nature. We are bound to praise thee above any
Nation whatsoever: for what Nation under Heaven enjoys so much light, or so
many blessings as we? above any Crea^u^e, for all the Creatures were ordained
for our sakes: and yet Heaven, Earth, and Sea, all the Elements, all thy
Creatures obey thy Word, and serve thee as they did at first: yea, call upon us
to serve thee: only men for whom they were all made, ingratefully rebel
against thee.

Thou might have said before we were formed; let them be Toads, Monsters,
Infidels, Beggars, Cripples, or Bondslaves so long as they live, and after
that, Cast-awaies for ever and ever: but thou have made us to the best
likeness, and nursed us in the best Religion, and placed us in the best Land,
and appointed us to the best and only Inheritance, even to remain in bliss
with thee for ever: so that thousands would think themselves happy, if they had
but a piece of our happiness.

Why should thou give us thy Son for a ransom, thy holy Spirit for a
pledge, thy Word for a guide, thy Angels for our guard; and reserve a Kingdom
for our perpetual inheritance? Why should thou bestow health, wealth, rest,
liberty, limbs, senses, food, raiment, friends, and the means of salvation upon
us, more then upon others, whom thou have denied these things unto? We can give
no reason for it, but that thou art merciful; and if thou should draw all
back again, we had nothing to say but that thou were just: which being
considered, why should any serve thee more then we, who want nothing but
thankfulness? Why should we not hate the Way to Hell, as much as Hell it self?
and why should we not make every cogitation, speech, and action of ours, as so
many steps to Heaven? yet if thou should now ask us what lust is assuaged,
what affection qualified, what passion expelled, what sin re^pented of, what
good performed, since we began to receive thy blessings to this day? we must
needs confess against our selves, that all our thoughts, words, and works, have
been the service of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: yea, it has been the
course of ou^ whole life, to leave that which thou command, and to do that
which thou forbiddest: yet, miserable wretches that we are, if we could give
thee our bodies and souls, they should be saved by it; but thou were never the
richer for them.

Thus while we look upon our selves, we are ashamed to li^t up our e^es unto
thee; yea, we are ready to despair with Cain: yet when we think upon thy Son,
and the rich promises of the Gospel, our fear is in some measure turned into
joy: while we consider that his righteousness for us, is more then our
wickedness against our selves; only give us faith we beseech thee, and set^le
it in thy beloved, that we may draw virtue from his death and resurrection,
whereby we may be enabled ^o die unto sin, and live unto righteousness; and it
suffices for all our iniquities, necessities, and infirmites.

It is true, O Lord, as we were made after thine own Image; so by sin we have
turned that Image of thine, into the Image of Satan: but turn thou us again,
and we shall be turned into the Image and likeness of thy Son: And what
though our sins be great, yet thy mercy is far greater then our sins either
are, or can be: we cannot be so bad, as thou art good; nor so infinite in
sinning, as thou art in pardoning, if we repent. O that we could repent! O that
thou would give us repentance! for we are weak, O Lord, and can no more turn
our selves, then we could at first make our selves: yea, we are altogether dead
in sin, so that we cannot stir the least joint, no not so much as feel our
deadness, nor desire life, except thou be pleased to raise and restore our
souls from the death of sin, and grave of long custom, to the life of grace:
Apt we are to all evil, but reprobate and indisposed to all grace and
goodness; yea, to all the means thereof. We are altogether of our selves
unable to resist the force of our mighty adversaries, but do thou f^ee our
wills, and set to thy helping hand, in casting down by thy Spirit our raging
lusts: and by thy grace subdue our untamed affections, and we shall henceforth
as much honor thee, as by your wickedness we have formerly dishonored thee.

Wherefore of thy goodness, and for thy great Names sake, we beseech thee take
away our stony hearts, and give us hearts of flesh: enable us to repent what we
have done, and never more to do what we have once repented, not fostering any
one sin in our souls.

Reform and change our minds, wills, and affections, which we have corrupted;
remove all impediments which hinder us from serving of thee, and direct all our
thoughts, speeches, and actions to thy glory, as thou have directed our eternal
salvation thereunto. Let not Satan any longer prevail, in causing us to defer
our repentance; since we know, that late repentance is seldom sincere, and that
sickness is no fit time for so great a work; as many have found that are now
in Hell: Neither is it reasonable, thou should accept of our feeble and
decrepit old age, when we have spent all the flower, and strength of our youth,
in serving of Satan, not once minding to leave sin, until sin left us.

Yea, O Lord, give us firmly to resolve, speedily to begin, and continually to
persevere, in doing and suffering thine holy will: Inform and reform us so,
that we may neither mis-believe, not mis^live: subdue our lusts to our wills,
submit our wills to reason, our reason to faith; our faith, our reason, our
wills, our selves, to thy blessed Word and Will. Dispell the thick mists and
clouds of our sins, which corrupt our souls, and darken our understandings;
separate them from us, which would separate us from thee: Yea, remove them out
of thy sight also, we most humbly beseech thee, as far as the East is from the
West; and in the merits of thy Son, pardon and forgive us all those evils,
which either in thought, word, or deed, we have this day, or any time
hereto^ore committed against thee: whether they be the sins of our youth, or of
our age; of omission, or commission; whether committed of ^gnorance, of
knowledge, or against conscience, and the many checks and motions of thy holy
spirit.

And now, O Lord, seeing the time approaches which thou have appointed for
rest; and because we can neither wake nor sleep without thee, who have made
the day and night, and rulest both: therefore into thy hands we commend our
souls and bodies, beseeching thee to watch over us this night, and preserve us
from all our spiritual, and bodily enemies; from thievs, fire, and from all
other dangers.



These things we humbly beg at thy fatherly hands, and whatsoever else thou
know in thy divine wisdom to be needful and necessary for our souls, or
bodies, or estates, or names, or friends, or the whole Church, better then we
our selves can either ask or think: and that for thy Names sake, for thy promise
sake, for thy mercies sake, for thy Sons sake, who suffered for sin, and sinned
not; and whose righteousness pleads for our unrighteousness: in him it is
that we come unto thee, in him we call upon thee, who is our Redeemer, our
Preserver, and our Savior; to whom with Thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be
ascribed as is most due, all honor, glory, praise, power, might, majesty,
dominion, and hearty thanksgiving, the rest of this night following, and for
evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening, which would be performed before Supper, and not when
we are more prone to sleep, then to pray.
O Eternal, Almighty, and incomprehensible Lord God; who art great and
terrible, of most glorious Majesty, and infinite purity: Creator, and Preserver
of all things, and Guider* and Governor of them being created: who fillest
Heaven and Earth with thy presence, and art every where at hand to receive, and
hear the prayers of all that repair to thee in thy Christ.

Thou have of thy goodness bestowed so many, and so great mercies upon us,
^ha^ we know not how to express thy bounty herein. Yea, we can scarce think
of any thing more to pray for, but that thou would continue those which thou
have bestowed on us already: yet we cover still, as though we had nothing, and
live as if we knew nothing of all this thy beneficence.

We no sooner lived, then we de^served to die; neither need we any more to
condemn us, then what we brought into the world with us: but thou have spared
us to this hour, to try if we would turn unto thee by repentance, as our first
Parents, and we have turned from thee by sin: yet thy mercy seems to have been
in vain, and thy long-suffering to no end: For whereas many have been won by
thy Word, we would not suffer it to change us; many have been reformed by the
Cross, but we would not suffer it to purge us; many have been moved by thy
benefits, but we would not suffer them to persuade us: yea, as if we had
contracted with the Devil, that we would abuse all thy gifts so fast as they
come: ^hy blessings make us proud, thy riches covetous, thy peace wanton, thy
meats intemperate, thy mercy secure; and all thy benefits serve us but as
weapons to rebel against thee. We have profaned thy days, contemned thy
ordinances, resisted thy Word, grieved thy Spirit, misused thy Messengers,
hated our Reprovers, slandered and persecuted thy people, seduced our friends,
given ill example to our Neighbors, opened the mouths of thine and our
adversaries, to blaspheme that glorious Name after which we are named, and the
truth we profess: whereas meaner mercies, and far weaker means, have provoked
others no less to honor thee, and the Gospel; who may justly rise up in
judgment against us. Besides, (which makes ou^ case far more miserable) we can
scarce resolve to amend; or if we do, we put off our conversion to hereafter:
when we were children, we deferred to repent till we were men: now we are men,
we defer until we be old men: and when we be old men we shall defer it until
death, if thou prevent us not: and yet we look for as much at thine hands, as
they which serve thee all their lives.

Perhaps we have a form of godliness, but thou who search st^^he heart, and
triest the reins, know that too often we deny the power of it: and that ou^
Religion is much of it hypocrisy, our zeal envy, our wisdom policy, our
peace security, our life rebellion, our devotion deadness; and that we live so
securely, as if we had no souls to save.

Indeed, thy Word and Spirit may work in us some flashes of desire, and
purposes of better obedience; but we are constant in nothing, but in perpetual
offending, only therein we cease not: for when we are waking, our flesh tempts
us to wickedness; if we are sleeping, it sollicites us to filthiness; or
perhaps when we have offended thee all the day, at night we pray unto thee: but
what is the issue of our praying? First we sin, and then we pray thee to
forgive it; and then return to our sins again; as if we came to thee for no
other end, but to crave leave to offend thee: Or, of thy granting our requests,
we even dishonor thee, and blaspheme thy name, while thou do support and
relieve us; run from thee, while thou do call us; and forget thee, while
thou art feeding us: so thou sparest us, we sleep; and to morrow we sin again.
O how justly might thou forsake us, as we forsake thee; and condemn u^,
whose consciences cannot but condemn our selves! But who can measure thy
goodness, who give all, and forgivest all? Though we be sinful, yet thou
love us; though we be miserably ungrateful, yet thou most plentifully
blessest us: What should we have, if we did serve thee, who have done all these
things for thine enemies? O that thou who have so indeared us to serve thee,
would also give us hearts and hands to serve thee with thine own gifts.

Wherefore of thy goodness, and for thy great Names sake, we beseech thee take
away our stony hearts, and give us hearts of flesh: enable us to repent what we
have done, and never more to do what we have once repented, not fostering any
one sin in our souls.

And because infidelity is the bitter root of all wickedness, and a lively
faith the true mother of all grace and goodness: nor are we Christians
indeed, except we imitate Christ, and square our lives according to the rule of
thy Word: Give us that faith which manifests it self by a godly life; which
purifieth the heart, works by love, and sanctifies the whole man throughout.
Yea since, if our faith be true and saying, it can no more be severed from
unfeigned repentance, and sanctification, then life can be without motion, or
the sun without light: give us spiritual wisdom, to try and examine our selves,
whether we be in the faith or not: that so we may not be deluded with opinion
only, as thousands are.

Discover unto us the emptiness, vanity and insufficiency of the things here
below, to do our poor souls the least good; that so we may be induced to set an
higher price upon Jesus Christ, who is the life of our lives, and the soul of
our souls: considering, that if we have him, we want nothing; if we want him,
we have nothing.

Finally, O Lord, give unto us, and increase in us all spiritual graces:
inlighten our minds with the knowledge of thy truth, and inflame our hearts
with the love of whatsoever is good; that we may esteem it our meat and drink
to do thy blessed will. Give us religious thoughts, godly desires, zealous
affections, holy endeavors, assured persuasions of faith, steadfast waiting
through hope, constancy in suffering through patience, and hearty rejoicing
from love: regenerate our minds, purify our natures, turn all our joies into
the joy of the Holy Ghost; and all our peace into the peace of conscience; and
all our fears into the fear of sin, that we may love righteousness, with as
great good will, as ever we loved wickedness; and go before others in
thankfulness toward thee, as far as thou go in mercy toward us before
them.

Give us victory in temptation, patience in sickness, contentment in poverty,
joy in distress, hope in troubles, confidence in the hour of death: give us
always to think and meditate of the hour of death, the day of judgment, the
joies of heaven, and the pains of hell; together with the ransom which thy Son
paid, to redeem us from the one, and to purchase for us the other: so shall
neither thy benefits, nor thy chastisements, nor thy Word return ineffectual:
but accomplish that for which they were sent, until we be wholly renewed to the
image of thy Son.

These things we humbly beg at thy fatherly hands, and whatsoever else thou
know in thy divine wisdom to be needful and necessary for our souls, or
bodies, or estates, or names, or friends, or the whole Church, better then we
our selves can either ask or think: and that for thy Names sake, for thy promise
sake, for thy mercies sake, for thy Sons sake, who suffered for sin, and sinned
not; and whose righteousness pleads for our unrighteousness: in him it is
that we come unto thee, in him we call upon thee, who is our Redeemer, our
Preserver, and our Savior; to whom with Thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be
ascribed as is most due, all honor, glory, praise, power, might, majesty,
dominion, and hearty thanksgiving, the rest of this night following, and for
evermore, Amen.

A Prayer to be used at any time.
O Almighty, Eternal, most Glorious, and only wise God; giver to them which
want, comforter of them which suffer, and forgiver of them that repent; whom
truly to know, is everlasting life: We they poor creatures acknowledge and
confess unto thee, who know the secrets and desires of all hearts: that --

-- of our selves, we are not worthy to list up our eyes to heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy Majesty with the least confidence, that thou
should hear our prayers, or accept of our services: but rather that thou
should take these our confessions, and accordingly condemn us to the lowest
place in Hell: for our continually abusing thy mercy, and those many means of
grace, which in thy long suffering thou have affoarded for our reclaiming. We
are the cursed seed of rebellious Parents, we were conceived in sin, and born
the children of wrath: And whereas thou might have executed thy fierce
displeasure upon us, so soon as thou gave us being; and so prevented our
further dishonouring thee: we have instead of humbling our selves before thee
our God, and seeking reconciliation with thy Majesty: done nothing from our
infancy, but added sin unto sin, in breaking every one of thine holy Laws,
which thou have given us as rules and directions to walk by, and to keep us
from sinning. Yea, there is not one of thy righteous precepts, which we have
not broken more times, and ways, then we can express: so far have we been from
a privative holiness, in reforming that which is evil: and a positive holiness
in performing that which is good: which thou may justly require of us, being
we had once ability so to do, if we had not wilfully lost it: for thou did
form us righteous and holy, had not we deformed our selves; whereas now like
Satan, we can do nothing else but sin, and make others sin too, who would not
so sin, but for us: for we have an army of unclean desires, that perpetually
sight against our souls: whereby we are continually tempted, drawn away, and
enticed through our own concupiscence. Yea, thou know, that the heart of man
is deceitful above all things; and that the imaginations thereof, are only,
and continually evil. O the infinitely intricate windings and turnings of the
dark Labyrin^hs of man's heart! who finds not in himself an indisposition of
mind to all good, and an inclination to all evil?

And according to this our inclination, has been our practice: we have
yielded our hearts as cages to entertain all manner of unclean spirits, when on
the contrary we have refused to yield them as. Temples for thine holy Spirit
to dwell in.

Yet, miserable wretches as we are, we like our own condition so well, that
we are not willing to go out of our selves unto thee; who would new make
us, according to the Image of thy Son: for by long custom, we have so turned
delight into necessity, that we can as willingly leave to live, as leave our
lusts: yea, we love our sins so well, and so much above our souls, that
(except thou change our hearts) we shall choose to go to Hell, rather then part
with them. Thou have used all manner of means to reclaim us, but nothing will
serve; neither the menaces and terrors of thy Law, nor the precepts and sweet
promises of thy Gospel can do it: We are neither softened with benefits, nor
broken with punishments; thy severity will not terri^ie us, nor thy kindness
mollify us. No, should thou send an Angel from the dead to warn us, all
persuasions would be in vain, since we hear Moses and the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles daily, and are never the better.

True, O Lord, there is a main reason of it, which we cannot now help; for
naturally we have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, hearts and understand
not. Yea, we are quite dead in sin, until thou do boar our ears, so^ten
our hearts, and break in upon our consciences by the irresistible power of thy
Spirit, and by going along with thy Word, shall quicken our souls, and
regenerate the whole man anew: In the mean time we are ready to receive all,
and return nothing but sin and disobedience; wherein we more then abound: for
we have done more against thee this week, then we have done ^or thee ever
since we were born. And whereas the least of thy mercies, is greater then all
the courtesies of men, we are not so thankful to thee for them all, as we are
to a friend for some one good turn.

Neither do we alone lay the fault upon our inability, or want of supply from
thee; but upon our own perverseness, and want of endeavor, and putting forth
that strength and ability, which thou have given us: for how long have thou (O
most gracious God) stood at the doors of our hearts; and how often have thou
knocked, when we have refused to open, and let thee in; And if at any time we
have been overruled by the good motions of thy holy Spirit, yet have we still
returned (with the Dog) to our vomit, and (with the Sow) refused the clear
streams of thy Commandments, to wallow in the mire of our filthy sins: whereby
we have justly deserved, that thou should have called us to an account in
the dead of our sleep, and have judged us to eternal destruction; and never
have suffered us again to have seen the light of the Sun: the remembrance of
which, together with our other rebellions, when we rightly consider them, makes
us even speechless like him in the Gospel: as neither expecting mercy, nor
daring to ask it.

Howbeit, when we call to mind thy manifold mercies, showed to Manasses, Paul,
Mary Magdalen, the Thief, and the Prodigal Son, with many others; who were no
less vile then we, and who notwithstanding found thee more ready to hear, then
they were to ask; and to give above what they durst presume to beg: we stay
our selves, and receive some encouragement from the application of the me^ts of
Christ Jesus; which thou have promised, shall be a sufficient satisfaction for
all our sins: and the rather, for that thou ca^est all that are weary and
heavy laden, with the burden of their sins unto thee; with promise that thou will ease them: and have promised, that though our sins be as red as scarlet,
thou will make them white as snow, and that thou will not the death of a
sinner, but that he turn from his wickedness and live: and that if a sinner^
does repent him of his sins, from the bottom of his heart, thou ^il^ blot out
all his wickedness out of thy remembrance* An^ ^^st we should yet be
discouraged, thou who did no less accept the (...) D^^i^, then the act of
Solomon, have further promised, that if were be (...) mind thou will accept of
us according to that which we have, and not according to that which we ^ave
not.

But forasmuch O Lord, as thou know, that is not in man to turn his own
heart, unless thou do first give him grace to convert; for thou O Lord, must
work in us both the will and the deed: and being that it is as easy with thee
to make u^ righteous and holy, as to bid us be such, O our God, give us
ability, and willingness to do what thou command, and then command what t^o
wilt; and thou shall find us ready to do thy blessed will. Wherefore give to
us, and increase in us all Christian graces, that we may know, and believe,
and repent, and amend, and persevere in well doing. Create in us O Lord, a new
^ea^t, and renew a right spirit within us: take away from us our greedy desire
of committing sin, and enable us by the powe^full assistance of thy grace, more
willingly to obey thee in every of thy commandments their ever we have the
contrary.

Be favorable to thy people every where; look down in much compassion upon thy
Militant Church, and every several member thereof: bless it in all places
(...) peace and truth, hedge it about with thy providence, defend it from the
misc^ievous designs, and attempts of ^^ine, and her malicious enemy: let thy
Gospel go on and con^ue^, maugre all opposition; that Religion and uprightness
of heart may be highly set by with all, and all profaneness may be trod under
foot. More particularly, be merciful to this sinful Land; the civil
^agistrates, the painful Ministers, the two Universities; those people that sit
yet in darkness; all the afflicted members of thy Son. Lord, comfort the
comfortless, strengthen the weak, bind up the broken hearted, make the bed of
the sick, be a father to the fatherless, and an husband to the widow; cloth
the naked, feed the hungry, visit the prisoners, relieve the oppressed,
sanctify unto them all their afflictions, and turn all things to the best to
them that fear thee.

Prosper the Armies that fight thy battles, and show a difference between thy
servants, and thine enemies, as thou did between the Israelites and the
Egyptians; that the one may be confirmed, and the other reclaimed.



These, and all other good things, which for our blindness we cannot ask,
vouchsafe to give us thine unworthy servants, not for our sakes, but for thy
mercies sake; and for thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ sake, in whom thou art
well-pleased; and in whom thou wast fully satisfied upon the Cross for our
sins: who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one God, world
without end.

Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O Lord, be still our defense; thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son, our salvation; thy
true and holy Word our instruction; thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort,
consolation, illumination, and sanctification, now and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer to be used at any time.
O Almighty, Eternal, most Glorious, and only wise God; giver to them which
want, comforter of them which suffer, and forgiver of them that repent; whom
truly to know, is everlasting life: We they poor creatures acknowledge and
confess unto thee, who know the secrets and desires of all hearts: that --

-- we have used all our wisdom, to commit the foolishness of sin: our whole
conversation has been to serve Satan, and fulfill the lusts of the flesh. We
even suck in iniquity like water, and draw on sin as it were, with cartropes.

Neither is there any part, power, function, or faculty, either of our souls or
bodies, which is not become a ready instrument to dishonor thee: for as our
heart is a root of all corruption, a seed-plot of all sin; so our eyes, are
eyes of vanity; our ears, ears of folly; our mouths, mouths of deceit; our
hands, hands of iniquity: and every part does dishonor thee, which yet would
be glorified of thee. The understanding which was given us to learn virtue, is
apt now to apprehend nothing but sin; the will which was given us to affect
righteousness, is apt now to love nothing but wickedness; the memory which was
given us to remember good things, is apt now to keep nothing but evil things:
for sin (like a spreading leprosy) is so grown over us, that from the crown of
our heads, to the soal of our ^eet, there is nothing whole therein, but wounds,
and swellings, and sores full of corruption. Yea, our souls and bodies are even
a very sink of sin; for like the common shore, we have not refused to welcome
any, the most loathsome pollutions, that either the world, our own corruption,
or the Devil at any time has offered unto us.

Or, admit we are exempt from some evils, we may thank thee, and not our
selves for it: for we are ready without thy restraining grace, to run out into
all manner of enormities whatsoever: we are swift to all evil, but to (...)
good immovable: when we do evil, we do it cheerfully, and quickly, and
easily; but if we do any good, we do it faintly, and rawly, and slackly. When
did we talk without vanity? when did we give without hypocrisy? when did we
bargain without deceit? when did we reprove without anger, or envy? when did we
hear without wearysomness? when did we pray without tediousness? such is our
corruption, as if we were made to sin, in deed, in word, or in thought. O the
pride, passion, lust, envy, ignorance, awkwardnesse, hypocrisy, infidelity,
vain thoughts, unprofitableness, and the like; which cleaves to our very best
actions! and how full of infirmity are our primest performances! for we have
not done any one action legally justifyable all our days* neither can ought we
do, abide the examinatirn of thy strict justice, until it he covered with thy
Sons righteousness; and the corruption thereof washed away in his most precious
blood. Yea, if thou should behold these our prayers, as they be in
themselves, without having respect unto us in Christ Jesus; they would appear
no better in thy sight, then a menstruous cloth.

Howbeit, when we call to mind thy manifold mercies, showed to Manasses, Paul,
Mary Magdalen, the Thief, and the Prodigal Son, with many others; who were no
less vile then we, and who notwithstanding found thee more ready to hear, then
they were to ask; and to give above what they durst presume to beg: we stay
our selves, and receive some encouragement from the application of the me^ts of
Christ Jesus; which thou have promised, shall be a sufficient satisfaction for
all our sins: and the rather, for that thou ca^est all that are weary and
heavy laden, with the burden of their sins unto thee; with promise that thou will ease them: and have promised, that though our sins be as red as scarlet,
thou will make them white as snow, and that thou will not the death of a
sinner, but that he turn from his wickedness and live: and that if a sinner^
does repent him of his sins, from the bottom of his heart, thou ^il^ blot out
all his wickedness out of thy remembrance* An^ ^^st we should yet be
discouraged, thou who did no less accept the (...) D^^i^, then the act of
Solomon, have further promised, that if were be (...) mind thou will accept of
us according to that which we have, and not according to that which we ^ave
not.

But forasmuch O Lord, as thou know, that is not in man to turn his own
heart, unless thou do first give him grace to convert; for thou O Lord, must
work in us both the will and the deed: and being that it is as easy with thee
to make u^ righteous and holy, as to bid us be such, O our God, give us
ability, and willingness to do what thou command, and then command what t^o
wilt; and thou shall find us ready to do thy blessed will. Wherefore give to
us, and increase in us all Christian graces, that we may know, and believe,
and repent, and amend, and persevere in well doing. Create in us O Lord, a new
^ea^t, and renew a right spirit within us: take away from us our greedy desire
of committing sin, and enable us by the powe^full assistance of thy grace, more
willingly to obey thee in every of thy commandments their ever we have the
contrary.

Y^a, let thy Spirit bear such rule in every one of our hearts, that neither
Satan that foreign enemy, and roaring Lion, which seeks to devour us, may
invade us; nor our own concupiscence, that homebred traitor, may by conspiring
with the world, work the ruin and overthrow of our poor souls: but that all
our wills which have been altogether rebellious, our hearts which have been the
receptacles of unclean spirits, and our affections which are altogether
carnal; may be whol^y framed according to thy holy and heavenly will. and that
we may the better know how to avoid the evil, and do the good, let thy Word as
a light, discover unto us all the sleights and snares of our spiritual
adversaries: yea, make it unto us as the Star which led unto Christ; and thy
benefits like the Pillar which brought to the Land of Promise; and thy Cross
like the Messenger, that compelled guests unto the Banquet.

Give us, O Lord, to consider, that although sin in the beginning seem never so
sweet unto us, yet in the end it will prove the bane, and ruin both of body
and soul: and so assist us with thy grace, that we may willingly part with our
right eyes of pleasure, and our right hands of profit, rather then sin against
thee, and wrong our own consciences: considering that it would be an hard
bargain, ^or us to win the whole world, and lose our own souls.

Bless, preserve and keep us from all the temptations of Satan, the world, and
our wicked hearts: from pride, that Lucifer-like sin, which is the forerunner
of destruction; considering that thou resistest the proud, and give grace to
the humble: from covetousness, which is the root of all evil; being taught out
of thy word, that the love of money has caused many to fall into diverse
temptations, and snares, which drown them in perdition and destruction; from
cruelty, that infernal evil, of which thou have said, that there shall be
judgment merciless, to him that shows not mercy: from hypocrisy, that sin
with two faces, whose reward is double damnation; and the rather, because
wickedness does most rankle the heart, when it is kept in, and dissembled; and
for that in all the Scriptures, we read not of an hypocrites repentance: from
whoredom, which is a sin against a man's own body, and the most inexcusable:
considering the remedy which thou have appointed against it: for the punishment
whereof, the Law ordained death, and the Gospel excludes from the Kingdom of
Heaven: from profanation of thy day, considering thou have said, that
whosoever sanctifies it not, shall be cut off from thy people; and did
command that he should be stoned to death who only gathered a ^ew sticks on
that day: from swearing, which is the language of hell; considering that
because of oaths the Land does mourn, and thou have threatened that thy curse
shall never depart from the house of the swearer: from drunkenness, that
monster with many heads, and worse than beast like sin, which in thy Word has
many fearful woes denounced against it: and the rather, for that it is a sin
(like the pit of Hell) out of which there is small hope of redemption.

Finally, O Lord, give us strength to resist temptation, patience to endure
affliction, and constancy to persevere unto the end in thy truth: that so
having passed our pilgrim^ge here, according to thy will, we may be at rest
with thee hereafter, both in the night of death, when our bodies shall sleep in
the grave, and in the day of our resurrection, when they shall awake to
judgment, and both bodies and souls enjoy everlasting bliss.

These, and all other good things, which for our blindness we cannot ask,
vouchsafe to give us thine unworthy servants, not for our sakes, but for thy
mercies sake; and for thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ sake, in whom thou art
well-pleased; and in whom thou wast fully satisfied upon the Cross for our
sins: who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one God, world
without end.

Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O Lord, be still our defense; thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son, our salvation; thy
true and holy Word our instruction; thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort,
consolation, illumination, and sanctification, now and for ever, Amen.

A Thanksgiving to be brought in to any, or every one of them, next before the
Conclusion, where the hand is placed.
ANd as we pray unto thee, so we desire also to praise thee: rendering unto thy
Majesty upon the bended knees of our hearts, all possible laud, and
thanksgiving, for all thy mercies and favors, spiritual and corporal, temporal
and eternal: For that thou have freely elected us to salvation from all
eternity; when thou have passed by many millions of others, both Men and
Angels, whereas we deserved to perish no less then they; and thou might
justly have chosen them, and left us: for that thou have created us Men, and
not Beasts; in England, not in Aethiopia, or any other savage Nation: in this
clear and bright time of the Gospel, not (...) the darkness of Paganism, or
Popery. For thine unexpressible love, in redeeming us out of Hell, and from
those unsufferable and endless torments, by the precious blood of thy dear
Son: who spared not himself* that thou might spare us. For calling us home
to thee by the Ministry of thy Word, and the work of thy good Spirit. For the
long continuance of thy Gospel with us, (the best of blessings). For sparing us
so long, and giving us so large a time of repentance. For justifying, and in
some measure sanctifying us, and giving us ground for assured hope of being
glorified in thy heavenly Kingdom. For preserving us from so infinite many
perils and dangers, which might easily have befalne us every day, to the taking
away of either our estates, our limbs, or our lives. For so plentifully and
graciously blessing us all our life long, with many and manifold good things;
both for necessity and delight. For peace of conscience, and content of mind.
For our health, wealth, limbs, senses, food, raiment, liberty, prosperity. For
thy great mercy in correcting us, and turning thy corrections to our good. For
preserving us in the night past from all dangers of body and soul; and for
infinite more mercies, of which we could not well want any one: and which are
all greatned, by being bestowed upon us, who were so unworthy; and have been so
ungrateful for the same. O that we could answer thee in our thankfulness, and
obedient walking, one for a thousand!

Neither are we unmindful of those national blessings, which thou have
vouchsafed unto our Land in general: as namely, that deliverance from the
Spanish Invasion in 88, and from that divelish design of the Gunpowder-Treason:
for preserving us from the noisome, and devouring Plague and Pest^lence. Lord
grant, that our great unthankfulness for these thy mercies, may not cause thee
to deliver us into the hands of our enemies: and although we have justly
thereby deserved the same, yet we beseech thee, give us not up unto their
wills, neither suffer Popery ever to bear rule over us; nor thy blessed Word
and Sacraments to be taken away from us; but continue them unto us, and to our
posterity after us, if it be thy good pleasure; until the coming of thy Christ.

Babes that are inexpert in the Word of righteousness, use milk: but strong
meat belongs to them that are of full age,

Heb. 5.13, 14. THE STATE OF A CHRISTIAN, lively set forth by an Allegory of a
Ship under Sail. Prove. 31.14. Job. 9.26. Isai. 23.1. Rev. 8.9.

MY Body is the Hull, the Keel my Back, my Neck the Stem, the Sides are my
Ribs, the Beams my Bones, my Flesh the Planks, Gristles and Ligaments are the
Pintels and Knee-timbers; Arteries, Veins and Sinews, the several Seams of the
Ship; my Blood is the Ballast, my Heart the principal Hold, my Stomach the
Cook-room, my Liver the Cistern, my Bowels the Sink, my Lungs the Bellows, my
Teeth the Chopping knives, (except you divide them, and then they are the 32
points of the Sea-card, both agreeing in number;) Concoction is the Caldron,
and hunger the Salt or Sauce: my belly is the lower Deck, my Kidneys Close
Cabbins, or receptacles; my Thighs are long Galleries for the grace of the
Ship, my Arms and Hands the Can-hooks, my Midriffe is a large Partition, or
Bulk-head; within the circumference of my head is placed the Steeridge-room,
and chief cabbins, with the Round-house where the Master lies; and these for
the more safety and decency, are enclosed with a double fence; the one
Dura-mater, something hard and thick; the other Pia-mater, very thin and soft,
which serves instead of hangings: The Ears are two doors, or Scuttles, fitly
placed for entertainment; the two Eyes are Casement^ to let in light, under
them is my Mouth the Stowidge, or Stewards-room; my Lips are Hatches for
receipt of goods, my two Nostrils serve as Gratings to let in air; at the one
end stands my Chin, which is the Beak-head, my Forehead is the Upper-deck, all
which being trimmed with my fat instead of pitch, and hair instead of Ockham,
are colored with my skin.

The fore-deck is humility, the stoarn charity, active obedience the sayls,
which being hoysed up with the several Yards, Halliars, and Bow-lings of holy
precepts and good purposes, are let down again by sicklenesse, faintings and
inconstancy; Reason is my Rudder, experience the Helm, hope of salvation my
Anchor, passive obedience the Capstain, holy revenge the Cat and Fish to hawl
the sheat-Anchor, or last hope; fear of offending is the Bu^y, virtues are the
Cables, holy desires, and sudden ejaculations the Shrouds, the zeal of God's
glory is my Mainmast, premeditation the Foremast, desire of my own salvation
the Mizzen-mast; saving-knowledge the Boltsprit: Circumspection a
Sounding-line, my Light is illumination, Justice is the Card, God's Word the
Compass, the meditation of life's brevity a four-hour-glasse, Con^emplation of
the creatures the Grosse-staff, or Jacob's Staff, the Creed a Sea-grammer, the
life of Christ my Load-star; the Saints falls are Sea-markes, Good examples
Landmarks: Repentance Pumpes out the sink of my sins, a good Conscience keeps
me clean, imputative righteousness is my Flag, having this Motto (BEING CAST
DOWN WE PERISH NOT) The Flag-staff is sincerity, the Ship is victualled afresh
by reading, hearing, receiving; Books are Long-boats, Letters are little
Skiffes to carry and re-carry my spiritual merchandise, Perseverance is my
speed, and Patience my name: my fire is lust, which will not be clean
extinguished; full feeding and strong drink is the fuel to maintein it, whose
flame (if it be not suppressed) is jealousy, whose sparks are evil words, whose
ashes is envy, whose smoke is infamy, lascivious talk is as flint and steel,
concupiscence as tinder, opportunity is the match to light it, sloth and
idleness are the servants to prepare it.

The Law of God is my Pilot, Faith my Captain, Fortitude the Master, Chastity
the Masters-mate, my Will the Coxen, Conscience the Preacher, Application of
Christ's death the Surgeon, Mortification the Cook, Vivi^^cation the Calker,
Self-denial is an Apprentice of his, Temperance the Steward, Contentation his
Mate, Truth the Purser, Thankfulness the Pursers-mate, Reformation the
Boat-swain, the 4 Humors, Sanguine, Choler, etc. are the Quarter Masters,
Christian vigilancie undertakes to supply the office of Starbord and Larbord
wa^ch, Memory is Clerk of the Check, Assurance the Corporal, the Armor
Innocence, the Mariners Angels, Scismaticks are Searchers sent aboard; my
understanding as Master-Gunner culls out from those who Budg-casks of the New
and Old Testament, certain threats and promises, which is my only Powder and
Shot, and with the assistance of the Gunners-mate, holy anger against sin,
charge my tongue, which like to a Piece of Ordinance shoots them, to the
shame and overthrow of my shirituall Adversaries.

My Noble Passengers are joy in the Holy Ghost, and the peace of conscience,
whose retinue are divine graces: my ignoble, or rather mutinous Passengers are
worldly cogitations and vain delights, which are more than a good many; besides
some that are arrant thievs and traitors; namely, pride, envy, prejudice; but
all these I Will bid farewell when I come to my journies end, though I would, but
cannot, before.

Heaven is my Country, where I am registered in the Book of life; my King is
Iehova; my tribute Almsdeeds, they which gather it are the poor; Love is my
Countries badge, my language is holy conference, my ^ellow Companions are the
Saints.

I am poor in performances, yet rich in Gods acceptance: The foundation of all
my good, is Gods free Election: I became bound into the Corporation of the
Church, to serve him in my baptism; I was enrolled at the time when he first
called me; my freedom is Justification, it was purchased with the blood of
Christ, my evidence is the earnest of his Spirit, my privileges are his
sanctifying Graces, my Crown (reserved for me on high) is Glorification.

My Maker and owner is God, who built me by his Word, which is Christ; of
earth, which was the material: he fraught it with the essence of my soul,
which is the Treasure; and has set me to sail in the Sea of this world, till
I attain to the Port of Death, which lets the terrestrial part into the
harbor of the grave; and the celestial into the Kingdom of Heaven: in which
voyage, convenience of estate is as Sea room, good affections serve as a tide,
and prayer a^ a prosperous gale of wind, to help forward.

But innumerable are the impediments and perils, for here I meet with the
proffers of unlawful gain, and sensual delights as so many Sirens; the baits
of prosperity ( as high banks) on the right hand or weather-shore, and there
with evil suggestions, and crabbed adversity (as Rocks) on the left hand, or
Lee-shore, ready to split me, the fear of Hell, like quicksands, threaten to
swallow me; Original sin, like weeds, clog me; and actual transgressions
like so many Barnacles, hang about me: yea, every sin I commit springs a new
leak; my senses are as so many storms of rain, hail, and snow to sink me; lewd
affections are roaring billows and waves; self-confidence, or to rely upon any
thing but divine assistance, i^ to lose the bolt sprit; Restitution is heaving
goods overboard to save the Ship; Melancholy, is want of fresh water: the
Scoffs of Atheists, and contempt of Religion in all places, is a notable
becalming; the lewd lives, and evil examples of the most, a contagious air;
Idleness surs it, and is a shrewd decay, both of Hull and Tackling. Moreover
sailing along, and keeping watch, (for they that are Christ's friends you know,
must look for all they meet to be their enemies) we no sooner look up, but
presently we ken a man of war, and then we must be for war too, and provide
for a skirmish.

Now the Gallion that has our Pinnace in chase, and always watches for
advantages to surprise it, is the Piracy of Hell, the Synagogue of Satan; her
freight is Temtations and persecutions, with all the Engines of mischief; in
which the Devil is Master, malice the Masters-mate, cruelty the Captain, Murder
the Cook, Flattery the Calker, Profaneness a Quartermaster, Riot the Steward,
Never-content his mate; Pride the Cockson, Superstition the Preacher,
Hypocrisy the Boatswain, Coveteousness the Purser, Lust the Swabber, Fury the
Gunner, Presumption the Corporal, Sedition the Trumpetter, Drunkenness the
Drummer: Vices are the Sails, Custom the Mainmast, Example of the multitude
the Foremast, Lusts and passions the Cables, Blindness of mind the Rudder,
Hardness of heart the Helm, the Wisdom of the flesh the Card, the Mystery of
iniquity the Compass, the five senses, or if you will, scoffing Atheists,
profane foul mouthed drunkards, and all the rabble of Hell are the Mariners;
lewd affections the Passengers, little conscience the Load-stare; she has two
tire of great Ordinance planted in her, heresy, and irreligion, (being either
for a false God or none) Oaths, Blasphemy, and curses are the Powder and Shot,
which they spit against all that worship the Lamb, or fight under the ensign of
Faith; her Armor is carnal security, the Flag in her top is infidelity, the
Motto ( There is no God but gain); Her ballast which keeps her upright, is
ignorance; most of her Tackling she has from Rome; Antichrist as Pilot steares
her in such a course, tha^ she goes on swiftly, proudly, securely; scorning and
scoffing ( Senacharib like) to hear that any Lord should deliver this poor
Pinnace out of her hands; yet in the sequel this silly Pink, having the
insurance of God's omni-presence, finds not only succor from the Stock of the
Churches Prayers, which like another Merchant-man comes in to the rescue; but
likewise that God's Almighty power and providence is near at hand, as a strong
Castle of defense to free her, whereby she escapes, even as a Bird out of the
snare of the Hunter, to praise the Lord, who has not given her as a prey unto
their teeth, that would have swallowed up all quick; but delivered her from
such swelling waters, floods of affliction, and streams of persecution, as else
had gone over her, and even drowned her soul, as it is Psalm 124, while this
great Gallion (though it seem like that Invincible Armado) flies, and ( having
no Anchor) when the storms of God's wrath arise, down she sinks to desperation,
and perishes in the bottomless pit, or burning lake of fire and brimstone,
where we will leave her, to receive a just recompense of reward.

Imprimatur

Th. Wykes.
December. 4. 1640.
FINIS.
Printed by I. Bell, for James Crumpe, and are to be sold at his house in
little Bartholomews Well-yard. 1657.

A SHORT AND SURE Way to Grace and Salvation; BEING A Necessary and Profitable
Tract, upon Three Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion: which few do
indeed know: and yet he who knows them not, cannot be saved: Viz. How Man was
at first Created. How he is now Corrupted. How he may be again Restored.
Together with the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, and to whom the
Promises of the Gospel belong. The which well learned, would keep Millions out
of Hell; that blindly throng thither.
By R. YOUNG of Roxwell in Essex.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the god of this
world, has blinded the minds of them which believe not; lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is ihe image of God, should shine unto them,

2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
Sect. I.
AS when God created the World, the first thing he made was Light, Genesis 1.3. so
when he makes us new creatures, he first creates light in the understanding,
whereby the* poor soul may see his spiritual misery and wretchedness; which
before (by reason of that vail or curtain which is drawn ever every natural
man's heart, 2 Cor, 3.14, 15, 16.) he is so far from discerning, that with
Laodicea he thinks himself rich, and to want nothing; when yet he is wretched
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and (...) of all spiritual endowments,
Rev. 3 17. 1 Timothy, 6.4. As for instance, it is to be observed, (can never be
enough bewailed) that generally throughout the Land people of all sorts ( young
and old, rich and poor) especially the poor, are so invincibly ignorant, that
(remaining so) it is impossible (so far as I am able to judge by the Word of
God;) that ever they should be saved.

As ask them these questions, How do you hope to be saved? They will answer, By
my prayers and good endeavors. Have you never broke this or that Commandment,
Thou shall have no other gods but the Lord. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not
steal. Thou shall not commit adultery? No, never they thank God* are you proud?
No, not they; What should they be proud of? and many the like. As for Original
sin, they know not what it means. Nor is there any convincing them, that they
were born sinners into the world. Yea, let a Minister come to them upon their
deathbed, and question with them about their estates, or ask them how their
souls fare, and what peace they have? What will be their manner of answering?
(especially if they have not been notorious offenders) Are they a whit troubled
for Sin, either Original or actual? Or will they acknowledge themselves in a
lost condition without Christ? No, their consciences are at quiet, and they are
at peace with themselves and all the world; and they thank God, no sin troubles
them nor ever did. They have been no Mu^therers, no Adulterers, no common
Drunkards; neither have they been Oppressors. (For they are so blind and
ignorant, that they think the Commandment is not broken, if the outward gross
sin be forborne.) Yea, will they say, I do not know that I have wronged man,
woman, or child. I have been a Protestant, and gone to Church all my days.

Sect. II.
Sect. 2. Yea so far are they from being sensible of their wants, that you
shall hear them brag of their faith, works, and good meaning; of their just and
upright dealing: the goodness of their hearts, the strength of their faith,
hope; and that they never doubted in all their lives. Yea, that it were pity
they should live, if they did not believe in Christ, and hope to be saved by
him. The usual expressions of formal Christians, and Protestants at large: who
know not what faith, hope, or a good heart means, no more then Nicodemus knew
what it was to be born again.

All which answers and brags of theirs do imply, that they are as righteous as
Christ him self, or Adam in the State of innocence: for he that can clear
himself from pride, or the breach of any one Commandment, or from Original sin;
may clear himself from all sin whatsoever; and if so, what need of Christ? Yea,
what possibility is there that ever such a soul should have any benefit by
Christ? Who came not to call the righteous, ( viz. such as think themselves so)
but weary and heavy-laden sinn^rs to repentance, Matthew. 10.6. and 15.24. and
18.11, 9.12, 13. 1 Timothy 1.1^, Luke 1.53.

Sect. III.
Again, this is an infallible truth, that without repentance there is no being
saved; and what hope of their serious and unfeigned repentance? For sin must be
seen, before it can be sorrowed for. A man must know himself sick, before he
will seek to the Physician. Yea where is no discovery of the disease, the
recovery of the health is in vain hoped for. Which makes Cyprian say, that it
is as mere lost labor, to preach unto a man the things of God, before he is
humbled with the sight of his wants: as to offer light to a blind man, to
speak to a deaf man, or to labor to make a brute beast wise.

Besides, if we look to be saved by any thing that we can do; Christ can
profit us nothing. For the Son of man is come ^o seek, and to save only that
which was lost: the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 18.11. Luke
19.10. 1 Timothy 115. even such as utterly despair in regard of all other helps.
Nor is he any way fit for absolution, who finds not himself worthy of
condemnation. We shall find no sweetness in Christ's blood, till we feel the
smart of our own sins. Yea, no men under Heaven are in so hopeless a condition
as they, who think to be saved by their performances, or any other thing or
means, then by the righteousness of Christ alone. It faring with them as it
does with unskillful swimmers: who when they begin to sink, if they catch hold
of weeds in the bottom, the faster they hold, the surer they are to be drowned.

Sect. IV.
Fourthly and lastly, there needs no more to condemn these men, then their
ignorance of such saving truths: especially, in such glorious times of light
and grace as these are; wherein they may hear the Word preached every day in
the week, if they did not sl^ght and disregard it, which aggravates their sin
exceedingly: For though it be enough, that God has set down his will in his
Word most plainly, and we may read, or hear it read, (were it at any rate) and
that the Epitomy of the whole Law is writ in every man's heart; whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them, Matthew. 7.12. (As it
serves not a Malefact^rs turn, to plead ignorantiam juris, he knew not the Law
of his Prin^^ which he has broken: for if the King have once proclaimed any
thing, (...) the subject after sufficient time of notifying his will, be
ignorant of (...) at his own peril be it.) Yet to be affectedly ignorant, and
to shut (...) eyes against the light of the Gospel, is by far more damnable:
this is a sin. with a witness. As what says our Savior? John 3.19. This is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light, because their deeds were evil. And so on the contrary, This
is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, Joh. 17.3. Besides, without knowledge, the mind cannot be good, as
wise Solomon affirms, Prove. 19. 2, A man may know, the will of God, and yet not
do it; but he cannot do it, except he know it. Neither can he be born of God,
that knows him not. 1 Ioh. 4.7. not ^an he love God (...) out thy fury upon
the Heathen that know thee not, Psalm. 79.6. And that other more terrible, 2
These. 1.7, 8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, to
take vengeance on them that know not God. Whence the Prophet Isaiah is
peremptory, It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them,
will not have mercy upon them; and he that formed them, will show them no
favor, Isa. 27.11.

Observe these Scriptures you ignorant souls, that think your ignorance will
excuse you: and let not Satan, nor your deceitful hearts so delude you, as to
think that God is in jest, where he says, My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge; and because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee.
Hosea 4.6. Or if you do, you shall one day find him in earnest. For as you know
not Christ here, so when you shall look for entrance into his Kingdom
hereafter, he shall say unto you, Depart from me, I know you not, Matthew. 25.12,
41. which will be but a sad saying; And far better were it, that you were
ignorant of all other things: which makes St Paul say, I desire to know nothing
among you, save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2.

Sect. V.
Now this being the case of millions in this City, and so all the Land over:
what can we other then conclude, That few (even amongst us) shall be saved, as
our Savior affirms, Matthew 7.13, 14. and 20.16. And that the whole world lies
in wickedness, as St John speaks, 1 Ioh. 5.19. And that the number of those
whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the Sea, Rev. 20.8. and 13.15, 16,
17. Isa. 10.22. Romans 9.27.

Which being so, I hold my self bound to acquaint them, what every one must of
neccessity know, or they cannot be saved: the which I will do in a few lines,
that all (who will) may have the benefit thereof Wherefore let all such (if
they have ears) hear what I shall say unto them out of God's Word, in laying
open those three Fundamental principles before mentioned.

Sect. VI.
Touching the bounty and goodness of GOD in Man's Creation, these things would
be known.

1. That God in the beginning made man in Paradise, after all his other works;
that he might come as to a sumptuous palace ready furnished. 2. That he was
made a compendium, and abridgment of all the other creatures: as being a little
world of himself; for whereas Planets have being, not life; Plants have life,
not sense; beasts have sense, not reason; Angels have being, life, reason, not
sense; Man has all, and contains in him more generality then the Angels; viz.
being, life, sense, reason. 3. That as he was made Lord of, and had dominion
over all; so he did excel all other visible creatures. 1. In that he had a
reasonable soul, 2. In that he has a speaking tongue, 3. In that he was made
upright, with his face lifted up to heavenward, 4. In that all things were
made subject to him, (...)

More especially we are to know, that as God made all things else for man's use
and service: so he created man (male and female) more immediately for his own
honor, and service; and did accordingly adorn him with gifts, and abilities
above all other visible creatures. For God made us (had not we unmade our
selves) after his own Image, endowing us (as with reasonable, and immortal
souls, so) with perfection of all true wisdom, holiness, and righteousness;
writing his Law in our hearts and giving us ability to obey, and fulfill the
same in every point; and withal a power to stand, and for ever to continue in a
most blessed and happy condition, free from all misery, and to enjoy a sweet,
and blessed Communion with his Creator. So that man was created very good, did
clearly and perfectly know the whole will, and works of his Maker* was able out
of the integrity of his soul, and fitness of all the powers fully, willingly
and cheerfully to love, observe, and obey his Maker, in every tittle and
circumstance he required, and to love his neighbor as himself: so that neither
the mind did conceive, not the heart desire, nor the body put in execution any
thing, but that which was acceptable, and well pleasing unto God, as these
ensuing Scriptures do plainly prove. Genesis 1.26, 27, 30. Eccles. 7.29. Romans
2.14, 15.

Sect. VII.
Which being so, how should it humble us, and make us ashamed of our present
condition; and withal set us on fire with a holy zeal, to outstrip and go
before all the rest of the Creatures in obeying our Creator; as far as he did
make us outstrip them all in spiritual and divine excellencies? whereas
hitherto, they have out-stript and gone before us in a high degree: as for
Instance. Though we are bound to praise and serve God above any creature
whatsoever, in that all the creatures were ordained for our sakes; yet heaven,
earth, and sea; all the elements, all the creatures, obey the Word of God, and
serve him as they did at first; yea, call upon us to serve him; only men for
whom they were all made, most ingratefully rebel against him. As if you
consider it rightly, the obedience of insensible and bruit creatures unto the
will of God, is a great check and reproof unto the disobedience of man. Man is
the chiefest of creatures, and they the lowest; yet do they as far exceed him
in obedience, as he does them in natural eminency. The Stork and the Swallow
know their appointed times; The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters
crib; the Sea moves in a settled and unmoving course; the Stars fits their
many changes, to a steady rule answerable to the will of him that never
changes. The Lord by Moses but spoke to the rock, and it gave water to the
thirsty Israelites; he but commanded the clouds to rain down Manna, and the
wind to bring them in Quails, for the satisfying of their hunger, and they did
so. Yea, he but bade the Ravens bring bread and flesh to Elijah, and they did
it. In like manner did the wind and sea* Matthew. (...) 2 Kings 2.24. the Fire,
Dan. 3.27. the Earth, Numb. 16.19, to 27. obey they voice of the Lord, and many
the like spoken of in Scripture. But man is wholly gone astray from his rule;
and not only runs from it but against it: so that he is far worse, then
things worse then himself.

Which were it rightly considered, would be enough to melt an heart of Adamant:
For was this the principal end, for which men were created in such a glorious
condition? That we might honor, love, and serve our Creator, and enjoy,
communion and happiness with him for ever; and are we so far from excelling
the rest of the creatures, that we are become more disobedient, and rebellious
to God, then any one of them, except Satan himself? One would think it should
make all, (that thirst not after their own damnation) not only to hate, and
dislike themselves for it: but force us with all possible speed and industry,
to seek out the cause, and how to recover our selves out of this wretched and
damnable condition.

Sect. VIII.
But it will be demanded how this comes to be so? and what was the cause;

To which I answer; God at first, entered into Covenant with our first, Parents
as public persons; both in behalf of themselves, and all that should proceed
out of their loins; and so that whatsoever gifts, privileges and endowments
they had bestowed upon them, should be continued to them and theirs; only upon
condition of their loyalty, and personal obedience (of which the tree of li^e
was a pledge:) and they should have and enjoy them, or lose and be deprived of
them, as well for their offspring, as for themselves, as they should keep or
transgress his royal Law.

But see how unworthily they demeaned themselves, toward this their bountiful
Maker and Benefactor! For whereas God placed them in Paradise, and gave them
free liberty to eat of the fruit of every tree in the Garden; save only of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil; prohibiting them that alone, even upon pain
of eternal death to them and theirs; they most perfidiously contemned, and
brake this Law; which (as sundry circumstances that do aggravate it show) was a
most execrable and damnable sin. As observe the several circumstances set down
by Moses, to amplify the foulness of their Fall: as, First, that they
despised, and made light of the promise of God; whereby they were commanded to
hope for everlasting life, so long as they continued their loyalty and
obedience. 2. There was in it an unsufferable pride and ambition, in that he
could not content himself with being Lord of the whole Universe: but he must be
equal unto God; and every way like his Maker. 3. What greater unbelief could
there be? when he gave more credit to the Serpent, in saying he should not die;
then to God, who immediately before tells them, that if he did sin in eating
the forbidden fruit, he should dye. 4. In this sin was not only unkindnesse
not to be paralleled: but wilful murder of himself, and all his posterity,
whom he knew were to stand of fall with him. 5. Herein was foul apostasy from
God to the devil: to whom (charging God with lying, envy, malice, etc,) he
revolted, and adhered, rather then stick to his Maker.


And to the might be added many the like circumstances. which grievously
aggravate the sin of our first Parents, and make it so deadly in effect. For
hereby it is, we not only lost our blessed communion with God; that the Image
of God after which they were created, was forthwith abolished, and blotted out:
but that many grievous miseries and punishments, came in the room of it: so
that in the place of wisdom, power, holiness, truth righteousness, and the like
ornaments, wherewith we had been clothed, there has succeeded these and the
like: 1. This their sin has filled our whole man with corruption. 2. It has
made us become vassals unto sin and Satan. 3. It has disabled us from
understanding the will, and observing the Commandments of the Lord. 4. It
caused us to lose our right unto, and sovereignty over the creatures. 5. It
makes our persons and actions unacceptable to God. 6. It has cast us out of
Gods favor, and made us liable, and subject to all the plagues and miseries of
this life; and to endless, easless, and remediless torments in the life to come.


Sect. IX.
And the reason is, Our First Parents being the root of all mankind; and
instead of all their posterity before they had issue: and the Covenant being
made with them as public persons, not for themselves only, but for their
Posterity; who were to stand or fall with them: they being left to the freedom
of their own wills, in transgressing the commandment of God by eating the
forbidden fruit, through the temptation of Satan: have made us, and all mankind
descending from them by ordinary generation, as guilty of their sin, as any
heir is liable to his fathers debt. Their act being ours; as the act of a
Knight, or Burgess in the Parliament House, is the act of the whole County. in
whose name, and room they sit, and whom they represent: by which means our
Nature is so corrupted, that we are utterly indisposed and made opposite unto
all that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that
continually; and have also lost our communion with God, incurred his
displeasure and curse; so as we are justly liable to all punishments both in
this life, and in the life to come.

Now for the fuller confirming and amplifying of what has been said, touching
Original sin; take only these ensuing Scriptures, and Auhorisms, without any
needless connection; that I may be so much the briefer.

Sect. X.
Amongst many others, the most pregnant Scriptures for the confirming of this
point. I hold to be these.

The fath^rs have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge,
Jer. 31.29. was a true proverb, though by them abused, By one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, in whom all
have sinned, Romans 5.12, to 21. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
not one, Job. 14.4. See Chap. 15.14, 15, 16. We are all as an unclean thing,
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64, 6. By the works of the
Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight, Romans 3.20. There is no
difference, for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.21,
22, 23. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth; and that
every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And
it repented the Lord that he had made man, Genesis 6 5, 6. Both Jews and Gentiles
are all under sin: As it is written, there is none righteous, no not one. There
is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God; They are all
gone ont of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable; there is none
that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher, the poison of
Asps is under their lips, there is no fear of God before their eyes, Romans 3.9,
to 20. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies, Mat. 15.19. See Gal. 5.19.
20, 21. Whence come wars, and sightings amongst you? come they not hence? even
of your lusts that war in your members, James 4.1. Unto them that are
unbelieving is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience is defiled,
Tit. 1.15. I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my
mind; and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin which is in my members.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death,
etc? Romans 7.14, to 25. where the Apostle speaks all this, and a great deal more
of himself; see Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Gal. 3.10.

Yet how many that grieve for their other sins, which are never troubled for
their Original corruption! which should above all be bewailed, even as the
mother and nurse of all the rest; and thought worthy not of our sighs alone,
but of our tears. For this is the great wheel of the Clock, that sets all the
other wheels a moving, while it seems to move slowest. And never did any truly
and orderly repent, that began not here: esteeming it the most foul and
hateful of all, as David, Psalm. 51.5. And Paul, crying out of it as the most
secret, deceitful, and powerful evil, Romans 7.23, 24. And indeed, if we but
clearly saw the foulness and deceitfulness of it; we would not suffer our eyes
to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber, until a happy change had wrought these
hearts of ours (which by nature are no better then so many styes of unclean
Devils) to become habitations for the God of Jacob.

Sect. XI.
We are the cursed seed of rebellious parents; neither need we anymore to
condemn us, then what we brought into the world with us. In Adam the root of
all, we all so sinned; that if we had no inherent sin of our own, this imputed
sin of his, were enough to damn us.

(...) Utter, the branches cannot be better. They were the fountain, we the
springs: if the fountain be filthy, so must the springs. Whence it is, that
holy David cries out; Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me, Psalm. 51.5.

Tantillus puer, tantus peccator, says St Austin: when a little child, I was
a great sinner. As in the little and tender bud, is infolded the leaf, the
blossom, and the fruit; so even in the heart of a young child, there is a
bundle and pack of folly laid up, as Solomon affirms, Pro. 22.15. And as Moses
Speaks, The thoughts of man's heart are evil, even from his childhood, Genesis 6.5.
and 8.21.

We brought a world of sin into the world with us; and were condemned, so soon
as conceived: we were adjudged to eternal death, before we lived a temporal
life. As admit thou had never offended, in the least thought, word, or deed
all thy life: yea, admit thou could now keep all the commandments, actually
and spiritually; yet all this were nothing, it could not keep thee out of Hell:
since that Original sin which we drew from the loins of our first Parents, is
enough to damn us.

Sin and corruption are the riches that we bequeath to our children; rebellion
the inheritance that we have purchased for them, death the wages that we have
procured them. God made us after his own image; but by sin we have turned the
image of God into the image of Satan: Yea, like Satan we can do nothing else
but sin, and make others sin too, who would not so sin but for us.

As a furnace continually sparkles, as the raging Sea foams, and casts up mire
and dirt, and as a filthy dunghill does continually reak forth, and evaporate
odious odors: so do our hearts naturally stream forth unsavory eructations,
unholy lusts and motions, even continually.

As, O the infinitely intricate windings and turnings of the dark labyrinths of
man's heart! who finds not in himself, an indisposition of mind to all good,
and an inclination to all evil? O the strange monsters, the ugly, odious,
hideous fiends; the swarms, litters, legions of noisome lusts that are co^ched
in the stinking styes of every one of our deceitful hearts! insomuch, that if
all our thoughts did but break forth into action we should not come far short
of the Devils themselves.

Sect. XII.
And as the healthiest body is subject to the mortallest disease; so there is
no sin so odious, unto which of our selves we are not sufficiently inclinable.
For Original sin, in which we are all born and bred, contains in it self the
seed of all sins; that fearful sin against the Holy Ghost it self not excepted.

Such venomous natures we have; that never was there any villainy committed by
any forlorn miscreant, whereunto we have not a disposition in our selves.
Insomuch, that we ought to be humbled, even for those very sins, from which we
are in a manner exempt ^ For that Cain's (...) blasphemy, Doegs murder,
Pharaohs cruelty, Sodoms lust, Judas his treason, Iulians apostasy, etc. are
not our sins, and as much predominant in us, as they were in each of them; it
is only Gods free grace and goodness. For all of them should have been thine
and my sins, if God had left us to our selves. Lord, says St Austin, thou have
forgiven me those sins which I have done, and those sins which only by thy
grace I have not done: they were done in our inclination to them, and even that
inclination needs Gods mercy. If we escape temptation, it is his mercy; if we
stand in temptation, it is his mercy; if our wills consent not, it is his
mercy; if we consent, and the act be hindered, it is his mercy; if we fall, and
rise again by repentance, all is his mercy.

We cry out of Cain, Judas, Julian, the Sodomites: alas, they are but glasses
to see our own faces in: For as in water, face answers to face; so does the
heart of man to man, says Solomon, Prove. 27.19. Even hating of God, is by the
Holy Ghost charged upon all men. Romans 1.30. John 15.23, 24, 25. We are all cut
out of the same piece; and as there is the same nature of all Lions, so of all
men.

There is no part, power, function, or faculty, either of our souls or bodies,
which is not become a ready instrument to dishonor God: our heart is a root of
all corruption, a seed plot of all sin; our eyes are eyes of vanity, our ears
are ears of folly, our mouths mouths of deceit, our hands hands of iniquity;
and every part does dishonor God; which yet would be glorified of him. The
understanding which was given us to learn virtue, is apt now to apprehend
nothing but sin; the will which was given us to affect righteousness, is apt
now to love nothing but wickedness; the memory which was given us to remember
good things, is apt now to keep nothing but evil things etc. For sin like a
spreading leprosy, is so grown over us, that from the crown of out heads, to
the sole of our feet, there is nothing whole therein, but wounds, and
swellings, and sores full of corruption. To be short, we are as Traitors,
condemned to suffer eternal torments in Hell fire, being only reprieved for a
time.

Sect. XIII.
And so much of Original sin, which is the pravity, naughtiness, and corruption
of our Nature, Psalm. 51.5. Now of actual sin, which is the transgression of
Gods Law, 1 Ioh. 3.4. when evil thoughts are consented unto, and performed in
outward deeds, James 1.15. Touching which we are to know, and take notice; that

The Law of God is spiritual, and therefore requires, not only outward
obedience in word and deed; but also inward in mind and heart, and that
chiefly: neither does it forbid only the committing of outward sins in word
and deed; but also all the secret corruptions of the mind and heart. Romans 7.13,
14, 15. Mat. 5.21, 22, 27, 28. 1 John 3.15.

Again, where any duty is commanded, there the means which tend thereto are
enjoined; and where any vice is forbidden, there the occasions, provocations,
and Allurements tending thereto are also forbidden. Again, (...) it well also
in regard of circumstances; as namely, that it flows from a pious and good
heart, sanctified by the holy Ghost; and be done in faith, obedience to the
word, humility, saving knowledge and sincere love to God, zeal of his glory,
and a desire to edify and win others: of which I might give you many examples;
as of the Jews fasting, Isa. 58, 3, to 8. of those reprobates preaching in
Christ's name, and casting out devils, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. of Cain's
sacrificing, 1 John 3, 12. He offered, and God abhorred; because he cared not
for the manner, to do it well, God cared not for his offering, though the act
was good. Simon Magus believed, Herod listened, Felix feared, Saul obeyed,
Iezabel fasted, the Pharisees prayed: but because they did not believe so, hear
so, fear so, obey so, fast so, and pray so as God required, and as is before
related, they were never the more regarded for what they did. For love is the
fountain of obedience; and all external obedience to God without inward love,
is hypocrisy: whereas Christ commends to his disciples, the care of keeping
his commandments aright, as the utmost testimony of their love unto him, Ioh.
15.10.

Sect. XIV,
Which being so, how often and how many ways do we all offend? For if we but
narrowly look into our hearts and lives: we shall easily perceive, that there
is not one of those righteous precepts, set down, Exodus 20. which we have not
broken, ten thousand times, and ten thousand ways. Yea, O God, (may the best
of us say) there is no vein in me, that is not full of the blood of thy Son,
whom I have crucified and crucified again by multiplying many, and often
repeating the same sins; there is no artery in me, that has not the spirit of
error, the spirit, of pride, of passion, of lust, the spirit of giddiness in
it; no bone in me, that is not hardened with the custom of sin, nourished and
suppled with the marrow of sin; no sinews, no ligaments, which do not tie and
chain sin and sin together. Yea, If we but watch over our own hearts narrowly
one day: we shall find an army of unclean thoughts and desires there,
perpetually fighting against our souls. Whereby we are continually tempted,
drawn away and enticed through our own concupiscence. As how many temptations
come in by those Cinque ports the senses? how many more by Satan's injections?
presenting to the affections things absent from the senses? but most of all by
lust it self, (a thing not created yet as quick as thought) tumbling over a
thousand desires in one hour: For, the devil and our flesh meet together every
day, and hour; to engender new sins, which is the reason our sins are counted
among those things which are infinite: as the hairs of our head, the sands of
the Sea, the stars of Heaven.

We are swift to all evil, but to all good immovable; when we do evil, we do
it cheerfully, and quickly, and easily; but if we do any good, we do it
faintly, and rawly, and slackly. We have used all our wisdom, to commit the
foolishness of sin; our whole conversation has been to serve Satan, and fulfill
the lusts of the flesh. We even suck in iniquity like water (...) It has been
the course of our whole life, to leave that which God commands, and to do that
which he forbids. The Word and Spirit may work in us some flashes of desire and
purposes of better obedience: but we are constant in nothing, but in perpetual
offending; only therein we cease not: for when we are waking, our flesh tempts
us to wickedness; if we are sleeping, it sollicits us to filthiness.

Whatever God commands, we do the contrary: We profane his Days, contemn his
Ordinances, resist his Word, grieve his Spirit, misuse his Messengers, hate our
reprovers, slander and persecute his people, seduce our friends, give ill
example to our neighbors, open the mouths of God's and our enemies, to
blaspheme that glorious Name after which we are called, and the truth we
profess. Yea, we have done more against God in one week, then we have done for
him ever since we were born; and whereas the least of Gods mercies is greater
then all the courtesies of men: we are not so thankful to him for them all, as
we are to a friend for some one good turn.

Sect. XV.
Neither are we sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak, least of
all to do ought that is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. John 15.4, 5. There is so much
wearisomness, pride, passion, lust, envy, ignorance, awkwardness, hypocrisy,
infidelity, vain thoughts, unprofitableness, and the like; cleaving to our best
actions, to defile them: that even our praying, and fasting, and repenting; our
hearing, believing, and giving; our holiest communication, our most brotherly
admonition, etc. are in themselves as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. were they not
accepted in Christ, covered with his righteousness, and washed white in his
most precious blood.

Our very righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, Isa. 64.6. What then is our
sinfulness? As bring we our lives to the rule; Look how many sins are
cherished, so many false gods there are chosen. Look how many creatures thou
inordinately love, fear, trustest, rejoycest in; so many new gods have
thou coined: and will thou not then plead guilty, when the first and second
Commandment arraigneth thee?

Thou can not away with swearing; but do thou reprove others for their
swearing? Did thou never hear Sermons unpreparedly, irreverently, etc? Does
thy heart upon a Sabbath rest from worldly thoughts? much more thy tongue from
worldly speeches? There is murder of the heart, hatred: Have not thou
murdered thy neighbors soul, by thy negligence, persuasion, evil example,
etc. Thou have not stolen, but have thou not coveted? Have thou been liberal to
those that are owners of a part of thy goods? have thou not robbed thy brother
of his good name? which is above silver and gold. Have not thou robbed God of
his worship? of his Sabbaths? of his Tithes, etc. Lying, flattering,
detracting, listening to ta^^s, yea not defending thy brothers good name, is to
bear false witness.

(...) very first motions of sins, springing out of our hearts, though
presently rejected; and a thousand the like: and yet for every drop of
wickedness that is in the life, there is a sea in the heart that feeds it.

Sect. XVI.
True, if thou look on thy sins in Satan's false glass, that will make them
seem light, and contemptible; but behold them in the clear and perfect g^ass of
Gods law, and they will appear abominable. Which makes our Savior call hatred,
murder; a wanton eye, adultery; etc. Yea, consider thy sins rightly, and they
will appear as the Iudasses that betrayed, the Soldiers that apprehended,
bound smote, and wounded thy Savior, as the gall and vinegar in his mouth,
spittle on his face, thorns on his head, nails in his hands, spear in his side,
etc.

This is the way to know thy self sinful: and as thus to know thy self, is the
best Divinity, as Demonax said of Philosophy: so thus to aggravate thy sins in
thine own sight, is the only way to have them extenuated in the sight of God.
Whence the more holy a child of God is, the more sensible he is of his own
unholiness; thinking none so vile as himself: as it fared with holy Job, Job
40.4. and 42.6. and with Isaiah, chap. 6.5. and 64.6. and with Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. Romans 7.14. to 25. and with holy David, who almost in every Psalm so
much bewails his sins, original and actual; of omission and commission.

Carnal men are only troubled for those sins that appear to the world; but
those in whom Christ's is formed anew, think they cannot be humbled enough for
their evil thoughts, vain and unprofitable words, for the evil which cleaves
even to their best actions; for sins of omission, as the want of faith, and
love, and repentance, want of the true fear of God, the neglect of preparation,
and unprofitable hearing, of praying, and reading, in their families, of
instructing their children and servants, of sanctifying the Sabbath, and seeing
that all under them do the same; their unfruitfulness, under the means of
grace, their not growing in grace, and the like. And thus do all experimental
Christians, all that have spiritual eyes. The want whereof I take to be the
cause of all desperate wickedness; as what else but invincible ignorance is the
cause, why wickedness so abounds in every corner o^ the Land? Sin indeed at
first was the cause of ignorance; but now ignorance is the cause of Sin,
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring abound (says the
Prophet) because there is no knowledge of God in the land, Hosea 4.1, 2. It is
a people that do err in their hearts, says God; Why? Because they have not
known my ways; Psalm. 95.10. Ye are deceived, (says our Savior) because ye
know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God, Matthew. 22.29. When Christ
wept over Jerusalem, what was the cause? Even their blindness. If thou had
known (says he) at the least in this thy day, those things which now are hid
from thine eyes, Luke 19.42. Because men know not the wages of evil, therefore
they do it: and because they would securely do it, therefore they refuse to
know it. O that men knew how good it is to obey; to disobey. how evil! for this
would soon disperse and dispel all the black clouds of their reigning sins in a
moment. If they were wise (says St. Bernard) they would foresee the torments
of Hell, and prevent them; but they that wander in bypath, declare themselves
ignorant of the rightway of salvation, Romans 3.17. I grant, many that are wicked
have a show of wisdom: but let them seem to know never so much; yet it is
through ignorance that they do so ill.

Sect. XVII.
And so having given you a short survey of our wretchedness, by reason of
Original sin, and actual transgressions; by which we must confess to have
deserved double damnation: I come now to declare the means which God of his
infinite goodness has found out, both for the satisfying of his justice, and
also freeing us from the guilt, and punishment of either. And that with as much
brevity, as may stand with perspicuity.

First in general we must undoubtedly know, that the sole perfection of a
Christian, is ^he imputation of Christ's righteousness; and the not imputation
of his own unrighteousness; as appears by the whole current of Scripture, of
which a few.

Even the Son of man came to give his life a ransom for many. Mark, 10.45. As
in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. As by
one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one,
shall many be made righteous, etc. Romans 5.18, 19. As by the offense of one, the
fault came on all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the benefit
abounded toward all men to the justification of life, Romans 5.18. Unto Jesus
Christ that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, Rev. 1.5.
The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all our sins, 1 John 1.7.
he is the reconciliation for our sins, etc. 1 John 2 1, 2. He has made him to
be sin for us, who knew no sin: that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. He was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again
for our justification, Romans 4.25. Who his own self, bare our sins in his own
body on the tree; by whose stripes we were healed, 1 Pet. 2.24. He was wounded
for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of
our peace was upon him and with his stripes we were healed, Isa. 53.5. Neither
is there salvation in any other; for among men there is given none other name
under Heaven whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. The wages of sin is death,
but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23.
I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, although he were
dead, yet shall he live, John 11.25. You has he quickened, that were dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the
world: but that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 4.16. to 20.

God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us: much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life, Romans 5, 6. to 11, read to the end of the Chapter. See more John 1.29.
Acts 13.39. Romans 6.4. to 23. and 8.2, 3. and 10. 3,4. 1 Cor. 15.56. Col. 1.14.
Gal, 3.22. Heb. 9.28. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. 1 John 3.8.

Sect. XVIII.
As Christ was a sinner only by the imputation of our sins: so we are just,
only by the imputation of his righteousness. Our good works (were they never
so many and rare) cannot justify us, or deserve any thing at Gods hands: it is
only in Christ that they are accepted, and only for Christ that they are
rewarded. Yea the opinion of thine own righteousness, makes thy condition far
worse then the wickedest man's alive. For Christ that came to save all weary and
heavy laden sinners; (be they never so wicked) neither came to save, or once to
call thee that have no sin, but art righteous enough without him. As hear his
own words to the proud Pharisees, who had the same thoughts of themselves as
thou have; They that be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. I
am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. The lost sheep of
the house of Israel, Mat. 9.13. and 10.6. and 15.24. and 18.11. Nor can any
soul be so dangerously sick; as thou, who art least sensible of thy being sick.

Briefly, until with Saint Paul, thou renounceth thine own righteousness, see
thy self the greatest of sinners, art able to discern sin in every thing thou
can think, speak, or do, and that thy very righteousness is no better then a
menstruous cloth, Isai. 64.6. thou can have no part in Christ. And until
Christ shall become thine by Regeneration, and a lively faith: Thou art bound
to keep the whole Law, actually and spiritually with thy whole man, thy whole
life; or else suffer eternal death and destruction of body and soul in Hell for
thy not keeping it. So that thou have yet to answer (and I pray mind it
seriously) for all the sins, that ever thou have committed, who art not able to
answer for one of the least of them. For the wages of sin, (any sin be it never
so small) is eternal death, Romans 6.23. Gal. 2.16, 19, 20, 21.

Neither let Satan, nor thy own deceitful heart delude thee; in thinking that
thou have faith, when thine own words declare the contrary. Nor would I ask any
more evidence against thee in this, then thine own mouth; in saying, that thou
never doubtedst in all thy life: for this makes it plain that thou never had
faith, nor ever knew what says means. For he who never doubted, never
believed: and Satan has none so sure, as those whom he never yet assaulted.

Sect. XIX
But this being a main fundamental point, which every man is bound to know: I
will more particularly and fully explain it, as thus:

Man being in a most miserable, and undone condition; by reason of Original and
actual sin, and of the curse due to both, being liable to all miseries in this
life, and adjudged to suffer eternal torments in hellfire after death, having
no possibility to escape the fierce wrath of Almighty God; who had already
pronounced sentence upon him; When neither Heaven, Earth, nor Hell, could have
yielded any satisfactory thing besides Christ; that could have satisfied Gods
justice, and merited Heaven for us: then, O then! God of his infinite wisdom
and goodness, did not only find out a way to satisfy his justice, and the
Law: but even gave us his own Son, out of his bosom, and his Son gave himself
to die, even the most shameful, painful and cursed death of the Cross to redeem
us, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life; John 3.16. A mercy bestowed, and a way found out; that may astonish all
the sons of men on earth, and Angels in Heaven. Wherefore wonder at this, you
that wonder at nothing! that the eternal God would die, to redeem our worse
then lost souls; that we might not die eternally? O the deepnesse of Gods love:
O the unmeasurable measure of his bounty! O Son of God who can sufficiently
admire thy love, or commend thy pity, or extol thy praise! It was a wonder that
thou made us for thy self; more that thou made thy self man for us, but
most of all that thou should unmake thy self, that thou should dye to
save us.

Which salvation stands, in two things. First, in freeing and delivering us
from Hell; Secondly, In the possession of Heaven, and eternal life. Christ by
his death, merits the first for us: and by his obedience, fulfilling the law,
merits the second. The parts of our justification are likewise two: the
remission of our sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness; whereby we
have freedom from all evil here, and the perfection of all good and happiness
in heaven. Insomuch that all those Millions of mercies that we have received,
from, before, and since, we were born, either for soul or body; (even to the
least bit of bread we eat) or shall enjoy to eternity: Christ of his free grace
has purchased for us, with the price of his own precious blood. For which see
Psalm. 68.19. and 145.15, 16. and 75.6, 7.

Hear this all you that care to be saved! God will pardon all your sins, he
will give you an eternal crown of glory in heaven, if you unfainedly repent,
and wholly rely upon Christ for your salvation by a lively faith; and that
because he is just: for although the Lord cannot in justice let sin go
unpunished; (for the wages of sin is eternal death, Romans 6.23. death in the
person, if not in the surety.) Yet Christ has sufficiently satisfied for all
the sins of the faithful, and paid their dept even to the utmost farthing; as
is evident by Isai. 53.4, 5. 2 Cor. 5.21. Heb. 9.26. 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans 3.25,
26. 1 Ioh. 1.7, 9. and sundry other places. As, are we bound to perform perfect
obedience to the Law? Christ performed it for us. VVet^ we for disobedience
subject to the sentence of condemnation, the curse of the Law, and death of
body and soul? He was condemned for us and bore the curse of the Law; he died
in our stead an ignominious (...). Did we deserve the anger of God? he endured
his Fathers wrathful displeasure, that so he might reconcile us to his Father,
and set us at liberty. He that deserved no sorrow, felt much; that we who
deserved much, might feel none. And by his wounds we are healed, Isai. 53.5.
Adam eat the apple, Christ paid the price. In a word, whatsoever we owed,
Christ discharged; whatsoever we deserved, he suffered, if not in the self-same
punishments (for he being God, could not suffer the eternal torments of Hell)
yet in proportion, the dignity of his Person, (he being God and Man) giving
value unto his temporary punishments; and making them of more value and worth,
then if all the world should have suffered the eternal torments of Hell. For it
is more for one that is eternal to die: then for others to die eternally.
Therefore was the Son of God made the Son of man: that the Sons of men might be
made the Sons of God: and therefore was he both God and man: lest being in
every respect God, he had been too great to suffer for man; or being in every
respect man, he had been too weak to satisfy God. And so much for explication
of the Third Principle, mentioned in the beginning.

Sect. XX.
But now comes the hardest part of my work to be performed. For admit the
Natural man be convinced of the truth of these three fundamental Principles
never so clearly: yet he will draw such a conclusion from the premises, that
he will be never the better, for what has been told him, yea he will decoct
all (even the mercy, and goodness of God) into poison. For what will such a one
suggest to himself (the Devil helping forward) Let it be granted, will he say,
that I were every way wretched and miserable; a great sinner, both originally,
and actually; and likewise liable to all the plagues of this life, and of that
to come: yet I thank God, I am well enough, so long as Christ has paid my
ransom; and freed me from all by a new Covenant; the tenure whereof is, Believe
and Live: whereas at first it was, do this and live: to which I answer.

In Covenants and Indentures between party and party, there are always
articles, and conditions to be performed on the one side, as well as promises
to be fullfilled on the other, as says Pareus. Now as God has covenanted and
bound himself by his word and Seal; to remit thee thy sins, adopt thee his
child by regeneration, and give thee the Kingdom of Heaven, and eve^lasting
life by and for his sons sake; so Christ has for, and on thy behalf
undertaken; yea, thou thy self did for thy part, bind thy self by covenant,
promise and vow in thy baptism, that thou would forsake the Devil and all
his works, constantly believe Gods holy Word, and obediently keep his
Commandments; the better thereby to express thy thankfulness toward him, for
so great a benefit, 1 Pet. 3.21. Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. And we know that in
Covenants and Indentures, if the Conditions be not kept, the Obligation is not
in force. Whereby millions ( Magus like) after the water of baptism, (which is
a Seal of the Covenant of Grace) go to the fire of Hell. Yea, except we repent
and believe the Gospel, ( threats, and precepts; as well as promises) that holy
Sacrament* together with the (...) to us our salvation; will be an obligation
under our own hand and seal against us; and so prove a seal of our greater
condemnation. Therefore the main question is, Whether thou art a believer? For
although Christ in the Gospel, has made many large, and precious promises:
there are none so general: which are not limited, with the condition of faith,
and the fruit thereof unfeigned repentance; and each of them are so tied and
entailed, that none can lay claim to them, but true believers, which repent and
turn from all their sins, to serve him in holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Isa. 59.20. As for instance, Our Savior has made
public Proclamation, Mark 16.16. That whosoever shall believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved. but mark what withal is added; he that will not
believe, shall be damned. Again, God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3.15, 16. And that none may deceive themselves, he
adds; He that believes on him is not condemned; but he that believes not is
condemned already: because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light, John 3.19, 20. And again, As
many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God: even to
them that believe on his name, Joh. 1.12.

Again, Heb. 5.9. He is said to be the Author of eternal salvation, unto all
that obey him: not unto them which continue in their rebellious wickedness, and
never submit themselves to be ruled by the scepter of his Word. Christ's blood
(says Zanchie) was shed as well for ablution, as for absolution: as well to
cleanse from the soil and filth of sin, as to clear and assoil from guilt of
sin, Romans 6.5, 6. God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the
world; that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love, Ephesians.
1.4. They therefore that never come to be holy, were never chosen. He is said
to have given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works, Tit.
2.14. Luke 1.74, 75. Yea, the Lord binds it with an oath, that whomsoever he
redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, they shall worship him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life, Luke 1.73, 74, 75.
1. Pet. 2.24. and Tit. 2. The grace of God which brings salvation, teaches
us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, verse. 12.

By all which it is plain, that as Christ's blood is a Charter of pardon; so
withal it is a Covenant of direction; and he that refuses to live as that
covenant prescribes, may perish as a malefactor that is hanged with his pardon
about his neck.

Sect. XXI.
But alas, say what can be said, carnal men (who love their sins, better then
their souls) will answer all, yea, confute whatsoever can be al(...), with, God
is merciful* Or in case that will not serve, yet they have another shift; or
rather the enemy of mankind will furnish them with an evasion, telling them
that they have a strong faith, good hearts, and mean well; they repent of their
sins, have as good wishes and desires as can be, are elected, hope to go to
heaven as well as the best, etc. But to every of these, I answer,

First, true faith purifieth the heart, and works by love, consumes our
corruptions, and sanctifies the whole man throughout, so that our faith to
God, is seen in our faithfulness to men; our invisible belief, by our visible
life.

Faith and holiness are as inseparable, as life and motion, the Sun and light,
fire and heat, ice and coldness, the spring and greenness, the rose and
sweetness, steel and hardness, crystal and clearness, pitch and foulness, honey
and sweetness. Again, faith believes the threats of the Word; together with
the promises. Now thou who pretendest belief in the promises, show me thy
belief in the threatenings. For did thou believe the truth of those menaces,
which God has denounced against unclean, covetous, ambitious, unjust, envious,
malicious persons, and such like sinners: how durst thou then so wallow in
these sins, that if God instead of Hell, had promised Heaven as a reward unto
them, thou could not do more then thou do? Why should thou deceive thy
self with an opinion of faith? when indeed thou believe not so much as the
Devil does; for he believes [namely the threatenings of the VVord] and trembles
for horror, Iam. 2. but thou go on in sin, even mocking at the menaces, and
in the infidelity of thy heart, give them the lie, saying, no such thing
shall befall thee. But Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultam; when they shall
say peace and safety, then comes on them sudden destruction, 1 These. 5.3.

Though those Persecutors of Christ, and murderers of the Lord of life, were
the Devils children; as they were plainly told by truth it self, Ioh. 8.44. yet
they most confidently believed, and stiffly maintained, that God was their
father, verse 41. And so will the worst of men in these days, such as do
nothing but sin, and make others sin, such as glory in, and maintain their sins.

Again, as faith is wrought by Gods spirit; so where it is wrought, it brings
forth the fruits of the Spirit, mentioned, Gal. 5.22, 23. whereas presumption,
as it is of the flesh, so it brings forth the fruits of the flesh, verse 19.20,
21.

But it is very easy to believe, thinks the sensualist; yes, but why? Satan
troubles not such, for then he who begot this presumptuous faith in him, should
be divided against himself. Nay, Satan confirms him in this his deceit.
Besides, this is a sure rule, that that persuasion only, which follows sound
humiliation, is faith; that which goes before it is presumption. And as Ambrose
speaks, no man can repent of sin, but he that believes the pardon of sin: nor
none can believe his sins are pardoned, except he has repented. Besides, how
easy a matter soever thou think it is to believe: he that goes about it,
shall find it as hard a work to believe the Gospel, as to keep the Law; and
only God must enable to both, and yet so far as we come short of either, so
far forth we have just cause to be humbled* if we consider how God at first
made us, and how woefully we have unmade our selves. But

Sect. XXII.
Secondly, as for their good hearts and meanings, they may think what they
will, but every wise man knows, that the outward actions declare the inward
intentions. A good conversion is proved by a good conversation.

There is no heart made of flesh, which at some time or other relents not; even
flint and marble will in some weather stand on drops. Men may flatter God with
their mouths, and with their tongues dissemble with him; when their hearts are
not upright with him, Psalm. 78.36, 37. and indeed they whose words and deeds
are faulty and evil; and yet plead the gooodness of their hearts toward God;
are like malefactors, who being convicted of theft, or the like naughtiness, by
plain evidence to their faces, do appeal to the testimony of such persons for
their purgation, as they know cannot be found. And in case the hearts of such
men could be seen of others, as their works and words are, their hearts would
appear worst of all, as they do to God, who sees them. Nor is any evil in the
mouth or hand, which was not in the heart first of all, as the stream in the
fountain. And let a vicious man boast never so much of his good heart; I will
as soon believe him that says he has the Philosophers stone, and yet lives
like a beggar, which two hang together like a sick man's dream.

We have good hearts, and mean well; alas poor ignorant souls! for every drop
of wickedness that appears in the life, there is an ocean in the heart. The
heart of man is deceitful above all things: and while he thinks there is no
deceit in it, even in that he is most of all deceived. Sinners are like that
peremtory Sex^on, that said, howsoever the day goes, I am sure the clock goes
right. So that the Spanish Proverb does every way please me; defienda me dios
de mio, God defend me from my self.

Carnal men are apt to boast of the goodness of their hearts: but a man's heart
is as arch a Traitor, as any he shall meet withal. We trust it too much, and
know it too little, as it fared with Leah, Genesis 30.18. and Hazael, 2 Kings
8.12, 13. and Peter, Mat. 26.33. Luke 22.32. Mark 14.29. And those Jews, Acts
2.36. And all this they will acknowledge in the end; yea, prove by experience,
that Heaven is full of good works, Hell of good wishes, and that the fetters
which sin makes it must wear.

Sect. XXIII.
Thirdly, touching their repentance my answer is; True repentance for sin, is a
turning from every sin to the contrary good. In all true repentance is a
change, both in the judgment from error to truth, and in the will from evil to
good, and in the affections from loving evil, and hating good; to love good and
hate evil, in the whole man from darkness, to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God. Without which change, no repentance, no being saved: The two
main and essential parts of repentance are contrition or humiliation, and
conversion or reformation. It is not true repentance, except humiliation and
reformation go both together: for either of these single make but a half, or
halting repentance. An unreformed sorrow, is but deformed: and a sorrowless
reformation, is but a very sorry one. Humiliation without reformation, is a
foundation without a building; and reformation without humiliation, is a
building without a foundation. Judas was grieved for murdering Christ, yet no
change followed: he fell to murdering of himself. It is not possible a man
should truly grieve, and be displeased for his sins; and yet continue in them
without a change.

Sect. XXIV.
Fourthly, as for their assurance of salvation, it is upon as good ground as
all the rest: for they slumber, and suppose themselves good Christians; their
faith is but a dream, their hope but a dream, their charity but a dream, their
obedience but a dream, their whole religion but a dream; and so their assurance
of salvation is but a dream; they have regeneration in conceit, repentance and
righteousness in conceit, they serve God well in conceit, do the works of
justice and piety in conceit, and they shall go to heaven only in conceit, or
in a dream, and never awake until they feel themselves in the flames of hell.
Every drunken beast and blasphemer thinks to go to heaven; though none shall
come there, nor once see God without holiness: which they abhor. One minds
nothing but his cups, another nothing but his coin, a third only his Curtizan;
yet all these point to meet in heaven, but this is not the way thither. The
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
is a broad way, but not to heaven. Micha when he had a Levite in his house,
thought that God loved him, Judge. 17.13. It is usual with formalists, when they
have the Sacrament in their belly, to think that all is well, as the Jews
thought, we may put away our wives, we may swear, we may hate our enemies, we
may kill the Prophets, subject the Word of God to our traditions, and follow
our own ways. Why, Abraham is our father, Ioh. 8.39. But by their leave,
Christ calls them bastards, and finds out another father for them, ver. 44. Ye
are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. Profane
Libertines, such as account not themselves well, but when they are doing ill:
yea, the most covetous oppressors, who may say as Pope Leo did, I can have no
place in heaven, because I have so often sold it upon earth; every man of them
hopes (I confess, with more confidence, then judgment) to have benefit by the
Gospel; when they will not be tied to the least tittle of the Law. But if
Christ be not our King to govern us, he will neither be our Prophet to
fore-warn, nor our Priest to expiate* Except we forsake our sins, God will
never forgive them, yea, he has sworn by an oath, that whomsoever he redeemeth
out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, shall serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their lives. Neither can it consist with his
justice, to pardon such as continue in an evil course of life.

If Christ has freed us from the damnation of sin, he has also freed us from
the dominion of sin. If with his blood he has quenched the fire of hell for
us, he has also quenched the fire of lust in us. Christ's justifying blood, is
given us by his sanctifying Spirit. He being consecrated, was made the author
of eternal salvation, unto all them (and them only) that obey him, Heb. 5.9.
Of whomsoever a man is overcome, even unto the same he is in bondage, 2 Pet.
2.19. Have ye then no government of your passions, no conscience of your
actions, no care of your lives? false hypocrites, ye do but abuse and profane
that name, which ye unjustly arrogate.

Sect. XXV.
But yet more to convince you, you go to heaven, when in sundry particulars,
you fall short of many wicked reprobates recorded in Scripture; as do but deal
impartially with thy self, and tell me thou civil Iusticiary whether thou ever
had the heart upon hearing the threatenings of the Word to relent and humble
thy self with Ahab? to confess thy sins, and desire the people of God to pray
for thee with Pharaoh? to be affected with joy in hearing the Word, and
practice many things, with Herod? to be zealous against sin, with Iehu?
willingly to part with a good part of thy goods, with Ananias? to forsake the
world and all thy hopes in it; to follow poor Christ, as Demas and others? to
venture thy life with Alexander the Copper-smith, in cleaving to the truth?
yea, it is said of Judas himself that he repented, there is contrition; he
says I have sinned, there is confession, and he restored the money again,
there is satisfaction; which is all the Papists repentance: and yet he is Judas
the son of perdition still. Now tell me? do thou not come short of these,
many such as these be wicked reprobates, and yet will thou please thy self in a
false conceit, of thine own happiness, who come further behind them, then
they do behind true Christians? If some that have journied in the wilderness to
Kadesh-barnea, shall yet never enter into Gods rest; shall those that never
left Egypt? Is the stony ground reprobate? and can the highway ground be good?
There are three sorts of ground mentioned, Mark 4.4, 5, 6, 7. and the very
worst of them receives the seed, yet all damned, whither then shall the tempest
of Gods wrath drive them, that would never yet give the Gospel a religious ear?

But vicious men, think God is all mercy (as foggie air uses to represent
every object far bigger than it is) when the Word tells us, that he is a
consuming fire, and a jealous God, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29. and when we shall
find in Deuteronomy. 28. thrice as many curses as blessings. Do thou expect to have
him merciful to thee, that art unmercifull, cruel, and bloody to him, to his,
and thine own soul? none that have eyes in their heads and open, can be so
sottish. But Sin is like the juice of poppie, called Opium; which if the
quantity exceed, brings the patient into a deep sleep, that he never awaketh.
Sinners dream they are awake, but indeed they are fast asleep; yea, with Sardis
they are dead, while they think they are alive.

And indeed this misprision or mistake, this very opinion of being in ease good
enough, keeps a man out of all possibility of being bettered; for what we
presume to have attained, we seek not after. Yea, this conceited
righteousness, is the only cause of all unrighteousness; and many a man had
been good, if he had not at present so thought himself. Until Paul was humbled
to the very ground; trembling and astonished, he never asked Jesus, what will thou have me to do. And the like of those Converts that were pricked in their
hearts at Peter's searching Sermon, upon their being convinced, that they were
the murderers of the Lord of Life, Acts 2.36.37, 38.

Sect. XXVI.
In the last place, touching their Election, this is an infallible truth;
Whomsoever God has appointed to salvation, to them he has appointed the means
also, which is holiness. Indeed a man may be so bold of his Predestination, as
to forget his conversation; so he may dream himself in Heaven, and waken from
that dream in Hell. Gods purpose touching the end, includes the means. Though
God had promised Paul that his company should not be drowned, yet he told the
Mariners, that unless they kept in the ship, they should be drowned, Acts
27.22, 23, 31. as if their safety should not be without means: Rebekah had Gods
Oracle for Jacobs life, yet she sent him away out of Esaus reach. It was
impossible for Herod to hurt the child Jesus, yet he must fly into Egypt.

And so I have shown in the last place, what are the conditions of the new
Covenant, and to whom the promises belong; which is all that I undertook. Now
if men will yet go on, and perish in their impenitency; their blood be on
their own heads, and not on mine, I have discharged my duty.

Nevertheless, least the single evidence that I bring from the Word of Truth,
should not prove sufficient to gain your credence to what has been spoken; And
because examples give a quicker impression then arguments, I have one thing
more to crave of thee, which is, that thou will also hear the confession of two
parties (in the ensuing or second part of this Discourse) that were lately in
thy very condition; though now by the Infinite goodness of God they have their
eyes opened, and their hearts changed, to see and know, both what it is to be
in the state of nature, and what to be brought into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God; that so by a three fold cord, you may be drawn to accept of
salvation upon Gods own terms; whereas otherwise you can no way escape his
eternal wrath.

The ensuing, or second part, which I would request you to read and mind, is;
A happy Conference, between a Formalist converted, and a loose Libertine,
entitled, An experimental Index of the Heart.

And so much of the first Part; the second follows.

FINIS.
Sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews VVell-yard; and by Henry
Cripps in Popes-head-Alley, At the same places there are also to be sold five
and thirty other Pieces of Practical Divinity composed by the same Author. 1660.
This sheet and half, with ^ower other sheets (of as considerable matter) are
all to be had for a Penny, at the Black Swan by Moor^ ga^e.

AN Experimental INDEX of the HEART: OR, SELF-KNOWLEDGE.
In which (As in a Looking-glass) the civillest of men may see what need they
have of a Redeemer; and that it most deeply concerns them with all speed, to
sue out their pardon in Christ, and to rely wholly and only upon Free Grace,
for pardon and Salvation; except they prefer an everlasting furnace of fire and
brimstone in Hell, before an eternal weight of superabundant glory in Heaven,
as all (most sottishly) do, that by sin and Satan are bewitched.
Drawn up and published for the good of all, By R. Young of Roxwell in Essex,
Florilegus.
Add this as a Third Part to the Trial of true Wisdom, and those Three
Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, Entitled, A short and sure Way
to Grace and Salvation.

Sect. XXVII.
A Loose Libertine, meeting with his Friend that had lately been a Formal
Christian; he greets him as follows:

SIR, methinks I have observed in you a strange alteration, since our last
meeting at Middleburrough: not only in your behavior, company, and converse;
but even in your countenance: What is the matter, if I may be so bold?

Convert. Truly Sir, you are not at all mistaken, nor am I unwilling to
acquaint you with the cause; if you can affoard to hear it.

Soon after my return into England, I was carried by a Friend to hear a Sermon:
where the Minister so represented the very thoughts, secrets, and
deceitfulness of my heart unto my conscience; that I could not but say of him,
as the woman of Samaria once spoke of our Savior: He has told me all things
that ever I did. Which made me conclude with that Unbeliever, 1 Cor. 14 24, 25.
That God was in him of a truth: nor could he ever have so done, if he were not
of God. As the young man in the Gospel reasoned with the Pharisees, touching
Jesus when he had opened his eyes, that had been blind from his birth, Joh.
9.32, 33. Whereupon I could have no peace nor r^st, until I had further
communed with him about my estate; for I found my self in a lost condition
touching Eternity: It faring with me as it did wi^h those Jews, Act. 2. when
Peter by his searching Sermon, had convinced them, that Christ, whom they had
by wicked hands crucified and slain, was the only Son of God, and Lord of
glory, ver. 36, 37. And having had the happiness to enjoy the benefit of his
sage advice as I stood in need thereof; ( God having given him the tongue of
the learned, to administer a word in season to them that are weary, Isa 50.4.)
I bless God, his Word and Spirit has wrought in me such a change and strange
alteration, that it has opened mine eyes that were blind before, inclined my
will to obedience, which before was rebellious, softened my heart, sanctified
and quite changed my affections: so that I now love that good which before I
hated, and hate that evil which before I loved; and am delighted with those
holy exercises* which heretofore did most displease me; and am displeased with
those vain pleasures and filthy sins which in times past did most delight me.
Which is such a mercy, that no tongue is able to express! For till that hour I
went on in the broad way, and worlds road to destruction, without any mistrust;
whereas now God has been pleased to take me into his Kingdom of grace here,
and will never leave me, until he has brought me to his Kingdom of glory
hereafter.

Loose Libertine. What you speak makes me wonder: for I ever held you the
compleatest man of my acquaintance; just in all your dealings, temperate and
civil in your deportment; yea, I have never seen you exceed in the least, or
heard you swear an Oath, except faith and troth, and that very rarely. Besides,
you have been a good Protestant, and gone to Church all your days.

Convert. What you speak, none that know me, can contradict; nor could they
ever accuse me of any scandalous crime, or unjust act. Yea, I had the same
thoughts of my self; and should any one have told me formerly, that I was such
a great sinner, such a Devil Incarnate as I was! I should have replied as
Hazael did to the Prophet, (telling him of the abominable wickedness he would
e're long commit) What am I a dog, etc. 2 Kings 8.12, 13. And no wonder, for as
every man in his natural condition, is stark blind to spiritual objects, 1 Cor.
2.14. so the heart of man is deceitful above all things: even so deceitful,
that none but God alone can know it, as the Prophet shows, Ier. 17.10. But
because this is a truth that transcends your belief, and because it may be of
singular use to you also, to know the same: I will give you a short character
of my former condition; the which done, I doubt not but you will assent unto
what I have hitherto said, or shall further relate.

Sect. XXVIII.
First, Touching my knowledge, (I mean saving knowledge, without which the soul
cannot be good, as wise Solomon witnesses, Prove. 19.2.^^ it was such, (though
I thought my self wiser than to make scruple of, o^ perplex my self about
matters of Religion, as do the Religious: even as the King of Tyrus thought
himself wiser than Daniel, Ezekiel. 28.3.) that spiri^tual things were mostly
represented to my understanding false, and clea^ contrary to what they are
indeed. Like corporal things in a Looking-glass wherein those that are on the
right hand seem to be on the left, and thos^ that are on the left hand seem to
be on the right. As it fared with Saint Paul, while he was in his natural
condition, Act. 26.9. which made m^ think and call evil, good; and good, evil;
bitter, sweet, and sweet bitter; t^ justify the wicked, and condemn the just,
as the Prophet complains, Isa. 5.20, 23^

As for instance, I most sottishly thought, that I both loved, and serve^ God
as I ought; yea, I should have taken it in foul scorn, if any one ha^^
questioned the same: when indeed I was a Traitor to God, and took (...) arms
against all that worshipped him in Spirit and in truth. I was so far from
loving and serving him, that I hated those that did it; and that for their so
doing; I could also hear him blasphemed, reproached, and dishonored without
being once stirred, or moved at it. I loved him dearly, but could never affoard
to speak a word for him; and likewise his Children entirely, but instead of
justifiing them, or speaking in their defense, when heard them scoft, scorned
and abused by wicked and ungodly men; all m^ delight was to jeer at, slight and
slander them where ever I came. I more feared the Magistrate, than I feared
God; and more regarded the blasts o^ men's breath, than the fire of Gods wrath.
I chose rather to disobey God, tha^ to displease great ones; and feared more
the worlds scorns, then his anger.

And the like of Christ that died for me; a strong argument that I love^
Christ, when I hated all that resembled him in holiness. Yea, I so hated
holiness, that I most bitterly hated men for being holy: insomuch that my
blood would rise at the sight of a good man, as some stomachs will rise a^ the
sight of sweetmeats. I was a Christian in name, but I could scoff at Christian
indeed; I could honor the dead Saints in a formal pro^ession^ while I worried
the living Saints in a cruel persecution. I condemned all for Roundheads, that
had more Religion than a Heathen, or knowledge o^ heavenly things, than a child
in the womb has of the things of this life; o^ conscience than an Atheist; or
care of his soul, than a Beast. I had always the basest thoughts of the best
men: making ill constructions of whatsoever they did or spoke: as the Scribes
and Pharisees dealt by our Savior*

Sect. XXIX.
As, O what a poor slave did I hold the man of a tender conscience to be ^ yea,
how did I applaud my self for being zeallesse, and fearlesse; togethe^ with my
great discretion, and moderation: when I saw this man vexed for his zeal, that
other hated for his knowledge, a third persecuted for the profession of his
Faith, etc. For (being like Cain, Ishmael, Eliah, Mich^l, Pharaoh, and Festus)
I thought their Religion Puritanisme, their conscienc^ of sin, hypocrisy;
their profession, dissimulation; their prudence, (...) their faith and
confidence, presumption; their zeal of Gods glory, to be pride and malice;
their obedience to Gods Laws, rebellion to Princes; their execution of justice,
cruelty, etc. If they were any thing devout or forward to admonish others, that
so they might pluck them out of the fire; conceived them to be besides
themselves: as our Savior was thought to be by his Kinsfolk, and Saint Paul by
Festus, Mark. 3.21. John 10.20. Acts 26.24. 1 Cor. 1.18. My religion was to
oppose the power of Religion; and my knowledge of the truth, to know how to
argue against the truth. ^ never affected Christ's Ambassadors, that preached
the glad tidings of salvation, but had a spleen against them; yea, I hated a
Minister, for being a Minister; especially, if a godly and zealous one, that
spoke home to my conscience, and told me of my sins; much more if he would not
admit me to the Lords Table without trial and examination: yea, then like Ahab
to Micah, I became his enemy, and hated him ever after; would impeach his
credit, and detain from him his dues. And are not all these strong evidences,
that I loved and served God, and my Redeemer as I ought? But to make it more
manifest, what a rare Christian I was:

I thought my self a Believer; yea, I could boast of a strong faith, when yet I
fell short of the very Devils in believing: for they believe the threats and
judgments contained in the Word, and tremble thereat, James 2.19. Whereas I
thought them but scar-crows to fright the simple withal: yea, I held Hell it
self but a fancy, not worth the fearing.

Because I was not notoriously wicked, but had a form of godliness, was civil,
etc. I was able to delude my own soul, and put off all reproofs and
threatenings; by comparing my self with those, that I presumed were worse than
my self: as, Drunkards, Adulterers, Blasphemers, Oppressors, shedders of blood,
and the like; counting none wicked but such. Yea, looking upon these, I admired
my own holiness; and thought my moral honesty, would be sufficient to save me.
Nor did I know wherein I had offended.

And whereas the Law is spiritual, and binds the heart from affecting, no less
than the hand from acting: I was so blind and ignorant, that I thought the
Commandment was not broken, if the outward gross sin be ^orborn. Whence these
were my thoughts, I never brake the first Commandment, of having many gods:
for I was no Papist, nor Idolater: nor the second, for I worshipped God aright:
nor the third, for I had been no common swearer, only a few petty oaths: nor
the fourth, for I had every Sabbath gone duly to Church: not the fifth, for I
ever honored my ^arents, and have been a loyal subject: not the sixth,
seventh, eighth, ninth, or tenth, for I never committed murder, or adultery,
never stole ought, never bare false witness; nor could I call to mind, that I
had at any time coveted my neighbors wife, servant, estate, etc. And nothing
more common with me, than to brag of a good heart and meaning, of the strength
of my faith and hope, of my just and upright dealing, etc. And because I
abstained from notorious sins, I thought my self an excellent Christian; if God
was not beholding to me for not wounding his name with oaths, for not drinking
and playing out his Sabbaths, for not railing on his Ministers, for not
oppressing and persecuting his poor Members, etc.

Sect. XXX.
And yet had it been so, as I imagined; admit I had never offended in the least
all my life; either in thought, word, or deed: yet this were but one-half of
what I owe to God; this were but to observe the negative part of his law, still
the affirmative part thereof I had been so far from performing, that I had not
so much as thought of it. And to be just in the sight of God, and graciously
accepted of him, these two things are required: the satisfactory part to escape
Hell, and the meritorious part to get Heaven. And the true method of grace is,
Cease to do evil, Learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. The Fig Tree was cursed, not
for bearing evil fruit; but because it bare no good. The evil servant was not
bound hand and foot, and cast into prison, for wasting his Masters goods; but
for not gaining with them. And those Reprobates at the last day, shall be bid
depart into everlasting fire; not for wronging or robbing of any, but for not
giving, for not comforting Christ's poor Members, Mat. 25. So that my case was
most desperate. For though, with that Pharisee, Luke 18.11. I was apt to thank
God, and brag; that I was just, and paid every man his due: yet I never thought
of being holy, and of paying God his dues; as his due of believing, or
repenting, of new obedience, his due of praying, hearing, conferring,
meditating on his word and works, sanctifying his Sabbaths, and instructing my
Children and Servants; teaching them to fear the Lord. His due of Love, Fear,
Thankfulness, Zeal for his Glory, charity and mercy to Christ's poor Members,
and the like.

I should have served God in spirit, and according to Christ's Gospel: as all
that are wise hearted do live, and believe, and hear, and invocate, and hope,
and fear, and love, and worship God in such manner, as his word prescribes. I
should have been effectually called, and become a new Creature by regeneration;
being begotten and born anew, by the immortal seed of the Word. I should have
found an apparent change wrought in my judgment, affections, and actions, to
what they were formerly. The Old man should have changed with the New man,
worldly wisdom with Heavenly wisdom, carnal love for spiritual love, servile
fear for Christian and filial fear, idle thoughts for holy thoughts, vain words
for holy and wholesome words, fleshly works for works of righteousness: even
hating what I formerly loved, and loving what I formerly hated.

But alas! I have heard the Gospel day after day, and year after year: which is
the strong arm of the Lord, and the mighty power of God to salvation; That is
quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two edged-sword; and yet stood it
out and resisted, Instead of submitting to Christ's call; even refusing the free
offer of grace and salvation. I have heard the word faithfully and powerfully
preached, for forty years: yet remained in my natural condition unregenerate:
without which new birth, there is no being saved, as our Savior affirms, Ioh.
3.5. I had not trodden one step in the way to conversion: for the first part of
conversion, is to love them that love God, 1 John 3.10, 11, 14. I should daily
have grown in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
but I was so far from growing man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12 14. I was all for
observing the second Table, without respect to the first: or all for outward
conformity, not at all for spiritual and inward holiness of the heart.

Sect. XXXI.
Either what I did was not morally good for the matter, or not well done for
the manner; nor to any right ends: as out of duty and thankfulness to God, and
my Redeemer; and out of love to my fellow members. Without which the most
glorious performances, and rarest virtues, are but shining sins, or beautiful
abominations. Gods Glory was not my principal end, nor to be saved my greatest
care.

I was a good, civil, moral, honest hypocrite, or Infidel: but none of these
graces, grew in the Garden of my heart. I did not shine out as a light, by a
holy conversation to glorify God, and win others. Now only to refrain evil,
except a man hates it also, and does the contrary good; is to be evil still:
because honesty without piety, is but a body without a soul.

All my Religion was either superstition, or formality, or hypocrisy. I had a
form of godliness, but denied the power thereof: I often drew near unto God
with my mouth, and honored him with my lips: but my heart was far from him,
Isa. 29.13. Mark. 7.2. to 14. Matthew. 15.7. to 10. All which considered, viz.
the means which God had afforded me, and the little use I had made thereof,
left me in a far worse condition, than the very heathen, that never heard of
Christ. So that it was Gods unspeakable mercy, that I am not at this present
frying in Hell flames, never to be freed.

God has sent unto us all his Servants the Prophets, rising up early, and they
have been instant in Preaching the Gospel, both in season, and out of season:
but my carnal heart has ever been flint unto God, wax to Satan: you shall dye,
if you continue in the practice of sin, I heard: but you shall not dye, as
says the Devil, I believed.

Sect. XXXII.
Besides all this, suppose I had none of these to answer for; neither sins of
Commission, nor sins of Omission: yet Original sin were enough to damn me, no
need of any more; and yet my actual transgressions have been such, and so many,
and my ingratitude therein so great; that it might have sunk me down with
shame, and left me hopeless of ever obtaining pardon for them. As see but some
small part of my monstrous, and devilish ingratitude to so good a God, so
loving and merciful a Savior and Redeemer; that has done, and suffered so
much for me, even more than can either be expressed or conceived, by any heart
were it as deep as the Sea!

Touching what God and Christ has done for me, in the first place he gave me
my self, and all the creatures to serve for my use; yea he created me after his
own Image, in righteousness, and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the
truth, with a power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed, and
happy condition. But this was nothing in comparison; for when I was in a sad
condition, when I had forfeited all this and my self; (...) become his enemy,
mortally hating him, and to my utmost fighting against him, and taking part
with his only enemies sin and Satan; not having the least thought or desire of
reconcilement, but a perverse and obstinate will, to resist all means tending
thereunto: he did redeem me, not only without asking, but even against my will;
so making of me his cursed enemy, a Servant, of a Servant a Son, of a Son an
Heir, and Coheir with Christ, Gal. 4.7. But how have I requited this so great,
so superlative a mercy? All my recompense of Gods love unto me, has been to do
that which he hates, and to hate those whom he loves.

Christ the fountain of all good is my Lord, by a manifold right, and I his
servant by all manner of obligations. First, He is my Lord by the right of
Creation, as being his workmanship made by him. Secondly, By the right of
Redemption, being his purchase bought by him. Thirdly, Of preservation, being
kept, upheld, and maintained by him. Fourthly, His by Vocation, even of his
family; having admitted me a member of his visible Church. Fifthly, His also
(had it not been my own fault) by sanctication, whereby to possess me. Lastly,
He would have me of his Court by glorification, that he might crown me; so that
I was every way his. God had raised me from a beggar to a great estate: but how
did I requite him? I would not if possible, suffer a godly and conscientious
Minister to be chosen, or to abide where I had to do; but to bring in one that
would flatter sin, and flout holiness; discourage the godly, and encourage the
wicked, I used both my own, and all my friends utmost ability. Much more might
be mentioned, but I fear to be tedious.

Now argue with all the world, and they will conclude, that there is no vice
like ingratitude. But I have been more ungrateful to God, than can be expressed
by the best Orator alive. It was horrible ingratitude in the Jews to scourge
and crucify Christ, who did them good every way; for he healed their diseases,
fed their bodies, enlightened their minds, of God became man, and lived
miserably amongst them many years, that he might save their souls: but they
fell short of my ingratitude to God, in that most of them were not in the least
convinced, that he was the Messiah sent from God, and promised from the
beginning. But I have not only denied this Lord that bought me, but I hated
him; yea, most spitefully and maliciously sought on Satan's, and sins side
against him; and persecuted his children, and the truth with all my might: and
all this against knowledge, and conscience, after some measure of illumination,
which cannot be affirmed of the Jews. Yet miserable wretch that I was, if I
could have given him my body and soul, they should have been saved by it, but
he were never the better for them.

Sect. XXXIII.
Lastly, To tell you that which is more strange! Notwithstanding all this that
has been mentioned, and much more: Yet I thought my self a good Christian
forsooth; yea, with that young man in the Gospel, I thought I had kept all the
Commandments. Nor was I a whit troubled for sin, either original, or actual:
but my conscience was at quiet, and I was at peace, neither (...) my self with
that Pharisee. Luke 18.9, to 15. and say, I was not like other men: not once
doubting of my salvation. I ever refused to do what my Maker commanded, and yet
confidently hoped to escape what he threatened. Nor did I doubt of having Christ
my Redeemer and Advocate in the next life, when I had been a bitter enemy to
him and his members in this life. Here was blindness with a witness; as it is
not to be believed how blind and blockish men are, that have only the flesh for
their guide; especially if they have hardened their hearts, and seared their
consciences with a customary sinning. As I could give you for instance, a large
catalogue of rare examples, how sin has besotted men: and what stark fools
carnal men are in spirital things; be they never so wise for mundane knowledge.
But least it should be taken for a digression or excursion, you shall have a
list of them by themselves, the which I will add as an Appendix to this
Discourse, or Dialogue. In the mean time I have given you a brief of my
manifold provocations, and great ingratitude to my Maker and Redeemer (for
otherwise I might be endless in the prosecution thereof.) It remains that I
should in like manner lay open my original defilement; which is the fountain
whence all the former (whether sins of commission, or sins of omission) do
flow. But touching it be pleased to peruse that small Tract, entitled, A short
and sure way to Grace and Salvation: Or, Three Fundamental Principles of
Christian Religion, by R. Y. from page 4. to page 10.

Sect. XXXIV.
Loose Libertine. If this has been your case, no wonder it has startled you;
for to deal plainly with you, as you have done with me; what I have heard from
you, makes me also tremble. For is such honest moral men, that live so
unreprovably, as you had done, go not to heaven; what will become of me? that
have been openly profane, and notoriously wicked all my time? Yea, it
contented me not to do wickedly my self, and so damn my own soul: but I have
been the occasion of drawing hundreds to Hell with me, by seducing some, and
giving ill example to others, (the infection of sin, being much worse than the
act.) As how many have I drawn to be Drunkards, and swearers, and whoremongers,
and profane persons? insomuch, that the blood of so many souls as I have drawn
away, will be required at my hands. Yea, my life has been so debauched and
licentious, that I have brought a scandal upon the Gospel, and made it odious
to the very Turks and Infidels, Romans 2.24.

Convert. Alas! what I did that was morally good, or what evil I refrained,
was more for self ends, or more for fear of men's Laws, than for love of Christ's
Gospel. True, I went under the notion of an honest man, and a good Christian: I
was baptized into the faith, and made a member of Christ's vivisible Church: but
I was so far from endeavoring to perform, what I then promised, that in effect
I even renounced both Christ, and my Baptism, in persecuting him, and all that
sincerely professed his Name; thinking I did God good service therein, Ioh.
16.2. Gal. 1.13, 14. Phil. 3.6. Nor was it for want of ignorance, that you
thought so of me: for by nature (be we never so mild and gentle) we are all
the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. and children of the Devil, Ioh. 8.44. Yea,
the very best moral man is but a tame Devil, as Athanasius well notes. But it
is a true proverb, the blind eat many a fly; and all colors are alike to him
that is in the dark.

Loose Libertine. So much the worse is my condition: for my conscience tells
me, there is not a word you have spoken of your self, but I can justly apply
the same unto my own soul, and a great deal more. For whereas you have been a
moral honest man; so that none except your self, could tax you for breaking
either Gods Law, or man's: I have been so wicked and profane, that I could most
presumptuosly, and of set purpose, take a pride in my wickedness, commit it
with greediness, speak for it, defend it, joy in it, boast of it, tempt and
enforce to it; yea, mock them that disliked it. As if I would send challenges
into Heaven, and make love to destruction; and yet did applaud my self, and
prefer my own condition before other men's: saying, I was no dissembler; yea, I
hated the hypocrisy of Professors: I do not justify my self, and despise
others, like the Puritanes: I am not factious, schismatical, singular,
censorious, etc. I am not rebellious, nor contentious like the Brownists, and
Anabaptists. I am a good fellow, and love an honest man with my heart, etc. and
as touching a good conscience, I was never troubled in mind, as many scrupulous
fools are. I have a good heart, and mean as well as the precisest. But now I
see the Devil and my own deceitful heart deluded me so, that my whole life
hitherto, has been but a dream, and that like a blind man, I was running
headlong to Hell, when yet I thought my self in the way to Heaven. Just as if a
beggar should dream, that he were a King, or a^ if a traitor should dream of
his being crowned, when indeed he was to be beheaded; the case of Laodicea,
Rev. 3.17. the young man in the Gospel, Luke 18.20, 21. and that Pharisee,
spoken of Luke 18.11, 12.

Sect. XXXV.
Convert. It was not your case alone, but so it fares with the worst of
sinners: Only it much rejoices me, that it has pleased God to open your eyes,
to see all this in your self. For flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
you. Yea we are naturally so blind, and deaf, and dead in sin and in soul: that
we can no more discern our spiritual filthiness, nor feel sin to be a burden,
than a blind Ethiopian can see his own blackness, or than a deadman can feel
the weight of a burden, when it is laid upon him, Act. 28.27. Isa. 6.9, 10,

And this common experience shows; for if you observe it, who more jocond,
confident and secure, than the worst of sinners; they can strut it under an
unsupportable Mass of oaths, blasphemies, thefts, murders, adulteries,
drunkenness and other the like sins; yea can easily swallow these spiders with
Mithridates, and digest them too: when one that is regenerate, shrinkes under
the burden of wandering thoughts, and want of proficiency. But why is it? they
are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. Revel. 3.1. Now lay a mountain upon a dead-man, he
feels not once the weight.

To a Christian that has the life of grace, the least sin lies heavy upon the
conscience: but to him that is dead, let his sins be as heavy as a mountain of
lead; he feels in them no weight at all.

Again* They are (...) for what the eye sees not, the heart rueth not.
Security makes worldlings merry, and therefore are they secure, because they
are ignorant. A dunce we know, seldom makes doubts: yea a fool, says Solomon,
boasts and is confident, Prove. 14.16. neither do blind men ever blush. And
the truth is, were it not for pride and ignorance, a world of men would be
ashamed to have their faces seen abroad. For take away from men's minds vain
opinions, flattering hopes, false valuations, imaginations, and the like; you
will leave the minds of most men and women, but poor shrunken things; full of
melancholy, indisposition, and unpleasing to themselves. Ignorance is a veil or
curtain to hide away their sins: whereupon they are never troubled in
conscience, nor macerated with cares about eternity; but think that all will be
well.

The Devil and the flesh, prophecy prosperity to sin, yea life and salvation,
as the Pope promised the powder-traitors: but death and damnation (which Gods
Spirit threatens) will prove the crop they will reap. For God is true, the
Devil and all flesh are liars.

When we become regenerate, and forsake sin, then the Devil strongly and
strangely assaults us: as he did Christ, when he was newly baptized; and
Pharaoh the children of Israel, when they would forsake Egypt; and Herod the
children, when Christ was come to deliver his people. Whence, commonly it comes
to pass, that those think best of themselves, that ave least cause; yea the
true Christian, is as fearful to entertain a good opinion of himself, as the
false is unwilling, to be driven from it. They that have store of grace, mourn
for the want of it: and they that indeed want it, chant their abundance. None
so apt to doubt their adoption, as they that may be assured of it: nor none
more usually fear, then they that have the greatest cause to hope. We feel
corruption not by corruption, but by grace: and therefore the more we feel our
inward corruptions; the more grace we have.

Contraries, the nearer they are to one another, the sharper is the conflict
betwixt them: now of all enemies, the spirit and the flesh are nearest one to
another, being both in the soul of a regenerate man; and in all faculties of
the soul, and in every action that springs from those faculties. The more
grace, the more spiritual life; and the more spiritual life, the more antipathy
to the contrary: whence none are so sensible of corruption, as those that have
the most living souls.

Sect. XXXVI.
Now for remedy of the contrary, there cannot be a better lesson for carnal men
to learn than this. All the Promises of God are conditional, to take place if
we repent: as all the threatenings of God are conditional, to take place if we
repent not. But wicked men, as they believe without repenting; their faith
being mere presumption: so they repent without believing, their repentance
being indeed desperation: and this observe, we are cast down in the
disappointing of our hopes; in the same measure, as we were too much lifted up,
in expectation of good from them. Whence these perremptory presumers if ever
they repent, it is commonly as Francis Spira, (...)

One star is much bigger than the Earth; yet seems many degrees less. It is
the nature of fear, to make dangers greater, helps less then they are. Christ
has promised peace and rest unto their souls that labor, and are heavy laden;
and to those that walk according to rule, Matthew. 11.29. Gal. 6.16. even peace
celestial in the state of grace, and peace eternal in the state of glory. Such
therefore as never were distressed in conscience, or live loosly; never had
true peace. Peace is the Daughter of Righteousness. Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God. But he who makes a bridge of his own shadow,
will be sure to fall into the water.

Those Blocks, that never in their life were moved with Gods threatenings, never
in any straight of conscience, never groaned under the burden of Gods anger:
they have not so much as entered into the porch of this house, or lift a foot
over the threshold, of this School of repentance. Oh! that we could but so much
fear the eternal pains, as we do the temporary; and be but so careful to save
our souls from torment, as our bodies. In the mean time, the case of these men
is so much the worse; by how much there fear is the less. It faring with the
soul, as with the body. Those diseases, which do take away all sense of pain;
are of all others most desperate. As the dead Palsy, the falling sickness,
the sleepy lethargy, etc. And the Patient is most dangerously sick, when he
has no feeling thereof. In like manner, whilst they suppose themselves to be
free from judgment; they are already smitten with the heaviest of Gods
judgments; a heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.5.

In a lethargy, it is needful the Patient should be cast into a burning Fever;
because the senses are benammed, and this will waken them, and dry up the
besotting humors. So in our dead security, before our conversion; God is fain
to let the Law, Sin, Conscience and Satan loose upon us; and to kindle the very
fire of Hell in our souls: that so we might be roused out of our security: but
thousands of these blocks, both live and depart with as great hopes, as men go
to a lottery: even dreaming of Heaven, until they awake in Hell. For they too
often die, without any remorse of conscience like blocks; or as an Ox dies in a
ditch. Yea thousands that live like Laban, dye like Nabal, (which is but the
same word inverted,) whilst others the dear Children of God, dye in distress
of conscience. For it is not every good man's hap, to dye like Antoninus Pius;
whose death was after the fashion, and semblance of a kindly and pleasant
sleep. However Saint Austin's rule, will be sure to hold; He cannot dye ill,
that has lived well: and for the most part, He that lives conscionably, dies
comfortably, and departs rich. And so you see, how it fares with the
wickedest and worst of men. Wherefore if you are truly sensible of your
wretchedness, it is a good sign, that you are in some forwardness to be
recovered; and really to become so good, as formerly you but dreamed, or
imagined your self to be. And indeed the very first step to grace, is to feel
the want of grace; and the next way to receive mercy, is to see your self
miserable. Therefore our (...), and most diligent search should be, (...)

Sect. XXXVII.
Loose Libertine. But is there any hope for one so wicked as I? who have turned
the grace of God into wantonness; applying Christ's passion as a warrant for my
licenciousnesse, not as a remedy; and taking his death as a license to sin, his
cross as a Letters pattent to do mischief. As if a man should head his drum of
rebellion, with his pardon. For I have most spitefully, and maliciously, taken
up arms against my Maker, and fought against my Redeemer all my days.

Convert. Do but unfeignedly repent you of your sins, and forsake your former
evil ways, and lay hold upon Christ by a true, and lively faith: my soul for
yours, God is very ready to forgive them, be they never so many, and
innumerable for multitude; never so heinous, for quality and magnitude. Yea, I
can show you your pardon from the great King of Heaven for all that is past:
the which you may read at large Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.21. to 29. and 33.11. Joel
2.12, 13, 14. Yea read 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. together with the story of Manasses,
Mary Magdelen, the Thief, and the Prodigal Son: and you shall see presidents
thereof. Yea the very murderers of the Son of God, upon their serious and
unfeigned repentance, and steadfast believing in him; received pardon and
salvation. And indeed despair, is a sin which never knew Jesus. True, every sin
deserves damnation: but no sin shall condemn, but the lying and continuing in
it. True Repentance, is ever blessed with forgiveness. And know this, that Gods
mercy is greater than thy sin, whatever it be: you cannot be so infinite in
sinning, as he is infinite in pardoning, if you repent: yea sins upon
repentance are so remitted; as if they had never been committed. I will put
away thy transgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, Isa. 44.22. And
what by corruption has been done, by repentance is undone. As the former
examples witness. Come and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, Isa. 1.18. Yea whiter than
snow. For the Prophet David laying open his blood-gui^^inesse, and his original
impurity, uses these words: Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean; wash
me, and I shall be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51.7. And in reason, did Christ come
to call sinners to repentance? and shall be not show mercy to the penitent? Or
who would not cast his burden upon him, that desires to give ease? As I live
says the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.

Only, apply not this salve before the ulcer be searched to the bottom: Lay not
hold upon mercy, until you be thoroughly humbled. The only way to become good;
is first to believe that you are evil: and by accusing our selves, we prevent
Satan: By judging our selves, we prevent God.

Are we as sick of sorrow, as we are of sin; then may we hopefully go to the
Physician of our souls, who came into the world only to cure the sick, and to
give light to them only, who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. God
does not pour the oil of grace, but into a broken, and contrite heart.

Would thou get out of the miserab^^ (...) of nature, into the blessed estate
of grace? and of Satan's bondsla(...) me the child of God, and a very sensible
how evil and wicked it is? that so thou may have a more humble conceit of thy
self? lay to heart these three particulars: 1 The corruption of our nature, by
reason of Original Sin. 2. Our manifold breach of Gods righteous Law, by actual
sin. 3. The guilt and punishment due to us for them both. This being done, thou will see and find, thy necessity of a Redeemer. And it is thirst only that
makes us relish our drink; hunger our meat. The full stomach of a Pharisee,
surcharged with the superfluities of his own merits, will loath the honeycomb
of Christ's righteousness. This was it, which made the young Prodigal, to
relish even servants fare; though before wanton, when full fed at home. No more
relish feels the Pharisaical heart, in Christ's blood, than in a chip, But O how
acceptable, is the fountain of living waters, to the chased heart panting and
braying. The blood of Christ, to the weary and tired soul; to the thirsty
conscience scorched with the sense of Gods wrath: he that presents him with it,
how welcome is he? even as a special choice man, one of a thousand. And the
deeper the sense of misery is, the sweeter the sense of mercy is.

Sect. XXXVIII.
Then if you would be satisfied for time to come, whether your Repentance, and
conversion be true and sound; these particulars will infallibly inform you. If
you shall persevere, (when this trouble for sin is over) in doing that which
now you purpose, it is an infallible sign, your repentance is sound, otherwise
not. If thou do call to mind, the Vow which thou madst in Baptism, and do
thy endeavor to perform that, which then thou did promise: If thou do
square thy life, according to the rule of Gods Word; and not after the
rudiments of the world: If thou art willing to forsake all sin, without
reserving one: (for otherwise that one sin may prove the bane of all thy
graces: even as Gideon had seventy Sons, and but one Bastard: and yet that
Bastard, destroyed all the rest that were Legitimate, Judge 9.5.) Sin is like
the Ivy in the wall, cut off bough, branch, body, stump, yet some strings or
other will sprout out again: Till the root be plucked up, or the wall be pulled
down and ruined, it will never utterly die.

Regeneration, or new birth, is a creation of new qualities in the soul, as
being by nature only evil disposed. Gods children are known by this mark, they
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. If Christ have called
you to his service, your life will appear more spiritual, and excellent than
others.

As for your fails, it is a sign that sin has not gained your consent, but
committed a rape upon your soul; when you cry out to God. If the ravished
Virgin under the Law cried out she was pronounced guiltless. A sheep may fall
into the mire, but a swine delights to wallow in the mire. Great difference
between a woman that is forced, though she cries out and strives, and an
alluring Adulteress.

Again, The thoughts of the godly are godly, of the wicked, worldly; and by
these, good and evil men are best and truliest differenced one from another.
Would we know our own hearts, and whether they be changed by a new birth?
Examine we our thoughts, words, actions, passions; especially, our thoughts
will inform us; for these cannot be subject to hypo^^risie, as words and deeds
are.

Sect. XXXIX.
Then by way of caution know; that a child may as soon create it self, a man in
the state of Nature regenerate himself. We cannot act in the leas^ unless God
bestows upon us daily privative grace, to defend us from evil and daily
positive grace, inabling us to do good. And those that are of Christ teaching,
know both from the word, and by experience, that of themselve they are not only
weak, but even dead to what is good; moving no more than they are moved: that
their best works are faulty, all their sins dead^ly, all their natures
corrupted originally. You has he quickened, that were dead in trespasses and
sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Yea, we are altogether so dead in sin^ that we cannot stir
the least joint, no not so much as feel our own deadness nor desire life,
except God be pleased to raise and restore our souls from the death of sin, and
grave of long custom, to the life of grace. Apt we ar^ to all evil, but
reprobate and indisposed to all grace and goodness; yea^ to all the means
thereof. My powers are all corrupt, corrupt my will:
Marble to good, but wax to what is ill.
Insomuch, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think, much less (...)
speak, least of all to do that which is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. Joh. 15.4, 5. I we
have power to choose or refuse the object; to do these well we have no power.
We have ability, we have will enough to undo our selves, scop^ enough
hell-ward; but neither motion, nor will to do good: that must b^ put into us by
him that gives both power and will, and power to will.

Finally, Each sanctified heart feels this, but no words are able sufficiently
to express, what impotent wretches we are, when we are not sustain^ed. So that
we have no merit, but the mercy of God to save us: nothin^ but the blood of
Christ, and his mediation to cleanse and redeem us: nothin^ but his obedience
to enrich us. As for our good works, we are altogether be^ holding to God for
them, not God to us; nor we to our selves: because they are only his works in
us.

Whatsoever thou art, thou owe to him that made thee: whatever tho^ have,
thou owe to him that Redeemed thee. Therefore if we do any thin^ amiss, let
us accuse our selves: if any thing well, let us give all the praise (...) God.
And indeed this is the test of a true or false Religion: that which teaches us
to exalt God most, and most to depresse our selves is the true that which does
most prank up our selves, and detract from God, is the false. As Bonaventure
well notes.

Sect. XL.
Now to wind up with a word of exhortation; if thou be convinced are
resolvest upon a new course; let thy resolution be peremptory, an^ constant:
and take heed, you harden not again; as Pharaoh, the Philistin^ the young man
in the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did: resemble not the iro^ which is no longer
soft, than it is in the fire; for that good (says Greg^^ry) will do us no
good, which is not made good by perseverance. If wi^^ these premonitions, the
Spirit has vouchsafed to stir up in thine heart an^ good motions, and holy
purposes to obey God, in letting thy sins go* quench not, grieve not the
Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. Return not with the Dog to thy vomit; lest thy latter end
prove sevenfold worse than thy beginning, Matthew. 12.43, 45. O it is a fearful
thing to receive the grace of God in vain! and a desperate thing, being warned
of a rock, wilfully to cast our selves upon it. Neither let Satan persuade you
to defer your repentance; no, not an hour; lest your resolution proves as a
false conception, which never comes to bearing. Besides, death may be sudden:
even the least of a thousand things can kill you, and give you no leisure to be
sick.

Thirdly, If thou will be safe from evil works, avoid the occasions; have no
fellowship with the workers of iniquity: neither fear their scoffs; for this be
sure of, if your person and ways please God, the world will be displeased with
both: If God be your friend, men will be your enemies: if they exercise their
malice, it is where he shows mercy. But take heed of losing Gods favor to keep
theirs.

Beda tells of a great man, that was admonished by his friends in his sickness
to repent: who answered, He would not yet; for that if he should recover, his
friends and companions would laugh at him: but growing sicker and sicker, they
again pressed him: but then his answer was, that it was now too late; for I am
judged and condemned already.

A man cannot be a Nathaniel, in whose heart there is no guile; but the world
counts him a fool. But Christ says, Verily except ye be converted, and become
as little children; ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.3.

Again, Satan and your deceitful heart will suggest unto you, that a Religious
life, is a dumpish and melancholy life: but holy David will tell you, that
light is sown to the righteous, and joy to the upright, Psalm. 97.11. Isa.
65.14. And experience tells, that earthly and bodily joys are but the body, or
rather the dregs of that joy, which Gods people feel and are ravished with. As
O the calm, and quietness of a good conscience! the assurance of the pardon of
sin, and joy of the Holy Ghost, the honesty of a virtuous and holy life how
sweet they are. Yea even Plato an Heathen could say, That if wisdom and virtue
could but represent it self to the eyes, it would set the heart on fire with
the love of it. And the like of a sinners sadness, as hear what Seneca says;
if there were no God to punish him, no Devil to torment him, no Hell to burn
him, no man to see him: yet would he not sin, for the ugliness and filthiness
of sin, and the guil^ and sadness of his conscience. But experience is the
best informer: wherefore take the counsel of holy David, Psalm. 34.8. O taste
and see, that the Lord is good: blessed is the man, that trusts in him. To
which accords that of holy Bernard, Good art thou, O Lord, to the soul that
seeks thee; what art thou then to the soul that finds thee? As I may appeal to
any man's conscience, that has been softened with the unction of grace; and
truly tasted of the powers of the world to come; to him that has the love of
God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost: whether his whole life be not a
perpetual halellujah, in comparison of his natural condition. Whence they are
able to slight all such objections, as he did: you tell me that scrupling of
small matters, is but stumbling at straws; that they be but trifles: When I
know your tongue can tell nothing but truth, I will believe you.

Fifthly, Beg of God that he will give you a new heart, and when the heart is
changed, all the members will follow after it, as the rest of the creatures
after the Sun, when it arises. But without a work upon the heart, wrought by
the Spirit of God; it will follow its own inclination to that which it
affects; whatsoever the judgment shall say to the contrary: That must be
first reformed, which was first deformed. It is idle, and to no purpose to
purge the channel, when the fountain is corrupt. Whence the Apostle orderly
bids us, first be renewed in the spirit of our minds; and then let him that
stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Yea it is Gods own counsel, to the men of
Jerusalem, Jer. 4. Wash thine heart from wickedness: that thou may be saved,
ver. 14. It is most ridiculous to apply remedies to the outward parts, when the
distemper lies in the stomach. To what purpose is it to crop off the top of
weeds, or lop off the boughs of the tree, when the root and stalk remain in the
earth: as cut off the sprig of a tree, it grows still; a bough, an arm, still
it grows, lop of the top, yea saw it in the midst, yet it will grow again;
stock it up by the roots, then (and not till then) it will grow no more. Whence
it is that God says, Give me thine heart, Prove. 23.26. Great Cities once
expunged, the dorpes and Villages will soon come in of themselves: the heart is
the treasury and storehouse of wickedness, Mat. 12.34. such as the heart is,
such are the actions of the body which proceed from it, Mat. 12.35. Therefore
as Christ says, Make clean within, and all will be clean, otherwise not, Mat.
23.26. Therefore David's prayer is, Create in me a new heart O Lord, and renew a
right Spirit within me, Psalm. 51.10. do thou the like, importune him for grace;
that you may firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere, in
doing and suffering his holy will: desire him to inform and reform you so, that
you may neither misbelieve nor mislive; to change and purify your naure,
subdue your reason, rectify your judgment, reform and strengthen your will,
renew your affections, and beat down in you, whatsoever stands in opposition to
the Scepter of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly and lastly; If you receive any power against you former corruptions,
forget not to be thankful, yea study all possible thankfulness. For that you
and I are not at this present frying in Hell flames, never to be freed; that we
have the offer of grace here, and glory hereafter, it is his unspeakable
goodness. And there is nothing more pleasing to God, nor profitable to us; both
for the procuring of the good we want, or continuing the good we have; than
thankfulness. He will sow there, and there only plenty of his blessings; where
he is sure to reap plenty of thanks and service: but who will sow those barren
sands, where they are sure not only to be without all hope of a good harvest,
but are sure to loose, both their seed and labor. Consider what has been
said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. And so much for the
Second Part. An Appendix follows: wherein you have instances of all sorts: how
sin besots men.

THE TRIAL OF TRUE WISDOM; WITH How to become Wise indeed.
OR, A Choice and Cheap Gift for a Friend; both to please and pleasure him: Be
he inferior or superior, sinful or faithful, ignorant or intelligent.
By R. Young of Roxwel in Essex, Floreligus.
Add this as an Apendix, or Third Part, to The Hearts Index. And, A short and
sure way, to Grace and Salvation.

Section 41.
LUcian tells of an Egyptian King, who had Apes taught (when they were young)
to dance, and keep their postures with much art: these he would put into rich
Coats, and have them in some great presence to exercise their skill; which was
to the admiration of such as knew them not, what little sort of active, nimble
men the King had got: And such as knew them, thought it no less strange; that
they should be trained up to so man-like, and handsome a deportment. But a
subtle Fellow that was once admitted to see them, brought and threw amongst
them, a handful of Nuts: which they no sooner spied; but they presently left
off their dance, fell a scrambling, tore one another rich Coats; and to the
dirision of the beholders (who before admired them) they discovered themselves
to be mere Apes.

These ensuing Notions (which I have purposely taken, as a handful out of the
whole sack, to squander away amongst my acquaintance) are such Nuts, as will
discover not a few (who are men in appearance, and their own opinion) to be as
wise, and well affected as Aesops Cock; that preferred a barley Corn, before a
Pearl: or Plinies Moal, that would dig under ground with great dexterity: but
was blind, if brought into the Sun. Or Diaphontus, that refused his mothers
blessing, to hear a song: Or the Israelites, who preferred Garlic and Onions,
before Quails and manna.

Men no more differ from Beasts, Plants, Stones; in speech, reason, shape, than
some differ from others, in heart, in brain, in life. Whence the very heathen
Poets usually and most fitly compare some men to stones, for their hardness,
and insensibleness; others to plants, that only fill their veins; a third sort
to beasts, that please their senses too; a fourth to evil Angels, that only
sin, and cause others to sin; a fifth to good Angels, that are still in motion,
always serving God and doing good, yet ever rest.

Again, Experience teaches, that men's judgments and censures are as various,
as their pallats: For what one admires, another slights; as is evident by our
Saviors Auditors; of which some admired, others censured, a third sort wept, a
fourth scoft, a fifth trembled, a sixth blasphemed when they heard him. And how
should it be otherwise, when the greater part, are as deeply in love with vice
and error; as the rest are with virtue, and truth. When men's conditions, and
constitutions vary as much; as their faces. As the Holy Ghost intimates, in
comparing several men, to almost every several creature in the Universe. Nor is
the Epicure more like a swine, the Lustful person a Goat, the Fraudulent man a
Fox, the Backbiter a barking Dog, the Slanderer an Asp, the Oppressor a Wolf,
the Persecutor a Tiger, the Church-robber a wild Bore, the Seducer a Serpent,
yea a Devil, the Traitor a Viper, etc. 2 Timothy 4 17. Luke 13.32. Phil. 3.2. Psalm
22.12, 13, 16, 20, 21. and 74.13, 14, 19. and 80.13. Matthew. 23.33. Dan. 7.4, 5,
6, etc Zeph. 3.^, 4, etc. Cant. 2.15, 17, etc. then every of them is unlike
another.

Amidst such a world of variety, I have chosen to set forth, how one man
differs from, and excels another in brain, and to prove, that to be wise
indeed, is the portion but of a few, even amongst us. And this discovery alone
(as I deem) will be richly worth my pains, and each man's serious Observation.

Sect. 42.
NOw all sorts of men, may be comprised, under one of these three Heads: The
Sensual. The Rational. The Spiritual.


For if you observe it, some men like the Moon at Full, have all their light
toward earth, none toward Heaven: Others like the Moon at VVaine, or Change,
have all their light to Heaven wards, none to the earth: a third sort like to
the Moon in eclipse, as having no light in it self, neither toward earth, nor
toward Heaven.

Touching these three degrees of comparison, you shall find, that the one
exceeds the other (in wisdom) as the stars exceed one another in glory. Of
which particularly.

First, There is no less difference, between the Rational and sensual, the wise
and simple, the learned and unlearned, than there is between men and beasts; as
Menander speaks. Or between the living and the dead, as another has it. And
yet the Rational, do not so far excel the sensual, as the spiritual excel the
rational.

Sensual men are so be-nighted, and puzzled with blindness, that they know no
other way than the flesh leads them. It is the weight that sets all their
wheels a going; the horses that draw their chariot, the very life of their
corruption, the corruption of their life, without which they do nothing.

The minds of brutish men, that have been ill bred, are so drowned in sin, and
sensuallity; and their spirits so frozen, and pitifully benumed with
worldliness, and wicked customs, that they cannot judge aright, either of
spiritual matters, or rectified reason. Yea, in matters experimental, they are
of as deep a judgment as was Callico, who stuffed his pillow (a brass pot) with
straw, to make it soft. Or that Germain Clown, who under-took to be very ready
in the ten Commandments: but being demanded by the Minister which was the
first? made answer, Thou shall not eat. Or that simple Fellow, who thought
Pontius Pilate must needs be a Saint, because his name was put into the Creed.
They are like the Ostrich, Job ^9.17. whom God has deprived of wisdom, and to
whom he has given no part of understanding.

Which men also, are so far from receiving instruction, that they will scorn
and scoff at their admonisher. As they have no reason, so they will hear none.
Nor will they believe any thing, but what they see, or feell: and he that
learns of none but himself, has a fool to his teacher. Yea, such as refuse
admonition, are by wise Solomon branded, for the most incorigible Fools alive;
so that their knowledge is ignorance, their wisdom folly, their sight
blindness. They neither consider what reason speaks, or Religion commands;
but what the will and appetite affects. For will is the axeltree, lusts and
passions the wheels whereupon all their actions are carried and do run.
Appetite being their Lord, Reason their servant, and Religion their slave.
Whereas Religion should govern their judgment, judgment and reason their wills
and affections; as Adam should have done Eve. They that are after the flesh, do
mind the things of the flesh: The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.5. to 9. And
which leaves them without all hope of being wiser, they had rather keep
conscience blind, that it may slatter them, than inform it, that it may give a
just verdict against them, counting it less trouble, to believe a favorable
falsehood, than to examine whether it be true. So that it is impossible for
fleshly minded men, to believe what sots they are, touching the good of their
souls. Wherefore when we see the folly, and misery of those that serve sin and
Satan, and how peevishly averse they are to their own eternal salvation, let us
pity them, as being so much more worthy our commiseration, as they are more
incapable of their own misery. And so much of the First sort, namely,
Sensuallists.

Sect. 43.
SEcondly, There is another degree of Knowledge, that is accrued or obtained,
by education and learning, observation and experience, called natural or
speculative knowledge, or reason improved. For humane learning, is as oil to
the lamp of our reason, and makes it burn cleerer; but faith and illumination
of the spirit, more than doubles the sight of our minds; as a prospective glass
does the corporal sight, Matthew. 16.17. 1 Cor. 2.7. to 17. Joh. 12 46. For as
the soul is the lamp of the body, and reason of the soul, and religion of
reason, and faith of religion: so Christ is the light, and life of Faith, Joh.
1.9. and 8.12. Act. 26.18. Ephesians. 5.14. Christ is the sun of the soul; reason and
faith the two eyes: reason discerns natural objects, faith spiritual and
supernatural. We may see far with our bodily eye sense, farther with the minds
eye reason; but farther with the souls eye faith than with both. And the
Believer has the addition of Gods spirit, and faith above all other men. I am
the light of the world, says our Savior, he that ^olloweth me (meaning by a
lively faith) shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life,
Joh. 8.12. and more see two eyes than one: yea, the day with one eye, does far
more things descry, than night can do with more than Argos eyes. So that as
mere sense is incapable of the rules of reason; so reason is no less incapable,
of the things that are divine and supernatural, Jer. 10.14. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15,
16. Ephesians. 5.8. And as to speak is only proper to men: so to know the secrets of
the kingdom of heaven, is only propper to believers, Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.32.
Amos. 3.7.

Now of natural and speculative knowledge, the wicked have as large a share as
the godly: but of spiritual, experimental, and saving knowledge which is
supernatural, and descends from above, Jam. 3.17. and keeps a man from
every evil way, Prove. 2.12. the wicked have no part with the godly. Whence all
men in their natural condition are said to be blind and in darkness, Matthew.
4.16. and 15.14. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. and 5.8. Whereas believers, are called children
of light, and of the day, 1 These. 5.5. 1 Pet. 2.9.

Nor is this kind of knowledge, any way attainable, but by Grace from above. No
learning, experience, or pains in studdy and Books, will bring them to it,
Ephe. 1.17, 18. and 3.19. except they become new creatures, have hearts, eyes,
and ears sanctified from above; and that the holy Ghost becomes their teacher,
Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. Psalm. 111.10. Joh. ^^.15. Romans 8.14, 15.

Nor is it saving knowledge that they seek after: For though many of them, be
great seekers after knowledge, great pains-takers to become wise: yet it is not
divine and supernatural knowledge, that they labor for, or desire.

Indeed wisdom in the largest sense, has ever carried that show of excellency
with it, that not only the good have highly affected it, (as Moses who studied
for wisdom; and Solomon who prayed for wisdom; and the Queen of Sheba who
traveled for wisdom; and David who to get wisdom, made the word his
counselor, hated every false way, and was a man after Gods own heart) but the
very wicked have labored for it, who are ashamed of other virtues; as, O the
pleasure that rational men take in it! Prove. 2.3, 10, 11. and 10.14. Phil. 3.8.

Knowledge is so fair a virgin, that every clear eye is in love with her; it is
a pearl despised of none but swine, Prove. 2.3.10.11. (whereas brutish and
blockish men, as little regard it) they who care not for one dram of goodness,
would yet have a full scale of knowledge. Amongst all the trees of the garden,
none so pleases them as the tree of knowledge. And as wisdom is excellent
above all, so it is affected of all, as oil was both of the wise and foolish
virgins. It has been a mark that every man has shot at, ever since Eve sought
to be as wise as her Maker: but as a hundredth shoot, for one that hitts the
white: so an hundred aim at wisdom, for one that lights upon it, Eccles. 7.28.
because they are mistaken in the thing. For as Jacob in the dark mistook Leah
for Rachael, so many a blind soul, takes that to be wisdom, which is not like
Eve, who thought it wisdom to eat the forbidden fruit, and Absalom, who
thought it wisdom to lie with his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all the
people; and the false Steward, who thought it wisdom to deceive his Master. And
so of Joseph's brethren, of Pharaoh and his deep counselors, of Achitophel, of
Herod, of the Pharisees in their project to destroy Jesus; and many the like.
All these thought they did wisely, but they were mistaken, and their projects
proved foolish, and turned to their own ruin.

Sect. 44.
BUt take some Instances, to prove that all sorts of Naturians are Fools, in
comparrison of the Godly. I Will begin with those that repu^e themselves, and are
reputed by others, the wisest amongst men: And they are your profound
Humanists, and cunning Politicians, wherein you shall see, whether the most and
greatest number are not grossly mistaken, in their opinions and verdicts
touching Wisdom.

First for profound Humanists, a man would think that they were incomparably
wise; for none so thirst after knowledge and wisdom as they; and to get it they
are no niggards of their labor: nor do they leave any thing unstudied but
themselves. They know all parts and places of the created world, can discourse
of every thing visible and invisible, divine, humane and mundane; whether it be
meant of substances or accidents, are ignorant of nothing but the way to
heaven, are acquainted with all Laws and customs, save the Law of God, and
customs of Christianity; they are strangers no where but in the court of their
own consciences: Yea, they build as hard, and erect as high as did the
Babel-builders; but all to no purpose: they never come to the roof, and when
they die they are undone. They spend all their time in seeking after wisdom; as
Alchimists spend all their estates, to find out the Philosophers stone; but
never find it; they never attain to that, which is true wisdom indeed. For as
the ragged Poet told Petronius, that Poetry was a kind of learning, that never
made any man rich: so humane learning of it self, never made a wise man.

As thus (if I may be so bold) what is it, or what does it profit a man, to
have the etymology, and derivation of wisdom and knowledge, without being
affected with that, which is true wisdom indeed to be able to decline virtue,
yet not love it? to have the theory, and be able to prattle of wisdom by rote;
yet not know what it is by effect and experience? To have as expert a tongue,
and as quick a memory as Portius; a perfect understanding, great science,
profound eloquence, a sweet style? To have the force of Demosthenes, the depth
of Thesius, the persuasive art of Tully, etc. if withal he wants Grace, and
lives remissely? With the Astronomer, to observe the motions of the heavens;
while his heart is buried in the earth? to search out the cause ^f many
effects, and let pass the consideration of the principal, and most necessary?
With the Historian, to know what others have done, and how they have sped;
while he neglects the imitation of such, as are gone the right way? With the
Lawmakers, to set down many Laws in particular, and not to remember the common
Law of nature, or Law general that all must die? Or lastly, with Adam to know
the Nature of all the Creatures: and with Solomon to be able to dispute of
every thing, even from the Cedar to the Hyssop or Pellitory; when in the mean
time he lives like Dives, dies like Nabal, and after all goes to his own place
with Judas? Alas! many a Fool goes to hell with less cost, less pains, and far
more quiet: that is but raw knowledge, which is not digested into practice: It
is not worth the name of knowledge, that may be heard only and not seen, Ioh.
13.17. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Good discourse is but the froth of wisdom: the sweet and
solid fruit of it, is in well framed actions: that is true knowledge, that
makes the knower blessed. We only praise that Mariner, that brings the ship
safe to the haven.

What says Aristotle? to be wise and happy are terms reciprocal. And Socrates,
that learning, says he, pleases me but a little, which nothing profits the
owner of it, either to virtue, or happiness: And being demanded, Who was the
wisest and happiest man? He Answered, He that offends least. He is the best
scholar, that learns of Christ obedience, humility, etc. He is the best
Arithmetitian, that can add grace to grace; he is the best learned, that knows
how to be saved. Yea, all the Arts in the world, are artless Arts to this.

Sect. 45.
THe best knowledge is about the best things; and the perfection of all
knowledge, to know God, and our selves: Knowledge and learning, says
Aristotle, consists not so much in the quantity, as in the quality; not in
the greatness, but in the goodness of it. A little gold (we know) is more worth
than much dross: a little diamond, than a rocky mountain. So one drop of
wisdom, guided by the fear of God; one spark of spiritual, experimental, and
saving knowledge, is more worth than all humane wisdom and learning: yea, one
scruple of holiness, one dram of faith, one grain of grace, is more worth than
many pounds, of natural parts. And indeed Faith, and Holiness, are the nerves,
and sinews; yea, the soul of saving knowledge.

What says Aristotle? No more than the knowledge of goodness, makes one to be
named a good man; no more does the knowledge of wisdom alone, cause any person
properly to be called a wise man. Saving knowledge of the truth, works a love
of the truth known: yea it is a uniform consent, of knowledge and action. He
only is wise, that is wise for his own soul: he whose conscience pulls all he
hears, and reads to his heart, and his heart to God: who turns his knowledge
to faith, his faith to feeling, and all to walk worthy of his Redeemer. He that
subdues his sensual desires and appetite, to the more noble faculties of
reason, and understanding; and makes that understanding of his to serve him, by
whom it is, and does understand. He that subdues his lusts to his will, submits
his will to reason; his reason to faith; his faith, his reason, his will,
himself to the will of God: this is practical, experimental, and saving
knowledge; to which the other is but a bare name, or title. A competnet estate
(we know) well husbanded, is better than a vast patrimony neglected. Never any
mere man (since the first) knew so much as Solomon: many that have known less,
have had more command of themselves.

Alas! they are not always the wisest, that know most: For none more wise and
learned in the worlds account, than the Scribes and Pharisees: yet Christ calls
them four times blind, and twice fools in one chapter, Matthew. 23. And the like
of Balaam, 2 Pet. 2.16. who had such a prophetical knowledge, that scarce any
of the Prophets, had a cleerer revelation of the Messiah to come. And the same
may be affirmed of Judas, and Athitophel; for many that know a great deal less,
are ^ar wiser. Yea, one poor crucified thief, being converted, in an hours
time, had more true wisdom and knowledge infused into him, than had all the
Rulers, Scribes, and Pharisees.

It is very observable, what the High Priest told the Council, as they were set
to condemn Christ; Ye know nothing at all: he spoke truer than he meant it;
for if we know not the Lord Jesus, our knowledge is either nothing* or nothing
worth. Rightly a man knows no more than he practices. It is said of Christ, 2
Cor. 5.21. that he knew no sin; because he did no sin: in which sense, he knows
no good, that does no good. These things if ye know (says our Savior) happy
are ye, if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. And in Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep the commandments of
God, and do them: for this is your wisdom, and understanding before God, and
man.

What is the national sweetness of Honey, to the experimental taste of it? It
is one thing to know what riches are, and another thing to be Master of them:
It is not the knowing, but the possessing of them that makes rich. Many have a
depth of knowledge, and yet are not soul-wise; have a liberary of divinity in
their heads, not so much as the least Catechism in their consciences; full
brains, empty hearts. Yea, you shall hear a flood in the tongue, when you
cannot see one drop in the life. Insomuch, that in the midst of our so much
light, and means of Grace, there be few I fear, that have the sound, and saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him crucified, which was the only care, and
study of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2.

Sect. 46.
ANd that I am not mistaken, the effect shows: For if men knew either God, or
Christ, they could not but love him; and loveing him, they would keep his
commandments, Ioh. 14.15. For hereby (says St. John) It is manifest that we
know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 John 2.3. But he that says, I know
him, and yet keeps not his commandments is a liar, and there is no truth in
him ver. 4. What says our Savior? This is life eternal to know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3. But how shall a man
know, whether he has this knowledge? Answ. St. John tells you in those last
words mentioned, and so plainly, that you cannot be deceived, except you desire
to deceive your own soul.

The knowledge of God that saves us, is more than a bare apprehension of him;
i^ knows his power, and therefore fears him; knows his justice, and therefore
serves him; knows his mercy, and therefore trusts him; knows his goodness, and
therefore loves him, etc. For he that has the saving knowledge of God, or of
Christ, has every other Grace: There is a sweet correspondence between every
one, where there is any one in truth: As in the generation, the head is not
without the body, nor the body without each member, nor the soul without its
powers and faculties; so in the regeneration, where there is any one grace in
truth, there is every one, 2 Cor. 5.17. If you will see it in particulars, read
Psa. 9.10. Jer. 9.24. 1 John 4.6. Joh. 4.10. 1 John 4.7, 8. and 2.3. Joh 42.5,
6. 1 Ioh. 4.7. which Scriptures show, that as feeling is inseparable to all the
organs of sense; the eye sees and feels, the ear hears and feels, the pallat
tastes and feels, the nostrils smell and feel; so knowledge is involved in
every grace: Faith knows and believes, Charity knows and loves, Patience knows
and suffers, Temperance knows and abstains, Humility knows and stoops,
Repentance knows and mourns, Obedience knows and does, Confidence knows and
rejoices, Hope knows and expects, Compassion knows and pities. Yea, as there is
a power of water in every thing that grows; it is fatness in the olive,
sweetness in the figg, cheerfulness in the grape, strength in the oak, taleness
in the cedar, redness in the rose, whiteness in the lilly, etc. so knowledge is
in the hand obedience, in the mouth benediction, in the knee humility, in the
eye compassion, in the heart charity, in the whole body and soul, piety.

Alas! If men had the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, it would disperse and
dispel, all the black clouds of their reigning sins in a moment; as the Sun
does no sooner show his face, but the darkness vanishes: or as Caesar did no
sooner look upon his enemies, but they were gone: Egypt swarmed with locusts,
till the west wind came, that left not one: He cannot delight in sin, nor dote
upon this world, that knows Christ savingly.

Virtue is ordained a wife for knowledge; and where these two join, there will
proceed from them a noble progine, a generation of good works. Again, as the
water engendereth ice, and the ice again engendereth water; so knowledge begets
righteousness, and righteousness again begets knowledge. It is between
science and conscience, as it is between the stomach and the head; for as in
man's body, the raw stomach makes a thumatick head, and the thumatick head
makes a raw stomach; so science makes our conscience good, and conscience
makes our science good: Nor is it so much scientiae capit^s, as conscientia
cordis, that knows Christ and our selves; whence Solomon says, Give thine
heart to wisdom, Prove. 2.10. and let wisdom enter into thine heart, Prove. 4.4.
And when he would acquaint us (...) become wise, he tells us, that the fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.7. as if the first lesson to be
wise, were to be (...), If it be asked, Why the natural man perceives not the
^ings of the spirit of God? Saint Paul answers, he cannot know them, because
they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. and indeed i^ ^hey (...)
spiri^ually discerned, how should they descern them (...) spirit? For though
the outward man receive^ the eleme(...) ^udiments of Religion by breeding and
education, yet his (...)veth them by heavenly inspiration, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12, 13
and 12.3 8 Matthew 16 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 29 2, 3, 4, Psa. 111.^0. Luke 24.4^ (...) 15
15. and ^his alone is enough to prove, that no wicke^ man (...) man; for if God
alone be the giver of it, we may be su^^ that (...) will (...) his secrets to
none but such as he knows will improve their knowledge to his glory, and the
good of others: Even as the husband man will not cast his seed but into ground
that will return him a good harvest, Psa. 25.14. Luke 24.45. Mark 4.34. Genesis
18.17. 1 John 4.7.

Sect. 47.
BUt would these men (any one, even the best of them) thus improve, or employ
their knowledge? Or do they desire it to any such end? No: but to some other
end, as I shall in the next place acquaint you.

Some men desire not to know, some desire only to know; Or rather thus, Few men
in comparison desire knowledge, fewer that desire divine and supernatural
knowledge; fewest of all that desire to be the better, or that others should be
the better for their knowledge: More particularly, a world of men desire
knowledge for no other end but to remove their ignorance; as Pharaoh used Moses,
but to remove the plagues. Others again study the Scriptures, and other good
Books, only to make gain thereof; or to be the abler to dispute and discourse,
as boys go into the water, only to play and paddle there, not to wash and be
clean. With Eve, they highly desire the tree of knowledge, but regard not the
tree of life.

As I would fain know, what fruit or effect the knowledge of most men produces
in them, except it be to enable them to dispute and discourse, to increase wit,
o^ ^o increase wealth, or to increase pride, or perhaps to increase Athiesm,
and to make them the more able and cunning to argue against the truth and power
of Religion? Whether the utmost of their aim be not to enrich, dignifie, and
please themselves; not once casting the eye of their souls at Gods glory, their
neighbors good, or their own salvation? Whether their main drift be not
purchasing of a great estate for them and theirs, with out either fear of God,
regard of men, or the discharge of their duty and calling? Again, whereas a
godly man and a good Christian, thinks himself as happy in giving light to
others, as in receiving it himself; how many are there, who as themselves are
never the better, (I mean in regard of Grace) for their great wisdom and
learning, so no more are others; for commonly they resemble dark Lanthorns
which have light, but so shut up and reserved as if it were not: and what is
the difference betwixt concealed skill, and ignorance; It is the nature and
praise of good, to be communicative, whereas if their hidden knowledge do ever
look out, it casts so sparing a light, that it only argues it self to have an
unprofitable being.

And for the most part these men if they may be thought great Rabbis, deep and
profound Scholars; this is the night of their ambition, though neither the
Church be benefited, nor God glorified by it; whereas they ought the contrary:
for as the grace of God is the fountain from which our wisdom flows; so the
glory of God should be the Ocean to which it should run: yea, that God may be
honored with, and by our wisdom, is the only end for which he gives us to be
wise: And for default of this end, he not seldom crosses the means, whereby
while men strive to expel ignorance, they fall into error; as an Emperick to
cure one Disease, causes a worse. Briefly, to conclude this point, So many as
are puffed up with their knowledge, or do not part with their sins, thew that
they never sought it for Gods glory, but for their own honor and glory. And
certainly if we seek not Gods glory in doing his work, he will give us no wages
at the latter end.

Sect. 48.
BUt for men to do no good with their gifts, is not all; yea, it were well if
that were the worst, for not a few of them resemble Achitophel, and Jonadab,
who employed their wit wickedly, and do mischief instead of good with their
wisdom: like Herod, whom you shall see turning over the Bible, searching the
Scriptures, examining the Prophets; but to what end and purpose? To know good,
but to do evil: yea, the greatest evil under the Sun, slay Christ in the
cradle: With many, their knowledge and learning is not for God and for Gideon;
but for Antichrist and for Babylon; and so of all other gifts; how many are the
worse for them? As give Saula Kingdom, and he will tyrannize; give Nabal
plenty, and he will be drunk; give Judas an Apostleship, and he will sell his
Master for money; let Sarmantus have a good wit, he will exercise it in scoffing
at holiness. Briefly, how often does wisdom without grace prove like a fair
estate in the hands of a fool, which not seldom becomes the owners ruin? Or
Absoloms hair, which was an ornament, wherewith he hanged himself: So that
wisdom without grace is nothing else but a cunning way of undoing our selves at
the last. Many men's knowledge to them, being like the Ark to the Philistims,
which did them more hurt than good: When their knowledge makes them prouder,
not better; more rebellious, not more serviceable; as it is, Isa. 47.10. Thy
wisdom and thy knowledge they have caused thee to rebel: And very often this
falls out, that as the best soil usually yields the worst air, so without
grace there is nothing more pestilent than a deep wit, no such prey for the
Devil, as a good wit unsanctified. Wit and Learning well used, is like the
golden earrings and bracelets of the Israelites, abused like the same gold
cast into an Idol; than which, nothing more abominable.

Now when it comes to this, That they fight against God with the weapon he has
given them; when with those the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 73.9. They set their
mouths against heaven, and are like an unruly Jade, that being full fed kicks
at his Master; what course does the Lord take with them? Answ. Read but that
Parable, Luke 19.24. Ioh. 7.17. it will inform you: For to him that uses his
Talent of knowledge well, he gives more; as to the servant that used his
talents well, he doubled them: but to them that use not their knowledge well,
much more if they abuse it, he takes away that which he had formerly given
them: as he took heat from the fire when it would burn his Children, Dan. 3.27.
As you may see, Isa. 44.25. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. Ioh. 7.17. Psa. 111.10. 1
Cor. 2.15. Eccles. 2.26. Prove. 28 5. Matthew. 21.43. Acts 26.18. Isa. 29.14. and
44 25. and 6.9, 10. Dan. 2.19.23. Job 5.13, 14. Ioh. 9.39. and 12.40. Romans
1.28. Ephe. 4.18, 19. 1 Cor. 1.20. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. turn to the places,
for they ate rare. I will destroy the Tokens of the Soothsayers, and make them
that conjecture, fools: I will turn the wise men backward, and make their
knowledge foolishness, says the Lord, Isa. 44.25. He takes the wise in their
own craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish, Job. 5.13. the
case of Achitophel: And justly are they forsaken of their reason, who have
abandoned God; yea, most just it is, that they who want grace, should want wit
too. And so much of abusing their gifts.

Lastly, These great knowers and wise men are so far from desiring soul wisdom,
and saving-knowledge to the ends before specified, that they do not at all
desire it, for that it suits not with their condition. For Natural men desire
only humane and mundane knowledge: Spiritual men, that which is heavenly and
supernatural; and the reason why they desire it not, is, for that they know it
not. A man desires not that he knows not, says Chrysostom; neither are
unknown evils feared: wherefore the work of Regeneration begins at
Illumination, Acts 26.18. Coll. 1.13. 1 Pet. 2.9.

Now according as men are wise, they prize and value this wisdom, and endeavor
to obtain it, Prove. 18.15. For it is more true of divine wisdom, than it was of
that Grecian beauty: No man ever loved her, that never saw her; no man ever saw
her, but he loved her.

And so on the contrary, according as men are ignorant and blockish, they
under-value and dis-esteem it, hate it, and are prejudice against it: And
hereupon carnal men being blinded by the Prince of darkness, together with
their own wickedness, and being of a reprobate judgment, do most usually and
familiarly term and esteem this soul-wisdom, this divine, spiritual,
experimental, and saving-knowledge to be mere foolishness, or madness, Wisd.
5.3. to 9. and the Professors thereof to be fools and madmen; Elisha was
counted no better, 2 King. 9 11. and the rest of the Prophets, Hosea 9 7. and
Paul, Acts 26.20. and all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.10. Yea, our Savior Christ
himself with open mouth was pronounced mad by his carnal bearers, Joh. 10.20.
Mark. 3.21. and this has been the worlds vote ever since. The sinceer
Christian was so reputed in Pliny's time, and after in St. Austin's time: yea,
Julian the Pelagian could gibe St. Austin, that he had none of the wise Sages,
nor the learned Senate of Philosophers on his side; but only a company of mean
tradesmen, of the vulgar sort, that took part with him: Whole Answer was, Thou
reproachest the weak things of the world, which God has chosen to confound the
things that are mighty.

To wordly men Christian wiseom seems folly, says Gregory. And well it may,
for even the wisdom of God is foolishness with the world. 1 Cor. 1.18 23.
therefore no disparagement to us his servants, if they repute us fools; nor I
think any honor to such sensualists that so repute us: However we will give
them their due: For,

Sect. 49.
I Grant that in some kind of skill they outstrip the best of Gods People,
who, if they are put to it, may answer as Themistocles did when one invited him
to touch a lute; for as he said, I cannot fiddle; but I can make a small town a
great state: So the godly may say, We cannot give a sollid reason in Nature,
why Nilus should overflow only in the Summer, when waters are at the lowest?
Why the Loadstone should draw iron, or incline to the pole star? How the heat
of the stomach, and the strength of the nether chap should be so great? Why a
flash of lightening should melt the sword without making any impression in the
scabbard? Kill the Child in the womb, and never hurt the Mother? How the waters
should stand upon a heap, and yet not overflow the earth? Why the clouds above
being heavy with water, should not fall to the earth suddenly, seeing every
beavy thing descends? Except the reason which God gives, Genesis 1.6. and Job
38 8.10 12. and 26.8. Psalm. 104.9. But we know the mystery of the Gospel, and
what it is to be born a new, and can give a sollid reason of our faith: we know
that God is reconciled to us, the Law satisfied for us, our sins pardoned, our
souls acquitted, and that we are in favor with God; which many of these with
their great learning do not know. And thus the godly are proved wiser than the
wisest humanist that wants grace. You have likewise the reasons why these great
knowers, know nothing yet as they might and ought to know: that is to say,
First, Because they are mistaken in the thing; they take speculative knowledge
for soul wisdom; and soul saving wisdom to be foolishness and madness. Now if a
man take his aim amiss, he may shoot long enough ere he hit the white: and
these men are as one that is gone a good part of his journey, but must come
back again because he has mistaken his way. Secondly, Because they are
Unregenerate, and want the Eye of Faith. Thirdly, For that they seek not to God
for it who is the giver thereof, and without whose spirit there is no attaining
it. Fourthly, Because they are proud, and so seek not after it, as supposing
they have it already. Fifthly, Because if they had never so much knowledge, they
would be never the holier, or the better for it, but rather the worse; nor
would they employ it to the honor of God, or the good of others. Sixthly,
Because they either do, or would do mischief instead of good with their
knowledge. Seventhly, Because they will not consult with the word about it, nor
advise with others that have already attained to it. Or thus, They read and
hear the Scriptures and mind not, (I mean the spirituallity of the word) or
mind and understand not, or understand and remember not, or remember and
practice not. No, this they intend not of all the rest; and they that are
unwilling to obey, God thinks unvvorthy to know.


When the Serpent taught knowledge, he said, If ye ear the forbidden fruit,
your eyes shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil: But God teaches
another lesson, and says, If ye will not eat the forbidden fruit, your eyes
shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil, Romans 12.2. See Psa. 111.10.
and 119.97, 98, 99, 100. Or if you do eat it, you shall be like images that
have ears and cannot hear, Romans 11.8. Isa. 6.10. Matthew. 13.14. Psalm. 115.6.

From all which Reasons we may collect, That there are but a few amongst us,
that are wise indeed, and to purpose; For these Seven Hindrances are applyable
to seventy seven parts of men in the Nation. Besides, if these great knowers
know so little, how ignorant are the rude rabble, that despise all knowledge?
Nor can it be denied but all impenitent persons, all unbelievers (who prefer
their profits and pleasures before pleasing of God; as Herodias prefered John
Baptists head before the one half of Herod's kingdom,) are arrant fools; yea,
fools in folio: For if they were wise, says Bernard, they would foresee the
torments of Hell, and prevent them.

And so wise are the godly, for they prefer grace, and glory, and Gods savor,
before ten thousand worlds.

Sect. 50.
OBject. But here thou will say, (or at least thou have reason to say) if there
be so few that are soul wise, I have all the reason in the world to mistrust my
self; wherefore good Sir, tell me how I shall be able to get ^his spiritual and
experimental knowledge? this divine and supernatural wisdom?

Answ. By observing these Five Rules:

First, Let such a willing and ingenuous soul, resolve to practice what he does
already know, or shall hereafter be acquainted with from the word of God and
Christ's faithful Messengers: For he that will do my Fathers will, says our
Savior, shall know the doctrine, whether it be of God or no, Joh. 7.17. A good
understanding have all they that keep the commandments, (says holy David)
Psalm. 111.10. and proves it true by his own example and experience: I
understood (says he) more than the Ancient, and became wiser than my teachers,
because I kept thy precepts, Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99, 100. To a man that is good
in his sight, God gives knowledge and wisdom, Eccles. 2.26. The spiritual man
understands all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. Wicked men understand not judgment, but
they that seek the Lord, understand all things, Prove. 28.5. Admirable
encouragements for men to become godly and conscientious; I mean practical
Christians.

Secondly, If thou would get this precious grace of saving knowledge; the
way is, to be frequeut in hearing the word preached, and to become studious in
the Scriptures, for they and they alone make wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Ye
err (says our Savior) not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22.29. Mark 12.24.
We must not in the search of heavenly matters, either do as we see others do;
neither must we follow the blind guide carnal reason, or the deceitful guide
our corrupt hearts; but the undeceivable, and infallable guide of Gods word
which is truth it self: and great need there is; for as we cannot perceive the
foulness of our faces unless it be told us, or we take a glass and look our
selves therein: so neither can we see the blemishes of our Souls, which is a
notable degree of spiritual Wisdom, but either God must make it known to us by
his spirit, or we must collect the same out of the Scriptures, that celestial
glass; though this also must be done by the spirits help. Therefore

Thirdly, If thou will be Soul-wise and truly profit by studying the
Scriptures, be frequent and fervent in Prayer to God who is the only giver of
it, for the direction of his holy spirit: For first, humble and faithful
Prayer, ushered in by meditation, is the cure of al obscurity. Especially being
accompanied with fervor and fervency; as you may see, Matthew. 21.22. If any lack
wisdom, says St. James, let him ask of God who gives to al men liberally and
reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1.5. Mark the words, it is
said if any; wherefore let no man deny his soul this comfort. Again, ask and
have; It cannot come upon easier terms. Yea, God seems to like this sure so
well in Solomon, as if he were beholding to his Creature, for wishing well to
it self. And in vain do we expect that alms of grace, for which we do not so
much as beg. But in praying for Wisdom, do not pray for it without putting
difference; desire not so much brain-knowledg as to be Soul-wise, and then you
will employ your wisdom to the glory of the giver. Let thine hearts desire be
to know God in Christ, Christ in Faith, Faith in good works; to know Gods will
that thou may do it; and before the knowledge of all other things, desire to
know thy self; and in thy self, not so much thy strength, as thy weakness:
Pray that thine heart may serve thee instead of a commentary, to help thee
understand such points of Religion as are most needful and necessary, and that
thy Life may be an Exposition of thy inward man, that there may be a sweet
harmony betwixt Gods Word, thy judgment, and whole conversation, that what
the natural man knows by roat, thou may double by feeling the same in thine
heart and affections. As indeed experimental and saving knowledge is no less
felt than known; and, I cannot tell how, comes rather out of the abundance of
the heart, than by extreme study; or rather is sent by God unto good men, like
the Ram that was brought to Abraham when he would have Sacrificed his son
Isaak. When Christ taught in the Temple, they asked, How knovveth this man the
Scriptures, seeing he never learned them? So it is a wonder what learning some
men have, that have no learning! Like Prisilla and Aquila, poor Tent-makers,
who were able to school Apollos that great Clerk, a man renowned for his
learning: What can we lay to it? For no other reason can be given but as Christ
said, Father so it pleases thee: For as Jacob said of his venison, when his
Father asked how he came by it so suddenly? Because the Lord thy God brought it
suddenly to my hands. So holy and righteous men do more easily understand the
words of God, than do the wicked, because God brings the meaning suddenly to
their hearts; as we read, Luke 24. That Christ (standing in the midst of his
Apostles after he was risen from the dead) opened their understandings, that
they might understand clearly the Scriptures, and what was written of him in
the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, verse. 44.45. Lo how
suddenly their knowledge came unto them! But see what a general promise ( God
in the Person of wisdom) hat^h made to all that serve him, Prove. 1. Turn you at
my reproof, and behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, and make known my
words unto you, verse. 23. And Psalm. 25. The secrets of the Lord are revealed to
them that fear him, and his covenant is to give them understanding, verse 14.
These secrets are hid from the wicked, neither has he made any such covenant
with them but the contrary: As see, Dan. 12.10. Unto you it is given to know
the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to othres in Parrables, that they
seeing should not see, and hearing they should not understand, Luke 8.10: Mark:
3:11: Matthew: 13:13:

Again, It is not enough to pray, except also it be in Christ's name, and
accrding to his will, believing to be heard for his sake, and that it be the
intercession of Gods own spirit in you: And (being truly sensible of your sins
and wants) that you chiefly pray for the pardon of sin, the effusion of
grace, and for the assistance of Gods Spirit: that you may more firmly believe,
more soundly repent, more zealously do, more patiently suffer, and more
constantly persevere in the practice and profession of every duty.

But above all you must know, that as Sampsons companions, could never have
found out his Riddle, if they had not plowed with his heifer: so no man can
know the secrets of God, but by the revelation of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.8. Mat.
16.17. Yea, suppose a man be not inferior to Portius, or Pythagoras, who kept
all things in memory, that ever they had read, heard, or seen: To Virgil, of
whom it is reported, that if all Sciences were lost, they might be found again
in him: To Aben Ezra, of whom it was said, that if Knowledge had put out her
candle, at his brain she might light it again; and that his head was a throne
of wisdom: or Josephus Scaliger, who was skilled in thirty Languages: Yet if
he want the Spirit of God to be his teacher, he is a dunce to the meanest, and
most illiterate believer. For one excellent, and necessary prerogative of the
spiritual man is this; he has God for his teacher; he learns the Counsels of
God, of that spirit which only knows Gods counsels, Luke 21.15. which is no
small privilege: for the scholar learns quickly, when the Holy Ghost is his
teacher; the Eye sees distinctly, when the Holy Ghost does enlighten it. With
the Spirits help, the means can never be too weak: without, never strong
enough, Luke 24.44, 45. Pro. 1.23.

51. Fourthly, Thou must get an humble conceit of thine own wisdom. The first
step to knowledge, is to know our own ignorance. We must become fools in our
own opinion, before we can be truly wise, as the Apostle sets it down, 1 Cor.
3.18. And indeed, the opinion of our knowing enough, is one of the greatest
causes of our knowing so little: For what we presume to have attained, we seek
not after. Yea, the very first lesson of a Christian is humility. He will teach
the humble his way, Psalm. 25.9. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. And he that has not
learned the first lesson, is not fit to take out a new. Pride is a great let to
true wisdom: For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, Jam.
4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Whence it comes to pass, that few proud wits are reformed,
John 9.39. And for this cause also did our Savior propound his woes to the
Pharisees, his doctrines to the People.

A heart full of pride, is like a vessel full of air: This self-opinion must
be blown out of us, before saving knowledge will be poured into us. Christ will
know none but the humble, and none but humble souls truly know Christ.

Now the way to become humble, is, by taking a serious view of our wants. The
Peacocks pride is much abated, when she looks on the blackness of her legs and
feet. Now suppose we know never so much; yet that which we know, is far less
then that which we are ignorant of: and the more we know, the more we know we
want, Pro. 1.5, 7. Psalm. 73.22. And the less sensible we are of our blindness,
sickness, deformity, etc. the more blind, sick, and deformed we are.

Fifthly, Thou must labor to get a true and lively faith: For as without faith
we cannot please God: so without faith, no man can know God. Faith most clearly
beholds those things which are hid both from the eye of sense, and the eye of
reason, John 12.46. Unregenerate men, that want faith, are like blind Sampson
without his guide: Or like Poliphemus, who never had but one eye, and that
Ulysses put out. For so does the pleasure and custom of sin blind the
Sensuallist.

We must have minds lifted above nature, to see and love things above nature:
heavenly wisdom, to see heavenly truth; or else that truth which is saving,
will be to us a mystery, Mark. 4.11. If it seem not foolishness, 1 Cor. 2.7,
8, 14. To them that are lost, the Gospel is hid, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Whereas the
Believer discerns all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.12.15,
16. Yea, God Gives him a mouth and wisdom, where against all his adversaries,
shall not be able to speak or resist, Luke 21.15. These are the five steps,
which lead up to the palace of wisdom, which all must ascend by, that mean to
enter. If you have once attained this precious grace of saving knowledge, you
will as much as in you lies, employ the same to the glory of the giver, And so
much to prove, that he is the wisest man, whose knowledge lies in the best
things, (as the weaker vessel may hold the better liquor) and that if men be
never so learned, except they have learned the Mystery of the Gospel, and what
it is to be borne again by their own experience, (which few with their great
learning do indeed know) they are in Gods account, no better then fools. I
come now to prove, that the greatest Politician is a verier fool then the
former.

52. Secondly, If we shall look upon the most cunning Politician, with a single
eye: judge righteous judgment, and not according to appearance only, we shall
find that the greatest Politician is the greatest fool. For he turns all his
Religion into hypocrisy, into Statisme, yea, into Atheism, making Christianity
a very footstool to policy.

I confess they are wiser in their generation, then the children of light; and
are so acknowledged by Christ himself, Luke 16.8. But why? not that there is a
deficiency of power in the godly, but will: for could not David go as far as
Achitophel? could not Paul show as much cunning as Tertullus? Yes, surely if
they would: But because their Master, Christ, has commanded them to be
innocent as doves; They have resolved in an heroical disposition with Abraham,
Genesis 14.22. that the King of Sodom shall not make them rich. No crooked, or
indirect means, shall bring them in profit; they will not be beholding to the
king of Hell for a shooty. And hereupon the Foxes wiles, never enter into the
Lions head.

But to speak of them as they are: These cunning Politicians, in stead of being
wise as serpents, they are wise serpents. They are so a^ted in subtleties,
through time and practice, that they are near upon as wise, as that old serpent
the Devil. Indeed he has one trick beyond all theirs; for like a c^nniug
fencer, he that taught them all their tricks, kept this one to himself,
namely, how to cheat them of their souls. But take a short Character of them.

They are such cunning dissemblers, that like Pope Alexander the sixth, what
they think, they never speak. Why is this cast away, says Judas? Crafty cub,
he would have had it himself. They are like a fellow that rides to the pillory,
they go not the way they look. They will cut a man's throat under color of
courtesy, as Ulysses by gold, and forged letters, was the means of stoning
Palamides, even while he made show of defending him. And then to wipe off all
suspicion from themselves, their gesture and conntenance shall be like Julius
Caesar's; who seeing Pompey's head fell a weeping, as if he had been sorry for
it, when by his only means it was cut off. So like Rowers in a boat, whilst
in their pretense they look one way, in their intent they go the quite
contrary: As our Savior found it to fare with the Pharisees, and Sadducees,
Matthew. 16.1, 3. which made him to conclude, with, O hypocrites! Nor shall any
man be able to determine, either by their gesture, words, or actions, what they
resolve, though like Hebrew letters, you spell them backward. Only this you
may be sure of, that they do not intend, what they pretend; Like as in juggling
feats, though we know not how they are done, yet we know well, that they are
not done as they seem to be.

Now if they can any way advantage themselves by another ruin, and do it
cunningly; as Iezabel did, when she killed Naboth, by suborning false witness
against him, and proclaimed a Fast before the murder: Though all such policy
be but misery, and all such knowledge, ignorance, Yet, o how wise they think
themselves! but they are grossly mistaken: for wherein does this their great
wisdom consist? but first; in being wise to deceive others: as the Old serpent
did our first Parents; or secondly in the end to deceive themselves, as the
same serpent did, which brought a curse upon himself for so doing, Genesis 3. The
crafty Fox hugged himself to think how he had cozened the Crow of her
breakfast: but when he had eaten it, and found himself poisoned with it, he
wished the Crow her own again. Wealth got by deceit, is like a piece of butterd
sponge, an Italian trick, it goes down glib; but in the stomach swells, and
will never be got out again. The gains a man gets by deceiving, at last he may
put in his eye, and yet see himself miserable. Sin is the greatest cheater in
the world, for it deceives the deceiver.

. 53 That it is so with them, and all others who go to Counsel, and leave the
God of wisdom behind them: let their case be viewed in other persons. What
says Pharaoh to his deep Counselors? Come, let us do wisely, when indeed he
went about that which destroyed both him and his country. The Scribes,
Pharisees, and Elders, took counsel against Christ; as though they would most
wisely prevent their own salvation. Joseph's brethren, to prevent his having
dominion over them, (as his dreams imported) thought they had taken a very
wise course, in selling him to the Ishmaelitish Merchants, which was indeed the
only means to effect it. They murder Christ, lest the Romans should come:
and by so doing, their coming was hastened. The Jews say, Come let us kill him,
that the inheritance may be ours: But in killing him, they lost the inheritance
and themselves too. And so it always fares with our Machivillians in the end,
speed they never so well for a time. For let the Devil promise them never so
fair, (suppose it be a Kingdom) the up-shot will be but sad and doleful: as it
fared with Athaliah, who having slain all the Kings seed, that she alone might
reign, lost both the government, and her life too. Or as it did with Abimelech,
who slew seventy of his brethren, that he might with safety enjoy the Kingdom
lost beth it, and his life with it. And many the like we read of.

Whence Sr. Ambrose observes, that the plots of the wicked, always return upon
their own heads. As Pope Hildebrands servant, by stumbling, was killed with
that stone he should have thrown down on Frderick the Emperor, at his
Devotions. Or as Griphus his mother, was made to take that draught, wherewith
she intended to poison him. Yea, how little was Judas set by of the High
Priests, when once he had served their turn? How did they shake him off in that
pitiful distress, with look thou to it? And so how poor are the witc^es, that
in confidence of these promises, even sell their souls to the Devil.

See here in these few Examples, you have the depth and solidity of our
greatest and wisest Politicians, and yet lewd men, most ridiculously and
absurdly, call wicked policies, wisdom, and their success, happiness. But
herein Satan makes them of all fools the superlative, in mistaking villainy and
madness for the best virtues. And what is the summa totalis of all but this?
Faux-like, they project other men's overthrow, purchase their own. Neither
has any man been wise to do evil, but his wisdom has had an evil end. As o
the multitude of Examples that are recorded, to give credit to this Doctrine!
Was not the wisdom of the Serpent turned into a curse? the wisdom of the
Pharisees into a woe? the wisdom of Achitophel into folly? the wisdom of
Nimrod into confusion? the wisdom of the unjust Steward into expulsion out of
Heaven? the wisdom of Jezabel, into a shameful death? etc. So that in the
issue, their case proves but like the spiders, that was weaving a curious net
to catch the swallow: who when she came, bore away both net, and webb, and
weaver too. Wherefore, o God, make me but soul-wise, and I shall never envy
their knowledge, that pity my simplicity: Let me be weak in policy, so I may
be wise to salvation.

And I cannot but wonder to see, how the most are mistaken in them: But being
thus discovered, I hope it will appear, that as love and lust are not all one,
so a cunning Politician and a wise man are not both one. As we have seen some
that could pack the cards, and yet were not able to play well.

54. True, if men shall look upon them side-wayes, as Appelles painted
Antigonus, that is, upon their strength of brain and parts alone, and not
consider them whole, and together, their abilities, with their deficiencies,
they will take them for wise men, and so be mistaken. But

If you would know how to call them, they are properly subtle persons? as the
Holy Ghost styles Jonadab, who gave that wicked and crasty counsel to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.3, 5. And the woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14.2. And Elimas, Act. 13.10. as
being rarely gifted to deceive, and more crafty and wily then is usual. But not
wise men; for this is rather wisdom back ward, and to study the dangerous art
of self-sophystry, to the end they may play wily beguile themselves, and to
plor self-treason, then which there is no greater, when the betrayer and
betrayed, spell but one man.

Again, admit them the most, they are not wise in good, though they be wise to
do evil: Or if you will, wise in goods, not wise in grace: For as that old
Serpent seemed to boast, that he was richer then Christ, when he said, All
these are mine, Matthew. 4.9. So the Politician may truly say, for the most part,
I am wiser then my plain dealing neighour by five hundred pounds. So that in
some sense it may be said of them, as one speaks of women, though partially,
that they are more witty in wickedness then men. Nor can I more fitly compare
them, then to Bats, Night-crows, Owls, and Cats, which can see better in the
dark, then in the light. Their wisdom is like that of the Polipus: which is a
most stupid and foolish fish, yet uses great skill in taking of other fishes.
Nevertheless, yield them all that has been mentioned, this is the up-shot.
They are blind, and in darkness, as having their beginning from Satan, the
Prince of darkuesse, and their end in Hell, which is the pit of darkness: and
because they are wise only to evil, their wisdom shall have but an evil end.

In the dialect of the wise man, the greatest sinner is the greatest fool,
Prove. 1.7. And David thinks, there is no fool to the Atheist, Psalm. 53.1. and
49.13. And Saint Austin tells us, that the wisest Politician upon earth, the
most ample, and cunning Machivillian that lives, be he a Doctor in that deep
reaching faculty, is worse then a fool: For if the Holy Ghost, says he,
terms him a fool that only laid up his own goods, Luke 12. 18, 20. find out
a name for him, that takes away other men's. And though worldly men call the
simple fools, ye^ God calls the crafty fools, Ier. 8.9. Mat. 6.23. And of all
atheists, and fools, which seem wise, there be no such fools in the world, as
they that love money better then themselves.

And so you have the wisdom of Humanists, and Politicians desciphered;
together with the wisdom of Gods servants. You see the difference between
them, and therein as I suppose, that neither of the former are so wise as the
godly man, nor so wise as the world reputes them, or they themselves.

I confess the one speak Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, the other Statutes,
History, and Husbandry, well enough to make their neighbors think them wise:
but the truth is, they seem wiser then they are, as is said of the Spaniard;
whereas the godly, like the French, are wiser then they seem. The former are
wise men in foolish things, and foolish men in wise things. Sharp-eyed as
Eagles, in the things of the earth, but blind as Beetles in the matters of
heaven. O that they had but the wit to know, that when all is done, Heaven is a
brave place, where are such joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God
has prepared there for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

. 55. Now as I have shown these two sorts of men their folly, to the end some
of them may be convinced, and ashamed, and consequently become soul-wise, that
so they may be saved; which is the principal thing I drive at (for I take no
pleasure in disgracing men purposely.) So it were as easy to prove, that all
sorts of sinners, are no better then sots, and shallow-brains, in comparison of
the conscientious Christian. Nor do I see, but it may prove of great, and
general concernment: therefore that others also may have benefit by the same, I
will briefly touch upon some particulars. And the next that I will speak to,
shall be such as come nearest to these last mentioned; that is, your Covetous,
Miserly Muck-worms, who though they be near neighbors to those Ambodexters I
last spoke of, yet they are not the same men.

Now although you cannot name one property of a natural fool, but the Covetous
man is in that particular a greater fool: Yet I will make the parallel in one
only: lest I should weary my Reader, before I have dispatched all my Clients,
or half listed my men.

The Covetous miser, if you mark it, esteems not of things according to their
true value; but prefers bables and trisles before things of greatest worth,
which is the most remarkable property of a natural fool, that is, being like
the ignorant Indians in Florida, Virginia, New England, and K^nida, who for a
Copper kettle, and a few toys, as Beads, and Hatchets, will depart from the
purest gold, and sell you a whole Country, with the houses and ground which
they dwell upon.

As Judas preferred thirty pieces of silver, before him that was Lord of the
whole world, and ransom of mankind: so the covetous man prefers Earth, yea
hell to heaven, time to eternity, his body before his soul; yea, his outward
estate before either soul or body. Whereas the godly care for the soul, as the
chief jewel, and only treasure; and for the body for the souls sake; and
settle their inheritance in no land but the land of promise; their end being to
possess a kingdom without end. They are not like Shebna, who built his
sepulcher in one Country, and was buried in another: But like our English
Merchants, that traffic in Turkey, get wealth in Turkey, yet plant not in
Turkey, but transport for England. It cannot be said of them, as it may of the
most; that they worship the golden Calfe: because they consider, that Pecunia,
the worlds Queen, (I mean that world, whereof the Devil is King) extends her
Regiments, but to the brim of the grave, and is not current one step farther.

Worldly hearts are penny-wise, and pound-foolish; they know how to set high
prizes upon the worthless trash of this world; but for heavenly things, or the
God that owns them, they shamefully under-value. Like Judas, who valued Mary's
ointment, which she bestowed upon the feet of Christ, at three hundred pieces
of silver, and sold his Master, on whom that odor was spent, for thirty. But
it is not so with the godly; they think it the best purchase that ever was in
the world, to buy him who bought them; in comparison of whom all things else
are dross and dung, as Paul speaks, Phil. 3.8. And indeed if we once have him,
we have all thing, as the Apostle argues, Romans 8.32. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. So
that the godlys man is only rich, the servant of Christ is Lord of all.
Whereas by a just judgment of God upon the covetous Miser, who makes Mammon
his god: The Devil makes them his Drudges, to get and bring him in Gold, as
the King of Spain does the poor Indians) that he may keep it in bank, for the
next prodigal to spend as ill, as the other got it. As how often is that spent
upon one Christmas revelling by the son, which was forty years a getting by the
Father? O fools, incomparable! to take a world of care and pains, endure so
much grief, sting of conscience, loss of credit, to deprive themselves of
Heaven, damn their own souls, to get wealth: and when they have got it, not to
be a jot the better for it. Yea, they are less satisfied, and contented then
other men, meanlier accommodated then m^an men: Yea, a poor beggar that has
nothing here, is in better estate, then a rich Miser, that has nothing in
effect, either here or hereafter. O that they would but use that! yea, half
that wit, study, and industry hereafter, to save their souls, that they have
formerly done to damn them. But hear more.

Aristippus cared only for his body, as if he had had no soul: Zeno but for
his soul, as if he had had no body: Achitophel for his Family alone, as if
neither soul nor body had been worth caring for: but these neither for body,
nor soul, nor any thing, but for a little muck to leave behind them. Yea, he
can find in his heart to go to hell for another, that wishes him gone, and
will damn his own soul to leave his son rich. Yea, what a deal of pains and
care does the covetous man take for his own damnation? ever tormenting himself
to get that; for getting whereof he shall be tormented: so himself is
voluntarily miserable here, and hereafter, that others may be happy. And so
much of the Miser. The next I will fall upon, shall be such as equal these in
their Idolatry another way; as

56. Fourthly, what think you of common Idolaters? are not they arrant fools?
I Will give you but one instance mentioned, Exodus 32. and you will need no more.
Turn to the place, and there you shall find, that those blockish Israelites
made them a molten Calfe, and then said, This is thy god, that brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, ver. 34. This is such a pregnant example, that there
needs no more to prove it; that a Beast should be their god; yea, and a beast
of their own making, and that this beast should have brought them out of Egypt,
which could not move it self, but as it was moved, and that before it had any
being. This is such a blockish absurdity, that as one would think, should never
enter into the heart of him, who is endowed with a reasonable soul. But what
can the Prince of darkness propound? that a wicked heart, (blinded with the
custom of sin, and given up by God, to be further blinded by Satan) will not
believe, as appears by our Ranters, Shakers, and Quakers at this day.

And such other fools are the Papists, though great Clerks, and wise men: who
(if I could intend to aquaint you) maintain a thousand ridiculous tenants,
stiffly defending those things for truth, which the Holy Ghost calls in express
words, The doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. And most justly are they
forsaken of their reason, who have abandoned God. Yea, most just it is, that
they who want grace, should want wit too. If Idolaters will needs set up a
false god for the true, is it not equal, that the true God should give them
over to the false? Again,

Fifthly, how does lust blind and besot men? when the Adulterer prefers a
filthy strumpet before his own chaste wife, though his own lawful Consort is
known to be more comely, and lovely then the strange woman. Yea, when they
shall confess the same (as it was the speech of one too great to name) That
were she not his wife, he could love her above all women in the world; a word
able to rot out the tongue that spoke it. But take an instance of this nature,
I Will give you one amongst many very remarkable. We read, Judges 16. that
Sampson cared more for his pleasure in this kind, then his life. O strange
debauchednesse! his filthy lust of a Nazarite, leaves him scarce a man! He that
might not drink wine, is drunk with the cup of fornication. How could he other
then think, if lust had not blinded and bewitched him? She whose body is
mercenary to me, will easily sell me to others? she will be false, if she will
be an Harlot. Was there ever such a motion made to a reasonable man? Tell me,
wherewith thou may be bound to do thee hurt? Who would not have spurned such
a suitor out of doors? And when upon the trial he saw such apparent treachery,
he yet wilfully betrays his life, by her to his enemies. All sins, all passions
have power to blind, and infatuate; but lust most of all. Never man that had
drank flagons of wine, had less reason left him, then this Nazarite. Many an
one loses his life, but he casts it away; not in hatred to himself, but in love
to a Strumpet. He knew she aimed at nothing but his slavery, and death, yet had
not power to deny her. He had wit enough to deceive her thrice, not enough to
keep himself from being deceived by her. Thrice had he seen the Philistims in
her chamber, ready to surprise him upon her bands; and yet will needs be a
slave to his Traitor. Yea, in effect, bids her bind^ him, and call in her
Executioners to cut his throat. O beware of a Harlot, as you would of the
Devil! and the rather, for that under the habit of a woman, it may be the
Devil in shape of a woman, as some have so been cheated. But

Sixthly, what can we think of an improvident Gamester? is not he a Fool? who
will hazard his whole estate upon the chance of a treacherous dye, that
flatters him with his own hand, to throw away his wealth to another. And a
Thief he is too, for if he wins, he robs another; if he looses, he no less
robs himself.

57. Seventhly, let me refer it to any rational man, whether the Voluptuous
Prodigal is not a sta^k Fool? who suffers himself to be stolen away for an
Apple: For, for a little tickling of the palate, a kind of running Banquet, he
will hazard the loss of eternal comfort, and expose himself to a devouring
fire, an everlasting burning? Isa. 33.14. And what greater folly? Is it not a
dear purchase? an ill penni-worth? yea, a desperate madness, to buy the
merriment of a day, (yea, possibly the pleasure of an hour, may deterimine it)
with ages of pangs, with eternity of unsufferable torments, that are capable of
neither ease nor end.

Nor is this all, for they run upon Gods judgments, as Balaam did upon the
swords point in the Angels hand, and yet are so far from being afraid, that
they applaud their own wisdom, for giving such liberty to their lusts;
thinking no men in the world enjoy the like freedom. When indeed their bondage
is much worse then the cruel and tyrannical bondage, and slavery of Egypt. For
first, that bondage was of the body only, but the service of sin is of the
whole man, body and soul.

Secondly, in the bondage of Egypt, they served men; but in this bondage,
service is done to sin and Satan, most vile Lords, which command most base,
and filthy works.

Thirdly, in the bondage of Egypt, the most harm was temporal, loss of
liberty, smart and pain of body, in this service of sin, the loss is
eternal, even destruction in Hell for ever (without the inifinite goodness of
God.) Fourthly, in this bondage under Pharaoh, they had a sense of their
thraldom, and desired liberty; in this of sin, men do not so much as suspect
themselves to be bound, but think themselves free, and despise liberty. Lastly,
in all outward bondage, they which are bound may possibly help themselves; as
by running away, or by entreaty, or by ransom: In this bondage we lie still,
as it were, bound hand and foot (till God by his mercy deliver us) not having
so much as the least thought of relieving our selves. By all which it appears,
that such who take the most liberty to sin, are the most perfect slaves in the
world; because most voluntary slaves: and that Christ's service is the only
true freedom; his yoke an easy yoke; his burden but as the burden of wings
to a bird; which makes her fly the higher. Wherefore, as we serve the laws,
that we may be free: so let us serve Christ, and we shall be the freest people
alive.

A godly man being demanded, what he thought was the strangest, and foolishest
thing in the world, answered, an impenitent sinner, or an Unbeliever: For, said
he, that a man should provoke God, so gracious and mighty, that he should
believe Satan the father of lies and cruelty, forget his own death so imminent
and in-evitable; obey the command of his Flesh, a Drudge so ignoble, admire the
world so fickle and dangerous, prefer it before Heaven so blessed and glorious;
wilfully cast himself into hell, a place so woeful and dolorous, and all for
vanity, such a wretched emptiness; that he should fear the blasts of men's
breath, and not the fire of Gods wrath; weep for the loss of friends, and not
for his soul: And lastly, that Christ should stand at the door of his heart,
craving for entrance, that he may remedy all, and make him everlastingly happy;
and God call him every day, either by his Word in the mouths of his
Messengers, or by strange judgments, or extraordinary mercies upon himself,
or others, and all in vain Such an one, says he, is the most foolish and
degenerate creature alive:

Thus I might go on to Traitors, Murderers, Back-byters, Seducers, Drunkards,
Blasphemers, Persecutors of the godly, proud persons, Hypocrites, Thieves,
Atheists, and what other sinners you can name: and prove them all fools alike.
But I have already (upon one occasion or other) done it in some other Tract.
Nor do I love to tautologize, except it be for a great advantage to my Reader,
and for others good: though in such a case, I can, I thank God, dishonor my
self, that I may honor my Maker. The which if men did well ponder, they wou^d
be more sparing of their censures; How-ever I could wish, that our Reverend
Divines would afford themselves more liberty in this case then they do. There
be some expressions, that we borrow from our Predecessors, that deserve to be
mentioned, or used (by a Minister that remains perhaps twenty, or thirty years
in a Parish) more then once, though it be to the same Congregation (for that
which takes not, or is not minded at one time, may at another: and how many
have been converted, by that only argument? that God sees all things even in
the dark, when the doors are shut, and the curtains drawn.) Nor do I think,
that a dull and flat tool, or instrument would be used, when a more quick, and
sharp one may be had at as easy a rate, and perhaps nearer at hand. But we are
mostly (even the best of us) ^oth to deny our selves; though it be for our
Masters, (and many of our Brethrens great gain and) advantage. But of this by
the way only, a word or two more, that may reach to all, that are in their
natural condition, and I shall conclude.

58. In the last place, Are not all wilful sinners arrant fools? who
Adam-like, will receive whatever comes, or is offered them? be it bribe, or
other sinful bait, not once thinking this is forbidden fruit, and thou shall
die the death. That think the vowed enemy of their souls, can offer them a bait
without a hook? you cannot but acknowledge them stark fools, though thou thy
self be one of the number.

Again, for men to dishonor God, and blaspheme his Name, while he does support
and relieve them, to run from him, while he does call them, and forget him,
while he does seed them. To imitate the Common Protestants in Queen Mary's
time, who laughed the Martyrs to scorn, and esteemed them superstitious fools,
to lose their lives and fortunes, for matters of Religion, accounting faith,
holiness, immortality of the soul, etc. mere fopperies and illusions. To be
quick-sighted in other men's failings, and blind to their own. Are not these so
many infallible properties of a fool? and yet these are the lively characters,
of every sensuallist. In so much, that if I should give you a list, or
Catalogue of all the fools in one City, or County: You would bless your
selves, that there are so few Bedlam houses, and yet so many out of their wits,
that can not perceive or discern the same. And yet no wonder; for as I told
you-ere-while, Sensual men are so be-nighted, and puzzled with blindness, that
they know no other way, then the flesh leads them. Yea, many by loss of
conscience become Atheists; and by loss of reason, Beasts. Yea, to any thing
that is spiritually good, the natural man is blind, and deaf, and dead, as ye
may see by these ensuing Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5.6. Romans 1.21, 22, 25. Ephesians.
5.14. Isa. 6.9, 10. John 12 40. Psalm. 69.23. Matthew. 4.16 and 15.14. Ephesians.
4.18, 19. and 5.8. 1 Pet. ^9. Acts 28.27. Romans 11.8. Matthew. 23.16, 17.19.24.26.
and 27.3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.16. Revel. 3.17. Romans 6.13. and 8.11. Micah 7.16.
Psalm. 58.4. Ephesians. 2.1. If our Gospel he hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in
whom the god of this world has blinded, 2 Cor. 4^ 3, 4.

But it is otherwise with the godly: as let Satan, or the world offer a wise
Christian the bait of pleasure, or profit: his answer shall be, I will not buy
repentance so dear: I will not lose my soul, to please my sense. If affliction
comes, he will consider, that Gods punishments for sin, calls for conversion
from sin: and in case God speaks to him by his Word, to forsake his evil
ways, and turn again to him, he will amend his course, lest if he hear not
the word, he should feel the sword. Whereas nothing will confute a fool, but
fire and brimstone.

The Lord spoke to Manasses and to his people; but they would not regard:
Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the Host of the King of
Ashur, that took Manasses, and put him in fetters, and brought him in chains,
and carried him to Babel, 2 Chronicles. 33.10, 11.

Fools, says holy David, by reason of their transgression, and because of
their iniquity, Psalm. 107.17. From which words, Musculus infers, that all
wilful transgressors are arrant fools. And it is the saying of Cardan: That
dishonesty is nothing else but folly and madness. Yea, Solomon throughout all
his Proverbs, by a fool, means the natural man; and by a wise man, a man
sanctified. O that it were rightly learned, and laid to heart by all, that are
yet in the state of un-regeneracy! for it is every one of their cases. To
conclude in a word, Without knowledge, the soul is not good, Prove. 19.2. The
ignorant cannot be innocent. I am the light of the world (says our Savior)
John 8.12. and 12.46. Where light is not, Christ is not: for Christ is light.

59. And so according to my skill, I have performed what I at first promised.
It remains before we leave it, that some use be made thereof, that so both wise
and weak, may learn something from what has been spoken of this subject.
Wherefore, in the first place, If it be so, that both the sensual and rational,
even all that are yet in their natural estate, are incapable of divine, and
supernatural knowledge, that they are blind touching spiritual things. Then
let not any carnal wretch hereafter dare to speak evil of the things, actions,
or persons, that are out of the reach of his capacity, but silently suspend his
judgment, until he be better informed: For as it pertains not to the
Rustic, to jugde of letters: So it belongs not to natural men to judge of
spiritual things. Yea, let those ignorant ones, that have used to speak evil
of the way of truth, learn to kick no more against the pricks, lest they bring
upon themselves the same curse, that their fellows did, who brought up an evil
report of the Holy Land, Number. 13 32, 33. and 14.23, 14. Yea, put case they
shall think they do God good service in it, as many do in persecuting, and
putting to death his children and Ambassadors, John 16.2. as a world of
examples witness. Yea, the Jews thought they did mavelous well, in
crucifying the Lord of life. But what says the holy Ghost, Prove. 14. There is a
way that seems right unto a man: but the end thereof are the ways of death,
verse. 12. Even the Powder-traytors thought they merited, when they intended to
blow up the whole State.

Alas, Natural men are no more fit to judge of spiritual matters, then blind
men are sit to judge of colors. And yet none more forward then they; as you
may see by those blind Sodomites, that dealt so roughly and coursely with Lot
and his two Angels, Genesis 19.1. to 12.

That they are ignorant, and so unfit, is evident of what is recorded of
^ich^l, 2 Samuel 6.16. Of Nichodemus, John 3.4. Of Festus, Acts 26.24. And
lastly, of Paul before his conversion. I was, says he, a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and an opposer of Christ and his members; but I did it igno^^^^ly
through unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13. It Is worth your observing too, that (...) no
sooner enlightened with the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, (...) was of a
contrary judgment, and preached that faith which before ^e ^^^demned and
persecuted. And this will be every one of their cases, (...); if not in this
life, yet hereafter, when Hell flames has opened their eyes, they will
confess. We fools thought his life madness, and his end to be without honor:
How is he now numbered with the children of God, and his lot among the Saints?
And when they shall see it, they shall be troubled with horrible fear, and
shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that
they looked for: and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within
themselves, This is he whom we once had in de^ision, and in a proverb of
reproach, therefore have we erred from the way of truth, we wearied our selves
in the way of wickedness and destruction: but as for the way of the Lord, we
have not known it. The light of righteousness has not shined unto us, nor has
the Son of righteousness arose upon us. What has pride profited us? or what
good has our riches and our vaunting brought us? with more of the like, for
which read, Wisdom 5. And what is the cause they acknowledge not the same now,
but their blindness and folly? and because they put their own faults in that
part of the wallet that is behind them; but ours in the other part, or end
which is before them: For self-examination would make their judgments more
charitable. Read also these Testimonies, John 15.21. and 16.2, 3. Mar. 16.23.
and 22.29. 1 Cor. 2.8. Isa. 5.20. But I will give you other instances. Was it
not an argument that Haman was blind? who thought Mordecaies not bowing the
knee to him, a more heinous offense, then his own murdering of thousands? Were
not the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees blind, who could see more unlawfulness in
the Disciples plucking a few ears of Corn on the sabbath day? and the Palsy
man's carrying his bed; then in their own devouring of Widows houses? who
thought they might better murder Christ, then others believe in him? and be
themselves the greatest of sinners, then our Savior to be in company with
sinners? Was not Ahab blind? who thought Elijah more troubled Israel, in doing
the will of the Lord, then himself in provoking the Lord above all the Kings of
Israel that were before him. And the like in our days. Is it not the manner of
thousands with us? not only of Clownes, and ill-bred people, who walk after the
flesh, in the lusts of uncleanness (whom St. Peter calls bruit beasts, led with
sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed.) But of proud wits, who one
would think should have more brains, and know something, to speak evil of the
things which they understand not, 2 Pet. 2.12. Yea, how severely will they
censure, not only things indifferent, but the most holy and approved good
duties in the godly? while they will patiently pass by the most heinous
crimes, as cursing, blaspheming, etc. in themselves and others; an infallible
sign of a man not born anew. Yea, will they not more deeply censure our
serving of God, then their own blaspheming of him? and think it a more heinous
offense in us to be holy, then for themselves to be profane, and persecute
holiness.

And what one does, is a law to the rest, being like a flock of sheep; which if
they but see one take a wrong way, all the rest will follow. As you may see in
the Example of Corah, and his two hundred and fifty followers, in Demetrius and
his fellows, in their quarrel against Paul and his companions. And lastly, in
Lots neighbors, Genesis 19. where you shall read, that when some Godless persons
had assaulted him, and his two Angels; before night, all the men of the City,
from the young even to the old, from all quarters compassed the house round,
seeking to break it open, railing upon, and reviling him. Yea, though they were
struck with blindness, they would not leave off, until they had wearied
themselves, and felt fire and brimstone about their ears, verse. 4. to 2 5.

Natural men in heavenly things, resemble Shel-fish, that have no smell: Or the
Camelion that has no taste. Nor do they see any more, then the mere bark or
outside of spiritual performances, 2 Samuel 6.16. And the Flesh ( Satan's ready
instrument) will be ever suggesting to them strange surmises, touching what the
Religious either say, or do.

And still, the more sottish, the more censorious: For where is least brain,
there is most tongue, and loudest. Even as a Brewers Cart upon the stones,
makes the lowdest noise, when his barrels are emptiest. They that know least,
will censure most, and most deeply. It is from the weakest judgments, that the
beaviest judgment comes. And so the more censorious, the more sottish, seem
they never so wise in the worlds account: For admit they have a show of
wisdom; yet for matter of Religion and saving knowledge, they know not their
right hand from their left; as it fared with those sixscore thousand Ninevites,
Jonas 4.11.

So that it is no disparagement to us, seem they never so learned: As what but
their ignorance makes them so censure us. They suspect much, because they know
little; as children in the dark, suppose they see what they see not. Yea, a
Dog will be very violent in barking at his own shadow on a wall, or face in a
glass. The Duke of Vondosme seeing his own and others faces in a well, called
for aid against the Antipodes. Paglarencis thought himself cozened, when he
saw his sow had eleven Pigs, and his Mare but one Foale that would be confessed.
So that they are like Harpast, a blind woman in Seneca's family, who fouud
fault with the darkness of the house when the fault was in her want of sight.
Or the Owl, that complained of the glory of the Sun, when the fault was in
her own eyes. Or like Pentheus, in Euripides his Bacchus, who supposed he saw
two Suns, two Thebes, every thing double: when his brain alone was troubled.
Or those that are vertiginous, who think all things turn round, all err: when
the error is only in their own brains. And so much for caution to the one.

60.
Secondly, for comfort to the other; If all natural men are (like Sampson
without his guide,) not able without the Holy Ghosts direction, to find out
the Pillars of the house, the principles of faith: let us not wonder, that they
swe^ve so much from the godly in their judgment, and practice: As is it any
strange thing to see a blind man stumble and fall? Neither let us be
discouraged, maugre all their slander and opposition. Nor think the worse of
our selves, if such shall reproach us never so: The Corinthians exceedingly
slighted Paul, he was this, and he was that; But what says Paul? With me it is
a very small thing that I should be judged of you, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. We know
little children will often laugh at wise men, when they are about serious and
necessary affairs: which notwithstanding is not an argument of the unworthiness
of the things they la^gh at; but of the folly of them which laugh. Will the
Merchant be discouraged because his wine pleases not a sick man's palate? Much
less cause have we to be discouraged by their distaste, or dislike of us and
our actions, as having more certainty to rely upon; they perhaps have sense,
reason, and experience to rely upon, but we have them with the advantage of
Gods Word, and Spirit, and Faith, three infallible witnesses. Yea, we have
great cause to rejoice, that they revile, and speak evil of us. For this is
both a token of perdition to them, and to us of salvation, and that of God, as
the Apostle phraseth it, Phil. 1.28.

True, they may raise any slander upon the best of us, as the Chief Priests did
upon our Savior, Math. 28.13, 14. and that slander may be believed time out of
mind, (as the Jews to this day believe that his Disciples stole him out of
the Sepulcher) Matthew. 28.15. to the hardening of many in their Atheism, and
Unbelief: For what should hinder? When Naboth was proved to be a blasphemer of
God, and Susanna a whore upon oath; and the same recorded to posterity; when
Jeremiah was reported to be an enemy to the State? Paul a polluter of the
Temple? Steven a destroyer of the Law? All the Disciples deceivers, and Christ
himself a wine-bibber, a Sabbath-breaker, a seducer of the people, a Beelzebub,
etc. So we may perhaps under-goe the like, in one kind or other (as the Devils
servants, want neither wit nor malice to devise;) But what need it trouble us,
so long as it shall add weight to our Crowns? For if we any way suffer for
Christ, be it but rebuke for his sake, happy are we here, and great shall our
reward be in heaven, Mat. 5.11, 12.

Wherefore let us never be ashamed of our Masters service, nor of their
censures: No matter what Judas says touching Mary's ointment, so long as
Christ approves of it. Did our Savior Christ forbear to heal on the Sabbath
day, because the Scribes and Pharisees took it ill? no, but rather did it the
more, Luke 6.7 to 12. and Luke 13.31, 32. When Peter and John were charged to
speak no more in the name of Jesus; their answer was, We cannot but speak that
which we have heard and seen, Acts 4.20. When Michol scoft David, and called
him fool for his dancing before the Arc; His answer was, I will be yet more
vile, and more lowly in mine own eyes. He knew that nothing could be more
heroical, then this very abasement. And it is our very case. Every scoffing
Michol, (for none else will do it) every drunken sot, derides our holy
profession: but with God and the gracious, we shall be had in honor. Yea, our
very malicious, and scoffing adversaries shall honor us, by deriding us. Their
dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor. Wherefore let us
imitate St. Austin; who as he feared the praise of good men, so he detested
that of evil, and ungodly men. And take our Saviors counsel; seek to justify
our judgments, to the children of wisdom, of whom she is justified; and not
to fools, by whom she is daily crucified. Neither let any think the better of
such whom they extol; for the blind eat many a fly.

61.
Thirdly, are the one regenerate, the other carnal? the one of this world, the
other chosen out of it? the one children of light, and of the day, the other
blind and in darkness? the one Christ's friends, the other his enemies? do the
one live after the flesh, the other after the spirit, Gal. 5.25. 1 Pet. 4.2.
Then look we for no love from, or peace with them: Different dispositions can
never agree. There can be no amity, where there is no sympathy. Athens and
Sparta could never agree, for that the one was addicted to serve Minerva, the
other Mars. Yea, when it was said of Phocian and Demosthenes, that they could
never agree; it was answered, No, how should they? when the one drinks water,
and the other wine. Much more may it be applied to these, when the holy Ghost
says, 2 Cor. 6. What communion between light and darkness? what peace between
the Believer and the Infidel? or unbeliever, verse. 14, 15. And in another
place; Know ye not, that the amity of the world, is the enmity of God? And that
whosoever will be a friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God, Jam.
4.4. And again, He that is borne after the flesh, will persecute him that is
born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. Yea, Solomon tells us directly, and in plain
terms, That a wicked man is abomination to the just; and that he who is upright
in his way, is abomination to the wicked, Pro. 29.27. Even our very ways which
God has commanded us to walk in, are abomination to them.

Whence it is, that the Natural man can agree with all that be natural; be
they civil, or profane, Turks, or Jews, Papists or Atheists, because all
these agree with him in blindness, and darkness: But with a sincere, and holy
Christian, a practicer of piety, he can never agree, because his light is
contrary to the natural man's darkness; Grace in the one, is a secret disgrace
to the other. Wherefore to be without enemies, or to have such our friends, we
may rather wish then hope; yea, once to expect it, were an effect of frenzy,
not of hope. Only let not us by our offending God, or jarring amongst our
selves, put weapons into their hands to wound us withal: and then we are sure
to have Christ (who is able enough to vindicate all our wrongs) to assist us,
and prevent our Enemies.

62.
Fourthly, If none be truly wise, but such as have passed the second birth; and
that this wisdom which makes us differ, comes down from the Father of
lights; and that we cannot have it, except God vouchsafe to give it us: it may
teach us to be humble, Job 42.6. And not like the Ape, that is proud of his
Masters jacket: And thankful, for Heavenly notions, grow not in us; we spin
them not out of our own breasts. Nor was there any thing in us, that makes us
differ: we slept nigh half our time in ignorance, and that we ever awakened,
it was only Gods infinite goodness and free grace. What cause have we then
to bless the giver? And to become suitors to our Savior in their behalf, who
are not yet awake: That he will be pleased to open their eyes, and remove that
vail which is laid over their hearts, in their hearing the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.14,
15, 16. And in the mean-time, let us condole their disastres, and drop some
tears in pity and compassion for their great and grievous misery.

Fifthly, and lastly, If with God one spark of spiritual, experimental, and
saving knowledge, be of more worth then all humane wisdom and learning, then
strive we after that knowledge that will make us for ever blessed. Let us so be
learned, that we may be saved. Let us not in our hearing, reading, and
communication, do as little children, that look only upon the babies in a
Book, without regard to the matter therein contained. But like men in years,
have more respect to the pith, and solidity of the matter, then to the phrase;
and to the profit of our souls, then the pleasing of our senses. Yea, let us so
mind what we either hear or read; that if any virtue be commended, we practice
it; if any vice condemned, we avoid it; if any consolation be insinuated, we
appropriate it; if any good example be propounded, we follow it. Yea, so mind
we what we hear, or read, as if it were spoke only to each of us in
particular; which to do, is to be for every happy. Good counsel for our young
Gulls, who will hear no other Ministers but such as flatter sin, and flout
holiness; nor read other Books, then such as fill them with Pride, and Lust,
and the Devil.

So I have given you a good, and profitable Book, one faultlesse fault being
born with. An answer that may satisfy such as shall make the Objection I
expect, viz. about repetition, which I take to be a fault deserving thanks.

If any shall find themselves gameis by reading of this piece, let them also
peruse the two foregoing parts, viz. The Hearts Index, and A short and sure
way to Grace and salvation, as treating upon the most needful subjects for a
natural man's conversion, that I could think of: The which being small things,
are sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews, welyard; And by Henry
Cripps, in Pope's Head Alley.

ERRATA.
Not to mention all the litterall mistakes, and points misplaced; there is one
fault in the Title page so gross, (though it past the view, both of
Transcriber, Composer, Corrector, and Author, without being discerned:) that
it would be mended with a pen, and of Floreligus, made Florilegus.

FINIS.
A serious and Pathetical Description OF HEAVEN AND HELL, According to the
Pencil of the HOLY GHOST; and the best Expositors: sufficient (with the
blessing of GOD) to make the worst of men hate Sin, and love Holiness.
Being five Chapters taken out of a Book entitled, The whole Duty of a
Christian; Composed by R. YOUNG^ of Roxwell in Essex, Florilegus*
CHAP. XIX.
Section I.
THus as the Unbeliever and Disobedient is cursed in eve^^ thing, and
wherever he goes, and in whatsover he does: Cursed in the City, and cursed
also in the field; cursed in the fruit of his body, and in the fruit of his
ground, and in the fruit of his Cattle: Cursed when he comes in* and cursed
also when he goes out; cursed in this life, and cursed in the life to come; as
is at large expressed, Deuteronomy. 28. So the Believer that obeyes the voice of the
Lord, shall be blessed in every thing he does, wherever he goes, and in
whatsoever befalls him, as God promises in the former part of the same Chapter,
and as I have proved in the eleven foregoing Sections. Yea, God will bl^ss all
that belong unto him; for his children and posterity, yea many generations
after him shall fare the better for his sake, Exodus 20.6. Genesis 30.27. Isa.
54.15. and 65.8. Romans 11.28. Genesis 18.26, 29, 31, 32. and 26.24. and 39.5. 1
King. 11.12, 32, 34* and (...) where he dwells, perhaps the whole Kingdom he
lives in, Genesis 39, to 48. Chap. Whereas many, yea, multitudes, Numb. 25.18.
Deuteronomy. 1.37. and 3.26. Psalm. 106.32. even a whole Army, Josh. 7.4, to 14. yea,
his childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation, fare the worse
for a wicked man, and an unbeliever, Exodus 20 5. Besides, his prayers shall
profit many; for he is more prevalent with God, to take away a judgment from a
people or a Nation, than a thousand others, Exodus 17.11, 12, 13. And he counts
it a sin to cease praying for his greatest and most malicious enemies, 1 Samuel
12.23. Though they like fools, would (if they durst, or were permitted,) cut
him off, and all the race of Gods people, Psalm. 83.4. Hester 3.6, 9, 13. Which
is as if one with a hatchet should cut off the bough of a Tree upon which he
stands: For they are beholding to Believers for their very lives: yea, it is
for their sakes, and because the number of Christ's Church is not yet
accomplished, that they are out of Hell. But to go on, as all things ( viz.)
poverty, imprisonment, slander, persecution, sickness, death, temporal
judgments, spiritual desertions; yea even sin and Satan himself, shall turn
together for the best unto those that love God, as you have seen: So all things
shall turn together for the worst unto those that hate God, as all unbelievers
do, Romans 1.30. John 15.18. even the mercy of God, and the means of grace, shall
prove their bane, and inhaunce their damnation: yea Christ himself, that only
summum bonum, who is a Savior to all Believers, shall be a just revenger to
all Unbelievers: and bid the one, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41, 46. Which shall be an
everlasting departure, not for a day, nor for years of days, nor for millions
of years, but for eternity; into such pains as can neither be expressed nor
conceived, Jude 6, 7. Rev. 20.10. Mat. 3.12. Heb. 6.2.

Sect. 2. Wickedness has but a time, a short time, a moment of time; but the
punishment of wickedness is beyond all time; There shall be no end of plagues
to the wicked man, Prove. 24.20. Their worm shall not dye, neither shall their
fire be quenched, Isa. 30.33. and 66.24. Matthew. 25.41. Mark. 9.44. And
therefore it is said, the smoke of their torment does asce^d for ever and ever,
Rev. 4.12. and 20.10. So that if all the men that ever have, or shall be
created, were Briareus like hundred-handed, and should at once take pens in
their hundred hands, and do nothing else for ten hundred thousand millions of
years, but sum up in figures as many hundred thousand millions as they could;
yet never could they reduce to a total, or confine within number, this
trisyllable word [ Eternal,] or that word of four syllables [ Everlasting.]

Now let such as forget God, but seriously consider this; it will not be an
imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, but during the King of Kings pleasure:
It is not a captivity of seventy years, like that of the children of Israel in
Babylon; for that had an end: nor like a captivity of seventy millions of
generations; for that also would in time be expired: but even for ever: The
wicked shall live as long in Hell, as there shall be a just God in Heaven.

Here we measure time by days, months, years* but fot (...) is no
Arithmetitian can number it: no Geometrician can measure it. For suppose the
whole world were turned into a mountain of sand, and that a little Wren should
come every thousand year, and carry away from that heap but one grain of the
sand, what an infinite number of years would be spent and expired, before the
whole heap would be fercht away? but admit a man should stay in torments so
long, and then have an end of his woe, it were some comfort to think, that an
end will come: but alas* when she has finished this task a thousand times
over, he shall be as far from an end of his anguish, as ever he was the very
first hour he entered into it.

Now, Suppose thou should lie but one night grieviously aff^^cted with a
raging fit of the stone, strangury, toothache, pangs of travel, or the like;
though thou had to help and ease thee, a soft bed to lie on, friends about to
comfort thee, Physicians to cure thee, all cordial and comfortable things to
aswage thy pain; yet how tedious and painful would that one night seem unto
thee? how would thou toss, and tumble, and turn from one side to another?
counting the clock, esteeming every minute a month, and thy present misery
unsupportable. What then will it be to lie in stames of fire? (to which our
fire is but air in comparison,) fire and brimstone kept in the highest flame
by the unquenchable wrath of God, world without end; where thou shall have
nothing about thee but darkness and horror; wayling and wringing of hands,
desperate yellings and gnashing of teeth; thy old companions in vanity and sin,
to ban and curse thee; the Devils insulting over thee, with cruelty and scorn;
the never-dying worm of conscience, to feed upon thy soul and flesh, for ever
and ever. O everlasting eternity* a never-dying life, an ever-living death!

Which yet is but just with God; for if thou might have lived for ever, thou
would have sinned for ever. If God would everlastingly have spared thee, thou
would have everlastingly hated and provoked him. What then can be more
equal, then that thou should suffer everlastingly?

O then bethink thy self of this word eternal and everlasting, and ponder upon
it: yea do but indeed believe it, and it will be enough to break thine hard
heart, and make it relent and repent, and thereby prevent the wrath to come. It
will put thee to a demur, What have I done? what am I now about? whether will
this course tend? how will it end? what will become of me if I go on? in
chambering and wantonness, surfeting and drunkenness, strife and envying,
swearing, profaneness, earthly-mindedness, and the like? For indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, shall be upon the soul of every one that does
evil, and continues therein, as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 2.8, 9. O then!
break off thy sins without delay, and let there be an healing of thine errors.

Sect. 3. Neither is the extremity of pain inferior to the perpetuity of it,
it is a place full of horror and amazedness; where is no remission of sin, no
dismission of pain, no intermission of sense, no permission of comfort; its
torments are both intolerable and interminable: and (...) neither he enda(...)

The pangs of the first death are pleasant, compared with those of the second:
For mountains of sand were lighter, and millions of years shorter, than a tithe
of those torments, Rev. 20.10. Jude 7. It is a death which has no death; it
has a beginning, it has no ending, Matthew. 3.12. Isa. 66 24.

The pain of the body, is but the body of pain; the anguish of the soul, is the
soul of anguish: For should we first burn off one hand, then another, after
that each arm, and so all the parts of the body, it would be deemed
intolerable; and no man would endure it for all the profits and pleasures this
world can afford; and yet it is nothing to the burning of body and soul in
hell. Should we endure ten thousand years torments in hell, it were grievous;
but nothing to eternity: Should we suffer one pain it were miserable enough;
but if ever we come there, our pains shall be for number and kinds, infinitely
various, as our pleasures have been here; every sense and member, each power
and faculty both of soul and body, shall have their several objects of
wretchedness, and that without intermission, or end, or eas^* or patience to
endure it, Luke 12 5. and 16.23. Matthew. 3.12. and 5.22. and 22.23.

The Schools affirm, that the least torture in Hell, exceeds the greatest that
can be devised by all the men on earth; even as the least joy in Heaven,
surpasses the greatest comfort here on earth. There is scarce any pain here on
earth, but there is ever some hope of ease, mitigation, or intermission; of
some relief or deliverance: but in Hell, their torments are easeless, endless,
and remediless; unsufferable, and yet ineviteable, and themselves left
hopeless, helpless, pittyless.

It were misery enough, to have the headache, toothache, Colic, gowt, burning
in the fire; or if there be any thing more grievous: Yea, should all these, and
many more meet together in one man, at one instant: they would come infinitely
short of the pains of Hell. Yea, they would all b^ bar as the stinging of
Antes, to the lashes of those Scorpions: but as dr^pes, to those Vials of
wrath, as sparks to that flame, as Chrysostom speaks. The Furnace of Babell,
was but a flea-biting, to this tormenting Tophet, prepared of old, Isa. 30. He
has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath
of the Lord like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it, verse. 32. So that it
were happy for reprobate spirits, if they were in no worse condition, than so
many Toads or Serpents. As consider, If a dark dungeon here be so loathsome,
what is that dungeon of eternal, of utter darkness? If material fire be so
terrible, what is Hell fire? Here we cry out of a burning fever, or, if a very
coal from the hearth do but light on our flesh, O how it grieves us; we cannot
hold our finger for one minute in scalding lead; but there both body and soul,
shall fry in everlasting flames, and be continually tormented, by infernal
fiends; whose society alone, would be sufficiently frightfull.

Sect. 4. Now consider* Is one hours twitches of t^^ ^orm of conscience here?
yo^ one minutes t^^ch of a tooth pulling out, so unsufferable? what is a
(...)mented in that flame: what think we shall that torment be, when body and
soul come to be united in torment? since the pains of Hell are more exquisite,
than all the united torments, that the earth can invent. Yea, the pains and
sufferings of the damned, are ten thousand times more than can be imagined by
any heart under heaven, and can rather (through necessity) be endured, than
expressed. It is a death never to be painted to the life; no pen nor pencil,
nor art, nor heart, can comprehend it, Matthew. 18.8, 9, 10. and 25.30. Luke 16
23, 24. 2 Pet. 2.4. Isa. 5.14. and 30 33. Prove. 15.11. Yea were all the land
paper, and all the water ink, every plant a pen, and every other creature a
ready Writer, yet they could not set down the least piece of the great pains of
hellfire.

Now add eternity to extremity, and then consider hell to be hell indeed. For
if the Ague of a year, or the Colic of a month, or the Rack of a day, or the
burning of an hour be so bitter here; how will it break the hearts of the
wicked, to feel all these beyond all measure, beyond all time? So that it is an
evil and bitter thing, to depart from the living God.

We poor mortals, (until God does bring us from under the power of Satan unto
himself) do live in the world, as if hell were not so hot, no^ the Devil so
black, as indeed they are: as if Hell and Heaven, were the one not worth the
avoiding, the other not worth the enjoying: but the heat of fire was never
painted, and the Devil is more deformed than represented on the wall. There are
unexpressible torments in Hell, as well as unspeakable joys in Heaven.

Nor will this be their case alone, that are desparately wicked; cursing and
blaspheming Drunkards, and sheders of blood; but of all impenitent persons. As
for instance, They who have lived in the fire of lust here, must not think much
to be scorched in the flames of Hell hereafter, Heb. 13.4. Rev. 21.8. and
22.15. The detractor is a devil above ground, his tongue is already set on fire
from hell, James 3.6. Rev. 16.10, 11. which does sadly presage, what will be
his portion for ever, unless repentance quench, those flames; and so of the
like offenders, Psalm. 9.17. Revel. 22.12. As what says the Apostle? Neither
fornicators, nor thieves, nor murderers, nor drunkards, nor swearers, nor
raylors, nor liars, nor covetous persons, nor unbelievers, nor no unrighteous
persons shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, but shall have their part and
portion in that lake which burns with the fire and brimstone, which is the
second death, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.8. which did they well consider, they
durst not continue in the practice of these sins without fear or remorse, or
care of amendment.

Sect. 5. Now what heart would not bleed, to see men run headlong into these
tortures that are thus intolerable? Dance hoodwinkt into this perdition? O
that it were allowed to the desperate russians of our days, that swear and
curse, drink and drab, rob, shed blood, etc. (as if Heaven were blind and deaf
to what they do) to have but a sight of this Hell! how would it charm their
mouths, appale their spirits, strik^ fear and astonishment into their hearts?
Yea if a sinner could see but one glimpse of hell, or be suffered to look one
moment into that fiery Lake, he would rath(...) sin. Nor can I think they would
do as they do, if they did but either see or foresee, what they shall one day
(without serious and unfeigned repentance) feel. And indeed, therefore are we
dissolute, because we do not think what a judgment there is after our
dissolution: because we make it the least, and last thing we think on; yea, it
is death, we think, to think upon death: and we cannot endure that doleful
bell which summons us to judgment, Lam. 1.9. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that men would
believe and consider this truth, and do accordingly!

Oh that thou would remember, that there is a day of account, a day of
death, a day of judgment coming, Heb. 9.27. Matthew. 25. wherein the Lord Jesus
Christ shall be revealed from Heaven* with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
to render vengeance unto them which obey not his Gospel; and to punish them
with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, as the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. Jude 15. Isa. 33 14. Mat.
25.46.

As consider seriously, I beseech you, whether it will not be worth the while,
so to foresee the torments of Hell, that you may prevent them: Or if otherwise,
will you not one day wish you had, when death comes and arrests you to appear
before the great and terrible Judge of all the world? Luke 16 23. to 32. Matthew.
13.30, 38. at which time an Assizes or Quarter Sessions shall be held within
thee, where Reason shall sit as Judge, and Satan shall put in a Bill of
Indictment, as long as that Book in Zechary, Chap. 5.2. Ezekiel. 2.9, 10. wherein
shall be alleged all the evil deeds that ever thou have committed, and all the
good deeds that ever thou have omitted, with their several circumstances that
may aggravate them, Eccles. 11.9. and 12.14. 2 Cor. 5.10. and all the curses
and judgments that are due to every sin. Thine own Conscience shall accuse
thee, and thy memory shall give bitter evidence against thee; and thou shall
condemn thy self, before the just condemnation of thy Judge, who knows all thy
misdeeds better than thy self, 1 John 3 20. Which sins of thine will not then
leave thee, but cry unto thee, We are thy works, and we will follow thee, Rev.
14.13.

And then who can sufficiently express what thy grief and anguish will be, when
the summons both of the first and second death do overtake thee at once? Prove.
1.27. And when at once thou shall think of thy sins past, thy present misery,
and the terror of thy torments to come; and how thou have made Earth thy
Paradise, thy belly thy God, and lust thy Law; so sowing vanity, and reaping
misery. And finding, that as in thy prosperity thou neglectedst to serve God,
so now in thy adversity God refuses to save thee, Prove. 1.24. to 32. Ezekiel.
23.35. When thou shall call to mind the many warnings thou have had of this
doleful day, from Christ's faithful Ambassadors, and how thou then made but
a mock or jeer at it, Prove. 1 25. and think how for the short sinful pleasures
thou have enjoyed, thou must endure eternal pains, Luke 16.24, 25. and Rev.
6.12.10.18. Which yet thou shall think most just and equal; saying, As I have
deserved, so I am served: for I was often enough offered mercy, yea (...) to
accept thereof* but I preferr^^ (...) pleasing of my (...) and the allurements
of Satan, than the Word of God, or the motions of his holy Spirit, Prove. 1.24,
etc. Mark 16.16. And (which I would have thee think upon) Hell fire is made
more hot, by neglecting so great salvation, Heb. 2.3. This is the condemnation
(says our Savior, none like this) that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil, Joh. 3.29. Now
salvation is freely offered, but men reject it; hereafter they would accept of
salvation, but God will reject them. Yea then a whole world (if thou had it)
for one hours delay, or ^^spite, that thou might have space to repent, and
sue unto God for mercy: but it cannot be, because thy body, which joined with
thy soul in thy sinful actions, is now altogether unfit to join with her in
the exercise of repentance; and repentance must be of the whole man. Besides,
death will take no pity; the Devil knows no mercy, and the God of mercy will
have utterly forsaken thee. Then will thou say, Oh that I had been more wise!
or that I were now to begin my life again; then would I contemn the world with
all its vanities: yea, if Satan should then offer me all the treasures,
pleasures and promotions of this world, he should never entice me to forget the
terrors of this dreadful hour, and those worse which are to follow, Luke
16.24, etc. and 13.28.

But, Oh wretched Caitiff that I am! how has the Devil and my own deceitful
and devilish heart deluded me? and how am I served accordingly? For now is my
case more miserable than the most despised Toad or Serpent, that perishes when
it dies; in that I must go to answer at the great Judgment Seat for all my
sins, that am not able to answer for one of the least of them, Eccles. 12.14.
Mat. 18.34. that I who heretofore gloried in my lawless liberty, am now to be
enclosed in the very claws of Satan, as the trembling Partridge within the
griping tallons of the ravening and devouring Falcon. Oh, Cursed be the day
when I was born, and the time when my mother conceived me, etc. Job. 3.

Sect. 6. And so death having given thee thy fatal stroke, the Devil shall
seize upon, or snatch away thy soul, so soon as it leaves thy body, Luke 12.20.
and hale the hence into the bottomless lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone; where she is to be kept in chains of darkness, until the general
judgment of the great day, Jude 6, 7. 1 Pet. 3.19 Rev. 21.8. Thy body in the
mean time being cast into the earth, expecting a fearful resurrection, when it
shall be reunited to thy soul; that as they sinned together, so they may be
everlastingly tormented together, Heb. 10.27. At which general Judgment, Christ
sitting upon his Throne, Joh. 5.22. shall rip up all the Benefits he has
bestowed on thee, and the miseries he has suffered for thee; and all the
ungodly deeds that thou have committed, and all the hard speeches which thou
have spoken against him, and his holy ones, Jude 15. Eccles. 12.14. and 11.9.
Within thee shall be thine own conscience, more then a thousand witnesses to
accuse thee: the Devils who tempted thee to all thy lewdness, shall on the ^ne
side testify with thy conscience against thee; (...) on the other side shall
stand the holy Saints and Angels, approv(...) thee all the world burning with
flaming fire; above thee an irefull Judge of deserved vengeance, ready to
pronounce his heavy sentence upon thee: beneath thee the fiery and sulphurous
mouth of the bottomless pit, gaping to receive thee, Isa. 5.11, 14. And in this
woeful and doleful condition thou must stand forth to receive with other
Reprobates this thy sentence, Romans 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.10. [ Depart from me] there
is a separa^ion from all joy and happiness, [ ye cursed,] there is a black and
direful excommunication, [ into fire] there is the extremity of pain, [
everlasting,] there is the perpetuity of punishment; [ prepared for the Devil
and his Angels] there are thy infernal tormenting, and tormented companions,
Matthew. 25.41. O terrible sentence! from which there is no escaping,
withstanding, excepting, or appealing. Then, O then shall thy mind be tormented
to think; how for the love of abortive pleasures, which even perished before
they budded; thou ha^t so foolishly lost Heavens joys, and incurred hellish
pains, which last to all eternity, Luke 16.24, 25. Thy conscience shall ever
sting thee like an Adder; when thou calle^t to mind, how often Christ by his
Ministers offered thee remission of sins; and the Kingdom of Heaven freely; if
thou would but believe and repent, and how easily thou might have obtained
mercy in those days. How near thou wast many times to have repented; and yet
did suffer the Devil and the World, to keep thee still in impenitency; and
how the day of mercy is now past, and will never dawn again. Thy understanding
shall be racked to consider, how for momentary riches, thou have lost eternal
treasure; and exchanged Heavens felicity, for Hells misery: where every part
and faculty, both of thy body and soul, shall be continually and alike
tormented, without intermission or dismission of pain, or from it: and be for
ever deprived of the beatifical sight of God; wherein consists the sovereign
good, and life of the soul. Thou shall never see light, nor the least sight of
joy; but lie in a perpetual prison of utter darkness: where shall be no order
but horror; no voice but howling and blaspheming; no noise but screeching and
gnashing of teeth; no society but of the Devil and his Angels, who being
tormented themselves, shall have no other ease, but to wreak their fury in
tormenting thee, Matthew. 13.42. and 25.36, etc. Where shall be punishment
without any pity, misery without any mercy, sorrow without succor, crying
without comfort, malice without measure, torment without ease, Rev. 14.10, 11.
Where the wrath of God shall seize upon thy soul and body, as the flame of fire
does on the lump of pitch, or brimstone, Dan. 7.10. In which flame thou shall
ever be burning, and never consumed; ever dying, and never dead, ever roaring
in the pangs of death, and never rid of those pangs; nor expecting ^^d of thy
pains. So that after thou have endured them so many thousand years as there are
blades of grass on the earth, or sands in the Sea, (...) on the heads of all
the sons of Adam from the first to the last born; (...) there have been
creatures in Heaven and Earth; thou shall be no nearer (...) and of thy
torments, than thou wast the very first day that thou (...) into them: yea so
far are they (...), that they are ever (...) damned soul could but conceive
some hope, that those torments should have an end: this would be some comfort,
to think that at length an and will come, but as often as thy mind shall think
of this word never, (and thou shall ever be thinking of it) it will rend thy
heart in pieces with ^^ge, and hideous lamentation: as giving still new life,
to those unsufferable sorrows; which exceed all expression, or imagination. It
will be another hell in the midst of hell. Wherefore consider seriously what I
say, and that while the compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive
you; and do thereafter, Prove. 1.24, etc. Take warning by Pharaoh's example, who
in the Rich man's scalding torments has a Discite a me, Learn of me, Luke
16.23, etc. For he can testify out of woeful experience, that if we will not
take warn^ing by the Word, (that gentle warner) the next shall be harder, the
third and fourth harder than that; yea, as all the ten plagues did exceed one
another; so the eleventh single exceeds them altogether. Innumerable are the
curses of God against sinners, Deuteronomy. 28. but the ^ast is the worst,
comprehending and transcending all the rest. The fearfullest plagues, God still
reserves for the upshot: all the former do but make way for the last.

H^ll in Scripture is called a Lake, that burns with fire and brimstone: and
than the torment of the former, what more acute? than the smell of the latter,
what more noisome?

CHAP. XX.
Sect. 1. THus I say, shall they be bid, Depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire, etc. while on the contrary the same Christ shall say unto the other, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit, the Kingdom prepared for you, from before the
foundation of the world, Mat. 25 34. Which Kingdom is a place where are such
joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heared, neither has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9.

A place where there shall be no evil present, nor good absent, Heb. 9.12. Mat.
6.20. In comparison whereof, all the Thrones and Kingdoms upon earth, are less
than the drop of a bucket, Deuteronomy. 10.14. 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. Isa. 66.1.

Heaven in Scripture, is compared to a Kingdom for soverainty, to a Throne for
preheminency, to a Crown for state and majesty, to an Inheritance for
perpetuity, to a Marriage Feast for plenty, pleasure and delicacy, and to
whatsoever else may set forth its excellency; though indeed in these
comparisons, there is little or no comparison, as I might show you in many
particulars, if I would be large: for instances in this case would be endless.

There death shall have no more dominion over us, Romans 6.9. The Sun* shall not
burn us by day, nor the Moon by night, Psalm. 121.6. There all (...) shall be
wiped from our eyes, Rev. 7.17. There shall be no sorrow, no^ pain, nor
complaint; there is no malice to rise up against us, no (...) afflict us; no
hunger, thirst, wearisomness, temptation, to disquiet us, (...) 19, 20. Heb.
9.12. There is no death nor dearth, no pin^^g nor (...) Rev. 7.16, 17. and
21.4. Heb. 9.12. There, O there! one day is better than a thousand; there is
Rest from our Labors, Peace from our Enemies, Freedom from our Sins, etc.
Job. 3.17. Heb. 4.3, 9, 10, 11, Rev. 14 13. Heb. 9.12, 15.

Sect. 2. Unto which Negative Privileges, there are also added Positive of all
sorts, as I might plentifully prove, but I study brevity. Do we delight in good
company? what pleasure shall we take in the company of Saints and Angels? in
whom there is nothing not amiable, comfortable, delectable? nothing in us, that
may cool the fervor of our love and affection to them. And so of all other
enjoyments: As, Do thou desire beauty, riches, honor, pleasure, long life,
or whatever else can be named? No place so glorious by creation, so beautiful
with delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation, nor so
durable for lasting, Heb. 12.22. 1 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Romans 9.3. and.
8.18. There are no Estates but Inheritances, no Inheritances but Kingdoms, no
Houses but Palaces, no Meals but Feasts, no noise but Music, no Rods but
Scepters, no Garments but Robes, no Seats but Thrones, no coverings for the
head, but Crowns, Romans 8.17. Tit. 3.7. Heb. 9.15. Mat. 25.31, 34. 2 Timothy 4.8.
Gal. 4.7. 1 Pet. 3 9, 10. Mar. 10.23, 24, 25. Rev. 7.13, 14, 15. and 6.11.

There we shall see the blessed face of God, which is the glory of all sights,
the sight of all glory. Yea, we our selves shall outshine the Sun in
brightnese, Mat. 13.43. For if the brightness of the body, shall match the Sun,
what will the glory and splendor of the soul be? And yet such honor shall all
the Saints have. For when Christ which is our head, and life, shall appear;
then shall we also appear with him in glory. And he shall change our vile and
mortal body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body, Col. 3 4. Phil
3.21.

Briefly, Our joy shall there be fall, and none shall be able to take it from
us, or diminish it, John 15.11. and 16.22. There is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 26. Joys and pleasures never ebbing, but ever
slowing to all contentment. There we shall rejoice, for the pleasantness of the
place we possess; for the glory of our souls and bodies, which we have put on;
for the world which we have overcome; for Hell which we have escaped; for the
joys of Heaven which we have attained to. We shall have joy above us, by the
beatifical vision and sight of God: joy within us, by the peace of conscience,
even the joy of the Holy Ghost; and joy round about us, by the blessed company,
and fellowship of our associates, the holy Saints and Angels.

Sect. 3. And in reason, if a Christian-soul in this Tabernacle of the body,
wherein we see but as in a glass, be so delighted to see the face of God
manifested in Jesus Christ; If it so glads a Child of God, when he can but in
the least measure master his corruptions, or has occasion to manifest the
sincerity of his affectionate love to his Maker, and Redeemer, (...) to serve
his Brethren in love: How joyful will he be, when these gra(...) be perfected,
and he freed from all grievances inward and out(...) Yea, if the communion, and
(...) of Gods Spirit, and (...) and ordinances* (...) better than a thousand
with the ungodly, Psalm. 84.10. What will it be to enjoy the immediate presence,
and glory of God our Father? Christ our Redeemer, and elder-Brother? the Holy
Ghost our Comforter? the Angels and Saints our Consorts, and Companions?

Our condition there will be so joyful, that look we outwardly, there is joy
in the society, Heb. 12.22. if inwardly, there is joy in our own felicity, 1
Cor. 2.9. Look we forward, there is joy in the eternity, 1 Pet. 5.10. Mark.
10.30. So that on every side we shall be even swallowed up of joy, Isa. 35.10.
and 51.11. Matthew. 25.23. and 18.10. Heb. 12.2, 22. Psalm. 16.11. As, Oh the
multitude and fullness of these joys! so many, that only God can number them;
so great, that he only can estimate them; of such ^arity and perfection, that
this world has nothing comparable to them, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. As, Oh the
transcendency of that Paradise of pleasure! where is joy without heaviness or
interruption; peace without perturbation; blessedness without misery; light
without darkness; health without sickness; beauty without blemish; abundance
without want; ease without labor; satiety without loathing; liberty without
restraint; security without fear; glory without ignominy; knowledge without
ignorance; eyes without tears; hearts without sorrow; souls without sin:
where shall be no evil heard of to affright us, nor good wanting to cheer us:
for we shall have what we can desire, and we shall desire nothing but what is
good, Deuteronomy. 10.14. Isa. 66.1. 1 King. 8.27. Mark* 10.21. Luke. 18.22. 1 Pet.
5.10. John 4.36. and 10.28. Matthew. 25.46.

Sect. 4 While we are here, how many clouds of discontent have we, to darken
the sunshine of our joy? when even complaint of evils past, sense of present,
and fear of future, have in a manner shared our lives among them. Here we love
and loath in an instant, (like Amnon to his Sister Tamar,) in Heaven there is
no object unlovely, nothing which is not exceeding amiable and attractive: And
not attractive only, but retentive also; for there we shall not be subject to
passion, nor can we possibly there misplace our affection. Here we have
knowledge mixed with ignorance, faith with doubting peace with trouble, yea
trouble of conscience. Or in (...) we have peace of conscience, alas how often
is it interrupted, with (...) of spirit? Now rejoice we with joy unspeakable
and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.84 but alas anon it falls out, that we need to pray with
David, Restore unto us the joy of thy salvation, Psalm. 51.12. but there is
peace, even full without want, pure without mixture, and perpetual without all
fear of foregoing, Dan. 2.44.

There shall be no concupiscence to tempt, no flesh to lust against the spirit,
no law in our members to rebel against the law of our minds.

Now abides Faith, Hope and Charity; these three now abide: but in Heaven,
Vision succeeds in the place of Faith; attainment in the place of Hope; and
perfect fruition and delectation in the room of Ch^^rity. There Promises shall
end in performances, Faith in sight and (...)sion, Hope in fruition and
Possession; yea time it self shall be swallowed (...) in Eternity: these are
the Soul^ Dowries in Heaven, where God (...) in Abraham, temperance in Joseph,
strength in Sampson, meekness in Moses, wisdom in Solomon, patience in Job,
(for it is rare to find all these graces, completely to meet in any one
subject,) but then and there he shall be omnia in omnibus; all these in every
of his servants! God shall be all in all, even the fullness of him that fills
all in all things, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1.23. The only knowledge of
God, shall fill up our understandings; and the alone love of God, shall possess
our affections. God shall be all in all to us; he will fill up our rational
part with the light of wisdom; our concupiscible part or appetite, with a
spring of righteousness; and the irascible part with perfect peace and
tranquillity, as Bernard expresses it. That is a blessed state, perpetual and
unchangeable: There is eternal Security, and secure Eternity, as Bernard
speaks: Or as Austin has it, There is blessed Eternity, and everlasting
Blessedness.

Let the end of our life then be, to come to a life whereof there is no end;
unto whith the Lord in his good time bring us, that we who now sow in tears,
may then reap in joy, the which he will be sure to do, if we but for a short
time serve him here in righteousness and sincerity. But otherwise, look we not
for eternal happiness, but for everlasting misery: For it is an everlasting
Rule, No grace, no holiness here; no glory, no happiness hereafter.

To sum up all in a word, there is no joy here comparable to that in Heaven:
all our mirth here to that is but pensiveness: all our pleasure here to that
but heaviness: all our sweetness here to that is but bitterness: Even Solomon
in all his glory and royalty, to that, was but as a spark in the chimney, to
the Sun in the firmament. Absaloms beauty, to that, is but deformity. Sampsons
strength, to that, is but infirmity. Methusalahs age, to theirs, is but
minority and mortality. Hazaels speed, and swiftness, but a snails pace to
their celerity. Yea, how little, how nothing, are the poor and temporary
enjoyments of this life, to those we shall enjoy in the next? 1 Cor. 2.9. Yea
Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, was but a wilderness, compared with this
Paradise. And indeed, if the Gates of the City be of Pearl, and the streets of
Gold; what then are the Inner-rooms, the dining and lodging Cha^^^^s? the
Presence Chamber of the great Monarch of Heaven and (...) what then may we
think of the Maker and Builder thereof?

In fine, (that I might da^kly shadow it out, since the lively representation
thereof is merely impossible) This life everlasting is the perfection of all
good things. For Fullness is the perfection of Measure; and Everlastingness the
perfection of Time; and Infiniteness the perfection of Number; and Immutability
the perfection of State; and immensity the perfection of Place; and Immortality
the perfection of Life; and God the p^^fection of All: who shall be All in All
to us; meat to our taste, beauty to our eyes, perfumes to our smell, music to
our ears. And what shall I say more? but as the Psalmist says, Glorious things
are spoken of thee, thou City of God, Psalm. 87.3. See Rev. 4.2, 3. and 21.10.
to the end.

Sect. ^. The glory of Heaven, cannot be comprehended here; only God has
vouchsafed to give us some small glimpses in the Scripture, (...) we may fram^
a conjecture, considerable enough to make u^ (...) of his fatherly
condescension, to stoop to our capacity, in representing Heavenly things under
earthly types: shaddowing out the joys thereof, by whatsoever is precious and
desirable in this life; as Cities, Kingdoms, Crowns, Pearls, Jewels, Marriages,
Feasts, etc. which supereminent and superabundant felicity, St. Paul that had
been an only witness, when he had been caught up into the third Heaven, not
able to describe, much less to amplify, sums up all in these words; A sure,
most excellent, exceeding and eternal weight of transcendant glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. and 12.2. But alas, such is man's parvity, that he is as far from
comprehending it, as his arms are from compassing it, 1 Cor. 2.9. Heaven shall
receive us, we cannot conceive Heaven. Do you ask what Heaven is, says one?
when I meet you there, I will tell you; For could this ear hear it, or this
tongue utter it, or this heart conceive it, it must needs follow, that they
were translated already thith^r, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. Yea, who can utter the
sweetness of that peace of conscience, and spiritual rejoicing in God, which
himself has tasted? If then the beginning and first fruits of it be so sweet;
what shall the fullness of that beatifical Vision of God be? If the earnest
penny be so precious and promising here; what shall the principal, and full
crop and Harvest of happiness in Heaven be? So that a man may as well with a
coal paint out the Sun in all his splendour, as with his pen, or tongue express,
or with his heart (were it as deep as the Sea) conceive the Fullness of those
Joys, and Sweetness of those Pleasures, which the Saints shall enjoy at Gods
right hand for evermore. Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is the fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand, are pleasures for evermore. For quality, they are
pleasures; for quantity, fullness; for dignity* at Gods right hand; for
Eternity, for evermore. And millions of years multiplied by millions, make not
up one minute to this Eternity, 2 Cor. 4.18. John 10.28.

The Eye sees much, the Ear hears more, the Heart conceives most; yet all short
of Apprehension, much more of comprehension, of those pleasures. Therefore it
is said, Enter thou into thy Masters joy; for it (...) great to enter into
thee, Matthew. 25.23. Neither will I any furthe^ ^^^cise my self in things too
high for me, Psalm. 131.1. For as St. Paul tells us, the heart of Man is not
able to conceive those joys; which being so, how should I be able to express
them in words?

And yet though we cannot comprehend this glory, this far most excellent,
exceeding and eternal weight of transcendent glory; yet may and ought we to
admire the never enough to be admired bounty and goodness of God and our
Redeemrr, in crying out, O the depth, etc! O the sweetness of his love! How
unsearchable are his thoughts, and intendments to man-ward? (once miserably
forlorn, lost and undone,) and his ways past finding out? Romans 11.33.

CHAP. XXI.
Sect. 1. BUt for the better confirming of this so important a (...)

First, If the Sun which is but a creature, be so bright and glorious, that no
mortal eye can look upon the brightness of it, how glorious then is the Creator
himself? or that light from whence it receives its light? If the frame of the
Heavens, and globe of the Earth be so glorious; which is but the lower house,
or rather the footstool of the Almighty, as the Holy Ghost phraseth it, Isa.
66.1. Matthew. 5.35. Act. 7.49. how glorious and wonderful is the Maker thereof,
and the City where he keeps his Court? Or if sinners, even the worst of wicked
men, and Gods Enemies, have here in this earthly pilgrimage, such variety of
enjoyments to please their very senses; as who can express the pleasurable
variety of Objects for the sight; of meats and drinks to satisfy and delight
the taste; of voices and melodious sounds, to recreate the hearing; of sents
and perfumes, provided to accommodate our very smellings; of recreations and
sports, to bewitch the whole man: And the like of honor and profit, which are
Idols that carnal men do mightily dote upon and take pleasure in: (though these
earthly and bodily joys are but the body, or rather the dregs of true joy,)
what think we must be the soul thereof, viz. those delights and pleasures, that
are reserved for the glorified Saints, and Gods dearest darlings in Heaven?
Again,

Secondly, If natural men find such pleasure and sweetness in secular wisdom,
lip-learning, and brain-knowledg; For even mundane knowledge has such a show of
excellency in it, that it is highly affected both by the good and bad; As, O
the pleasure that rational men take therein! It being so fair a Virgin, that
every clear eye is in love with her; so rich a Pearl, (...) at none but Swine
do despise it: yea among all the Trees in the Garden, none so takes with
rational men as the Tree of knowledge; (as Satan well knew, when he set upon our
first Parents) insomuch that Plato thinks, in case wisdom could but represent
it self unto the eyes, it would set the heart on fire with the love of it. And
others affirm, That there is no less difference between the Learned and the
Ignorant, than there is between the ^^^ing and the dead, or between men and
beasts. And yet the pleasure (...) ^atural and moral men take in secular and
mundane knowledge and lea^^^g, is nothing comparable to that pleasure that an
experimental Christian finds in the Divine and Supernatural knowledge of Gods
Word: which makes David and Solomon prefer it before the honey and the
honeycomb for sweetness; and to value it above thousands of gold and silver;
yea, before Pearls and all precious stones for worth. How sweet then shall our
knowledge in Heaven be? For here we see but darkly, and as it were in a glass,
or by moonlight; but there we shall know, even as we are known, and see God
and Christ in the face, 1 Cor. 13.12.

Thirdly, if mere Naturians have been so taken with the love of Virtue, that
they thought if a virtuous soul could but be seen with corporal eyes, it would
ravish all men with love and admiration thereof; yea if the very worst of men,
drunkards, blasphemers, and the like; though they most spitefully scoff at, and
backbite the people of God; yet when they know a man sincere, upright and
honest, cannot choose ^^^ (...) touching John, and King Agrippa touching Paul.

Sect. 2. Or rather if Gods own people are so ravished with the graces and
privileges which they enjoy upon earth, as the assurance of the pardon of sin,
the peace of a good conscience, and joy of the Holy Ghost; which is but
glorification begun: what will they be, when they shall enjoy the perfection of
glory in Heaven? As see but some instances of their present enjoyments here
below. First, if we were never to receive any reward for those small labors of
love, and duties we do to the glory of God, and profit of others; we might
think our selves sufficiently recompensed in this life, with the calm and
quietness of a good conscience, the honesty of a virtuous and holy life: That
we can do and suffer something for the love of Christ, who has done and
suffered so much to save us: That by our works the Majesty of God is magnified;
to whom all homage is due, and all service too little. For Godliness in every
sickness is a Physician, in every contention an Advocate, in every doubt a
Schoolman, in all heaviness a Preacher, and a comforter unto whatsoever estate
it comes; making the whole life as it were a perpetual Halleluja. Yea, God so
sheds his love abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, that we are in Heaven
before we come thither. Insomuch, that as the fire flies to his Sphere, the
stone hastens to the center, the River to the Sea, as to their end and rest;
and are violently detained in all other places; so are the hearts of Gods
people, without their Maker and Redeemer, their last end and eternal rest and
quietness, never at rest: like the Needle touched with the Loadstone, which
ever stands quivering and trembling until it enjoyes the full and direct aspect
of the Northern Pole. But more particularly:

How does the assurance of the pardon of sin alone, clear and calm al^ storms
of the mind; making any condition comfortable, and the worst and greatest
misery to be no misery?

To be delivered of a child, is no small joy to the mother: but to be delivered
from sin, is a far greater joy to the soul. But to this we may add the joy of
the Holy Ghost, and the peace of conscience, otherwise called the peace of God
which passes all understanding. These are privileges, that (...) Paul happier
in his chain of Iron, than Agrippa in his chain of gold (...) Peter more merry
under stripes, than Caiaphas upon the Iudgment-seat; and Steven the like under
that shower of stones. Pleasures are ours, if we be Christ's: whence those
expressions of the Holy Ghost, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof
we rejoice. Be glad in the Lord and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all
ye that are upright in heart. Let all that put their trust in thee rejoice, let
them even shout for joy. Rejoice evermore, and again, I say, rejoice; rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our conscience. Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take
from you, etc. So that it is a shame for the faithful, not to be joyful; and
they sin, if they rejoice not, whatever their condition be. The Eunuch no
sooner felt the pardon of sin, upon his being baptized into the faith of
Christ, but he went on his way rejoicing, Act 8.39. He then found more solid
joy, than ever he had done in his r^che^ honors, and great places under
Candace Queen of the Aethiopians. (...) same time when the Disciples were
persecuted, they are said to be filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost, Acts
13.52. And as their afflictions do abound, so their consolations abound also, 2
Cor. 1.5. For these are comforts, that will support and refresh a Child of God
in the very midst of the flames, as the Martyrs found: for maugre all their
persecutors could do, their peace and joy did exceed their pain; as many of
them mani^ested to all that saw them suffer.

Sect. 3. Where observe before we go any further; what sots they are; that cry
out, It is in vain to serve God, and unprofitable to keep his Commandments; as
it is in Malachy 3.14. For had these fools, but tasted the sweet co^forts that
are in the very works of piety, and that Heaven upon earth, the feast of a good
conscience, and joy of the inward man; they could not so speak. Yea then would
they say, there is no life, to the life of a Christian. For as the Priests of
Mercury, when they ate their figs and honey, cried out, O how sweet is truth!
So if the worst of a Believers life in this world be so sweet; how sweet shall
his life be in that Heavenly Jerusalem, and holy City, where God himself
dwells; and where we shall reign with Christ our Bridegroom, and be the Lambs
wife? which City is of pure gold like unto clear glass; the walls of Jasper,
having twelve foundations garnished with all manner of precious stones; the
first foundation being Jasper, the second Saphir, the third a Chaleedony, the
fourth an Emerauld, the fifth a Sardonyx, the sixth a Sardius, the seventh a
Chrysolite, the eighth a ^eryl, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysoprasus,
the eleventh a Iacinth, the twelfth an Amethyst; having twelve gates of twelve
Pearls; the street ^hereof of pure gold, as it were transparant glass: In the
midst of which City, (...) a pure River of the water of life, clear as Cristal
and of either side the ^ree of life; which bears twelve manner of fruits,
yielding her fruit every month; the leaves whereof serve to heal the Nations:
Where is the Throne of God and of the Lamb; whom we his servants shall for ever
serve, and see his face, and have his Name written in our foreheads. And there
shall be no night, neither is there need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it: for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. Into which nothing that defiles shall enter; but they alone which are
written in the Lambs Book of life; As is expressed, Rev. 21, and 22 Chap. The
Holy Ghost speaking after the manner of men, and according to our slender
capacity, for otherwise no words can in any measure express the transcendency
of that place of pleasure. Only here we have a taste, or earnest penny, one
drop of those divine dainties, of those spiritual, supernatural and divine
pleasures, reserved for the Citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem; some small
smack whereof we have even in the barren desert of this perilous
peregrination. God letting out as it were, a certain kind of Manna, which in
some sort refreshes his thirsty people, in this wilderness; as with most sweet
honey, or water distilled from out the Rock. As what else are those ^ubilees of
the heart; those secret and inward joys which proceed from ^ good conscience,
grounded upon a confident hope of future salvation? (...) do these great
clusters of grapes signify, but the fertility of (...) Land of Promise?

Sect. 4. True it is, none can know the spiritual joy and comfort of a
Christian, but he that lives the life of a Christian, Joh. 7.17. As none could
learn the Virgins Song, but they that sang it, Rev. 14 3. No man can know the
peace of a good conscience, but he that keeps a good conscience: no man knows
the hid Manna, and white Stone, with a new name written in it, but they that
receive the same, Rev. 2.17.

The world can see a Christians outside: but the raptures of his soul, the
ravishing delights of the inward man, and joy of his spirit for the remission
of his sins, and the infusion of grace, with such like spiritual Privileges,
more glorious than the States of Kingdoms; are as a covered mess to men of the
world.

But I may appeal to any man's conscience, that has been softened with the
unction of grace, and truly tasted the powers of the world to come; To him that
has the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost; in whose soul
the light of grace shines; whether his whole life be not a perpetual
Hallelujah, in comparison of his natural condition? Whether he finds not his
joy to be like the joy of harvest? or as men rejoice when they divide a spoil?
Isa. 9.3. Whether he finds not more joy in goodness, than worldlings can do,
when their wheat, wine, and oil abounds? Psalm. 4.7 and 53.17. Yea, he can
speak it out of experience, that as in profane joy, even in laughter the heart
is sorrowful: so in godly sorrow, even in weeping the heart is light and
cheerful. The face may be pale, yet the heart may be calm and quiet. So St.
Paul, as sorrowing, and yet always rejoyceing, 2 Cor. 6.10. Our cheeks may run
down with tears, and yet o^^ mouths sing forth praises. And so on the
contrary, Where (O God) there wants thy grace,
Mirth is only in the face; 2 Cor. 5.12
Well may a careless worldling laugh more, as what will sooner make a man laugh
than a witty jest? but to hear of an Inheritance of an hundred pounds a year,
that is fallen to a man, will make him more solidly merry within. Light is sown
to the righteous, and joy for the upright, Psalm. 97.1^ My servant, says God,
shall sing and rejoice: but they shall weep, etc. Isa. 65.14.

Indeed we are not merry enough, because we are not Christians enough, because
sin is a cooler of our joy, as water is of fire. And like the worm of Jonah his
gourd, bites the very root of our joy, and makes it wither: Yea, sin like a
damp, puts out all the lights of our pleasure, and deprives us of the light of
Gods countenance, as it did David, Psalm. 51.1^ and 4.6. So that the fault is
either; First, in the too much sensuality of a Christian, that will not forgo
the pleasures of sin, or the more muddy joys and pleasures of this world, which
are poisons to the soul, and drown our joys: as Bees are drowned in honey, but
live in vinegar. Men would have spiritual joy, but withal they would not part
with their carnal joy: Yet this is an infallible Conclusion, There is no
enjoying a worldly Paradise here, and another hereafter.

Or Secondly, The fault is in the taste, not in the meat; in the folly of (...)
To taste spirit^al joys, a man must be spiritual, for the Spirit relisheth
only the things of the Spirit; and like loves his like. Between a spiritual
man, and spiritual joys, there is as mighty an appetite and enjoying, as
between fl^shly meat, and a carnal stomach. Therefore the want of this taste
and apprehension condemns the world to be carnal, but magnifies the joys
spiritual, as being above her carnal apprehension. Or,

Thirdly, Herein lies the fault; few feel these joys in this life; because
they will not crack the shell to get the kernel: they will not pare the fruit,
to ^at the pulp; nor till the ground, to reap the Harvest. They ^lie the wars,
and thereby lose the glory of the Victory. They will not dig the craggy
mountain, to find the mine of gold. Nor prune the Vine, therefore enjoy not the
fruit. They ^lie mortification, and therefore attain not the sweet spiritual
consolation, which ever attends the same. And so much for the Reasons. The Use
may be manifold.

CHAP. XXII.
Sect. 1. FIrst, Is it so that the torments of Hell are so exquisite: even
worse than the pangs of death, or childbirth, scalding lead, drinks of gall
and wormwood, griping of chest-worms, fits of the stone, gowt, strangury,
flames of fire and brimstone? Yea are all these, and all other pains that can
be named put together, but shadows, and flea-bitings to it? And are they to be
endured everlastingly? And are all Fornicators, Idolalaters, Thieves, Covetous,
Drunkards, Swearers, Raylors, fearful and unbelieving persons, Murderers,
Sorcerers, Liars, and all unrighteous persons to have their part and portion in
that lake? And withal lose their part and portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, as
the Word of God expressly tells us? Rev. 21. 7, 8. and 22.14, 15. How is it that
we are not more affected therewith?

The only reason is, most men are so far from believing the word of God in this
point; that they do not believe there is a God. The fool (says David) has
said in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 53.1. They (meaning the wicked) think
always there is no God, Psalm. 10.4. to 14. And the reason follows, His ways
always prosper, Psalm. 73, 3. to 21. And hence it is, that they live like
beasts, because they think they shall die like beasts, without any answer for
what they have either acted or left undone; and accordingly resolve, Let us eat
and drink, ^or to morrow we shall die, as the Holy Ghost has acquainted us
with their inmost thoughts, 1 Cor. 15.32. Whereas if men did believe either
Heaven or Hell; they could never s^ carelessly hazard the loosing of the one, or
the procuring of the other. As O^ the madness of these men! that cannot be
hired to hold their finger for one minute, in the weak flame of a farthing
candle; and yet for trifl^s will plunge themselves body and soul, into those
endless and infinitely scorching flames of Hell fire.

If a King but threatens a Malefactor to the Dungeon, to the Rack, to the
wheel; his bones tremble a terrible palsy runs through all his joyn^: (...)
unmoved, undaunted. And what makes the difference? tho one we believe as
present, the other is, as they think uncertain, and long before it comes if
ever it do come. Otherwise it could not be, since the soul of all sufferings,
are the sufferings of the soul; since as painted fire is to material; such is
Material to Hellfire.

Men may say they believe there is an Hell, and a Heaven, but surely, they
would never speak as they speak; think as they think; do as they do; if they
thought that their thoughts, words, and actions, should ever come to judgment.
If men believed that Heaven were so sweet, and Hell so intolerable as the Word
makes them; they would be more obedient upon earth. The voluptuous, and
covetous, would not say, take you Heaven, let us have money, pleasure, etc.

Sect. 2. True, there are none so confirmed in Atheism, but some great danger
will make them fly to the aid of a Divine Power, as Plato speaks. Extremity of
distress, will send the prophanest to God: as the drowning man stretches out
his hand to that bough, which he contemned whiles he stood safe on shore. Even
Sardanapalus, for all his bold denying of a God, at every hearing of thunder,
was wont to hide his head in a hole.

Yea, in their greatest jollity, even the most secure heart in the world, has
some flashes of fear, that seize on them like an arrest of Treason. At least on
their deathbeds, had they as many Provinces as Ahashuerosh had: they would
give an ^^ndred six and twenty of them, to be sure there were no Hell, though
all their life they supposed it but a fable. And (...) makes them fearful to
die, and to die fearfully. Yea, how often do those Russians that deny God at the
Tap-house, preach him at the Gallows? and confess that in sincerity of heart,
which they oppugned in wantonness* And certainly, if they did not at one time
or other believe a God, a day of judgment, an Heavens and an Hell: they should
be in a worse condition than Felix, or Belshazzer; yea, than the Devils
themselves; for they believe them, yea quake and tremble to think of them, as
being still in a fearful expectation of further degrees of actual torments,
Mat. 8.29.

However, admit their lethargized consciences be not awakened, until they come
into Hell, (as God not seldom leaves them, to be confuted with fire and
brimstone, because nothing else will do it:) yet in Hell, they shall know there
is a righteous Judge, that will reward every man according to his deeds; and
confess that what they once vainly imagined, was but imagined. There may be
Athiests on earth, there are none in Hell. Vengeance shall make them wise, whom
sin has made, and left foolish.

A Pope of Rome, being upon his deathbed, said to those about him: Now comes
three things to trial, which all my life I have made doubt of: whether there be
a God, a Devil, and whether the soul be immortal* 'Twas not long, over he was
fully resolved with a vengeance: and so shall you, O ye foolls, when that hour
comes, though you flatter your selves for the present. When you feell it, you
will confess it: and when (...) late, you will like a fool say, Alas I had not
thought. For this is the (...) foreseeth the evil, (the evil of Hell, says
Bernard) and preventeth it; but fools go on, and are punished, Prove. 22.3.
Acknowledge thy self a fool then, or bethink thy self now, and ^o thereafter
without delaying one minute: For there is no redemption from Hell, if once thou
come there. And there tha^ may be (for ought thou know,) this very day;
yea, before thou can swallow thy spittle: Thy Pulse may leave beating, before
thou can fetch thy Breath.

Sect. 3. But to speak thus to the Sensualist, is labor in vain: For their
consciences are so blinded, that they (as they think) do believe an Heaven, and
an Hell; yea, in God, and in Christ, as well as the precisest, John 5.38, 39,
46, 47. For it is hard for men to believe their own unbelief in this case, They
that are most dangerously sick, are least sensible of their being sick.

A very likely matter thou believe in Christ, and hopest to be saved by him,
when tho^ wilt neither imitate his actions, nor follow his Precepts. How does
this hang together? Let me ask thee a question or two, that may convince thee
of thy unbelief: If a Physician should say to his Patient, here stands a
cordial, which if you take, will cure you; but touch not this other vial, for
that is deadly poison; and he wittingly refuses the cordial to take the
poison; will not every one conclude, that either he believed not his Physician,
or preferred death, before life? If Lots Sons-in-law had believed th^^r Father,
when he told them the City should suddenly be destroyed with fire and
brimstone, and that by flying they might escape it, they would have obeyed his
counsel. If the old World had believed that God would indeed, and in good
earnest, bring such a stood upon them as he threatened, they would have entered
the Ark, and not have scoft at Noah for building it. So if you did firmly
believe what God in the Scriptures speaks of Hell, you would need no entreaties
to avoid the same.

Sect. 4. But alas! men of thy condition are so far from believing what God
threatens in his Word against their sins, that they bless themselves in their
hearts, saying we shall have peace, although we walk according to the
stubbornness of our own wills; so adding drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Yea, they prefer their condition before others, who are so abstemious, and
make conscience of their ways, thinking that they delude themselves with
needless fears and scruples, 2 King. 18.22, 30, 33, 35.

Alas, if they d^d in good earnest believe, that there is either God or Devil,
Heaven or Hell, or that they have immortal souls, which shall everlastingly
live in bliss or woe; and receive according to what they have done in their
bodies, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5.10. They could not but live
thereafter, and make it their principal care, how to be saved.

^ut alas, they believe what they see, and feell, and know; they be(...) this
makes them abstain from murder, felony, and the like; but they believe not
things invisible and to come: For, if they did, they would as well, yea much
more fear him that has power to cast both body and soul into Hell, as they do
the temporal Magistrate, that has only power to kill the body* they would
think it a very hard bargain, to win the whole world, and lose Heaven, and
their own souls, Luke 9 25.

Men fear a Gaol, more then they fear Hell; and stand more upon their silver or
sides smarting, than upon their souls; and regard more the blasts of men's
breath, than the fire of God's wrath; and tremble more at the thought of a
Sergeant or Bailiff, than of Satan and everlasting perdition* Else they would
not be hired with all the worlds wealth, multiplied as many times as there be
sands on the Sea shore, to hazard in the least the loss of those everlasting
Joys before spoken of; or to purchase and plunge themselves into those caseless
and everlasting flames of fire and brimstone in Hell, there to fry body and
soul, where shall be an innumerable company of Devils and damned Spirits to
affright and torment them, but not one to comfort or pity them. Confident I am,
thou would not endure here to hold thy hand in a fiery crusible the space of
a day, or an hour, for all the worlds wealth and splendor: How then (if thou
bethinkest thy self) will thou hereafter endure that, and ten thousand thousand
times more, for millions of millions of ages? Look Revel. 20.10. and bethink
thy self, how thou will brook to be cast into a dole^ull disconsolate dungeon,
to lie in utter darkness in eternal chains, in a little ease, a no ease for
ever and ever. Can thou endure to dwell with the devouring fire? with the
everlasting burning?

Sect. 5. Wherefore let me, my Brethren, beseech you, not to be such Atheists
and Fools, as to fall into Hell before you will fear it, when by fearing it you
may avoid it, and by neglecting it you cannot but fall into it. What though it
be usual with men, to have no sense of their souls till they must leave their
bodies? yet do not you therefore leap into Hell to keep them company, but be
persuaded to bethink your selves now, rather than when it will be too late,
when the Draw bridge will be taken up, and when it will vex every vein of your
hearts that you had no more care of your souls. Yet there is grace offered, if
we will not shut our hearts and wills against it, and refuse our own mercy; but
how long God will yet wait thy leisure, or how soon he will in his so long
provoked Justice pronounce thy irrevocable sentence, thou know not; nor
can thou promise thy self one minutes time.

Oh that men would believe the God of truth (that cannot lie) touching
spiritual and eternal things, but as they do these temporary and transitory! Oh
that thou who art the sacred Monarch of this mighty frame, would give them
hearts to believe at least thus much; That things themselves are in the
invisible World, in the World visible but their shadows only! And that
whatsoever wicked men enjoy here it is but as in a dream; their plenty is but
like a drop of pleasure, before a River of sorrow and displeasure; And
whatsoever the godly feel, but as a drop of misery* (...) Judge of all the World
come slowly to judgment; yet thou will come surely. As the Clock comes
slowly, and by minutes to the stroke; yet it strikes at last. That those are
only true riches, which being once had, can never be lost. That Heaven is a
Treasure worthy our hearts, a purchase worth our lives: That when all is done,
how to be saved, is the best plot. That there is not mention of one, in the
whole Bible, that ever sinned without repentance; but he was punished without
mercy. For then there would not be a Fornicator, or profane person as Esau;
who for a portion of meat sold his inheritance, Heb. 12.16. Then they would not
be of the number of those, that so doted upon Purchases, and Farms, and Oxen;
that they made light of going to the Lords Supper, Luke 14.18, 19, 20. Nor of
the Gadarens mind, who preferred their Hogs before Christ. Then would they know
it better to want all things, then that one needful thing: whereas now they
desire all other things, and neglect that one thing which is so needful. They
would hold it far better, and in good sadness, to be saved with a few, as Noah
was in the Ark: than in good fellowship with the multitude, to be drowned in
sin, and damned for company. Nor would they think it any disparagement to their
wisdoms, to change their minds, and be of another judgment to what they are.

CHAP. XXIII.
Sect. 1. SEcondly, Are the joys of Heaven so unspeakable and glorious? How
then should we admire the love and bounty of God, and bless his Name, who for
the performance of so small a work, has proposed so great a Reward? And for
the obtaining of such an happy state, has imposed such an easy task. Yea
more, is Heaven so unspeakably sweet and delectable, and Hell so unutterably
doleful? Then let nothing be thought too much, that we can either do or suffer
for Christ, who has freed us from the one, and purchased for us the other.
Though indeed, nothing that we are able to do or suffer here, can be compared
with those woes we have deserved in Hell, or those joys we are reserved to in
Heaven. And indeed, that we are now out of hell, there to fry in flames of fire
and brimstone, never to be freed, that we have the free offer of grace here,
and everlasting glory hereafter in heaven; we are only beholding to him. We
are all by nature, as traitors condemned to suffer eternal torments in
hellfire, being only reprieved for a tim^: But from this extremity, and
eternity of torment, Jesus has freed and delivered us.

O think then! yea, be ever thinking of it, how rich the mercy of our Redeemer
was, in freeing us; and that by laying down his own life to redeem us. Yea, How
can we be thankful enough, for so great a blessing? It was a mercy bestowed,
and a way found out, that may astonish all the sons of men on earth, and Angels
in Heaven! Which being so (...) can any one in common reason, meditate so
unbottomed a love, and not study and strive for an answerable and thankful
demeanor. If a Friend had given us but a thousand part of what God and Christ
has, we should heartily love him all our l^ves, and think no thank^
sufficient: What price then, should we set upon Jesus Christ, who is the life
of our lives, and the soul of our souls? Do we then for Christ's sake, what we
would do for a Friends sake: Yea, let us abhor our selves for our former
unthankfulness, and our wonderful provoking of him. Hearken we unto Christ's
voice, in all that he says unto us, without being swayed one way or another,
as the most are? Let us whom Christ has redeemed, express our thank^ulness, by
obeying all that he says unto us, whatever it shall cost us, since nothing can
be too much to endure for those pleasures which shall endure for ever. As Who
would not obtain Heaven at any rate, at any cost or trouble whatsoever?

In Heaven is a Crown laid up for all such as suffer for righteous^ess, even a
Crown without cares, without rivals, without envy, without end; And is not this
reward enough, for all that men or Devils can do against us? Who would not
serve a short apprentiship in Gods service here, ^o be made for ever free in
glory? Yea, Who would not be a Philpot for a month, or a Lazarus for a day, or
a Steven for an hour, that he might be in Abraham's bosom for ever? Nothing can
be too much to endure, f^r those pleasures that endure for ever. Yea, what pain
can we think too much to suffer? What little enough to do, to obtain eternity?
for this incorruptible Crown of Glory in Heaven? 1 Pet. 5.4. where we shall
have all tears wiped from our eyes. Where we shall cease to sorrow, cease to
suffer, cease to sin. Where God shall turn all the water of our afflictions,
into the pure wine of endless, and un^xpressible comfort.

You shall sometimes see an hired servant, venture his life for his new Master,
that will scarce pay him his wages at the years end; and can we suffer too much
for our Lord and Master, who gives every one that serves him, ^ot Fields and
Vineyards, as Saul pretended, 1 Samuel 22 7. etc. nor Towns and Cities, as Cicero
is pleased to boast of Caesar; but even an hundred-^old more than we part
withal here in this life, and eternal Mans^ons in Heaven hereafter, John 14.2.

St. Paul says, Our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes us a
far most excellent and eternal weight of glory; 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Where note the
incomparable and infinitive difference, between the wo^k and the wages: light
affliction receiving a weight of glory; and momentary affliction, eternal
glory. Suitable to the reward of the wicked, whose empty delights live and die
in a moment; but their unsufferable punishment is interminable and endless.
Their pleasure is short, their pain everlasting; our pain is short, our joy
eternal. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of life, ^am. 1.12.

(...) what folly is it then, or rather madness, for the small pleasure of some
base lust, some paltry profit, or fleeting vanity, (which passes away in the
very act, as the taste of a pleasant drink, dies so soon as it is down,) to
bring upon our selves in another world, torments without end, and beyond all
compass of conceit?

Fourthly, Is it so? that God has set before us life and death, Heaven and
Hell, as a reward of good and evil; leaving us as it were to our choice,
whether we will be completely and everlastingly happy or miserable: with what
resolution and zeal should we strive, to make our calling and election sure?
nor making our greatest business, our least and last care. I know well thou
had rather when thou die, go to reign with Christ in his Kingdom for
evermore, than be confined to a perpetual Prison or Furnace of fire and
brimstone, there to be tormented with the D^vil and his Angels; If so, provoke
not the Lord, who is great and terrible, of most glorious Majesty, and of
infinite purity; and who has equally promised salvation unto those which keep
his Commandments; and threatened eternal death and destruction to those who
break them. For as he is to all repentant sinners a most merciful God, Exodus
34.6. so to all wilful and impenitant sinners, he is a consuming fire, and a
jealous God, Heb. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4 24.

There was a King, who having no issue to succeed him, espied one day a
well-favoured and towardly youth; he took him to the Court, and committed him
to Tutors to instruct him, prov^ding by his Will, that if he proved fit for
Government, he should be crowned King, if not, he should be kept in chains, and
made a Gally-slave: the youth was m^sled, and neglected both his Tutors good
Couns^l, and his Book, so as his Master cor^ected him, and said; O that thou
knew what honor is prepared for thee! and what thou art l^ke to loose by
this thy idle and loose carriage! Well, thou will afterward when it is to late,
sorely rue this. And when he grew to years, the King died, whose Counc^l and
Executours perceiving him to be utterly unfit for State Government, called him
before them, and declared the Kings will and pleasure, which was accordingly
performed: for they caused him to be fettered, and committed to the Galleys,
there to toil, and tug at the Oa^s perpetually, where he was whipped and lasht,
if he remitted his stroke never so little; where he had leisure to consider
with himself, that now he was chained, who might have walked at liberty; now he
was a slave, who might if he would, have been a King; now he was overruled by
Turks, who might have ruled over Christians. The thought whereof could not but
double his misery, and make him bewail his sorrow with tears of blood. Now this
hereafter will be the case of all careless persons, save that this comes as
(...) of that, as earth comes short of heaven, and temporal misery, of eternal.
Wherefore if thou would have this to become thy very case, go on in thy
wilful and perverse impenitency; but if not, bethink thy self, and do
thereafter, and that without delaying one minute: For there is no redemption
from hell, if once thou come there: And (...) thou can swallow thy spittle,
if thou die this day in thy natural condition.

Many men take liberty to sin, and continue in a trade of sin, because God is
merciful: b^t they will one day find that he is just as well as merciful.
There is mercy with God (says the Psalmist) that he may be feared, not that he
may be despised, blasphemed, etc. Psalm. 130.4. Yea, know this, and write it in
the Table Book of thy memory, and upon the table of thy heart; That if Gods
bountifulness, and long-suffering toward thee, does not lead thee to
repentance; it will double thy doom, and increase the pile of thy torments. And
that everyday which does not abate of thy rec^oning, will increase it: And that
thou by thy hardness and imp^nitency, shall but treasure up unto thy self
wrath, against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the just judgment of
God, Romans 2.4* 5, 6.

Now this Judge has told us, that we must give an account for every idle word
we speak, Mat. 12.36. much more then for our wicked actions; therefore beware
what thou do against him.

Men may dream of too much strictness in holy courses; but they do not consider
the power, the purity, and strictness of the Judge: He who bri^gs even idle
words to judgment, and forgets not a thought of disobedience; How will he spare
our gross negligence and presumption? How our formality and irreverence in his
service? much more our flagitious wickedness, Heb. 12.29.

Sect. 3. Wherefore as you ever expect or hope for Heaven, and Salvation; as
you would escape the tormenting flames of h^ll-fire; cease to do evil, learn to
do well. For Sanctification is the way to Glorification, Holiness to eternal
Happiness. If we would have God to glorify our bodies in Heaven; we also must
glorify God in our bodies here on earth.

And now for conclusion: Are the Joys of Heaven so unspeakable and glorious?
the torments of Hell so woeful and dolo^ous? then it behooves all Parents and
Governors of Families, to see to their Children and Servants souls; and that
they miscarry not through their neglect. As tell me, Will not their blood be
required at your hands, if hey perish through your neglect? Will it not be sad
to have Children and Servants rise up in judgment against you, and to bring in
evidence at the great Tribunal of Christ? saying, Lord, my Father never minded
me, my Master never regarded me; I might sin, he never reproved me; I might go
to Hell, it was all one to him: Will not this be sad?

Secondly, If it be so, Let Children and Servants consider, that it is better to
have lust restrained, than satisfied; it is better to be held in, and restrained
from sin; than to have a wicked liberty. Be not angry with those who will not
see you damn your souls, and let you alone: they are your best Friends. Fear
the strokes of Gods anger, be they spiritual or eternal* more than the strokes
of men. What Is a setter to a Dungeon? a Gallows to Hell fire.

Give not way to imaginary, speculative, heart-sins: Murder in the beast,
uncleanness in the eye, and thoughts given w^y to, will come to actu(...) he
get but in, he will be to hard for you. And let so much serve to have been
spoken of Heaven and Hell.

Upon the one I have stood the longer, that so I might, if God so please, be a
means to save some with fear, plucking them out of the fire of Gods wrath,
under which (without Repentance) they must lie everlastingly.

And for the other, I have like the Searchers of Canaan, brought you a cluster
of grapes to give the Reader a taste thereby, of the plentiful vintage we may
expect, and look for in the heavenly Canaan.

Now if any would truly know themselves, and how it will fare with them in the
end; let them read the whole Boo^, out of which this is taken, viz. The whole
duty of a Christian. Which Book is licenced by John Downame and Thomas Gataker.

What follows, is both to fill up the sheet, and to occasion or forewarn
Swearers, (who swarm so in all places) and ignorant persons, (whose number is
numberless, and who of all others are most confident that they shall do well
enough) not to forget, what they have herein heard of Heaven and Hell. And to
these, their faithful and impartial Monitor (the Book giver,) presents a few
Considerations.
EVen such is the power of sin, that it made God become man, Angels become
D^vils, and men become beasts. For each man by nature, every one, whose heart
is not changed by the Loadstone of the Gospel, is a very beast in condition, as
Jeremy affirms, Ier. 10.14. and St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.12. But that is not all; for
when the custom of sin, has so brawned men's hearts, s^ared their consciences,
and blinded their minds, that they can Swear and Curse, as familiarly as dogs
bark: When the just and true God, has for their rebellious wickedness in
rejecting him, and despising all good means of being bettered; given them up to
their own hearts lusts; and to Satan the god of this world, to be taught and
governed by him: even as a just Judge, having passed sentence upon some heinous
Malefactor, gives him up to the Iaylor, or Executioner: (as you may see by
sundry places, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. 1 Kings 22.20, 21, 22. 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians.
2.2. John 13.2. Acts 5.3. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Genesis 3.1. to 6. Revel. 2, 10* 3, 15.
John 8.44. and 12.31. and 14, 30. 2 Cor. 4.4.) Then they become so devilized,
that as Paul being guided by the good Spirit of God, could say, I live not, but
Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. so may, they say, we live no^, but the Devil
lives in us. For he is not only their Father, Genesis 3.15. John 8 44. But their
God, 2 Cor. 4.4. And their Prince, John 14.30. And works in them his pleasure,
Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. So that they are ready and willing to say or do, what he
will have them: as you may plainly read Ioh. 13.2. Acts 5.3. and 12.1, 2, to
12. 1 Chro. 21.1. Genesis 3* 1, to 6. Rev. 2.10.

And these you may easily know by their language: For Swearing and Cursing, is
the very language of the damned: as you may see, Revel. 16.1. 21. Only they
learn it (...), before they come in Hell. As whence do (...) Devils learn this
their damnable Cursing and Swearing? Are not their tongues fired and edged from
Hell, as St. James has it? James 3.6. And does not experience show, that the
language of hell is so familiar with many of them, that blasphemy is become
their mother tongue?

Tr^e, these poor simple souls, know none of all this: as those four hundred of
Ahabs Prophets, in whom this ^vil Spirit spoke, did not know that Satan spoke
by them, 1 King. 22.22. Neither did Judas know when he eat the sop, that Satan
entered into him, and put it into his heart to betray Christ, John 13.2. Nor do
Magistrates, when they cast the Servants of God into Prison, once imagine, that
the Devil makes them his Iaylors, but he does so. They are his Instruments, but
he is the Principal Author; as is plain by Rev. 2.10. Neither did Annanias and
Sapphira once think, that Satan had filled their hearts, or put that lie into
their mouths, for which they were struck dead, Act. 5. yet the Holy Ghost
tells us plainly, that he did so, verse. 3. Nor Eve in Paradise, had not the
least suspicion, that it was Satan that spoke to her, by the Serpent: Nor Adam,
that it was the Devils mind in her mouth, his heart in her lips; when tempted
to eat the forbidden fruit. Nor did David once dream, that it was Satan, who
moved him to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Much less did Peter, who so
loved Christ, imagine that he was set on by Satan, to tempt his own Lord and
Master with those affectionate words, Master pity thy self: For if Christ had
pitied himself, Peter and all the world had perished. Yet it was so, which
occasioned Christ to answer him, Get thee behind me Satan. Matthew. 16.22, 23.

Much more is it so with you, who tare Heaven with your blasphemies, and bandy
the dreadful Name of God, in your impure and poluted mouths, by your bloody
Oaths and Execrations. For how else could you Swear and Curse as if he that
made the ear could not hear? or as if he were neither to be feared nor cared
for, who for sin cast the Angels out of Heaven* Adam out of Paradise, drowned
the old world, rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom, commanded the earth
to open her mouth, and swallow down quick Korah and his company? He who smote
Egypt with so many plagues, overthrew Phoraoh and his host in the Red Sea,
destroyed great and mighty Kings, giving their Land for an Inheritance to his
people: and can as easily with a word of his mouth, strike you dead while you
are blaspheming him, and cast you body and soul into Hell for your odious
unthankfullness: yea, it is a mercy beyond expression, that he has spared you
so long.

When a dog flies in his Masters face that keeps him, we conclude he is mad:
Are you then rational men, that (being never so little crossed,) will fly in your
Makers face, and tare your Saviours-Name in pieces with Oaths and Execrations,
which is worse than frenzy? No, you are demoniacal, obsessed or rather posessed
with a Devil: and more miserable than such an one, because it is a Devil of
your own choosing, as Basil speaks. Or if you have any spark of reason left, o^
do in the least love your selves; leave off your damnable, and devilish
Sweating and (...) God has made, and set down in his Word against this horrid
sin; and against all those that so daringly and audaciously provoke him, lest
you be plagued with a witness, and that both here and hereafter: for God (who
cannot lie) has threatened that his curse shall never depart from the house of
the Swearer, as it is Zach. 5.1, to 5. And I doubt not but you are already
cursed, though you know it not: That either he has cursed you in your body, by
s^nding some foul Disease; or in your estate, by suddenly consuming it; or in
your name, by blemishing and blasting it; or in your seed, by not prospering
it; or in your mind, by darkening it; or in your heart, by hardening it; or in
your conscience, by terrifying it; or will in your soul, by everlastingly
damning it, if you repent not. Wherefore take heed what you do, before it prove
too late. Yea, my Brethren, bethink your selves what God and Christ has done
for you. It is his maintenance we take, and live on. The air we breathe, the
earth we tread on, the fire that warms us, the water that cools and cleanses
us, the clothes that cover us, the food that does nourish us, the delights
that cheer us, the b^asts that serve us, the Angels that attend us, even all
are his. That we are not at this present in Hell, there to fry in flames, never
to be freed; that we have the free offer of grace here, and everlasting glory
in Heaven hereafter, we are only beholding to him, And shall we deny this Lord
that has bought us? Shall we most spightfully and maliciously fight on Satan's
side against him with all our might, and that against knowledge and conscience?
I wish that you would a little think of it

Neither object that ye are so accustomed to Swearing that you cannot leave it;
for this defense is worse than the offense. As take an instance: Shall a thief
or murderer at the Bar allege for his defense, that it has been his use and
custom of a long time, to rob and kill, and therefore he must continue it? Or
if he do, will not the Judge so much the rather send him to the Gallows? And so
much the rather, for that of all other sins this sin of Swearing is the most
inexcusable. First, Because it is a sin from which of all other sins we have
most power of abstinence: For were you forced to pay three shillings four pence
for every Oath you swear, (as the Law enjoins;) or if you were sure to have
your tongue cut out, which is too light a punishment for this sin, damnation
being the due penalty thereof, as the Apostle sets it down, Iam. 5.12. you both
could and would leave it. Secondly, Because it is a sin to which of all other
sins we have the fewest temptations; for all thou can expect by it, is, the
suspicion of a common Liar, by being a common Swearer; or that thou shall vex
othe^s, and they shall hate thee: for it brings not so much as any appearance
of good unto us to induce us: For whereas other sins have their several baits
to allure us; some the bait of profit, some of honor, some of pleasure; this
sin is destitute of them all, and only brings much loss here, namely, of
Credit and a good Conscience; and the loss of Gods Favor, and the Kingdom of
Heaven hereafter, which (...) of more value than ten thousand Worlds; which
shows, that thou lo(...)lice to, and contempt of God, which is most fearful,
and (as a man would think) should make it unpardonable: I am sure the Psalmist
has a terrible word for all such, if they would take notice of it: Let them be
confounded that transgress without a cause, Psalm. 25.3. Wherefore no longer
continue it, but repent of it, and forsake it, lest the Lord should deal by you
as he has threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. That if we do not fear and dread his
glorious and fearful Name, the Lord our God, he will make our plagues
wonderful, and of long continuance, and the plagues of our posterity. Besides,
how frequently do thou pollute and profane Gods Name, and thy Saviors? The
Jews grievously sinned in crucifying the Lord of Life but once, and that of
ignorance; but the times are innumerable that thou do it, every day in the
year, every hour in the day, although thy Conscience and the Holy Spirit of
Grace has checked thee for it a thousand and a thousand times. Do thou
expect to have Christ thy Redeemer and Advocate, when thy Conscience tells thee
that thou have seldom remembered Him but to blaspheme Him? and more often named
Him in thy Oaths and Curses, than in thy Prayers?

True, thou take so little notice of the number of thy Oaths and Curses, that
thou will not acknowledge thou did Swear or Curse at all* Yea, though thou
be taken in the manner, and told of it, thou will not believe it: But all
that are present can witness the same, and Satan also; as also the searcher of
hearts, who himself will one day be a swift witness against swearers, Mal. 3.5.
For of all other sinners, the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain, as the third Commandment tells you, Exodus 20.7.

But woe is me, it fares with common Swearers as with persons desperately
diseased, whose excrements and filth comes from them at unawares* For as by
much labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sense of labor; so their
much swearing causes such a brawny skin of senslesness to overspread the
heart, memory and conscience, that the Swearer swears unwittingly; and having
sworn, has no remembrance of his Oath, much less repentance for his sin.

Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies of God (who has removed so many evils,
and conferred so many good things upon you, that they are beyond thought or
imagination) to leave it; especially after this warning, which in case you do
not, will be a sore witness, and rise up in judgment against you another day.

Or if you regard not your self, nor your own souls good; yet for the Nations
good, leave your Swearing and Banning: For the Lord has a great controversy
with the Inhabitants of the Land, because of swearing, Hos. 4 1, 2. Yea,
because of Oaths the whole Land (even the three Nations) now mourns, as you
may see, Ier. 23.10.

But thou (who art a little civilized) wilt allege, That if ^hou do swear,
it is but Faith and Troth, by our L^^y, the Light, or the (...)

Answer: True, blind sensualists, (that have no other guide but the flesh,) may
deem or dream it a mite, a moate, a matter of nothing. But had thou the least
knowledge of the Law of God, or s^ill in Scripture; thou would know, that God
expressly forbids it, and that upon pain of damnation, James 12*5. And that
Christ commands us not to swear at all, in our ordinary communication: saying,
That whatsoever is more than Yea Yea, Nay Nay, comes of evil, Matthew. 5.34, 35,
36, 37.

If the matter be light and vain, we must not swear at all; if so weighty, that
we may lawfully swear, as before a Magistrate, being called to it, then we must
only use the glorious Name of our God in a holy and religious manner, as you
may see, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Isa. 45.23. and 65.16. Josh. 23.7. Exodus 23.13. Ier. 5.7.
And the reasons of it are weighty, if we look into them; for in swearing by
Faith, Our Lady, The Light, or any other creature, you ascribe that unto the
said creature, which is only proper to God, namely to know your heart, and to
be a discerner of secret things; Why else should you call that Creature as a
witness unto your conscience, that you speak the truth and lie not, which only
belongs to God? And therefore the Lord calls it a forsaking of him; as mark
well what he says, Ier. 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods? And do you make it a
small matter to forsake God, and make a God of the creature? Will you believe
the Prophet Amos? If you will, he says, (speaking of them that swore by the
sin of Samaria,) That they shall fall, and never rise again, Amos 8.14 A
terrible place to vain Swearers.

Yea, in swearing by any Creature whatsoever, we do invocate that Creature, and
ascribe to it divine worship; a lawful Oath being a kind of Invocation, and a
part of Gods worship: Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate both as our
witness, surety and Judge, Heb. 6.16. and by consqeuence deifie it, by ascribing
and communicating unto it Gods incommunicable Attributes, as his Omnipresence,
and Omnisciency of being every where present, and knowing the secret thoughts
and intentions of the heart: and likewise an Omnipotency, as being Almighty in
Patronizing, Protecting, Defending and Rewarding us for speaking the truth, or
punishing us if we speak falsely: all which are so peculiar to God, as that they
can no way be communicated or ascribed to another. So that in swearing by any
of these things, thou committest an high degree of gross Idolatry, thou
spoilest and robbest God of his glory (the most impious kind of these) and in a
manner dethronest Him, and placest an Idol in his room.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our Oaths, for in so doing we
make base Idols, and filthy Creatures, Corrivals in honor, and Competitors in
the Throne of Justice with the Lord, who is the Creator of Heaven and earth,
and the supreme Judge and solo Monarch of all the world.

(...) Lord and by Malcham, which Malcham was their King, or as some think
their Idol, Zeph. 1.4, 5.

But as if swearing alone would not press thee deep enough into Hell* thou
addest Cursing to it, a sin of an higher nature, which n^ne use frequently, but
such as are desperately wicked* it being their peculiar brand in Scripture; as
how does the Holy Ghost stigma^ize such an one? His mouth is full of Cursing,
Psalm. 10.7. and Romans 3.14. or he loves Cursing, Psalm. 109.17. And indeed, whom
can you observe to love this sins, or to have their mouths ^ull of Cursing?
But Ruffians and sons of Belial, such as have shaken out of their hearts the
fear of God, the shame of men, the love of Heaven, the dread of Hell, not once
caring what is thought or spoken of them here, or what becomes of them
hereafter; yea, observe them well, and you will find, that they are mockers of
all, that match not under the pay of the Devil. Besides, it is the very depth
of sin, roaring and drinking is the horse-way to Hell; whoring and cheating the
foot-way; but Swearing and Cursing follows Korah Dathan and Ab^ram. And
certainly if the infernal Tophet be not for these men, it can challenge no
guests.

Again, Why do thou curse thine enemy? (if he be so) but because thou can
not be suffered to kill him. For in heart, and God account, thou art a
murderer, in wishing him the pox, plague, or that he were hanged, or damned.
Nor will it be any rare thing at the day of judgment, for Cursers to be
indicted of murder. For like Shimei and Goliath to David, thou would kill him
if thou durst; thou do kill him so far as thou can. I would be loath to
trust his hands that bans me with his tongue. Had David been at the mercy of
either Shimei or Goliath, and not too strong for them, he had then breathed his
last.

Such as would know how witless, graceless, and shameless, even the best are
that use to curse; (for I pass over such as call for a Curse on themselves,
saying, God damn me, confound me, The Devil take me, and the like; which would
make a rational man tremble to name; because I were as good knock at a dead
man's grave, as speak to them: let them read my larger piece, entitled, A
hopeful way to Cure that horrid sin of swearing, page 8, etc. In the mean time
take notice what will be the issue? The causeless curse shall not (...) where
the Curser meant it, Prove. 26 2. yea, though thou cursest (...) God will bless,
Psalm. 109.28. but thy Curses shall be sure to (...) back into thine own breast,
Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. Prove. 14.30. Cursing mouths are like ill made Pieces,
which while men discharge (...) others, reco^l i^ splinters on their own faces.
Their words and (...) be but whirlewinds, which being breathed forth return
again to the same place. As hear how the Holy Ghost delivers it, Psalm. 109
(...) he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him; and as he loved not
blessing, so shall it be far from him. As he clothed himself (...) cursing
like a garment, so shall it (...) into his bowels like water, and (...) (...)
into his (...) be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a ^^rdle
wherewith he shall always be girded, verse 17, 18, 19. Hear this all (...)
whose tongues run so fast on the Devils errand; you loved Cursing, you shall
have it, both upon you, about you, and in you, and that everlastingly, if you
persevere and go on; for Christ himself at the last day, even he which came to
save the world, shall say unto all such, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. where
they shall do nothing but curse for evermore. And indeed, who shall go to Hell,
if Cursers should be left out. Wherefore let all those learn to bless, that
look to be heirs of the blessing.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

II. To all that in the midst of such plentiful means of light and grace, are
ignorant of these three main points, which every one must of necessity know, or
he cannot be saved. viz. How man was at first Created. How he is now Corrupted.
How he may be again Restored.


Without knowledge the soul cannot be good, Prove. 19.2.

This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil, John 3.19.

If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: whom the God of this
world has blinded, etc. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.

Pour out thy ^ury upon the Heathen that know thee not; and upon the Fa^^lies
that call not on thy Name, Jer. 10.25. Psalm. 79.6.

It is a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them shall not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor, Isa. 27.11.

My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have rejected
knowledge, I will also reject thee, Hos. 4.6.

The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them which know not God, 2 These. 1.7, 8.

Take special notice of these Predictions and Testimonies, touching ignorant
person^ for they are a notable proof of the very small number of those that
shall be saved (set down Mat. 7.13, 14. and 20.16. 1 John 5.19. Rev. 20.8
(...). 13.15, 16, 17. Isa. 10.22. Romans 9.27.) For consident I am, out of
sufficient experience, that nineteen of twenty, all the Land over, are ignorant
of the very first principles of Christianity. Of which more in a (...),
^^tituled, A short and sure way, to grace and salvation.

London, Printed by D. M. to be sold by Henry Crips in Popes-head-alley, by
(...)

The Blemish of Government, the Shame of Religion, the Disgrace of Mankind;
or, a Charge drawn up against Drunkards, and presented to his Highness the Lord
PROTECTOR, in the name of all the Sober Party in the three Nations. Humbly
craving, that they may be kept alone by themselves from infecting others;
compelled to work and earn what they consume: And that none may be suffered to
sell Drink, who shall either Swear, or be Drunk themselves, or suffer Others
within their Walls.
By R. Young of Roxwell in Essex.
1. BRANCH of the Charge.
THat as the Basiliske is chief of Serpents: so of sinners the Drunkard is
chief. That Drunkenness is of sins the Queen: as the Gowt is of diseases: even
the root of all evil, the rot of all good. A sin which turns a man wholly into
sin. That all sins, all beast-like, all serpentine qualities meet in a
Drunkard, as rivers in the sea: and that it were far better be a Toad, or a
Serpent, then a Drunkard. That the Drunkard is like Ahab, who sold himself to
work wickedness. That he wholly dedicates, resignes, surrenders, and gives
himself up to serve sin and Satan. That his only imploiment is to drink, drab,
quarrel, swear, curse, scoff, slander and seducet as if to sin were his trade,
and he could do nothing else; like the Devil, who was a sinner from the
beginning, a sinner to the end. That these sons of Belial, are all for the
belly: for to drink God out of their hearts, health out of their bodies, wit
out of their heads, strength out of their joints, all the money out of their
purses, all the drink out of the Brewers barrels, wife and children out of
doors, the house out at windows, the Land out of quiet, plenty out of the
Nation, is all their business. In which their swinish swilling, they resemble
so many frogs in a puddle, or water-snakes in a pond: for their whole exercise,
yea, religion, is to drink; they even drown themselves on the d^^e^^nd. That
they drink more spirits in one night, then their flesh and brains be worth.
That more is thrown out of one swines nose, and mouth, and guts, then would
maintein five sufficient families.

2. Br. That it is not to be imagined what all the Drunkards in one shire or
County do devour, and worse then throw away in one year: when it has been
known (if we may give credit to Authors, and the oaths of others) that two and
thirty in one cluster have made themselves drunk; that six and thirty have
drank themselves dead in the place with carowsing of healths; that at one
supper, one and forty have killed themselves, with striving for the conquest:
that two have drank each of them a peck at a draught: that four men have drank
four gallons of wine at a sitting: that one man has drank two gallons of wine;
and two more, three gallons of wine a piece at a time: that one Drunkard in a
few hours, drank four gallons of wine: that four ancient men (...) all, three
hundred cups of wine amongst four men: and lastly that three women came into a
Tavern in Fleetstreet (when I was a boy take it upon Claptons Oath and credit,
who drew the Wine) and drank forty nine quarts of Sack; two of them sixteen a
piece, and the third to get the victory, seventeen quarts of Sack. Which being
so, what may the many millions of these ding-thristy dearth-makers consume in a
year in all the three Nations.

Nor need it seem incredible, that common drunkards should drink thus: for they
can disgorge themselves at pleasure, by only putting their finger to their
throat. And they will vomit, as if they were so many live Whales spuing up the
Ocean; which done, they can drink afresh.

Or if not so, yet custom has made it to pass through them, as through a
tunnel, or streiner; whereby it comes out again as sheer wine as it went in, as
has been observed.

Nor has the richest Sherrie, or old Canarie any more operation with them,
then a cup of six has with me. And no marvel! for if physic be taken too often,
it will not work like physic: but nature entertains it as a friend, not as a
Physician: yea poison by a familiar use becomes natural food. As Aristotle (in
an example of a Maid, who used to pick spiders off the walls and eat them,)
makes plain.

3. Br. That as Drunkards have lost the prerogative of their creation, and are
changed (with Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.16.) from men into beasts, so they turn the
sanctuary of life into the shambles of death: yea thousands (when they have
made up the measure of their wickedness) are taken away in God's just wrath in
their drink; (as it were with the weapon in their bellies) it faring with them
as it did with that Pope, whom the Devil is said to have slain in the very
instant of his Adultery, and carry him quick to hell; being suddenly struck
with death, as if the execution were no less intended to the soul, then to the
body.

That by the Law of God in both Testaments; He that will not labor, should not
eat. Genesis 3.19. Prove. 20.4. 2 These. 3.10. because he robs the Commonwealth of
that which is altogether as profitable as land, or treasure. But Drunkards are
not only lazy get-nothings, but they are also riotous spendalls; and yet
these drunken drones, these gut-mongers, these Quagmirists, like vagrants and
vermin, do nothing all their life-long that may tend to any good, as is
storied of Margites, and yet devour more of the fat of the Land, then would
plentifully maintein those millions of poor in the Nation, that are ready to
famish. A thing not fit to be suffered in any Christian Commonwealth; yea far
fitter they were stoned to death, as by the Law of God they ought, Deuteronomy. 21.20,
21. since this might bring them to repentance; whereas now they spend their
days in mirth: and suddenly they go down into hell, Job 21.13. Drunkards being
those swine, whom the legion carries headlong into the Sea, or pit of perdition.

4. Br. That every hour seems a day, and every day a month to a drunkard, that
is not spent in a Tap-house; yea, they seem to have nailed their ears to the
door of some Tavern, or Tap-hous, and to have agreed with Satan, Master* it is
good being here. That where ever the Drunkards house is, his dwelling is at the
A^e-house, except all his money be spent, and then if his wife will fetch him
home with a lantern, and his men with a barrow, he comes with (...)

That the pot is no sooner from their lips, but they are melancholy, and their
hearts as heavy, as if a millstone lay upon it. Or rather they are vexed like
Saul with an evil-spirit, which nothing will drive away but drink and Tobacco.
They so wound their consciences with all kind of prodigious wickedness, and
so exceedingly provoke God, that they are rackt in conscience, and tortured
with the very flashes of hellfire. That they drink to the end only, that they
may forget God, his threats and judgments; that they may drown conscience, and
put off all thoughts of death, and hell; and to hearten and harden themselves
against all the messages of God, and threats of the Law: which is no other in
mitigating the pangs of conscience, then as a saddle of gold to a galled-horse,
or a draught of poison to quench a man's thirst. That if they might have their
wills, none should refuse to be drunk unpunished, or be drunk unrewarded at the
common charge. As how will they boast what they drank, and how many they
conquered at such a meeting, making it their only glory. That the utmost of a
Drunkards honesty is good-fellowship: that temperance and sobriety with them
is nothing but humor and singularity; and that they drink not for strength,
or need, but for lust and pride; to show how full of Satan they are, and how
near to swine.

That though these swinish swill-bouls make their gullet their god, and
sacrifice more to their god-bellie, then those Babylonians did to their god
Bell, Bell and the Dragon, ver. 3. yet they will say, yea swear, that they
drink not for love of drink; though they love it above health, wealth, credit,
child, wief, life, heaven, salvation, all. They no more care for wine, then
Esau did for his pottage, for which he sold his birthright, Isa. 56.12.

5. Br. That Drunkards are the Devils captives, at his command, and ready to do
his will; and that he rules over, and works in them his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26.
Ephesians. 2.2. that he enters into them, and puts it into their hearts what he will
have them to do, John 13.2. Acts 5.3. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. opens their mouths, speaks
in and by them, Genesis 3.1, to 6. stretches out their hands, and they act as he
will have them, Acts 12, 1, 2. Rev. 2.10. he being their father, Genesis 3.15.
John 8.44. their king, John 12.31. and 14.30. and their god, 2 Cor 4.4. Ephesians.
2.2. And which is worst of all, that drunkenness not only dulls and dams up
the head and spirits with mud, but it beastiates the heart, and (being worse
then the sting of an Aspe) poisoneth the very soul and reason of a man, whereby
the faculties and organs of repentance and resolution are so corrupted and
captivated, that it makes men utterly incapable of returning, unless God
should work a greater miracle upon them, then was the creating of the whole
world. Whence Austin compares it to the very pit of hell, out of which (when a
man is once ^allen into) there is no hope of redemption.

That Drunkenness is like some desperate plague, which knows no cure. As what
says Basil, Shall we speak to drunkards? we had as good speak to
livelesse-stones, or senseless plants, or witless beasts, as to them; for
they no more believe the threats of Gods Word, then if some Imposter had spoken
them. They will fear nothing, till they be in hellfire; resembling the
Sodomites, who would take no warning, though they were all struck blind; but
persisted in their course, until they felt fire and brimstone about their
ears* (...)

That there is no washing these Blackmores white, no charming these deaf
Adders; blind men never blush, fools are never troubled in conscience, neither
are beasts ever ashamed of their deeds.

That a man shall never hear of an habituated, in^atuated, incorrigible,
cauterized Drunkard, that is reclaimed with age.

6. Br. That as at first, and before custom in sin has hardened these
Drunkards, they suffer themselves to be transformed from men into swine; as
Elpe^or was transformed by Circos into a hog; so by degrees they are of swine
transformed again into Devils, as Cadmus and his wife were into serpents, as
palpably appears by their tempting to sin, and drawing to perdition.

That these Agents for the Devil, Drunkards, practice nothing but the Art of
debauching men; that to turn others into beasts, they will make themselves
devils, wherein they have a notable dexterity, as it is admirable how they
will wind men in, and draw men on by drinking first a health to such a man,
then to such a woman my mistress, then to every ones mistress; then to some, Lord
or Lady; their master, their magistrate, their Captain, Commander, etc. and
never cease, until their brains, their wits, their tongues, their cies, their
feet, their senses and all their members fail them: that they will drink until
they vomit up their shame again, like a filthy dog, or lie wallowing in their
beastliness like a brutish swine. That they think nothing too much either to
do or spend, that they may make a sober man a drunkard, or to drink another
drunkard under the table; which is to brag how far they are become the devils
children: that in case they can make a sober and religious man exceed his
bounds, they will sing and rejoice as in the division of a spoil; and boast
that they have drenched sobriety, and blinded the light; and ever after be a
snuffing of this taper, Psalm. 13.4. But what a barharous, graceless, and
unchristian-like practice is this, to make it their glory, pastime and delight,
to see God dishonored, his Spirit grieved, his Name blasphemed, his creatures
abused, themselves and their friends souls damned. Doubtless such men have
climbed the highest step of the ladder of wickedness; as thinking their own
sins will not press them deep enough into hell, except they load themselves
with other men's; which is Divel-like indeed! whose aim it has ever been,
seeing he must of necessity be wretched, not to be wretched alone.

That as they make these healths serve as a pulley, or shooing-horn to draw men
on to drink more, then else they would or should do: so a health being once
begun, they will be sure that every one present shall pledge the same, in the
same manner and measure, be they thirsty, or not thirsty, willing, or not
willing, able, or unable: be it against their stomachs, healths, natures,
judgments, hearts and consciences, which do utterly abhor, and secretly
condemn the same. That in case a man will not for company, griev^usly sin
against God, wrong his own body, destroy his soul, and wilfully leap into
hellfire with them; they will hate him worse then the hangman: and will sooner
adventure their blood in the field, upon refusing, or crossing their healths,
then in the cause and quarrel of their Country.

7. Br. How they are so pernicious, that to damn their own souls is the least
part of their mischief; and that they draw vengeance upon thousands, by
seducing some, and giving ill example to others. That one Drunkard ma^^ (...) a
multitude; being like the Bramble, Judge. 9.15. which first set it self on fire,
and then fired all the Wood. Or like a malicious man, sick of the plague, that
runs into the throng to disperse his infection; whose mischief out weigh's all
penalty. And this shows, that they not only partake of the Devils nature, but
that they are very devils in the likeness of men: and that the very
wickedness of one that fears God, is far better then the good entreaty of a
Drunkard.

That which sweet words they will tole men on to destruction, as we tole beasts
with sodder to the slaughterhouse; And that to take away all suspicion, they
will so molsifie the stiffnesse of a man's prejudice, so temper and fit him to
their own mould, that once to suspect them; requires the spirit of discerning.
And that withal they so confirm the profession of their love with oaths,
protestations and promises, that you would think Ionathan's love to David
nothing to it. That these pernicious seducers, devils in the shape of men, have
learned to handle a man so sweetly, that one would think it a pleasure to be
seduced.

But little do they think! how they advance their own damnations: when the
blood of so many souls as they have drawn away, will be required at their
hands. For know this thou tempter, that thou do not more increase other men's
wickedness on earth, (whether by persuasion, or provocation, or example) then
their wickedness shall increase they damuation in hell, Luke 16. 27.28. Non
fratres dilexit, sed seipsum respexit. And this let me say to the horror of
their consciences, that make merchandise of souls; that it is a question when
such an one coms to hell, whether Judas himself would change torments with him.

8. Br. That the Drunkard is so pleasing murderer, that he tickles a man to
death, and makes him (like Solomon's sool) die laughing. Whence it is, that many
who hate their other enemies (yea, and their friends too) embrace this enemy,
because he kisseth when he betraieth. And indeed what fence^ for a pistol
charged with the bullet of friendship. Hence it is also, that thousands have
confessed at the Gallows, I had never come to this but for such and such a
Drunkard. For commonly the Drunkards progress is, from luxiory to beggerie,
from beggerie to thieverie, from the Tavern to Tyborne, from the Alehouse to
the Gallows. Briefly; That these Bawds and Panders of vice breath nothing but
infection, and study nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. That
the Drunkard is like Julian, who never did a man a good turn, but it was to
damn his soul. That his proffers are like the ^owlers shrape, when he casts
meat to birds, which is not out of pity to relieve, but out of treachery to
ensnare them. Or like traps we set for vermin, seeming charitable, when they
intend to kill, Ier. 5.26. And thou may answer these cursed tempters, who
delight in the murder of souls, as the woman of Endor did Saul, 1 Samuel 28.
Wherefore seekst thou to take me in a snare, to cause me to die, Verse. 9.

That he is another Absalom, who made a feast for Amnon whom he meant to kill.
And there is no subtlety like that which deceives a man, and has thanks for
the labor. For as our Savior says, Blessed is the man that is not offended
at their scoffs, Mat. 11.6. So blessed is the man that is not taken (...) with
their wiles. For herein alone consists the difference, He whom the Lord loves,
shall be delivered from their meretricious allurements. Eccles. 7.26. And he
whom the Lord abhors, shall ^all into their snares, Prove. 22.14.

9. Br. That Tave^ns and Tap-houses are the drinking schools where they learn
this their skill, and are trained up in this trade of t^mpting. For Satan does
not work them to this height of impiety all at once, but by degrees: When
custom of sin has deaded all remorse for sin; as it is admirable how the soul
that takes delight in ^ewdnesse, is gained upon by custom. They grow up in
sin, as worldlings grow in wealth and honor. They wax worse and worse, says
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.13. they go first over shoo's, then over boots, then over
shoulders; and at length over head and ears in sin, as some do in debt. Now
these Tap-houses are their meeting-places, where they hear the Devils lectures
read; the shops and markets where Satan drives his trade; the schools where
they take their degrees: these are the Guild-halls where all sorts of sinners
gather together, as the humors do into the stomach before an Ague fit, and
where is projected all the wickedness that breaks sorth in the Nation, as our
reverend Judges do find in their several Circuits.

That these Taverns and Alehouses (or rather hell-houses) are the ^ountains
and well-heads from whence spring all our miseries and mischiefs: these are the
Nurseries af all riot, excess and idleness, making our Land another Sodom,
and furnishing yearly our Iayls and Gallowses. Here they sit all day in troops,
doing that in earnest which we have seen boys do in sport; stand on their
heads, and shake their heels against heaven; where, even to hear how the Name
of the Lord Jesus is pierced, and God's Name blasphemed, would make a dumbe-man
speak, a dead-man almost to quake.

10. Br. That it were endless to repea^ their vain babbling, scurrilous jesting,
wicked talking, impious swearing and cursing: that when the drink has once bit
them, and set their tongues at liberty, their hearts come up as easily as some
of their drink; yea, their limitlesse tongues do then clatter like so many
windows loose in the wind, and you may as soon persuade a stone to speak, as
them to be silent; it faring with their clappers as with a sick-mans pulse,
which always beats, but ever out of order. That one Drunkard has tongue
enough for twenty men; for let but three of them be in a room, they will make
a noise; as if all the thirty bells in Antwerpe stee^le were rung at once: or
do but pass by the door, you would think your self in the Land of Parrats.
That it is the property of a drunkard to disgorge his bosom with his stomach,
to empty his mind with his maw: His tongue resembles Bacchus his Liber pater,
and goes like the sail of a Winde-mill: For as a great gale of wind whirleth
the sayls about, so abundance of drink whirleth his tongue about, and keeps it
in continual motion. Now he rayls, now he scoffs now he lies, now he slanders,
now he seduces, talks bawdy, swears, bans, soams, and cannot be quiet, till his
tongue be wormed. So that from the beginning to the end, he belcheth forth
nothing, but what is as far from truth, piety, reason, modesty* as that the
Moon came down from heaven to visit Mahomet: As oh! the beastliness which
burns in their unchaste and impure minds, that smokes out at their polluted
mouths! A man would think, that even the Devil himself should blush, to hear
his child so talk. How does (...) his mouth run over with falsehoods against
both Magistrates, Ministers, and Christians: what speaks he less then
whoredoms, adulteries, incests at every word; yea, hear two or three of them
talk, you would change the Lycaonians language, and say, Devils are come up in
the likeness of Men.

11. Br. That at these places men learn to contemn Authority, as boys grown
tall and stubborn, contemn the rod: Here it is that they utter swelling and
proud words against such as are in Dignity, as Saint Peter, and Saint Jude
have it. They set their mouths against heaven, and their tongues walk through
the earth, Psalm. 73.9. So that many a good Minister and Christian may say with
holy David, I became a song of the drunkards, Psalm 69.12. And in case any of
them have wit, here they will show it in scoffing at Religion, and flowting at
holiness. From whence it is, that we have so many Atheists, and so sew
Christians amongst us (notwithstanding our so much means of grace); and that
the Magistracy and Ministry are so woefully contemned by all sorts of people.

That these tippling Tap-houses are the common Quagmires of all filthiness,
where too many drawing their patrimonies through their throats, exhaust and
lavish ont their substance, and lay plots and devices how to get more. For
hence they fall, either to open courses of violence, or secret mischief, till
at last the Iayle prepares them for the Gibbet; for lightly they sing through a
red Lattise, before they cry through a Grate.

12 Br. I speak not of all, I know the calling to be good, and that there are
good of that calling, (and these will thank me, because what I have said, makes
for their honor and profit too) but sure I am, too many of these
drinking-houses are the very dens and shops, yea the thrones of Satan; very
sinks of sin, which like so many Common-shores, refuse not to welcome and
encourage any, in the most loathsome pollutions they are able to invent, and
put in practice. As did you but hear, and see, and smell, and know what is done
in these Taverns and Alehouses, you would wonder that the earth could bear the
howses, or the Sun endure to look upon them. That least they should not in all
this do homage enough to Satan, they not seldom drink their healths upon their
knees, as the Heathen Witches and Sorcerers (of whom these have learned it)
used to do, when they offered drink offerings to Beelzebub the prince of
Devils, and other their Devil-gods.

That these godless Ale-drapers, and other sellers of drink, in entertaining
into their houses, and complying with those traiters against God, and in
suffering so much impiety to rest within their walls, do make themselves
guilty of all, by suffering the same; and that a fearful curse hangs over
their heads, so long as they remain such. For if one sin of thest, or perjurie
is enough to rot the rafters, to grind the stones, to level the walls and roof
of any house with the ground; as it is Zech. 5.4. What are the oaths, the
lies, the thefts, the whoredoms, the murders, the damnable drunkenness, the
numberless, and namelesse abominations that are committed there. For these
Alehouse keepers are accessarie to the drunkards sin, and have a fearful
account to give for their tollerating such, since they might, and ought to
redress it: so that their gain is most unjust, and all they have is by the
sins of the people; as Diogenes said of the strumpet Phrine.

13 Br. That of all seducing drunkards these Drink-sellers are the chief; their
whole life being naught else but a vicissitude of devouring and venting, and
their whole study how to toule in customers, and then egg them on to drink;
for as if drinking and tempting were their trade: they are always guzling
within doors, or else tempting at the door, where they spend their vacant
hours, watching for a companion, as a spider would watch for a poor fly; or as
the whorish woman in the Proverbs laid wait for the young novice, until with
her great craft, and fla^tering lips, she had caused him to yield, Prove. 7.6,
to 24. Though when he sees a drunkard, if he but hold up his finger, the other
follows him into his borough, just like a fool to the stocks, and as an Ox to
the slaughterhouse, having no power to withstand the temptation. So in he
goes, and there continues as one bewitched, or conjured with a spell; out of
which he returns not, until he has emptied his purse of money, and his head
of reason: while in the mean time his poor wise, children and servants want
bread.

That did sellers of drink aim at the glory of God, and good of others, as
they ought, 1 Cor. 10.31. the^e would not be an hundredth part of the
drunkards, beggars, brawls, and famished-families there are: whereas now
thousands do in sheer drink, spend all the clothes on their beds and backs. As
be they poor laboring men, that must dearly earne it before they have it,
these Al^-house keepers, these vice-breeders, these soul-murtherers will make
them drink away as much in a day, as they can get in a week; spend twelve
pence, sooner then earne twopence, as S. Ambrose observes.

That thousands of these Laboring men may be found in the very Suburbs of this
City, that drink the very blood of their wives and children, who are near
famished, to satisfy the drunkards throat, or gut, wherein they are worse then
Insidels, or Cannibals, 1 Timothy 5.8. who again are justly met withal: For as if
God would pay them in their own coin, how eft shall ye see verm^ne sucking the
drunkards blood, as fast as he the others.

14. Br. That these Drnnkards and Ale-drapers are always laying their heads
together, plotting and consul^ing how to charm and tame their poor wives (for
the Drunkard and his wife agree like the harp and the harrow) which if maids
did but hear, they would rather make choice of an Ape-carrier, or a
Iakes-farmers-servant, then of one who will be drawn to the Ale house. For let
them take this for a rule, he that is a tame Devil abroad, will be a roaring
Devil at home; and he that has begun to be a Drunkard, will ever be a
Drunkard. True, they will promise a maid fair, and bind themselves by an
hundred oaths and protestations; and she (when love has blinded and besotted
her) will believe them; yea, promise her self the victory, not doubting but
she shall reclaim him from his evil company; but not one of a thousand, scarce
one of ten thousand that ever finds it so, but the contrary. For let Drunkards
promise, yea and purpose what they will; experience shows, that they mend as
sour Ale does in Summer; or as a dead hedge, which the longer it stands is the
rottener. And how should it be other, when they cannot go the length of a
street, but they must pass^ by, perhaps an hundred Alehouses, where they shall
be called in. And all the while they are in the drinking school, they are bound
by their law of good fellowship to be pouring in at their mouths, or whiffing
out at their noses: one serving as a shooinghorn to the other; which makes them
like ratsban'd Rats, drink and vent, vent and drink, Sellengers round, and the
same again. Oh that a maids sorewit were but so good as her after-wit! then the
drunkard should never bave wise more to make a slave of, nor wives such cause
to curse Alehouse keepers, as now they have. And indeed if I may speak my
thoughts, or what reason propounds to me; drunkards, are such children and
fools (to what governors of families ought to be) that a rod is f^ter for them
then a wife. But of this by the way only, that maids may not so miserably cast
away themselves: for they had better be buried alive, then so married, as most
poor men's wives can inform them.

15. Br. That to speak to these Demeoriuses, that get their wealth by drinking;
yea, by helping to consume their drink, and that live only by sin, and the
sins of the people, were to speed as Paul did at Ephesus, after some one of
them had told the rest of their occupation. Yea to expect amendment from such,
in a manner were to expect amendment from a Witch, who has already given her
soul to the Devil. That to what has been spoken of drunkards and
drink-sellers, in the particular cases of drinking and tempting, might be added
seventie times seven more of the like abominations. For the drunkard is like
some putrid grave, the deeper you digg, the fuller you shall find him both of
stench and horror: Or like Hercules's monster, wherein were fresh heads still
arising one after the cntting off of another. But there needs no more then this
taste, to make any wise man (or any that love their own souls) to detest and
beware these Bawds and Pandors of vice, that breath nothing but infection, and
study nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. These Bro^ers of
villainy, whose very acquaintance is destruction: as how can they be other then
dangerously infectious* and desperately wicked? whose very mercies are cruelty.

16. Br. That I have unmasked their faces, is to insatuate their purpose: that
I have inveighed and declaimed against drunkenness, is to keep men sober; For
vices true picture, makes us vice detest.

O that I had dehortation answerable to my detestation of it! Only here is a
discovery how drunkards tempt: if you will see directions how to avoid their
temptations, read my Sovereign Antidote against the contagion of evil company.
Only take notice for the present, that the best way to avoid evil, is to shun
the occasions: Do not only shun drunkenness, but the means to come to it: and
to avoid hurt, keep thy self out of shot; come not in drunken company, nor to
drinking places: As for their love and friendship, consider but whose Factors
they are, and thou will surely hate them. Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding in all things.

POSTSCRIPT.
COnsidering the premises, if there were any love of God, any hatred of sin,
any zeal, any courage, any conscience of an Oath in most of our Justices of the
Peace, they would rather put down and purge out of their Parishes and
Liberties, this viperous brood of vice-breeders, and soul-murtherers (I mean
Alehouse keepers) then increase them as they do, when any Common Drunkard,
Cheat, or Witch may procure a License to sell drink, if they will but bribe
some one of their Clerks. But if it be left to them (if his Highness himself do
not by some other way redress it, as blessed be God he has already begun the
work in some Counties) I look never to see it mended, until Christ comes in
the clouds.

Only it is much to be feared, that as we turn the sanctuary of life into the
shambles of death: so God may send a famine after such a satietie, and
pestilence after famine. Or rather that our Land, which has been so long sick
of this disease, and so often surfeted of this sin, should spue us all out, who
are the Inhabitants.

Or in case God be pleased to dispense with the Nation, the wickedness that is
done by these drunkards and drink-sellers, shall be reckoned, unto those that
are the permitters, for their own. For Governors make themselves guilty of
those sins they may redress and will not. But I know to whom I speak, and my
hopes are depending.

In the mean time, it is sad to consider, how many Drunkards will hear this
Charge, for one that will apply it to himself. For confident I am that fifteen
of twenty, all this City over, are Drunkards; yea, seducing Drunkards, in the
dialect of Sc^ipture, and by the Law of God, which extends even to the heart
and affections, Mat. 5.21, 22, 28. Perhaps by the Laws of the Land, a man is
not taken for drunk, except his cies stare, his tongue stutter, and his legs
staggers; but by God's Law he is one that goes often to the drink, or that
tarrieth long at it, Prove. 23.30, 31. He that will be drawn to the Tavern or
Alehouse by every idle soliciter, and there be detained to drink, when he has
neither need of it, or mind to it; to the spending of his money, wasting of
his precious time, neglect of his calling, abusing of the creatures (which
thousands want) discredit of the Gospel, the stumbling of weak ones, the
encouraging of indifferent ones, the hardening of his associates, and all the
truths enemies that know or hear of it. Briefly, he that drinks more for lust,
or pride, or covetousness, or fear, or good fellowship, or to drive away time,
or to still conscience, then for thirst, is a Drunkard in Solomon's esteem,
Prove. 23.30, 31. Perhaps thou do not think so, but can you produce that holy
man of God, that will not deem him a drunkard, who can neither buy, nor sell,
nor meet any friend or customer, but he must to go the Tavern, or Alehouse,
perhaps six times in a day; and who constantly clubs it, first for his mornings
draught, secondly at Exchange time, thirdly at night when shops are shut in; as
is the common, but base custom of most Tradesmen; yea, and the Devil so
blindes them, that they will plead a necessity of it; and that it is for their
profit.

Nor can it be denied, but in cases of this nature, things are rather measured
by the intention and affection of the doer, then of the issue, and event. And
why should not a man be deemed a drunkard for his immoderate and inordinate
affection to drink, or drunken company? as well as another, an Adulterer, for
the like affection to his neighbors wife, Mat. 5.21, 22, 28. Yet these men are
in their own, and other men's esteem, not only good and civil men, but good
Ch^istians forsooth. Certainly the more light we have, the more blind men are,
or else this could not be; For I would gladly ask such, Are you Christian? in
what part of the Word find you a warrant for it? Where find ^ou, that this
custom was ever used, by any one of the Saints in former ages? Well may you
(with Agrippa) be almost Christian, but sure enough, you are not with Saint
Paul, altogether such: and then what will become of you? For almost a son is a
bastard, almost sweet is unsavorie, almost hot is lukewarm; and those that are
lukewarm will God spue out of his mouth, Rev. 3.15, 16.

A Christian almost, is like a woman that dies in travel, almost she brought
forth a son; but that almost killed the mother, and the son too. If thou
believ'st almost, thou shall be saved almost; as we may say of a Thief that
has a pardon brought him whiles he is upon the gallows, he was almost saved,
but he was hanged; and his paroon did him no good. To be almost a Christian, is
to be like the foolish Virgins, that had Lamps, but without oil in them; for
which they were shut out of heaven, though they came to the very door, Matthew.
25.10, 11, 12. Can the door which is but almost shut, keep out the Thief? Can
the ship that is but almost tite, keep out the water? The soldier that does
but almost fight is a coward. And therefore if thou love thy self, look to
it, and that in time, least hereafter you most dolefully rue it: For know this,
that you shall once given an account for every idle penie and hour you spend,
and for every cup of drink you shall spoil, or waste; and for every one that is
encouraged to do the like by you example. For which see Matthew. 12.36. Luke
16.2. Romans 14.12. 1 Pet. 4.5. Rev. 20.13. and 22.12.

That (by the blessing of God) our children, and childrens children may loath
drunkenness, and love sobriety; let this be fixed to some place convenient
in everyhouse, for all to read. The Persians, Parthians, Spartans, and
Lacedaemonians did the like, and found it exceeding efficacious: And Anacharsis
holds in the most effectual means to that end.

Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMIE.

FINIS.
Offer of Help to Drowning-Men.
Imprimatur,

THO. GATAKER

SEeing, and foreseeing the sad effects of men's crying down Books, Learning,
the Ministry, Sanctification, etc. if this their deep, and divellish design do
meet with no stop: and seeing we should specially prepare for defense, where
Satan specially prepares for offense. Considering also ^he numberless number
of those that by professing themselves Protestants, discredit the Protestant
Religion: Who because they have been Christened, as Simon Magus was, received
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, like Judas; and for company go to Church
also as Dogs do, are called Christians, as we call the Heathen Images gods:
yea, and ( being blinded by the Prince of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.4.) think to be
saved by Christ, though they take up Arms against him; and are no more like
Christians, then Michols Image of Goats hair was like David: Who make the world
only their god, and pleasure or profit alone their Religion: Who are so
graceless, that God is not in all their thoughts; except to blaspheme him, and
to spend his days in the Divel's service: Who being Christians in name, will
scoff at a Christian indeed: Who honor the dead Saints in a cold profession,
while they worrey the living Saints in a cruel persecution: Who so hate
Holiness, that they will hate a man for it; and say of good living, (as Festus
of great Learning) It makes a man mad: whose hearts will rise at the ^ight of a
good man, as some stomachs will rise at the sight of sweet meats: Whose
Religion is to oppose the power of Religion; and whose knowledge of the Truth,
to know how to argue against the Truth: Who justify the wicked, and condemn
the ^ust: who call Zeal, madness; and Religion, foolishness: Who love their
sins so much above their souls, that they will not only mock their Admonisher,
scoff at the means to be saved, and make themselves merry with their own
damnations; but even hate one to the death, for showing them the way to eternal
life: who will condemn all for Roundheads, that have more Religion then an
Heathen, or knowledge of heavenly things then a child in the womb has of the
things of this life; or conscience then an Atheist, or care of his soul, then a
Beast, and are mockers of all that march not under the pay of the Devil: Who
with Adam, will become Satan's bondslaves for an Apple; and like Esau, sell
their Birthright of Grace here, and their Blessing of Glory hereafter for a
mess of Pottage: Who prefer the pleasing of their palates before the saving of
their souls: who have not only cast off Religion, that should make them good
men; but reason also, that should make them men: Who waste virtues faster then
riches, and riches faster then any virtues can ^et them: Who do nothing else
but sin, and make others sin too: who spend their time and patrimonies in Riot;
and upon Dice, Drabs, Drunkenness, who place all their felicity in a Tavern or
Brothel house, where Harlots: and Sycophants rifle their Estates, and then send
them to rob: Who will borrow of every one, but never intend to satisfy any
one: Who glory in their shame, and are ashamed of that which should and would
be their glory: Who desire not the reputation of honesty, but of good
fellowship: Who instead of quenching their thirst, drown their senses; and had
rather leave their wits then the wine behind them: Who place their paradise in
their throats, heaven in their guts: and make their belly, their god: Who pour
their Patrimonies down their throats, and throw the house so long out at
windows, that at length their house throws them out of doors: Who think every
one exorbitant that walks not after their rule: Who will traduce all whom they
cannot seduce; even condemning with their tongues, what they commend in their
consciences: Who, as they have no reason, so they will hear none: Who are not
more blind to their own faults, then quick-sighted in other men's: Who being
displeased with others, will fly in their Makers face, and tear their Saviors
Name in pieces with oaths and execrations, as being worse then any mad dog that
flies in his Masters face that keeps him: Who swear and curse even ou^ of
custom, as currs bark; yea, they have so sworn away all grace, thar they count
it a grace to swear; and being reproved for swearing, they will swear that they
swore not.

Or perhaps they are covetous Cormorants, greedy Gripers, miserly Muck-worms;
all whose reaches are at riches: Who make gold their god, and commodity the
stern of their consciences: Who hold every thing lawful, if it be gainful: Who
prefer a little base pe^f before God, and their own salvations; and who being
fa^ted with Gods blessings, do spurn at his precepts: Who like men sleeping in
a boat, are carried down the stream of this World, until they arrive at their
graves-end [Death] without once waking to bethink themselves whether they are a
going [to Heaveu or Hell].

Or Ignorant and Formal Hypocrites: who do as they see others do, without
either conscience of sin, or guidance of reason: Who do what is morally good,
more for fear of the Law, then for love of the Gospel: Who fear the Magistrate
more then they fear God or the Devil; regard more the blasts of men's breath,
then the fire of God's wrath; will tremble more at ^^e thought of a Bayliffe,
or a Prison* then of Satan, or Hell, and everlasting perdition: Who will say,
they love God and Christ* yet hate all that any way resemble him; are slint
unto God, wax to Satan; have their ears always open to the Tempter, shut to
their Maker and Redeemer; will choose rather to disobey God, then displease
great Ones; fear more the Worlds scorns, then His anger, and rather then
abridge themselves of their pleasure, will incur the displeasure of God: Who
will do what God forbids, yet confidently hope to escape what He threatens: Who
will do the Devils works only, and yet look for Christ's wages; expect that
Heaven will meet them at their last hour, when all their life long they have
galloped in the beaten Road toward Hell: Who expect to have Christ their
Redeemer and Advocate*; when their consciences tell them, that they seldom
remember him, but to blaspheme him; and more often name him in their Oaths and
Curses, then in their Prayers: Who will persecute Honest and Orthodox
Christians; and say, they mean base and diss^^bling Hypocrites: Who think they
do God service in killing his servants, Joh. 10.2. Who will boast of a strong
faith, and yet fall short of the Devils in believing, Jam. 2.19. Who turn the
grace of God into wantonness; as if a condemned person should head his Drum of
Rebellion with his Pardon; resolving to be evil, because God is good: Who will
not believe what is written, till they feel what is written; and whom nothing
will confute, but fire and brimstone: Who think their villainy is unseen,
because it is unpunished; and therefore live like beasts, because they think
they shall die like beasts.

Considering the swarms, Legions, Millions of these, I say, and many the like,
which I cannot stand to repeat. As also in reference to Levit. 19.17. Isa.
58.1. And out of compassion to their precious souls; there are above twenty
several Books purposely composed, wherein are proper remedies (of the same
alloy) for each soul seduced, or afflicted; to be had without any expense:
which Books (like Glasses) will show them (from Gods Word) the very faces of
their hearts: And (like Peter to Cornelius, Acts 11.) tell them words whereby
(with blessing from above) both they, and their Associates (by their means) may
be saved. Verse. 1^.

And that they might the better recompense the Readers pains; whether he
propound to himself pleasure or profit: they are (as many Revereud Divines
deem) a brief Collection of the most winning and convincing Arguments out of
the choicest Authors; very pithily, orderly, and elegantly conveyed, and
embellished* with much both variety of graceful and delightful illustration.
Yea, if such as they concern, shall be pleased to make use of them; they may
(with God's blessing) not only have their vice^ lessened, their knowledge
increased, and their minds cheered and comforted: but probably they shall
find in them the flower, cream, or quintessence, of what would otherwise cost
them twenty years reading to extract.

It remains only, that the Patients, for whom this Physic is proper, be
prevailed withal to take it. For although here is all necessary provision
made, and the Guests lovingly invited, yet (of themselves) they will refuse to
come, as in tha^ Parable of the Lords Supper, Luke 14.16. to 25. Because, as
good meats are unwelcome to sick persons; so is good counsel to obstinate
sinners. Here is light, but they love darkness rather then light; lest their
deeds which are evil, should be reproved. Only they that do well, and love
truth, will come to the light; that their deeds may be made manifest, John
3.19, 20, 21. Also many young novices in sin will entertain them as Lot did
those Angels, that came to fetch him out of Sodom, Genesis 19. And probably some
Parents and Masters will desire them, to prevent the spreading of these
Gangrenes in their Children and Servants. But as for the parties principally
concerned and invited, and that stand in the greatest need, and are most to be
pitied; they will even storm at this very Offer of Help, and hiss like
Serpents, because it troubles their Nests. Being like him, Luke 8.27, 28. who
having been possessed with Devils a long time, was at length very loath to part
with his Guests.

Indeed, if some, whose hearts God has already changed, would put them into
their hands, and use their best Art to make them relished: (For like Babes,
meat must not only be given them, but prepared too, and put into their
mouths). some return of good might happily come thereof. As weak means shall
serve the turn, where God intends success. Even a word seasonably spoken ( God
blessing it) like a Rudder, sometimes steers a man quite into another Course*
Antiockus by hearing from a poor man, all the faults which he and his Favorites
had committed* carried himself most virtuously ever after. Antoninus amended
his future life and manners, by only hearing what the people spoke of him. The
very crowing of a Cock occasioned Peter's repentance. Augustine that famous
Doctor, was converted by only reading that Text, Romans 13.13. Let us walk
honestly, as in the daytime, etc. Learned Iunius, with reading the first
Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, was won to the faith of Christ. And Melancthon
mnch after the same manner. I have read of two famous Strumpets, that were
suddenly converted by this only Argument, That God sees all things, even in
the dark; when the doors are shut, and the curtains drawn. And Mountain tells
of a libidinous Gentleman, that sporting with a Courtizan in a house of sin,
happened to ask her name, which she said was Mary* whereat he was so stricken
with reverence and remorse; that he instantly both cast off the Harlot, and
amended his whole future life. Bilney's Confession converted Latimer: yea,
Adrianus was not only converted, but became a Martyr too, by only hearing a
Martyr at the Stake allege that text, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, etc. 1
Cor. 2.9. Yea, it was an observation of Mr John Lindsay, that the very smoke of
Mr Hamilton converted as many as it blew upon. Yea, even those Jews that
crucified the Son of God, were converted by hearing those few words of Peter,
Act. 2. And it pleased God, when I, my self, was in as hopeless a condition,
as any of those Sensualists beforementioned; (I mean, as much fore-stalled
with prejudice against Religion, and the Religious) that a poor man's
persuading me to leave reading of Poetry, and fall upon the Bible, was a means
of changing my heart, before I had read out Genesis, being but twenty years of
age: Whom I more bless God for, then for my Parents from whom I received life.
And this (because I know no better way to express my thankfulness to him, who
has free^d me from frying in Hell-flames for ever and ever, then by
endeavoring to win others from Satan's Standart to Christ's) makes me do the
like to others. For I seldom hear any one swear or scoff, or see any drunk, or
the like, but I present them with one of these forementioned Messages, from
that God, whom they so daringly and audasiously provoke. Nor do I always miss
the mark at which I aim, And I tell it you, because many discreet ones are apt
to wonder, that I so make my self a scorn and gazing stock to fools: Though I
shall never think it a shame to me, which was the only glory of him, that was
a man after God's own heart, as you may very often hear him profess, as in
Psalm 50 15. and 71.17, 18, 19, 24. and 51. 14. and 119.171. and 22.22. and
35.18. and many the like; see Luke 8.38, 39.

I also mention it, that I may (if possible in this covetous, cold and dull
Age) p^ovoke others to do the same; or at least something for the saving of
these poor, ignorant, and impotent wretches; that are neither able nor willing
to help themselves. Though as one would think, (for I speak to enlightened
souls) they should not need spurring, nor prompting to this Duty: For what
heart would it not make to bleed, that has any Christian blood in his veins,
to see what multitudes there are, that go blinde-fold to destruction; And no
man offer to stop or check them before they arrive there, from whence there is
no Redemption. Math. 7.13, 14. 1 Ioh. 5.19. Rev. 20.8. and 13.16. Isa. 10.22.
Roman. 9.27. 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.1, to 4. Phil. 3.18. Ioh. 8.44.
and 14.30.

Yea, how should it not make all, that are themselves got out of Satan's
clutches* plot, study,, and contrive all they can; to draw others of their
brethten after them.

We read that Andrew was no sooner converted, and become Christ's Disciple; but
instantly he drew others after him to the same Faith, John 1.41. and the like
of Philip, ver. 45. and of the woman of Samaria, John 4.28, to 41. And of
Peter, Luke 22.32. Acts 2.41. and 3 Chap. and 4.4. And so of all the Apostles.
Yea, Moses so thirsted after the salvation of Israel, that rather then he would
be saved without them, he desired the Lord to blot him out of the Book of life,
Exodus 32.32. And Paul to this purpose says, I could wish my self to be
separated from Christ, for my brethren; that are my kinsmen according to the
flesh: meaning the Jews, Romans 9.3. And indeed, all heavenly hearts are
charitable. Neither are we of the Communion of Saints, if we desire not the
blessedness of others: it being an inseparable adjunct, or relative to grace;
for none but a Cain will say, Am I my brother's keeper? Yea, where the heart is
thankful, and inflamed with the^ love of God, and onr neighbor, this will be
the principal aim* As by my sins, and had example, I have drawn others from
God, so now I will, all I can, draw others with my self to God. Saul converted,
will build up as fast as ever he plucked down, and preach as zealously as ever
he persecuted. And we are no whit thankful for our own salvation, if we do not
look with charity and pity upon the gross mis-opinious and misprisions of our
Brethren. And what though we cannot do what we would? yet we mnst labor to do
what we can to win others; not to merit by it, but to express our thanks.
Besides, it were very dishonorable to Christ not to do so. Did you ever know
that wicked men; Thievs, Drunkards, Adulterers, Persecuters, false Prophets, or
the like, would be damned alone? no, they mis-lead all they can, as desiring to
have companions. Yea. the Pharisees would take great pains, compass sea and
land, to make others twofold more the children of hell then themselves, as our
Savior expressly witnesses, Mat. 23.15. which may cast a blush upon our
cheeks, who are nothing so industrious to win souls to God. And what a shame is
it! that our God should not have as faithful servants, as he has unfaithful
enemies: That wicked men should be at more cost and and pains to please an ill
master, then we can afford to please so good a God, so gracious, and so loving
a Father? Shall they labor so hard, for (...) will but inhance their
damnation? and shall we think any pains too much for that, which will add to
the weight of our eternal glory and salvation.

And what though their case be not only desperate, but almost hopeless? (as in
reason, that sin is past cure, which strives against the cure: nor would these
drowning men refuse help, were they no^ wilful murderers of their own souls)
yet there is a mercy due even to them: And it is our duty to use the means:
leaving the issue to him who is able to quieken the dead, and to make even of
stones children to Abraham? Witness Manasses in the Old Testament, and Paul in
the New. Yea, I suppose, that this their sad condition, calls for our more then
ordinary compassion. Since they have precious souls, that must everlastingly
live, in bliss, or woe. And hence it is, that the Angels are said to rejoice
more at the conversion of such a sinner, then for the building up of ninety and
nine that are already converted, Luke 15.7 because he to whom God has given a
new heart, and spiritual life, will be sure to seek out for, and use the means
of growing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Whereas the former, are not only dead in sin; but so buried in the grave of
long custom, that they cannot stir the least joint; no, not so much as feel
their deadness, nor desire life; but resist all means tending thereunto.
Insomuch, that the conversion of such an one is held by Divines a greater work,
or Miracle, then the creating of the whole World: For in every New Creature are
a number of Miracles; A blind man is restored to sight: A deaf man to hearing,
A man possessed with many Devils, dif-possest; Yea, A dead man raised from the
dead; and in every one a stone turned into flesh: in all which God meets with
nothing but opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

Wherefore you, that (by calling to mind your own former blindness, and
bondage) are able to know how it fares with them; and accordingly to pity them:
you that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward their precious
souls; use your utmost endeavor to reduce them; earnestly admonish them; draw
them to hear some Bo^nerges, that preaches with power and authority, and not as
the Scribes: Persuade them also to read Books that are convincing, etc. So
shall you discharge your Duty to God, show your love to them, your thankfulness
to your Redeemer; and not a little pleasure your selves. For if you do gain
them, you shall shine as the stars in Heaven, for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Or
in case you cannot reclaim them* yet he who requires it at your hands, Will
return the same into your own bosoms, Isai 49.4, 5. Prove. 11.18. and 25.22.

But I were as good knock at a deaf man's door, as press or persuade the most to
this duty, though thus necessary: for those two Idols, Discretion and cursed
Covetousness; bear a greater sway with the common Prosessors of this Age; then
either their Maker or Redeemer: Though confident I am, others will do more then
Isay, Phile. 21.

Melancthon having found the Word, most easily to prevail with him; doubted not
but his Preaching should do wonders upon otheps: but having tried, he found and
confessed, That old Adam, was too strong for young Melancthon.

Many Lepers were in Israel, in the time of Elizeus the Prophet: but none of
them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian, Luke 4.22 to 29.

Many are called, but few are chosen, Matthew. 22.14.

FINIS.
Printed by I. Bell, and are to be sold by James Crumpe, in Little Bartholomew
Well-yard, who will also show the other Books, and tell the place where, (...)
Of these Enchiridions, a Repenting Prodigal, (upon occasion of his late return)
thinks himself bound, to give ten thousand for others good; and takes it for an
incomparable favor, that it came into his heart so to do. Yielding a threefold
reason thereof. First, because it is probable, that that Medecin which has
cured one desperate Patient; if it be communicated, may work the same effect
upon others; and that those thoughts, which our experience has found
comfortable, and useful to our selves: should (with neglect of all censures) be
communicated to others. Secondly, because the retribution of his obedience, may
in some proportion, answer his offense; as was that of Paul's, who as he had
done more evil to the Saints, then all the rest of the Apostles: so he labored
more then they all, in adding to the Church such as should be saved, 1 Cor.
15.10. Act. 9.16. Thirdly, for that as exemplary offenders, leave their
inventions and evil practices to posterity; whereby they cease not to sin,
though they cease to live, (for when dead they are still tempting, and still
sin so long as they cause sin; yea how should not every Turk that perishes by
Mahomets juggling, add to the pil^ of his unspeakable horrors?) So if we sow
good works, succession shall reap them; and we shall be happy in making others
so.

Good Report from Bad men, no mean disparagement. TOGETHER With a Cordial for
Christians; when they receive evil, for well doing.
BEING An Arrow drawn forth of that Sententious Quiver: Entitled, A Christian
Library, or a pleasant and plentiful Paradise of practical Divinity.
SECT. I.
Convert,
REverend Sir, when (by a providence) you heard me swear and curse; you gave me
a printed Paper to convince me of that foul, audacious, provoking, and yet
unprofitable sin, and withal entreated me to read three larger Tracts, viz. A
short and sure way to grace and salvation. The hearts Index. with A serious and
pathetical description of Heaven and Hell.

This to me (whom you had never before seen) seemed no less absurd then
strange; and having a dark heart, in stead of great love and thanks, I
returned you a most churlish and uncivil answer, and accordingly when I met
with my drunken consorts, I read it with no less scorn then ignorance; but
before I had done, it made me tremble! nor could I rest, until I had perused
the other three Books, which have so represented the very thoughts, secrets,
and deceitfulness of my heart unto my conscience: that I could not but say of
them, as the woman of Samaria once spoke of our Savior; They have told me all
things that ever I did, John 4.29. Which made me conclude with that Unbeliever,
1 Cor. 14.24.25. That the hand of God was in the contriving of them; Nor could
they ever have so done, if they were not of God, as the young man in the
Gospel, reasoned with the Pharisees touching Jesus, when he had opened his
eyes, that had been blind from his birth, John 9.32.33. Which is such a mercy,
that no tongue is able to express! for till then* I went on in the broad way,
and worlds road to destruction, without any mistrust. What change they have
wrought in me, (with Gods blessing upon the means) and how greatly I have
longed to see you again, I forbear to mention: Only this, when I had read
them, in reference to Levit. 19.17. and in compassion to their precious souls,
who are neither able nor willing to help themselves, I have (and not without
some comfortable success) taken up your trade, in giving the Papers and
mentioning the Books to all that I hear blaspheme my Maker, or belch out their
spleen against goodness: As well considering, that one soul is of more worth
then the Indies.

And indeed, whose heart would it not make to bleed to see what multitudes
there are that go blindfold to destruction! and no man offer to stop or check
them, before they arrive there, from whence there is no redemption, Matthew.
7.13.14. 1 John 5.19. Revel. 20.8. and 13 16. Romans 9.27. 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor.
4.4. Ephesians. 2.1 to 4. John. 8.44.

And certainly it more then behooves me, (as being my self snatched out of the
fire, Jude 23.) to do what I can to draw others of my brethren after me, in
imitation of Andrew, John 1.41 and Philip v. 45. and the women of Samaria, John
4.28 to 41. and Peter, Luke 22.32. Acts 2.41. and 4.4 etc. 3. and of Moses,
Exodus 32.32. and Paul. Romans 9.3. Neither are we of the communion of Saints, if
we desire not the salvation of others. Yea how could I be thankful to my
Redeemer? that has done and suffered so much for me! or in the least love God
and my Neighbor? if I should not thus resolve; as by my sins and bad example,
I have drawn others from God; so now I will all I can, draw others with my self
to God; yea what a shame were it? If I should not be as faithful a servant to
my Savior? As I have formerly been to Satan. Saul converted, will build up as
fast as ever he pulled down, and preach as zealously, as ever he persecuted.

Only there is a great rub in the way, which makes me fear I shall not be able
to hold out, for I am so scoft and scorned where ever I come, both by Parents,
Friends, and Enemies, for giving these Papers, that they make me even weary of
my life, as the daughters of Heth did Rebecca. Genesis 27 46. And yet I dare not
leave off, since our Savior says expressly, that he will be ashamed of such
at the latter day, who are now ashamed for his sake, to bear a few scoffs and
reproaches from the World, Mark 8.38. Nevertheless, I am in a wonderful
strait! for if I seek to please God, and discharge my conscience, I displease
the world, and that will hate and vex me; if I seek to please the world, I
displease God, and he will hate and condemn me.

Now though the case be plain enough, for better it is to have all the world
mine enemies, then my Maker, my Redeemer, and my Conscience, Acts 5.29. Yet it
almost beats me off, from being religious, back to the world: And certainly he
must be more spirit then flesh, that can contentedly make himself contemptible,
to follow Christ, be pointed at for singularity, endure so many base and vile
nicknames, have his Religion judged hypocrisy, his godly simplicity silliness,
his zeal madness, and the like malicious and mischievous constructions made, of
whatsoever he speaks or does: For my part, I could better abide a stake, ( God
assisting me) then the mocks, scoffs, and scorns, which every where I meet
withal: Its death to me to be mocked, as it fared with Zedekiah, Jer. 38.19.

Now could you cure me of my cowardliness, as you have of my cursing and
swearing, I should have cause indeed to bless the time that ever I saw you, and
why not? Since God has given you the Tongue of the learned, to administer a
word in season to them that are weary, Esaias. 50.4.

Sect. 2. Minister, If you would shake off this slavish yoke of bondage and
fear, in which Satan for the present holds you, and be rid of this bashful
devil. Search the Scriptures, and they will both inform your judgment, and
confirm, comfort, and strengthen you against the worlds hatred, and calumny,
though there needs no more then, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, James 3.6.2. Tim. 3.12.
Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12, and 10.22. and 24.9. Luke 2.34, 35. and 4.29. John 15.20.
Genesis 3.15. 1 John 3.13, 1 Pet. 4.1^, 13, 14. Luke 14.27. and 6.26. Philip.
1.28, 29. Revel. 2.13. Do but seriously ponder these few places, and consider
by whom they were spoken, and then certainly you will confess, that if there be
any nectar in this life, it is in sorrows we endure for righteousness: And
methinks, when I hear goodness calumniated, I bear it the easier, because the
servants of vice (and none else) do it.

But the better to help and further you, in this great work, take these ensuing
Notions, Aphorisms, and conclusions, which perhaps alone, may both imbolden
you, and stop many of their mouths that scoff you.

First, men scoff and scorn you; and why is it? But because you delight no less
in goodness, then they do in lewdness: Because you in great love to their
souls, will be at the cost to give them Books, thereby to convince them of
their swearing and cursing, and use the likeliest means, to stop them in their
way to destruction, because you would draw them to heaven, as they do many to
hell. A grievous fault, if a wise man may have the judging of it! As I pray
consider of it you that have brains; Its no fault in them to be perjured! but
for you to keep your vow and promise which you made in your baptism, is both a
crime and shame. It has ever been the worlds great quarrel, we refuse to
pledge them, in their wicked customs, and will rather obey God then men. As
wherefore was Cain wroth with his brother Abel, and afterward flew him? but
because his own works were evil, and his brothers good, 1 John 3.12. Wherefore
was holy David had in derision, hated, standered, contemned, and made a byword
of the people, a song of the drunkards? But because he followed the things that
were good and pleasing to God, and in him put his trust, Psalm. 11.2. and 22.6,
7, 8. and 37.14. and 69.10, 11, 12. Why were all the just in Solomon's time, had
in abomination, and mocked of the wicked? but because they were upright in their
way, and holy in their conversation, Prove. 29.27. Or those numberless number of
Martyrs, Rev. 6.9. even killed; but for the word of God, and for the testimony
which they maintaine^t

That great Dragon the Devil, and his subjects make war, and are wroth with
none but the woman and her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ, Revel. 12.17. Lot vexed himself, because he saw
men bad; these because they are good: not because Gods Law is broken, but
because others keep it better then themselves. It is the cursed zeal of these
men, to malign the good zeal of all men. But,

Sect. 3. Secondly, men hate, scoff, and scorn you, but who? are they not
such as these? a crew of Drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. or a sort of vicious persons
following their own lusts? 2 Pet. 3.3. Or a company of abject persons? Psalm.
35.15. like those enemies, Acts 17. lewd fellows of the baser sort? ver. 5. A
rout of profane, godless, irreligious Atheists, and ignorant fools, that do
no more know the power, then Turks and Heathens know the truth of godliness,
Psalm. 14.1. to 6. And it is a shrewd suspicion, that he who is a mocker is an
Atheist. It well becomes him to mock at Religion, that denies a God* And its
evident enough, that he denies a God, that mocks at godliness. However take
this for a rule: As Cham was worse then Noah, whom he derided, and Ishmael
worse then Isaac, whom he mocked; and Saul worse then David, whom he
persecuted; And Iezebel worse then Naboth, whom she defamed and murdered: So
they that are wont to jeere and persecute others, have greater faults
themselves, and cause to be jeered and despised by others, the which they know
not how to cover, but by disgracing of others: And let them but spy (as they
are as Eagle-eyed to our faults, as they are pur-blinde to their own) the
smallest spot in a good man's face, it shall excuse all the sores and ulcers in
their bodies. Again,

Sect. 4. Thirdly, why do these and the Devil hate you? but because God has
chosen you. Why are you a thorn in their eyes, as Job was in the Devils? but
because you fare better then they. As why did Cain envy and hate Abel? but
because the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering; but unto Cain and
his offering he had no respect, Genesis 4.4, 5. Wherefore did Saul so hate and
persecute David? but because he was so praised, and preferred of the people
before himself; And the Lord was with David, and prospered him in every thing
he took in hand, 1 Samuel 18.7, 8.12, 13.28, 29. David's success was Saul's
vexation: Yea, he found not so much pleasure in his kingdom, as vexation in
the prosperity of David: And so of his brother Eliabs envy and ill will to him,
1 Samuel 17.28. And of the Elder brothers envy (in the parable) to his younger
brother, when his father so kindly entertained him, Luke 15.25, 26, 27, 28.
which is meant of the Jews envying the Gentiles conversion.

Envy is sick, if her neighbor be well: and the good man's honor, is the
envious man's torment? As it fared between Haman and Mordecai: and as hereafter
the glory of Christ shall add to such Reprobates confusion, when they are
driven to confess, This is he whom we once had in derision: But,

Sect. 5. Fourthly, are you scoft, and scorned for goodness? a great matter;
our Savior Christ was far wose dealt withal. Yea, his whole life, even from
his Cradle to his Grave, was nothing else but a continued act of suf(...)
Saboth-breaker, etc. was scoft at, scorned, scourged, crucified, and what not.
Ye^* he suffered in every place, in every part: In every place, hunger in the
Desert, resistance in the Temple, sorrow in the Garden, contumelies in the
Judgment Hall, crucifying without the City, etc. In every part, his eyes ran
down with tears, his temples with blood, his ears tingled with buffettings,
glowed with reproaches: They afflicted his taste with gall, spit in his face,
pierced his head with thorns, his hands and feet with nails, his side with a
spear, his heart was full of sorrow, his soul with anguish, his whole body was
sacrificed as an offering for sin: And yet he suffered all for us, to the end
he might leave us an example that we should follow his steps. Neither was it so
much what he suffered, as with what affection, willingness, and patience he
suffered; that did nobilitate the merit of his sufferings.

And the Disciple is not above his Master, Matthew. 10.24, 25. Shall we then
think much to taste of that Cup of which our Savior drank so deep. Christ
wore a Crown of Thorns for me, and shall I grudge to wear this Paper cap for
him? said John Huss, when they put a cap upon his head, that had ugly Devils
painted on it, with the Title of Heresy. The Apostle gives a general
testimony of all the Saints in the Old Testament, saying, some endured the
violence of fire, some were wracked, others were tried by mockings, and
scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, some stoned, some hewn in sunder, some
slain with the sword, and the like, being such as the world was not worthy of,
as you may read, Heb. 11. Yea, our Forefathers here in England, most willingly
under-went those fiery trials, and shall any of Christ's band shrink under the
burden of an ayery trial only?

Neither have any of Gods Children, (from the first to the last) been exempt
from suffering what you do; namely tongue-persecutiou. And it is an everlasting
rule, He that is borne after the flesh, will persecute him that is borne after
the spirit, Gal. 4, 29. When CHRIST was borne, all Jerusalem was troubled, and
Herod cut the throats of all the children in Bethlehem, Matthew. 2.3. to 22. --
All was quiet at Ephesus before St. Paul came thither: but then there arose no
small strife about that way* Acts 19.23. etc. Again,

Sect. 6. Fifthly, Are you scoft and scorned? how can the world pleasure or
honor you more? First, for Honor; Reproach in Gods service is the best
preferment: For as in the Wars, to have the hottest and most dangerous service
imposed upon them by their General, is accounted the greatest honor. Neither
will he confer the same upon any, but the stoutest and most valiant: So even
bearing the Cross with Christ, is as great a preferment in the Court of
Heaven, as it is in an earthly Court, for the Prince to take off his own Robe,
and put it on the back of his servant, as you may perceive by the Lords speech
to Paul, Acts 9.15, 16. and 23.11. And our Saviors words to his Apostles, Acts
1.8. Yea, says Father Latimer, to suffer for Christ, is the greatest
privilege that God gives in this world. And the story of Job is a bookcase to
prove it. Yea, the same Job professes, that if his adversary should write a
Book against him, he would esteem it his crown, Job 31.35, 36, 37.

Whence Moses esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches then all the
treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26. Whence Peter and John, when they were beaten
and imprisoned, departed from the Council, rejoicing, that they were counted
worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's Name, Acts 5.41. They esteemed it a grace
to be disgraced for him. And so it has been accounted by the best and wisest
ever since. They that reproach me, says St. Austine, do against their wills
increase my honor, both with God and good men. And another of the Fathers, It
is the highest degree of reputation to be evil spoken of for well doing. It is
no small credit with the vile, to have a vile estimation. Tertullian thought
much the better of Christianity, because Nero persecuted it. Calvin made the
reproaches, and evil speeches of his enemies a matter of great joy to him. To
be disliked of evil men, says Picus Mirandula, is to be praised for
goodness; their dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor.

Never did Neckarchife become me so well, as this chain (said Alice Drivers)
(...) a Rope was put about his fellows neck; Give me that Gold chain, and dub
me a Knight also of that noble Order. And shall we grutch to bear a few scoffs
for CHRIST? No; but in our greatest streights and extremities let us
acknowledge it a favor, and give GOD thanks: And indeed it is the sum of all
Religion, to be thankful to GOD in the midst of miseries. But if thou can
not bear a few ill words for thy Savior, without murmuring and impatience?
how would thou endure wounds for him, yea how would thou afford him thine
ashes, and write patience with thine own blood? Then,

Sect. 7. 2ly. For profit; Let a good man be scoft and scorned for a fault, he
will be the better for it to his dying day. His enemies by their evil tongues
shall beget in him a good and holy life. For happily they shall bring to his
remembrance sins forgotten, wean him from the love of the world, discover
whether he be sincere or no, make him humble, exercise and improve his
patience, and all his other graces, and augment his glory. Yea, his patient
suffering shall be rewarded here, as well as hereafter, Deuteronomy. 23.5. 2 Samuel
16.12.

Blessed are they which suffer for righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven, Matthew. 5.10. to 14. They that suffer here for well doing, shall be
crowned hereafter for well suffering. And certainly nothing that we can suffer
here, can be compared with those woes we have deserved in Hell, or those joys
we are reserved to in Heaven. By our crosses sanctified, weight is added to our
Crown of bliss. Our Enemies, says Bernard, are but our Fathers Goldsmiths,
working to add pearls to the Crowns of the Saints. Whence Moses chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, Heb. 11.26. And hence it is that the Holy Ghost calls upon us to
rejoice, and be exceeding glad, when men shall revile, and persecute, and say
all manner of evil against us falsely for Christ's sake: and tells us, we are
blessed and happy, for that the spirit of glory, and of God does so much the
more rest upon us, which on their parts is evil spoken of, but on our part is
glorified, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. Mat. 5.11, 12. Phil. 1.28, 29. Rev. 2.13. And
this has made thousands to embrace the very flames, when they might easily
have been freed, by exchanging eternal happiness, for temporary and transitory.

Your cruelty is our glory (said the Martyrs in Tertullians time) to their
persecutors; For the harder we are put to it, the greater shall our reward be
in Heaven. It is to my loss, said Gordius the Martyr, if you bate me any thing
of my sufferings.

Sect. 8. Now if in conclusion, the most malicious practices of our worst and
greatest Enemies (by the blessing of God, and our well hushanding of them)
prove no other in effect to us then did the malice of Joseph's brethren,
Mistress, and Lord to him, then the malice of Haman to Mordecai and the Jews:
Then Balacks malice to the Children of Israel: Then the Devils spite to Job:
Then the malice of Achitophel and Shimei to David: Or then the Arians malice to
Paphnutius; all which made for their inestimable good, benefit and advantage.
Then grutch not at it, neither mutter at the matter, but receive what ever
comes, with humility, patience, piety and thankefulness. Yea, if none but evil
men do it, and that because you do better, or fare better then they; and that
what you suffer, is nothing to what Christ, and the best of Saints have
exceeded you in: Let it make you no less joyful then thankful: Yea, let it
cause you to cry out, O the wonderful and sovereign goodness of our God! that
turns even our poisons into cordials. And henceforth, think it no shame, but
count it your glory. Be not grieved, when you have so much cause to rejoice;
for it shows you to be borne of God, your enemies to be the seed of the
Serpent. The worlds hating you, shows that Christ loves you, and has chosen
you out of the world. Yea, this is to your Adversaries a sure token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.

Yea, do not only bear with them, but pity and pray for them, for they need
no help to be miserable: As who sets them on work, but he that will pay them
with damnation (though God offers them better wages) Nor is it so much they, as
the Devil in, and by them. It is his mind in their mouth, his heart in their
lips, his Arrow shot by man's Bow* He lends them his lies and malice, and
borrow^th their tongues to utter them, because the Devil wants a tongue.

True, they have sworn themselves Christ's faithful servants and soldiers: but
they will fight only for sin and Satan. And least their own sins should not
damn them deep enough; they do, what in them lies, draw others to damnation:
For it is not enough for them to be ^ad themselves, except they rail at, and
persecute the good, and that against their own consciences. As for example,
Pilate judged Christ guiltless, yet he put him to death; and Festus
acknowledged Paul without crime, yet he left him in prison.

Only they have some wit in their anger: For how should Naboth be clenly put
to death, if he be not first accused of blasphemy? 1 Kings 21.13. And the like
of Joseph, Elias, Jeremiah, Paul, Stephen, and our Savior Christ himself.
Indeed these want that power that their fellow persecutors have had: and
therefore can only show their teeth, otherwise their hearts are as bloody, and
as full of the Serpents enmity as Doegs was. In the mean time we are safe
enough, since their words are but like a boys squib, that flashes, and cracks,
and stincks, but is nothing. And how little is that man hurt, whom malice
condemns on earth, and God commends in heaven.

Only I wish they would take notice, that he is bottomlesly ill, who is so
far from being good himself, that he hates goodness in others. They are
desperately wicked, that cannot so much as endure the sight of godliness; that
are displeased with others, because they please God, and murmur like the
Scribes and Pharisees at the same things whereat the Angels rejoice. Such an
one is upon the very threshold of Hell, and none but a Cain or a Devil in
condition will do so. Nor co^ld they do it, if the Devil were not in their
hearts.

Sect. 9. Object. But their usual objection is, why will you be so singular?
are you wiser then all? this is but want of discretion.

Answ. Suppose such do think as they speak: Shall Lot leave his Righteousness,
for such an imputation of singularity? Or shall he not depart Sodom, because
the whole City thinks it better to stay there still? Shall Noah leave building
the Arc, and so himself and his whole household perish, because all the world
else thinks him hare-brain'd? Or shall the name of Roundhead dishearten us
from the service of God? No, but after the way, which to profane men is most
ridiculous, let our souls desire to serve Jesus Christ, Acts 24.14. It was
Noah's happiness, that he followed not the Old worlds fashions; It was Lots
happiness, that he was singular in Sodom. It was good for Nichodemus that he
was singular among the Rulers. Yea, it was happy for Ruben, that he was
opposite to all his brethren. Happy for Caleb, and Ioshuah, that they were
opposite to the rest of the Spies. Happy for Luther, that he was opposite to
the rest of his Country. And in case Jesus Christ, and his twelve Apostles be
on your side, no matter if all the world be against you. For better be saved
with a few, as Noe was in the Arc, then be drowned with the world, and damned
for company.

Sect. 10. And now for conclusion; Let all Scoffers take notice, that as they
scoff at us, so God laughes at them in Psalm. 2.4. Yea, judgments are prepared
for these scorners, and stripes for the bracks of these fools, Pro. 19.29. God
shall rain down fire and brimstone upon such scorners of his word, and
blasphemers of his people as thou art, said Mr. Philp^t the Martyr, to mocking
Morgan, and the rest of his persecutors.

But on the contrary, let not the taunts of an Ishmael make any Isaac out of
love with his Inheritance. A wise man will not be scoft out of his money, nor a
just man be flouted out of his Faith. Yea, for a man to be scoft out of his
goodness, by those that are lewd, is all one, as if a man that sees, should
blinde-fold himself, or put out his eyes, because some blind wretches, revile
and scoff at him for seeing. Or as if one that is sound of limbs, should limp
or maym himself to please the Criple, and avoid his taunts. Wherefore proceed
good Sir, without ever growing faint: Let others serve the God of this world,
resolve you to serve the God of heaven.

Now if any swearer, curser, or scoffer has the wit, let him read those four
Books formerly mentioned, which for his, and others good, are all (together
with this) to be had for a penny, being an hundred and eleven pages, and
contain as much matter, as is usually to be found in a book of half a crown
price. The place where any one may have them is at the first door on your left
hand, in Bores-head Court by Criplegate, Ox at the Black Swan by Moore-gate.

FINIS.
Farewell my little Benjamin, go out into the world and prosper: And the
blessing of him that dwelt in the bush, Deuteronomy. 33.16. even the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob* Ex* ^.6. go along with thee: For otherwise Old Adam will
prove too strong for Young Melanc^^on.

To such as for my great love, and no little cost, do hate me; and for using
the likeliest means to stop them in their way to destruction, do scoff, and
traduce me.

Who so rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house, Prove.
17.13. But*

ARe you Christians? Or do you own him that made you, and that has bestowed so
many millions of mercies upon you? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 2 Pet. 1.4. If so, fight
not for Satan against your Savior, 2 Chro. 13.12. Acts 5.39. and 23.9. who
has done and suffered so much for you, Romans 4.25. and 5, 6. to 20. and 6.23.
and 8.2. Rev. 1.5. 1 Pet. 2.24. For this is an unkindness, next door to
unpardonable, Mar. 3.22, 29, 30. Hate me not to the death, for showing you the
way to eternal life, Acts 11.14. as those Libertines did Stephen, Acts 7.54.
and the Jews Christ, Mat. 27.27. Or if you do, what shall you gain, or I loose
thereby? when this your malice is a sure token to you of perdition, but to me
of salvation? as the Apostle tells you, Phil. 1.28. Ishmael did but flout
Isaac, yet for that flout, he is by the Holy Ghost branded for a persecutor,
and shall fry in hell flames everlastingly, Gal. 4.29. Those little children, 2
King. 2. did but mock Elisha, but for that mock 42. of them were devoured of
wild Bears, verse. 24. Cham did but deride Noah, but that alone brought his
Fathers curse upon him, and Gods upon that, Genesis 9.25. which Prophetical curse
lies so heavy upon Chams posterity (the Ethiopians) to this day (though almost
four thousand years since) and they are so devoted to slavery, that Parents
will sell their own children to be slaves, to such as trade in Negroes. And yet
the most dreadful part of the curse, lies upon them in spirituals, there being
few of Chams posterity in any age of the world, that have ever been taken into
the Church. Wherefore take heed of mocking or scossing at Religion, or the
Religious: For (as the Serpents hissing, sufficiently betrays his malice, so)
that, viz. scoffing alone; infallibly declares you to be the Serpents seed, and
children of the Devil, Act: 13.10, Genesis 3.15. Nor is it you, but the Devil in
and by you; as you may see by Genesis 3.1. to 6. Ephesians. 2.2. Matthew. 16.22, 23. 1
King. 22.22, 23. John 13.2. Acts 5.3. And none but a Cain, or a devil in
condition will envy, because his own works are evil, and his brothers good, 1
John 3.12. 1 Pet. 4.4.

But they will not believe that are ordained to perish, Prove. 29.1. 1 Samuel
2.25. And as good admonish a bruit beast, as a scorner, Prove. 12.1. and 13.1.
and 19, 29. For scorners are upon the very threshold of hell, Luke ^6.31. 2
Chr. 25.16. As how dreadfully does St. Peter speak of such, his words are
these, and the like: They walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness,
they are presumptuous, and self-willed, they speak evil of the things which
they understand not, they sport themselves in their own deceivings, they are
reserved uuto the day of Judgment to be punished, yea (says the Apostle) as
natural bruit beasts, they are made to be taken and destroyed (mark that! they
are made to be taken and destroyed) and shall utterly perish in their own
corruption, and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, to whom the
blackness of darkness is reserved for ever, 2 Pet. 2.9. to the end. O woeful
and doleful condition!

Beware then of scoffing at goodness, for there cannot be a greater argument of
a soul soul, given up to Satan the God of this world, 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2. 2
Cor. 4.4. And to prove you a Soldier belonging to that great Red Dragon that
fights against Michael and his Angels, Rev. 12. Who when his hands are bound,
casts a flood of reproaches out of his mouth against the Church, and the
remnant of her seed which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ, ver. 15, 16, 17.

Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. Though a sinner
do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that
it shall be well with them that fear God, etc. Eccles. 8.11, 12.

[ LONDON, Printed by T. R. for James Crump.

Preparation to Conversion; Or, Faith's Harbinger.
In a rare Epistle, writ by a Person of Quality before his death, to his
surviving Friends. Showing, That Satan prevails most by deception of our
Reason: That the beauty of Holiness and true Wisdom is unseen to the World:
That ungrateful persons are as witless as wicked: Why most men hear the Gospel
year after year, and are never the better: With wholesome instruction, to prevent
destruction. All richly fraught with choice and pithy Sentences, Similitudes,
Examples, Metaphors, Rhetorical and pointed Expressions. Which being thought by
many worth the Transcribing at no small charge, is now committed to the Press
by R. Young of Roxwel in Essex.

Much Respected,

IF you ask, Why I take this pains? Turn to Levit. 19.17. Heb 3.13. and you
have there both my answer and warrant; for I do but supply with my pen, what I
was bound to perform with my tongue. If for a President? Take that of Photian;
who, when a Friend of his would have cast himself away, suffered him not,
saying, I was made thy Friend to this purpose. And he that loves not such a
Friend, hates himself. If why I have been silent so long? These are the only
reasons: Want of courage, fear to displease; and lest you should think me to
have had more Zeal then Wit, and more Religion then Discretion: A case too
common; which makes me fear, that what our Savior says Mar. 8.38. Whosoever
shall be ashamed of me, etc. will prove a dreadful Text to a great many: For
who almost does not make a very Idol of Discretion; and more fear the censures
of men, then the displeasure of God? Men owe God some good will, but (like
those Rulers, Ioh. 12.42.) they dare not show it. They would please him, yet so
as they might not displease others, nor themselves: Never considering, that he
who bears with his Friends vices, makes them his own.

Now in case you shall (with those Gentiles Rom 10.20.) receive more good by it
then you desire, admire the providence and free grace of God, who will show
mercy to whom he will show mercy, Exodus 33* 19. Romans 9.15. That little which
Croesus learnt of Solon, saved his life: And had Pilate taken that fair warning
his wife gave him, it might have saved his soul. Nor am I without hope to
prevail with some of you; since Nathan wrought more upon David by one private
particular Admonition, then all the Lectures of the Law could do for three
^arters of a year together. However it were happy for millions, were they so
plainly dealt withal.

Wherefore be persuaded to hearken a while unto me, as you would (...) will
even refer the point to your selves to determine. As let me propound your case
in the person of another, as the disguised Prophet dealt with Ahab, 1 King. 20.
v. 39. to 43. Or as Christ dealt with the Priests, Scribes and Elders, Luke 20.
v. 1, to 20. The case is this.

2 God in great love sent Sampson to deliver the men of Judah from the slavish
thraldom of their enemies; but they in requital bind him (in whom all their
hope of deliverance lay) and deliver him up to those enemies that kept them
under; to the end they might slay him, and still make slaves of them, Judge. 15.
Again after this, God sent unto their successors the Jews, his only Son; to
the end he might heal their diseases, feed their bodies, inlighten their
minds, and save their souls: And they in requiral of all, hate, revile,
scourge and crucify him; though in killing him, they did their utmost to split
or sink the only ship that could save them. Two rare and remarkable Examples!

Now tell me what you think of these blockish Jews: Were they more wicked, or
witless, or ungrateful? I know you will answer me, You cannot tell; as the
Priests, Scribes and Elders did our Savior, when the conscience of their own
guiltiness had stopped their mouths, Luke 20.1, to 8. Or if you do make a
satisfying answer, it shall be like David's answer to Nathan's parable, wherein
he pronounced sentence of death against himself, 2 Samuel 12.1, to 8. For it is
your very Case, if you had but eyes, or the wit to see it. I mean all you, who
any way misuse, or are ungrateful to your Ministers; whom God out of his
infinite love has sent to be your Deliverers from the grievous slavery and
thraldom you are in, under Sin, Satan and Hell. I know you think your selves
wise men, and Christians good enough; yea, what but your high thoughts and good
opinion of your selves, has brought you to become scorners of your Teachers
and Instructors, and more of their godly instruction? As proud men are wont to
admire their own actions, but to abate the value and derogate from the esteem
of others; every whit as basely to vilify other men's doings, as they
over-highly prise their own, as Julian observes.

Bnt consider it rightly, and this alone (could you be taxed with nothing but
this) not only shows you to be foolish and frantic, but so ungrateful and
wicked withal, as if your wickedness and unthankfulness did strive with Gods
goodness for the victory; as Absalom strove with David, whether the Father
should be more kind to the son, or the so^^ more unkind to the Father.

As what can you allege for your selves, or against your Pastors? Are they
any other to you, then those three Messengers were to Lot, that came to fetch
him out of Sodom, that he might not feel the fire and brimstone which followed?
Genesis 19. Or then the Angel was to Peter, that opened the iron-gates, loosed his
bands, brought him out of prison, and delivered him from the thraldom of his
enemies? Acts 12.

3 What wrong do they do you? They beg and dig, they dig and beg; as that good
Vine-dresser did, whose Mattock kept off the Masters Ax, Luke* ^* 8, 9. They
beat their brains, they spend their spirits, pour out their prayers, plot and
contrive all they can to save your precious souls, (were you but willing to be
saved:) They bring you the glad tidings of salvation; would furnish and endow
you with the spiritual, invaluable, and lasting riches of grace and glory: They
are content to waste themselves (like a candle) that they may give light unto,
and bring others to Heaven, 1 Cor. 9.19. 2 Cor. 12.15. And do you, instead of
honoring, respecting and rewarding them, hate, traduce and persecute them? This
is not for want of ignorance: For you show just as much reason in it, as if
those blind, deaf, diseased, possessed, distracted or dead persons spoken of
in the Gospel, should have railed upon our Savior for offering to cure,
restore, dispossess, recover and raise them again* And had not they great
reason so to do? For shame think upon it* For did you know and rightly
consider, that you cannot be nourished unto eternal life, but by the milk of
the Word; you would rather wish your bodies might be without souls, then your
Churches without Preachers: You would not, like so many Mules, suck their milk,
and then kick them with your heels.

But this most plainly shows, that you are so far from knowing the necessity
and worth of the Word of life, that you do not know you have souls; which makes
you as little care for them, as you know them. Otherwise, how could you make
such a mighty difference between your bodies and souls? As had any of you but a
leg or an arm putrified and corrupt, you would even give money, and think your
selves beholding too, to have them cut off; Because it is the only way and
means to preserve the whole body. And if so, what love and thanks can be too
much, that is expressed to them, who would (would we give them leave) pluck our*
Souls out of Satan's clutches, and bring us to eternal life? Nor can he ever be
thankful to God, who is not thankful to the instrument or means by whom God
does, or would do him good. Yea more, That man (I dare boldly affirm) cannot
possibly have any interest is Christ's blood, who is not forced with Admiration
to say, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace,
bring glad tidings of good things, and publish salvation! Romans 10.15. Isa.
52.7. But to prove and clear this, see both Examples, and Testimonies.

4 First, Examples. The Galatians are said to have received them as Angels of
God, yea, even as Christ Jesus; and that to pleasure them, they would, if it
had been possible, have plucked out their own eyes, and have given the same
unto them, Gal. 1.14, 15. and thought it their duty, to communicate unto them
in all their goods, Gal. 6.6. And likewise the Romans, Romans 15.27. Yea, by the
Apostles testimony, we that are converted do owe even our own selves unto our
spiritual Pastors, Phil. 1.9. and the like of other Churches: Insomuch that
Luther (speaking of the Primitive times, and of Christians in general) says
that so soon as the Gospel took root in men's hearts, the glad tidings of
salvation by Christ was so sweet to them, that in comparison hereof riches had
(...) relish. And Acts. (...) and ^.34, 35* (...) same. And indeed, who ever
knew what Conversion and Regeneration was; who has tasted of the powers of the
world to come, and enjoyed the joy of the Holy Ghost, and that peace of
conscience which passes all understanding? but would rather have their bodies
want food, and the Firmament want light, then that their souls should want that
light and spiritual food of the Gospel, by which they are nourished and do
live? For, far better be unborn, then untaught, as Alexander a mere Heathen
could say.

That this is the one only thing necessary, and which Believers prize above
all, you may see by what holy David says of it, Ps. 27.4. and 84.1, to 11. and
119.103. One thing have I desired, etc. Oh how sweet is thy word unto me, etc.
As turn but to the places, and see how he expresses himself; for I may but
touch upon things. And the like of wise Solomon Pro. 8.10. True, to you that
are strangers to, and utterly unacquainted with these soul-ravishing
enjoyments, these things will appear impossible; as the like did to Nicodemus
touching Regeneration, Ioh. 3.4. and to that multitude of Jews touching
Stephens vision, when he told them how he saw the heavens opened, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God in glory: Which they were so far from
believing, that it made their hearts brast for madness, to gnash their teeth,
stop their ears, cast him out of the city, and stone him to death, Acts 7.54,
to 60. They could not possibly believe, that he should see what was hid to
every one of them.

But this I can assure you, (even you my friends) beyond all exceptions; That
if ever the mask of prejudice be taken from before your sight, or if your eyes
shall be opened before you drop into Hell, you will have other thoughts of
these things, and so of the Publishers of them, and be clean of another mind,
yea, you will loath what you now love, and love what you now loath. Yea, I dare
refer my self in this case to the very damned in hell: For what else made
Dives, being in those torments, desire Abraham, that one might be sent unto his
brethren from the dead, to give them warning, and to acquaint them with his
success, but the alteration of his judgment? And you, know how that Reprobate
Balaam wished to die the death of the righteous; though for the present he
preferred and loved riches and honor before and above his soul. But,

5 Secondly, see precepts and testimonies to confirm it. Are we not commanded
by the Holy Ghost to have them in singular love, and count them worthy of
double honor for their works sake? 1 These. 5.13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Yea, the Apostles
words are not only, Let them that labor in the word and doctrine be accounted
worthy of double honor; but he adds, He who preaches the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.7, to 15. saying also, Let him that is taught in the
word, communicate unto him that teaches in all his goods, Gal. 6.6. Yea, if
any man (says he) does not communicate, and communicate in all his goods, God
is not mocked, v. 7. So it falls, and I fear it falls heavy on many amongst us.
Again says the same Apostle, If we have ^own unto you spiritual things, is it a
great thing if (...) that they which minister about holy things, live of the
things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar, etc. v. 13, 14. Again, does he not say, that our debt and duty (he terms
it not benevolence) to our Spiritual Pastors is such, as that we owe unto them
even our own selves, Phil. 19. with a great deal more of the like, that he may
meet with men's carnal reasonings in this case, which are not a few, 1 Cor. 9.
All which is New Testament too, if obstinacy would permit men to take notice of
it.

Thus you see how you ought to esteem and reward your Ministers* and how
Believers do, and have done. Whereas you, (as if you were Antipathites to all
wisdom and goodness) hate, revile, slight, rob and persecute them. Are you not
ashamed of it? does it not make you tremble? yea, is it not enough to make you
despair of ever finding mercy at the Throne of Grace, or of having Christ your
Redeemer and Advocate? to whom, and for whose sake you do it, as I shall
suddenly show.

But you will say (for want of acquaintance with the Word of God, and your own
hearts; as every Natural man is as great a stranger to his own heart, as Hazael
was, who could not be persuaded by the Prophet that he should commit such
abominable wickedness, as a while after it fell out;) That you neither hate,
nor persecute any one of them.

To which I answer: What then makes you so spightful, in spitting out your
spleen against them, when you but hear a Minister mentioned* What makes you so
frequent in slighting, scorning, and scoffing at them where ever you come, and
in all companies? What makes you pick so many holes in their coats, find so
many faults with them, raise so many objections (if not lies) against them;
that nothing they either do, or deliver, can please you? As how many of your
cavils and exceptions could I reckon up, that I have heard from your own
mouths, if I would foul Paper with them? Yea, I could give you a large List of
instances, and in your own expressions: But they are so trivial, barbarous and
base, that I am ashamed to nominate them; and no less unwilling, lest I should
arm other mad men with your weapons.

Now do but lay aside dissimulation, and speak the naked truth; and then say,
whether all this proceeds not from an ^eart full fraught with enmity and malice
against the Ministry, even for the very graces of Gods Spirit that shines in
them? As it fared with that Council of Priests, Scribes and Elders touching
Steven, Acts 6.15. and 7.54. Do but examine your Consciences well, and you will
not deny it.

6 Again, what makes you that are so civil in other cases, so uncivil, as not
to afford them of all other men the common Title of [ Master such an one] which
you will not deny to a very Cobbler? Can you tell me? No, I dare challenge the
strongest brained Achitophel, or the most fluent Tertullus amongst you, to
yield a wise reason thereof: except that which God has set down, Genesis 3, 15. I
will put enmity between the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman.

But further to convince you, answer me another question: What mak^s you to
detain their dues from them, and not pay them a penny except you be forced to
it? Or if you do for your peace or credit sake, any thing is thought too much
for your Minister; and what you part with, is drawn from you as so much blood
from the heart. And then also you will basely asperse him; at least you will
allege one thing or other to save your purses; as, He had not my voice nor
consent when he was chosen; or, I hear at other Churches, and come not at him;
or, I like not his preaching, or the like: As any thing shall serve, to save
your silver, and to forestal you with prejudice, and make you resolve against
your own Conversion: For what is this, but to pick straws, as it were, to put
out your own eyes withal?

Yea, many they be, that will pretend conscience (forsooth) that they may rob
their Minister; and allege, That he has taken Degrees, is Ordained, He is a
Black-coat: Or rather which is the same in effect, He is a conscientious
Pastor, or Sheperd of Christ's sending, and not an ^ntruder.

But lest what has been said should not prove sufficient; how basely will you
calumniate him that but takes his Dues, especially of a poor body? Ministers,
more then all the world besides, must take a testern for a shilling. And not he
alone shall suffer, but all these Churchmen (say you) are so covetous, that
they never think they have enough: when they have scarce enough to fill the
bellies of their own families. All which not only argues you as brainless as
beasts, but proves you to be as full of the serpents enmity, as the egg of a
Cockatrice is full of poison.

Thus every, or any thing shall serve their turns, that study quarrels: Even as
a crooked stick shall serve to beat a dog, when a straight one cannot be found.

Now lay all together, and tell me whether this argues not hatred? if not, what
can? For love (as the Apostle witnesses) suffers long, it is kind,
charitable, envieth not, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own,
is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, bears
all things, enduret^ all things, 1 Cor. 13. Yea, love is so far from finding
faults where are none, that (as wise Solomon has it) it covers or passes
over all sins, and will not see them, Prove. 10.12. So that if you loved the
Ministers, as you will pretend you do, you would deal by them, as the people
did by Ulysses; whom they so applauded for the acuteness of an ingenious mind,
that they spared to object unto him his bodily deformities; Or if any one did
show the least malignity toward him, that person was branded for a notorious
wicked man, as Homer relates. And to speak rightly, we need say no more of a
man, then -- He is an Enemy to his faithful Pastor; that is enough to brand
him: Nor can there be a greater argument of his being of the brood of Cain,
Haman, Eliah, Michol, Doeg, Shimei, Ahab, Rabshekah, Tobiah, Sa^ballat, Pashur,
Zedekiah, Elymus, Herodias, and their fellows, then the hatred of good
Ministers. For such men would do the same to Christ himself, were he their
Minister. There was never any so innocent or virtuous, to whom such Belialists
took not exceptions; because they are as deeply in love with vice, as others
are with virtue. Yea, whom all men commend, you have some Thersites will take
occasion to blast. I Will give you an ear-mark to know such a one by: whereas one
of the modester sort will allege, his Minister is a Presbyterian, or an
Independent, or a Royalist; this overgrown Toad will object, that he is a
Roundhead; the meaning whereof is, a Religious, Godly, Conscientious man.

7 But perhaps this is not your case. Suppose it be not; yet what I have before
convicted you of, is sufficient to prove you a soldier belonging to that great
Red Dragon, that fights against Michael and his Angels, Rev. 12. Who, when
his hands are bound, casts a flood of reproaches out of his mouth against the
Church, and the remnant of her se^d which keep the commands of God, and have
the testimonies of Jesus Christ, v. 15, 16, 17. But you are not at all versed
in Scripture; therefore we'll come to Reason, and therein answer me a few
questions.

Do you do by the Ministers as you ought, or as you would be done by? Would
you, when you have discharged your duty and conscience to the utmost of your
endeavor, have ill constructions made of your best actions and intentions? be
rewarded with the greatest evil, for the greatest good; and the greatest
hatred, for the most superlative love? (For, love to the soul, is the very soul
of love) Is this an evidence that you have them in singular respect for their
works sake? Is this to receive them as an Angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus?
Is this to make them partakers of all your goods, and to be willing to pluck
out your own eyes, and to give them if need were, as God commands, and as the
godly have been willing to do? I think not.

Indeed, if you may be your own Judges, you will (during the time of this your
prejudice) think all but little or nothing. But if the Word of God be consulted
with, it will be found persecution in the highest degree: Like that of Ahab and
Iesabel to Elias; or that of Herod and Herodias to John Baptist; or that of the
Jews, Scribes and Pharise^^ against our Savior: for they did but express their
utmost spigh^ to Gods Messengers that came to save them; and so do you. And
this is a sure rule: He that now under the Gospel shows a spightfull and a
malicious mind to a godly zealous Minister; if he had lived in Christ's days,
he would have been ready to have driven the first nail into his body, and
rather have been for Barrabas then Jesus. And God measures what we do, by what
we would do, whether in good or evil. Thoughts and Desires, in Gods account,
are good and evil works* Neither does (...) punish or reward any thing but the
Will.

Again, whereas you think not Tongue-taunts to be persecution; (...) shall one
day (if you go on) hear it pronounced so, in your Bill of Indictment. Ishmael
did but flout Isaac, yet S. Paul says he persecuted him, Gal. 4.29. God calls
the scorning of his servants by no better a name then persecution. Cham did but
scoff at Noah, yet that scoff brought his fathers curse upon him, and Gods upon
that. Even the serpents hissing betrays his malice. Those two and forty little
children (though but children) were devoured of wild Bears, for only scoffing
at the Prophets bald head, 2 King. 2.24. A small matter, if Sensualists may be
Judge. But whatever you conceive of it, let all, even heart and
tongue-persecution be as far from my soul, as my soul from hell. For assuredly,
God will one day laugh you to scorn, for laughing his to scorn; and at last
despise you, that have despised him in his Ambassadors.

8 Again, you think it nothing, or no great matter to detain the Ministers
maintenance. But look narrowly into it, and you shall find it to be theft,
sacrilege, murder, yea soul-murder, and that in the highest degree: For you
rob the Minister of what is as due to him, as any land of inheritance is to the
owner. You rob God of his Tithes, offerings, etc. which he accounts most
abominable; as you may gather from the many complaints and threatenings which
God throughout all the Old Testament utters touching it. For which see only
Mal. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. and 1.7, 8, 13, 14. Hag. 1 and 2 chap. Hereby you make
your selves guilty of murder: First of murdering your Pastors body and whole
family; for if all should be of your minds, they should starve. Secondly of
your own, and all the peoples souls, as much as in you lies: For how should
your Pastor feed your souls, if you feed not his body? how should the lamp
burn, if you take away the holy oil that should maintain it? and in case it
burn not, there will be but a dark house. Men would have fire kept in the
Sanctuary, but allow no fuel; they would have the lamp burn, but without oil.
But how do they serve Christ and themselves, in so serving their Ministers? To
take away the Provante from the Army, is to betray it to the Enemy.

And indeed, if you might have your wills, or if others were of your mind and
temper, there should be no Preaching at all, no souls saved, all go to hell.
For, to expect that Ministers should preach without maintenance, yea good
maintenance, (for to furnish themselves with Books only will cost more then a
little) is as if you should shut a Bird into a cage, give her no meat, and yet
bid her sing. It amazes me to think how unreasonable and base most men be: They
will bestow more upon their very Hair in a month, or upon the Smoke of a
needless Indian wanton Weed in a week, then upon God and their souls in a whole
year. And were it not most just with God to take away our faithful Ministers
from us, when we so ill entreat them, and so unworthily reward them? yea, since
we love darkness more then light, may not God justly leave us in the dark? and
bring upon us a famine of Preaching, who would bring a famine upon the
Preachers, by purloining the maintenance of his Ministers? It is but just with
God to take away the lamp from that Nation, which has taken away the holy oil
that should maintain it. But it is a true observation, Sacrilege is the
greatest theft, yet of it men make the least conscience^*

But lastly, You make your selves not only guilty of persecution, theft,
sacrilege, of murdering bodies and souls, of provoking God to send a famine of
his Word, and the like, but you become by it guilty of high treason against
God, in thus using his Ambassadors, and against Christ and all his members. For
besides that all the disgraces and wrongs that are done to Christ's Ministers,
redound to him; and he that ^raduceth, or any way wrongs a Minister for the
discharge of his place, his envy strikes at the Image of God in him, as a world
of places prove: So the very root or spring of this their spite and enmity
against the Ministry, is an inbred enmity and hatred against God himself. As
when Satan slew Jobs sons and servants, his malice was against Job; Or as when
Saul darted a spear Jonathan, his spite was against David.

And accordingly, God takes what is done to his messengers, as done to himself;
as in that case of David sending his Ambassadors to the King of Ammon, 2 Samuel
10.6, 7. They have not cast thee away, says God to Samuel, but they have cast
me away, that I should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7. You are gathered
together against the Lord; and what is Aaron, that ye murmr against him?
Numb. 16.11. and the like Exodus 16.7, 8. Luke 10.1^. Ioh. 15.23, 24. Ioh. 7.7.
He that despises you, despises me, 1 Samuel 17.45. Isa. 37.23. Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. Rev. 16.9.11. Psalm. 89.23.

9 Which being so, how does it behove you to look to your selves, and bewail
this sin, this horrible and desperate sin! Was there ever any that was stout
against the Lord and prospered, as Job speaks, Job 9.4. When the Pitcher
contends with the Rock, straw with the fire, it is easy to judge who will come
by the worst. And certainly, if most men were not both blind and mad, they
would more respect the Ministry: For if I understand any thing of the Word of
God, or know what rectified reason is, there is not a sin in the Nation that so
hinders the blessings, or pulls down the judgments of God upon us, as does this
very sin. And yet it is not more provoking, then it is a common sin. How it
will be answered to their Lord and master at the great day, I tremble to think:
Can you answer it then with flashes of wit, or carnal reasons, as you do now? I
beseech you look to it. Nor is our love, or hatred to God any way better known,
then by our respect to, and usage of his Ambassadors. Lip-love is but lying
love. If you love me, keep my commandments, says our Savior, Ioh. 14.15.
Wherefore let my counsel be acceptable: Break off your sins by repentance, kick
no more against the pricks; Refrain your selves from these men and let them
alone, lest ye be found even fighters against God, Acts 5.38, 39. Nor will it
ever repent you, if you come in Heaven, that you were stopped in this your way to
destruction. Yea, let the consideration of what you have already done, make you
sink down with shame, and tremble for astonishment to think, that
notwithstanding you have been so many years in arms against your Maker and
Redeemer, and most spightfully and maliciously persecuted his Ambassadors that
came to rescue you from the subtlery and slavery of Satan, that bloody
devouring Dragon, and vowed enemy of all mankind: yet God has no taken the
advantage of casting you into Hell, but of his never enough admired mercy has
spared you to this hour! whereas he might most justly have prevented all, in
sending you body and soul into everlasting torments, when you were but a span
long. For know this, that we need no more to condemn us, then what we brought
into the world with us. Yea, we were condemned, so soon as conceived: And that
you and I are not at this present frying in Hell-flames, never to be freed, no
reason can be al^^adged, but O the depth!

Wherefore take heed in time, and as you tender the good of your own souls,
defer not a minute; but study and bestir your selves how you may make your
peace with God. Yea, do it while the yerning bowels, the bleeding wounds, and
compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive you* whiles ye have
health, and life, and means, and time to repent, and make your peace with God.
As you tender, I say, the everlasting happiness and welfare of your almost lost
and drowned souls: As you expect or hope for grace, or mercy, for joy and
comfort, for heaven and salvation, for endless bliss and glory at the last: As
you shall escape the direful wrath of God, the bitter doom and sentence of
Christ, the never dying sting and worm of conscience, the tormenting and
soul-scorching flames of Hell, and everlasting separation from Gods blissfull
presence, abjure and utterly renounce this accursed sin. Oh, get an interest in
Christ! For till we become members of his mystical body by regeneration and a
lively faith; we (even the b^st of us) are as Traitors condemned to suffer
eternal torments in Hellfire, ^eing only reprieved for a time. O bless God
all the days you live, yea, to eternity, that the gate of mercy yet stands
open!

10 But withal take hold of the opportunity before the Draw-bri^ge be taken up,
lest you never have the like again. Do not dally with God and your own souls;
for if this warning be slighted, never look for the like* For warning (such a
warning) not taking, is a certain presage of destruction, Pro. 29.1. and 1.24,
25, 26. The sons of Eli would not hearken un^^, nor obey the voice of their
Father: why? because (says the Text) the Lord was determined to destroy them,
1 Samuel 2.25. I know, says the Prophet to Amaziah, the Lord has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25.16, 20. Whereas contrarily the Ninevites by harkening to Jonah; and
those very murderers of the Lord of life, by listening to Peter, were
converted and saved, Acts 2.36, 37.

O take heed of preferring your own carnal reason before the written were of
God: And that what is spoken of Babel, may not be verified in you; We would
have cured him, but he would not be cured: lest you be given to destruction as
she was. What says our Savior? This is the condemnation (no^ like this) that
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather th^^ light, because
their deeds were evil, John 3.19, 20. Indeed, if you will rather believe Satan,
or his solicitor the Flesh, or be led by the persuasions of your own
flattering heart, which is deceitful above all things, and most desperately
evil, Ier. 17.9. No marvel you should be deaf to all has been said, (...)
thinking your selves already good enough, and then farwell all hope of being
better: For the opinion of men's being wise, and good enough, is the sole and
only cause of their being no wiser, nor better. Yea, therefore are millions
Christians in name only, because they think themselves Christians indeed. And
who is there in all this Nation, that thinks not himself a Christian? though
they are able to yield no reason except this; They are neither Turks nor Jews,
nor (which is worse then either, as they suppose) Roundheads. A strong
argument, I promise you, able to move the gentlest s^le(...) i^ this. Yet all
the reasonings of Carnal men are thus weighty: As let me give you a few
instances.

11 They will say, they love and ^ear God as they ought: when what he commands,
they do the contrary; are flint unto God, wax to Satan; have their ears always
open to the Temper, shut to the Maker and Redeemer* when they are Traitors to
him, and take up arms against him. A good sign they serve God and Christ, when
Satan, the World and the Flesh have more command of them: when they so far are
from loving and serving him, that they hate those that do it, and that for
their so doing; and from fearing him, that they more fear the worlds scorns,
then his anger. They will in like manner pretend they love Christ that died for
them, when they hate all that resemble him in holiness. They are Christians in
name, when they will scoff at a Christian in deed, and are enemies to the cross
of Christ: Love a form of godliness, but hate the power of it. They will do
what God forbids, yet confidently hope to escape what he threatens: will do the
Devils works, yet look for Christ's wages: Expect that Heaven should meet them
at their last hour, when all their long-life they have gallopped in the beaten
road toward Hell: Expect to have Christ their Redeemer and Advocate, when
their consciences tell them that they seldom remember him but to blaspheme him,
and more often name him in their oaths and curses then in their prayers: Will
persecute honest and orthodox Christians, and say they mean base and
dissembling Hipocrites; think they do God good service in killing his servants,
Ioh. 16.2. as Paul touching Stephen, and the Jews touching Christ: Boast of a
strong faith, and yet fall short of the Devils in believing, Iam. 2.19. These
are some of their syllogisms or arguings; I could even tire your ears with the
like. But what doting, blockish and brainsick Bedl^m- Positions are these?
Could rational men ever argue in this manner* had not the God of this world
blinded their eyes, that the light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ should not
shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. 2 These. 2.9, 10. Did not their deceitful
hearts damnably delude them, as in that case of Leah, Genesis 30.18. and of Saul,
1 Samuel 23.7.21. and of Micah, Judge. 17.13. Turn to the places, for they are
rare to this purpose. If this be Reason, it is Reason frighted out of its wits:
Yet this is every wilful sinners case, yea of every unregenerate man in some
measure: As I Will but give you an instance more to clear it.

You shall have them maintain with incredible impudence, accompanied with
invincible ignorance; That if a man make scruple of small matters, or of those
sins or sinful customs which they allow of, and will not do as they do, That
he is over-precise: Though they may as soon find Paradise ^word Hell, as any
Text in the Bible that makes for looseness, or against circumspe^^ walking. Yea,
who would dream that so gross blockishness should find har^or in any reasonable
soul, as to think that God should like a man the worse for his being the
better, or for having a tender conscience; or look for (...) fear, reverence,
and obedience from his servants, then we do from our servants* And yet the same
men will grant, that a servant can never be too (...) Natural men are blind to
spiritual objects, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 18.20. and 2.14. and so no more
fit to judge of them, then blind men a^ fit to judge of colors. And hence it
is, that they have the basest though^ of the best men, making ill constructions
of whatsoever they speak or do as the Scribes and Pharisees dealt by our
Savior. Until we are bor^ again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew not what it
was to be bor^ again, John 3.4. Until we become zealous our selves, we are like
Fest^^ who thought zeal madness, Acts 26.24. Until we be humble our selves we
are like Michal, who mocked David for his humility, and thought hi^ a fool for
dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16. For, to carnal-minde men, all Religion
seems foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18. It faring between the Sensual and Spiritual, as
it does between Youth and Age: For as Youn^ men think Old men to be fools, but
Old men know the Young to be fools so Worldlings think the Religious fools, but
the Religious know them to be fools, because they have had the experience of
both conditions; (...) the old have been young, but the other are utterly
unacquainted wit^ what they see and know. Besides, the one make the Word their
rule i^ every thing; for they live, and believe, and hear, and invocate, and
hope and fear, and love, and worship God in such manner as his Word prescribes*
The other do all as the flesh leads them, and according to the customs an^
rudiments of the world.

12 Now lay all together, and you will think it no whit strange, tha^
notwithstanding their condition is so miserable, they should yet be so jo^cund,
confident and secure, that they should neither be sensible of their present
condition, nor afraid of future Judgment. Security makes world^lings merry; and
therefore are they secure and merry, because they are ignorant. A Dunce (we
know) seldom makes doubts; yea, a Fool (say^ Solomon) boasts and is
confident, Pro. 14.16. Ignorance is a veil or curtain to hide away their sins.
Our knowledge, says one of the Learned, dot^ but show us our ignorance: And
Wisdom (says another) is but one of man^ greatest miseries, unless it be as
well able to conquer, as to discern. The next thing from being free from
miseries, is, not to be sensible of them* Erasmus could spy out a great
privilege in a blockish condition; Fool (says he) being free from ambition,
envy, shame and fear, are neither troubled in conscience, nor macerated with
cares. And Beasts, we see, are not ashamed of their deeds. Where is no reason
at all, there is no sin where no use of reason, no apprehension of sin; and
where no appre^hension of sin, there can be no shame. Blind men never blush;
neither are Worldlings ashamed, or afraid of any thing; because for want o^
bringing their lives to the rule of Gods word, they perceive not when they do
well, when ill. The Timber not brought to the Rule, may easily appear straight,
when yet it is not. Whereas every small sin, to a holy and regenerate man that
weighs his sin by the balance of the Sanctuary, i^ very grievous, and
disturbeth his conscience exceedingly.

Besides, the Regenerate know, that the very end for which they were (...)
^reator and Redeemer. They remember also, that they bound themselves by (...)
and promise in their baptism so to do. Whereas these brainless and ^ruitish men
never once consider what they came into the world for, nor what ^ill become of
them when they depart hence: Only their care is, that they ^ay eat, drink,
play, sleep and be merry: Whereupon they spend their ^ays in mirth, and
suddenly they go down into hell, as Job speaks, Job 21.13. ^or, like men
sleeping in a Boat, they are carried down the stream of this World, until they
arrive at their Graves-end Death; without once ^aking to bethink themselves
whither they are going, to Heaven or Hell.

I grant, that in their long sleep they have many pleasant dreams. As (...)
instance: They slumber, and suppose themselves good Christians, true
Protestants; they dream they repent them of their sins, and that they ^elieve
in Christ; they dream they have true grace, that they fear, and ^^ve, and serve
God as they ought; they dream they shall go to Heaven and be saved: But the
truth is, all their Religion is but a Dream, and (...) is their assurance of
salvation. They have Regeneration in conceit, ^epentance and Righteousness in
conceit; they serve God well in con^eit, and they shall go to Heaven only in
conceit, or in a dream; and never ^wake, until they feel themselves in a bed of
unquenc^^^se flames. neither did pure and naked Supposals, ever bring any man
to eternal ^ife.

13 Which being so, and that with the greatest part of the World: ^ow does it
concern every one of you to try and examine your selves, ^hether it fares not
so with you; and to mistrust the worst of your ^^lves, as all wise and
sound-hearted Christians do; as you may see by ^^e Apostles, Matthew. 26.22. even
every of them was jealous of himself, ^^d examined his own heart, though but
one of them was guilty of that ^^ul sin which Christ spoke of.

Now if you would examine your selves but by those marks I have ready given
you, you may easily see whether you are the men guilty (...) what I have laid
to your charge. If you would be further informed, ^^^k your selves only these
three questions. Whether you are of that small ^^mber, whom Christ has chosen
out of the world? Whether you are Re^^nerate? Whether you have true and saving
faith? For otherwise all our hopes and persuasions are but vain presumptions
and delusions.

First, Are you of that small number? For, the greatest number, whether (...)
men, or great men, or great Scholars, go the broad way to destruction* ^^d but
a few of either, the narrow way which leads unto life; as ap^^ars by many
clear testimonies and examples; for which see those known ^^aces, Mat. 7.13,
14. 1 Ioh. 5.19. Rev. 20.8. Christ's flock, that believe (...) Gospel, are but a
little flock, Luke 12.32. and but few in numbers ^^.10.22. and 53.1. Romans 9.27.
and 10.16. Rev. 3.4. 2 Cor. 4.4. Mat. 8.34. (...) 27.22. Acts 28.22. Rev. 13.16.

Yea, of all the CCLXXXVIII several Opinions which Philosophers (...) way to
attain to it, was by doing as the most do. Yea, they all conclude^ that Number
was the best note of the worst way. And we even see by experience, that the
basest things are ever most plentiful. And therefore it ^^mazes me to think,
how men should be so blockish as they are in this particular: for if you mark
it, most men walk in the broad way, and yet ever^ man thinks to enter in at the
strait gate: which could never be, if they we^^ not fools, or frenzy. Again
take notice, that many seekers fall short of heaven, Luke 13.24. Do you strive?
The righteous shall scarcely be saved* what then shall become of the
unrighteous? 1 Pet. 4.18.

14 Secondly, Are you regenerate and born anew? For Christ's words to Nicodemus
(a knowing, honest, moral man) are express; yea, and he binds it with an oath:
Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye be born again ye can in no wise enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

Now if you be regenerate, it will appear by this: Regeneration or new birth,
is a creation of new qualities in the soul, as being by nature only evil
disposed. In all that are born anew, is a change, both in the Judgment from
error to truth, and in the Will from evil to good; and in the Affections from
loving evil, and hating good, to love good, and hate evil; in the whole man
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Is this change
wrought i^ you? For without it there is no going to heaven, no being saved.
The^ --

Thirdly, Have you a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ? For there is no
coming to Christ but by says, Heb. 11.6. By faith we receive the forgiveness
of our sins, Luke 7.47, 50. By faith we are justified, Romans 3.26, 28, 30. Gal.
3.8. By faith through grace we are saved, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Luke 18.42. By faith
through the power of God we are kept and preserved to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
Nothing but faith can assure us of Gods favor, Eccles. 9.1.2.3. By faith we
obtain whatsoever we ask, Mat. 21.22. By faith we are blessed, Gal. 3.14. By
faith we know God, 1 Ioh. 4.7. Psalm. 9.10. Without faith we cannot profit by
hearing the Word, Heb. 4.2. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, be they never so glorious
performances, Romans 14.23. and 10.14.

Now you shall know whether you have says, by this: Faith comes by hearing the
Word preached, Romans 10.17. And the Spirits powerful working with it, Ioh.
3.3.5.8. Faith purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. works by love, Gal. 5.6. and
sanctifies the whole man throughout, Act. 26.18. Faith is known by its works,
Iam. 2.17.18.22. Faith and holiness are as inseparable as life and motion, the
sun and light, fire and heat. Again, Faith believes the threats of the Word,
together with the promises; and thereupon fears sin, as i^ fears hell. Again,
if the Image of God by faith be repaired in you, you cannot but love them that
love God, 1 Ioh. ^.10.

Besides, this is a sure rule: That that persuasion only which follows sound
humiliation, is Faith; That which goes before it, is Presumption. And (...)
Ambrose speaks; No man can repent of sin* but he that believes the pardon (...)
about it, shall find it as hard a work to believe the Gospel, as to keep the
La^^^^ only God must enable to both.

Now if upon trial you evidently find that you are of Christ's little flo^ that
you are regenerate, and that you have this precious grace of Fa^^^^ wrought in
your heart, you may comfortably assure your self that you sh^^^^ be saved.
Otherwise the Devil and your own heart do but delude you, in (...) ^^^ing you
the least benefit by the blood of Christ: Yea, it had been bet^^^ for you, that
there had been no Christ come into the world: For, ev^^ the mercy of God,
(which you have contemned) and the means of grace, a^^ the offer of salvation,
shall but inhance your damnation, Yea, Christ him (...) that only Summum
bonum, who is a Savior to all Believers, shall be a Revenger to you, if you go
on; and bid you Depart ye cursed into everlast^^^ fire, etc. Matthew. 25.41.

15 And so much, for the discharge of my conscience and duty; a^^ to make a
supply of that, which I should have some way performed lo^^ since.

Yet least I should imitate those, who kindle a fire under green wood, a^^
leave it so soon as it begins to flame; (for I take it for granted, that so of
you will lay to heart what has been said) I have sent you three Bo^^^ (writ by
an impartial Author, no^ a Party) which I hold exceeding p^^^fitable for you to
peruse. The one speaking more home and full to t^^ matter. The second showing
how it comes to pass, that so many are ^^ceived, who hope to be saved. The
third setting out to the life, the (...) thoughts, words, and actions of all
natural men; insomuch that no (...) can more lively represent your faces, then
it does your hearts. There (...) that you may not be disappointed of your end,
by mistaking your way; (...) you may become as true friends to God, and the
Ministry, as you have (...) bitter enemies; and so have your part and portion
with them at Gods (...) hand, where are pleasures for evermore: Be persuaded to
read them, (...) as much observation and circumspection, as you would do the
Evidence your Inheritance. Neither count it as a thing indifferent, that may
ei^^^^ be done, or dispensed with; except you are indifferent whether you be
(...) or damned. Yea, so mind what you read, as if it were an Epistle writ
(...) Heaven, and sent to each of you in particular. Expect not that Christ
(...) himself from Heaven should call to you severally by name, as he (...)
Saul, and say, Ho Ishmael! such a one; or Ho Elymas! such a (...) why do
thou persecute me? I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Acts 9. ^^ Which yet, if
he should, it were no more in effect then he has often do nor would you be any
more warned, or reclaimed by it. As is eviden^ the example of Hazael, 2 Kings
8.12, 13, etc. And by what Abraham Dives, Luke 16.31. If you will not (...)
Moses and the Prophets, Christ his Apostles in his Word; neither (...) he be
persuaded, though one (...) be sent unto you from the damned in ^e^l, or from
the glorified spirits in (...) Wherefore hearken unto Conscience; and what
concerns you, apply it* (...) not the whole Bible and all the Sermons they
hear, yea the c^eck^ of (...) own Consciences, and the motions of Gods Spirit
utterly ineffectual, (...) want of wit and grace to apply the same to
themselves. Whereas if they would rightly and ingenuously apply but one Text or
two unto their own souls, as they can unto others, (being better able to
discern others (...) then their own beams) they might be everlastingly happy.

16 But it is now a just plague upon our so much Formality and (...) faneness,
under our so much means of Grace; that because we (many of us) have heard the
Word, and enjoyed the means for thirty, forty, fifty years together, and are
never the better, bring forth no fruits thereof; that Christ should say unto
such, as he did to the fruitless Fig Tree, Mar. 11.13, 14* Never fruit grow on
thee hence forward. And the truth is, if yon observe it, you shall very rarely
hear of an old Formalist, or Protestant at large, that ever is converted, (but
young ones, as Ministers can sufficiently inform you:) Perhaps they may turn to
be Antinomians, Ranters, Quakers, or the like, and embrace Error; but they turn
not to the Truth. Or if so, it is a greater miracle then was the creating of
the whole world. For, in making such a one a New creature, must be a number of
miracles: A blind man is restored to sight, a deaf man to hearing, a man
possessed with many devils dispossessed; yea, one not only dead in sin, but buried
in the grave of long custom, with a gravestone laid upon him, raised from the
dead; and in every one, a stone turned into flesh. In all which God meets with
nothing b^t opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

Thus I have been large: But as John could only baptize with water^ so I can
but teach you with words; And when God withholds his condemned grace, Paul
himself cannot move a soul. If the Holy Ghost shall set it home to your hearts,
that you may so meditate on what has been spoken, and so practice what has
been prescribed; that God in Christ may be pacified, your sins by free grace
pardoned, and your souls eternally saved: That while you are here, you may
enjoy the peace of God, which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. and when
you depart hence, you may arrive at the Haven of all happiness in Heaven, where
is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore; Blessed and happy are ye, Psalm.
16.11. Which is my prayer and hope, and should be my joy.

FINIS.
London, Printed by Thomas Newcomb* and are to be sold by (...)

^ Hopeful way to Cure that horrid Sin of SWEARING.
Or an help to save SWEARERS, if willing to be saved: Being an Offer or Message
from HIM, whom they so Daringly and Audaciously provoke. Also a Gurb against
Cursing.
MEMB. 1.
1.. Messenger.

NOt to admonish our brother is to hate him, as the Holy Ghost witnesses,
Levit. 19.17. But to scorn our brother should admonish us, is more to hate our
selves. That little which Cresus learned of Solon, saved his life. And had
Pilate taken that fair warning, his wife gave him: it might have saved his
soul; which once lost, cannot be redeemed with ten thousand worlds: no not with
the enduring of ten thousand thousand years torments in Hell. When a Dog flies
in his masters face that keeps him; we conclude he is mad; are they then
rational men, that (being never so little crossed) will fly in their Makers
face, and tear their Saviors name in pieces, with oaths and execrations?
which is worse then Frenzy. Yea, this is to send challenges into Heaven, and
make love to destruction! And certainly it is Gods unspeakable mercy, that
every such oath and blasphemy, proves not a Benoni, the death of the mother,
Genesis 35.18*

2. Think me not too bold, or over harsh: for I speak to you both for and from
my Maker and Redeemer. Yea, he persuaded to hearken a while unto me, as you
would have God another day, hearken unto you. Are you Christians, as you call
your selves? if you be, you have at least heard what God and Christ has done
for us. How when we were in a sad condition; when by sin we had forfeited our
selves and all we had, and wilfully plunged our souls and bodies into eternal
torments: When neither heaven, earth, nor hell could have yielded any
satisfactory thing besides Christ, that could have satisfied Gods justice, and
merited heaven for us; then, O then! The eternal God would dye, viz. so far as
was possible or necessary, that we might not dye eternally, John 3.16. A mercy
bestowed, and a way found out, that may astonish all the sons of men o^ (...)
were his enemies, mortally hating him, and to our utmost fighting against him,
and taking part with his only enemies ( Sin and Satan) as now you do, not
having the least thought, or desire of reconcilement: but a perverse and
obstinate will, to resist all means tending thereunto.

3. O my brethren! bethink your selves; It is his maintenance we take, and live
on. The air we breath, the earth we tread on, the fire that warms us, the water
that cools and cleanses us, the clothes that cover us, the food that does
nourish us, the delights that cheer us, the beasts that serve us, the Angels
that attend us, even all are his. That we are not at this present in hell,
there to fry in flames, never to be freed. That we have the free offer of grace
here, and everlasting glory in heaven hereafter, we are only beholding to him.
And shall we deny this Lord that has bought us? shall we most spightfully and
maliciously fight on Satan's side against him with all our might, and that
against knowledge and conscience? I wish you would a little think of it.

4. For favors bestowed, and deliverances from danger, bind to gratitude: or
else the more bonds of duty, the more plagues for neglect. The contribution of
blessings, requires retribution of thanks; or will bring distribution of
judgments. And certainly, if a friend had given us but a thousand part of what
God has, we should heartily love him all our lives, and think no thanks
sufficient. And in reason, Has God done so much for us, and shall we deny him
any thing he requires of us? though it were our lives, yea our souls; much
more our sins; most of all this sottish and damnable sin, in which there is
neither profit, nor pleasure, nor credit, nor any thing else to provoke, or
entice us unto it, as in other sins; for all you can expect by it is the
suspicion of common Liars, by being common Swea^ers: Or that you shall vex
others and they shall hate you. Whereas if we could give Christ our Bodies, and
Souls, they should be saved by it, but he were never the better for them. Yea
swearing and cursing are sins from which of all other sins we have the most
power to abstain. For were you forced to pay three shillings four pence for
every oath and curse you utter, as the Law enjoins* or if you were sure to have
your tongue cut out, which is too light a punishment for this sin ^ damnation
being the due penalty thereof, as the Apostle sets it down James 5.12. you both
could and would leave it, which alone makes it altogether inexcusable. And this
know, that the easier the thing commanded is, the greater guilt in the breach
of it: and the lighter the injunc^ion, the heavier the transgression, as Austin
speaks, and Adams eating the forbidden fruit, sufficiently proves. So that it
is evident you love this sin, merely because it is a great sin, and blaspheme
out of mere malice to, and contempt of God, which is most fearful, and (as a
man would think) should make it unpardonable, I am sure the Psalmist has a
terrible word for all such, if they would take notice of it, Let them be
confounded that transgress without a cause, Psalm. 25.3.

And no marvel that this fearful imprecation should fall from the Prophet^
mouth; for that man is bottomlesly ill, who loves vice merely because (...)
digious, damnable wretch, who (rather then not die) will anger God on set
purpose. Wherefore look to it, and think of it, you cursing, and cursed
Swearers; You swear away your salvation, curse away your blessing* Howling and
Cursing shall be your chief ease in Hell, to whom blasphemy was an especial
recreation on Earth.

5.. Argue with all the world, and they will conclude, there is no vice like
ingratitude. And mere ingratitude returns nothing for good, but you return
evil* yea, the greatest and most malicious evil, for the greatest and most
admired love. It was horrible ingratitude for the Jews to scourge and crucify
Christ, who did them good every way: for he healed their diseases, fed their
bodies, enlightened their minds, of God became Man; and lived miserably among
them many years, that he might save their souls: (though in killing him, they
did their utmost to sink the only ship that could save them) but you are more
ungrateful to God and Christ then they were, or can be expressed by the best
Orator alive. For which read more, in a Treatise entitled, Gods goodness,
and Englands unthankfulness, from Chapter 4. to Chapter 7.

6.. O that you would but consider, that the Lord Jehovah, who is a God, great,
and terrible, of most glorious majesty, and infinite purity; hears and beholds
you in all places, and in every thing you think, speak, or do who is a just
Judge, and will not let this cursed sin go unpunished: then would you keep a
narrower watch over your thoughts, then any other can do over your actions;
yea, you would as soon stab a dagger to your hearts, as let such oaths and
execrations drop from your mouths: whereas now you swear and curse, as if he
that made the ear could not hear, or as if he were neither to be feared nor
cared for, who for sin cast the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise,
drowned the old world, r^^^ed down fire and brimstone upon Sodom, commanded
the earth to open her mouth, and swallow down quick Corah, and his company; he
who smote Egypt with so many plagues, overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red
sea, destroyed great and mighty Kings, giving their land for an inheritance to
his people: and can as easily with a word of his mouth strike you dead while
you are blaspheming him, and cast you body and soul into Hell, for your odious
unthankfulness: yea, it is a mercy beyond expression, that he has spared you
so long. Consider of it I beseech you, lest you swear away your part in that
blood which must save you, if ever you be saved; yea, take heed lest you be
plagued with a witness, and that both here and hereafter: for God (who cannot
lie) has threatened that his curse shall never depart from the house of the
Swearer, as it is Zach. 5.1. to 5. And I doubt not but you are already cursed,
though you know it not; That either he has cursed you in your body by sending
some foul disease, or in your estate by suddenly consuming i^, or in your name
by blemishing and blasting it, or in your seed by not prospering it, or in your
mind by darkning it, or in your heart by hardening it, or in your conscience by
terrifying it, or will in your soul by everlastingly damning it, if you repent
not. Wherefore take ^eed what (...) (...) our smart) has a great controversy
with the Inhabitants of the Land, because of swearing, Hos. 4.1, 2. Yea,
because of oaths the whole land (even the three Nations) now mourns, as you
may see Ier. 23.10. Neither object that ye are so accustomed to swearing that
you cannot leave it, for this defense is worse then the offense; as take an
instance, Shall a Thief or Murderer at the Bar allege for his defense, that
it has been his use and custom of a long time to rob and kill, and therefore
he must continue it, or if he do, will not the Judge so much the rather send
him to the Gallows?

Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies of God (who has removed so many evils,
and conferred so many good things upon you, that they are beyond thought or
imagination) to leave it: especially after this warning, which in case you do
not, will be a sore witness, and rise up in judgment against you another day.

MEMB. 2.
Swearer. Did I swear or curse?

1. Messenger. Very often, as all here present can witness, and Satan also,
who stands by to take notice, reckon up, and set on your score every Oath you
utter, keeping them upon Record against the great day of Assizes, at which time
every Oath will prove as a daggers point stabbing your soul, to the heart, or
as so many weights pressing you down to Hell, Rev. 20.13. and 22 12. As also
the searcher of hearts, who himself will one day be a swift witness against
Swearers, Mal. 3.5. For of all other sinners the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain, as the third Commandment tells you,
Exodus ^0.7.

2. But woe is ^he, it fares with common Swearers as with persons desperately
diseased, whose excrements and filth comes from them at unawares; for as by
much labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sense of labor, so their
much swearing causes such a brawny skin of senslessenesse to overspread the
heart, memory, and conscience, that the swearer swears unwittingly: and
having sworn, has no remembrance of his Oath, much less repentance for his
Sin.

Swearer. Alas though I did swear, yet I thought no harm.

3. Messenger. O fool! What Prince hearing himself abused to his face, by the
reproachful words of his base and impotent Subject, would admit of such an
excuse? that whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, yet he thought no ill in his
heart? And shall God take this for a good answer, having told us before hand,
Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. That if we do not fear and dread his glorious and fearful
Name, the Lord our God, he will make our plagues wonderful and of long
continuance, and the plagues of our posterity. Besides, how frequently do
thou pollute and profane Gods Name, and thy Saviors? The Jews grievously
sinned in crucifying the Lord of life but once, and that of ignorance: but the
times are innumerable that thou do it, every day in the year, every hour in
the day, although thy conscience, and the holy Spirit of (...) thee that thou
have seldom remembered him but to blaspheme him? and more often named him in
thy Oaths and Curses, then in thy prayers.

Swearer. Surely, If I did swear, it was but Faith and Troth, by our Lady* the
Mass, the Rood, the Light, this Bread, by the Cross of the silver, or the
like: which is no great matter I hope, so long as I swore not by God, nor by my
Savior.

4.. Messenger. That is your gross ignorance of the Scriptures, for God
expressly forbids it, and that upon pain of damnation, Iam. 5.12. First, our
Savior Christ in his own person forbids it, Mat. 5 34, 35, 36, 37. I say unto
you Swear, not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods Throne; nor by the
earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the
great King; neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make
one hair white o^ black; but let your communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay: for
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. And then by his Apostle, Above
all things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any
other oath, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay: lest you fall into
condemnation, James 5.1^ where mark the Emphasis in the first words, Above all
things swear not; and the great danger of it in the last word, condemnation.

5.. If the matter be light and vain, we must not swear at all; if so weighty,
that we may lawfully swear as before a Magistrate, being called to it, then we
must only use the glorious Name of our God in a holy and religious manner, as
you may see, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Esaias 45.23. and 65.16. Josh. 23.7. Ier* 5.7. Exodus
23.13. And the reasons of it are weighty, if we look into them* for in swearing
by any creature whatsoever, we do invocate that creature, and ascribe to it
divine worship; a lawful oath being a kind of Invocation, and a part of Gods
worship; Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate, both as our witness,
surety, and judge, Heb. 6.16. and by consequence, deifie it, by ascribing and
communicating unto it Gods incommunicable Attributes, as his Omnipresence, and
Omniscience, of being every where present, and knowing the secret thoughts and
intentions of the heart: and likewise an Omnipotency, as being Almighty in
patronising, protecting, defending, and rewarding us for speaking the truth, or
punishing us if we speak falsely: all which are so peculiar to God, as that they
can no way be communicated or ascribed to another. So that in swearing by any
of those things, thou committest an high degree of gross Idolatry, thou
spoilest and robbest God of his Glory, (the most impious kind of theft) and in
a manner dithronest him, and placest an Idol in his room.

6.. And as to swear by the creature makes the sin far more heinous, so the
more mean and vile the thing is which you swear by (be it by my fay, by cock
and pie, hares foot, by this cheese, and such like childish oaths, which are so
much in use with the ignorant and superstitious swarm) the greater is your sin
in swearing such an Oath: because you ascribe that unto these basest of
creatures, which is only proper to God, namely, to know your heart, and to be a
discerner of secret things; why else should you call that ^^eature (...) of
him; as mark well what he says, Ier. 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy
children have forsaken me and sworn by them that are no Gods. And do you make
it a small matter to forsake God, and make a God of the creature? Will you
believe the Prophet Amos, if you will, he says (speaking of them that swore by
the sin of Samaria) that they shall fall and never rise again Amos 8.14. a
terrible place to vain swearers.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our oaths, for in so doing we
make base Idols, and filthy creatures Corrivals in honor, and Competitors in
the Throne of Justice with the Lord, who is Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
the supreme Judge and sole Monarch of all the world.

Or, in case we do, our doom shall be remediless, for the Lord threatens by
the Prophet Zephany, that he will cut off them that swear by the Lord and by
Malcham. which Malcham was their King, or as some think, their Idol, Zeph. 1.4,
5.

But admit the sin were small, as you would have it to be, yet the
circumstances make it most heinous; for even the least sin in its own nature is
not only mortal, but rests unpardonable: so long as it is willingly committed,
and excuted or defended.

Swearer. But all do swear, except some few singular ones, and they also will
lie, which is as bad.

7.. Messeng. You must not measure all others by your own bushel for although
ill Dispositions cause ill Suspicions; even as the eye that is bloudshood sees
all things red, or as they that have the Iaundies see all things yellow; yet
know that there be thousands who can say truly through Gods mercy, that they
had rather choose to have their souls pass from their bodies, then a wilful
prenseditated lie, or a wicked oath, from their mouths; wherefore when you want
experience, think the best, as charity bids you, and leave what you know not
to the searcher of hearts.

8. As for the number of Swearers, it cannot be denied, but the sin is almost
universal, and this is it which has incensed Gods wrath and almost brought an
universal destruction upon our whole Nation; but is no^ this excuse [ That
others do so] a most reasonlesse plea, and only becoming a fool? When our
Savior Christ has plainly told us, that the greatest number go the broad way
to destruction on, and but a few the narrow way which leads unto life, Mat.
7.13, 14. And S. John, that the whole world lies in wickedness 1 John 5.19.
And that the number of those whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the
sea, Rev. 20.8 and 13 16. Isa. 10.22. Romans 9.27. And tell me. Were it a good
plea, to commit a Felony, and say that others do so? Or Will thou leap into
Hell and cast away thy soul, because others do so? A ^orry comfort it will be
to have a numerous multitude accompany us into that lake of fire that never
shall be quenched.

Besides it is Gods express charge, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil, and S. Paul's everlasting rule, Romans 12.2. Fashion not
your selves like unto this world.

(...) some urgent matter constrains for the confirming of a necessary tru^^
(which can by no other lawful means be cleared) and for the ending of all
contentions and controversies, and clearing our own or our neighbour^ good
name, person, or estate, and to put an end to all strife, aiming at Gods glory,
and our own or our neighbors good: which is the only use and end of an oath;
in which case a man is rather a patient then a voluntary agent You may swear,
otherwise not. Neither must we swear at all in our ordinary communication, if
we will obey Gods Word, as you may see, Mat. 5*34, 35, 36, 37. Iam. 5.12.

Swearer. Except I swear, men will not believe me.

10.. Messenger. Thou had as good say, I have so often made shipwrac^ of my
credit by accustomary lying, that I can gain no belief unto my word without an
oaths; for it argues a guilty conscience of the want of credit, an^ that our
word alone is worth no respect, when it will not be taken without a pawn or
surety. Neither will any but base Bankrupts pawn so precious* Jewel as their
Faith, or offer better security for every small trifle. Beside he that often
swears, not seldom forsweareth. And so I have informed yo^ from Gods Word,
what the danger is of vain and wicked swearing.

MEMB. 3.
1.. But as if Swearing alone would not press thee deep enough into hell, thou
addest cursing to it, a sin of an higher nature, which non use frequently, but
such as like Goliath and Shimei, are desperately wicked it being their peculiar
brand in Scripture; as how does the Holy Ghost stig^matize such an one? His
mouth is full of cursing, Psalm. 10.7. and Romans 3.1. or, be loves cursing,
Psalm. 109.17. and indeed, whom can you observe to lo^ this sin, or to have
their mouths full of cursing? but Russians and sons o^ Belial, such as have
shaken out of their hearts the fear of God, the shame o^ men, the love of
heaven, the dread of hell, not once caring what is though or spoken of them
here, or what becomes of them hereafter; yea observe the^ well, and you will
find, that they are mockers of all that march not under the pay of the Devil.

2.. And whence do these Monsters of the earth, these hellish miscrean^ these
bodily and visible Devils learn this their damnable cursing and swearing* Are
not their tongues fired and edged from Hell? as Saint James has* Jam. 3.6.
yea, it is the very language of the damned, as you may see Rev. ^^ 1, 21. Only
they learn it here before they come thither, and are su^^proficients therein,
that the Devil counts them his best scholars, and se^ them in his highest form,
Psalm. 1.1. And well they deserve it, with who^ the language of hell is so
familiar, that blasphemy is become their moth tongue. Besides, it is the very
depth of sin, roaring and drinking is the horse-way to Hell; whoring and
cheating the foot-way; but Swearing a^ Cursing follows Korah, Dathan and
Abiram. And certainly, if the infe^^^ Tophet, be not for these men, it can
challenge no guests. But see no^ witless, graceless, and shameless even the
best are that use to curse; (...) I shall man tremble to name; because I were
as good knock at a deaf man's (...), or a dead man's grave, as speak to them.

3.. Thou art crossed by some one, perhaps thy wife, child, or servant, or else
thy horse, the weather, the dice, bowls, or some other of the creatures
displease thee; and thou fallest a cursing and blaspheming them, wishing the
plague of God, or Gods vengeance to light on them, or some such hellish speech
falls from thy foul mouth. And so upon every foolish trifle, or every time thou
art angry, God must be at thy beck, and come down from heaven in all have and
become thy Officer to revenge thy quarrel, and serve thy malicious humor. (O
monstrous impiety! O shameless impudenciel to be abhorred of all that hear it)
not once taking notice what he commands in his Word, as, Bless them that
persecute you, bless, I say, and curse not, Romans 12.14. And again, Bless them
that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6.28. which is the
practice of all true Christians 1 Cor. 4.12.

4.. But this is not one half of thine offense, For whom do thou curse? Alas
the Creatures that displease thee are but Instruments, thy sin is the cause,
and God the author, 2 Samuel 16.11. Psalm. 39.9, 10. Genesis 45.8, Ioh 1.21. from
whom thou have deserved it, and ten thousand times a greater cross: but in
stead of looking up from the stone, to the hand which threw it; or from the
effect to the cause, as Gods people do; thou like a mastiff ^og, set upon
the stone or weapon that hurts thee. But in this case, Who are you angry
withal? Does your horse, the dice, the rain, or any other creature displease
you? Alas, they are but servants, and if their Master bid smite, they must not
forbear; they may say truly what Rabshekeh usurped, Isa. 36.10. Are we come
without the Lord? and all that hear thee may say, as the Prophet did to
Senacherib, 2 King. 19.22. Whom have thou blasphemed? and against whom have
thou exalted thy self? even against the Holy One of Israel.

5.. Besides, why do thou curse thine enemy? (if he be so) but because thou
can not be suffered to kill him. For in heart, and Gods account, thou art a
murderer, in wishing him the pox, plague, or that he were hanged or damned.
Nor will it be any rare thing at the day of judgment, for cursers to be
indicted of murder. For like Shimei and Goliath to David; thou would kill him
if thou durst; thou do kill him so far as thou can. I would be loath to
trust his hands that bans me with his tongue. Had David been at the mercy of
either Shimei or Goliath, and not too strong for them, he had then breathed his
last.

Nor is it commonly any sin committed, or just offense given thee; that thou
cursest. Who could have less deserved those curses and stones from Shimei then
David? Yea, did not that head deserve to be tonguelesse, that body to be
headless, that so undeservedly cursed such an Innocent? as after it fell out.
For the curses and stones which Shimei threw at David, rebounted upon Shimei,
and split his heart; yea, and at last knock^ out his brains; and the like of
Goliahs curses; which is also thy very case. For (...) Curser meant it, Prove.
26.2. yea, though thou cursest, yet God will bless, Psalm. 109.28. ^ut thy
curses shall be sure to rebound back into thine own breast, Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16*
Prove. 14.30. Cursing mouths are like ill made Pi^^e^ which while men discharge
at others, recoil in splinters on their own faces, Their words and wishes be
but whirlwinds, which being breathen forth, return again to the same place. As
hear how the Holy Ghost delivers it* Psalm. 109. As he loved cursing, so shall
it come unto him; and as he loved not blessing, so shall it be far from him. As
he clothed himself with cursing like a garment so shall it come unto his
bowels like water, and like oil into his bones; let it be unto him as a garment
to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith he shall always be girded, v. 17, 18,
19. Hear this all ye, whose tongnes run so fast on the Devils errand, you loved
cursing, you shall have it, both upon you, about you, and in you, and that
everlastingly; if you persevere and go on; for Christ himself at the last day,
even he which came to save the world, shall say unto all such, Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat.
25.41. Where they shall do nothing but curse for evermore; for they no farther
apprehending the goodness, mercy, and bounty of God, then by the sense of
their own torments (the effects of his justice) shall hate him, and hating him
they shall cur^e him, Rev. 16.11. They suffer, and they blaspheme; there is in
them a furious malice against him, being cursed of him, they re-curse him; they
curse him for making them, curse him for condemning them, curse him because
being adjudged to death, they can never find death; they curse his punishments,
because they are so unsufferable; curse his mercies, because they may never
taste them; curse the blood of Christ shed on the Cross, because it has
satisfied for millions and done their unbeleeving souls no good; curse the
Angels and Saints in heaven, because they see them in joy and themselves in
torment; Cursings shall be their sins, and their chief ease, Blasphemies their
prayers, Lacrymae their notes, Lamentation all their harmony; these shall be
their evening songs, their morning songs, their mourning songs for ever and
ever. And indeed, who shall go to Hell, if Cursers should be left out?
Wherefore let all those learn to bless, that look to be heirs of the blessing.

7.. But to be in Hell, and there continue everlastingly in a bed of
quenchlesse flames, is not all. For this is the portion, even of Negative and
vicelesse Christians; if they be not virtuous. Of such as do not swear exexcept
they fear an oath. That abound in good duties, if they do them not out of
faith, and because God commands them; that he may be glorified, and others
edified thereby. Whereas thou do supererogate of Satan, in damning many
souls besides thine own. Thou have had a double portion of sin, to other men
here; and therefore must have a double portion of torment to them hereafter.
The number and measure of thy torments, shall be according to the multitude and
magnitude of thine offenses, Rev. 20.12, 13. and 22.12. Luke 12.47. Mat. 10.15.
Romans 2.5, 6. And those offenses if I could stand to aggravate them by their
several circumstances, would appear (...)

With thy swearing and cursing, thou do not only wound thine own soul worse
then the Baalites wounded their own bodies: for thou (wilfully mu^therest thine
own soul, and that without any inducement, as has been proved.) But thou art
so pernicious, that this is the least part of thy mischief; for thou drawest
vengeance upon thousands, by thy infectious and damnable example; as how can it
be otherwise? Thou do not only infect thy companions, but almost all the
hea^, or come near thee. Yea, little children in the streets, have learnt of
thee to rap out oaths, and belch out curses and scoffs almost as frequently as
thy self; and through thy accustomary swearing learned to speak English and
Oaths together; and so to blaspheme God almost so soon as he has made them.
And not only so, but thy example infects others; and they spread it abroad to
more, like a malicious man sick of the plague, that runs into the throng to
disperse his infection, whose mischief but-weighs all penalty. It is like the
setting a man's own house on fire, it burns many of his neighbors houses, and
he shall answer for all the spoil. So that the infection of sin is much worse
then the act.

8. Nor will thou cease to sin when thou shall cease to live; but thy
wickedness will continue longer then thy life. For as if we sow good work^,
succession shall reap them, and we shall be happy in making them so: so on the
contrary, wicked men leave their evil practices to posterity, and though dead,
are still tempting unto sin, and still they sin in that temptation, they sin so
long as they cause sin. This was Ierob^ams case, in making Israel to sin: for
let him be dead, yet so long as any worshipped his Calves, Jeroboam sinned.
Neither was his sin soon forgotten; Nadab his son, and Baasha his successor;
Zimri, and Omri, and Ahab, and Ahaziah, and Iehoram; all these walked in the
ways of Jeroboam which made Israel to sin; and not they alone, but millions of
the people with them. So that it is easy for a man's sin to live when himself
is dead; and to lead that exemplary way to Hell, which by the number of his
followers, shall continually aggravate his torments. As, O what infinite
torments does Mahome^ endure! when every Tu^k that perishes by his juggling,
does daily add to the pile of his unspeakable horrors. And so each sinner,
according to his proportion, and the number of souls which miscarry through the
contagion of his evil example. And look to it, for the blood of so many souls
as thou have seduced will be required at thy hands, and thou must give an
account for the sins, perhaps, of a thousand. Thou do not more increase
other men's wickedness on Earth, then their wickedness shall increase thy
damnation in Hell, Luke 16.

9.. It were easy to go on in aggravating thy sin and wretchedness; and
making it out of measure great, and the souls that miscarry through the
contagion of thy evil example numerous. For is not the Gospel and the name of
God blasphemed among the very Turks, Jews, and Infidels; and an evil scandal
raised upon the whole Church; through thy superlative wickedness, and other
thy fellows? Yea, does not this keep them off from embracing the Christian
Religion, and cause them to protest against (...) and all such wicked and
profane wretches, are not (like dirt in the house of God) thrown out into the
street by excommunication: Or as e^^ovements and bad humors in man's body,
which is never at case till it be thereof disburthened; as Austin well notes.
That they are not marked with a black coal of infamy, and their company
avoided, as by the Apostles order they ought, Romans 16.17. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 14.
Ephesians. 5 5, 7. 1 Cor. 5.5, 11. 1 Timothy 1.20. That they are not to us as Lep^rs
were among the Jews; or as men full of plague sores are amongst us. We well
know the good husband man weeds his field of ^urtfull plants, that they may not
spoil the good corn. And when fire has taken an house, we use to pull it down,
lest it should fire also the neighbors houses. Yea, the good Surgeon cuts
off a rotten member betimes, that the sound may not be endangered. Nor will the
Church of England ever flourish or be happy in her Reformation, until such a
course is taken.

MEMB. 4.
Swearer. Sir, I unfainedly bless God, for what I have heard from you; for
formerly, I had not the least thought that swearing by faith, ^roth, or any
other creature, was so grievous a sin, ^s you have made it appear from the
Word. And I hope it shall be a sufficient warning to me for time to come.

1.. Messenger. If so, you have cause to bless God indeed. For all of you have
heard the self-same Word; but one goes away be^tered, others exasperated and
enraged, wherein Will only makes the difference. And who makes the difference
of Wills, but God that made them? He that creates the new heart, leaves a stone
in one bosom, puts flesh into another.

2.. Of hearers there are usually four sorts, Mat. 13.19, to 24. as first, an
honest and good heart, will not return from hearing the word unbettered. Yea,
he will so note what is spoken to his own sin, that it shall increase his
knowledge and lessen his vices. As who by looking in a Glass shall spy spot^
in his face, and will not forthwith wipe them out? A wise man will not have one
sin twice repeated unto him. And these may be resembled to wax, which yields
sonner to the seal, then steel to the stamp. But

3.. Secondly, others are like Tullies strange soil, much rain leave^ them
still as dry as dust. Or the Wolf in the emblem, which though she sucked the
Goat, kept notwithstanding her wolvish nature still. For speak what can be
spoken to them, it presently passes away like the sound of a Bell that is rung.
Let testimonies and examples never so much concern them, they prove no other
then as so many characters writ in the water, which leave no impression
(...)hind them. Who may be resembled to an Hour-glasse or Condu^t, that which
in one hour runs in, the same in another hour runs out again. Or the
Smiths Iron, put it into the fire, it is much sofined: again put it into the
water, it is harder then before. Yea, let them never so much smart for their
sins: they will return to them again until they perish. Resembling some silly
fly, which being beat from the candle an hundred times, and often singed
therein, yet will return to it again until she be consumed, Prove. 23.35. All
those Beasts which went into the Arc (...) came likewise ou^ (...)

4.. Thirdly another sort will very orderly hear the Word, and delight in it;
so long as the Minister shall rove in generalities, preach little or nothing to
the purpose; But if once he touch them to the quick, drive an application home
to their consciences touching some one sin of theirs, as John Baptist served
Herod; then they will turn their backs upon him, and hear him no farther, as
those Jews served our Savior, Ioh. 6.66. The Athenians Paul, Acts 17.16, to
34. and Ahab Micaiah, 1 King. 22.8.

5.. Sore eyes* you know are much grieved to look upon the Sun, Bankrupts
cannot abide the ^ight of their counting books, nor do deformed faces love to
look themselves in a true Glass. For which read John 3.19, 20, 2^.

But let such men know, that to fly from the light, and reject the means, puts
them out of all hope. That sin is past cure, which turns from, and refuses the
cure, Deuteronomy. 17.12. Prove. 29.1. As what is light to them that will shut their
eyes against it? or reason to them that will stop their Ears from hearing it?
If those murderers of the Lord of life, Act. 2.23. had refused to hear Peter's
searching Sermon, in all probability they had never been pricked in their
hearts, never been saved, ver. 37, 38. And take this for a rule, if ever you
see a drowning man refuse help, conclude him a wilful murderer.

6.. Fourthly and lastly, (for I pass by those blocks that go to Church as
dogs do only for company, and can hear a powerful Minister for twenty or
thirty years together, and mind no more what they hear then the seats they sit
on, or the stones they tread on.) There are a generation of Hearers who when a
Minister does plainly reprove them for their sins, and declare the judgments of
God due unto the same, to the end they may repent and believe, that so they may
be saved; will carp and fret, and spurn against the very Word of God for being
so sharp and searching; and thereupon persecute the Messenger, as the Princes
and false Prophets did Jeremiah, Herodias John Baptist, and the Pharisees
Christ.

7.. And this God takes as done to himself, What says Paul? 1 Cor. 7.10. I
have not spoken, but the Lord: and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, Acts
9.4. that he persecuted him, (though in heaven;) so they which resist any truth
delivered out of the Word, do resist God himself, and not his Messenger, as
evidently appears by these Scriptures, Psalm. 44.22. and 74.4.10.18.22.23. and
83.2, 5, 6. and 89.50, 51. and 139.20. Prove. 19.3. Romans 1.30. and. 9.20. Mat.
10.22. and 25.45. 1 Samuel 17.45. Is^^. 37.4 22, 23, 28. Acts 5.39. and 9.4, 5.
Joh. 9.4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. Joh. 15.20, to (...) Numb. 16.11. 1 Samuel 8.7. Mark.
9.42. Psalm. 79.^2. 2 King. 2.24. O that the Gospels enemies would but seriously
consider these Scriptures, and be warned by them. For certainly it is neither
wise, good, nor safe, either resisting or angring him, that can anger every
vein of their hearts. Yea, God has Messengers of wrath for them that despise
the Messenger of his love.

8.. But hear why they so mortally hate the naked truth. Because it is the Word
by which they are condemned: they loath as much to hear it, as a (...) if many
(as we know by experience) love not to hear the worst of the temporal causes,
and cases; nor yet of their bodily distempers, with why their lives or estates
be endangered. How much more will wicked men de^cline from seeing their heinous
abominations, and themselves guilty of Hell and eternal damnation? though
thereof there ^^ an absolute necessity, if ever they be saved.

9.. Guilty sinners love application as dearly as a dog does a cudgel. And no
marvail, for what Leaper will take pleasure in the searching of his sore^^ Nor
were Satan his Crafts-master, if he did permit them: For if they could clearly
see the loathsomeness of their impieties, it were not possible not to abhor
them, not to abhor themselves for them; but their blindness makes them love
their own filthiness, as Ethiopians do their own swarthiness* Besides, they
love not to have their consciences awakened, but would slee^ quietly in their
sins. And he that desires to sleep, will have the curtain drawn, the light shut
out, and no noise made. Whence as good meats, are unwelcome to sick persons:
so is good counsel to obstinate and resolved sinner^* Tell them of their
swearing, drinking, whoring, cheating; they will fret, and chafe, and fume, and
swell, and storm, and be ready to burst again to hear it^ But let envy sweat,
swell, and burst; truth must be spoken. And indeed why should not Gods servants
take as free liberty in reproving, as the Devil^ servants take liberty in
offending? Shall not the one be as loud for God, as the other are for Baal and
Beelzebub?

10.. Yea, admonish them never so mildly, they will say we take too much upon
us: as Corah and his accomplices twitted Moses, Numb. 16.3. not knowing how
strictly God commands and requires it, Lev. 19.17. 2 Timothy 2.25 Ezekiel. 3.18, to
22. 2 Pet. 27, 8. Whence as the Chief Priests answered Judas What is that to
us? so they will blaspheme God, tear Christ in pieces, and more then betray,
even shed his innocent blood, digging into his side with oaths and say, when
told of it, What is that to us? when they might as well say, What is Christ to
us? what is heaven to us? or what is salvation to us? for to us the one cannot
be without the other: we shall never inherit part of hi^ glory in heaven, if we
do not take his glories part upon earth. And with God it is much about one,
whether we be doers of evil, or no hinderers. For i^ we must not see our
neighbors ox, nor his sheep go astray, or fall into a (...) but we must
reduce him, and help him out of it, Deuteronomy. 22.1. we are much more bound to help
our neighbor himself from droping into the bottomless (...) of Hell. And what
know we but we may win our brother, and so save his soul, Mat. 18.15.

11.. They will hiss like Serpents, if we trouble their nests never s^ little.
And its a sure sign the horse is galled that stirs too much when he i^ touched.
But what are these men like, and how are they like to speed ^^ the end? they
are like the Thracian flint that burns with water, and is quenched with oil:
their souls are the worse for Gods endeavor to better the^ His holy precepts
and prohibitions; do either harden them, as the Sun (...)

12.. But to be exasperated with good counsel, and in stead of penitency to
break into choler; when fury sparkles in those eyes which should gush out with
water; it is an evident sign of one that shall perish, Prove. 29.1. Read the
words and tremble, a man that hardneth his neck being often reproved shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy: see more Prove. 1, 24, 25, 26,
to 33. Whence ^is the Prophet tells Amaziah, I know that God has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25.16, 20. and that the Holy Ghost speaking of Elyes sons, says that
they would not hearken unto, nor obey the voice of their father, because the
Lord was determined to destroy them; 1 Samuel 2.25. Yea, it is an observation of
Livie, that when the destruction of a person or Nation is destined: then the
wholesome warnings both of God and Man, are set at naught. And in reason that
sin is past all cure which strives against the cure. Herbs that are worse for
watering, Trees that are less fruitful for dunging and pruning, are to be
rooted out, or hewn down. Even salvation it self will not save those that spill
the potion, and fling away the plaster. When God would have cured Babylon, and
she would not be cured, then she is given up to destruction without further
warning.

13.. Ignorant Worldlings (who will believe nothing which comes not within the
compass of their five senses) think that because God strikes not, be minds
not, Psalm. 50.21. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men, is fully set in them to
do evil, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 8.11. They are like the Israelites, 1 Samuel 12.15, to 20. they will not believe without a miracle; and it will be a
miracle if ever they be saved. For should they see miracle upon miracle; should
God forthwith strike one dead with a thunderbolt, and rain down fire and
brimstone upon another, and cause the Earth to swallow down a third quick while
they are blaspheming him: they would be as far from believing as they were
before; as the examples of the old world, the Sodomites, Pharaoh, Balaam, Ahab,
Belshazzar, Malchus, and those great Clerks, the Scribes and Pharisees,
together with thousands of the Jews, sufficiently manifest.

Yea, it is easier for a man possessed with many Devils to be dispossessed; to
raise one from the dead; or to turn a stone into flesh (in which God should
meet with no opposition) then persuade an habituated Swearer to believe these
ensuing pr^^pts, predictions, testimonies of the Gospel, or any other saving
truth, Mat. 5.20. and 12.36. and 25 30, to 46. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. and 2.12
Heb. 12.14, 29. Rev. 20.12. to the end, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Prove. 1.24. to 33^

14.. Well may they believe what the World, the Flesh, and the Devil suggests
unto them: As Satan (that he may make smooth their way to perdition) will
persuade the most impudent and insolent sinners, Drunkards* Adulterers,
Blasphemers, Sabbath Breakers, Bloodthirsty Murderers, Persecu^ters of the
Godly, and contemners of Religion, that they may take liberty to continue their
sensual lusts, by a testimony of ^cripture, and apply Christ's passion (...)
head his drum of Rebellion with his pardon: they live as if the Gospel were
quite contrary to the rule of the Law; or as if God were neither to (...)
feared not cared for. Hence they exercise their saucie wits in proph^^^ scoffs
at Religion, and disgrace that blood, whereof hereafter they would giv^ a
thousand worlds for one drop: hence they tear heaven with their blasphemie^ and
bandie the dreadful name of God, in their impure and polluted mouths by their
bloody oaths and execrations: hence they are so witless, grace^lesse, and
shameless; as to swear and curse even as dogs bark. Yea, the have so sworn
away all grace, that they count it a grace to swear; and at so far from
believing what God threatens in his Word against sin, an^ what is affirmed of
his justice, and severity in punishing all wilful, and im^penitent sinners
with eternal destruction of body and soul: that they pres^sume to have part in
that merit, which in every part they have so abused to be purged by that blood,
which now they take all occasions to disgrace to be saved by the same wounds
and blood, which they swear by, and so often swear away; to have Christ an
Advocate for them in the next life, when they are Advocates against Christ in
this: that heaven will meet them a^ their last hour, when all their life long,
they have galloped in the bearer rode toward hell. And that though they live
like swine all their life long yet one cry for mercy at the last gasp, shall
transform them into Saints. An^ this is the strong faith, they are so apt to
boast of, viz. presumption, not confi^dence: Or rather, Hope frighted out of
its wits. For not withstanding all this, in believing the Scriptures, they fall
short of the Devils themselves For the Devils do really believe that God is no
less true and just then he ^word;^ merciful; as his Word declares him to be:
and thereupon they tremble a S. James has it, James 2.19. whereas these men
believe not a word tha^ God speaks, so as to be bettered by it.

15.. And no marvail, for their wont has been to believe Satan ra^ther then
God; as did our first parents, Genesis 3. Therefore now afte^ they have rejected
all means of grace, when they are so crusted in their vil^lanie, that custom
is become a second or new nature: God (that he may pu^nish their hardness and
excess in sin, with further obduration,) not onl^ delivers them up to Satan,
the God of this world; who so blindes their minds and deludes their
understandings, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ shall not
shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. But he give^ them up,
even to a reprobate judgment, to the hardness of their hearts, and t^ walk in
their own connsels, Psalm. 81.11.12. Romans 1.21, to 32. And bette^ be given up
to Satan, as the incestuous Corinthian was, then thus to be given up. For he
was thereby converted and saved, as God used the matter: making the Scorpion a
medicine against the sting of the Scorpion: the Horseleec^ a means to abate the
vicious and superfluous blood; so ordering Satan's craf^ and malice, to ends
which himself intended not.

Whereas these are given over; as a desperate Patient is given over by hi^
Physician when there is no hope of his recovery. As thus, Because they will not
receive the truth in love, that they mights be saved; for this cause God give
(...) damned who believe not the truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness:
they are the very words of the holy Ghost, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. If any would
see more touching to woeful condition of a deluded worldling; and how Satan
guls wicked men with a world of misprisions, that he may the better cheat them
of their souls; Let them read The Drunkards Character, and The Cure of
Misprision; for in this I study all possible brevity, being loath either to
surfeit or cloy the Swearer; who is commonly short breathed in well-doing; and
l^st adding more should hinder him from hearing this: for Satan and his corrupt
heart will not condescend, he shall hold out to hear his beloved sin so-spoken
against.

MEMB. 5.
1.. Only I will insert a few notions, aphorisms, or conclusions, touching the
former point of Gods forbearing to punish the most stagitious sinners when they
so horribly provoke him: together with some pregnant examples of some that he
has executed Martial Law upon, even in this life.

Cornelius Gallus (not to mention many, nor any that every Author sets down)
dyed in the very act of his filthiness, as Plutarch well notes. Nitingall,
Parson of Crondall in Kent, was struck dead in the Pulpit, as he was belching
out his spleen against religion and zealous professors of the Gospel. It was
the usual imprecation of Henry Earl of Schuartzbourg, Let me be drowned in a
Iakes, if it be not so; and such was his end. You may remember one Lieutenant
of the Tower was hanged; it had wont to be his usual imprecation, as he
confessed at his death. Earl Godwin wishing at the Kings Table that the bread
he eat might choke him if he were guilty of Alphreds death, whom he had before
slain: was presently choked, and fell down dead: Yea his lands also sunk into
the Sea, and are called Godwins sands: where thousands since have made
shipwreck. It was usual with John Peter mentioned in the book of Martyrs to
say; if it be not true, I pray God I may rot ere I dye: and God saying Amen to
it, he rotted away indeed. A Serving-man in Lincolnshire for every trifle used
to swear, Gods precious blood, and would not be warned by his friends to leave
it: insomuch that hearing the bell tole in the very anguish of death, he
started up in his bed and swear, by the former oath that bell toled for him:
whereupon immediately the blood most fearfully issued, as it were, in streams
from all parts of his body not one place left free and so dyed. Popiel King of
Poland had over this wish in his mouth; If it be not true, I would the Rats
might eat me; and so it came to pass: for he was so assailed by them at a
banquet, that neither his guards, nor fire, nor water could defend him from
them; as Munster mentions. The Jews said, Let his blood be upon us and upon our
children; and what followed? sixteen hundred years are now past, since they
wished themselves thus wretched; and have they not ever since, been the hate,
and scorn of the world? Did they not (many of them) live to see their City
buried in ashes, and drowned in blood! to see themselves no Nation? Was there
ever any people under heaven, that was made so fa(...) (...) Nor is it seldom
that God pays them in their own coin: men profane Gods name, and he makes
their names to stink. When the pestilence rages in our streets; blasphemy and
execration must confess that they have their d^e wages. Blasphemers live
swearing, and dye raving; it is but their wages.

2.. He punishes some in the Suburbs of hell, that they might never come into
the City it self. The evil he now suffers uncorrected, he refers to be
condemned. Sin knows the doom, it must smart here, or hereafter. Outward
plagues are but favor in comparison of spiritual judgments; and spiritual
judgments but light, to eternal torments. God does not punish all flagitious
sinners here; that he may allow some space to repent; and that none may doubt
his promise of a General Judgment: nor does he forbear all here, lest the
world should deny his providence, and question his justice.

MEMB. 6.
1.. But what do I urge reason to men of a reprobate judgment? to admonish
them, is to no more purpose, then if one should speak to life-lesse stones, or
sense-lesse plants, or wit-lesse beasts; for they will never fear any thing
till they be in Hell fire; wherefore God leaves them to be confuted with fire
and brimstone, since nothing else will do it. If there be any here that believe
a Resurrection (as I hope better things of some of you) all such I would
beseech, by the mercies of God before mentioned, that they would not be so
desparately wicked, as to mock their admonisher, scoff at the means to be
saved, and make themselves merry, with their own damnations; but that they
would entertain this message as if it were an Epistle sent from God himself,
to invite and call them to repentance. Yea, consider seriously what I have
said, and do not, Oh do not mock at Gods Word, nor sport away your souls into
those pains which are easelesse, endless, and remediless. Shall we give an
account at the day of judgment for every idle word we speak, Mat. 12.36. and
never give a reckoning for our wicked swearing and cursing? we shall be judged
by our words, v. 37.

Are you willing to be saved? if you are, Break off your sins by repentance
Dan. 4.27. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isai. 1.16.17. Seriously
grieve and bewail for the millions of times that you have blasphemed God and
pierced your Savior, and never more commit the like impiety. Yea, do not only
leave your swearing, but fear an Oath and make conscience of it resolve not to
take the glorious name of God in vain, nor place any other creature in his
room: though the Devil should say unto you, as once h^ did to Christ, All
this will I give thee. For it is not enough that we abstained from evil,
unless we hate it also, and do the contrary good; Sanctify the Lord God in
your heart, 1 Pet. 3.15. Make a covenant with your mouth, as Jo^ did with his
eyes, and set a watch before the door of your lips, that you thu^ offend not
with your tongue, Psalm. 141.3.

2.. Which if you do rightly, the like care to avoid all other sins will
necessarily follow: because he that fears to commit one sin out of conscience,
and because God forbids it, will upon the same ground, fear all the (...)
commit it, as that God should never impure it, 2 Timothy 2.19. Neither can a
regenerate mind consist with a determination to continue in any one sin; as
when Christ cast out one Devil, we read that he cast out all, even the whole
Legion, Mark. 5.2 etc. And he that makes not some consience of all sin, makes
no true conscience of any sin.

And the same is to be understood also of duties commanded, for the same law
which injoins us to hate and for sake all sin, commands us also to strive after
universal obedience to every precept. And it is a true rule, he that has not
in him all Christian graces in their measure, has none; and he that has any
one truly, has all. He that is not sanctified in every part, is truly
sanctified in no part, 1 Pet. 1.15. 2 Pet. 3.11. Mat. 5.48. 2 Timothy 3.17. 2 Cor.
7.1. And the least sin allowed of, be it but a vain thought, or one duty
omitted, is enough to cast thee into hell; for the wages of sin (any sin be it
never so little) is death, Romans 6.23. Jam. 1.15. Yea admit thou had never
acted any the least evil in all thy life, it were not enough to save thee from
hell, much less to bring thee to heaven, for we need no more to condemn us,
then what we brought into the World with us. Genesis 2.17. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.12.
Whence the new born child in the law was commanded to offer a sin offering,
Lev. 12.6.

3.. Wherefore as you tender the good of your own soul, set upon the work
presently before the Drawbridge be taken up; provide with Joseph for the dearth
to come; With Noah, in the days of thine h^alth, build the Ark of a good
conscience against the floods of sickness. Imitate the Ant, who provides her
meat in Summer for the Winter following, Yea, do it whilst the yearning bowels,
the bleeding wounds, and compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive
you. Whiles you have health, and life and means, and time to repent, and make
your peace with God in Christ, as you tender I say the everlasting happiness
and welfare of your almost lost and drowned soul, as you expect or hope for
grace or mercy, for joy and comfort, for heaven and salvation, for endless
bliss and glory at the last. As you would escape the direful wrath of God, the
bitter sentence and doom of Christ, the never dying sting, and worm of
conscience, the tormenting and soul- scorching flames of hell, and everlasting
separation from Gods blissfull presence, abjure utterly renounce all wilful
and affected evil; and in the first place this abominable sin of swearing and
cursing.

4.. The which Grace if you would obtain, omit not to pray for the assistance
of Gods spirit, otherwise thy strength is small; yea, except God give thee
repentance, and removes all impediments that may hinder, thou can no more
turn thy self, then thou could at first make thy self. We are not sufficient
of our selves to think, much less to speak, least of all to do ought that is
good, 2 Cor. 3.5. Job. 15.4, 5. We are swift to all evil, but to any good
immovable. Wherefore beg of God that he will give you a new heart, and when
the heart is changed, all the members will follow after it, as the rest of the
creatures after the Sun when it arisest. Importune him for grace, that, thou
may firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere in doing and
suffering his holy will. Desire him to regenerate thy heart, change and pu(...)
then thy will, renew thy affections, and beat down in thee whatsoever stands in
opposition to the Scepter of Jesus Christ. Only this let me add^. Be sure you
wholly and only rest on your Savior Jesus Christ for salvation, abhorring to
attribute or ascribe ought to doing: for our very righteousnesses are as filthy
rags, Esa. 64.6. And the sole perfection of a Christian, is the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, and the not imputation of his own unrighteousness^ a
rule which we are very apt to swerve from, either on the right or left hand^
wherefore if you would not err, observe this golden mean, endeavor to live as
if there were no Gospel, and to dye as if there were no law. And now for
conclusion, If thou receivest any power against this great evil, forget not to
be thankful, and when God has the fruit of his mercies, he will not spare to
sow much where he reaps much: and so having set before you life and death, I
leave you to choose which of them you like best. Only think what account you
shall give of that you have read; for if this warning prevail not, it is much
to be feared the next will be that of The Son of man. Mat. 25.41. Depart from
me, etc.

Postscript.
YOu that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward the precious souls
of those poor ignorant men, women, and children, whom you hear to swear and
curse as Dogs barks; (that is not more of curstness then out of custom;) with
them to read these few pages, neither count it as a thing indifferent which may
either be done or dispensed withal; for besides that, God has commanded the
duty of admonition, Heb. 3.13. 2 Timothy 2.25. and commended the practice of it,
Rev. 1.2, 6. and condemned the contrary, v. 20. If you do not it, or the like,
you hate your brother, Lev. 19.17. and make your self guilty both of his sin
and ruin, Ezekiel. 3.18. to 22. For as none but a Cain will say, Am I my brothers
Keeper? so these could never continue their cursing and swearing as they do:
if they were but so happy as to meet with timely and faithful admonition. Nor
can you love God and patiently hear these miscreants blaspheme his holy Name as
they do, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Or manifest your self his by adoption and regeneration;
for wel-born children are touched to the quick with the injuries of their
Parents; and not to be moved in this case, is to confess our selves bastards.
Yea it is a base, vile, and unjust ingratitude in those men, that can endure
the disgrace of them, under whose shelter they live. Which being so, make it a
part of your charity, to give of them as you meet with occasion; as that you
shall hourly do, even as you pass the streets, if you but mind it. And me
thinks, none that are able should spare to be at a farthing cost, when that
farthing, may possibly prove saving of a Swearers soul. And to that end, any
one may have what they please; giving so many farthings to the poor. And also
other Books or more general concernment, upon the like terms, repairing to the
Blew pales, over against the high Constables short of Shoreditch Church, where
there is a Glass Lantern in the window.

Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNHAM, THO. GATAKER.

Add this (together with the Abstract of the Drunkards Character) to God (...)
The Printer to the Reader.
IT being observed that many meeting with some of this Authors Collections, do
earnestly enquire after the rest^. I think it not amiss, to satisfy their
desire, and save them further labor, by setting down the severals; which are
these, The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, etc. already printed.
The Cure of Misprision; or Mistake. already printed. The Victory of Patience.
already printed. The Drunkards character, with an addition. already printed.
The Character or Touchstone of a true Believer already printed. The Character
of formal Hypocrite, or Civil Justiciarie. already printed. Characters of the
kinds of Preaching. already printed. Complete Armor against evil Society.
already printed. Cordial Counsel. already printed. Gods goodness and
Englands unthankfulness, the second Edition, that is divided into chapters and
sections. already printed. The first part of the Pastors Advocate. already
printed. An Abstract of the Drunkards Character. already printed.
The second part of the Pastors Advocate. to be printed. The Arraignment and
conviction of covetous, cunning, and cruel Governors, Politicians, Officers,
Judges, Lawyers, etc. with the lovely and lively characters of Justice,
Thankfulness, Contentation, Frugality, Liberality, etc. to be printed. The
Laymans Library, or the poor man's Paradise. to be printed.


FINIS.
ENGLANDS Unthankfulness striving with Gods Goodness, for the Victory: as
Abaslom strove with David, whether the father should be more kind to the son;
or the son more unkind to the father. Or, Enough (being welweighed) to melt an
heart of Adamant.
By R. Young, Florilegus.
In reference to Leviticus 19.17. and Isaiah 58.1.


In reading whereof, reflect upon your selves; hearken to conscience; and what
concerns you, apply it not to others, as David did Nathans Parable, 2 Samuel
12.1, to 8. And Ahab the Prophets, 1 King. 20.39, to 43. Want of application
makes all means ineffectual; and therefore are we Christians in name, only,
because we think our selves Christians indeed, and already good enough.

The fourth Impression.

Imprimatur,

Thomas Gataker.

CHAP. I.
1 A Wise man (says Solomon) foreseeth the evil, and preventeth it: but fools
go on, and are punished, Prove. 22.9. An argument that most men; yea, almost all
men are stark fools, as wilfully appear, if we observe but these three, things.

The Precepts of the Gospel. The Predictions of the Gospel. The Testimonies of
the Gospel.
First, Observe but how strict holy, just, and good the Precepts or Rules ^^,
by which we ought to walk.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, Mark 12.30.

Whether ^^ eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10.31.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even the same do you unto
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7.12.

Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly tell
him of his faults; and suffer him not to sin, Levit. 19.17.

And then consider, how few there are amongst us; and how rare (only here and
there one) like rich men, among the multitude, or jewels among other stuff,
that either do, or care to walk by this golden Rule; Yea, that instead thereof,
make not the World only their God; and Pleasure, or Profit alone their
Religion.

2. Secondly, Observe (o that we had the grace seriously to observe and minde^)
but the Predictions; touching the paucity and fewness of those that shall be
saved. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many will seek to enter, and
shall not be able; because strait is the gate, and narrow the way which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it: But wide is the gate, and broad the
way, that leads to destruction; and many there be that go in thereat, Matthew.
7.13, 14. Luke 13.23, 24. Again, Many are called ( viz. by the outward
Ministry of the Word) but few chosen, Mat. 20.16. and 22.24. Yea, St. John
affirms, that the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 1.19. And that the
number of those, whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the Sea, Revel.
20.8. and 13.15, 16, 17. Esa. 10.22. Romans 9.27.

And we find it too true, by sad experience; for what eyes can but run over to
see, for the most part, how ignorant and erroneous men are, and what lives they
leads for scarce one of a hundred, whose knowledge, belief, and life, is in any
degree answerable to the Gospel, or the Title that they bear; for Christians
they are called, but no otherwise then the Heathen Images are called Gods:
because he that is a Christian indeed, will strive to imitate Christ, and
square his life in some measure, according to the rule of Gods Word*

3. Thirdly, Observe but the Testimonies manifesting how they must be
qualified, who mean to be saved. O that we would but believe them; for God
expressly tells us, That no unrighteous person shall ever inherit the Kingdom
of Heaven; but that such shall have their part and portion in that lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Gal. ^.21. Rev. 21.8. And that without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12.14. And that except our righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees: (who yet excelled our formal Hypocrites, and civil
Iusticiaries) we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 20. And that
he will recompense every man according to his works, be they good or evil,
Psalm. ^2.12. Rev. 10.13. and 22.12. Romans 2.6. Ier. 2^.14. and 82. 19. and
50.29. and 51.56. Ezekiel. 7.4, 8, 9. and 9.10. and 11.21. and 16. ^^. And that we
shall give an account at the day of Judgment, for every idle word we speak,
Mat. 12.36. And that Christ will come the second time in ^aming fire, to render
vengeance unto them that know him not, and that obey not his Gospel, 2 These.
1.7, 8. Psalm. 11.6. Yea, the Lord tells us expressly, that he will not be
merciful to such as flatter themselv^s in an evil way, but that his wrath and
jealousy shall smoke against them; and every curse that is written in his
book, shall light upon them, etc. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. And that if we will not
regard, nor hearken unto him when he calls upon us for repentance: he will not
hear nor regard us, when in our distress and anguish, we shall call upon him
for mercy, but even laugh at our destruction, and mock when our fear comes,
Prove. 1.24, to 33. See other places to this purpose, Hebr. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4.24.
Mat. 25.30, 41, to 46. and 3.10.

4 Nor can it indeed consist with his justice to pardon such as continue in an
evil course of life; neither was it ever heard, that any ascended into heaven
without going up the stairs of new obedience: that any have attained unto
everlasting life, without faith, repentance, and sanctification of Spirit: For
even the Thief upon the Cross believed in Christ, and showed the fruits of his
faith, in acknowledging his own sin, in reproving his fellow, in confessing his
Savior, even when all denied and forsook him, in calling upon his Name, and
desiring by his means and merits everlasting life. Besides we read not, that
ever he was outwardly called, until this very hour. Secondly, though there was
one saved at the last hour, that none might despair: yet there was but one,
that none should presume. Thirdly, the Thiefs conversion was one of the
miracles, with the glory whereof our Savior would honor the ignominy of his
Cross. Fourthly, he was saved at the very instant of time, when our Savior
triumphed on the Cross, took his leave of the world, and entered into his
glory: And it is usual with Princes to save some heinous Malefactors a^ their
Coronation, when they enter upon their Kingdoms in triumph, which they are
never known to do afterward. Nor was his sudden conversion ever intended in
Gods purpose for an encouragement to Procrastinators; And therefore no cause
have we to expect that he should deal after a new and extraordinary way with
us, then he has with all others, and so break the course of his so just, and
so long continued proceedings: Yea, he binds it with an Oath, that whomsoevr he
redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, they shall worship him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives, Luke 1.73, 74,
75. 1 Pet. 2.24. Which Scriptures sufficiently show, that they who in life will
yield no obedience to the Law, shall in death have no benefit by the Gospel,
Nor ought any indeed, to pro^es^ Christ, or once to name him with their mouths,
except they depart, from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

5. The which Scriptures, if they be true, (and they fall short of the Devils
that deny it, Iam. 2.19.) what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy
conversation and godliness? as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3.11. And yet most
men live as if the Gospel were quite contrary to the rule of the Law, as if God
were neither to be feared nor cared for, as if they were neither beholding to
him, nor stood in awe of him, both out of his debt and danger; yea, as if there
were no God to judge, nor Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward.

And (which mightily aggravates their sin, and will add to their torment) let
some Boanerges be sent unto them, with a message from God, it fares with them
as with the Adder, no charming can charm them. The strongest command the
loudest denunciations of judgments, the shrillest and sweetest promu^gations
of mercies, will do no good upon them: For while they are in Dalilahs lap, and
lie sleeping like Drones by the hearth of hell, they think themselves as safe,
as if they were in Abraham's bosom: Their Adamantine hearts will neither yield
to the fire, nor to the hammer, admit of no impression; yea, let them hear of
never so many judgments, they tremble and relent no more then the seats they
sit on, or the stones they tread on: Even the declaration of sins, denunciation
of judgments, description of torments, and the like, no more stir them, then a
tale moves one in a dream; their supine stupidity is no more capable of
excitation, then the Sea Rocks are of motion, or the Billows of compassion;
which would make one even tremble to think of it.

CHAP. II.
1. BUt what is the reason, why men make no more use of these Predictions of
this warning? but that as near as can be computed, one of two are lascivious or
voluptuous; two of three drunkards, (^n Gods account;) nine of ten cruel and
unjust persons; nineteen of twenty swearers; twenty nine of thirty Athiests;
thirty nine of forty ignorant wretches; forty nine of fifty covetous; ninety
nine of an hundred open, or secret enemies to the power of Religion, and
contemners of holiness: For certainly what God in these three particulars has
revealed in his Word, cannot be unknown to any among us, that hate not the
light; for every house almost has a Bible, and Christ has continued his
Gospel amongst us now, near upon an hundred years, with such supply of able
Ministers, that no Nation under Heaven may compare with us.

2. I might give you many reasons of this, as that they were born stark dead in
sin, and they thank God they are no changelings; that they, are as good as
their Forefathers, or those among whom they live, and they neither desire to
be better nor wiser; yea, it were a ridiculous singularity so to be: That the
custom of sin has brawned their hearts, and blinded their minds. That they do
as Satan their God, 2 Cor. 4.4 and Father, Ioh. ^.44. and King, or Prince, Ephesians.
2.2 would have them to do: That they will either not hear the Word; (for I
think I may say, that one half of the men and women in the Kingdom come not
once a year within the Church-doors, I mean the poorer sort that do not know
they have souls: It were good, they were compelled to hear the Word preached,
for the wicked, like sullen children, would not forsake their play for their
meat, but for the Rod of Correction: And many Saints in heaven might now
confess, that they had not known God, but for the Laws. First, compulsory means
brought them to the feast, whereof once tasting, they would never leave it;
Compel them to come in, etc. Luk, 14.23.) Or if they do hear the Word and
understand it in some measure, they will not apply it to themselves: That they
will not receive the truth in love, that they might be saved, and are therefore
given over to strong delusions to believe lies: That they will not by any means
that Christ can use, understand and be converted, and saved; therefore they
shall not understand, nor be converted, nor saved, Isai. 6.9, 10. Matthew. 13.15.
That they harden their own hearts, whereupon their hearts are more hardened:
That because they will not regard nor retein God in their thoughts, God gives
them over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. That because they will not take the
Spirits counsel, the Spirit gives them up to walk in their own counsels, Ier.
9.14. That they will believe Satan rather then God, therefore God delivers them
up to Satan, so to be deluded, that the light of the glorious Gospel shall not
shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 These. 2.9, 10. 1 Timothy 4.7. That
they are not as they ought, and as it was in the Primitive times cast out of
the Church, and all Christian society by excommunication, as dirt into the
street, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Timothy 1.20. Romans 16.17, 18. 2 These. 3.6. 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 Timothy 3.5. That they do as their flattering False Prophets teach them: That they
think they have as good hearts, as the best; and therefore follow that
deceitful guide: That they are not ver^t in the Scriptures, at least they
understand not the spirituality of the Word; nor have they the Spirit to
convince them of sin: But I have largely handled these upon other occasions;
wherefore I will pass them, and only give you this one, and I pray, mind it.

3. Wicked men (and such are all natural, and unregenerate persons, whether
loose Libertines, or rich worldlings, or civil Iusticiaries, or formal
hypocrites, or profound humanists, or cunning Politicians,) are so blockish and
void of spiritual understanding, that they will not believe what is written,
till they feel what is written; nothing will fully confute them but fire and
brimstone: Sin shuts their eyes, and only punishment can open them. Nor will
they once think of Heaven, till with that rich man they are tormented in the
flames of hell: but even that rich man that had so little care of his own soul
during life, when he was in hell torments, took care for his Brethrens, not out
of charity, but because as he had by his persuasion and ill example, bin the
occasion of their greater sin; so they by continuing in those sins, should be
the occasion of his more grievous torment. But had he bin so wise, as to have
believed Moses and the Prophets report of hell, he needed never to have come
into it: The common case of all that come there. They will not believe what
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles tell them, touching the truth,
justice, and severity of God, in punishing sin with eternal destruction of body
and soul, and the necessity of obeying his Precepts, until they shall hear
Christ say unto them, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.

4. And indeed for want of this fore-wit, the wisest worldlings, as Balaam and
Judas, and the rich man in the Gospel, and the Scribes and Pharisees, and all
Atheists, are in Scripture Language styled fools, and the wisdom of the world
called foolishness, twelve times in one Chapter. Read 1 Cor. 1. and Chap. 2.
Nor can there be so sure a sign to distinguish between a wise man and a fool.
A wise man (says Bernard) fore-sees the torments of hell, and avoideth them;
but a fool goes on merrily until he feels them, and then says, I had not
thought. True, many wicked men are taken to be wise, and in some sense are so,
they have enlightened heads, and fluent tongues, as had Balaam, and Judas, and
Paul before his conversion, and the Scribes and Pharisees; but their hearts
remain dark and foolish, as is plain by Romans 1.21, 22. Ioh. 3.10. Whence even
the wisest of them are called by our Savior fools and blind, Matthew. 23.16,
17, 19, 24, 26. and 27.3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.16. And indeed what is that wisdom
worth, which nothing profits the owner of it, either touching virtue, or
happiness? So that you may take this for a rule, They that have but a show of
holiness, have but a show of wisdom.

5. Men of the world believe the things of the world, they believe what they
see, and feel, and know; they believe the Laws of the Land, that there are
places and kinds of punishment here below, and that they have bodies to suffer
temporal smart, if they transgress, and this makes them abstain from murder,
felony, and the like; but they believe not things invisible and to come; for
if they did, they would as well, yea much more, fear him that has power to
cast both body and soul into hell, as they do the Temporal Magistrate that
has only power to kill the body; they would think it a very hard bargain to
win the whole world, and lose their own souls. But if visible powers were not
more feared then the invisible God, and the Halter more then Hell (natural men
being like beasts, that are more sensible of the flash of powder, then of the
bullet,) the world would be overrun without rage. Or,

6. Secondly, they believe the Devil and the Flesh, that prophecy prosperity
to sin, yea, life and salvation; as the Pope promised the Powder-Traitors; for
though men do the Devils works, yet they look for Christ's wages; and there is
scarce a man on earth but he thinks to go to heaven; yea, the Devil and sin so
infatuate and before many, that they can even apply Christ's passion, as a
warrant for their licentiousness, and take his Death as a license to sin, his
Cross as a Letters Pattent to do mischief; So turning the grace of God into
wantonness: As if a condemned person should head his Drum of Rebellion with
his Pardon, resolving therefore to be evil, because he is good: which is to
sin with an high hand, or with a witness, and to make themselves incapable of
forgiveneesse. And yet wretched and senseless men, they presume to have part in
that merit, which in every part they have so abused; to be purged by that
blood, which now they take all occasions to disgrace; to be saved by the same
wounds, which they swear by, and so often swear away; to have Christ an
Advocate for them in the next life, when they are Advocates against Christ in
this: And that Heaven will meet them at their last hour, when all their life
long, they have galloped in the beaten road toward Hell.

7. The Devil makes large promises to his; but ever disappoints them of their
hopes, as he did our first Parents: You shall die says God; You shall not die
at all, says Satan: Yea, you shall be as Gods, says he, when his drift was to
make them Devils. Yet the Devil was believed, when God could not be credited.
Diabolus mentitur, ut fallat; vitam pollicetur, ut perimat, says Cyprian. And
ever since our first parents, gave more credit to Satan, then their Maker: Our
hearts naturally have been flint unto God, wax to Satan; so that Satan may in a
manner triumph over Christ, and say, I have more servants then Christ* and they
do more for me, then his servants do for him: and yet I never died for them as
Christ has done for his: I never promised them so great reward, as Christ has
done to his, etc.

8. Well may these men think they believe the Gospel, as the Jews (who
persecuted Jesus, and sought to slay him) thought they believed Moses writings,
Ioh. 5.38, 39, 46, 47. But it is altogether impossible, as Christ (who knew
their hearts better then themselves) affirms of them: for certainly they would
never speak as they speak, think as they think, do as they do; if they thought
their thoughts, words, and deeds should ever come to judgment.

Did men believe, that neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Swearers, nor Railers, nor the Fearful, nor
Unbelieving, nor Murderers, nor Sorcerers, nor Liars, nor no unrighteous
persons, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; (as the Scripture expressly
speaks,) but shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death: They durst not continue in the practice
of these sins, without fear, or remorse or care of amendment. As for instance,
If Lots sons-in-Law had believed their Father, when he told them from God that
the City should suddenly be destroyed with fire and brimstone, and that by
flying they might escape it, they would have obeyed his counsel. Or if the old
world had believed, that God would indeed, and in good earnest bring such a
flood upon them as he threatened, they would not have neglected the opportunity
of entering into the Ark before it, was shut, and the windows of heaven opened;
much less would they have scoffed, and flowted at Noah, while he was a bulding
it. So if men did firmly believe what God speaks of ^ell, it would keep them
innocent; make them officious; they would need no entreaty to avoid it. Men
love themselves well enough to avoid a known pain; yea, there would be more
fear, and danger of their despair, then of their security. And the like of
heaven; if men but believed, what fullness of joy, and what pleasures are
reserved at Gods right hand for evermore, for them that love, and serve him in
sincerity, Psalm. 16.11. they would be more obedient upon earth.

CHAP. III.
1. WHat believe the former Scriptures? and nothing appear in men's lives in the
whole Land almost, but pride, covetousness, cruelty, damnable Hypocrisy,
profaning of the Sabbath, cursed swearing and cursing, abominable, and worse
then beast-like drunkenness, adultery, lying, slandering, persecuting, contempt
of Religion and all goodness: grinding of faces like edged tools, spilling of
blood like water, racking of Rents, detension of Wages, and workmens hire;
incredible cruelty to Servants, enclosing of Commons, engrossing of
Commodities, griping exactions, with straining the advantages of greatness:
unequal levies of legal payments, spiteful suits, biting usury, bribery,
perjury, partiality, sacrilege, simoniacal contracts, and soul-murder;
scurrility and profaneness, cozening in bargains, breaking of promises,
persidious underminings, Luxury, wantonness, contempt of Gods Messengers,
neglect of his Ordinances, violation of his days, and the like: as if these
were fruits of faith, and not of Atheism rather.

2. Yea, as if we had contracted with the Devil, that we would abuse all Gods
gifts so fast as they come: his blessings make us proud, his riches covetous,
his peace wanton, his meats intemperate, his mercy secure; And all his benefits
serve us but as weapons to rebel against him: so that we turn his grace into
wantonness, and make a trade of sin: yea, it is our least ill to do evil: for
behold we speak for it, joy in it, boast of it, tempt, and enforce to it, yea,
mock them that dislike it, as if we would send challenges into heaven, and make
love to destruction.

3. And yet we are Christians forsooth: I am even ashamed to think that men,
that rational men, should be such Sots, or suffer Satan so to gull and beguile
them! Certainly men are stark mad; for otherwise, how could it be? how were it
possible? that our ears should be always open to the Temp^er, shut to our
Maker and Redeemer? That we should do nothing else but sin, and make others sin
too? That all our thoughts, words and works, should be the services of the
world, the flesh, and the Devil? Yea, that we should be even mockers of all
that march not under the pay of the Devil? And yet fancy our selves the
servants of God, and followers of Christ. Will God be thus mocked? O abominable
blindness! for I dare refer my self to the worst of men that have reasonable
souls. As let a very Heathen read the Gospel, and compare the rules thereof
with our lives; he must needs conclude, that either it is not Christ's Gospel,
or we are not Christians.

4. O that men would come to themselves! as it is said of the repenting
Prodigal, Luke 15.17. And recover their wit^ again, that they have lost by the
fall, and the long custom of sin. And then they would clearly see and confess,
(as all that truly fear God know) that whatsoever they say, or think of
themselves; they do not in deed, and in truth believe a Deity: for if they did,
how durst they exercise their saucy wits, in profane scoffs at Religion? and
disgrace that blood, whereof hereafter they would give a thousand worlds for
one drop: How durst they tear Heaven with their blasphemies? and bandy the
dreadful Name of God, in their impure and polluted mouths, by their bloody
oaths and execrations? How could they be such witless, graceless, and shameless
miscreants, as to swear and curse, even as Dogs bark? yea, they have so sworn
away all grace, that they count it a grace to swear! And are so far from
believing, that the curse of God shall never depart from the house of the
swearer: And that himself will be a swift witness against swearers: That the
Lord has a great controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because of
swearing; and that of all other sinners, they shall not be found guiltless,
that take his Name in vain: And that the Land mourns because of Oaths, as the
Scripture speaks, Zach. 5.1, to 5. Exodus 20.7. Hos. 4.1, 2. Ier. 23.10. that
(as I said before) they think to be saved by the same wounds, and blood which
they swear by, and so often swear away.

And lest they should not themselves soon enough, fill up the measure of their
wickedness, even Boys in the streets, have learned of them to wrap out oaths,
as frequently as they, and no man so much as reprove, or find fault with them:
yea, through the Parents accustomary swearing, their children have learned to
speak English and oaths together, and so to blaspheme God, almost as soon as he
has made them. So that we may well wonder, that the Land sinketh not under us,
because of Oaths* As, o the numberless number of Oaths and Blasphemies, that
this Land groans under! which are spit out, as it were, in defiance of God; and
al his prohibitions to the contrary.

5. But the case is so clear, that I dare refer it to themselves, in their
sober fits: for their consciences cannot choose but tell them at one time or
other, when they are alone, and at leisure to hear it: that either they believe
there is no God at all, or else that God is not just and true; nor speaks as he
means in his Word, which is worse: Or if they do believe that he is a just and
true God, they believe also that they shall be punished as he threatens for
their impenitency and provoking of him; and they provoke him, that they may be
punished, which is worst of all. But behold the just judgment of God, (upon
the wilfully blinded, and obstinate,) who pays them in their own coin^ they
will not see, nor hear, nor understand, nor be converted, nor saved; but wink
with their eyes, stop their ears, stifle their consciences, harden their
hearts, and believe Satan rather then God, and walk in their own counsels:
Therefore, says God, they shall not see, nor hear, nor understand, nor apply
any wholesome truth to themselves, nor be converted, nor saved, as may plainly
be seen by these ensuing Scriptures, Prove. 28.14. Exodus 7.3, 22. and 10.20. and
14.8. Isa. 6.9, 10. Psalm. 69.23. Ier. 51.9. Mat. 13.15. Ioh. 12.37, 39, 40.
Romans 1.21, to 33. and 11.8. Acts ^^.27. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
Heb. 3.8.

It is exceeding remarkable, how God for this cause inflicteth more spiritual
judgem^nts upon this Age and Nation, then ever we read of. I fear few consider
it, as they ought: Wicked men will needs harden themselves without cause;
therefore they shall have cause enough. As, had they ever since the world
began, such cause to speak evil of the way of Truth, (if I may so speak) and
the Professors thereof, as now they have, by reason of the many and abominable
errors broached, and maintained? The bitter enmity that is between the very
people of God, about things not fundamental: The foul mouths of many, whose
Religion and zeal is to rail upon the most godly, able, and Orthodox Ministers;
but especially the vicious and lewd practices of many that pretend for
Religion; and the notorious cheating, and cozening of those in places of trust,
who at first were made choice of, for their pretended piety. All which God
permits for the further hardening of his obstinate and malicious enemies. And
let wicked men look to it: For as the Devil first puts out their eyes, and then
lays blocks in their way, to make them stumble and fall, that so they may dash
themselves in pieces: so God himself in justice suffers these scandals to be
given, or these stumbling blocks to be laid, that they may stumble at them to
their destruction, and break their souls necks, as it is Ezekiel. 3.20. See more,
1 King 22.20, 21, 22. Mat. 18.7. 2 Pet. 2.12. Isa. 8.14, 15. 2 Samuel 24.1. 1 Chronicles. 21.1 And this is a sure rule, that none thus stumble at scandals, but
wicked men and Gods enemies; as in the case of David, 2 Samuel 12.14. If you
would see more, read Mr. Dyke, of Scandals.

And herein the sin and punishment answer each other in their trancendency, for
as of all other judgments, none like this; so likewise of the sin: For this is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil, John 3.19, 20.

6. Nor is this all, the worst is reserved for the Upshot: As hear what will be
the issue of men's horrible profaneness, and abominable wickedness, if they
continue therein, without hearty contrition, and amendment, Men may think it an
argument of Gods favor, or dispensation, that they prosper in their
wickedness; that some eminent judgment is not executed speedily upon them:
But there cannot be a greater unhappiness, a heavier curse, then to prosper in
ill designs, and ungracions courses; to go on in sin uncontrouled; for he that
uses to do evil, and speeds well, seldom rests until he come to that evil
from which there is no redemption.

Besides, Forbearance is no acquittance; the wickedness of the Old World is as
abundant in the New World; yet is not the World drowned with water. But why?
because God has ordained for it a deluge of fire. The sins of Sodom are
practiced every where in our City and Kingdom, yet do the committters escape
fire and brimstone on earth, because they are reserved to fire and brimstone in
Hell. Do not many persecute the Church as violently as Pharaoh, with Chariots
and Armies? who yet escape drowning; there is a reservation of a deeper and
bottomless Sea for them; diverse murmur at the passages of Gods providence in
these times of retribution and Reformation, who are not stung with fiery
Serpents, as the Israelites, because they are reserved to a fiery serpent in
Hell: Many, yea the most that can come by them take Bribes like Gehazi, without
a Leprosy, because of that eternal Leprosy which waits for them. How many a
deceitful Executor and Trustee says and swears with a little inversion of
Ananias his lie, I received but so much, I disbursed so much; yet are not
stricken with death temporal, because they are reserved to death eternal. Have
not many Monopolists with us, done as bad as those Philippians? Act. 16.16.19.
who compounded with the Devil for a Pattent, to bring them in gain, and yet
grow rich, and prosper, and leave a great deal of substance to their heirs,
whose gain will be found loss, when Satan shall seize upon their bodies and
souls, and hurry them to Hell. And so of other Sinners; for the like is
appliable to the whole Nation, except some few despised ones, and he is a rare
man, that does not either mis-believe, or grossly mislive, that is not a
worshipper of one of these three, the lust of the flesh, voluptuousness; the
lust of the eyes, covetousness; or the pride of life, ambition; which is all
the Trinity the world worships.

But of all the rest, let all envious Cains, scoffing Ishmaels, reviling
Goliahs, bloody-minded Hamans and Doegs, cursing Shimeis, railing Rabshake's,
flouting Tobiahs and Sanballats, cruel Herod's, and all the like God-^aters,
(that carry an aching tooth against every good man they know, and will even hate
one, for his being holy, though poor ignorant souls they know it not) look for
a whole volume of plagues in the next life, though they escape in this, if they
repent not. For it hellfire shall be their portion that obey not the Gospel,
how can they look to escape that oppose it? Or if at the great day men shall be
bid, Depart into everlasting torments, for not feeding, clothing, visiting;
what shall become of those that maliciously scoff at Religion, and persecute
Christ in his members? which is the depth of sin: For he that despises,
traduceth, or any way wrongs one that believes in Christ, (especially one of
his Ambassadors of the Ministry) strikes at the Image of God in him, by whose
Spirit he both speak^ and acts: And God takes it as if it were done to himself,
for proof of both, se^ Psalm. 44.22. and 74.4, 10, 18, 22, 23. and 83.2, 5, 6.
and 89.50, 51. and 139.20. Prove. 19.^. Romans 1.30. and 9.20. Matthew. 10.22. and
25.45. ^ Sam. 17.45. Isai. 37.4, 22, 23, 28. and 54.17. Acts 5.39. and 9.4, 5.
Job 9.4. 1 These. 4.8. John 15.20. to 26. Numb. 16.11. 1 Samuel 8.7. Mark 9.42.
Ier. 17.18. Psalm. 79.12. 2 Kings 2.24. O that my old acquaintance, the Formal
Hypocrite, and my feigned friend the Civil Iusticiary, and my well-meaning
neighbor the Loose Libertine, with millions more, would but seriously consider
these Scriptures, and he warned by them, before the Drawbridge be taken up:
For if the bountifulness, and long-suffering of God, do not lead us to
repentance, it will increase our condemnation: Besides, God owes that man a
grievous payment, whom he suffers to run on so long unquestioned; and his
punishment shall be the greater when he comes to reckon with him for all his
faults together.

CHAP. IV.
1. BUt admit men's unbelief, impenitency, and profaneness, in such glorious
times of light, and means of grace as ours is, were not enough to provoke God,
to inflict this heavy and grievous judgment upon them; how well do they
deserve this, and much more for their horrible and abominable ingratitude to so
good a God, so gracious a Savior and Redeemer, that has done and suffered, or
would do more for them, then can either be expressed, or conceived by any
heart, were it as deep as the Sea? As mark well what I (the meanest of a
million) shall but paint or draw ou^ as it were with a cole, of his unspeakable
goodness to sinners: I will according to my slender ability, but give you a
drop to taste out of that ocean.

Touching what God and Christ has done for us: In the first place he gave us
our selves, and all the creatures to be our servants; yea, he created us after
his own Image in righteousness and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the
truth, with a power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed and
happy condition; and this deserves all possible thankfulness; but this was
nothing in comparison; for when we were in a sad condition; when we had
forfeited all this, and our selves: when by sin we had turned that image of God
into the image of Satan, and wilfully plunged our souls and bodies into eternal
torments, when we were become his enemies, mortally hating him, and to our
utmost fighting against him, and taking part with his only enemies; ( Sin and
Satan) not having the least thought or desire of reconcilement, but a perverse
and obstinate will to resist all means tending thereunto; He did redeem us, not
only without asking, but even against our wills: so making of us (his cursed
enemies) servants, of servants sons, of sons heirs, and coheirs with Christ,
Gal. 4.7. Here was a fathomless depth, a wonder beyond all wonders!

2. But that we may the better consider what an alms or boon God gave us, when
he gave us his Son: Observe that when neither heaven, earth, nor hell, could
have yielded any satisfactory thing, besides Christ that could have satisfied
Gods justice, and merited heaven for us, then, O then! God, in his infinite
wisdom and goodness, did not only find out a way to satisfy his Justice and
the Law, but gave us his Son, his only begotten Son, his only beloved Son out
of his bosom: And his Son gave himself to die, even the most shameful,
painful, and cursed death of the Cross to redeem us; That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16. The very
thought of which death, before he came to it, together with the weight and
burden of our sins, put him into such an Agony in the Garden, that it made him
to sweat, even drops of blood. A mercy bestowed, and a way found out, that may
astonish all the sons of men on earth, and Angels in Heaven! Wherefore, o
wonder at this, you that wonder at nothing! That the Lord should come with such
a price to redeem our worse then lost souls, and to bring salvation to us, even
against our wills: The Lord Ies^^ Christ being rich, for our sakes became poor,
that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. Even the eternal
God would die, that we might not die eternally; o the deepness of Gods love! o
the unmeasurable measure of his bounty! o Son of God, who can sufficiently
express thy love? Or, commend thy pity? Or, extol thy praise? It was a wonder,
that thou made us for thy self, more that thou made thy self man for us;
but most of all, that thou should unmake thy self, that thou should die
to save us.

3. And which is further considerable, It cost God more to redeem the world,
then to make it: In the Creation he gave thee thy self; but in the Redemption
he gave thee himself. The Creation of all things cost him but six days to
finish it; the Redemption of man cost him three and thirty years. In the
Creation of the World, he did but only speak the word; in the Redemption of
man, he both spoke and wept, and sweat, and bled, and died, and did many
wonderful things to do it: Yea, the saving of one soul single, is more and
greater then the making of the whole World. In every new creature are a number
of miracles, a blind man is restored to fight, a deaf man to hearing, a man
possessed with many Devils dis-possest; yea, a dead man raised from the dead, and
in every one a stone turned into flesh in all which God meets with nothing but
opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

4. But the better to illustrate this love, consider, that salvation stands in
two things: First, in freedom and deliverance of us from Hell Secondly, in the
possession of Heaven, and eternal life; Christ by his death merits the first
for us; and by his obedience fulfilling the Law, merits the second. The parts
of our Justification are likewise two; the remission of our sins, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness. And to this would be added, first,
Conversion, which comprehends both Faith and Repentance: Secondly,
Sanctification* the Parts whereof are Mortification that is, dying unto sin;
and Vivification, which is living unto righteousness. Thirdly, Glorification
begun and perfected, which is freedom from all evil here, and the perfection
of all good and happiness in heaven.

5. What shall I say? God of his goodness has bestowed so many and (...)
great mercies upon us, that it is not possible to express his bounty therein;
for if we look inward, we find our Creators mercies; if we look upward, his
mercy reaches unto the heavens, if downwards the earth is full of his
goodness, and so is the broad Sea; if we look about us, what is it that he
has not given us? Air to breath in, Fire to warm us, Water to cool and cleanse
us, Clothes to cover us, Food to nourish us, Fruits to refresh us; yea,
Delicates to please us, Beasts to serve us, Angels to attend us, Heaven to
receive us; And which is above all, Himself and his own Son to be enjoyed of
us: So that whithersoever we turn our eyes, we cannot look besides his bounty;
yea, we can scarce think of any thing more to pray for, but that he would
continue those blessings, which he has bestowed on us already: Yet we covet
still, as though we had nothing, and live as if we knew nothing of all this his
beneficence. We are bound to praise him above any Nation whatsoever; for what
Nation under Heaven enjoyes so much light, or so many blessings, as we? above
any creature, etc.

God might have said before we were formed, Let them be Toads, Monsters,
Infidels, Beggars, Cripples, Bondslaves, Idiots, or Mad men, so long as they
live, and after that Castaways for ever, and ever: But he has made us to the
best likeness, and nursed us in the best Religion, and placed us in the best
Land, and appointed us to the best, and only inheritance, even to remain in
bliss with him for ever; yea, thousands would think themselves happy, if they
had but a piece of our happiness; for whereas some bleed, we sleep in safety;
others beg, we abound; others starve, we are full fed; others grope in the
dark, our Sun still shines; we have eyes, ears, tongue, feet, hands, health,
liberty, reason, others are blind, deaf, dumb, are sick, maimed, imprisoned,
distracted, and the like, yea, God has removed so many evils from us, and
conferred so many good things upon us, that they are beyond thought or
imagination: For if the whole Heaven were turned into a Book, and all the
Angels deputed Writers therein, they could not set down all the good, which
Gods love in Christ has done us. For all those millions of mercies that we
have received from, before, and since we were born, either for soul or body,
even to the least bit of bread we eat, or shall to eternity, (of which we could
not well want any one) Christ has purchased of his Father for us, and yet God
the Father also, has of his free grace, and mercy given us, in giving us his
Son; for which read Psalm. 68.19. and 145.15, 16. and 75.6, 7. Yea, God is many
times working our good, when we least think upon him: as he was creating Adam
an help meet for him, when he was fa^^ asleep. And as much do we owe unto God,
for the dangers from which he delivers us: as for the great wealth and
dignities whereunto he has always raised us.

Now if we are so bound to bless God for his external, temporal, inferior,
earthly, perishing benefits: what praise do we owe for the lasting fruits of
his eternal love and mercy? and how thankful should we strive to be? which
shall be the next thing treated of.

Now what should we render unto the Lord our God so good and gracious, in way
of thankfulness for all these his mercies? for favors bestowed, and
deliverances from danger, bind to gratitude; or else the more bonds of duty,
the more plagues for neglect. The contribution of blessings require retribution
of thanks, or will bring distribution of plagues.

Neither could we possibly be unthankful, if we seriously thought upon what God
gives, and what he forgives: For in reason has he contrived so many ways to
save us; and should not we take all occasions to glorify him? has he done so
much for us, and shall we deny him any thing that he requires of us, though
it were our lives, yea our souls; much more our lusts? We have exceeding hard
hearts, if the blood of the Lamb cannot soften them: stony bow^ls, if so many
mercies cannot melt them. Was Christ crucified for our sins? and should we by
our sins crucify him again?

6. Now the meditation of what God and Christ has done for us, should make us
do what we are able for him again. For did Christ all this for us, and shall we
do nothing for him for our selves? like favors require like gratitude. He that
confers a benefit upon a grateful nature robs him of his liberty, and self
also: and in one and the same act makes him a vassal, and himself his master.
Wherefore if we have any ingenuity in us, it will make us to direct all our
thoughts, speeches, and actions to his glory, as he has directed our eternal
salvation thereunto.

But to help and further you herein, if you be willing so to do, take these few
directions.

First, Let these things be never out of the minds, memories, and mouths of
those whom Christ has done thus for. O let us (I say) remember, as we should
never forget. Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid jam reddam pro merefecto,
says holy Bernard. If I owed my whole self unto thee, for giving me my self
in my creation: what have I left to pay for giving thy self for me to so cruel
a death, to procure my Redemption, which was not so cheap as my creation? Great
was the benefit that thou would create me of nothing; but what tongue can
sufficiently express the greatness of this grace, that thou did redeem me
with so dear a price, when I was worse then nothing? We are full of thy
goodness: O let our hearts run over with thankfulness; yea, let so many of us
as have either heart or brain, in the next place say, O Lord, What is man that
thou art so mindful of hi^* Psalm. 8.4. And O man, what is God that thou art
so unmindful of him. And then conclude with, What shall I render unto thee, o
Lord, for all these thy benefits? but love thee my Creator, and Redeeme^, and
become a new creature. I will serve thee, o Lord, by the assistance of thy
grace, because thou have given me my self: but much more honor thee, because
thou have given me thy Son Christ.

7. Nor can any man in common reason meditate so unbottomed a love, and not
study and strive for an answerably thankful demeanure. If a friend had given us
but a thousand part of what God has, we should heartily love him all our
lives, and think no thanks sufficient. What a price then should we set upon
Jesus Christ! who is the life of our lives, and soul of our souls?

But, thirdly, this should at least make us part with our nearest, dearest, and
sweetest darling sins, to serve him in righteousness and holiness every day;
every hour, all the days of our lives: Even every sin; for what sin should be
so dear to us, as Gods only Son was to him? Do we then for, Gods sake not
spare our dearest sin; when God for our sakes, did not spare his dearest Son.

Yea, what a brutish and barbarous unthankfulness, and shame were it that God
should part with his Son, and his Son with his own precious blood for us? and
we not part with our sinful lusts, and delights for him.

8. Fourthly, Has Christ done all this for us, his servants, so much, and so
many ways obliged unto him? let us do what we are able for him again. 1 Let us
be zealous for his glory, and take his part when we see or hear him
dishonored. Nor can there be any love, where there is no zeal, says
Augustine. Well-born Children are touched to the quick, with the injuries of
their Parents. And it is a base, vile, and unjust ingratitude in those men that
can endure the disgrace of them, under whose shelter they live. 2 Let us seek
to draw others after us, from Satan to Him. 3 Do we all we can, to promote his
worship and service. 4 Take all good occasions to publish to others, how good
God is; and what he has done for us. 5 Let us wholly ascribe all the good we
have, or do to free grace; and give him the glory of his gifts, employing them
to our masters best advantage. 6 Let us, (that we may express out
thankfulness to him) show kindness to his Children, and poor ^embers, who are
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.7 (...) or we ourselves
for our former unthankfulness, and our wonderful provoking of him. 8 Hearken
we unto Christ's voice, in all that he says unto us, and express our
thankfulness by our obedience. Yea, all this (...), if we do it but for our own
sakes: For what should we have, if (...) thus serve Christ, who has done all
these things for his enemies (...) and dishonouring him?

True, we cannot properly be said to do any thing for (...) that have all we
have from him: Or if we could give him our bodies and souls, they should be
saved by it; but he were never the better for them; yet we may do these, and
many the like things, which he accounts, and rewards as done to himself.

CHAP. V.
1. NOw these things we ought to do; thus thankful we ought to be to God, for
his inestimable and unspeakable benefits toward us. But do we thus requite the
Lord? or do we what we are able for him again? O that I could say we did! Y^^,
I would we were but so thankful to Christ for all his mercies: (the least
whereof is greater then all the courtesies of men) as we are to a friend for
some one good turn.

But woe worth us, a people not worthy the crumbs of Christ's, and our Makers
least mercy: Yea, well worthy of more plagues, then either Tire, or Sydon,
Chorazin, or Bethsaida, Capernaum, Sodom, or Gomorrah, Matthew. 11.21, to 25. or
any people since the Creation: For as if all that Christ has done for us, were
nothing to move us; we are so far from being thankful, from loving, and serving
him: that did we seriously think of Christ's love, and our odious
unthankfulness: and compare Gods goodness with our ingratitude, rightly
weighing how we have from time to time abused his mercy, and those many means
of grace, which he in his long-suffering has afforded for our reclaiming: it
would even make us speechless, like him in the Gospel, as neither expecting
pardon, nor daring to ask it. Yea, o Lord, it is thine unspeakable mercy, that
our Land has not long since spued us out; and that we are not at this present
frying in Hell. For whereas God has removed so many evils spiritual and
corporal, temporal and eternal, from us; and conferred so many good things upon
us, that they are beyond thought or imagination.

2. We have striven to multiply offenses against him, and to make them as
infinite in number, as his blessings. We have done nothing from our infancy,
but added sin unto sin; as he has added mercy to mercy^ whereby our sins are
become for number, as the sands in the Sea; and as the Stars of heaven; and
answerable to their multitude, is the magnitude of them, as I have (in the
former Part) shown, and shall further amplify in this. As tell me; may not God
justly another day, call Heaven and Earth to witness against us? that he would
have saved us? yea did woo us to accept of salvation; saying, Turn ye; turn ye,
from your evil ways: for why will you die, o people of England? Ezekiel. 33.11.
But we would not be converted nor saved. As thus,

3 Whereas God has offered us a pardon (in tendering Christ unto us, upon the
condition of faith and repentance) even his own Son, to be a means of our
reconciliation; which is such a spectacle of unspeakable mercy, as might ravish
our souls with admiration: We are so far from accepting it thankf^lly; that we
not only refuse and contemn it, but in a manner deride the offer of it our
selves; oppose the Gospel of glad tidings, and persecute Christ in his Members;
either with hand, or tongue, or both. We are so far from being holy our selves,
(most of us) that we hate holiness in others. For if any become Religious, and
conscionable; and will not for company grievously sin against God; wrong their
bodies, destroy their own souls, and wilfully leap into Hellfire with us: we
envy, hate, censure, scoff at, nickname, rail on, and slander them; that we
may flout them out of their faith, damp, or quench the spirit where we perceive
it is kindled; discourage them in the way to heaven; baffle them out, and make
them ashamed of their holy profession, and religious course, and consequently
pull them back to the World; that so we may have their company here in sin, and
hereafter in torment. Nor do we so serve the most sincere only, in whom the
graces of Gods Spirit do as apparently shi^^t as the Sun at noonday, to the
dazzling of their eyes: But we condemn all that have more religion then an
Heathen; or more knowledge of heavenly things, then a child in the womb has
of the things of this life; or more conscience then an Atheist, or care of his
soul then a Beast: That live religiously, and will not revel it with us in a
shoreless excess; for Roundheads, and Puritans, a name so full of the Serpents
enmity, as the egg of a Cockatrice is full of poison.

4. And in all (which is worst of all) we have caused others to do the same
abominations, by our evil example. Yea, worse yet then all this, our abominable
wickedness, has brought such a scandal upon our Religion, and the Gospel; that
it is even abhorred of the Heathen, and the great and glorious Name of God
blasphemed among them. Yea, what else but the unchristian-like behavior of
Christians? has caused the Turks and Jews, and many among our selves, even to
protest against their own conversion. Or what else has alienated the Indians
from the Christian Religion, making them to refuse the Gospel; but this? that
they saw our lives more savage, then those Savages themselves: yea, it has
made those poor souls resolve, that whatsoever Religion the Christians were of,
they would be the contrary; thinking it impossible, that such beastly and
bloody d^eds could proceed from any true Religion: Or, that he could be a good
God, who had such evil sons. Whereas in the Primitive times, more of them were
won to the faith, by the holy lives of Christians; then by the Doctrine which
they taught: for it caused them to say, This ^s a good God, whose servants are
so good.

CHAP. VI.
1. ANd thus according to my scantling, I have spread before you what God and
Christ has done for us: and how we have again required him. Though God (who
searches the heart, and tries the reins) knows infinitely more by us, and
sees what strange monsters; what ugly, odious, hideous fiends: what swarms,
what litters, what legions of noisome lusts, are couched in the stinking styes
of every one of our deceitful hearts: and finds, that if all our thoughts did
but break forth into action, we should not come far short of the Devils
themselves.

And certainly, if we shall compare the numberless number of our great and
grievous abominations, wherewith our Land is filled from corner to corner; with
the many means which God has afforded for our reclaiming: it will be found,
that no Nation under heaven, did ever more provoke the Lord. Nor has he ever
strove more with any Nation to reclaim them, then he has done with us: for
when neither mercies, nor any ordinary means would serve the turn; he has at
several times visited us with several judgments, to try what they would do:
But we have been so little moved therewith, that instead of becoming better,
we have bin the worse for them, (as appears at this day) and more audacious in
declaring our sins; as if with Sodom, we took a pride in them, to the great
dishonor of our Redeemer* and his Gospel; and to the hardening of all that
hear of it: so that our horrid sins are grown up unto heaven* in regard whereof
we may justly be confounded, and ashamed to lift up our eyes unto him, who is a
Lord so great, and terrible: of such glorious Majesty and infinite purity. Now
he that has ears, let him hear: and he that has wit, let him consider, and
lay it to heart, how thankful a people we are. And not only ye, o inhabitants
of this our Jerusalem and Judah, would I have to judge, between Christ and his
Vineyard; what he could have done for us, more then he has done, Isaiah 5.4,
to 8. But hear ye also* o heavens, and give ear, o earth; be astonished at
it, and horribly afraid, that this foolish people and unwise, should so requite
the Lord, Jer. 2.11, etc. Isai. 1.2, to 9. and Verse 15, to 25. Deuteronomy. 32.6, etc.

Oh my Brethren, Englands unthankfulness has striven with Gods goodness for
the victory, as Absalom strove with David, whether the Father should be more
kind to the son, or the son more unkind to the Father. We have been fatted
with his blessings, and then spurned at his precepts; resembling the Leopard,
who wrongs them most, that give him most fodder.

2. But why do I call it, unthankfulness? when our sin is many degrees beyond
ingratitude it self: For not to confess a benefit, is the utmost confine of
unthankfulness: mere ingratitude, returns nothing for good, but we return
evil, yea the greatest, and most malicious evil, for the greatest, and most
admired love.

Argue with all the World, and they will conclude, there is no vice like
ingratitude: But we are more ungrateful to God, then can be expressed by the best
Orator alive. It was horrible ingratitude, which the chief Butler showed to
Joseph, Genesis 41.9. which the nine Lepers showed to Christ, Luke 17. 17, 18.
which the men of Succoth, and Penuel, showed to Gideon, Judge. ^.6, 8. which
those five spies showed to Micha, Iugd. 18.14, 18. It was worse which the
Israelites showed to Gideons seed, Judge. 9.17, 18. which Michael Thraulus
showed to Leo the Emperor; which Iustinianus showed to that renowned Captain
Bellizarius. It was yet worse, which Popilius showed to Cicero; which Lycaon
showed to his stranger guests, that came to him for relief. It was worst of all
in the Jews, to scourge and crucify Christ, who did them good every way: for
he healed their diseases, fed their bodies, enlightened their minds; of God
became Man, and lived miserably amongst them many years, that he might save
their souls: (though in killing him, they did their utmost; to sink the only
ship that could save them.) But all these fall far short of our ingratitude to
God: for his maintenance we take and live on, the bread we eat, the air we
breath, the clothes we wear, all are his.

3. That we are out of Hell, there to fry in flames, never to be freed: That we
have the free offer of grace here, and everlasting glory hereafter in Heaven;
where are such joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered
into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. we are beholding to him: Yet we
not only deny this Lord that has bought us, (as every one does; that prefers
Mammon, or any other thing before him) but we hate him, (as he does hate, and
not love God; that loves what he hates, or hates what he loves:) but most
spightfully, and maliciously fight on Satan's and sins side, against him: and
persecute his Children, and the truth with all our might; persuading, and
enforcing others to do the same; even wishing that we could pull him out of his
Throne, rather then to admit him our just Judge: And all this against knowledge
and conscience, after illumination. I wish men would a little think of it; and
then if this will not melt their hearts, no hope that any other means should do
it, but perish they must.

4. I confess, I have small hope, that what has been said of Gods love, and
our odious unthankfulness: his goodness, and our ingratitude; (which being
seriously considered, were enough to bring the whole world upon their knees)
should make them any whit ashamed, or the better; because their blockishness is
such, that they think themselves good enough, and that to doubt of it, or
strive to be more holy, were but a foolish and needless scrupulosity. Yea, they
prefer their condition, before other men's that are so conscientious; A thing
strange! yet it is so: For although there be not a leaf in the sacred Volume,
but has matter against a voluptuous life, none for it: For ^o please flesh and
blood, is the Doctrine of the Devil. Yet how do a wo^ld of men stifle their
consciences, and force themselves to believe, if it were possible: that in case
men will not swear, drink drunk, conform to their lewd customs, and the like;
they are overprecise: and that God will like a man the worse, for his being the
better; or for having of a tender Conscience. And that he looks for less fear,
reverence, and obedience from his servants; then we do from our servants: and
yet hold that a servant can never be too punctual, in his obedience to his
Masters lawful commands. They think it not enough for themselves, to prefer the
pleasing of their senses, before the saving of their souls: and to venture
tasting the forbidden fruit, at the price of death eternal: but they account
them fools, that do otherwise.

CHAP. VII.
1. O My brethren! it is not to be believed, how blind and blockish men are;
that have hardened their hearts, and seared their consciences with accustomary
sinning: for albeit I have informed them how dangerous their estate is, that
they might plainly see it, truly fear it, and timely prevent it: yet I have
very little hope to do any good upon them. For first, These lines to them are
but as so many Characters writ in the water, which leave no impression behind
them: as being like one that beholds his natural face in a glass; who when he
has considered himself, goes his way, and forgets immediately what manner
of one he was, James 1.23, 24. of like some silly Fly, which being beat from
the Candle and hundred times, and often singed therein: yet will return to it
again, until she be consumed, Prove. 23.35. All those Beasts which went into the
Ark unclean, came likewise out unclean.

Secondly, Though these sparks of grace may kindle piety in others, yet not in
them: for they are out of all hope of being healed. For what is light, to them
that will shut their eyes against it? or reason, to them that will stop their
ears from hearing it, and men of their condition, do on purpose stop their
ears, and wink with their eyes: lest they should see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and so should be converted,
as our Savior shows, Matthew. 13.15. and St. Paul, Acts 28.27. yea, it is well,
if they do not carp, and fret against the Word, and persecute the Messengers,
as Herod did John Baptist, Demetrius Paul, and the false Prophets Jeremiah. And
how should not that patient perish, who after he is launced, flies from the
Surgeon, before the binding up of his wound? Or how should not that sin be
past cure, which strives against the cure? certainly salvation it self, will
not save those that spill the potion and fling away the plaster. O if these
Adders had not stopped their ears! how long since had they been charmed? I grant
they have reason so to do (such as it is.) For will a Leper take pleasure, in
the searching of his sores; and Satan the like: for if they could clearly see,
the loathsomeness of their impieties: it were not possible not to abbor them;
not to abhor themselves for them: but their blindness makes them love their
own filthiness, as Ethiopians do their own swarthinesse.

2. And to tell you the truth, (though I speak against my self, had I not a
further reach in it) it were an unreasonable motion in me, if I should request
minds propossest with prejudice to hear reason. Since the World and the Devil
has so forestalled their judgments therewith against Gods people, and
goodness it self; that they resolve never to be better then they are. And
where Satan has set this his porter of prejudice: though Christ himself were
on earth: that soul would make an ill construction, of whatsoever he did or
spoke: as we see in the Scribes and Pharisees; who when he wrought miracles,
reputed him a sorcerer: when he cast out Devils, thought it to be by the power
and Prince of Devils: when he reproved sinners, he was a seducer; when he
received sinners, he was their favourer: when he healed the sick, he was a
Sabbath-breaker, and the like: yea, they counted him the greatest offender,
that offended not once in all his life; which would make a wise man suspect his
own judgment, or the common ^ame* and to examine things thoroughly before they
condemn one, whom they know no evil by.

Yet this is the case of these men of most men: for even as an ill stomach,
turns all it receives into ill humors: or as a Spider converts every thing she
eats into poison: so they whatsoever they hear of, or see in the godly: So
blinding themselves with prejudice, that like Pyrrhon, they will not believe
what their eyes see, and their ears hear. Yea, I would fain know, what means
can possibly be used, that shall be able to reclaim them? They will neither be
softened with benefits, nor broken with punishments: Gods severity cannot
terrify them, nor his kindness mollify them. Yea, should these fools be
brayed in a mortar, among wheat with a Pestle, yet they will not depart from
their wickedness, as Solomon expresses ^t, Prove. 27.22. Yea, the more these
Anviles are beaten upon, the harder they are.

3. The change of means, whether the Word, Judgments, Mercies, or the like: do
but obdure their hearts, instead of melting them; as we see by many examples.
The nine plagues could not prevail with Pharaoh: Yea, they hardened his heart
the more, When Jesus cried with a loud voice, and yielded up the ghost; the
vail of the Temple rent in twain, from top to the bottom: the earth did quake,
the Graves did open themselves, and the dead Saints came forth, and went into
the holy City; the Sun was forsaken of his light, etc. as if all were se^^ible
of their Makers suffering: when as the generality of the people that had heard
his preaching, and seen his many miracles: yea, those great Clerks, the Scribes
and Pharistes, were altogether insensible, and worse then all the rest of the
creatures: The very stones of the Temple were soft in comparison of their stony
hearts: and they which were dead in their graves, were alive to those which
were dead in their sins.

Let Malchus be smitten to the ground, with the words of our Savior: let him
have his right ear cut off, and miraculously healed again by him, whom he came
to apprehend: yet he will be one, that shall lead him bound to Pilate. Let the
Sodomites be all struck blind, for contesting with Lot, and his two Angels:
they will not cease seeking his door, to break it open, until they feel fire
and brimstone about their ^ares, Genes. 10.

And let men look to it, for If they will not believe Moses, and the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles: they would not believe, though God should send an
Angel from the living in Heaven; or a Messenger from the dead in Hell to warn
them; as Abraham tells Dives, Luke 16.31. Yea, let God himself forbid Balaam to
go with Balaks messengers; to curst^e (...) of Israel: yea, let an Angel stand
in his way, with a drawn sword to stop him: yea, let him hear his beast speak
under him: yet he slights all. I might instance other examples; as what a
warning had Haz^el given him by the Prophet; of all the abominable wickedness
he should commit? 2 Kings 8.12, 13, etc. And likewise Ah^b, who was told from
the Lord, that if he went to war, he should perish? yet neither would take
warning, but wo^t on, and sped accordingly. And also of the Old world: so that
one word as good speak to liveless stones, or senseless plants, or witless
beasts, as to such men (...) any thing they will be bettered by it. Yea,
reason^once debauch (...) is worse then brutlshnesse: I see the savagest of all
creatures, Lions, Tyge^s, Bears, etc. by an instinct from Go^, came to seek the
Ark: (as we see swine foreseeing a storm; run home, crying for shelter) not one
man do I see, except Noah and his family. So none but the well-affected, whose
hearts is pleases the Lord to change, will be the better for what they have
heard, of Gods goodness and their Ingratitude, see 1 Samuel 10.26.

4. They have been too long sick of sin to be recovered, and will rather be
confounded, then reformed: they have brazen brows, sti^^e necks, uncircumcized
ears, blinded eyes, fat, and heavy hearts, obdurate souls, as strong as a
stone, and as hard as a nether mil-stone, Ezekiel. 11.19. by reason whereof it
comes to pass; that those who are fil^hy, will be filthy still; in spite both
of Law and Gospel. Yea, they are stark dead to all ordinary means: which is an
infallible sign of their eternal ruin, as they may see, both by testimonies,
Deuteronomy. 17.12. Prove. 19.1. and 1.24, 25, 26. Heb. 10.28. Hos. 4.14, 17. Isai.
57.17. And likewise by pregnant examples, 1 Samuel 2.22, to 26. 2 Chronicles. 25.16,
20.

What should I more say? If thou be an habituated sinner; blinded, or
f^restalled with prejudice; and resolved to go on in thy wickedness, and do as
others do, without either conscience of sin, or guidance of reason. Thou art
dead in sin; and not only dead, as Ia^rus daughter was, Matthew. 9.25. Nor only
dead, laid out and coffined, as the widows son of Naim was, Luke 7.14. But
dead, coffined, and buried as Lazarus was, John the 11.39. even till thou
stinkest in the nostrils of God, and all good men. So that I have no other
message to deliver unto thee; then that which the vigilant Captain, delivered
together with a deaths wound to his sleeping Sentinels Dead I found thee, and
dead I leave thee.

5. Only thou, o Father, to whom nothing is hard, if it be thy good pleasure:
(as why not seeing it will make much for the glory of thy great Name, to save
such a mighty sinner; who Manasses-like has multiplied offenses above the
number of the sand of the Sea; and is bound down with many iron bands.) Say
unto his soul, Live; yea, quicken thou him, ^ merciful Redeemer, who art the
fountain of life. It is true, they angry threatening against sinners is
importable: but thy merciful promise is unmeasurable, and unsearchable. Thou
therefore that are able to quicken the dead; and make even of stones, children
to Abraham: mollify these stony hearts, we beseech thee, with the blood of the
Lamb: and make of these children of the Devil ( John 8.44.) Members of thy Son
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
1. ANd that my utmost endeavor, may answer the strength of my desires: and
for that God does not ordinarily work, but by means. I will notwithstanding the
small hope I have, of these Aethiopians changing their skin: or these Leo^ards
their spots, Jer. 13.23. even against my own reason, try yet annother way:
because my hearts desire is, that they may be saved, Romans 10.1. Yea, I assure
you, if God should bid me ask what I would, (as once he did Solomon) if I know
my own heart; it should be no other thing, then that my brethren, and
Countrymen, might have their eyes opened: be turned from darkness to light;
d^d from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ, Acts
26.18.

2. Nor am I altogether out of hope; for as with God nothing is impossible: so
I call to mind that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14. If an unbelieving Idiot,
shall hear the secrets of his heart made manifest to himself, and others: he
will then be convinced, and ^all down on his face and worship God and say: This
is of God indeed, or of a truth, Verse. 24, 25. and I doubt not, but by Gods
help, I shall show these ignorant unbelievers, from the written Word, their
very thoughts and the most secret intents of their hearts, Heb. 4.12. and so,
that their own consciences shall bear me witness, I belie them not.

Wherefore lend me your best attentions, I beseech you: and in reading take
notice, of what concerns each of you: and if conscience plead guilty, hearken
thereunto.

3. Now that I may speak to all whom it concerns; namely those ignorant,
unbelieving and ungrateful wrethches formerly spoken of: and that It may prove
of general behoof, I will give you the several chara^^^r^ of seven sorts of
men, which include the whole number, viz. The Loose Libertine, The Civil
Iusticiary, The Formal Hypocrite, The Miserly Muck-worm, The Profound Humanist,
The Cunning Politician, The False Teacher, that flatters sin, and flowts
holiness.


And in some one of these, every nat^ral man shall read the very thoughts of
his heart: together with his words and actions. For if ought be wanting in the
one, it shall be supplied in the other: which is as much as can be expected.
For otherwise I can no way avoid Tautologies; nor Interfering.

If it be asked, why I seem to forget the character of an ignorant person? I
answer, it were not proper to make him a distinct party: for all these that I
have mentioned; are equally ignorant, (if unregenerate:) touching spiritual,
experimental, and saving knowledge: though some more fools then others in the
things of this life. Nor is any Profound Humanist, or Cunning Politician, or
False Teacher so wise: but it is through ignorance, that he does so ill: and
which is as good, the ignorant man shall meet with his own thoughts, words, and
actions, in every of the seven Characters: if he be but wise enough to know the
issue of his own heart and brain, when he sees the Brats brought before him.

I shall also occasionally pourtray, or paint out: the usual cunning,
Covetousness, and Cruelty.

Of Governors, Of Officers, Of Judges, Of Lawyers, Of Projectors, Of
Engrossers, Of Gripers, Of Wasters, etc.
And the better to illustrate, or set out the fairness, or deformity; of each
virtue and vice: I will give you the lively and lovely Characters of Justice,
Thankfulness, Contentation, Frugality, Liberality.


CHAP. IX.
1. I Begin with the Loose Libertine, or openly profane: for he shall lead the
Troop, as Judas led the Soldiers.

Thou that art openly pro^hane do so manifestly prove and profess thy self to
be one of those ignorant, unbelieving, ungrateful, and wicked wretches herein
co^cern'd: yea, to be one of the children of disobedience whom Satan has
blinded: that in respect of others, I should think it needless to spend time
in further proof thereof: yet I would gladly say something to shame thee out of
thy self: wherefore briefly thus: Thou art kept by the Devil in a snare, and
taken captive of him at his will: he rules, and works his pleasure in thee,
as being thy God and Father, and Prince, and M^ster, 2 Timothy 2.26. Joh. 8.44.
and 14.30. 2 Cor. 4.4. Thy odious qualities are these and the like: thou do
ban^^h all civility, and give thy self over to sensuality: and art neither
afraid nor ashamed; to let thy wickedest thoughts break forth into actions.
Yea, thou think thy self the honester man for it: and boastest thou art none
of those dissembling Hypocrites that seem to be what they are not. Thou art a
common Drunkard: in^tead of quenching thy thirst, thou drownest thy senses and
wilt leave thy wits, rather then the Wine behind thee.

2. Thou desire not the reputation of honesty, but of good fellowship* Thou
art a continual swearer, and that of bloody oaths. One of our Ruffians, or sons
of Belial: who when thou art displeased with others, wilt fly in thy Makers
face, and tear thy Saviors Name in pieces: even swearing away thy part in that
blood, which must say thee if ever thou be said. Yea, if thou art never so
little provoked, curses with thee, strive for number with oaths, and lewd
speeches with both. Thou know no other dialect, then roaring, swearing, and
banning: the language of Hell, which thou learnest before thou come thither:
and in case thou art reproved for it, thou will say, We take too much upon us:
as Corah and his accomplices twitted M^ses, Numb. 16.3. not knowing how strictly
God commands, and requires it, Levit. 19.17. Heb. 3.11. 2 Timothy 2.25. Ezekiel.
3.18, to 22. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Whence as the chief Priests answered Judas; What is
that to us? so thou will blaspheme God, tear Christ in pieces, and more then
betray; even shed his innocent blood, digging into his side with oaths: and
say: when told of it, What is that to us? When thou might as well say; What
is Christ to us? What is Heaven to us? or what is salvation to us? For to us
the one cannot be without the other. We shall never inherit part of his glory
in Heaven, if we do not take his glories part upon Earth. And with God it is
much about one; whether we be doers of evil, or no hinderers. For if we must
not see our neighbors Ox, nor his Sheep go astray; or fall into a pit: but we
must reduce him, and help him out of it, Deuteronomy. 22.1. We are much more bound, to
help our Neighbor himself, from dropping into the bottomless pit of Hell. And
what know we? but we may win our brother, and so save his soul? Matthew. 18.15.
Again, thou art an usual companion of Harlots, thy summum bonum is a Punk* and
thou will rather burn in hell, then marry: All thy felicity is in a T^vern, or
Brothel-house: where Harlots and Sycophants rifle thy estate, and then send
thee to rob. Thou art one of those that St. Peter speaks of: thou have eyes full
of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin. Thou gazest upon every fair face;
and lustest after every beautiful woman: Thy speech is lewd, and obscene: thy
discourse scurrility, lascivious thy behavior. Thou art a frequent slanderer
of thy Neighbor: an open Sabbath-breaker: Can boast of sin, and mischief,
and if need be defend it.

3. Like the Salamander, thou art never well, but in the fire of contention:
And art apt to quarrel, yea, kill a man for every foolish trifle; be it but for
the wall, or refusing to pledge thee; as if thy honor were of more worth then
thy soul. Yea, the Devil has so blinded, and bewitched thee: that thou think
every wrong, or disgraceful word quarrel just enough, to shed blood: that true
valor consists only in a brave revenge and being implacable: that patience is
but an argument of baseness; and therefore thou will rather suffer a sword in
thy bowels, then a lie in thy throat. I confess, thou will fight in no quarrel
but a bad one: and sooner in thy Mistresses defense, then in thy Makers.

4. Thou art of a reprobate judgment touching actions and persons: esteeming
good evil, and evil good, Prove. 17.15. and 29.27. Isai. 5.20. Thou do stifle
thy conscience, and would force thy self to believe if it were possible:
that in case men will not swear, drink drunk, conform to thy lewd customs, and
the like: they are over-precise; and to forbear evil, is quarrel sufficient for
thee. Thou speak evil of all, that will not run with thee to the same excess
of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. making them a byword to the people, Job 17.6. and a song
amongst thy fellow Drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. Thou art so desperately wicked, that
thou will mock thy admonisher, scoff at the means to be saved; and make thy
self merry with thy own damnation.

5. Instead of hating the evil thou do, and thy self for doing it: thon art
glad of it, rejoycest in it, boastest of it; yea, pleadest for it, and
applaudest thy self for thy wickedness: God is not in all thy thoughts, except
to blaspheme him, and to spend his days in the Devils service. And rather then
abridge thy pleasure, thou will hazard the displeasure of God. Thou do not
honor, but art stubborn, and disobedient to thy parents: a Rioter, etc. If
they stand in need of thee; thou will not nourish, or maintain them, as they
did thee in thy need. Thou take no care to provide for ^hine own family; but
drinkest the very blood of thy Wife, Children, and Servants: and art therein
worse then an Infidel. Thy greatest delight (...) in devilish cruelty: as to
see the poor innocent Creatures fight, pick ^ut one another eyes, and tear
each others flesh. Yea, to see two men fight, and kill one another: thou
accountest but a sport, or playing, 2 Samuel 2.14, ^0 17.

6. Thou will borrow, or run in debt with every one; but nev^^ ^arest (...), or
satisfy any one: except it be thy Hostess for (...) lest she should never more
trust thee. Thou wickedly spendest thy patri^mony in riot, and upon Dice,
Drabs, Drunkenness. Thou have never the wit to think upon sparing, until thou
come to the bottom of the Purse like an hourglass turned up, thou never
leavest running till all be out Should thou live never so long, thou will
never attein to the years o^ discretion: thou will never become thine own man,
until thou have no o^ther: nor ever see want, until thou feel it. Thou art
only witty t^ wrong, and undo thy self: and which is worse then all; if death
find thee as banquerout of spiritual; as of worldly goods: it will send thee
to an eternal Prison. Thy pride so swells thee, and makes thee look so big* as
if the river of thy blood, would not endure to be banked within the channel of
thy veins. Thou must have shift of attire, though thou cans^ not shift thy self
out of the Mercers books, until thou have sold the other Farm, or Lordship:
thou will pay the whole reckoning, that thou may^^^ be counted the best man: a
bare head in the streets, does thee more good* then a meals meat. Thou will
soon bring a noble to nine pence: an inheritance of five hundred pounds per
annum, to five hundred shillings* Thou art a vain glorious fool, and scornest
any employment, or to be of any calling: which is a pride, without either wit
or grace.

7. As good men by their godly admonition, and virtuous example; draw all they
can to Heaven: so thou by thy subtle allurements, and viclous example; drawest
all thou can to hell. For as if it were too little, to damn thy own soul: or
as if thine own sins would not press thee deep enough into hell: thou do all
that possibly thou can, to entice and enforce others to sin with thee: for
thou do envy, hate, scoff at, nickname rail on, and slander the godly; that
thou may flowt them out of their faith, damp, or quench the spirit where
thou perceivest it is kindled; discourage them in the way to heaven, to make
them ashamed of their holy conversation, and religious course: pull them back
to the World, tha^ so thou may have their company here in sin, and hereafter
in torment.

8. Thou fear a Iayl more then thou fear hell: and stand more upon thy
sides smarting, then upon thy soul. Thou regardest more the^ blasts of men's
breath, then the fire of Gods wrath: and tremblest more a^ the thought of a
Ser^eant, or Bailiff, then of Satan, and everlasting perdition. Thou take
encouragement from the Saints falls, and sins of God^ people, to do the like:
when they should serve thee as Sea-marks, to mak^ thee beware. Yea, thou do
most sordidly, take liberty, and encouragement to go on more securely in thy
evil courses; because God is merciful^ and forbears to execute judgment
speedily: and to defer thy repentance, be^cause the Thief upon the Cross, was
heard at the last hour. Thou will boldl^ do what God forbids; and yet
confidently hope to escape what he threatens* Thus I could go on, to tell thee
a thousand more of these thy wicke^ thoughts, words, and actions; had I not
already done it. But because I would not present my other Readers, with
Cole-worts twice sod: be persuaded to take view of them, in my other small
Tract, entitled, The odious, despicable, and dreadful condition of a Drunkard,
drawn to the Life: though indeed, even a tithe of these are sufficient
evidences, to prove thee one of those ignorant, unbelieving, ungrateful, and
notorious wicked wretches before spoken of: and to make thee confess that thou
art in a most damnable condition. But stand thou by, and let the Civil
Iusticiary, and formal Hypocrite hold up their hands, and hear their Charge.

And so much for the first Division allotted for such as are notoriously
wicked. For though I determined to have made of all but one Volume; yet now new
thoughts have taken place, and caused me to melt the whole again; and cast it
into several Divisions: whereby being sold single, every man may have his
proper portion apart. My reasons are these, and the like.

1 It is because many (be they never so short-breathed, in well doing) will
read a few leaves: that will not once look upon a large Volume. 2 Diverse will
be at the cost of a few pence, that would rather perish then lay out a pound. 3
Some, as they have but little money; so they have less time to spare, (as they
use the matter) for the good of their souls. 4 Admonitions, and instructions if
they exceed: are wont as nails, to drive out one another. 5 Should the Civil
Iusticiary read the profane man's Character; or the open-handed Prodigal, the
close-fisted, and griping Oppressors: this would rather encourage, and
strengthen them in their wickedness, then fright them from it. 6 Some have such
queasie stomachs, that if they see their potion big, as well as bitter; they
will choose to die, rather then take it.
And because I have found by ample experience, that many have a mind to read
good Books yea, a zeal (such as it is) to reclaim others from evil, so it may
cost them nothing: who otherwise have no stomach to either. (For when the like
was to be given about, swearing and cursing: even the better sort of men and
women could fetch them by a thousand a week from all parts of the Kingdom. But
since they have (for some reasons) been sold, for eight a penny: not one of an
hundred could find in their hearts to give that penny, were it to save eight of
their friends souls: which shows both how they love money; and what
hollow-hearted devotion they have. The Lord discover the same unto them.) There
is (over against the High Constables short of Shoreditch Church) of this first
part, or division to be given freely, together with the cure of cursing and
swearing: provided, they that desire them can read very well: for otherwise
they will so nickname words, and make it such nonsense, that one would rather
his lines should never be read, then so brokenly. And I could wish that men
would not fetch them for base ends, as one did formerly fetch many hundreds of
that against Swearing, and Cursing: only to save the buying of waste Paper
(though he had many fair pretenses of sending them to Graves-end, Canterbury,
Dover, and all other places, where Seamen resorted:) which being found out,
made the Donor withdraw his gift until now.

It was, I think, a most wicked act, for which he deserves to be stigmatized
and made an example to others. And let men take heed of abusing things
Dedicated to holy uses; for they are the sharpest kind of edged tools, and
therefore are not to be jefted with: Neither will God so be mocked.

The end of the first Division.
POSTCRIPT.
AUgusti^e that his ignorant hearers might the better understand him, would
sometimes speak false Latin: and I for my accidental Readers good, have (and
that purposely) done as absurdly in another kind: viz. used the same
expression in one Tract (when I have deemed it weighty and convincing) that may
be found in another: which to many will not be discernable, though obvious
enough to some: Who may if they please censure it and me for it: But presuming
that the more charitable, and ingenuous would not have it otherwise, it shall
not much trouble me.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. L. for James Crump, in Little Bartholomews
Well-yard.

A LEAF From the TREE of LIFE, Wherewith to heal the NATION of all Strife and
Controversy and to settle therein PEACE and UNITY.
By R. Young a Roxwell Be, whose sting is as Sovereign as its Honey is sweet,
and whose Enemies have no less cause to love him then his Friends.
Sold by James Crump in Little Bartholmews, Well-Yard, and Henry Crisps in
Popes Head-Alley, 1661.

CHAP. I.
Reverend Sir,
SOme time since I heard you upon Ier. 51.9. We would have healed Babylon, but
she would not be healed, etc. What change it has wrought in me, I forbear to
mention: But certainly Satan and the World fear they have lost, the one a
subject or prisoner, the other a limb or member ever since: for whereas they
never molested me formerly ^ now as if I were rescued out of Satan's clutches,
that Lion foams and roars, and bestirs himself to recover his loss.

And as for my old acquaintance, they so envy to see themselves casheered, and
so mortally hate me, for that I will no longer continue miserable, nor run with
them (as I have done) to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.44 that they make
me weary of my life, as the daughters of Heth d^d Rebeckah, Genesis 27.46.

Yea I am so scoft at and scorned, both by Parents, Friends, and Enemies, that
it not only hinders me from doing the good I would, or appearing the same I am;
but it almost beats me off from being religions back to the world.

And certainly he must be more spirit then flesh, that can contentedly make
himself contemptible to follow Christ; be pointed at for si^gularity, endure so
many base and vile nicknames; have his Religion judged hypocrisy, his godly
simplicity, silliness; his zeal, madness; his contempt of the world, ignorance;
his godly sorrow, dumpishness; and the like malicious and mischievous
constructions made of whatsoever he speaks or does. For my part I could better
abide a stake (God assisting me) then the mocks, (...) and scorns, which every
where I meet withal. It is death to me to be (...) ^s it fared with Zed^kiah,
Jer. 38 19. Nor is there above Hell, a (...) ^ishment in my j^dgement, then to
become a San^^^, a subject of (...) ^ampson (I doubt no^) found (...) ^tion of
his goods, nor his banishment, nor the wounds he received in his body, were so
grievous to him, as one scornful word from his enemy Ctesiphon.

Yea doubtless our Saviors car was more painfully pierced, then either his
brows, or hands, or feet. It could not but go deep into his soul, to hear those
bitter and g^rding reproaches from them whom he came to save: A generous nature
is more wounded with the tongue then with the hand.

CHAP. II.
Minister. I Grant there is no such rub in the way to Heaven as this; Satan
has not such a tried shaft in all his quiver: he gets more now by such
discouragements, and the reproaches that are cast upon Religion, then he did
formerly by fire and faggot; for then the blood of the Martyrs, was found to be
the seed of the Church: Others ( Phaenix like) springing out of their ashes:
Whereas now, multitudes of souls are scoft out of their Religion by wicked men;
many being apt with Peter to deny their Religion, when they come in company
with Christ's enemies; and with David to dissemble their faith when they are
amongst Philistines, lest they should be mocked, have so many frowns, and
frumps, and censures, and scoffs; be branded with that odious and stigmatical
name of an hypocrite, etc. Yea S. Austin confesses, that he often belied
himself with sins which he never committed, lest he should be unacceptable to
his sinful companions; which makes our Savior pronounce that man blessed that
is not offended in him, Matthew. 11.6.

But for all that, a wise man will not be scoft out of his Money, nor a just
man flowted out of his Faith. The taunts of an Ishmael shall never make an
Isaac out of love with his inheritance. Yea for a man to be scoft out of his
goodness by those which are lewd, is all one, as if a man that sees should
blindfold himself, or put out his eyes, because some blind wretches rev^le and
scoff at him for seeing. Or as if one that is found of limbs, should limp or
maim himself to please the criple, and avoid his taunts; And know this, That if
the barking of these currs, shall hinder us from walking on our way to Heaven,
it is a sign we are most impotent cowards: Yea if our love be so cold to
Christ, that we are ashamed for his sake, to bear a few scoffs and reproaches
from the world, it is evident we are but counterfeits, such as Christ will be
ashamed of before his Father and his holy Angels at the latter day, Mark. 8 38.
For, for the comfort of all that are single and honest-hearted, notwithstanding
all the scoffs and scorns of Atheists and careless worldlings, all their
persuasions and persecutions, they shall both lose their labors, and
themselves too in the end. Well may they intend, and also do their utmost to
flout us out of our Faith, that so they may slay us with death eternal, and
speed thereafter; (As God that regards not so much what is performed, as what
was intended, and measures what we do by what we meant to do; as in the case of
Abraham's offering up his son, and those Jews who only thought they had killed
Paul, Acts 14*19.) but they shall be no more able to hinder the salvation of
any one (...) God has chosen to his Kingdom of grace and glory, then Saul
with his (...) could hinder David from attaining the promised Kingdom of
Israel, (...) Rev. 13.8. The winds may well toss the ship wherein Christ
(...) overtur^ it. If Christ have but once possessed the affections, there is no
dispossessing him again. The League that Heaven has made, Hell wants power to
break. Who can separate the conjunctions of the Deity? Whom God did
predestinate, says Paul, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8.30. They shall
sooner blow up hell with trains of powder, then break the chain of this
dependent truth. No power of men or devils is able to withstand the will of
God, it shall stand firmer then the firmament.

A fire in the heart overcomes all other fires without: as we see in the
Martyrs, which when the sweet doctrine of Christ had once got into their
hearts, it could not be got out again by all the torments that wit and cruelty
could devise.

CHAP. III.
Convert. BUt how should I a novice, a punie, a white-liver, shake off this
slavish yoke of bondage and fear in which Satan for the present holds me?

Minister. By well observing what the Scriptures in this case hold forth for
the encouragement of all that thus suffer. I will commend to your serious
consideration only six things, and I pray mind them well; for Virgil most
excellently and profundly, couples the knowledge of cause, and the conquest of
all fears together.

First observe, that grievous temptations and persecutions, do always accompany
the remission of sins. That all men, as Austin speaks, are necessitated to
miseries, who bend their course toward the Kingdom of Heaven: neither can Gods
love be enjoyed without Satan's disturbance. Yea the world and the devil
therefore hate us, because God has chosen us. If a convert comes home, the
Angels welcome him with songs, the devils follow him with uprore and fury, his
old acquaintance with scorns and obloquie, as you sufficiently find. Godly men
are thorns in wicked men's eyes, as Job was in the devils, because they are
good, or for that they are dearly beloved of God. If a man's person and ways
please God, the world will be displeased with both: whence we are so often
foretold and forewarned of it, that we may be the better forearmed and prepared
to entertain it: All that will love godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Ye shall be hated of all men and nations for my Names
sake, Matthew. 10.22. and 24.9. Behold I send you forth, as sheep in the midst of
wolves, Matthew. 10.16. and many the like. Whence also those many and strong
encouragements in the word, which may serv^ (...) so many flaggons of wine, to
comfort and strengthen us against whatsoever we meet withal in the world:
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for (...)teousnesse sake for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are (...) when men shall revile
you and persecute you, and say all manner of evil a (...) you falsely for my
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your (...) in Heaven, for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you, (...) Rejoice, inasmuch as
ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when (...) shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding joy. For if ye (...)ed for the Name of Christ,
happy are ye. For the spirit of glory and (...) upon you, which on their part
is evil spoken of, but on your part is (...) 12, 13, 14. Lo here is reward
enough, for all that men or devils (...)against us; which has made thousands
even ambitious to embrace the flames. Your cruelty is our glory, said the
Martyrs in Tertullians time to their persecutors, for the harder we are put to
it, the greater shall our reward be in Heaven. It is to my loss (said Gordius
the Martyr) if you bate me any thing of my sufferings: See more Phil.. 1.28,
29. Rev. 2.13.

And so much to show, that he refuses to be an Abel, whom the malice of Cain
does not exercise, as Gregory speaks: For it is an everlasting rule of the
Apostle, He that is born after the flesh, will persecute him that is born after
the Spirit (Gal. 4.29.) not because he is evil, but because he is so much
better then himself, 1 John 3.12. Because his life is not like other men's, his
ways are of another fashion, Wisd. 2.15.

CHAP. IV.
SEcondly consider, That as we are every where in the word forewarned of it, so
it is not our case alone; for search the whole Bible over, and you shall not
find one holy man mentioned, without mention of something he suffered from
ungodly men; as it were easy to instance, how Abel, Lot, Noah, righteous men;
Abraham the father of the faithful; Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Patriarchs and
Fathers of the Church; meek Moses, upright Samuel, Job that nonesuch, all the
Lords Priests, Prophets, Apostles, yea the harmless Babes, and our Savior
Christ himself did severally suffer from wicked and ungodly men: Yea never man
came to Heaven, but first he past through this Purgatory. God had one Son
without sin, but never any one without suffering. Which makes our Savior say,
Woe be to you when all men speak well of you, that is, when evil men speak well
of you; for so did the Jews of the false Prophets, Luke 6 26. Wherefore marvel
not though the world hate you, as St. John speaks, 1 Job. 3.13. Neither count
it strange, as St. Peter has it, concerning the fiery trial, which is amongst
you to try you, as though some strange thing were come unto you, 1 Pet. 4.12
For Christ and his Cross are inseparable, Luke 14.27. Whence that distinction
of Luther, that a Christian is a Crosse-bearer. He that will be my discipl^,
let him take up his cross daily and follow me, Luke 9.23. and 14.26, 27.

CHAP. V.
THirdly, No hope it should be otherwise, since God from the beginning of the
Creation, has proclaimed a War, enmity and strife, between the wicked and the
godly: Did you never read that Scripture, Genesis 3.15. where God himself says to
the Serpent, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed; he, or it, shall bruise thine head, and thou shall bruise his
heel. Where by the serpentts seed are meant the whole generation of wicked men;
and by the woman's seed, Christ and all his members, as all Interpreters
conclude, and other Scriptures make clear, where wicked men are called
serpents, a generation of vipers, and children of the Devil, Matthew. 23.33. John
8.44. 1 John 3.10. And as this war was proclaimed in Paradise, even in the
beginning of time, ( original sin, being the original of this discord) so it
shall continue to the end of all time: When time, says One, began, this malice
first began, nor will it end but with the latest man. It (...) everlasting Act
of Parliament, like a Statute in Magna Charta. Which (...) thing I would
commend to your serious consideration: And that you may be the better confirmed
therein, see how according to the Lords prediction or proclamation, there has
been a perpetual war, enmity and strife in all ages past, is now and ever shall
be, between Satan and Christ, and their Regiments the wicked and the godly.

For proof whereof I could produce testimonies and examples innumerable, there
being scarce a page in the Bible, which does not express or imply somewhat
touching this enmity. But that I may be brief, and because examples give a
quicker impression then arguments, I will only give you an instance in every
Age. As

First, to begin with the first Age, viz. the old World before the flood. We
read of this mortal enmity and strife between Cain and Abel, 1 John 3.12.
Secondly, after the Flood, before the Law between Esau and Jacob, first in the
womb, the more plainly to shadow out this enmity, Genesis 25.22, 23. and after
they were born, Genesis 27.41. Thirdly, After the Law, before Christ, between Doeg
and the 85. Priests which he slew with the edge of the sword, 1 Samuel 22.18, 19.
Fourthly, Since the Gospel, in the time of Christ, and his Apostles; this
enmity so manifested it self not only in the Gentiles, but in the Jews, Gods
own people, who first raised those persecutions against Christ and his members;
that having beheaded John Baptist his harbinger, and crucified himself the Lord
of life: We read that of all the twelve, none died a natural death save only S.
John, and he also was banished by Domitian to Patmos, and at another time
thrust into a Tun of seething oil at Rome, as Tertullian and S. Hierome do
report: See Acts 7.51, to 60. and 12. 1. to 5. Romans 8.36. John 21.18, 19.
Fifthly, After the Apostles, if we consider the residue of the ten Persecutions
raised by the Romans against the Christians, which was for three hundred years
till the coming of godly Constantine, we find that under Dioclesian, seventeen
thousand Christians, were slain in one month, amongst whom was Serena the
Empress also. Yea, under him and nine other Empere^s, there was such an
innumerable company of innocent Christians put to death and tormonted, that S.
Hierom in his Epistle to Chromatius and Heliodorus says, There is no one day
in the year, unto the number of five thousand Martyrs might not be ascribed,
except only the first day of January. Yea there was two thousand suffered in
the same place and at the same time with Nicanor, Acts and Monuments, page 32.
who were put to the most exquisite deaths and torments, that ever the wit or
malice of men or devils could invent to inflict upon them, and all for
professing the faith of Christ, and being holy: which makes S. Paul cry out, I
think that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed to death!
1 Cor. 4.9.

CHAP. VI.
SIxthly, From the Primitive times and infancy of the Church hithe^to (...)
Turk and the Pope have acted their parts in shedding the blood of (...) Saints,
as well as the Jews and Roman Emperors; touching which I will ofer you to the
Book of Acts and Monuments; and Revel. 17. The Babylon was drunk with the blood
of the Saints, and with the blood of the (...) Jesus, ver. 6. Which in part was
fulfilled in England under the reign of (...) Mary; and in France, where before
many late bloody (...) more then two hundred thousand who suffered Martyrdom
about Transubstantiation: See Ecclesiastical History, lib. 6. cap. 4, 5, 16. But

Seventh^y, To come to these present times wherein we live: Is it possible for
a man to live a conscionable and unreproveable life? abstain from drunkenness,
swearing, profaning the Lords day, separate himself from evil company, be
zealous for the glory of God, admonish others that do amiss etc. without being
traduced, calumniated, hated, slandered and persecuted for the same? no it is
not possible: for if our righteousness do but exceed the righteousness of a
swearer, or a drunkard, we are sure to be persecuted for our righteousness, as
Abel was persecuted of Cain, because his Sacrifice was better then his. If a
man walk according to the rule of Gods Word, he is too precise; if he will be
more then almost a Christian, he is curious, fantastical, factious, and shall
be mocked with the Spirit, as if the Spirit of God were a Spirit of dishonor
and shame. Yea, in these times not to be an Atheist, or Papist, is to be a
Fanatic: as how common a thing is it to wound all holiness under the name of
Fanatic, a name so full of the Serpents enmity, as the egg of a Cockatrice is
full of poison? What should I say? the World is grown so much knave, that it is
now a vice to be honest. O the deplorable condition of these times! Even the
Devil himself durst not have been so impudent, as to have scoft at holiness in
those ancient and purer times: but now I could even sink down with shame, to
see Christianity every where so discountenanced: Our very names come into few
mouths, out of which they return but with reproaches. Amongst the rest of our
sins, O God, be merciciful to the contempt of thy Servants.

Eighthly, For the time to come: It is like not only to continue, but the last
remnants of time are sure to have the most of it; because as in them love shall
wax cold, Matthew. 24.12. so as love grows cold, contention grows hot.

More expressly the Holy Ghost foretells, that in the last days the times shall
be per^lous, and that toward the end of the world, there shall be scoffers,
false accusers, cursed speakers, fierce, despisers of them that are good; and
being steshly, not having the spirit* they shall speak evil of the things
which they understand not: and that many shall follow their damnable ways,
whereby the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And that as Iannes and
Iambres withstood Moses, so these also shall resist the truth, being men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, being before of old ordained to
condemnation, 2 Timothy 3.1. to 13. 2 Pet. 2. 2 and 3.3. Jude 4 10.16, 18, 19. And
so much of the third particular.

CHAP. VII.
FOurthly, It would be considered, that what you suffer is far short of what
others have suffered before you; for whereas you suffer a little
tongue-persecution your betters and such as the world was not worthy of, have
suffered (...) and scourgings, bonds, and imprisonments; were stoned, sawn
(...) the sword: endured the violence of fire; were rackt, (...) deserts and
mountains, in dens and caves of the earth, in she^p(...) (...), destitute,
afflicted, and tormented: Not ^^^^epting delive(...) might obtain a better
(...) stoned, some crucified, some beheaded, some thrust through with spears,
some burnt with fire, some broiled, some brained; with many the like, and worse
kinds of death: for we read of no less then twenty nine several deaths they
were put unto. But to clear your sight, I Will give you some particular instances
of the several ways that the best of Gods people have suffered before you.

First, You shall find, that it has been the manner of wicked men, out of
this enmity, to envy the virtuous and good estate of the godly: as Cain envied
Ab^l, Genesis 4.5. Secondly, To contemn their supposed mean estate, as Sanballat,
Tobiah, and Gershom, with the rest of that crew contemned Nehemiah and the
Jews, Nehem. 4.1, 2, 3. Thirdly, To rejoice at their supposed evil estate, as
the Princes of the Philistines did at Sampsons blindness and bondage, Judge.
16.25. Fourthly, To hate them, as all carnal men hate the members of Christ,
Matthew. 10.22. Fifthly, To murmr against them, as the Israelites murmured
against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 11.1 and 14* 2, 3. Sixthly, To censure their
actions, and misconster their intentions, as Eliab did David's zeal for Gods
glory, in fighting with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.28. and those wicked ones, his
fasting and mourning, Psalm. 35.13, to 17. Seventhly, By carrying tales of them
unto others, as Doeg did to Saul of David and Ahimeleck, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10. and
the Ziphims, 1 Samuel 23.19, 20. and 26* 1. Eighthly, To persuade and give
divelish counsel to others like themselves to persecute them; as the Princes
and Rulers did to Zedekiah the King against Jeremiah, Jer. 38.4. Ninthly, To
scoff at them, as Ishmael scoft at Isaac, Genesis 21.9. Tenthly, To nickname
them, as the Jews did Paul, Acts 24.14. and all the Disciples, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10.
Eleventhly, To revile and rail on them, as the Jews did upon Paul and Barnabas,
Acts 13.45. Twelfthly, To raise slanders of them, as those wicked men slandered
Naboth, confirming the same with an Oath, 1 Kings 21. Thirteenthly, To curse
them, as Goliath cursed David, 1 Samuel 17.43. and also Shemei, 2 Samuel 16.7, to
15. Fourteenthly, To threaten them, as all the men of Sodom did Lot, Genesis 19.9.
Fifteenthly, By subtilty to undermine them in talk, that they might betray
them; as the false Prophets and other enemies of the truth undermined Jeremiah,
seeking every way to destroy him, Ier. 18. 18 etc. Sixteenthly, By using
scornful and disdainful gestures to despite them; as Goliath against David, 1 Samuel 17.42. and also those wicked ones, Psalm. 22.7.13. and 35.16. and 109.25.
Seventeenthly, To withstand and contrary the doctrine which they are commanded
by God to deliver. As Elymas the Socerer withstood Paul and Barnabas in their
preaching, Acts 13. 8. Eighteenthly, To combine themselves together and lay
divellish plot; to destroy them; as Demetrius with the rest of the Craftsmen
conspired the death of Paul's companions, Acts 19. and likewise more then forty
of the Jews which bound themselves by a curse, not to eat nor drink till they
had killed (...) in which conspiracy the chief Priests were likewise
assistants, Acts 23.12, 14. Nineteenthly, To imprison them, as the malicious
Priests did (...) Jer. 36.5. Twentieth, To strike them as Zedekiah the false
Prophet (...) Micaiah 1 Kings 22 24. Twenty one, To hurt and maim them (...) of
Antiochia and Iconium did Paul, Acts 14.19. Twenty two and (...) slay them, as
Iezabel did all the Prophets of the Lord (...) 1 Kings 18.4.

CHAP. VIII.
Now to speak nothing in this place of the diversity of deaths and tortures,
that millions of Martyrs have suffered for professing of Christ's Name and
keeping of a good Conscience, though their sufferings were nothing, either to
what their sins h^d deserved, or to what their Savior had done and suffered
for them; for he endu^ed many a little death all his life for our sakes, and at
length that painful, shameful and cursed death of the Cross; yea he suffered
every one of these two and twenty ways beforementioned, and that from his own
countrymen and kinsfolks, yea of the Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who
were teachers and expounders of the Law, and which sat in Moses chair. For he
was Envied, Matthew. 26.15. Contemned, Mat. 12.24. and 13.55. Rejoiced at in his
misery and distress, Matthew. 27.29. Hated, Joh. 77. Murmured against, Luke
15.2. Had his actions and intentions mis-construed, Matthew. 11.19. Had tales
carried of him, Matthew. 12.14. and divelish counsel given against him, Matthew.
27.20. was scoffed at, Matthew. 27.42. Nicknamed, Matthew. 13.55. Railed on, Luke
23.39. Slandered, Matthew. 28.13. Cursed, Gal. 3.13. Threatened, John 11.53.
Undermined in talk that they might accuse him, Matthew. 22.15. They used
disdainful gestures before him, Matthew. 27.29, 39. Withstood him in his
preaching, and contraried his doctrine, Luke 5.21. Matthew. 9.34. Combined
together and laid divelish plots to destroy him. Mat. 12.14. Took him prisoner,
Matthew. 26.57. Smote him, Luke 22.64. Hurt and wounded him, Matthew. 27.29. John
19.34. And lastly, they put him to death, Mat. 27. 35. And why all this? not
for any evil they found in him, for their own words are, He has done all
things well, Mark 7 37. He has done, such was his power: all things, such was
his wisdom: well, such was his goodness: and yet crucified, and every way
abused he must be. But it was for his zeal, purity and holiness, and because
his life and practice was clean contrary to theirs; his doctrine too powerful
and pure for such carnal hearts to embrace or endure. Now cast up thy Receipts,
and compare them with thy deservings; look upon thy deliverance from the fire
of hell: Yea, look but upon thy sufferings single, and thou shall find them
nothing, to what thy fellow Saints, and Christ thy Elder brother has suffered
before thee. At a Lions Den, or a fiery furnace, not to turn tail, were
something worthy a Christian. Yea compare thine own estate with thine enemies,
and thou shall see yet greater cause to be not only patient, but thankful. For
if these scoffs and flouts of men like thy self are so grievous to thee, how
will thine and Gods enemies endure those mocks and flouts of the devils in
hell? how will they endure that devouring fire, that everlasting ^urning, Isa.
33.14. Psalm. 68.21. And the way not to repine at those above us, is to look at
those below us. But leaving the application until the conclusion;

CHAP. IX.
FIfthly, Consider but seriously, who they are, that hate, sc^ff and jeer you,
and that have persecuted the Saints before you, and mocked at holiness; and
(...) exceedingly to support you against whatever you shall hear or (...). As
first, What is their Character in Scripture? are they not (...) A company of
hypocrites, Psalm. 35. Hypocritical mockers, v. 16. (...) Drunkards, Psalm. 69. I
am a song of the Drunkards, verse. 12. a sort of vicious persons, following
their lusts, 2 Pet. 3.3. There shall come mockers, walking after their own
lusts. A company of abject persons, Psalm. 35 15. like those enemies, Acts 17.
Lewd fellows of the baser sort, ver. 5. A ^ou of profane, godless, irreligious
Atheists and ignorant fools, that do no more know the power, then Turks and
Heathens know the truth of godliness, Psalm. 14 1. to 6. And it is a shrewd
suspicion, that he who is a mocker is an Atheist. It well becomes him to mock
at Religion, that denies a God: And it is evident enough that he denies a God,
that mocks at godliness. But secondly, Experience sufficiently acquaints us
what they are, and the examples before rehearsed; for such as Cain, and the
Sodomites, and Ishmael, and Esa^. and Haman, and Eliab, and Goliath, and Michal,
and Doeg, and Shemei, an^ Rabshekeh, and Ahab, and Iezabel, and Tobiah, and
Sanballat, and Pashur, and Zedekiah, and Herod, and Judas, and S. Paul before
his conversion, and Ananias the High Priest, and Demetrius the silver-smith,
and Alexander the Copper-smith, and Elimas the Sorcerer: such as these I say
are the men, wh^ amongst us do the like things that they did. And will any wise
man stumb at Religion for such men's scoffs and reproaches? what better can be
expected from them? What said the Orator to Salust? It cannot be, but he tha^
lives thy life should speak thy language; yea, a man would choose his Religion
by such men's enmity, and it is a great honor to Religion that it has such
adversaries. For as the Primitive Christians used to say when No^ persecuted
them; they that know him must needs think it some great go^ which Nero so hated
and condemned; so every wise man will love Religi^ the better, and take it for
a great honor to the Saints, that hypocrites, drunkards, vicious followers of
their lusts, base and l^wd fellows, godless Atheists and blind Sensualists are
her scoffing adversaries: And scarce do I know a better argument to persuade to
love and embrace it, then that such men hate (...) deride it; neither can it be
the true Religion, which is not every where (...) spoken against, Act. 28.22.
But

CHAP. X.
SIxthly and lastly, Observe but the reasons why they do it; and this will
notably confirm and strengthen you against their scoffs and scorns.

Convert. Have they any reason for their so doing?

Minist. Not properly: For as the Prophet very often complains, they (...) mine
enemies without a cause, and they hate me without a cause, etc. Psalm. 7. and
69.4. though they pretended many causes. So they have no (...) nor reason to
hate, censure ard slander us as they do; for no evil deed (...) a good reason:
yet they do it not without many by reasons and felt and (...)

First, The main and most material cause why wicked men so mortally (...) the
godly, and which breeds so many quar^el, is the contrariety of the (...)tures
being as contrary one to the other as are God and the devil, the (...)ing the
children of God, and partaking of the divine nature, a^ being one (...) Father
and the Son, 2 Cor. 6.18. Gal. 3.26. Joh. 1.12 and 17.14, (...) 4. being like
God in holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15. Brethren of, and heirs, annexed Christ, Romans
8.17.29. Members of his body. 1 Cor. 12.27. Bone of his bone, and (...) of his
flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. having his spirit dwelling in them. Romans 8.9-16 (...) Temples
of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. Jam. 1.18. Joh. (...)

And the other being the seed of the serpent and children of the devil; and so
partake of his nature, as is plain by 1 John 3.8, 10, 12, 14. and 6.70. and 8,
44. Matthew. 13.38, 39. 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Timothy 2.26. Genesis 3.15. and 5.3. Ephesians. 2.2,
etc. Which being so, how is it possible they should ever agree; although God
had not proclaimed an enmity between them? For there can be no amity where
there is no sympathy; no reconciling of the wolf and the lamb, the winds and
the sea; no neighborhood, no alliance, no conjunction, is able to make the
cursed seed of the serpent, and the blessed seed of the woman ever agree. For
fire and water, light and darkness, heaven and hell are not more contrary.

One blood, one belly, one ^ouse, one education, could never make Cain and Abel
accord, Jacob and Esau, Isaac and Ishmael at one. Yea though they be man and
wife, parent and child, yet if they be not like, they will not like. 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15. As how many a wife is so much the more hated, because a zealous wife?
how many a child less beloved, because a religious child? how many a servant
less respected, because a godly servant? And no marvel, for though they dwell
in the same house, yet they belong to two several Kingdoms: and albeit they
both remain upon earth, yet they are governed by two several Laws, the ones
Burguship being in heaven, Phil. 3.20 and the other being a Denizen belonging
to hell; as Irish men are dwellers in Ireland, but denizens of England, and
governed by the Statutes of this Kingdom.

And indeed what is the corporal sympathy, to the spiritual antipathy? Can
there be such a parity between the parent and the child, the husband and the
wife, as there is a disparity between God and Satan? no certainly.

A wicked man can agree with all that are wicked, be they Papists, or Turks or
Atheists; Profane or Civil man: for all these agree with him in blindness and
darkness, and are all seed of the same Serpent: but with sincere Christians and
practisers of piety he can never agree, the religious shall be sure of
opposition, because their light is contrary to his darkness, grace in the one
is a secret disgrace to the other.

Yea let wicked men be at never so much odds one with another, yet they will
concur and join against the godly, Acts 6.9. The Sadduces, Pharisees and
Herodians, were Sectaries of diverse and adverse Factions, all differing (...)
from another; yet all join together against our Savior, Matthew. 22. ^^erod
neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews Herod, yet both are agreed to ^ex the
Church. Yea Herod and Pilate, two enemies will agree so it be against christ:
they will fall in one with another, to fall out with God.

CHAP. XI.
NOr is this of theirs an ordinary hatred, but the most bitter, exorbitant,
unlimited and implacable of all others. No such concord, no such dis(...) says
one of the Learned, as that which proceeds from Religion. He that upright in
his ways, says Solomon, is an abomination to the wicked, Prove. ^7. My ^^me,
says, Luther, is more odious to them, then any thief or (...) Christ was more
detestable to the Jews, then Barabas. And it (...) enough for the Pope was so
busy and hot against Luther, that he (...) all Christandom against the Turk:
which declared that he would easier digest Mahometisme then Lutheranisme. The
case of two many in our days, in opposing the Reformation. Behold, says
David, mine enemies, for they are many; and they hate me with a cruel hatred,
Psalm. 25.19. Yea; so cruel, that it makes their teeth gnash, and their hearts
burst again, as it fared with those that stoned Stephen, Acts 7.54. This made
the truths adversar^es, give St. Paul stripes above measure, 2 Cor. 11.23. And
the Heathen Emperors to devise such cruel tortures for all those that but
professed themselves Christians. This made Ahab so hate Eliah, that there was not
one Kingdom or Nation where he had not sent to take away his life, 1 King.
18.10. And this made the Papists dig many of our choice Ministers out of their
graves, that they might the better curse them, with Bell, Book and Candle. Yea,
ask from East to West, from one Pole to the other, search all records under
Heaven, if ever there was the like of the intended Powder Plot.

Neither does this hatred extend it self to this or that person alone, but to
the whole generation of the godly; as is well expressed, Psalm. 83. Come let us
cut them off from being a Nation, and let the Name of Israel be no more in
remembrance, ver. 4.12. And the like we see in Haman, whose hatred to Mordecai
was so deadly, that he thought it too little to lay hands on him only, except
he destroyed all the Jews his people, that were throughout the whole Kingdom
of Ahashuerosh, Esth. 3.5, 6. For the effecting whereof he offered ten thousand
talents of silver into the Kings treasury, ver. 9.13. And of his mind was
Herodias, who preferred the head of John Baptist before the half of Herod's
Kingdom. And such another was cruel Arundale Archbishop of Canterbury, who
swore he would not leave a slip of professors in this Land.

And the world is no changling, for this age has but two many such Hamans and
Arundales, who so hate the children of God, that they wish as Caligula once did
of the Romans, that they had all but one neck, that so they might cut it off at
a blow, were it in their power. As why are not our Sanctuaries turned into
Shambles? and our Beds made to swim with our Bloods? but that the God of Israel
has crossed the confederacy of Balack, and their wickedness does not prosper.
For their studies are the plots of our ruin; and the best they intend, is the
destruction and overthrow of Religion, or the religious, or both, Mat. 24.9.
John 16.2. Yea, their enmity and hatred is so virulent and bitter, that were
their power answerable to their wills and malice, the brother would betray the
brother to death, the father the son, and the children would rise up against
their parents, and cause them to die; the kinsman against the kinsman, and the
friend against the friend; only for profe^^^^ Christ's Name and being religious,
as himself affirms, Matthew. 10.34, 35, 36. (...) 21.16, 17. Neither is it
strange, for this was one of the ends of Christ's (...) into the world, as
appears Matthew. 10.34, 35. where himself says, Think (...) I am come to send
peace but the sword: meaning between the seed of the ^^^^pent, and the seed of
the woman: for I am come to set a man at variance (...) his father, the
daughter in law against the mother in law, and (...) shall be they of his own
housheld, Luke 12.51, 52, 53.

Neither want we Presidents of this: For by whom was upright (...)cuted and
slain, but by his own brother Cain? who scoft at righteou(...) hara put to
death, for embracing the Christian faith, but by her own Father Dioscorus? who
made Serena the Empress a Martyr, for her faith in Christ, but her own husband
Dioclesian? who helped to burn Bradford but Bourn, whose life he had formerly
saved? And lastly, By whom was our Savior Christ betrayed, but by his own
Disciple Judas?

CHAP. XI.
Convert. WHerein consists their unlikeness and contrariety?

Minister. There be more differences between the children of God and the
children of the Devil, then there are between men and beasts: But principally
they differ in their judgments, affections and actions. How they differ in
their judgments and affections, I have shown upon another occasion. How in
their actions and practice (which occasions the greatest strife and discord) I
will acquaint you as briefly as I can.

There is nothing more common then for all sorts and kinds of men to hate,
scorn, persecute, reproach, revile, accuse, slander and condemn the religious,
because their own works are evil and wicked, and the others good, holy and
righteous. As wherefore slew Cain his brother, says S. John, but because his
own works were evil, and his brothers good, 1 John 3.12. Why was Joseph accused
of his Mistress for an adulterer, and thereupon committed to prison, but
because he would not be an adulterer like her, Genesis 39? yea it was his party
colored coat, composed of all kinds of graces and blessings, that formerly
procured his brethrens hate. Wherefore was holy David, as himself complains
almost in every Psalm, had in derision, hated, slandered, reviled, contemned,
and made a proverb and song of the drunkards, and other wicked men which sat
in the gate: but because he followed the things that were good and pleasing
unto God, and in him put his trust, Psalm. 11.2. and 22.6, 7, 8. and 37.14. and
69.10, 11, 12. And lastly (for I might be endless in the prosecution of this,)
Why were all the just in Solomon's time, had in abomination, and mocked of the
wicked? but because they were upright in their way, and holy in their
conversation, Pro. 29.27. Or those numberless Martyrs, whose souls S. John saw
under the Altar, Rev. 6.9. killed? but for the Word of God, and for the
testimony which they maintained? And the Mister himself? not for any evil as
themselves are forced to confess, Mar. ^.37. Which examples sufficiently prove,
that that great Dragon the Devil, and these his Subjects, are wroth with none
but the woman and the remnant of her (...), which keep the Commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus, (...) 12.17. All was quiet at Ephesus
before S. Paul came thither; but then (...) arose no small strife about that
way, Acts 19.23 etc. A wolf flies not upon (...) sheep: we can with delight
look upon the picture of a Toad: It is your (...) Christian that is most
spighted and persecuted. As how many with (...) may complain with Jeremy, that
because they live a godly life themselves, (...)all upon others to do the same,
they are cursed of every one, and counted con^^^^, Jer. 15.10. It faring with
many as it did with Caius Selius, of whom (...) were wont to say, that he was a
good man, but he was a Christian. (...) but a spark of fervent devotion break
out in a fam^ly, all the rest. (...) clamours; as when bells ring disorderly,
every one is ready with his (...) disgraced he must be for a Puritan,
Roundhead, or Phanatick, but only by Laodiceans. Indifferency strives to dash
zeal cut of countenance. And the reason is, wheresoever Christ comes, there
will be opposition. When Christ was born, all Jerusalem was troubled, and Herod
cut the throats of all the children in Bethlem: so when Christ is born in any
man, the soul is in an uprore, and Satan with his instruments are ready to kill
in him every good motion, though it be never so little a babe. You cannot anger
a wicked man worse, then to do well: yea, he hates you more bitterly for this,
and the credit you gain thereby, then if you had cheated him of his patrimony
with your own discredit. Whereas, if a man will but bear them company in their
sins, drink, swear, temporize, contemn holiness, mis-spend his time, haunt
Taverns, play the good fellow, and do as the rest do; he shall have the
approbation and good word of the greatest number. Yea if none would be precise
in their actions, nor reprove others for their evil courses; if they would but
be profane and wicked, and make no bones of sin ^ their malice would cease,
and we should not have a Roundhead or a Phanatick in all the world.

Neither is Christ a sign to be spoken against of many in Babylon or Assyria,
but of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. where Religion is professed publicly: Yea when
sincerity is wanting, the nearer the line with any opposition, the greater
eclipse. The Gadarens but besought Christ to depart; his own countrymen drove
him out, and cast him down headlong, Luke 4.29. And who was his greatest enemy,
but his greatest friend, even one of his household Chaplains? and who but
Ieremies familiars watched for his halting.

Yea commonly, virtue fares hardest from such as should and seem to uphold her;
for the chief Persecutors of Christ and his followers, are not professed
Atheists, or Turks, or Jews, but such as hold some great place in the Church.
And intruders upon other men's right, can endure any man how bad soever rather
to live by them, then the servants of him whom they intrude upon; as you may
see, Matthew. 21.33, to 39. where those farmers of the vineyard did not kill the
thieves, robbers and spoilers of the vineyard; but the servants, yea and the
son too; and the end of all was, that they might take the inheritance. And
indeed it has been the complaint almost of all that have written that they
have suffered most from such as professed the same Faith and Religion with them.

And so much touching the main difference between the seed of the serpent, and
the seed of the woman.

CHAP. XIII.
I Might go on, and show you that as they hate and persecute the (...) because
they do well, so likewise because they fare well, and are (...) before them. As
why was Cain wroth with his brother Abel, and after (...) him, as affirms the
holy Ghost, but because the Lord had respect unto * and to his offering, but
unto Cain and his offering he had no respect, (...) Why did Esau hate Jacob,
and purpose to kill him, but because of the (...) wherewith his father blessed
him? Genesis 23.41. Isaac's blessing (...) hate. Again, wherefore did the
Philist^nes and (...) stop up his wells, and banish him from them, but because
the Lord so abundantly blessed Isaac, as appears Genesis 26.12. to 18. Wherefore
did Joseph's Brethren hate him, not being able to speak peaceably unto him, and
after sell him into Egypt? but because his father more favored him, and they
fear^d he should reign over them, Genesis 37.4, to 9. If Joseph be his fathers
darling, he is his brethrens eyesore. Wherefore did Saul persecute David, and
pursue after him from place to place to take away his life, but because he was
so praised and preferred of the people before himself? and the Lord was with
David, and prospered him in every thing he took in hand, 1 Samuel 18.12, 13, 28,
29. David's success is Saul's vexation; yea, he finds not so much pleasure in
his Kingdom, as vexation in the prosperity of David? And lastly (for I pass
by the Elder Brothers envy in the Parable against his younger Brother, when
his Father so royally entertained him at his return, Luke 15.28. which is meant
of the Jews envying the Gentiles conversion, and many the like instances.) Why
was Eliah wroth with his younger brother? 1 Samuel 17.28. but because he should
be more exalted. And I doubt whether David's brethren were more glad that Goliath
was slain, or angry that he was slain by their brother: For envy is sick if
her neighbor be well, and the good man's honor is the envious man's torment, as
it fared between Haman and Mordecai; as hereafter the glory of Christ shall add
to these Reprobates confusion, when they are driven to confess this is he whom
we once had in derision, Luke 13.28. I might also apply all this to many in our
times. As why do many men's hearts rise against every holy man they meet? as
some stomachs rise at the sight of sweet meats: Why do all drunkards and
vicious livers hate the religious? and so belch out their enmity and spleen
against them, in raising and spreading of slanders as they do: but although
partly to rescue themselves from contempt, and to procure a contrary esteem by
putting a foul, and ugly vizard upon virtue, and decking up vice in a gorgeous
and comely attire; yet chiefly because they partake of the divine nature, and
are one with the Father and the Son, John 17.14.21, 22. 2 Cor. 6.18. I might, I
say, be large upon this, and many the like, but I must only mention them.

CHAP. XIV.
SEcondly, Another cause is, their Ignorance: They shall hate and persecute
you, yea, they shall excommunicate and kill you for my Names sake, says ^ur
Savior to his Disciples, because they have not known the Father nor me, ^ohn
16.2, 3. and 15.21. And again, they are an offense unto us, because ^hey
understand not the things which are of God, but the things which are of men,
^atth. 16.23. And are deceived, because they know not the Scriptures, nei^^^
the power of God, Matthew. 22.29. Luke 19.42. This the Apostle con^^^ to have
been the cause of his persecuting the Church, 1 Timothy 1.13. (...) soon as he was
enlightened with the saving knowledge of the truth, (...) his note, with his
name, and preached that faith, which before he (...). Yea, the most ugly and
monstrous wickedness, that ever was (...) or brought forth into the world,
calls ignorance mother: Had (...) (says the Apostle) they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory, (...) Acts 3.15, 17. (...) forgive them, says he
of his murderers, for they know not what they do. And why have the Kings of
the earth, in all ages banded themselves together against the Lord, and against
his Christ, Psalm. 2.2. but because they knew him not? Ioh. 15.21. they see no
more then the bar^ or outside of spiritual things, 2 Samuel 6.16. And the flesh
(Satan's ready instrument) will be ever sugesting to them strange surmises
touching what the Religious either say or do; as is evident by what is recorded
of Michal, 2 Samuel 6.16. of Nicodemus, Joh. 3.4. of Festus, Act. 26.24. and
lastly, of Paul, before his conversion, 1 Timothy 1.13.

It is the nature of ignorant and carnal men (that walk after the flesh in the
lusts of uncleanness, whom Saint Peter calls brute beasts, led with sensuality)
to speak evil of the things which they understand not, 2 Pet. 2.12. especially
in judging acts of zeal and piety, their opinion still lights upon the worst
sense, like them in Act. 2. who mocked the Apostles when they were filled with
the Holy Ghost, and hearing them speak languages which they understood not,
cried out, These men are drunk with new wine.

Until we be born again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew not what it was to be
born again, Ioh. 3.4. Until we become zealous our selves, we are like Festus,
who thought zeal madness, Act. 26.24. Until we be humble our selves, we are
like Michal, who mocked David for his humility, and thought him a fool, for
dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16. Yea, to such as shall perish, or are for
the present in a perishing condition, all Religion seems foolishness, 1 Cor.
1.18.

CHAP. XV.
THirdly, They therefore speak evil of us, and do all the evil they dare to us:
Because we will no longer run with them to the same excess of riot, as the
Apostle acquaints us, 1 Pet. 4.4. When our affections like wild and mad horses,
are violently galloping to Hell; if the Spirit of God by repentance, as with a
bridle, suddenly gives a jerk and turns them another way, yea, sets them going
as fast in the narrow path toward Heaven: presently those our companions in
the broad way, stand marvelling at us that we break off company, and envy to
see themselves cashiered.

The Israelites, were never set upon by Pharaoh and all his Forces, until they
were got out of his land. So long as S. Paul joined with the High Priests and
Elders, to make havoc of the Church; he was no whit molested by them: but when
he became a convert, and preached in the name of Jesus, none so hated and
persecuted as he. That great Dragon, the Devil, and his subjects wicked men,
make war and are wroth with none, but the Woman (that is the Church) and the
remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ. Revel. 12.17.

The Accuser of the Brethren makes choice of wicked men to traduce thos^ whom
he cannot seduce as he desires; as we may plainly see in our Saviors example;
who notwithstanding he fulfilled all righteousness, and did all things well,
for in his mouth was found no guile, nor fault in his manners, nor errou^ in
his doctrine, Which of you (said he) can rebuke me of sin? Yet the world
traduced him for a Samaritan, a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, a wine-b^^ber, (...)
enemy to Caesar, and what not?

Thus they deal with the godly, as sometimes a lustful person (...) chaste
woman, when he cannot take away her honesty, he will take away (...) credit;
brag of effecting his will with her, when yet he could never have ad^mittance
into her company. Beside^ how should those enemies of holiness work their will
upon us? if they did not thus cast aspersions upon, and accu^^ us. How should
Naboth be cleanly put to death, if he be not first accused of blasphemy? 1
Kings 21.13. and the like of Joseph, Eliah, Jeremiah, Susanna, Paul, Steven,
and our Savior Christ himself: Alas, they well know, and their Consciences
spare not to tell them that the men whom they nickname, and asperse, are
honester men, and more righteous then themselves, as Pharaoh was forced to
confess touching Moses, Exodus 10.16, 27. And Saul touching David? 1 Samuel 26.21.
yea, I know they are persuaded well of them, even when they speak most to the
contrary, we know Pilate judged Christ guiltless, but yet he put him to death.
And Festus acknowledged that Paul wa^ without crime, yet he left him in prison.
I dare say Tertullus knew that he lied, when he called Paul a pestilent fellow,
etc. his conscience could not choose but answer him, thou lie in thy throat
Tertullus, Paul is an honester man then thy self; and the like of our accusers
at this day; but malice regards not how true any accusation is, but how
spightful. I grant that in many case^ they think as ^ll of us, as they speak;
and the reason is, when they want evidence, their manner is to judge of us by
themselves; as it fared with Nero, who verily believed that all men were
Libidinists, because himself was such an one; and indeed their own guiltiness
is a main and usual cause of their censuring and slandring us, for most
commonly suspicion proceeds from a self defect, and a bad construction from a
bad mind.

Deceitful, ever will mistrustfull be:
But no distrust is sound in honesty.
And it is a rule which seldom fails: That as Cham was worse then Noah whom he
derided: and Ishmael worse then Isaac whom he mocked: and Saul worse then David
whom he persecuted: and Iezabel worse then Naboth whom she defained and
murdered: and Herod worse then John Baptist whom he beheaded: So they that are
wont to slander, jeer and persecute others, have themselves more cause to be
jeered and judged by others. Experience sufficiently only acquaints us what
they are, and the examples before rehearsed; And will any wise man stumble at
Religion for such men's scoffs and reproaches?

CHAP. XVI.
FOurthly, Another Reason is, They know their glory and credit with the world,
is greatly eclipsed by such as excel in virtue: Their vicious lives are
plainly reproved, and their persons most grievously shamed by the holy
conversation of good men. And this makes them smut the face that is fairer:
blemish honest men's fame by their censuring and ^nspersions; that they may
mirtigate their own shame with others discredit like Potiphars wife they
pretend we are guilty, that themselves may be taken for innocent. And have they
not reason so to do? Ye^, for the whiter the Swan is, the more black is (...)
that is by her; and how is a vicious person discredited and made (...) by the
virtuous life of an holy man? We know straight lines (...) c^ooked. And it is
easy to guess, that Pharaohs fat Kine (...) the lean ones more ill favored.
A swarthy and hard featured visage* (...) not the company of clear beauties.
Its a plain case, if the Gospel should ris^, sin and error must go down; Herod
thought he could not be King* if Christ should reign; And the Pharisees knew
that they should be de^^ised* if Christ were regarded. And this makes them
watch for our halting, and withal as sharp sighted as Eagles to spy faults in
us: Briefly, They put their own faults in that part of the Wallet which is
behind them; but ours, in the other part or end which is before them. Indeed
self-examination would make their judgments more charitable.

Fifthly, They delight in censuring and slandering us: because Satan (who in
their God, 2 Cor. 4.4. and their Pr^nce, Ioh. 14.30. and works in them hi^
pleasure, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26.) is ever prompting them thereunto, Acts 5.3.
Rev. 12.10. For it is Satan that speaks in and by them, as once he did by the
Serpent: It is his mind in their mouth, his heart in their lips, Mat. 16.23.

And they being his Sons, Servants and Subjects* thirst to do him what honor
and service they can. Nor can they pleasure him more, it being the hopefullest
way to discourage men in the way to heaven, quench the good motions of Gods
spirit, kill the buds and beginnings of grace, draw them back to the world, and
so by consequence damn their souls, that can be, to see that whatsoever they do
or speak; base constructions are made thereof. Hereupon that subtle Serpent
does like Maximinus who set on work certain vile persons to accuse the
Christians of heinous crimes, that so he might persecute them with the more
show of reason. True, they poor souls do not know that Satan speaks in and by
them: As those four hundred of Ahal^ Prophets, in whom this evil spirit spoke,
did not know that Satan spoke by them, 1 King. 22.22. Neither did Judas know
when he eat the sop that Satan entered into him, and put it into his heart to
betray Christ, John 13.20. Neither do Magistrates (when they cast the servants
of God into prison) once imagine that the devil makes them his jaylors, but he
does so (...) whence that Phrase of the Holy Ghost, The Devil shall cast some
of you into prison, Rev. 2.10. They are his instruments, but he is the
princ^pal Author. Neither did Ananias and Saphira once think that Satan had
filled their heart^^ or put that lie into their mouths which they were struck
dead for Acts* ye^ the Holy Ghost tells us plainly that he did so, ver. 3. No,
Eve in Paradise (...) not the least suspicion that it was Satan that spoke to
her by the Serpent; nor Adam that it was the Devils mind in her mouth when
(...) to eat the forbidden fruit. Nor did David once dream that it was Satan
which moved him to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Much less (...) who so
dearly loved Christ, imagine that he was set on by Satan to (...) his own Lord
and Master with those affectionate words. (...) self for if Christ had pitied
himself, Peter and all the world had (...) yet he was so, which occasioned
Christ to answer him. Get (...) Satan, Matthew. 16.22, 23. Whence we may argue,
That if Satan can (...) the best and wisest of Gods servants, do him such
service (...) besides their intention* how much more can he make (...)dren and
servants who are kept by him in (...) at his will* 2 Timothy 2.26. and whom he
altogether rules and works his pleasure in, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. as I might give
you instances of all sorts Our Savior tells us, that they shall think they do
God service, in persecuting (...) servants, as the Jews formerly did in putting
his Prophets to death, John 16.^^ and experience shows that thousands in these
days do so; and why di^ Soul make havoc of the Church? but in zeal to the
traditions of his Fathers, Gal. 1.14. There was a Monk poisoned Henry the
seventh, Emperor of Germany with the Sacramental Bread, and thought he did God
good service in so doing: So did the Powder Traitors, when they intended to
blow up the whole State. Maximinian thought the blood of Christians would be an
acceptable sacrifice to his gods. So Francis the second of France, and Philip
the second of Spain, thought of the Lutherans blood in their Dominions. In the
sixth Council of Toledo, It was enacted, That the King of Spain should suffer
none to live in his Dominions, that professed not the Roman Catholic Religion:
Whereupon King Philip having hardly escaped shipwreck, as he returned from the
Low Countries, said, he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root
out Lutheranism, which he presently began to do: professing that he had rather
have no Subjects then such. And how could this be? if Satan did not hold the
Stern.

* One that formerly held it not enough to be bad himself, except he railed at
and persecuted the good; has now given ten thousand of these Books, to clear
the sight of others, who look upon Religion and holiness with Satan's
Spectacles. Wherefore such as will, need but call at James Crumps in Little
Bartholomews, in Well-yard, and have them gr^tis so long as they last; and
afterward ( at Mr. Cripps his Shop (...) Popes H^^d Alley, also) for pence
(...).

* It is the usual lot of the godly to suffer for speaking of truth; but the
Devils servants prevail most by telling of lies; as when the Jews accused Paul
to Agrippa; they charged him with many things, but proved nothing; neither
could they well undo us, if first they did not falsely accuse us; as it fared
with Iezabel touching Naboth, and the wife of Potiphar touching Ios^ph. We read
that the Chief Priests, Elders, and all the counsel sought false Witnesses to
accuse Christ of heinous evils, that so they might crucify him by a Law,
Matthew. 26.59.

(...) innocence is no shelter against persecution.

Again, Why do all the Serpents seed censure, and in censuring stan(...) but
that they may incite and stir up others to do the like: Re(...) those ancient
enemies of the Gospel, who clad the Martyrs in the (...) wild Beasts; to
animate the Dogs to tear them: Nor will the (...) multitude be wanting what
lies in them, for they like so ma(...), have not heads sufficient to direct
them; and therefore do only, (...) they see others do: They are a generation
that (for matter of Religi(...), discern between their right hand and their
left: as (...) committing of evil with ignorant persons, who are Cisterns to
sin, (...) to grace: As in the Sodomites, Genesis 19.4. to 12. In Kora^ and his
^^0 followers: In Demetrius and his fellows, Acts 19. etc. And the like in our
times, as how many thousands do censure and blaspheme the godly* because they
hear others do so? for other reason they can give none. Thus I might go on in
giving you other reasons of their censuring and slandering us; as one in regard
of Satan, who loses so many of his Subjects or Captives as turn believers: for
every repentant sinner is as a prisoner broke loose from his chains of
darkness.

And another in regard of the World, which loses a limb or member ^ when a
convert will no longer accompany them in their wicked customs.

I might also make it appear, that Atheism or Unbelief is another cause* Psalm.
2.1. to 4. and 10.4. and 94.5, 6, 7. John 8.37. a Kings 18.35. Dan. 3.15. Exodus
5.2. Acts 17.2. to 11. 1 Timothy 1.13. Speaking of truth another, 1 Kings 22.8,
17, 23, 24, 26, 27. Jer. 26.8, 9.11. and 38.4, 5, 6. Amos 5.10. Acts 17.5, 6,
7, 13. and 22.22, 23. and 23.12, 13, 14. Gal. 4.16. Misprision another, Acts
24.14. and 26, 9, 10, 11, 24. Jer. 44.17, 18, 19. Wisdom 5.4. Matthew. 13.55, 56,
57. John 2.19, 20, 21. and 3.3, 4. and 7.24. and 8.15. and 16.2. 2 These. 2.11.
1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 14, 15, 16. Revel. 3.17. Breaking off society with them another,
Genesis 39.12. to 21. Psalm. 26.4, 5. and 119.115. Prove. 23.20. 2 These. 3.6, 14. 1
Pet. 4.4. The serpentine preaching of some Ministers another, Jer. 5.31. and
8.11. and 23.13, 14, to 33. Ezekiel. 22.28. Matthew. 9.34. Mark 13.22. John 5.43.
Acts 20.29, 30. 2 Cor. 2.17. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. second chapter. The
scandalous lives of some Professors another, Genesis 9.21, 22. and 34.13. to 31. 1 Samuel 2.12. to 18. 2 Samuel 12.14. Matthew. 18.7. and 23.3.14, 23, 24, 25, 27.
Flocking after sermons another, John 11.48. and 12.19. Acts 13.45. See more
Psalm. 56.6. and 59.2, 3. Matthew. 23.13, 15. Luke 11.52. John 11.18. and 12.10,
11. Revel. 12.17. as they make them: but I hope I have said enough: Only a Word
more by way of caution; set not your wit to theirs, if they revile you, revile
not you again; but pray for them, as the Prophet for the Syrian Army, 2 Kings
6.20. Lord open the eyes of these men that they may see. Or as Stephen for his
enemies, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Acts 7.60. Or as Christ for his
murderers, Luke 23.34. Father (...) them, for they know not what they do. Yea,
let you and I and all that suffer (...) them send down water from our
compassionate eyes, and weep for (...) by whom we bleed: And well we may, for
their case has been our (...) were by nature the seed of the serpent; if we
are now changed to (...) woman's seed, whom may we thank for it? not our selves:
God (...) thing in us but enmity, 1 Cor. 15.10. Romans 7.18, 25. And (...) might
have left us in that perishing condition (being bound to (...) have chosen
them; he has of his free grace adopted us, and (...) sent) left them: What Is
the reason? surely no reason can be given* (...) depth! Only this is sure, It
is a mercy beyond all (...)

A PRECIOUS MITHRIDATE FOR The SOUL Made up of those two POISONS, Covetousness
AND Prodigality: The one drawn from the Fathers Ill Qualities: The other from
the Sons: For the Curing of both Extremes, and advancing Frugality, the Mean.

Being four Chapters taken out of R. Iuntus his Chrstian Library, And are to
be sold by I. Crump Stationer in (...) Bartholmes Well-yard, and H. Crips in
Popeshead (...)

A Precious Methridate for the Soul, Made up of those two Poyfons, Covetousness
and Prodigality:
PREFACE.
Such as have formerly heard these Nightingales, or seen these Jewels in
another Cage, or Cabinet; may please to take notice, that they are not stolen,
but borrowed. Every Garden is furnished from other Gardens, and so is mine; but
with leave from the Owners: As Virtue is distributive, and good Fruit the more
common it is, the better it is. Besides the oftener these Nails are hammered,
the deeper they pearse; and pearse too deep they cannot: for five words
remembered is better than a thousand forgotten. Again, old metal cast into a new
mold, becomes new, and is so est^emed. These Pearls are filed upon a string,
that men may not shake them out of their pockets. If thou receivest any
spiritual benefit, by pertaking of this Banquet (or extract) give God the
glory; which is all the Confectioner expects for his pains: for praise or
thanks I seek none, as I have deserved none. Or in case my labor has been
worthy of hire, the great pleasure I took therein, has been sweeter than
another^ wages. Yea, if I have not grown better by it, yet it has kept me from
worse, and not afforded me time to entertain the Devil. Nor have I more made my
Book, than my Book has made me.

CHAP. 1.
HAving felt the Cormorants pulse, I find into beat most violently after gain;
He were a skillful Physician that could (...) greedy worm, which makes him so
hungry: yea, (...) for you shall sooner hear of an hundred Malefactors
conversion at the Gallows, then of one Covetous Cormorant in his bed. Only I
will giv^ you his and his Sons Effigies, and set them up as Sea-marks to mak^
others beware; that both may do good service to the Church: For where^ honest
men profit the Commonwealth, by occasioning themselves to be in^tated* these
shall happily benefit the same, by causing themselves to b^ evitated. As
sometimes a Harlots face has suggested chastness: an^ good may be learnt, both
by similitude and contrariety. At least the beauty of all Christian graces,
are illustrated by the blackness of their opposi^^ vices.

The Covetous Miser is one that affects no employment or Occupatio^ for it
self, but for gain* all his reaches are at riches: his summum bonum is
commodity, and gold is the Goddess he adores in every thing. He plots studdies,
contrives, breaks his peace, his sleep, his brains, to compass his desires: and
though he venters his ears, his neck, his soul; he dares no deny his slave, his
dog, his Devil Avarice: nor cares he how he gets, bu^ what he gets. There is no
evil that he will nor do, so goods may com^ of it; you cannot name the Sin
that he will not swallow in the sweet broth of commodity: like Dorio the Bawd
in T^rrence, he is not ashame^ of the basest actions that bring him in benefit;
nor does he smell any difference, between gold got by oppression, and that
which is honestly come by*

Avarice is the grave of all good, it ^ats out the very heart of grace^ by
eating grace out of the heart. The damps of the earth do not more quench fire,
then the love of earth stisles grace: neither trees not grass^ grow above,
where the golden Mines are below; If the love of money be once curred into the
heart, no fruits of goodness will appear in the life: yea there is an absolute
contrariety, between the love of God, and the love of Mammon; as our Savior
shows, Luke 16.13,

This Machivillians heart is a very mint of fraud, that can readily c^yn
falsehoods upon every occasion; yea, he is such a deep, that one may better
roll the hairs of his head, then either the springs, wards, or wickedness of
his deceitful heart: and yet so foolish withal, that he not onel^ (...) his
soul, to enrich his body, but to purchase a great estate* he will (...) both
soul and body. Like Sylvester the second, who to get the Popedom, gave his
soul to the Devil.

The poor ^hea^s soul (if ever it be saved) costs no less a price than Christ's
precious blood: yet half a crown, yea six pence will make this Chu^^e fell his.
By which means he swells in his estate from a Toad to an^ (...) ^isease we call
the Wolf; which is ever eating, yet keeps the body Lean. The Covetous Cormorant
is like one of Pharaoh's lean and illfavoured kine: (...) though he devours
much, yet he is never the less hungry, never the ^ore fat. A moderate water
makes the Mill go merrily, but too much ^ill not suffer it to go at all.

The Covetous Miser is like the Indians, who though they have all the Gold
among them, yet are the most beggarly people alive. He is like Tantalus, who
stands up to the c^^n in water, and has all kinds of fruits hanging over his
head, but is not suffered to taste the one, nor drink of the other. Or like an
Ass that is laden with gold and dainty cates, but feeds upon thistles. He
scarce wears a good garment, or eats a liberal meal, or takes a quiet sleep;
but is ever tormenting himself to get that, for getting whereof he shall be
tormented. As a proud man is ignorant in the midst of his knowledge, so is he
poor and needy in the midst of his wealth. Yea, whereas the Poor Beggar wants
many things, the Rich Miser wants every thing.

His business will never give him leave to think of his conscience: All his
Religion is the love of money. He goes to Church indeed, but it is not to serve
God, but the State; which he uses not as a means to save his soul but his
silver. To him all spiritual and eternal things seem incredible, because they
are invisible. Nothing will sink into his head that he cannot see with his
eyes, or feel with his fingers. And in case he cannot gain by being Religious,
his care shall be not to lose by it: and that Religion will like him best that
is best cheap, and that will cost him least. Any doctrine is welcome to him,
but that which beats upon good works, only that he cannot endure. No, if
another be at the charges to serve God, this Churl like Judas, will cry out,
Why is this waste? Nor shall any means ever convert him. No Physic is strong
enough to purge out this Humor: Because, if ever he should repent, he must
restore his ill gotten estate; which to him is as hard an injunction as that of
God to Abraham; Genesis ^2.2. Or, as that of our Savior to the Young man, Luke
18.22. and therefore what hope of his yielding? Covetousness is Idolatry, Ephesians,
(...) ^oll. 3.5. and Money is the covetous man's god: and will he part (...) No,
And so long as he keeps the weapon (ill-got goods) (...) and will not pluck it
out by restitution; how is it possible he should be ^^^ed? He may with that
Rich man, Luke 10. have a good mind to Heav^^^ reversion: yet for all that he
will not hear of parting with him. He (...) ^hereof he has the present
possession.

(...) then a Drunkard; yet had I rather be a Drunkard then a Covetous Mise^
Matthew. 21.31, 32.

CHAP. 2.
Now, as this Merciless Miser is all for sparing, so his Heir is all (...)
wasting: He lives poorly and penuriously all his life, that he may die rich
Psalm. 39.6. And what comes of it? As he has reapt that which another sowed, so
another shall thrash that which he has reaped. He hords up, (...) knowing who
shall enjoy it; and commonly they enjoy it who lay it out a^ fast. He takes
only the bitter, and leaves the sweet for others, perhap^ those that wish him
hanged, upon condition they had his means the sooner.

Or possible it is he may have children; which if he have, he loves them so
much better then himself, that he will voluntarily be miserable here and
hereafter, that they may be happy. He is willing to go in a thredbare coat, to
starve his body, lose his credit, wound his conscience, torment his heart and
mind with fears and cares; yea he can find in his heart to damn his own soul
and go to hell, that he may raise his house, and leave his heir a great estate,
as thinking his house and habitation shall continue for ever, even from
generation to generation, and call their lands by his name, as the Psalmist
shows, Psalm 49.11. He is careful to provide his children portions, while he
provide^ no portion of comfort for his own welfare, either here or hereafter.
He provides for his childrens bodies, not for their souls, to show that he
begat not their souls but their bodies. He leaves a fair estate for the worser
part, nothing for the estate of the better part. He desires to leave his
children great rather then good, and is more ambitious to have his sons Lords
on earth, then Kings in heaven. But as he that provides no^ for their temporal
estate, is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. So he that provides not for their
eternal estate, is little better then a devil, which yet is the case of nine
parts of the parents throughout the Land.

But observe how his children requite him again, and how God requi^es him in
his children; for commonly they are such, as never give him thanks (...) the
least lament his Loss; perhaps they mourn at his funeral, yet (...) for that he
i^ dead, but because he died no sooner. Nor is it any ra^e (...) for men to
mourn, for him dead, whom they would by no means have still to be alive. Yea
for the most part, it is but a fashionable sor^^^, which the son makes show of
at his fathers death; as having many (...) for that hour. A sorrow in show
only, like that of Jacobs sons when the^ had sold their brother Joseph, who
professed a great deal of gre^^ (...) when inwardly they rejoiced. Have ye not
heard of a pre^^^ young heir? that encouraged his companions, with, come let us
(...) revel, throw the house out at windows; the man in Scarlet will (...)
^^^cious liquor into a Seeue, that will hold no liquid substance; which
occasioned the Rhodians, and Lydians, to enact several laws; that those (...)
which followed not their fathers in their virtues, but lived viciously, ^^^uld
be disinherited, and their lands given to the most verteous of that ra^e, not
admiting any impious heir whatsoever to inherit, as Varro well notes. But it is
otherwise in this case, for (in regard of Gods curse upon ^his unmerciful
Muckworm) if he have more sons then one, the eldest ^roves a prodigal, and he
inherits.

Every man's own experience can tell him, that for the most part a scatterer
succeeds a gatherer, one that wastes virtues faster then riches, and riches
faster then any virtues can get them; one that is as excessive in spending, as
the other was in scraping; for as the father chooses to fill his chests, so
the son is given to satisfy his lusts. Nor could the one be more cunning at
the rake, then the other will be at the pitchfork. The moneys which were
formerly chested like caged Birds, will wing it merrily when the young heir
sets them flying. And as Cicero speaks, he riotously spends that which the
father had as wickedly gotten. The one would have all to keep, the other will
keep nothing at all; the former gets and spends not, the latter spends and gets
not. Yea the son being as greedy of expense, as the father was in scraping; he
teddeth that with a fork in one year, which was not gathered with a rake in
twenty. Yea how often is that spent upon one Christmas revelling by the son,
which was forty years a getting by ^he Father? Which Diogenes well considered,
for whereas he would ask of a frugal Citizen but a penny, of a Prodigal he
would beg a talent, and when the party asked him what he meant, to desire so
much of him and so little of others, his answer should be, Quoniam tu habes,
ille habebunt; because thou have, and they will have. I shall beg of thee but
once, thy estate will so soon vanish, of them often: yea give me now a talent,
I may live to give thee a groat. And at another time, hearing that the house of
a certain Prodigal was offered to sale, he said, I knew well that house was so
accustomed to surfeiting, and drunkenness, that ere long it would spue out the
Master.

Nay in all likelihood he foresees it himself; and therefore as he makes short
work with his estate, so not long with his life, as knowing, that if he should
live long, he must be a beggar.

As seldom but he shortens his days some way; for he gives himself to all
manner of vice, gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, pride,
riot, contention, etc. He even banishes civility, and gives himself over to
sensuality; and such a life seldom lasts long.

They may rightly be called spend-alls, for they not only spend all they have,
but themselves also, in stead of quenching their thirsts, they (...) both their
bodies, souls and estates in Drink. They will call, (...) us an Ocean, and then
leave their wits rather then the wine beh^nde (...) Religion that should make
them good men; but even reason that sho^^^ make them men; And saving only on
the Sea, they live without all c^^pass; as a ship on the water, so they on the
land re^^ too and fro, and (...) like a drunken man, Psalm. 107.27.

All their felicity is in a Tavern, or brothell-house, where harlots (...)
sicophants rifl^e their estates, and then send them to rob, or teach th^^ how
to cheat or borrow, which is all one, for to pay they never mean, (...)
prodigality drives them to repair their too great lavishnesse in one thin^^ by
too great covetousness and injustice in another. The greatest mispend^^s for
the most part are constrained to be as great misgetters, that they may feed one
vice with another.

Now as if they had been bred among Bears, they know no other dialect then
roaring, swearing and banning. It is the tongue or language of hell they speak;
as men learn before hand the language of that Country whether they mean to
travel.

By wine and surfeting they pour out their whole estates into their bellies.
The father went to the devil one way, and the son will follow him another; and
because he has chosen the smoother way, he makes the more have. The one so
loved Money, that he could nor afford himself good Drink: the other so loves
good Drink, that he scorns Money. The Father cannot find in his heart to put
a good morsel into his belly, but lives on roots, that his prodigal heir may
feed on Phesants; he drinks water, that his son may drink wine, and that to
drunkenness. The one dares not eat an egg, lest he should lose a chicken, and
goes to hell with whay and carrots, the other follows after with Canary,
Partridges, and Potatoes.

These are Epecures indeed, placing Paradise in their throats, and heaven in
their guts; their shrine is their Kitchen, their Priest is their Cook, their
Altar is their table, and their belly is their God. By wine and surfeit^ng,
they pour out their whole estates into their bellies; yet nevertheless complain
against nature for making their necks so short.

Aristippus gave to the value of sixteen shillings for a Patridge; his clownish
neighbor told him, he held it too dear at two pence. Why, quoth Aristippus, I
esteem less of a pound, then thou do of a penny: the same in effect says the
prodigal son, to his penurious father; for how else could be so soon bring a
noble to nine pence, an inheritance of a thousand pounds (...), to an anunity
of five hundred shillings? besides, the one obtains (...) and pounds with more
ease, then the other did a thousand pence; and by (...) much the l^ss he
esteems of money, by so much the more noble and better m^n he esteems himself,
and his father the more base; and here(...) ^he co^^any calling, and must go
apparelled like a Prince.

(...) it as a perpetual law, In the sweat of thy Face (be it (...)) shall thou
eat bread, till thou return to the earth, Genesis 3.19. (...) Gentleman to dis^^se
honest callings ( mental or manual) (...) (...) ground of frugality. Besides,
exercise is not more wholesome for the (...) then it is for the mind and soul;
but this vain glorious Coxcombe ^^all for sports and pleasure, and seldom
ceases hunting after sports (as Esau (...) venison) until he has lost the
Blessing. But he should (O that he would) consider, that medicines are no meat
to live by.

Then for his pride in apparel, you may know that by this; he is like the
Cinnamon tree, whose bark is of more worth then his body; or like the ^ridge or
Bird of Paradise, whose feathers are more worth then her flesh: Or some
Vermin, whose case is better then het carcass. And yet this swells him so, and
makes him look as big, as if the river of his blood could not be bancked within
the channel of his veins; and shift his attire he must, like the Islanders of
Foolianna the ficle; or that King of Mexico, who was won^ to change his cloths
four times a day, and never wear them again, employing his leavings and cast
suits, for his continual liberalities and rewards, and who would also have
neither pot nor dish, nor any implement in his Kitchen, or on his Table, be
brought twice before him.

Indeed he cannot shift himself out of the Mercers books, until he has sold
the other Farm or Lordship; perhaps a dinner or supper at some Tavern, may cost
him ten pounds or more; for he must pay the whole reckoning, that he may be
counted the best man. Yea when the shot comes to be paid, for any man to draw
in his company, is a just quarrel, and use has made it unpleasant to him not
to spend, and yet a bare head in the streets, does him more good, then a meals
meat. He has the Wolf of vain glory, and that he feeds until himself
becomes the food. Nor can it be long, first, for an excessive and successive
impairing, always imports a fin^^ dissolution. Nor has he ever the wit to
think upon sparing, till he comes to the bottom of the purse, resembling
Plautus that famous comical Poet, born in Umbria, who having spent all he had
on plaiers apparel, was forced for his living, to serve a Baker in turning a
hand mill. Like an hour glass turned up, he never leaves running till all be
out; He never looks to the bottom of his patrimony, till it be quite
unravelled; and then (too late) complains that the stock of his wealth ran
coarse at the fag end*

His father had too good an opinion of the world, and he too much (...) daines
it: only herein he speeds (as he thinks) a little the better (...) that those
who barked at his father like curs, faune upon him, and (...) hand like
Spaniels. Yea the Prodigalls case is herein better then the (...) sers, for the
Prodigal shall only have nothing hereafter; but the (...) man, has nothing
here nor hereafter. He bestows upon his (...) gifts, thinking it good gain to
receive for it good words, (...) ship. Thus by the frequent use of subtracting
pounds out of (...)lings out of pounds, and pence out of shillings, the end of
his account (...) all Ciphers.

Idleness is the Coach that brings, a man to Need^ (...) the proverb) is no
man's foe else; be he never so old, he never attai^^ (...) the years of
discretion; And in case providence do not take him w^rd* (...) heirs shall
never be sought after. His Vessel has three leaks, a lascivi^^^ eye, a gaming
hand, a deified belly; and to content these, he can neither rule his heart, his
tongue, nor his purse. He never proves his (...) till he has no other, and
then perhaps when want, or good counsel, (...) time has made him see as much
as his father did, at last he sues for a Room in an Almeshouse, that his father
built; else when he feels want (for till then he never sees it) he complains of
greatness for ingratitude; that he was not thought of when promotions were a
d^^ling. Yet seeing there is no remedy but patience, when his last Acre lies in
his purse, he projects strange things, and builds houses in the air, having
sold those on the ground. Not that he is a man of parts, for he is only witty
to wrong and undo himself; Ease, says, Solomon, slays the foolish, and the
prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1.32.

CHAP. 3.
MAny an one has his father unfeathered to warm him, but pride, drunkenness,
gamming, etc. plucks them away again so fast, that he soon becomes naked and
bare. He is like a barren plot of ground, for let him receive never so much
seed and manuring, Sun and showers, he remains ever dry and fruitless, and no
marvail, when not only his lewd and vicious courses bring Gods curse upon all
he has or takes in hand; but when he and what he has, is also cursed for his
fathers sake. For whereas the Holy Ghost says of the just man, His seed shall
be mighty upon earth, his generation shall be blessed, etc. Psalm. 112.2 and
many the like, Psalm. 103. where God has promised to bless and reward the
children; yea, the childrens children for their fathers goodness, verse, 17.
Isa. 58.10, 11.12. Psalm. 37, 25, 26 and 112.2 to 6. Of which I might give you
examples, not a few. The children of Noah were preserved from drowning for
their fathers sake, Genesis 7.1. Mephibosheth fares the better for his fathers
goodness^: The Kenites for Ie^broes, 1 Samuel 15.6. and that some hundreds of
years after their Ancester was dead; Phineas his seed for his (...) Numb. 25,
11, 12, 13. Solomon for his father David's sake, 2 Samuel 1. ^. Ishmael for
Abraham's sake, Genesis 17.20. And all Isarel fared the better for Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacobs sake, Deuteronomy. 4.37. 1 Kings 11.12. The loving kindness of the Lord,
says the Psalmist, indureth for ever, and ever, (...) them that fear him, and
his righteousness upon childrens children, Psalm. (...). Exodus 20.6.

And as God usually blesses, and rewards the children for their fathers
goodness, so on the contrary, Exodus 20.5. Eternal payments God uses (...) of
the persons only, temporary oftentimes of succession as we sue (...) (...)
third and fourth generation, Exodus 20.5. As for the sin of Haman, his ten (...)
were hanged, Hester 9.13, 14. And so for Saul's sin, his seven sons were
^^kewise hanged, 2 Samuel 21.6. and thus for Achans sin, all his sons and
daughters were stoned to death, and burned with fire by the Commandment of
Moses, who was in Gods stead, Josh. 7 Yea God has peremtorily threatened, Psalm.
109. that the children of a cruel and unmercifull man, shall be Vagabonds and
beg their Bread, and that none shall extend mercy or favor unto them, ver. 7.
to 17. God will make those children beggars, for whose sakes the fathers have
made so many beggars; this is a truth which the father will not believe, but as
sure as God is just, the Son shall feel. As what common and daily experience
have we thereof, had men but the wit to observe it? for hence it is, that
riches ill got, shift Masters so often. As rare it is, if the wealth of an
Oppressor does last to the fourth generation, seldom to the second; for
commonly in this case, as the father was the first that raised his house, by
his extreme getting and saving, so the son proves the last, in overthrowing his
house by excessive spending and lavishing; as Tullius Cicero answered a
P^odigal that told him he came of beggarly parents; for no man when his means
is gone, will ever after trust him with a stock to begin the world again; the
case standing with him, as it did with the unjust Steward, who having wasted
his masters goods for the time past, could not be trusted with the like for the
the time to come; and whereas hitherto he has with Esau, rejected the blessing
of prosperity, it will be denied him hereafter, though he should seek it with
tears: and which is worse then all, if death find him (as is much to be feared)
as banquerupt of spiritual, as of Worldly goods, it will send him to an eternal
prison: for what can we think of them, that do not only lose crusts and
crummes, which our Savior would have carefully gathered up, John 6.12. but
even lavish and wherle away whole patrimonies; yea, most wickedly spend them in
riot, and upon Dice, Drabs, Drunkenness? O the fearful account which these
unthrifty Bailiffs will one day have to give up to our great Lord and Master,
when he shall call them to a strict reckoning of their talents! if he was
condemned that increased not the sum concredited to him, what then shall become
of him that lawlesly and lavishly spends and impaires it? bringing in such a
reckoning as this; Item, spent upon my (...) pleasures, and pride, forty
years, and five hundred or ten thousand pounds etc. let them be in their right
senses, they cannot thin that God will take this for a good discharge of their
Steward-ships, though the devil may and will make them believe, that Christ
will quit all scores between (...) father and them.

And thus I have made it plain, that want and beggary, is the (...) parent to
riot and prodigality, and that he who when he should not (...) too much, shall,
when he would not, have too littel to spend a (...) young gulls. I have
likewise shown, that what the covetous (...)

As O that the covetous Moule, who is now digging a house in the earth for his
posterity, did but foresee how his Prodigal son will consume wh^^ he with so
much care and industry has scraped together; for should he have leave
hereafter to come out of hell for an hour, and see it, he would curse this his
folly, yea, if possible, it would double the pain of his infernal torment, as
it fares with Gnipho the Usurer, who (as Lucian feigneth) lying in hell,
lamenteth his miserable estate, that one Rodochares, an incestuous Prodigal, on
earth consumed his goods Wastfully, which he by unjust means had scraped
together so carefully; the which seems to have some affinity with the word of
truth; why else is Dives being in hell torments, said to lift up his eyes, and
to see Abraham a far off and Lazarus in his bosom, parlying so seriously
about his brethren, whom he had left behind him? Luke 16*23* etc. Why else does
our Savior say, that the wicked shall gnash their teeth for vexation, when
they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, and
themselves thrust out of doors? Luke 13.28.

But that thou may the better foresee, or at least fore-think what will
follow, I will show thee thy case in sundry other persons.

Clodius, son to Esophus the Tragedian, spent marvelous great wealth which his
father left him. Epicharmus the Athenian, having a large patrimony left him by
his parents, consumed it in six days, and all his life time after lived a
beggar. Apicius, in banqueting, spent great revenues, left him by his
parsimonius father, and then because he would not lead a miserable life, hanged
himself. Pericles, Calias, and Nicius, by prodigal lavishing and palpable
sensuallity, spent in a short time very great patrimonies, left them by their
parents, and when all their means was gone they drank each of them a poisoned
potion one to an other, and dyed in the place.

Again, we read that Caligula, in one year of his reign, spent prodigally,
sixty seven millions of gold, which Tiberius his Predecessor had gathered
together, as Tacitus tells us, and whereas John the 22. left behind him, (as
Petrarch reports) two hundred and fifty tun of gold; insomuch that an odd
fellow made this jest of him, Erat Pontifex maximus (...) tumen maximus. Pope
Sixtus Quintus, (called of (...) byword, for selling our Kingdom to Philip of
Spain, Six (...),) through his intolerable covetousness, left in his
Exchequer five (...) his succers^r Gregory the fourteenth, wasted four of them
in ten (...)

CHAP. 4.
ANd so you have three Chapters, taken out of the prevention of poverty. In
Gods goodness and Englands unthankfulness by the same Author? I find this
ensuing Character of a Prodigal or Loose Libertine: it is in Chapter the 9th.
where he is appointed to lead the Troop, of Ignorant, unbeleiving, Ungrateful
and wicked persons; as Judas led the Soldiers. It begins, and goes on as
follows.

Thou that art Openly profane; do so manifestly prove, and profess thy self
to be one of those ignorant, unbelieving, ungrateful, and wicked wretches
herein concerned: yea, to be one of the children of disobedience whom Satan
has blinded: that in respect of others, I should think it needless to spend
time in further proof thereof: yet I would gladly say something to shame thee
out of thy self: wherefore briefly thus: Thou art kept by the Devil in a snare,
and taken captive of him at his will: he rules, and works his pleasure in
thee, as being thy God and father, and Prince, and Master, 2 Timothy 2.26, Joh.
8.44. and 14.30. 2 Cor. 4.4. Thy odious qualities are these and the like: thou
do banish all civility, and give thy self over to sensuality: and art
neither afraid nor ashamed; to let thy wickedest thoughts break forth into
actions. Yea, thou think thy self the honester man for it: and boastest thou
art none of those dissembling Hypocrites that seem to be what they are not.
Thou art a common Drunkard: in stead of quenching thy thirst, thou drownest thy
senses.

Thou desire not the reputation of honesty, but of good fellowship: Thou art
a continual swearer, and that of bloody oaths. One of our Ruffians, or sons of
Belial: who when thou art displeased with others, will (...) in thy Makers
face, and tear thy Saviors Name in pieces: even swearing away thy part in that
blood, which must save thee if ever thou be^st saved. Yea, if thou art never so
little provoked, curses with thee, strive for number with oaths, and lewd
speeches with both. Thou know no other dialect, then roaring, swearing, and
banning: and in case thou ar^ reproved for it, thou will say, We take too much
upon us: as C^^ah and his accomplices twitted Moses, Numb. 16 3. not knowing how
strictly God commands, and requires it, Levit. 19.17. Heb. 3.11 2 Timothy 2.25
(...) 3.18 to 22.2 Pet. 2.7, 8 Whence as the Chief Priests answered (...) is
that to us? so thou will blaspheme God, tear Christ in pieces, and (...) 22.1.
We are much more bound to help our Neighbor himself, from dropping into the
bottomless pit of Hell. And what know we? but we may win our brother, and so
save his soul? Matthew 18.15. Again, thou art an usual companion of Harlots, thy
summum bonum is a Punk: and thou will rather burn in Hell, then marry.

Thou art one of those that St. Peter speaks of: thou have eyes full of
adultery, and that cannot cease to sin. Thou gazest upon every fair face; and
lustest after every beautiful woman: ^hy speech is lewd and obscene: thy
discourse scurrility, lascivious thy behavior. Thou art a frequent slanderer
of thy Neigbour: an open Sabbath-breaker: Can boast of sin and mischief, and
if need be defend it.

Like the Salamander, thou art never well, but in the fire of contention. And
art apt to quarrel, yea, kill a man for every foolish trifle; be it but for the
wall, or refusing to pledge thee; as if thy honor were of more worth then thy
soul. Yea, the Devil has so blinded, and bewitched thee: that thou think
every wrong, or disgraceful word quarrel just enough, to shed blood, that true
valor consists only in a brave revenge and being implacable: that patience is
but an argument of baseness; and therefore thou will rather suffer a sword in
thy bowels, then a lie in thy throat. I confess, thou will fight in no quarrel
but a bad one, and sooner in thy Mistresses defense, then in thy Makers.

Thou art of a reprobate judgment touching actions and persons: esteeming good
evil, and evil good, Prove. 17.15. and 29.27. Isa. 5.20. Thou do stifle thy
conscience, and would force thy self to believe if it were possible, that in
case men will not swear, drink drunk, conform to thy lewd customs, and the
like, they are over precise; and to forbear evil, is quarrel sufficient for
thee. Thou speak evil of all, that will not run with thee to the same
excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. making them a byword to the people, Job 17.6. and
a song amongst thy fellow Drunkards, Psalm. 69. (...). Thou art so desperately
wicked, that thou will mock thy admonisher, scoff at the means to be saved;
and make thy self merry with thy own damnation.

In stead of hating the evil thou do, and thy self for doing it; thou (...)
of it, rejoycest in it, boastest of it: yea, pleadest for it, and appla^^ed
(...) self for thy wickedness: God is not in all thy thoughts, except (...)
him, and to spend his days in the Devils service; And rather (...) thy
pleasure, thou will hazard the displeasure of God. Thou do not (...) but art
stubborn, and disobedient to thy parents; a Rioter, etc. If they stand in need
of thee; thou will not nourish or maintain (...) they did thee in thy need.
Thou take no care to provide for thy (...) Thou will borrow, or run in debt
with every one; but never carest to pay, or to satisfy any one: except it be
thy Hostess for drink, lest she should never more trust thee.

As good men by their godly admonition, and virtuous example; draw (...) they
can to Heaven: so by thy subtle allurements, and vicious example, thou drawest
all thou ^anst to hell. For as if it were too little to damnthy own soul, or as
if thine own sins would not press thee deep enough into hell; thou do all
that possibly thou can, to entice and enforce others to sin with thee: for
thou do envy, hate, scosf at, nickname, rail on, and slander the godly;
that thou may flout them out of their faith, damp, or quench the spirit
where thou perceivest it is kindled; discourage them in there way to heaven, to
make them ashamed of their holy conversation, and religious course: pull them
back to the World, that so thou may have their company here in sin, and
hereafter in torment.

Thou fear a Gaol more then thou fear hell: and stand more upon thy
sides smarting, then upon thy soul. Thou regardest more the blasts of men's
breath, then the fire of Gods wrath: and tremblest more at the thought of a
Sergeant or Bailiff, then of Satan, and everlasting perdition. Thou take
encouragement from the Saints falls, and sins of Gods people to do the like:
when they should serve thee as Sea-marks, to make thee beware. Yea, thou do
most sordidly, take liberty, and encouragement to go on more securely in thy
evil courses: because God is merciful and forbears to execute judgment
speedily: and to defer thy repentance, because the Theif upon the Cross, was
heard at the last hour. Thou will boldly do what God forbids; and yet
confidently hope to escape what he threatens.

Thus I could go on, to tell thee a thousand more of these thy wicked thoughts,
words, and actions; had I not already done it. But because I would not present
my other Readers with Cole-worts twice sod: be persuaded to take view of them,
in my other small Tract, entitled, The odious, despicable, and dreadful
condition of a Drunkard, drawn to the Life: though indeed even a Tyth of these
are sufficient evidences to prove and to make thee confess that thou art in a
most damnable condition. But stand thou by, and let the civil Iusticiary, and
formal Hypocrue hold up their hands, and hear their charge.

Here ends the Prodigals Character with which I will conclude.

FINIS.
The Prevention of Poverty, Together with the Cure of Melancholy, Alias
Discontent.

Or the best and surest way to Wealth and Happiness: being Subjects very
seasonable for these Times; wherein all are Poor, or not pleased, or both; when
they need be neither.

By Rich. Young, of Roxwel in Essex, Florilegus.

Imprimatur Joseph Caryl.

LONDON Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, and are to be sold by James Crumpe, a
Book-binder in Little Bartholomews Well-yard, 1655.

Of the Prevention of Poverty.
By R. Y.
Virtue is distributive, and loves not to bury benefits, but to pleasure all
she can: And happy is he, that leaves such a president; for which both the
present and future Ages shall praise him, and praise God for him. It was no
small comfort (I suppose) to Cuthemberg, Anaximenes, Triptolemus, Columbus, and
other the like; whose happiness it was to find out Printing, the Dial, the
Plough, to enrich the World with the best of Metals, with the Loadstone, and a
thousand the like: But had they smothered their conceptions, as so many lights
under a bushel; and not communicated the same for the public, it had argued in
them a great dearth of charity; whereas now (to the glory of God,) all men are
the better for them.

Nor is any employment so honorable, as for a man to serve his generation, and
be profitable to many: When like the Moon, we bestow the benefits received from
God; to the profit and commodity of others. It is the Suns excellency, that his
bright rays and beamns, are dispersed into every corner of the Universe.

The Tragic, Buskin (as they say) would fit all, that should put it on: Here
is that will much benefit thee, (being made use of) be thy condition good or
bad, rich or poor, learned or unlearned, mental or manual. The which to
conceal, would argue in the Author, either too much lucre, or too little love.
Even the Physician, that has a sovereigne Receipt, and dies unrevealing it:
robs the world of many blessings, which might multiply after his death: leaving
to all survivors this collection, that he once did good to others, but to do
himself a greater.

C. E.

The Prevention of POVERTY, Together with the Cure of MELANCHOLY, Alias
DISCONTENT. Or the best and surest way to Wealth and Happiness: Being Subjects
very seasonable for these Times, wherein all are Poor, or not pleased, or both,
when they need be neither.
THE PREFACE.
SECT. 1.
WHen a Gentleman in Athens had his plate taken away by Ahashucrus as he was at
dinner, he smiled upon his friends, saying, I thank God that his Higness has
left me any thing. So whatever befalls us, this should be our meditation: It is
of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, Lam. 3.22. Or this, He that has
afflicted me for a time, could have held me longer; he that has touched me in
part* could have stricken me in whole; he that has laid this upon my name, or
estate, has power to lay a greater rod both upon my body and soul, without
doing me the least wrong. And indeed if we but think of our deliverance from
the fire of Hell, or that our names are writ in Heaven, it is enough to make us
both patient and thankful, though the trifles, we delight in, be taken from us.

But most men are so far from this, that if God does not answer their desires
in every thing, they will take pleasure in nothing; they will flight all his
present mercies and former favors, because in one thing he crosses them. Li^^
Ahab, they are more displeased for one thing they want (or rather fain and
pretend they want, or at least have no right unto) than they are thankful for
a thousand things they enjoy; though the least mercy they enjoy is beyond their
best merit. They are ready to receive all, while they return nothing but sin
and disobedience, wherein they more than abound; for they have done more
against God in one week, than they have done for him ever since they were born:
Yea, such sotts they are, that if another displease them, they will be revenged
on themselves, grow melancholy and discontent, like foolish Children, who will
forbear their meat, and g^^w sick of the sullens, if never so little crossed.
Yea, though men have all their hearts can wi^h, and might (if they would, and
had but the wi^ and grace) be as happy as any men alive, yet some small trifle
shall make them weary of themselves and every thing else, as it fared with
foolish ^^man, Esther 5.13. More particularly, if their purses grow light,
their ^earts grow heavy; yea, as if men did delight to vex themselves; how many
are there, that of happy make themselves miserable? or more mi^serable than
they need, by looking upon miseries in multiplying glasses: the opinion only
of being poor, or fear that they may be so when they are old, makes them never
enjoy a merry day, when they neither want, nor are like to do; and every man
is so miserable as he thinks himself. The raft of goods or evils does greatly
depend on the opinion we have of them.

SECT. 2.
Thus millions are miserable, melancholy, discontent, by their own concelt*
when thousands would think themselves happy, had they but a piece of their
happiness. Which discontent or melancholy occasions more murmuring amongsts us,
than ever there was among those Israelitos in the wilderness; an unthankfulness
able to make or keep them poor and miserable, and that everlastingly.

Indeed, because judgment is not executed speedily, Eccles. 8.11. they think
it no sin at all, such is their ignorance, Otherwise they might know, that as
the Israelites was, so their murmuring is, against even the holy One of Israel;
as Isaiah affirmed of Sens^^^erib, 2 King* 19.22. And David of Goliath, 1 ^am.
17.36, 45. The Lord (s^yes Moses to the people, when they grumbled for want of
bread, and also to Da^hau and Abiram) hears your murmuring against him, and
what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord, Exodus
16.8. Numb. 16.15, 21. Only this is the difference, multitudes of them were
destroyed suddenly (even fourteen thousand and seven hundred at a clap) yea,
they had all been consumed in a moment for their murmuring, had not Moses stood
up in the gap, and interceded for them, Numb. 16.41. to 50. and 32.10. to 14.
and 26.64, 65, and 11.12, 33. and 14.12, 22, 23. and 21.5, 6. Whereas millions
among us do the like, and are not stung with fiery Serpents as they were:
because they are reserved without repentance, to a fiery Serpent in Hell. Nor
stricken with death temporal, because reserved to death ^ternal. But God is
the same God still, and as just now as ever, though now under the Gospel,
instead of corporal judgments he inflicts many times spiritual, as blindness
of mind, hardness of heart, and final impenitency, the forerunner of eternal
destruction of body and soul in that burning lake, Revel. 19.20. For why is
their ruin recorded? but for our learning and warning, ^ Cor. 10, 11. Neither
is forbearance any acquittance; yea, to be let go on in a continual repeating
of so great a sin (under such means of light and grace) uncontrouled, is the
greatest unhappiness, the heaviest ^urle, because such seldom rest, until they
come to that evil, from which there is no redemption. God owes that man a
grievous payment, whom he suffers to run on so long unquestioned, and his
punishment shall be greater, when he comes to reckon with him for all his
faults together. O that men (...) but seriously consider this, before it proves
too late ^ and before the drawbridge be taken up, for favors bestowed, and
deliverances from dangers bind to gratitude; or else the more bonds of duty,
the more plagues for neglect. The contribution of blessings require retribution
of obedience, or will bring distribution of judgments.

Yea, argue with all the world, and they will conclude, that there is no vice
(...) ingratitude; and mere ingratitude returns nothing for good, but these
return evil for good, yea, the greatest evil for the greatest good, being
more ungrateful to God and Christ, than can be expressed by the best Orator
alive. Our Redeemer has done and suffered more, or would do (did we not so
daily provoke him, for which read Gods goodness and Englands unthankfulness)
more for us, than either can be expressed, or conceived by any heart, were it as
deep as the Sea.

Yea, God has removed so many evils from us, and conferred so many good things
upon us, that they are beyond thought or imagination. And were the whole Heaven
turned into a Book, and all the Angels deputed Writers therein, they could not
set down all the good which Gods love in Christ has done us. As consider, if
we are so bound to bless God for his external, temporal, inferior, earthly,
perishing benefits (as food, ray^^nt, friends, fire, air, water, health,
wealth, life, limbs, liberty, senses, and a thousand the like) what praise do
we owe him for the lasting fruits of his eternal love and mercy? and how
thankful should we strive to be? And as much do we owe unto God, for the
dangers from which he delivers us; as for the great and many mercies he has
bestowed upon us. Neither could we possibly be unthankful, if we seriously
thought upon what God gives, and what he forgives. Besides (which would also be
thought upon) what should we have if we did truly love and serve Christ? who
has done all this for his enemies, neglecting and dishounouring him.

SECT. 3.
Now can any one in common reason meditate so unbottomed a love, and not study
and strive for an answerable thankful demeanor: yet, as if all that Christ
has done for us were nothing to move us, we are so far from being thankful,
that our whole life, language and religion is naught else but one continued act
of muttering and murmuring! this is the case, and it is the case of almost who
not.

And is this a small matter? Is it Gods unspeakable mercy, that we are not at
this present frying in Hell flames, never to be freed, and do we complain for
want of a trifle? O that we might, as we ought, lay this to heart! and that
Gods Heralds would be often, and ever minding men of this their sordid and base
condition, and their grievous provoking the Lord, who is even a consuming fire,
Heb. 12.29. For to me it is a wonder, that of all other sins, this is the least
preached against. And me thinks it should ^ut the very hearts of th^se, that
have felt the love of Christ, ^o hear him so dishonored, who is the life of
their lives, and soul of their souls, and that by those who profess themselves
Christians. Nor do I think I could have pitched upon a Subject more serious,
public and profit^ble, whether we consider the generality of the disease, or
the nec^ss^^y commodity and common good that I hope, and is likely to come by
the (...).

As tell me, will it be any desertlesse office, to find out a way to help all
this? and to make the most poor and melancholy the richest and happiest men
alive? for that is my drift; it is a Theme that perhaps has not hitherto been
thought of, at least not handled* but you will grant it as profitable a
Project, when once it is effected, as was Columbus his discovery of the West
Indies, yea, and I hope will extend it self to as many; for like a cunning
Augler, I have baited my hook with that, at which every fish will be sure to
bite. As who, or where, is the man that desires not to be rich and happy? I
dare say, if the Great Cham, who is said to have a tree full of pearls banging
by clusters, should but make proclamation, that whoever would re^^ it to him
should have plenty of gold, he might drive such a trade, as would soon make him
a Bankcrupt: For as the Prophet observes, every one, even from the least unto
the greatest, is given unto covetousness, Ierem. 6.13. All ^^ape after gain,
and how to get is each man's thought from sun to sun, insomuch that it is to be
feared, nineteen parts of all the men in Christendom are whorshippers of the
golden Calf. And let this serve by way of Preface, least the par^h or entry
prove too big for the house: Or least it should be said of me (as once
Nebuchadnezar objected to the Inchanters and Astrologians) that I do but while
away the time, because I cannot tell them this thing, they so much expect and
long for, Dan. 2.8.

SECT. 4.
As what will some Momus say? Here are great words, but no security; Its well
if all prove not like the Indian Fig Tree, whose leaves are as broad as a
target, when the fruit is no bigger than a bean. Many an Alchymist in
projecting the Philosophers stone, have been so confident to find that which
should do all the world good, that they have distilled away great estates of
their own and other men's, to whom they have promised beforehand gold in whole
scuttles, but at length their glasses have broken together with themselves and
all their adherents.

Answer: I know it is no unusual thing with Projectors, to lift up Expectation
so high, that she not seldom over-thinks the birth: But I had rather men should
find more than they expect, than look for more than they shall find. Nor do I
ask any more, than that you will hear all before you censure, which is no
unreasonable request, for so far as we see, we dare believe a suspected or
discredited person; and there are some dishes that we may ^at, even from
sluttish bands. Neither shall thou after the perusal of it (in case I should
tall short of what I pretend) have occasion, as many buyers, to cry out with
him in the Comedy, pol ego and oleum, and oper^^ perdi^^.

Yea, these two things I will poremptorily promise thee: First, That whosoever
can show thee the way better, yet none can show thee a better way to grow rich
and happy. The second (...) that if thou be not wanting to thy self, if thou will but reserve those rules and directions which I shall produce from the
mouth of God, (who never yet deceived the trust of any, that had the wit or
grace to confide in him, and obey his Precepts, thou shall become of poor and
melancholy, both rich and happy. Wherefore be at leisure to hear what I shall
say, and call your best thoughts to counsel touching this great business.


CHAP. I.
NOw for the better discharge of what I have undertaken, you may please to take
notice, that a poor and malancholy man is like a City inf^sted with too Enemies
(the one foreign, the other domestic) which can never enjoy peace and safety,
unless the one be kept out, and the other cast out, or which is better, both
subdued. The domestic, or inbred enemy to be cast out is Melancholy; the
foreign foe to be kept out, Is Poverty: of these two I will choose to s^t upon
the last first, and the rather, for that this being kept out, or vanquished, the
other will the sooner yield, or with more eas^ be overcome.

Touching Poverty, (for that error in practice proceeds many times, originally
and dangerously from error in judgment; and because a sound mind, and a right
understanding of things will much advantage a man in the obtaining and enjoying
of a good and happy estate (for the one lays the foundation, as the other
raises the walls and roof) and lastly, because this discourse may enrich the
soul, settle the heart, and with Gods blessing change the will, as well as
increase wealth ( an ignorant rich man, being no better than a sheep with a
golden fleece) that so God in all may have the glory* I will first show what it
(...), and what it is not, to be rich, and then acquaint you h^^ of poor you
may become rich. As touching the first of these, it is to be observed, that
most men are much mistaken in judging who are poor, and who are rich: as
strongly persuading themselves, that a man is so much the happier, by how much
the more he is wealthier, which is as gross a delusion as possibly can be; for
there are some cases, wherein men are never the better for their wealth, and
others again, wherein they are much the worse, as thus.

God gives to every man a stock or portion of this worlds goods (as well as of
grace and wisdom) more or less to occupy withall^ yea, I persuade my self
there are few men, that have not once in their life a golden opportunity
offered them, whereby, if they neglect it not, they may live comfortably all
their days, and to him who is thankful, and uses the same well, (...) to
Gods glory, and profit of himself and others, he gives more as to the servant
which used his tallents well, be doubted them* but to such as are unthankful*
and abuse the same to their own (...) and Gods dishonor, or distrustfully
^oord it up, he either takes from them that which he had formerly (...) as he
took away the ^^ talent from the servant, which had (...) outward blessings,
without his blessing upon them, and then they w^^ better mist then had, and
will do them more hurt than good, Eccles. 5.13. Or thirdly, which is worst of
all, he bestows riches upon them in wrath, as he gave a King to the Israelites
and Quails: of these severally and is order.

Only it will be necessary, that I first give you an account in brief, how
sordidly and ingratefully they deal with God, that so you may the better see
how God again requites and pays them back in their own coin, without the least
tincture of injustice or severity.

CHAP. II.
GOD has bestowed more blessings upon many men, than they have hairs on their
heads, yea, God has given them far larger portions of this worlds wealth, than
he has done to millions of their brethren; they so grow and increase in
substance, as if they had found out the Philosophers ^tone, and had the art to
turn copper into gold, or as if with Thales they had the faculty to foresee
what commodities will be cheap, and what dear: and the more God has bestowed
upon them, the greater is their debt of thankfulness and the greater their duty
of obedience: But alas, They are like the hog, that ^cornes feed upon,
But never look up from what tree they come:
Or they more regard the gift than the giver; as Martia, Catoes daughter, found
it to fare with her Suitors, who being asked why she did not marry, m^de
answer, that she could not meet with a man that would love her more than hers.

Perhaps they will profess they love God, and afford him a kind of verbil
thanks, so resembling the Elder-tree, whose slour is more worth than all the
tree besides. Or Nazianzens Country of Ozizal^, which abounded with gay
flowers, but was barren of corn; for their thanks is a mere complement, and
heir lip-love no other than self-love, as any one may see by those few signs.
As observe but how easily they are moved at their own injuries, how p^rl^n: at
Gods: let their own credits or riches be troubled, they rage little Lions, let
Gods honor be questioned, they are as tame as Lambs: If the aspersion of
scandal lights upon their names, there is suit upon suit, from Court to Court,
all to beggar the raiser of it, let the Lords dreadful name be blasphemed, they
are so far from spending a penny, that they will not spare a syllable: like
Jonah they are more moved for the loss of their gourd, than for all Nineveh,
which could not be if they did in the least love God, or were thankful, as they
say* they do and are.

Yea* ^r were well if this were the worst, if they were only negative, if they
did return nothing for all the loving kindness of God, and good they ha^^
received from him for they return evil; as may not God say to these, I me^^
all unholy and unmerciful rich men, as ^arah spoke to Abraham concerning Hag^r,
I have given thee mine handmaid, and now I am despised in thine eyes* And to
(...) return that rich men make to God* for as of(...) as Seneca observes; so
fares it between God and the ungrateful. As our ^^omacks are usually worst in
summer, so are our appetites to grace-wards* weakest in time of prosperity and
peace. And as the Moon, when she is fuller of light, is still farthest from the
Sun, so the more wealth men have, the farther commonly they are from God. Too
much rankness lays the corn, and trees overladen with fruit are their own
ruin. God has thrown away a little white and red earth upon thee, and thou
art like some vain Whiffler, that is proud of his borrowed chain. It had been
happy for many a man, if God had permitted them to be poor still; for as Saul
was changed to another man presently upon his an^ynting, so are men commonly
upon their advancement, and according to our ordinary proverb, their good and
their blood rises together: As if you observe, what ever they were before, if
they be now but a little crossed, they will swell like the Sea in a storm, and
be more troubled at an affront from their inferior or equal, than for death
or hell.

Yea, how many with their greatness have such great thoughts of themselves,
that God himself must not displease them* for if an unseasonable shower does
but cross their recreations, they are ready to fall out with heaven, and to
quarrel with God himself (like Mrs. Minkes riding to Ware) as if they were
wronged, because he did not take his times, when to rain, and when to shine,
resembling therein the Horse, that being overmuch pampered will grow fierce,
and kick, and not abide his rider. Or the Mules F^^es who when she has sucked
her sill, and has enough of her damms milk, casts up her heels and kicks
unkindly. But he is a very quartellous cu^^, that barks at every horse, and in
the silent night the very moonshine opens his clamourous throat. Now how do we
not then wonder and bless our selves that such men enjoy so much, something,
any thing* yet hear all, and you will confess that others are more beholding to
God, whom he denies, and keeps short of these bewitching balts of wealth and
greatness.

But I have not told you one half of their base ingratitude, for commonly when
they have been fatted with Gods blessings, they not only spurn at his
precepts, but as if they studied to be superlative in their provoking of him*
they return the greatest and most malicious evil for the greatest and most
admired love, even hating God and his people. John 15.24, 25. yea, they most
spightfully and maliciously fight on Satan's and sins fide against Christ, and
persecute his members, and the truth, with all their might, persuading, and as
far as they can, inforeing others to do the same; and all this against
knowledge and conscience, as I have upon another occasion made it plainly
appear, though the Devil so blinds them, that there is no convincing them
thereof.

Thus these sin is many degrees beyond ingratitude it self; it is a wickedness
of that nature, that there is no name significant enough to express it. Yea, to
receive so many, such good things at the hands of God, and return such, and so
much evil, is a desperate wickedness not to be endured.

CHAP. III.
BUt observe what they get by it, and how God (even here) pays them again in
their own coin; whereof I will give you several instances, for God does not
deal alike with all in this case, but is various in these kinds of ^etallation.
If I be large upon this point, consider of what consequence and concernment it
is, and you will not blame me for prolixity: yea, admit it should be supposed a
digression, yet would I hope to have thanks for it.

First, How many are there, to whom God gives abundance of wealth, and after
some few years (for their abusing the same, and their great unthankfulness)
takes from them again, even that which he had formerly given them* Yea, how
many hundreds are there every year, even in this City, reputed good men, yea,
formerly known to be so, which all on a sudden have shut up their shop windows,
and broke for thousands. Neither was the talent only taken from him in the
Gospel, that evil servant was but a type of many, that should have their
talents taken away.

The Hi^d in the Fable (O that it were but a fable) being hunted by the Dogs,
hid her self under a vine, whose broad leaves covered her, where perceiving
many sweet grapes, she in requital began to eat them, but by her breaking and
pulling them, she made such a noise and shaking of the leaves, that she was
soon perceived by the hunts-men, and so taken and devoured by the Dogs; such is
the gain of unthankfulness. The ungrateful man forfeits all Gods favors, even
what he has, and what he might further expect, merely for want of paying that
small quit-rent of thankfulness.

Strabo reports in his 8. Book, that the Sea, raised by an earthquake,
overflowed the City of Helice, distant twelve furlongs from it, and drowned all
the Inhabitants thereof for their inhospitallity to the Ionians.

The Lords impost for all his blessings is our thankfulness, if we neglect to
pay this impost, the commodity is forfeit, and God will take it back, our
returns are expected according to our receipts.

So that it is hard to determine, whether the ungrateful person be more
wicked, or simple; for what man is so mad, as to purchase barren lands that
will bring forth nothing but weeds, briars and thorns? Or who will not be
willing to sow plent^fully, where he shall reap plentifully?

The best means to get more, is to be thankful for what we have, God loves to
sow much where he reapes much. Thankfulness for one benefit inviteth another,
but to do good to an unthankful body, is to sow corn on the sand, and such
speed thereafter. For the earth, which drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, and brings forth herbs, meet for him by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God; but that which bears thorns and briars is
reproved, and is near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.7, 8.
Whence arises this conclusion, that want of piety is the conviction of folly.
But

CHAP. IIII.
SEcondly, admit God i^ pleased to continue or increase the unthankful and
(...) then he had as good be without it; for no outward blessing proves a
blessing, without Gods blessing upon it, Mal. 2.2. The wealth of Croesus, were
it to be given,
Were not thanks-worthy, if un-blest by Heaven.
That Gods blessing upon all we have or do is all in all, and that without it
all is nothing, is easy to prove. The diligent hand, says Solomon, makes
rich, Prove. 10 4. but withal, the blessing of God makes rich, says the same
Solomon, ver. 22. not diligence without Gods blessing, for without it all the
earning of great wages, is but putting money into a bag with holes: Haggai 1.6.
Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye have not enough, ye
drink, but ye are not filled with drink, ye cloth you, but there is no
warmness, and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with
holes; and a great deal of the like in verse the ninth: and why all this? they
were all for themselves, and sought not the glory of God, and therefore he did
blow upon it, and blast all their blessings, as the whole book shows. And the
same we daily see; for have not many men great fees, great offices, great
revenues, great gettings, and yet they can scarce keep themselves out of debt?
Yea, who more needy, and who run more in debt than those, that have hundreds
and thousands a year? whereas others that have very little, but small means,
and yet maintain themselves and their families well, yea, and help their poor
friends and neighbors also. Only the word that proceeds out of Gods mouth,
makes the difference, his blessing sets forward the one, which he justly
withholds from the other for their wicked unthankfulness.

Though Laba^ changed Jacobs wages ten times, yet he could not one time change
that blessing of God which was always with him. A little thing which the
rightoeus injoyeth is better than great riches to the wicked, Prove. 16.8. Meat,
though it have a virtue to nourish, Medicine, though it have a virtue to heal,
raiment, though it can both adorn and defend the body against the injury of air
and cold, wealth, though it can make rich, yet man lives not by bread,
physic, raiment, etc. only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God does a man live, as our Savior speaks, Math. 4.4.

Nay, without Gods blessing the very use of their meat is taken away, for it
shall not satisfy, as it fell out with them, Hosea 4.10. And the like of other
things, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it,
except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in vain. It is in vain for
you to rise early, and to lie down late, and eat the bread of carefulness,
Psalm. 127. 1, 2. And again, Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but it is
God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. as in temporal, so in spiritual
food, it is not the Teacher, but the divine operation of Gods Spirit working
with the word, which converteth the soul; and for want of this blessing, and
divine operation from God, even the best of outward blessings, as health,
strength, riches, honors, beauty, wit, learning, etc. prove but the bane of
the owners; as Absaloms hair proved his halter. And nothing so sovereign, which
(belog abused by sin) may not of a blessing become a curse.

(...) can rot the grain in the ground, blast it in the ear, wither it in the
blade, rot It with unseasonable showers, when it is r^pe cause v^rmine to
devour it in the barn, yea, when it has past the flayl, the mill, the oven, he
can make it gall in the mouth, in the stomach poison. He can either give a man
meat and no stomach, or a stomach and no meat. And the same God, that can break
the staff of bread, Ezekiel. 4.16. can also break the staff of friends, riches,
promotion, wit, learning, and all other means that we trust to, or put our
confidence in, as he did the staff of Physic to Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.12, 13. as
he restrained the fire from burning, Dan. 3.27. and the water from drowning,
Exodus 14.21, ^2. and the Lions from devouring, Dan. 6 22. Whereas if he please
to give his blessing, a man shall be happy, have he any thing or nothing.

Even a word out of his mouth can either sustain us without bread, as it did
Moses and Elias; or with a miraculous bread, as it did Israel with Manna; or
send ordinary means after a miraculous manner, as food to the Prophet by the
Ravens; or multiply ordinary means miraculously, as that meal and oil to the
Sareptane widow; or make a little means go a great way, and perform much, as
those two mean meals of the Prophet, when in the strength thereof he traveled
forty days 1 King. 19 5. to 9. Unto which we may refer the strength of Moses,
who being one hundred and twenty years old, ^ad not his natural strength
abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. and the like of Caleb, Joshua 14.10, 11. All things are
sustained by his almighty word, how else should the whole Globe of the earth
and sea hang in the middle of the air, and have no other supporter?

The only means for grass, and herbs, and trees, and fruit to grow by, is
rain, yet God provided for Adam all these things before ever it had rained on
the earth* The usual means of light is the sun, howbeit God provided light
before he made the sun, light the first day, the sun the fourth day, he only
said, let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1.3.

There is no reason in the world, that seven loaves, and a few little fishes,
in the Gospel, should feed four thousand, much less, that five loaves and two
fishes should feed five thousand, means very insufficient to natural reason;
yet God speaking the word to them, they did it. The like whereof we may read 2
King. 4.43, 44. So for the apparel of the Israelites, which they had when they
were young and children in Egypt, to serve them till they were grown men, even
forty years together in the wilderness* without being worn out, Deuteronomy. 29 5.
and the like of that water and pulse, which with Gods blessing made Daniel, and
his companions, farter and fairer than all the children, which did eat the
portion of the Kings meat, Dan. 1* 15.

We live by food, but not by any virtue that is in it without God, yea, without
the concurence of his providence bread would rather choke than nourish us: if
he withdraw his word and blessing from his creatures, in their greatrst
abundance we perish. A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from
heaven, John 3.27. All which should teach us confidently to trust in God, what
ever our extremeties be; for if God needs not his own lawful, much less thy
unlawful moanes. Again, if no moanes will serve the turn, or do us any good,
without the blessing of God upon it, let us not forfeit his blessing by our
vile ingratitude, but rather desire his blessing, though we want the means.

Thirdly, Is it be the blessing of God that makes rich, and not anything that
we can do, let us take heed of ascribing the same to our wit and industry, of
sacrificing to our net, and burning incense to our yarne, as the Prophet
speaks, Hab. 1.16

Fourthly and lastly, say not as many do, O that I were so rich, that I had but
so much as such a man^ then should I be happy: but rather desire God, that he
will bless and sanctify unto thee what thou have, that he may have glory, thy
self and others good by the same: or else God may give thee thy desire, yea,
more than thy heart can wish, as the Psalmist speaks of the wicked, Psalm. 7*
3.7, 9. but it shall be to thy grief and sorrow: as it was said to Neroes
Mother about her sons being Emperor: or as Bacchus granted the request of
Midas, whose desire was, that whatsoever he touched might instantly be
converted into gold, which was little to ^^^comfort, when even his bread, wine,
the feathers of his bed, his shirt, garments, and every thing else turned into
that hard metal, as Fulgentius delivers it: he had his desire, but so, as he
would gladly n^w have unpray'd his prayers. Alas, how often does riches,
without Gods blessing upon them, prove or become the owners ruin? Many a young
Heir has a great and fair estate left him, and is cried up as happy, but it
proves to him within a while, even like the Ark to the Philistines, which did
them more hurt than good, and so fares it with all that forget God, and are
unthankful to him for what they have. Neither is this all: For,

CHAP. V.
THirdly, there are abundance of men that God does not only withdraw his
blessing from them, but sends his curse with the riches he bestows.

As suppose a man grows never so rich by indirect means, as some care not
how, but what and how much they get; for to get one scruple of gold, they will
make no scruple of conscience; they care not to make many poor to make
themselves rich: for they have consciences like a barn door, as loving money
better than themselves: yea, they care not, so they may get silver, if they
loose their souls. Now God not seldom suffers such to grow very rich, but
together with their riches, they have the curse of God, whereby they become the
worse, and not the better, for them.

There is an evil sickness, says Solomon, that I have seen under the sun, to
wit, riches reserved to the owners thereof for their hurt, Eccles. 5.13. To
which accords that of the Prophet Malachy, If ye will not hear it, nor consider
it in your heart, to give glory to my names says the Lord of hosts, I will
even send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed
them already, because ye do not consider it in your hearts, Mal. ^.2. Their
riches are seeming benefits, very curses, even gifts given in wrath, as a King
unto Isra^l. I give them a King in my wrath, says the Lord, Hosea 13.11. And
so of their Qu^iles, He gave them their desire, but be sent l^^nnesse into
their souls, Psalm. 106.15. They did ^^^ and were well filled, yet turned obey
not from their lusts; but the flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was
chewed, even the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord
smote the people with an exceeding great plague, Numb. 11.23. Psalm. 78.29, 30,
31. And in another place, Let their table be a snare unto them, and their
prosperity their ruin, Psalm. 69.22. They had better have had no meat, then
such sauce withal.

The covetous Cormorant, and unthankful wretch, deals with God, as a dog does
with his master, who devoureth by and by whatever he can catch, and gopeth
continually after more: and it were a marvel, that God should answer him with
such abundance, and as it were, be still pouring water into that vessel which
already runs over, considering his monstrous unthankfulness; were it not to rot
the hoops and chines, that so the whole cask may break in pieces, were there
not poison mixed with it, I mean Gods secret curse, as I shall suddenly show.

We well know, that a Ship may be so laden, as that her very freight may ^e the
cause of her sinking. Demonica having betrayed Ephesus (where all her friends
and kindred were) to Brennus of Senona for the love of gain; was brought to a
great heap of gold, and loaded so heavy therewith, that she dyed under the
burden. Tarpeia for the desire she had of all the gold bracelets which the
Sabines wore about their left arms, when they went to besiege Room, sold the
Fort or Castle of the City (wherein there was a great Garrison, of which her
Father Tarpeius was Captain) to the Sabines; and asking for reward of her
treason, Fatius the Sabines General, according to his promise, when she had
opened them a gate in the night and let them in, commanded his whole Army to do
as he did, who taking the bracelet which himself wore on his left arm, and his
target, did hang them about her neck, and so all the rest, until she being
bowed down to the ground with the weight of them, was pressed to death under
the burden. And much after this manner does God deal with unmerciful misers,
and all wicked and ungrateful men. As see the sad condition of a man, to whom
God gives riches in wrath; it is so well worth your knowledge and observation,
that David was very inquisitive with the Lord about it, Psalm. 73.3. to 13. and
likewise the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 12. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I speak
with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments, wherefore does the way
of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea, they have taken r^^^, they grow,
yea, they bring forth fruit; thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
reins, ver. 1, 2, 3. Yea, it is admirable to consider, how the tabernacles of
robbers do prosper, how secure they are that provoke God, and how abundantly
God gives into their hands, Job 12.6. They increase in riches, wax fat and
sbine, Jerem. 5.28. They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they
plagued like other men; their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than
heart can wish, yea, there are no hands in their death, Psalm 73. and many the
like places: But hear all, and ye will never envy their prosperity, neither
will your teeth water after their dainties: as what is ever the conclusion?
their felicity and happiness is no sooner mentioned, but it follows: And thou
did set them in slippery places, thou castedst them down into destruction,
they are brought into desolation, in a moment they are utterly consumed with
terrors, Psalm 73.18. to the 21. verse. Pull them out like sheep for the
slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter, Ierem. 12.3. They spend
their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down into hell. Job 21.13.
Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God, Psalm. 55.19. But no
greater judgment, then thus to be free from judgments. Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone, says God, Hosea 4.17. And the like: I will not visit
your daughters when they are harlots, nor your spouses when they are whores,
ver. 14. and hereupon all they do is well.

But think it not an argument of Gods favor or dispensation, that thou and
thousands more do prosper in their wickedness, that some eminent judgment is
not executed speedily upon them, while they are contriving their deep and
divelish plots: For though prosperous wickedness is one of the devils
strongest chains, yet there cannot be a greater unhappiness, an heavier curse,
than to prosper in ill designs and ungracious courses. Such a man's preservation
is but a reservation, as it fared with Sodom and her sisters, which were
preserved from the slaughter of the four Kings, that God might rain down hell
from heaven upon them. And Sennacherib, who escaped the stroke of the
destroying Angel, that he might fall by the sword of his own Sons, Isai.
37.37, 38.

Wicked men are not wise enough to cosinder, that usually God does most afflict
those whom he best affects; dealing with his children, as the good husband
deals with his trees, those in the garden he is ever and anon meddling with
them, either lopping off the superfluous branches, or scraping off the moss, or
paring of the root, or digging and dunging about them, so using all good means
to make them fruitful; whereas he lets them alone which grow in the hedge-row
or forest, till at the length he comes with his Axe and cuts them down for the
fire. Fatted ware, you know, is but fitted for the shambles. God puts money
indeed into these earthen boxes, that have only one chink to let in, but none
to let out, with purpose to break them when they are full. What was Haman the
better for all he had, when the King frowned upon him? or the happier for being
lift up the ladder, when he was to come down again with a rope? And for ought
thou know, this very night thou may loose both thy gold, thy life, and
thy soul too. And therefore what ever thou make choice of, let me rather beg
with innocent Lazarus, then abound with unjust Ahab, or unmerciful Dives, so
shall my turn be soon over, whilst theirs is to come and continue everlastingly.

But my purpose is not so much to show you, what will be the end of unmerciful
and ungrateful men, as how their riches proves a curse to them here. That they
had better be without their wealth, than that God should give it them upon such
terms as he does, I shall demonstrate in these* on particulars. I pray mind
them.

CHAP VI.
FIrst, How many are there, that by an intolerable care, and pains, and grief,
and sting of conscience, and loss of credit, and undergoing many perils, get
great estates, and when they have obtained all that heart can wish, by a just
judgment of God, they have not power to partake of what they have, or be a
farthing the better for all. As observe but what wise Solomon speaks Eccles. 6.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men,
a man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants
nothing for his soul of all that he desires; yet God gives him not power to
eat thereof, ver. 1, 2. And again, There is one alone, and there is not a
second, yea, he has neither child nor brother, yet is there no end of all his
labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he, for whom do
I labor and bereave my soul of good: this is also vanity, yea, this is a sore
travel, Eccles. 4.8.

Yea, how many such could I nominate, that are baser by being wealthier, that
are no other than rich beggars, or beggars in the midst of their riches (as
Cain was a vagabond upon his own land) upon whose estates there is ^et a spell,
insomuch that their wealth says to them in effect, touch not, taste not, handle
not.

It is the misers curse, want in the midst of abundance, hunger in the midst of
plenty, he freezes by the fires side, and is like an unhappy boy, that has a
great trusse of points to play with, and but one at his breeches to tie them
together, or rather he resembles a dog in a wheel, that toils all day to roast
meat for others eating, as the wise man shows, Eccles. 6.1.2.

The covetous Miser covets without end, but all to no end; he only feeds his
eyes with that which should feed his belly, and cloth his back. Like him that
Horace tells of in Room, called Oxide, who was so rich, that he might measure
his gold by the bushel, and yet went almost stark naked, and never would fill
himself half full of meat. They are like Tantalus, who stands up to the chin in
water, and has all kinds of fruits hanging over his head, but is not suffered
to taste of the one, nor drink of the other: Or like an Ass, that is laden with
gold, or dainty cates, but feeds upon thistles: Or like the Indians, who though
they have all the gold amongst them, yet are the most beggarly and naked people
alive.

For as if they were such fools, as not to know that their money will buy them
all necessaries of meat, drink, apparel, and the like, they scarce wear a good
garment, or eat a liberal meal, or take a quiet sleep, but are ever tormenting
themselves to get that, for getting whereof they shall be tormente^. Like a
true Chemist, he turns every thing into gold, both what he should eat, and
what he should wear. He is like a man robbed, hurt and bound, who though he has
means to relieve himself, yet has not liberty to go where he may be releived.

As a proud man is ignorant in the midst of his knowledge, so is the covetous
man poor, and needy, in the midst of his wealth: Yea, a poor beggar is in
better estate than a rich miser, for whereas the poor beggar wants many things,
the rich miser wants every thing.

Crates threw his money into the Sea, resolving to drown it, least it should
(...) him. The drunkard casts his money into a deluge of drink, both drowning it
and himself with it: wherein the Miser and the Rioter are opposites, the one so
loves money, that he will not afford himself good drink, the other so loves
good drink, that he scorns money. But in several respects, the Misers case is
worse than the Prodigals, for the prodigal shall have nothing hereafter, but
the covetous man has nothing here, nor shall hereafter.

Riches, says Seneca, are the wise man's servant, but the fools master: and
the miser makes himself a slave to his servant. Riches are good when the party
that possesses them can tell how to use them; but as instruments are of no use
unto them that are ignorant of music, so are riches of no use to the covetous.
So that in my judgment, that rich fool in the Gospel was far wiser than these
blocks, for he having attained his purpose, got a great estate, could after all
afford himself the comfort of it; for these are his words to himself, Thou have
much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink and take thy
pastime, Luke 12.19.

Nay, to abound with all things, and to be never the better for them, not to
partake of them, what fool or mad man has been known so senseless? yea, not to
flatter his pretended prudence, no beast will starve in a fat pasture; if then
a man shall pinch his guts when God has afforded him affluence; the Ass is
not so very an Ass as he. Nor do I know any beast like him, save Pharaohs
seven lean and evil favored kine, and to them he is very like: For when his
large and greedy conscience has devoured or eaten up many Customers or Clients
estates, as they did the seven fat and well favored kine, yet it cannot be
known by any real amen^ment, that he has eaten them, but in his food,
raiment, satisfaction of his mind, etc. he is as ill favored as at the
beginning. He does not more lock up his goods from the ^heif than from himself:
So that I cannot more fitly compare him to any thing, than to an Idol, for as
an Idol has eyes but sees not, so he has a reasonable soul, but understands
not And most just it is, that he who is unjust to all others, should be most
unjust to himself. And as a covetous man is good to no body, so he is worst of
all to himself.

It is the depth of misery to fall under the curse of Cham, a servant of
servants, divitis servi, maxim servi, no thraldom to the inward and outward
bondage too. So that if there be any creature miserable, it is the miserable
miserly muck-worm; and yet he is least to be pitied, because he makes himself
thus miserable.

Now this may move wonder to astonishment! that they should take such care and
pains, and cast away their souls to heap up riches, and when they have done,
to be never a penny the better for them. Yea, what can any wise man think of
them, are they not stark mad? are they not fools in folio? What, take so much
care and pains, endure so much grief, sting of conscience, loss of credit,
deprive themselves of heaven, damn their own souls, to get wealth, and when
they have got it, not to be the better for it: yea, they are less satisfied
and contented than before, meanlier accommodated than mean men; and could this
possible be so, if God did not give them their riches in wrath? nor would be
otherwise deny them the use of their own; for the wise man has given it as a
rule, That to whom God has given riches as a blessing, he also gives him to
eat, and drink, and to take pleasure, and delight his soul with the profit of
his labors, wherein he travelleth under the sun: for which see Ecces. 2.24.
and 3.12, 13. and 5.17, 18, 19. and 8.15. And so you have one particular to
prove what I promised. But

CHAP. VII.
SEcondly, To this is added as another judgment, let the Ungrateful merciless
miser have never so much, he is never the more, but the less contented* As how
many have mighty estates, their houses full, their shops and warehouses full,
their coffers full, their purses full, and their pastures full, and yet as if
their hearts were bottomless, that is, still as lank and empty through an
excessive desire of more, as if they did indeed want all things. The Cormorants
desires are rather sharpened by enjoying, and augmented by possession.

For wishing still, his wishes never cease,
But as his wealth, his wishes still increase.
To show that covetous men belong to hell after they dye, they are like hell
while they live: Hell is never filled, and they are never satisfied, covetous
men drink brine, which increases thirst rather than quenches it. And though
the devil should say to them as he said to our Savior, touching the whole
world, and glory thereof, all these will I give thee, (though he needs not
offer them all, for they will serve him for less) yet all would not content
them, no more than heaven it self contented Lucifer: For as the rich glutton in
hell desired a drop of water, and yet a river would not have satisfied him; for
if his desire had been granted in the first, he would have required more, and
then more to that, never ceasing to ask, never having enough, nor being the
better when he had it: so it fares with the covetous man, his abundance no more
quenches his lust, than fuel does the flame. For as oil kindles the fire,
which it seems to quench, so riches come as though they would make him
contented, but they make him more covetous. And is not this thy very case that
art covetous? No man more happy, in respect of outward things, then thy self,
could thou but see it; thou have all things that heart can wish, and
should thou but come to want what thou now injoyest, and think not worth
thanks; when it were past thou would say, thou wast most happy, and after a
little miss, wish withal thine heart, thou hadest the same again: yea, a
world for such a condition and content withal Only the devil (by Gods just
permission) bewitches thee to think, that thou have not enough, when thou have
too much, and more than thou need, or know what to do withal.

Nor is it possible for a worldling to be contented: for whereas natural
desires are soon satisfied, those that are unnatural are infinite. Hunger is
soon apeased with meat, and thirst allayed with drink: but in burning Fevers,
quo pl^^ sunt potae plus (...) aqua, they still love, amere con^^^scentia,
never amore complacentiae. If covetous, or ambitious men ever feel content in
these transitory things, it is no otherwise then as itching soars do in clawing
and scratching fingers. And indeed how should intemperate desires be satisfied
with increase, according as they are replemished, when these appetites are not
capable of satiety?

Men in this case, are like poisoned Rats, which when they have tasted of their
bane, cannot rest until they drink, and then can much ^e^s rest till they
drink again, swell and burst. Covetousness is like the disease called the
Woolf, which is always eating, and yet keeps the body lean. A moderate water
makes the Mill go merrily, but too much will not suffer it to go at all.

Secondly, another reason is, Nothing can fill the heart of man, but he that
made it: The heart shall be satisfied with gold, when the body shall be
contented with wind. The whole world is circular, the heart of man is
triangular; and we know a circle cannot fill a triangle. Yea if it be not
filled with the three persons in Trinity, it will be filled with the world, the
flesh, and the devil. The heart is the seat or receptacle of spiritual things;
and the things of the world are corporal and carnal: Now carnal and corporal
things, can no more fill our hearts, then spiritual things can fill our
Coffers. Visible light will not clear the invisible understanding; nor will
corporal food feed the soul. Blessed are they, says our Savior, who thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, Mat. 5.6. not they that
thirst after riches, or honor, or pleasure; for instead of being satisfied,
they thirst more. Yea these Mammonists are so infinite in desiring, that could
such a one swallow the whole earth that swallows all, and will swallow him ere
long, it might choke him, but not satisfy him, as abundance of examples that I
could give you, sufficiently prove: namely Alexander, and Crassus, and
Lie^nius, and Marcus Crassus, and Ahab, and Haman, etc. But,

CHAP. VIII.
THirdly, to this is added as a further judgment, that as the more he has the
more he coveteth, so the nearer he is to his journeys end, the more provision
he makes for it. Other vices are weakened with age and continuance, only
covetousness (and that odious sin of drunkenness) grows stronger. As the
covetous wretch increases in years, so he increases in covetousness. What
Pline writes of the Crocodile, is fitly appliable to the miserly muckworm:
other creatures grow up to their height, and then decay and dye, only the
Crocodile grows to her last day. The aged worldling, though he have one foot in
the grave, yet his appetite to, and persute of gain, are but new born. Yea,
though he has outlived all the teeth in his gums, that hairs of his head, the
sight of his eyes, the taste of his palate; have he never so much, yet he has
not enough, and therefore would live to get more, and covets, as if he had a
thousand generation^ to provide for. He so lives, as if he were never to dye;
and so dies, as if he were never to live again. He fears all things, like a
mortal man, says Seneca, but he desires all things, as if he were immortal.
Had it not been for sin, death had never entered into the world: and were it
not for death, sin (especially the Misers sin) would never go out of the world.
Lus^ is commonly the disease of youth, ambition of middle age, covetousness of
old age: And Plautus makes it a wonder to see an old man beneficent. But what
faith Byas, covetousness in old men is most monstrous: for what can be more
foolish and ridiculous, then to provide more money and victuals for our journey,
when we are almost at our journyes end?

Wherefore remember thou, O old man, yea O remember! that your Spring is past,
your Summer over-past, and you are arrived at the fall of the leaf; yea winter
colors have already stained your head with gray and hoary hairs. Remember
also, that if God in justice did not leave you, and the Prince of darkness did
not blind you, and your own heart did not grossly deceive you; you could not
possible be so senceless as you are in these three last mentioned miseries.

Thus three of the covetous man's woes are past, but behold more are coming; for
God inflicts more plagues upon him, then ever he did upon Pharaoh. I Will
acquaint you only with seven more.

CHAP. IX.
FOurthly, his thoughts are so taken up with what he wants (or rather desires,
for he wants nothing but wit, and a good heart) that he not once minds or
cares for what he has, as you may see in Abab, 1 Kings 21.4. and Haman, Hester
5.13. and Micha, Judges 18.^4.

What the covetons man has, he sees not; his eyes are so taken up with what he
wants; yea the very desire of what he cannot get torments him, and it is an
heartbreaking to him, not to add every day somewhat to his estate: besides,
not to improve it so many hundreds every year, will disparage his wisdom more
to the world, then any thing else he can do, as I have heard such an one
allege, when I have told him my thoughts, about perplexing himself.

But see the difference between him, and one that has either wit or grace:
whose manner it is, even in case of the greatest losses, to look both to what
he has lost, and to what he has left; and instead of repining, to be
thankful that he has lost no more, having so much left that he might have
been deprived of. But fortish sensualists have a duller feeling or many good
turns, then of one ill: they have not so sensible a feeling of their whole
bodies health, as they have of their fingers aching; nor are they so thankful
for twenty years jollity, as displeased for one days misery. Whereas an humble
and good man, will see matter of thankfulness there. Where the proud and
ungrateful find matter of murmuring. And so much of the fourth particular,
only let me add as a sure rule, He that in prosperity is unthankful, will in
adversity be unfaithful.

CHAP. X.
Fifthly, the Devil, by Gods just permission, prevails by his temptations* to
make them think that the forbidden fruit is the sweetest of all fruits, as he
did our first parents. Nor will any other content him; each thing pleases him
better that is not his own. And as Publius observes, other men's goods are far
more esteemed by him.

Plines Woolf is a true emblem of this avaritious beast: whose nature it is
when he is eating his prey, though never so hungry, if he sees another beast
feeding, to forsake that which he is about, to take the prey from the other.
Ahab was such a Wolf, who could not content himself with his own, though he
enjoyed a whole kingdom, but he must wrest Naboths inheritance from him. The
commandment is express, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall
not covet thy neighbors wife, servant, Ox, Ass, nor any thing that is thy
neighbors, Exodus 20, 17. and all that fear God observe it; but nothing more
cross to the grain of a wicked man's heart, to whom stolen waters are most sweet,
and hi^ bread the most pleasant, Prove. 9.17. For one so insatiably covets after
another man's estate or office, that he is never the better for his own. Another
so loves his neighbors wife, that he even loathes and contemnes his own. Thy
neighbors wife to thee, to him thines fairest, says the Poet. Hence has that
cursed speech issued from one too great to name, That he could love his wife
above any other, if she were not his wife, a word sufficient to rot out the
tongue that spoke it.

Solomon was a wise man, and had tried all things. Oh that men would be so wise
as to take his counsel, and enjoy their own with joy and gladness of heart;
drink waters out of their own Cistern, and rejoice with the wife of their
youth, so as her breasts may satisfy them at all times, and they be ravished
always with her love, rather then deprive themselves of that happiness, by
inbracing the bosom of a stranger, and coveting that which is another, Prove.
5.15. to 21. Oh that thou would be convinced, that thy present condition what
ever it is, is the best for thee, had thou but the wit to see it; and that
only good use gives praise to earthly possessions: that there are no riches
comparable to content (for this is the gift of God) then surely thou will not
much remember the days of thy life, because God answers the joy of thine
heart, Eccles. 5.17, 18, 19.

But no matter, they love misery (lose the comfort of their own breast, and all
outward blessings, together with the tuition of God) and they shall have it;
for he that makes his fire with hay, has much smoke, and bu^ a little heat,
which leads me to the sixth particular.

CHAP. XI.
SIxthly, another sore judgment which God inflicts upon the merciless
mnckworm, for his monstrous unthankfulness, is, he injoyes not a merry day, no
not a pleasant hour in seven years, ye if you observe it, he resembles
Agelaustus, Grandfather to Crassus, who never laughed in all his life, save
once when he saw a mare eating of thistles: or rather Anaxagoras Clazoenius,
who was never seen to laugh or smile from the day of his birth. Joys never so
much as look in at the door of his heart; worldly delights to him, are but like
delicate meats to him that has lost his taste.

But O the cares, fears, anxieties, sighs, sorrows, suspicions, sad thoughts,
restless desires, the horrors, troubles, tortures, torments, vexations,
distractions, griefs, girdes, gripes, grudgings, repinings, doubts, dolors,
desperation, that are the ordinary companions of the covetous. How is he
hurried with desires to get, distracted with getting, vexed for what he cannot
get, tortured for what he loses, or another gains, troubled with fear of
losing what he has already gained? yea his labor to gather riches is restless,
his care to keep them boundless, his sorrow if he chance to lose them endless,
and his fear lest he should hereafter lack cureless.

Of all plagues sent into Egypt, that of the Flies was one of the most
troublesome, for they never suffered men to rest, for the more they were beaten
off, the more they came upon them: so of all miseries and vexations that God
lays upon worldlings; this is not the least, to be continually vexed and
tormented with cares, which they neither can (nor indeed would) beat off by any
means they are able to devise; for they rush in upon them in the morning so
soon as they awake, accompany them in the day, forsake them not at night, they
follow them to bed, and will not suffer them to sleep: their thonghts will not
permit them to sleep, nor their sleep permit them to rest. They afflict them in
their dreams, as giving them no quiet either by day, or night, as God
threatens to wicked men by the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 6. I could give you a
large bill of particulars; but fear of cloying is always at hand to curb me:
wherefore take these few for a taste. Want does not break so many sleeps for
provision the next day, as abundance does for increase. His nights are as
troublesome and uniquiet as his days; and his days as the days of Babylons
downfall. Never is more watchfulness, then where is most purpose of wickedness:
see Micha 2.1. Luke 16.8. Psalm. 36.4. Eccles. 5.12. It Was Chilons sentence,
Misery and Usury go commonly together.

If his plot be crossed, and his hand cannot act that wickedness by day, which
his head has devised by night, he is taken with a fit of of melancholy, sick
of the sullens, as was Ahab. He thinks it a death, that he cannot be suffered
to dye; it is a hell to him, that the gates of h^ll are shut against him.

Having engrossed a commodity, if he cannot have his expected price for it, or
prevail not in his suit, or cannot recover what he expected, or if any one
breaks in his debt, or if he hear of a Tax, or some unavoidable payment, and
an hundred the like, every of them adds to the care and grief of his heart,
which was ready to burst with care and grief before; for he had rather be
damned, then damnified; and in case he cannot have his will of another, he will
be revenged of himself, like Nanplius King of Euboea, who when he could not
revenge his sons death upon Ulysses, cast himself into the Sea. Yea in case he
sustain any great loss, he is ready to make himself away: as Menippus of
Phenicia did, who having lost his goods, strangled himself. Or like Dinarcus
Phidon, who at a certain loss, cut his own throat, to save the charge of a
cord. At least he feels more sorrow in losing his money, then ever he found
pleasure in getting it: nor will any condition content him; for the lightness
of his purse, gives him an heavy heart, which yet filled, does fill him with
more care. His medicin is his malady. These rich men, are no less troubled with
that they possess (lest they should lose it) then poor men are for that they
want. In the day time, he dares not go abroad for fear of robbing; nor stay at
home for fear of killing. His thoughts are so troubled with fear of thieves,
that he cannot, that he dares not sleep: yea he fears a thief worse then the
devil, therefore will he be beholding to the devil for a spell to save him from
the thief; which once obtained, a little Opium may rock his cares asleep, and
help him to a golden dream; for all his mind and heart is to get money; if
waking, he talks of nothing but earth, if sleeping, he dreams of it. Lastly, as
if all his delight were to vex himself, he pines himself away with distrustful
fear of want, and projecting how he shall live hereafter, and when he is old:
resembling Ventidius the Poet, who would not be persuaded but he should dye a
beggar. And Apicius the Roman, who when he cast up his accounts, and found but
an hundred thousand crowns left, murdered himself for fear he should be
famished to death.

CHAP. XII.
SEventhly, To the former miseries which a cruel Miser is justly plagued
withal, this may be added; the dolefulness of his conscience; for the sin of
oppression lies upon the soul as heavy as lead; yea as the shadow does ever
follow the body, so fear and desperation in all places, and at all times, do
wait upon an evil conscience. Sin arms a man against himself, and our peace
ever ends with our innocence. A Pithagorean bought a pair of shoos upon trust,
the Shoemaker dies, he is glad, thinks them gained, but a while after his
conscience twitches him, and becomes a continual chider; he hereupon repairs to
the house of the dead, casts in his money with these words, There take thy due,
thou live to me, though dead to all beside. Micha stole from his mother
eleven hundred shekels of silver, but his complaining conscience made him to
accuse himself and restore it again, Judge. 17. Il gotten goods lie upon the
conscience, as raw meat upon a sick stomach, which will never let a man be
well, or at ease, until he has cast it up again by restitution.

Means ill gotten, is to the getter, as the Angels book was to Saint John, When
he eat it, it was in his mouth as sweet as honey, but when he had eaten it, it
became in his stomach as bitter as gall, Rev. 10.10. The which is notably
illustrated Job 20.12. to 20. which together with the whole Chapter, is
mavelous good for cruel and unmerciful men to read; for I may not stand here
to repeat it. Sweetness is promised in the bread of deceit, but men find it as
gravel, crashing between their teeth.

Nor will his troubled conscience suffer him to steal a sound sleep: yea he
sleeps as unquietly, as it his pillow were stuffed with Lawyers per-knives.

I may give ye a hint of these things from the word, but only God and he can
tell, how the remembrance of his forepast cozenages and oppression, occasions
his guilty conscience many secret wrings and pinches, and gives his heart many
a sore lash, to increase the fear and horror of his soul every time he calls
the same to remembrance, which is not seldom: As, O poor wretches! what do they
endure? how are they immerged in the horrors of a vulned conscience? there is
more ease in a nest of Hornets, then under the sting of such a tormenting
conscience. He that has this plague, is like a man in debt, who suspecteth
that every bush he sees, is a Sergant to arest and carry him away to prison. It
was Gods curse upon Cain, when he had slain his brother Abel, to suspect and
fear, that every one he met would kill him: yea it makes him so afraid of every
thing, that a very Maulking frights him, and it is much, that he dares trust
his Barber to shave him. Dionysius was so troubled with fear and horror of
conscience, that not daring to trust his best friends with a razor, he used to
findge his beard with burning coals, as Cicero records. He is much like a
Malefactor in prison, who though he fare well, yet is tormented with the
thought of ensuing judgment. It is the handwriting on the wall, that prints
bloody characters in Belshazzars heart.

So that if any should deem a man the better, or happier, for being the richer,
he is very shallow; as many looking on the outer face of things, or see but the
one side (as they used to paint Antigonus, that they might conceal his
deformity on the other side) see not how they smart in secret, how their
consciences gripe them. Nor does any one know, how the shoowrings the foot, but
he that wears the same.

Or admit the best that can come, as suppose they can stop consciences mouth
for a time, or with the music of their money play it asleep for the present;
yet when they lie upon their deathbeds, it will sting them to the quick. For
when death besieges the body, Satan will not fail to beleagure the soul; yea
then he will be sure to lay on load; for as all corrupt humors, run to the
diseased and bruised part of the body; so when conscience is once awakened, all
former sins, and present crosses join together to make the bruise or sore more
painful. As every Creditor falls upon the poor man, when he is once arested. Or
let it be granted that his con^cience never troubles him on his sick bed, and
that he have no bonds in his death, as the Psalmist speaks Psalm. 73. -- but
departs likes a Lamb, which is not only possible but probable; for more by
many thousands go to hell like Naball, then like Judas; more dye like sots in
security, then in despair of conscience: yet all this is nothing, for the sting
of conscience here, though it be intolerable, is but a flea-biting to that he
shall endure hereafter, where the worm of conscience dies not, and where the
fire never goes out.

This is part of sins wages, and Satan's reward: We have sinned, therefore our
hearts are heavy, Isa. 59.11, 12. The sorrows of them that offer to another God
(as do the covetous) shall be multiplied says holy David, Psalm. 16.4. Yea
Seneca an heathen could say, that an evil life causes an unquiet mind; so
that Satan's government, is rather a bondage then a government, unto which
Christ gives up those that shake off his own.

What his government is, you may partly guess at by the servile slaveries he
puts his subjects upon. As O the many hard services which Satan puts his
servants upon, and what a bad Master is he: when we read that Origin at his
only appointment, made himself an Eunuch. Democritus put out his own eyes,
Crates cast his money into the Sea, Thracius cut down all the Vines, whereas
David did none of these, Ahaz made his son to pass through the fire, Jephta
sacrificed his only daughter, as the text seems to import. Wicked men think
they do God good service in putting his children to death: but where do we
find any Religious Israelite, or servant of God, at such cost? or when did God
require this of his servants? The Prophets and Apostles never whipped nor lanced
themselves, but Baals Priests did this and more. And so of the Papists, those
hypocrites of late years, and the Pharisees of old. How many sleepless nights,
and restless days, and wretched shifts, treacherous and bloody plots and
practices, does covetousness and ambition cost men? which the humble and
contented Christian is unacquainted with. How does the covetous man's heart
droop wish his Mammon? How does he turmoile and vex his spirit, torment his
conscience, and make himself a very map of misery, and a sink of calamity? it
is nothing so with Christ's servants.

CHAP. XIII.
I Have much more to enlarge of the miseries of unmerciful and ungrateful
Misers, but before I speak of them, I will give you the reasons and uses of
these already dispatched, wherein I will be as brief as may be.

You see that God may give men riches in wrath; and so as they shall be never
the better for them, but the worse. Now that you may not think it any strange
thing, observe the reasons why, and how justly they are so served.

The first Reason is, the unmerciful Misers monstrous unthankfulness, for those
millions of mercies he has received from God (of which I shall give you an
account in the second part) this causes God either not at all to give him, or
in giving him riches, to add this you have heard as a curse withal. He is
unthankful for what he has, therefore have he never so much, it shall not be
worth thanks. He is cruel to the poor, therefore he shall be as cruel to
himself. The poor shall have no comfort of what he has, therefore himself
shall have as little.

The covetous are cozen Germans to the nine leapers, thankless persons. They
are so much for receiving, that they never mind what they have received. He
deals with God, as a dog does with his master, who as Austine observes,
devoureth by and by whatever he can catch, and gapeth continually for more. Nor
has covetousness any thing so proper to it, as to be ungrateful. A greedy man
is never but shamefully unthankful; for unless he have all, he has nothing. He
must have his will, or God shall not have a good look from him; yea, as the
Mill, if it go empty, makes an unpleasant and odious noise, so the covetous
man, if the Lord does not satisfy his desires in every thing, he will most
wickedly murmur and blaspheme his providence; and if ever he sustaines loss,
he will never forget it. He writes benefits received in water, but what he
accounts injuries in marble. And for this his great ingratitude, God gives him
riches, but withdraws his blessing. For as Jacob gave Ruben a blessing, but
added, thou shall not be excellent, Genesis 49.4. so God gives the worldling
riches, but says, thou shall not be satisfied. He that loves silver, shall
not be satisfied with silver, Eccl. 5.10. Yea no man more unsatisfied; for let
him have what his heart can wish, he is not yet pleased, like the Israelites,
who murmurod as much when they had Mannah, as when they had none.

Secondly, the merciless Miser, never sued or sought to God for his riches;
neither does he acknowledge them as sent of God, but ascribes the increase of
his means to his wit and industry. Nay he dares not pray the Lords prayer,
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, lest he call for a curse upon
himself. Nay if he be (as probably he is) an Vsuerer, then in respect of other
men, he has no need to pray at all, for as one observes, Each man to heaven
his hands for blessing reares;
Only the Vs'rer needs not say his prayers.
Blow the wind East or West, plenty or dearth,
Sickness or health, sit on the face of earth,
He cares not, time will bring his money in,
Each day augments his treasure, and his sin.


Or admit he ever calls upon God, his prayer is that some one may dye, that he
may have his office, or break his day, that the beloved forfeiture may be
obtained. His morning exercise being only to peruse his bonds, look over his
baggs, and to worship them, as Marcus Cato worshipped his grounds, desiring
them to bring forth in abundance, and to keep his Cattle safe.

And as touching hereafter, if he shall find in his heart to pray, God will
not hear him, Prove. 1. The sacrifice of the wicked, is an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 21.27. What hope has the hypocrite says Job, when he has heaped
up riches; will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? Job 27.8, 9.
When you shall stretch out your hands, says God to such, I will hide mine eyes
from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear, Isa. 1.15. God
will turn him off to his gold and silver for help, as he did Iehoram to the
Prophets of his Father, and the Prophets of his Mother, 2 Kings 3.13. And it is
but just and equal, that those which we have made the comfort and stay of our
peace, should be the relief and comfort of our extremity. If our prosperity
has made the world our God: how worthily shall our deathbed be choked with
such an exprobration?

If God do answer such an ones prayers, it is as Archelaus answered the request
of a covetous Courtier, who being importuned by him for a cup of gold, wherein
he drank; gave it unto Euripides that stood by, saying Thou art worthy to ask
and be denied, but Euripides is worthy of gifts, although he ask not. And
indeed good men many times receive gifts from God, that they never dreamt o^,
nor durst presume to beg, which others extremely strive after and go without.
As it is feigned of Pan, that it was his good hap to find out Ceres, as he was
hunting, little thinking of it, which none of the other gods could do, though
they did nothing else but seek her, and that most industriously.

Now, if he neither prays to God for what he would have, nor gives him thanks
for what he gives, nor desires a blessing upon what he receives, viz. that he
may be content, and satisfied therewith, How should God bestow this great
blessing of contentation upon him, and a true use of his riches?

Thirdly, he cares not for grace but for gold, therefore God gives him gold
without grace. He longs not after righteousness, but riches, therefore he shall
neither be satisfied nor blessed; whereas both are their portion that thirst
after the former, Mat. 5.6. He desires riches without Gods blessing, he shall
have it with a curse; he loves gold more then God, and desires it rather then
his blessing upon it or grace, therefore he shall have it and want the other.
Whereas if he did first seek the kingdom of heaven, all things else should be
added thereunto, Mat. 6.33. But this worldlings appetite stands not toward the
things of a better life; he finds no taste in heavens treasure; let him but
glut himself on the filthy garbage of ill-gotten goods, he cares not for Manna.
He sings the song of Curio, vincat utilitas, let gain prevail, he had rather be
a sinner then a beggar. The Apostle Saint Peter said, silver and gold have I
none, Act. ^.6. The devil says, all these are mine, Luke 4.6. The Rich man, I
have much goods laid up for many years, Luke 12.19. Now ask the covetous muck
worm, whether had you rather lack with those Saints, or abound with the devil
and the rich man? his heart will answer, give me money, which will do any
thing, all things, Eccles. 10.19.

Now if he prefers gold, before either God, grace, or glory, no marvail if God
grant him his desires to his hurt, as he did a King and Quails to the
Israelites.

CHAP. XIIII.
FOurthly, he puts his trust in his riches, and not in God, loves and serves
Satan more then God, therefore he shall have his comfort, and reward from them
and not from God. Yea Satan shall have more service of him for an ounce of
gold, then God shall have for the Kingdom of heaven, because he profers a
little base pelf before God and his own salvation. He loves God well, but his
money better, for that is his summum bonum: yea he thinks him a fool that does
otherwise. What part with a certainty for an uncertainty? if he can keep both,
well and good, if not, what ever betides he will keep his Mammon, his money,
though he lose himself, his soul. And yet the Lord gives far better things for
nothing, then Satan will sell us for our souls; had we the wit to consider it,
as we may see, Isa. 55.1, 2.

Again he loves his children better then the Lord, oppressing Gods children to
enrich his own, for so his young ones be warm in their nest, let Christ's
members shake with cold, he cares not. He loves the Lord, as Laban loved Jacob,
only to get riches by him, or as Saul loved Samuel, to get honor by him. He
will walk with God, so long as plenty, or the like does walk with him, but no
longer; he will leave Gods service rather then lose by it.

That the Mammonist loves not God, is evident; for if any man love the world,
the love of God is not in him, 1 John 2.15. yea the two poles shall sooner
meet, then the love of God and the love of money.

Not is this all, for he not only loves Mammon more then God, but he makes it
his god, shrines it in his coffer, yea in his breast, and sacrif^ceth his heart
to it; he puts his trust, and places his confidence in his riches, makes it
his hope, attributing and ascribing all his successes thereunto, which is to
deny God that is above, as we may plainly see Job 31.24, 28. Nor ought covetous
men to be admitted into Christian society. We have a great charge to separate
from the covetous, Eat not with him, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11. and also
wise Solomon, Prove. 23.7.

Covetousness is flat idolatry, which makes it out of measure sinful, and more
hanious then any other sin, as appears, Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5. Job 31.24, 28.
Ier. 17.5. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Fornication is a foul sin; but nothing to this, that
pollutes the body, but covetousness defiles the soul; and the like of other
sins. Yea, it is such a sordid and damnable sin, that it ought not once to be
named among Christians, but with detestation, Ephesians. 5.3.

It is a sound Conclusion in Divinity, That is our God, which we love best and
esteem most; as gold is the covetous man's god, and ^ellychear, the voluptuous
man's god, and honor the ambitious man's god: and for these they will do more,
then they will for God. Yea all wicked men make the devil their god; for why
does Saint Paul call the devil the god of this world? but because wordly men do
believe him, trust him, and obey him above God, and against God; and do love
his ways and commandments better then the ways and laws of God.

We all say, that we serve the Lord, but as the Psalmist speaks, other Lords
rule us, and not the Lord of heaven and earth. The covetous Mammonist does
insatiably thirst after riches, placing all his joys, hopes, and delights
thereon; does he not then make them his God? ye^ God says, lend, clothe, feed,
harbor; The devil and Mammon, say, take, gather, extort, oppress, spoil;
whether of these are our gods? but they that are most obeyed? Know ye not,
says, Saint Paul, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey,
his servants ye are to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. the case is plain enough, that
every wilful sinner makes the devil his god; he cannot deny it. I wish men
would well weigh it. The goods of a worldling are his gods, Ye have taken away
my gods, says Micha, and what have I more to lose, Jud. 18.24. He makes Idols
of his coin, as the Egyptians did of their treasure: They have turned the truth
of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature, forsaking the
Creator, which is blessed for ever, Amen, Romans 1.25.

The greedy Wolf, Mole, or Muckworm, who had rather be damned then damnified,
has his Mammon in the place of God, loving it with all his heart, with all his
soul, with all his mind, making gold his hope, and saying to the wedge of
gold, Thou art my confidence; and yet of all men alive, he is least contented
when he has his hearts desire, yea more then he knows what to do withal; the
issue of a secret curse. For in outward appearance they are as happy as the
world can make them, they have large possessions, goodly houses, beautiful
spouses, hopeful children, full purses; yet their life is never the sweeter,
nor their hearts ever the lighter, nor their meals the heartier, nor their
nights the quieter, nor their cares the fewer; yea none more full of complaints
among men. Oh cursed Ciatifs, how does the devil bewitch them! Generally, the
poorer the merryer, because having food and raiment, they are therewith
content, 1 Timothy 6.8. They obey the rule, Heb. 13, 5. and God gives his
blessing. But for those that make gold their god, how should not God either
deny them riches, or deny his blessing upon them; and instead thereof, blast
his blessings with a curse, and give them their riches in wrath, so that they
had better be without them.

If we put our trust and confidence in God, he has promised (...) to fail nor
forsake us, Heb. 13, 5. But this is the man that took not God for his strength;
but trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and put his strength in his
malice, Psalm. 52.7. Yea he says in his heart, God has forgotten; he hides
away his face and will never see, Psalm. 10.11. He puts his certain trust in
uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. And not for want of ignorance, for to trust to
God, and not to any creature or carnal policy is the greatest safty. A lesson
yet to be learned of many, that do in a good measure trust in God (which this
muckworme not so much as minds) But shall we trust God with our jewels, our
souls, and not with the box, Mat. 6.30? Take we heed, lest whiles he does grant
us that wherein we do not trust him (worldly riches) he take away that wherein
we do trust him (everlasting joy and happiness.)

Fifthly and lastly, let a graceless and ungrateful cormorant, an unmerciful
miser have never so much, he neither intends to glorify God, nor do good to
others with his riches: he will not change a piece without profit, scarce let
another light a torch at his candle. He will not lose a groa^ to gain a man's
life, nor speak a syllable for God were it to save a soul: And God cares for
none, that care for none but themselves, making themselves the center of all
their actions and aims. Whereas he is abundantly bountiful to public spirits,
that aim at his glory, and others good. And so ye have the Reasons, the Uses
for the present, and in this place, shall be only

CHAP. XV.
Three 1. Of Information, 2. Of Exhortation. 3. Of Consolation.


ANd of these but a word. First for Information; let the premises teach us
this lesson, That whatsoever is given to any one, if Christ and a sanctified
use thereof be not given withal, it can be no good thing to him. Did the
stalled Ox know that his Master fatted him for the slaughter, he would not
think his great plenty an argument of his masters greater love to him. The
Physician lets that sick person have what he will, of whose recovery he
despaireth; but he restrains him of many things, of whom he has hope. We use
to clip, and cut shorter the feathers of Birds or other foul, when they begin
to fly too high, or too far: So does God diminish the riches and honors of his
children, and makes our condition so various, that we may not pass our bounds,
or glory too much in these transitory things. As if we well observe it.

First, some have the world and not God, as Nabal, who possessed a world of
wealth, not a dram of grace or comfort.

Secondly, some have God and not the world, as Lazarus: his heart was full of
grace, and divine comfort, whiles his body lacked crumbes.

Thirdly, some have neither God nor the world, nothing but misery here, nothing
but torment hereafter; for the poorest are not seldom the wickedest.

Fourthly, some have both God and the world, as Abraham, who was rich while he
lived on earth, and dying was glorious in Heaven. Yea oftentimes they that are
dearest to God, do with great difficulty work out those blessings, which even
fall into the mouths of the careless.

That wise disposer of all things, knows it fit many times, to hold us short of
those favors which we sue for, and would not benefit, but hurt us. Unlovely
features, have more libertty to be good, because freer from Solicitors; and
though it be not a curse, yet it is many times an unhappiness to be fair (as well
as to be strong and witty) Helena, daughter to Jupiter and Leda, for her
excellent beauty, was ravished at the age of nine years, by Theseus; and once
again by Paris, which caused the wars, and utter ruin of Troy.

Plutarch observes, that Lisander did more hurt the Lacedaemonians, in sending
them store of riches and precious movables, then Sylla did the Romans in
consuming the reveneues of their treasure. And as Sylvius relates, the
liberallity of Princes, and especially of Metilda a Duchess of Italy, who at
her death made the Pope her heir, begat ambition in the Bishops of Rome, and
ambition destroyed Religion. These things are such as the possessors mind,
Good if well used, if ill, them ill we find.
For even evil things work together for the good of the good; and even good
things work together to the evil of the evil.

Lucian seigneth, that riches being sent by Jupiter from heaven, come softly
and slowly, but from the infernal god comes flying apace. And the other Poets
feign Pluto to be the god of riches and of hell, as if hell and riches had both
one master. And indeed he that resolves to be evil, making no conscience how he
comes by it, may soon be rich, but the blessings of God in our ill getting, or
unworthy carriage in their use, prove but the aggravations of sin, and
additions to judgment. And let this serve for the first use.

Secondly, Let what has been delivered touching the miseries of an unmerciful,
miserly, muckworme, serve to make us take heed and beware of all sin, but
especially of the sin of covetousness; yea^ let us look to it, lest while we
hunt after the worlds venison with Esau; we lose our Fathers blessing. Can we
not warm us at the Sun, but we must make an Idol of it to worship? must we
needs either hide our faces, or bow our knees; either renounce all profits and
pleasures, or be their slaves. This is a second use.

Thirdly, this, if we seriously consider it, may serve for a use of great
comfort to the godly and conscientious: For if worldlings are so many ways
perplexed and distracted with cares and fears, about getting, and keeping, and
lofing their riches and grace estates* how happy are the servants of God, that
are not acquainted with any of them? No man, says the Apostle, that warreth
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, because he would please him
that has chosen him to be a soldier, 2 Timothy 2.4. They cast their care upon
God, and he cares for them, who will see that they shall never want what is
good and fit for them, Mat. 6.25, 30. But in the transgression of an evil man
is his snare, says wise Solomon, Prove. 29 6.

But of this by the way only, for there are other plagues, yet behind, which
God usually inflicts upon the merciless miser: nor would one of them be left
unconsidered.

CHAP. XVI.
THe eighth is the loss of his credit and good name, which he seldom or never
scapes, which is not a light punishment, however he esteems it. The memorial of
the just shall be blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot, says Solomon,
Prove. 10.7. Yea the cruel, and unmerciful man's name stinks worse then a new
opened grave. His evil actions have been so many and notorious, that (like
Vitellius) as he waxes daily more mighty, so he grows daily more odious, so
that in a few years, his credit proves a banckrupt with all men; for as the
Eagle by losing a feather at every flight, has never an one left by that she
is old; fo it fares with him touching his credit; When he dies, he always goes
away in a stink, as is usually reported of the devil.

Nor will this his infamy dye with him, for says the Lord by his Prophet to
such, I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame that
shall never be forgotten, Jer 23.40. It has been proverbially spoken of him
that would suddenly be rich, he must have much greedins, much diligence, little
credit, and less conscience, blame enough he cannot miss of. For as shame is
the fruit of sin, Romans 6.21. and distrust the just gain of unfaithfulness so it
is the just judgment of God, that this cruel and hard-hearted wretch should be
marked as it were with the letter Law, or Cains mark, to make him hateful. That
as the fig tree, because it had no fruit, was spoiled of his leaves: so they
who have made shipwreck of hon^sty, shall make shipwraek of credit too: That
that which he seem^th to ^ave should be taken from him. His name shall go with
a brand upon it, like Cain the murderer, Simon the sorcerer, Judas the
traitor. Thus Demas had for his title, Demas that embraced this present world.
Thus Esau was called Edom, which signifies red, to keep his wickedness in
remembrance, because he had sold his birth right for a mess of red pottage. And
thus an extortioner shall not only be dishonest and hard-hearted, but known to
be so: like a rogue that is burned in the hand, or has lost his ears; and he
shall not be able to disguise himself so with the soberness of his countenance
and smooth tongue, but as though his life were writ in his forehead, whereas he
scarce thought he had been known to God, every one shall point at him as he
goes in the street.

And not seldom, does some of his infamous actions stand upon record to
posterity: for as Christ promised that Mary's good work, should be spoken of to
the worlds end; so he has caused Iudasses evil work, and Achans evil work, and
Absaloms evil work, and Ieroboame evil work, to be spoken of to the worlds end
too.

Yea sin and shame is so inseparable; and God is so severe in this case, that
though a man has repented him of the sin, yet some blemish sticks to his name,
even as a scar still remains after the wound is healed. Matthew will ever be
called, Matthew the publican, and Rahab, Rahab the harlot; Mary Magdalen will
not longer be mentioned, then the devils which were cast out of her will be
mentioned with her; and the like of others How carefully then should we avoid
those actions which may ever stain us?

But all this he values not, for like that wretched worldling in Horace, he
cares not what the people say, so his baggs be full. He drowns the noise of the
peoples curses, with the music of his money; as the Italians in a great
thunder, ringe their bells, and shoot off their Canons. No^ has pride so great
power over him as covetousness: He is not like Simon in Lucian, who having got
a little wealth changed his name from Simon to Simonides, for that there were
so many beggars of his kin, and set the house on fire wherein he was born,
because no body should point at it.

Nevertheless, though he prefers gain before an honest reputation; yet the
word of God informs us, that gain got with an ill name is great loss; and
certainly that man cannot be sparing in any thing that is commendable, who is
prodigal of his reputation. But herein lies the difference, gracious and tender
hearts are galled with that, which the carnally-minded slight, and make nothing
of.

Secondly, they are not wise enough to know what a singular blessing it is to
have a name spotles^, a report unreprovable, and a fame for honesty and
goodness, as it fared with Joseph, and Ruth, and David, and Samuel, and Ester,
and Solomon, and our Savior, and Cornelius, and those worthies mentioned in
the eleventh to the Hebrews, who all obtained a good report, which proceeds of
the Lord, and is bestowed as a great blessing upon such as he will honor, Genesis
39.21. Zeph. 3.19, 20. Act. 10.22. Romans 16.19. Ruth 2. and 3. Chapters; which
makes wise Solomon say, that a good name is better then a good ointment; and to
be chosen above great riches, Prove. 22.1.

I know well, that this miserly muckworm (this sordid pinchgur, the very basest
of creatures that look upwards) does keep up his credit with some base and
ignoble persons, some blind Moales like himself; as being able to discern
nothing but the bark or dregs of things. For they account of men, as we do of
baggs of money, prize them best, that weigh heaviest; and measure our their
love and respect by the Subsidy Boo^, for only by their wealth they value
themselves, and only by their wealth (as Camels by their burdens) be they
valued. If he have good^ enough, he both think^ himself, and others think him
good enough^ they think he is best that has most, and repute him most worthy
that is most wealthy, and naught is he be needy; accounting poverty the
greatest dishonesty. Yea as if credit and reputation were only intailed on the
rich, credit grows just as fast as wealth here in the City, and in the country,
reputation is measured by the Aker; and the words weigh according to the purse.

But others that are able to distinguish between good and evil, know, that
either these are fools, or Solomon was not wise. Nor does he think himself more
honorable, then wise and good men think him base. And certainly, if such
muckworms were as odious to the rest as they are to me, they would appear in
the street like Owls in the day time, with whom no honest man would converse.
And why should I prefer him before a piece of copper, that prefers a piece of
gold before his Maker?

God commanded in the old Law, that whatsoever did go with his breast upon the
ground, should be abomination to us: how much more should we abominate the man
who is endued with reason and a soul, that has glued his heart and soul unto a
piece of earth? But of this enough.

CHAP. XVII:
NInthly, the next is, That as the unmerciful Miser is all for spa^ing, so his
heir shall be all for wasting, He lives poorly and penuriously all his life,
that he may dye rich. He walks in a shadow (says the Psalmist) and
disquieteth himself in vain, heaping up riches, not knowing who shall gather
them, Psalm. 39.6. As he has reapt that which another sowed, so another shall
thrash that which he has reaped. He hordes up, not knowing who shall enjoy it;
and commonly they enjoy it who lay it out as fast. He takes only the bitter,
and leaves the sweet for others, perhaps those that wish him hanged, upon
condition they had his means the sooner.

Or possible it is he may have children; which if he have, he loves them so
much better then himself, that he will voluntarily be miserable here and
hereafter, that they may be happy. He is willing to go in a thredbare coat, to
starve his body, lose his credit, wound his conscience, torment his heart and
mind with fears and cares; yea he can find in his heart to damn his own soul
and go to hell, that he may raise his house, leave his heir a great estate, as
thinking his house and habitation shall continue for ever, even from generation
to generation and call their lands by his name, as the Psalmist shows, Psalm
49.11. He is careful to provide his children portions, while he provides no
portion of comfort for his own welfare, either here or hereafter. He provides
for his childrens bodies, not for their souls, to show that he begat not their
souls but their bodies. He leaves a fair estate for the worser part, nothing
for the estate of the better part. He desires to leave his children great
rather then good, and is more ambitious to have his sons Lords on earth, then
Kings in heaven. But as he that provides not for their temporal estate, is
worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. So he that provides not for their eternal
estate, is little better then a devil, which yet is the case of nine parts of
the parents throughout the Land.

But observe how his children requite him again, and how God requites him in
his children; for commonly they are such, as never give him thanks, nor in the
least lament his loss; perhaps they mourn at his funeral, yet not for that he
is dead, but because he died no sooner. Nor is it any rare thing for men to
mourn for him dead, whom they would by no means have still to be alive. Yea for
the most part, it is but a fashionable sorrow, which the son makes show of at
his fathers death; as having many a day wished for that hour. A sorrow in show
only, like that of Jacobs sons when they had sold their brother Joseph, who
professed a great deal of grief for his loss, when inwardly they rejoiced. Have
ye not heard of a prodigal young heir? that encouraged his companion^, with
come let us drink, revel, throw the house out at windows; the man in Scarlet
will pay for all; meaning his father who was a Judge, but he adjudged the
patrimony from him to one of his younger sons more obedient; And good reason he
had for it, for to give riches to the ryotous, is all one as to pour precious
liquor into a seeve, that will hold no liquid substance; which occasioned the
Rhodians, and Lydians, to enact several laws; that those sons which followed
not their fathers in their virtues, but lived viciously, should be
disinherited, and their lands given to the most virtuous of that race, not
admiting any impious heir whatsoever, to inherit, as Varro well notes. But it
is otherwise in this case, for (in regard of Gods curse upon this unmerciful
Muckworm) if he have more sons then one, the eldest proves a prodigal, and he
inherits.

Every man's own experience can tell him, that for the most part a scatterer
succeeds a gatherer; one that wastes virtues faster then riches, and riches
faster then any virtues can get them; one that is as excessive in spending, as
the other was in scraping; for as the father choseth to fill his chests, so the
son is given to satisfy his lusts. Nor could the one be more cunning at the
rake, then the other will be at the pitchfork. The moneys which were formerly
chested like caged birds, will wing it merrily when the young heir sets them
flying. And as Cicero speaks, he roituously spends that which the father had
wickedly gotten. The one would have all to keep, the other will keep nothing at
all; the former gets and spends not, the latter spends and gets not. Yea the
son being as greedy of expense, as the father was in scraping; he teddeth that
with a fork in one year, which was not gathered with a rake in twenty. Yea how
often is that spent upon one Christmas revelling by the son, which was forty
years a getting by the Father? Which Diogenes well considered, for whereas he
would ask of a frugal Citizen but a penny, of a Prodigal he would beg a talent,
and when the party asked him what he meant, to desire so much of him and so
little of others, his answer should be, Quoniam tu habes, illi habebunt;
because thou have, and they will have. I shall beg of thee but once, thy
estate will so soon vanish, o^ them often, yea give me now a talent, I may live
to give thee a gro^^ And at another time, hearing that the house of a certain
Prodigal was offered to sale, he said, I knew well that house was so accustomed
to surfeting, and drunkenness, that ere long it would spue out the master.

Nay in all likelihood he foresees it himself; and therefore as he makes short
work with his estate, so not long with his life, as knowing, that if he should
live long, he must be a beggar.

As seldom but he shortens his days some way; for he gives himself to all
manner of vice, gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, pride,
riot, contention, etc. He even banishes civility, and gives himself over to
sensuality; and such a life seldom lasts long.

They may rightly be called spend-alls, for they not only spend all they have,
but themselves also; instead of quenching their thirsts, they drown both their
bodies, souls and estates in drink. They will call drawer give us an Ocean, and
then leave their wits rather then the wine behind them. One cries to his
fellow do me reason; but the drink answers, I will leave thee no reason, no not
so much as a beast has; for these Nabals cannot abound, but they must be drunk
and surfeit They have not only cast off Religion that should make them good
men; but even reason that should make them men; And saving only on the Sea,
they live without all compass; as a ship on the water, so they on the land reel
too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, Psalm. 107.27.

All their felicity is in a Tavern, or brothell house, where harlots and
sicophants rifle their estates, and then send them to rob, or teach them how
to cheat or borrow, which is all one, for to pay they never mean, and
prodigallity drives them to repair their too great lavishness in one thing, by
too great covetousness and injustice in another. The greatest mispenders for
the most part, are constrained to be as great misgetters that they may feed one
vice with another.

Now as if they had been bred among Bears, they know no other dialect then
roaring, swearing and banning. It is the tongue or language of hell they speak;
as men learn before hand the language of that Country whether they mean to
travel.

By wine and surfetings they pour out their whole estates into the^^ bellies.
The father went to the devil one way, and the son will follo^ him another; and
because he has chosen the smoother way, he mak^ the more have. The father
cannot find in his heart to put a good morsel into his belly, but lives on
roots, that his prodigal heir may feed (...) Phesants; he drinks water, that
his son may drink wine, and that (...) drunkenness. The one dares not eat an
egg, least he should lose a chicken, and goes to hell with whay and carrots,
the other follows after with Canary, Partridges, and Potatoes*

These are Epicures indeed, placing Paradise in their throats, and ^^aven in
their guts; their shrine is their Kitchen, their Priest* is their ^^ok their
Altar is their table, and their belly is their God. By wine ^^d surfeiting,
they pour out their whole estates into their bellies; yet nevertheles complain
against nature for making their necks so ^^^rt.

Aristippus gave to the value of sixteen shillings for a Patridge; his clownish
neighbor told him, he held it too dear at two pence. Why, quoth Aristippus, I
esteem less of a pound, then thou do of a penny: the same in effect says the
prodigal son, to his penurious father; for how else could he so soon bring a
noble to nine pence, an inheritance of a thousand pounds per ann^m, to an
annuity of five hundred shillings? besides, the one obtains a thousand pounds
with more ease, then the other did a thousand pence; and by how much the less
he esteems of money, by so much the more noble and better man he esteems
himself, and his father the more base; and hereupon he scorns any calling, and
must go apparelled like a Prince.

God has inacted it as a perpetual law*. In the sweat of thy face (beit brow
or brain) shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the earth, Genesis 3.19. And
for the best Gentleman to despise honest callings ( mental or manual) is a
pride without wit or grace. Even gallant Absalom was a great sheep^master: the
bravery and magnificence of a Courtier, must be built upon the ground of
frugality. Besides, exercise is not more wholesome for the body, then it is for
the mind and soul; but this vain glorious Cox-combe is all for sports and
pleasure, and seldom ceases hunting after sports (as Esau for venison) until
he has lost the blessing. But he should (O that he would) consider, that
medicines are no meat to live by.

Th^n for his pride in apparel, you may know that by this; he is like the
Cinnamon tree, whose bark is of more worth then his body; or like the Estridge
or Bird of Paradise, whose feathers are more worth then her flesh: Or some
Vermin, whose case is better then her carcass. And yet this swells him so, and
makes him look as big, as if the river of his blood could not be bancked within
his veins; and shift his attire he must, like the Islanders of Foolianna the
ficle; or that King of Mexico, who was wont to change his cloths four times a
day, and never wear them again, employing his leavings and cast suits, for his
continual liberalities and rewards, and who would also have neither pot nor
dish, nor any implement in his Citchen, or on his table, be brought twice
before him.

Indeed he cannot shift himself out of the Mercers books, until he has sold
the other Lordship; perhaps a dinner or supper at some Tavern, may cost him ten
pounds or more; for he must pay the whole reckoning, that he may be counted the
best man. Yea when the shot comes to be paid, for any man to draw in his
company, is a just quarrel; and use has ^^de is unpleasant to him not to
spend, and yet a ^a^^ head in the streets, does him more good, then a meals
meat. He has the Wolf (...) vain glory, and that he feeds until himself
becomes the food. Nor (...) it be long first, for an excessive and successive
impairing, always imp^^^teth a final dissolution. Nor has he ever the wit to
think upon spar^^ till he comes to the bottom of the purse, resembling Plautus
that fam^^^ comical Poet, born in Vmbria, who having spent all he had on pla^^^
apparel, was forced for his living, to serve a Baker in turning a ha^^
millpunc; Like an hourglass turned up, he never leaves running till all (...)
out; He never looks to the bottom of his patrimony, till it be quite
unravelled; and then (too late) complains that the stock of his wea^^^ ran
coarse at the fag end.

His father had too good an opinion of the world, and he too much disdaines it:
only herein he speeds (as he thinks) a little the better, for that those who
barked at his father like curs, faune upon him, and lick his hand like
spaniels. He bestows upon his inferiors liberal gifts, thinki^^ it good gain to
receive for it good words, and your Worship. Thus by the frequent use of
substracting pounds out of hundreds, shillings out of pounds, and pence out of
shillings, the end of his account proves all Cifers.

Ideness is the Coach, that brings, a man to Needam; prodigality the posthorse.
His father was no man's friend but his own, and he (says the proverb) is no
man's foe else; be he never so old, he never attaine^ to the years of
discretion; And in case providence do not take him ward, his heirs shall never
be sought after. His Vessel has three leaks a lascivoious eye, a gaming hand,
a deified belly, and to content these, he can neither rule his heart, his
tongue, nor his purse. He never proves his own man, till he has no other, and
then perhaps when want, or good counsel, or time has made him see as much as
his father did, at last he sues for a Room in an Almeshouse, that his father
built; else when he feels want (for till then he never sees it) he complains of
greatness for ingratitude; that he was not thought of when promotions were a
dealing. Yet seeing there is no remedy but patience, when his last Acre lies in
his purse, he projects strange things, and build^ houses in the air, having
sold those on the ground.

Not that he is a man of parts, for he is only witty to wrong and u^ do
himself, Ease, says, Solomon, slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools
destroys them, Prove. 1.32.

CHAP. XVIII.
MAny an one has his father unfeathered to warm him, (...) pride, drunkenness,
gamming, etc. plucks them away against fast, that he soon becomes naked and
bare. He is like a barren plot of ground, for let him receive never so much
seed and manuring, Sun (...) showers, he remains ever dry and fruitless, and
no marvail, when (...) ^nely his l^ud and vicious courses bring Gods curse upon
all he has or ^ake^ in hand; but when he and what he has, is also ^ursed for
(...) ^^hers sake. For whereas the Holy Ghost says of the just man, His seed
^^all be mighty upon earth, his generation shall be blessed, etc. Psalm. 112.2.
and many the like, Psalm. 103. where God has promised to bless and reward the
children; yea, the childrens children for their fathers goodness, verse. 17.
Isa. 58, 10, 11.12. Psalm. 37.25, 26, and 112.2. to 6. Of which I might give you
examples, not a few. The children of Noah were preserved from drowning for
their fathers sake, Genesis 7.1. Mephibosheth fares the better for his fathers
goodness, the Kenites for I^tbroes, 1 Samuel 15.6. and that some hundreds of
years after, their Ancester was dead; Phi^eas his seed for his sake, Numb.
25.11, 12, 13. Solomon for his father David's sake, 2 Samuel 1.2. Ishmael for
Abraham's sake, Genesis 17.20. And all Israel fared the better for Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacobs sake, Deuteronomy. 4 37. 1 Kings 11.12. The loving kindness of the Lord,
says the Psalmist, indureth for ever, and ever, upon them that fear him, and
his righteousness upon childrens children, Psalm. 103.17. Exodus 20.6.

And as God usually blesses, and rewards the children for their fathers
goodness, so on the contrary, Exodus 20 5. Eternal payments God uses to require
of the persons only, temporary oftentimes of succession; as we sue the Heirs
and Executors of our Debtors. God has peremtorily told us, that he will visit
the iniquity of ungodly parents, upon their children, unto the third and fourth
generation, Exodus 20.5. As for the sin of Haman, his te^ sons were hanged,
Hester 9.13, 14. And so for Saul's sin, his seven sons were likewise hanged, 2.
Sam. 21.6. and thus for Achans sin, all his sons and daughters were stoned to
death, and burned with fire by the Commandment of Moses, who was in Gods stead,
Josh. 7. Yea God has peremtorily threatened, Psalm. 109. that the children of a
cruel and unmercifully man, shall be Vagabonds and beg their bread, and that
none shall extend mercy or favor unto them, ver. 7. to 17. God will make those
children beggars, for whose sakes the fathers have made so many beggars; this
is a truth which the father will not believe, but as sure as God is just, the
Son shall feel. As what common and daily experience have we thereof, had men
but the wit to observe it? for hence it is, that riches ill got, shift masters
so often. As rare it is, if the wealth of an Oppressor does last to the fourth
generation, seldom to the second; for commonly in this case, as the father was
the first that raised his house, by his extreme getting and saving, so the son
proves the last, in overthrowing his house, by excessive spending and
lavishing; as Tullius Cicero answered a Prodigal that told him he came of
beggarly parents; for no man when his means is gone, will ever after trust him
with a stock to begin the world again; the case standing with him, as it did
with the unjust Steward, who having wasted his masters goods for the time past,
could not be trusted with the like for the time to come; and whereas hitherto
he has with Esau, rejected the blessing of prosperity, it will be denied him
hereafter, though he should seek it with tears, and which is worse then all, if
death find him (as is much to be feared) as banquerout of spiritual, as of
worldly goods, it will sen^ him to an eternal prison; for what can we think of
them, that do not only lose crusts and crummes, which our (...) would have
carefully gathered up, John. 6.12. but even lavish and when away whole
patrimonies; yea, most wickedly spend them in riot, and upon Dice, Drabs,
Drunkenness? Oh the fearful account which these unth^^^ Baylifs will one day
have to give up, to our great Lord and Master, when he shall call them to a
strict reckoning of their talents! he was condem^^^ that increased not the sum
concredited to him, what then shall become of him that lawlessely and lavishly
spends and impaires it? bringing (...) such a reckoning as this; Item, spent
upon my lusts, pleasures and pr^^^ forty years, and five hundred or ten
thousand pounds, etc. let them be (...) their right senses, they cannot think
that God will take this for a (...) discharge of their Steward-ships, though
the devil may and will ma^^ them believe, that Christ will quit all scores
between him, the fat^e^, and them.

And thus I have made it plain, that want and beggary is the heir^^ parent to
riot and prodigality, and that he who when he should not, spe^^^ too much,
shall, when he would not, have too little to spend, a good lesson for young
gulls. I have likewise shown, that what the covetous has b^^gotten, is as ill
bestowed, and worse employed, a good item for old Curmudgens to take notice of,
that so they may not starve their bodies, and damn their souls, for their sons,
to so little purpose.

As O that the covetous Moule, who is now digging a house in the ea^^^ for his
posterity, did but foresee how his prodigal son will consume what he with so
much care and industry has scraped together; for should he have leave
hereafter to come out of hell for an hour, and see it, he would curse this his
folly, yea, if possible, it would double the pain of his infernal torment, as
it fares with Gnipho the Usurer, who (as Lucia^ feigneth) lying in hell,
lamenteth his miserable estate, that one Rodoch^res, an incestuous Prodigal, on
earth consumed his goods wastfully, which he by unjust means had scraped
together so carefully; the which seems to have some affinity with the word of
truth; why else is Dives being in hell torments, said to lift up his eyes, and
to see Abraham a far (...) and Lazarus in his bosom, parlying so seriously
about his brethren, who^ he had left behind him? Luke 16.23, etc. Why else does
our Savio^^ say, that the wicked shall gnash their teeth for vexation, when
they shall (...) Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, and
themselves thr^^ out of doors, Luke 13.28.

But that thou may the better foresee, or at lest fore-think what (...)
follow, I will show thee thy case in sundry other persons.

Clodius, son to Esophus the Tr^gedian, spent marvelous great weal^^^ which his
father left him. Epicharmus the Athenian, having a large p^trimony left him by
his parents, consumed it in six days, and all his life time after lived a
beggar. Apicius, in banqueting, spent great re^^^nues, left him by his
parsimonious father, and then because he would (...) lead a miserable life,
hanged himself. Pericles, Callias, and Nicius, by prodigal lavishing and
palpable sensuallity, spent in a shorttime very great ^^trimonies, left them by
their parents, and when all their means was gone, they drank each of them a
poisoned potion one to another, and dyed (...) the place.

Again, we read that Caligula, in one year of his reign, spent prodigally,
sixty seven millions of gold, which Tiberius his Predecessor had gathered
together, as Tacitus tells us, and where as John the 22. left behind him, (as
Petrarch reports) two hundred and fifty tun of gold; insomuch that an odd
fellow made this jest of him, Erat Pontifex maximus si non virtute pecunia
tamen maximus. Pope Sixtus Quintus, (called of Englishmen, a by word, for
selling our Kingdom to Philip of Spain, Six Cinque,) through his intolerable
covetousness, left in his Exchequer five millions; but his successor Gregory
the fourteenth, wasted four of them in ten months and less, besides his
ordinary revenues, in riot and prodigality; and many the like which I could
tire you with; insomuch that the curse of Epimenides is daily fulfilled, which
was, that all the treasure whorded up by the covetous, should be wasted by the
prodigal; for, for the most part the Misers means lights into the hands of
some such ding-thrifty dearth-maker, as out of a laborious Silkworm, rises a
painted Butter-flye.

CHAP. XIX.
AND so much of the ninth judgment which God usually inflicts upon the
merciless Miser. I will add but one more, nor needs he any more to make him
completely miserable; for though the former were woeful enough, yet this last
is worse then all the rest, as I shall clearly demonstrate in the ensuing
pages. For,

Tenthly, does covetousness reign in a man? is he bewitched with the love of
money? is his heart rivited to the earth? and is he once inslaved to this sin?
if so, there is no probability, hardly any possibility, that ever he should be
converted or saved; nor is it to any more end to admonish him, then to knock at
a deaf man's door, or a dead man's grave.

Covetousness is not more the root of all evil, as the Apostle fitly styles
it, then it is the rot of all good, as is easy to prove; it is the root of all
evil, the mother and metropolis of all sins that can be named; for th^^^ is no
sin whatsoever, but it has sprung from this cursed root, whether it be lying,
or swearing, or cursing, or slandering, or Sabbath-breaking, or drunkenness, or
adultery, or bawdery; whether theft, murder, treason, cozening in bargains,
breaking of promises, perfideous underminings, contempt of God and all
goodness, persecuting the truth, opposing the Gospel, hatred of Gods
Messengers, sleighting of his Ordinances, unbelief, idolatry, witchcraft,
ante-Cristanism, sacrilege, soul-murther, etc. For whence spring all these,
and what else can be named, but from covetousness? There is no evil that a
covetous man will not put in practice, so goods may come of it; you cannot name
the sin, but the Auaritions will swallow it, in the sweet broth of commodity.

He that is greedy of gain, will sell the truth, sell his friend, his father,
his ma^^er, his Prince, his Country, his conscience; yea, with Ahab he will
sell himself for money, as I might instance in a world of examples; yea, daily
experience has taught us, since our Civil Wars, that many to advantage
themselves five shillings, will indamage another five hundred pounds; and to
gain five pounds, will endanger the losing of three whole Kingdoms; yea, when
once men are bewitched with the love of money, as Judas was, a small matter
would hire them to sell Christ himself, were he now on the earth to be sold.

A resolution to be rich, is the fountain of infinite evils; yea, Covetousness
is the Index, or Epitomy of, or rather a Commentary upon all sin and
wickedness. Name but covetousness, and that includes all the rest, as being a
sin made up of many such bitter ingredients. All vices rule, where gold reigns,
at least that heart which has once inslaved it self to this sin, may be
wrought by Satan to any thing.

Justice is the mistress of all virtues, and the truest trial of a good man,
but the covetous heart, is a very mint of fraud, and can readily coin
falsehoods for advantage, upon all occasions.

And as it is the root or cause of all evil, so it is the rot or main hinderer
of all good; Covetousness is the grave of all goodness, it eats out the very
heart of grace, by eating grace out of the heart, Romans 1.29. When Avarice once
gets admission into the heart, it turns all grace quite out of doors; as where
salt grows, it makes the ground so barren of all other things, that nothing
else will breed therein; this is the cursed devil that mars all, Covetousness.

No such impediment to conversion and salvation as it; as for instance,
Ministers wonder that their Sermons take no better, that among so many arrows
none should hit the mark: but God tells us the reason, Ezekiel. 33. they sit
before thee, and hear thy words, but their hearts go after their covetousness,
ver. 3. Whence is is, that you may see swearers, drunkards, adulterers, etc.
weep at a sermon, where as you never saw the covetous shed a tear, be the
Doctrine never so dreadful.

Oh this golden devil, this Diana of the Ephesians, does a world of mischief,
it destroys more souls then all other sins put together, as the Apostle
intimates, 1 Timothy 6.10. Whence it is, that we shall sooner hear of an hundred
Malefactors contrition at the gallows, then of one covetous Misers in his bed.

The Children of Israel would not believe Samuel, that they had sinned in
asking a King, before they saw a miracle from Heaven, even rounder and rain in
wheat harvest, which was contrary to the nature of that Climate, and then they
could confess it, and repent, 1 Samuel 12.17, 18, 19. But the covetous are in
Pharaohes case, whom neither miracles nor judgments could prevail withal, and
of whom God speaks to Moses in this manner. See that thou speak all the words,
and do all the wonders before Pha^aoh, which I have put in thine hand; but I
will harden his heart, and he shall not let the people g^, Exodus 7.1, ^, 3, 4.
And certaiuly, they of all others are the men to whom these ensuing Scriptures
are applyable; Go, and say unto these people, ye shall hear indeed, but you
shall not understand* (...) shall plainly see and not perceive; make the heart
of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their ey^, lest they see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and
convert, and he heal them, Isa. 6.9, 10. They would none of me, nor hear my
voice, so I gave them up unto the hardness of their heart, and they walked in
their own counsels, Psa. 81.11, 12. Go up unto Gilead, and take balm, O Virgin
daughter of Egypt, in vain shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall have
none health, Jerem. 46.11.

The precious stone Diacletes, though it have many excellent soverainties in
it, yet it loses them all, if put into a dead man's mouth; so are all means
ineffectuall that are used for the recovery of the covetous, as is well
employed in those words of Abraham, to the rich Glutton, Luke 1^.29, 30, 31.
our Savior expressly affirms, that it is easier for a Camel to go through the
ey of a needle, then for a rich man (that is, a covetous rich man) to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luk.18.25. and the Apostle, That no covetous man
can look for any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ* and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10.

Such an ones doom is set down, Deuteronomy. 17.12. That man that will do
presumptuously, not hearkening unto the Priest that stands before the Lord to
minister there, that man shall dye, says the Lord.

And again, Prove. 29.1. He that hardens his neck when he is reproved, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, implying that there is no hope
of such a man; and indeed, he that despises Moses law, dies without mercy, as
the Apostle concludes, Heb. 10.28. A covetous man, is like a sick patient that
cannot spit, whom nothing will care, or like a crack^ Bell, for which there is
no other remedy then the fire, or like one that has the plague tokens, who (as
is conceived) is past all hope, and for whom all that can be performed, is to
say, Lord have mercy upon him, Deuteronomy. 17.12. Pro. 1. Heb. 10.28. which makes
Musculus say, that Divines shall reform this vice, when Phisicians cure the
gout, which is incurable. Our Mithologists tell us of many strange
metamorphoses, of men turned into beasts, by Circe. Our Poets tell of Licaon,
turned into a Wolf, but when a ravenous Oppressor repents, and turns pious and
merciful, there is a Wolf turned into a man, yea, a Devil turned into a Saint;
Whence the Holy Ghost (speaking of Zacheus, and his conversion) brings it in
with a^ ^cce, behold, as if it were a wonder that Zacheus a covetous man should
be converted; as let me refer it to the experience of the spiritual Reader,
Did ye ever know, or hear, of three such covetous extortioners as Zacheus was,
that repented and made restitution as he did? no, for if you should, it were as
great and as rare a miracle, as if at this day the Turk, Pope, and K. of Spain,
ware at once persuaded to forsake their Idolatry and Superstition.

CHAP. XX.
AND ye^ it is no wonder, if we consider the reasons. For, First, the covetous
man is an Atheist, one that (like David's f^^l) says in his heart there is no
God; the Mamonist is like Leo the tenth, Hildebrand the Magician, Alexander the
sixth, and Julius the second, who were all mere Atheists, who thonght
whatsoever was said of Christ, Heaven, Hell, the day of judgment, the
immortallity of the soul, etc. to be but fables, and mere impostures, dreams,
toys, and old wives fables; and being Atheists that believe not a Heaven, Hell,
or day of judgment, when every man shall be rewarded according to his deeds,
be they good or evil, what hope is there of their conversion or salvation? or
how should they not prefer temporal things, before celestial and eternal?

As, what is the reason that there are few rich men that will not rather offend
the Divine Majesty, then the Temporal Authority? and few poor men that resemble
not the poor Swedes in their serving of God, who always break the Sabbath,
saying, it is only for rich men and Gentlemen, that have means, to keep that
day; yea, that almost all men, rich and poor, are for matter of Religion, like
Sir John Kennede, who in choosing of his wife, would have her well born and
educated, fair, rich, wise, kind, with the like accomodations, but quite forgot
to wish her good and vertous, and was accordingly blessed in his choice; as King
James (who made many such Matches) used the matter: the main reason of all is,
men believe not a God, or a day of judgeme^t. Whence it is, that amongst all
the desired privileges of this life, men commonly leave out holiness, which
sufficiently argues their infidelity, which in these times is much propagated
and strengthened; for the plurality of faiths among many, has brought a
nullity of faith in the most.

Worldly minds, mind nothing but worldly things, their business is thought upon,
not God, nor their salvation, for they make that no part of their business;
their business gives them no leave, or leisure, to think of their consciences,
nor do they go to Church to serve God, but the State, which they use not as a
means to save their souls, but charges. There is no Religion in them but the
love of money; most men have their souls as it were wrapped up in the port-mantua
of their senses, and to them all spiritual, celestial, and eternal things seem
incredible, because they are invisible. Machiavil thought all piety and
religion, to be nothing but policy, Pharaoh imputed men's worshipping of God, to
idleness; They be idle, says he, therefore they cry, let us go offer sacrifice
unto our God, Exodus 5.^. It is a foolish thing, says Cato, to hope for life by
another death; Seneca jeered the Jews for casting away a seventh part of their
time upon a weekly Sabbath; and of their minds are the most among us, if they
would speak out their thoughts. Let the word or Minister tell them, (that
prefer profit before honesty) that godliness is great gain, as having the
promises of ^his life, and of that which is to come; yet their conclusion is,
they cannot live unless they deceive, they cannot please unless they flatter,
they cannot be believed unless they swear, as Demetrius thought he should beg,
unless he might sell Images, Act. 19.27.

Nothing will sink into their heads, that cannot be seen with their eyes, or
felt with their fingers. We hate the Turks for selling Christians for slaves,
what do we think of those Christians that sell themselves, and how odious are
they? the poorest cheat's soul (if ever he be saved) cos^ Christ's precious
blood, yet half a crown, yea six pence sometimes, will make him sell it, by
forswearing himself.

CHAP. XXI.
SEcondly, another reason is, if a covetous man do repent, he must restore what
he has wrongfully gotten, which perhaps may amount to half, or it may be three
parts of his Estate at a clap: which to him is as hard, and harsh an
injunction, as that of God to Abraham, Genesis 22.2. Sacrifise thy son, thine only
son Isaac. Or as that of our Saviors to the young man, Luke 18.22. Sell all
that ever thou have, and distribute unto the poor: And is there any hope of his
yielding? No, Covetousness is idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5.

And Gold is the covetous man's god, and will he part with his God, a certainty
for an uncertainty? No, a godly man is content to be poor in outward things,
because his purchase is all inward; but nothing except the assurance of
heavenly things, can make us willing to part with earthly things; neither can
he contemn this life, that knows not the other, and so long as he keeps the
weapon (evil-gotten goods) in his wound, and resolves not to pluck it out by
restoring) how is it possible he should be cured?

Besides, as there are no colors so contrary as white and black, no elements
so disagreeing as fire and water, so there is nothing so opposite to grace and
conversion, as covetousness; and as nothing so alienates a man's love from his
virtuous spouse, as his inordinate affection to a filthy strumpet; so nothing
does so far separate and diminish a man's love to God, and heavenly things, as
our inordinate affection to the world and earthly things; yea, there is an
absolute contrariety between the love of God, and the love of money: no
servant, says our Savior, can serve two masters, for either he shall hate the
one, and love the other, or else he shall lean to the one and despise the
other, ye cannot serve God and riches, Luke 16.13. Here we see, there is an
absolute impossibility, and in the fourteenth Chapter and elsewhere, we have
examples to confirm it, All those that doted upon purchases, and farms, and
oxen, and wives, with one consent made light of it, when they were bid to the
Lords Supper, Luke 14, 15. to 23. The Gadarenes that so highly prised their
hoggs, would not admit Christ within their borders, Luke 8. Judas that was
covetous, and loved money, could not love his Master, and therefore sold him.

When Demas began to embrace this pr^sent world, he soon forsook Paul, (...)
put their trust and place their confidence in their riches; they make gold
their hope, they set their hearts upon it, and do homage thereunto, attributing
and ascribing all their successes thereunto; which is, to deny the God that is
abo^e, as we may plainly see, Job 31.24, 28. and as for his love and regard to
the Word of God, I will refer it to his own conscience to determine, whether
he finds any more taste in it, then in the white of an egg, yea, whether it be
not as distasteful to him, as dead beer after a banquet of sweetmeats. Nor is
it only distasteful to his palate, for his affections being but a little
lukewarm water, it makes his religion even stomack-sick: Let him go to the
Assemblies, (which he does more for fear of the Law, then for love of the
Gospel, and more out of custom then conscience, as Cain offered his sacrifice,
and so will God accept of it:) he sits down as it were at Table, but he has no
stomach to eat; his ears are at Church, but his heart is at home; and though he
hear the Ministers words, yet he resolves not to do them; for his heart goes
after his covetousnes, as the Lord tells Ezekiel touching his Auditors, Ezekiel.
33.30. to 33.

And as is his hearing, such is his praying, for that also is to serve his own
turn; he may afford God his voice, but his heart is rooted and rivited so the
earth, They have not cried unto me, says God, with their hearts, when they
^owled upon their beds, and when they assembled themselves, it was but for corn
and wine, for they continue to rebel against me, Hosea 7.14. O that God had
but the same place in men's affections, that riches, honors, pleasures, and
their friends have! but that is seldom seen, the more shame, folly, and
madness, and the greater and juster their condemnation; whence that terrible
Text in Jeremiah, Chapter 17. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the
Lord, verse. 5. And that exhortation, 1 Timothy 6. Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high-minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us abundantly all things to enjoy,
verse. 17. And well does that man deserve to perish, that so loves the creature,
a^ that he leaves the Creator.

CHAP. XXII.
FOurthly, another reason, (were there no other) why it is so impossible to
prevail with the covetous, is, they will never hear any thing that speaks
against covetousness, (and their refusing to hear it, shows them to be such,
for flight argues guiltiness always). Covetous men will never hear Sermons, or
read Books that press to good Works, or wherein the necessity of restitution is
urged; neither had Satan any brains, if he should suffer them so to do. A
Faulkner ye know, will carry diverse Hawks b^^ded quietly, which he could not
do, had they the use of their sight.

Such I say, will not vouchsafe to hear reason, lest it should awake their
consciences, and convince their judgments; resembling (...) that would nor
have his Physician remove the thirst which he felt in his ague: because he
would not lose the pleasure he took in quenching the same with often drinking;
they had rather have their lusts satisfied, then exstinguished.

Now we know, that hearing is the only ordinary means of life and salvation; if
then the soul refuse the means of life, it cannot live. If Caesar had not
delayed the reading of his Letter, given him by Artemidorus, as he went to the
Senate, wherein notice was given him of all the conspiracy of his murderers;
he might with ease have prevented his death, but his not regarding it, made the
same inevitable: which together with the rest of this Chapter, gives me a just
and fair occasion (now I have obtain my purpose) to acquaint the ingenuous
Reader, why I rather call my Book, The prevention of Poverty, and best way to
become Rich and Happy, then The arraignment and conviction of Covetousness; for
by this means, many a covetous wretch may out of lucre, be touled one to read
it, to the saving of their souls; who otherwise would never have been
acquainted with a thousand part of their wretchedness, and so not capable of
amendment. Bnt

Fifthly, suppose he should be prevailed withal to hear me, alls one; even an
ounce of gold with him, will weigh down whatsoever can be aledged from the
Word, for though with that rich man, Luke 10. he may have a good mind to heaven
in reversion, yet for all that, he will not hear of parting with his heaven,
whereof he has present possession. He can like Canaan well enough so he may
enjoy his fleshpots also, and could love the blessing, but he will not lose
his pottage; and in case he cannot gain by being religious, his care shall be
not to loose by it; and tha^ Religion shall like him best, that is best cheap,
and will cost him least; any Doctrine is welcome to him, but that which beats
upon good works: Nor will he stick with the Sages, to fall down and worship
Christ, but he cannot abide to present him with his gold; No, if another will
be at the charges to serve God, he will cry out, why is this waste? as Judas
did when Mary bestowed that precious ointment upon her Savior, which otherwise
might have been sold, and so put into his bag. The love of money, and commings
in of gain, is dearer and sweeter to the Muck-worm, the^ the saving of his
soul, what possibility then of his being prevailed withal?

To other sins Satan tempts a man often, but Covetousness is a fine and
recovery upon the purchase, then he is sure of him; as when a Jailer has locked
up his prisoners safe in a Dungeon, he may go play.

Covetous men are blind to all dangers, deaft to all good instructions; they
are be sotted with the love of money, as Birds are with their bain; yea, they
resolve against their own conversion. The Scribes and Pharisees, who were
covetous, shut their eyes, stopped their ears, and barri^ ^^d^ed their hearts
against all our Savior did or said; yea, they s^oft at his preaching, Luke
1^.24. and of all sorts of sinners that Christ preached unto ^e was never
(...), but by them, when he preached against covetousness. Christianum dogma,
vertitur in scomma, and what is the reason but this? rich worldlings think
themselves so much the wiser, as they are the richer.

These things considered, no wonder that our Savior expressly affirms, that
it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man (that is a covetous rich man) to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; as well
knowing, that no Physic can be found strong enough to purg out this humor.
Well may they gnaw their tongues for sorrow, when they shall be tormented with
fire, and boil with great heat, and blaspheme the God of Heaven for their
pains, and for their soars, but repent of their works they will not, as it is
Revel. 16.8. to 12. only others may make some good use of that evil they see in
them, at least learn to beware of covetousness.

I grant, that to God (who has commanded us to use the means) all things are
possible, for he is able, even of stones, to raise up children unto Abraham,
Mat. 3.9. but in respect of ordinary means, it is no more possible for a
covetous miserly muck-worm to be converted, then it is for a dead man to be
raised. And therefore, though I had rather be a Toade then a Drunkard, yet had
I rather be a Drunkard then a covetous Miser, and should somewhat the more hope
to go to Heaven, Mat. 21.31, 32.

CHAP. XXIII.
AND so much of the tenth plague which God inflicts upon the miserly muck-worm;
I might give you many more, for almost every thing becomes a deadly snare to
such men, even every thing they see or hear of, each thought that comes into
their minds, yea the very Word of God, the mercy of God, and the merits of
Christ, become their bain, and shall inhanse their damnation; for as all things
shall turn together for the best, to those that love God, so all things shall
turn together for the worst, unto them that hate God, as they do, John 15.24.
Romans 1.30. But enough has been said (as I suppose) to make good what I
promised, and to prove that the c^uell and unmercifull Miser is never the
better for his riches, but the worse, and how God bestows these outward
blessings upon him, rather in wrath then in love, with the reasons thereof; but
as you have heard what it is, not to be Rich and Happy: so in the next place
hear what it is to be so.

For to clear men's judgments, and for the further and fuller discharge of what
I promised in the beginning, that also is to be discovered, which when I have
dispatched, I shall honestly acquaint you, how of poor, melancholy, and
miserable, you may become rich, happy, and comfortable; now as touching the
former of these, you are to know: That a competency of earthly things, is
indeed and really the best estate in the world, if we had but the wit to know
when we are well, which makes Agur pray, Give me neither poverty nor riches,
but feed me with (...) (...) 30.8, 9. He prays against riches, as well as
poverty, and that which we are to pray against, we may not desire; and what is
it our Savior teaches us to pray? but Give us this day our daily bread, Man.
6.11. We are never so happily fed, as when we wait upon God for our daily
bread, and are therewith content; and lest our Saviors words should not be
enough, he teaches us this lesson no less by his own practice, then by
precept; for though he was owner of all things in the universe, yet he would
have no more then just what he needed, as when he wanted money to pay tribute,
he sent for no more then he was to disburse presently, Matthew. 17.27. he might
have commanded twenty pounds as well as twenty pence, but he would not, to show
that we should desire no more then will serve our turn.

A competent measure of wealth to retain an honest reputation in the world, so
that we neither need to flatter nor borrow, is sufficient: He is rich enough
says Ierom, that lacks not bread, and high enough in dignity that is not
forced to serve. I would says another, desire neither more nor less then
enough, I may as well dye of a surfeit as of hunger.

This worlds wealth that men so much desire,
May well be likened to a burning fire;
Whereof a little can do little harm
But profit much, our bodies well to warm.
But take too much, and surely thou shall burn,
So too much wealth, to too much woe does turn.
It is a great skill to know what is enough, and greater wisdom to care for
no more; if I have meat, drink, and apparel, I will learn therewith to be
content; if I had the world full of weal^h beside, I could enjoy no more then I
use, the rest could please me no otherwise then by looking upon, as wise
Solomon shows, Eccles. 5.11. and why can I no^ thus solace my self while it is
another? It was a dainty disposition of one that followed a great Lord, who
was often heard to say, I bless God, I have as much in effect as my Lord
himself, though I am owner of little or nothing, for I have the use of his
Gardens and Galleries to walk in, I hear his Music with as many ears, I hunt
with him in his Parks, eat and drink of the same with him, though a little
after, and so of other delights which my Lord enjoys. And indeed, what great
difference is there, save in the pride and covetousness of a man's mind? for my
part, (let me speak it to Gods glory, and out of thankfulness) I have no share
with either of them in these delights; I enjoy neither curious gardens, nor
delicious music, nor sumputous f^re, my body will scarce permit me a cup of
strong drink, I do not know that I have been free from getting cold in my head
(more or less) one whole day this thirty years, my means will not afford me to
keep either horse or man, except with the unjust Steward, I should cozen my
master, yet I would not change my con(...) s^nds of my mind, as preferring a
retired life, spent in conversing with Authors, before all the honors,
pleasures, and profits that others enjoy; This is the gift of God, (Eccl. 5.15.
to the end,) and not unmeet to be spoken in the great Congregation, Psalm.
35.18, and 119.46. Riches and Poverty are more in the heart then in the hand;
we may be as happy and as warm in Country russet, as in Tissue; he is wealthy
that is contented, and he poor that is not, were he as rich as Croesus, he only
is rich and happy, in regard of outward things, who thinks himself so, and only
the covetous and uncontented are poor and miserable. The contented man in
coveting nothing, enjoyes all things, though he have nothing; even as Adam was
warm, though he had no clothes. The eyes quiet, the thoughts medicine, and the
minds Mitridate, is content, it is a sweet sauce to every dish, and adds
pleasantness to all we do; how many miserly muck worms macerate themselves with
perplexing thoughts, cares, and fears of want, when they want nothing but a
thankful heart? these are miserably poor and unhappy, but it is in opinion
only, for otherwise were they but contented, they might be the richest and
happiest men a live, not by adding to, or heaping up goods upon goods, but by
diminishing and taking away from their greedy and covetous desire of having
more. The shortest cut to riches, is by their contempt; it is great riches not
to desire riches, and he has most that cove^s least, says Socrates, and also
Seneca.

CHAP. XXIV.
TRue, this so transcends the condition, or indeed, the capacity of a Miser or
Muck-worm, that he will count these but words, and mere bravadoes; but that
those lovers of wisdom, were so contented with a little, that they desired no
more, their practice did sufficiently prove. For when Alexander bad Diogenes
ask what he would, his answer was, Stand aside, and let the Sun shine upon me,
take not that away which thou art not able to give; further avouching, that he
was richer then himself; for I, quoth he, desire no more then what I enjoy,
whereas thou, O Emperor, can not content thy self with all the world, but
daily hazardest thy life and fortunes, to augment thy Possessions. Now all that
this Heathen possessed, was a Tub to dwell in, the peoples charity to maintain
him, and a Dish to take up water in, the which (when he saw a boy take up with
his hand to drink) he threw away, saying* I knew not that nature had provided
every thing needful, so little did he desire superfluities. Abdolomenes, a
poor Gardener, refused a great City offered him by Alexander. Fabricius, a
noble Roman, refused a great sum of money, sent him by Pirrhus; albeit, he was
so poor, that when he dyed, his daughters were married at the common charge of
the City. Apollonius T^^neas, having diverse rich gifts sent him by Vespasian,
refused the saying. They were for covetous-minded men and for those that had
need of them, which he had not. Socrates being (...) by Archel^u^ to come to
receive store of gold; sent him word, that a measure of flower was sold in
Athens for a penny, and that water cost him nothing. Themistocles finding rich
bracelets of Pearl and precious stones lie in his path: bade another take them
up, saying, Thou art not Themistocles. Anacreon the Philosopher, having
received from Policrates a great reward, of ten thousand Ducats; soon after
repented himself: for he entered into such thoughts, and was so vexed with fear,
care and watching for three days and three nights; that he sent it back again,
saying, It was not worth the pains, he had already taken about it.

Democritus the Philosopher of Abdera, having learned of the Chaldeans
Astronomy, and of the Persians Geometry: returned to Athens, where he gave
infinite wealth to the City, reserving only a little Garden to himself. Crates,
to the end that he might more quietly study Philosophy; threw his goods into
the Sea. Crates the Thebane, delivered a stock of money to a friend of his,
upon condition; that if it should happen his children proved Fools, he should
deliver it unto them: but if they became learned, and Philosophers; then to
distribute it to the Common people, because said he, Philosophers have no need
of wealth. Which examples I could parallel with many mentioned in the Word, as
Jacob, Genesis 28.20. and Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.3. and Job Chap. 31.24, 28. Moses,
Numb. 16. and 15. Ier. 15. and 10. Agar, Prove. 30.8. Abraham, who would not
receive so much as a shoe-latchet of the King of Sodom: Genesis 14.21, 22, 23.
David, who refused to have the threshing-floor of Araunah, except he might pay
to the full for it; and whose longing was not after the increase of corn, wine
and oil; but for the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4.67. Yea, he more valued
Gods Word, then thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 19.10. and 119.14, 127.
Elisha refused Naamans rich present of gold and costly garments; though so
freely offered, and so well deserved, 2 Kings 5.16. Saint Paul in his greatest
need, -- was as well content, as when he had the most plenty: and rather chose
to work at his trade, then he would be chargeable to any, Phil. 4.11. He
coveted no man's silver, nor gold, Acts 20.33. it was only the saving of souls,
that he thirsted after, 2 Cor. 12.14. Zaccheus, when he was once become a
Christian, was so far from desiring more, that he was all for diminishing what
he had: for he gave one half to the poor, and with the other he made fourfold
restitution, Luke 19.8. And the like might be shown of all the Apostles, and
lastly, of our Savior Christ.

To all which I might add examples of many in this age, and of that that went
before it; As Sir Thomas Moore, Sir Julius Caesar, The Lord Harrington, Bishop
Hooper, Mr. Bradford Martyr, Reverend Mr. F^x that wrote the Book of Martyrs,
Master Wheatley, Minister of Banbury, Doctor Tailor; and others that are yet
living: were it fit to name them, that have but a small portion, a poor
pittance of these earthly enjoyme^^s (in comparison of what others have, and
are not pleased with all) even just enough to make even at the years end,
living frugally: yet are they so contented, that they desire no more, nor would
they change their private and mean condition, with any men alive, be they never
so rich, never so great. Nor would thou think it probable, their hearts
should deceive them, if thou knew what offers they have refused. And I
doubt-not, but there are many such in the land.

Nor can it be thought strange, that Gods children (whose affections are set
upon heavenly things) should be so content with a little; that they desire no
more; when we read of one Esau, that could say, I have enough my brother, keep
that thou have to thy self, Genesis 33.9. Yea, if it fared so with the Heathen,
for the love of that wisdom and virtue, which shall have no reward, because
they wanted faith and saving knowledge, how much more should Christians? (who
have a more sure word of promise, then they had, 2 Pet. 1.19. with Mary make
choice of that better part, which shall never be taken from them, Luke 10.41,
42.

True worldly minds think, no man can be of any other then their own diet; and
because they find the respects of self-love, and private profit, so strongly
prevail with themselves: they cannot conceive, how these should be capable of a
repulse from others. Nature thinks it impossible, to contemn honor and wealth:
and because so many souls are thus taken, cannot believe that any would escape.
But let carnal hearts know there are those, that can spit the world in the
face, and say, Thy gold and silver perish with thee, Acts 8.20. That had rather
be masters of themselves, then of the Indies: and that in comparison of a good
conscience, can tread under foot with disdain, the worlds best proffers, like
shadows as they are; and that can do as Balaam said, If Balack would give me
his house-full of silver and gold; I cannot go beyond the Commandment of the
Lord, Numb. 24.13.

Elisha and Gehazi, looked not with the same eyes upon the Syrian treasure; but
one with the eye of contempt, the other with the eye of admiration and covetous
desire. Two men see a Mass together, one is transported with admiration and
delight, the other looks upon it with indignation and scorn; one thinks it
heavenly, the other knows it blasphemy.

CHAP. XXV.
NOw why are godly Christians so content with a little? that they desire no
more: certainly they could be as rich as the richest, and as wise for earthly
things, as they are for heavenly. (As when Thales was upbraided, that all his
wisdom could not make him rich: se^^ing but his mind to it, he saw by study,
that there would be a great Scarcity of oil, which in the time of plenty he
took up upon credit, and when the want came, by his store he became exceeding
rich as La^rtius relates:) but they are better pleased with a competency then
to trouble themselves to get, or indeed to desire an opulency. The Christians
reasons are these.

First, they consider, that as a shoe fit is better then one either too big, or
too little; (for one too big sets the foot awry, and one too little hinders
the going) so a mean estate is best. Better is a little with the fear of the
Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith, Prove. 15.16. A ship of great
burden, and heavy laden, comes with great labor and difficulty, and with much
ado is brought in; if it want ballast and lading, there is great danger of
overturning; but a light Pinace indifferently freight, comes along swiftly, and
is brought to the harbor with much ease.

Nor do the godly wise, desire more then they can wield, in which they resemble
Aristippus, who when a servant in journeying with him, was ^yred with the
weight of the money which he carried; bid him cast out that which was too heavy
and carry the rest: whereas the covetous man is like Arthipertus King of the
Lombards; who flying from Asprandus his enemy, and being to swim over the River
Tesino, to save his life, took so much gold with him, that he both drowned it,
and himself with it.

Secondly, the poor and mean, have a deeper sense of Gods fatherly care and
providence, in replenishing them, at all times of need, (even beyond
imagination or expression) then others have, that know no^ what it is sometimes
to want: whiles wicked minds have their full scope, they never look up above
themselves: but when once God crosses them in their projects, their want of
success, teaches them to give God hi^ own.

We should forget at whose cost we live, if we wanted nothing: And doubtless,
one bit from the mouth of the Raven, was more pleasing to Elijah; then a whole
Table full of Ahabs dainties. Nothing is more comfortable to Gods children,
then to see the sensible demonstrations of the divine care and providence, as
is promised, Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct
thy ways. The godly man wearies not himself with cares and fears, have he but
from hand to mouth: (never so little) for he knows he lives not at his own
cost. He considers what Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 5. Cast your care upon the
Lord, for he cares for you, verse 7. He remembers what our Savior faith,
Matthew. 6. observes the same, and never doubts of the performance; so he takes
no thought for to morrow, what he shall eat, or what he shall drink or
wherewith he shall be clothed: but applauds his own happiness, knowing that he
who feeds the fowls of the Air, and arrayeth the Lillies of the field, will
be sure to feed and clothe them that are his sons and household servants, Matthew.
6.25, to the end, Luke 12.22, to 33. Levit. 26.3, to 14. Phil. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.7.
Psalm. 55.22.

Besides, as there are intercourses of sleeping and waking, of night and day,
of fair weather and foul, of war and peace, of labor and recreation; that each
may set off the other, so God finds it meet, by a sense of want to humble us;
and by supplying our wants to fill us with joy and thankfulness.

Ptolomie King of Egpyt, going a hunting lost his way, and could get no better
fare, then a course brown loaf in a Shepherds house: but this he said seemed
sweeter and better to him; then all the delights that ever he ate or met with
before. Content in want, is plenty with an overplus.

The giver of all things knows how to dispense his favors so, as that every
one may have cause both of thankfulness and humiliation: whiles there is none
that has all, nor any one but has some.

Thirdly, God in mercy not seldom keeps his children from riches and
abundance: lest they should choke and wound them; for they are snares and
thorns, Matthew. 13.22.

Indeed riches are a blessing, if we can so possess them; that they possess not
us: There can be no danger, much benefit in abundance, all the good or ill, of
wealth or poverty; is in the mind, in the use. But this is the misery, Plenty
of goods, commonly occasions plenty of evils. How many had been good? had they
not been great. Diverse have changed their minds with their means, neither has
God worse servants in the world, then are rich men of the world: if adversity
has slain her thousands, prosperity has slain her ten thousand. Commonly
where is no want, is much wantonness: and as we grow rich in temporals, we grow
poor in spirituals. Usually so much the more proud, secure, wanton, scornful,
impenitent, etc. by how much the more we are enriched, advanced, and blessed.
They spend their days in wealth, therefore they say unto God, Depart from us,
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; and what is the Almighty that we
should fear him? Job 21.13, 14, 15.

CHAP. XXVI.
FOurthly, men in a middle condition are mostly more merry and contented then
others, that surfeit with abundance. Who so melancholy as the rich worldling?
and who more merry then they? that are poorest. I have read of a rich
Landlord, that envied his poor tenant, because he heard him sing every day at
his labor, yet had scarce bread for his family; while himself wanting nothing,
was full of discontent: One advised him to convey cunningly into his Cottage, a
bag of money; he did so, the tenant finding this mass, so great in his
imagination, left off his singing, and fell to ^arking and caring how to
increase it. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam: The Landlord fetches back his
money, the Tenant is as merry as ever he was. Which shows, that there is no
riches comparable to a contented mind, as Plutarch is of opinion, That there
are poor Kings, and rich Cobblers, as wise Solon seemed to insinuate to the
King, when he was vaunting of his greatness: For it was Iris a poor beggar,
that he told Croesus was the happiest man in his Dominions. And when King Agis
requested the Oracle of Apollo to tell him, who was the happiest man in the
world? expecting to hear himself nominated: the answer was Aglaion, who was a
poor Gardener in Arcadia, that at sixty years of age, had never gone from home,
but kept himself and his family with their labor, in a fruitful plot or
garden, as Livius relates. Pyrrhus opened himself to his friend Cineas, that he
first intended a war upon Italy, and what then said Cineas? then we will
attempt Cicile, and what then? then we may conquer Carthage and Africa; and
what then said Cineas? Why, then quoth Pyrrhus, we may rest, and feast, and
sacrifice, and make merry with our friends: to which Cineas replied, (as every
servant of God would do in the like case) and may we not enjoy all this,
sweetness now? and that without all this ado. But natural men are mad men. Yea,
were great men, though good men, but asked the question; their consciences
could not but acquaint us, if they would speak out; that true contentment
seldom dwells high, whiles meaner men of humble spirits, enjoy both earth and
heaven. However not a few of them have freely acknowledged it, as I have
largely related in my second Part of Philarguromastix. Wherefore be pleased, o
God, to give me a contented mind: and then if I have but little in estate, I
shall have much in possession.

Fifthly, mean ones with their pover^y, misery, ignominy, are often saved;
whiles others with their honor, and opulency go to hell. When we are judged,
we are chastened of the Lord; that we may not be condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11.32. Riches do so puff up some men, that they even think it a discredit
to their great Worships, to worship God. Nothing feeds pride, nor keeps off
repentance so much, as prosperous advantage. The Prodigal never thought of his
father, till he wanted husks. We serve God, as our servants serve us: of whom
many have too good clothes, others too much wages, or are too full fed to do
work. As a woman finding that her hen laid her every day an egg; for all she
was very lean, had a conceit, that if she were fat and lusty, she would lay
twice aday; whereupon she fed and crammed her thoroughly: but in a short space,
she became so fat, that contrary to her expectation, she left laying
altogether. Who so nourishes his servant daintily from his childhood; shall
after find him stubbron, Prove. 29.21.

Sixthly, they fix their affections upon heavenly riches, and not upon the
temporary and transitory riches of this world: because in sickness, when they
stand in the greatest need of all, they will not do them the least good, Your
gold will not bribe a disease, your bags will not keep your head from aching, or
your joints from the Gout, a loathing stomach makes no difference between an
earthen dish, and one of silver. Riches can no more put off the stone, or
assuage grief, or thrust out cares, or purchase grace, or suspend death, or
prevent hell, or bribe the Devil; then a satin sleeve can heal a broken arm.

Indeed the foolish Prior in Melan^thon, rolled his hands up and down in a
basin full of Angels; thinking by this means to cure his Gout: but it would not
do. Yea, thou that placest thy happiness, and put thy confidence in a
little white and red earth; and dotest so upon the world, tell me? When the
hand of God has never so little touched thee, what good thy great wealth will
do thee? Therefore, o vain desires! and impotent contentments of men, that
place their happiness in these things: will not this your fair Herodias,
appear as a stigmatized Gypsy? Will not all the toil and cost you have been at
to get riches, appear as ridiculous; as if a countryman should anoint his
axle-tree with Ambergris? or as if a travaller, should liquour his boots
with Balsamum. Yea, your wealth will not only not save you from evils, but help
to make you more miserable, and not only here, but hereafter, Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8.

Why then do you set so high a price upon them? and so shamefully undervalue
the riches of the mind? which will much mitigate your grief, and increase your
comfort, in what condition soever you are. But

Seventhly, they little set by the wealth of this world; because their riches
may soon leave them: When with the Spider we have exhausted our very bowels, to
contrive a slender web of an uncertain inheritance: one puff of wind and blast
blown upon it by the Almighty, carries all away. What says Solomon? Prove. 23.
Cease from thy wisdom, will thou cast thine eyes upon that, which is nothing?
for riches takes her to her wings, as an Eagle, and flies away, Verse 4, 5.
and Ier. 17.11. Isaiah 33.1. Prove. 12.27. Yea, all riches are uncertain, but
those that are evil gotten, are ^ost uncertain: as examples of all ages
witness. The first of these was verified in Job; who lived to see himself poor
to a Proverb; and fell from the want of all misery, to the misery of all wants.
And Dionysius, who fell from a Tyrant over men, to be a Tutor over boys, and
so to get his living. And Perses son and heir, who was fain to learn an
Occupation, the Black-smiths trade; to relieve his necessity. And Henry the
Fourth that victorious Emperor, who after he had fought two and fifty pitched
Battails; became a Petitioner, for a Prebendary, to maintain him in his old
age. And Geliner, that potent King of the Vandals, was so low brought: that he
entreated his friend to send him a harp, a sponge, and a loaf of bread; an Harp
to consort with his misery, a sponge to dry up his tears, and a loaf of bread
to satisfy his hunger. Yea, how many have we known in this City? reputed very
rich, yet have broken for thousands. There are innumerable ways to become,
poor; a fire, a thief, a false servant, suretiship, trusting of bad customers,
an unfaithful factor, a Pyrate, an unskilful Pilate, God wines sands, a cross
gale a wind, and many the like, has brought millions of rich men to poverty.
And yet this is the only wind, that blows up the Words bl^dder.

You see little children, what pains they take to rake and scrape snow
together, to make a snow-ball: right so it fares with them, that scrape
together the treasure of this world, they have but a snow-bal of it, for so
soon as the Sun shines, and God breaths upon it, by and by it comes to
nothing.

And as riches well gotten are uncertain, so those that are evil gotten, are
(...) seldom lost with shame. As how many of our over-reachers have
overreached themselves so far? either by perjury, forgery, receiving of stolen
goods, or the like: that they have left either their bodies hanging between
heaven and earth; or their ears upon the pillory, and died in prison: so that
the safest way, to praise a covetous miser is, when he is dead. But

CHAP. XXVII.
EIghthly, to this may be added, that if riches should not leave us, and be
taken away, as they were from Job; yet of necessity we must ere long leave and
be taken from them; as the rich man in the Gospel, was from his substance and
wealth. Nor do we know how soon, for so soon as a man is born, he hastens as
fast to his end, as the Arrow to the mark: each day, is another march toward
death; and that little time of stay is full of misery, and trouble: and
therefore it is fitly called a passage, a shadow, a span, a tale, a vapor, a
cloud, a bubble in the water; It is like a candle in the wind, soon blown out;
like a spark in the water, soon extinguished; like a thin Air, soon expired;
like a little snow in the sun, soon melted; It is like a pilgrimage, in which
is uncertainty; a flower, in which is mutability; a house of clay, in which is
misery; a Weavers shuttle, in which is volubility; a Shepherds tent, in which
is variety; to a ship on the sea, in which is celerity; to smoke, which is
vanity; to a thought, whereof we have a thousand in a day; to a dream, of which
we have many in a night; to vanity, which is nothing in it self; and to
nothing, which has no being in the world.

And which is further considerable, the young may die as soon as the old. Yea,
more die in the spring, and summer of their years; then do live to their autumn
or winter: and more before ten, then after threescore. There are graves of all
sizes, and likewise sculls in Golgotha, as, says the Hebrew proverb. One dies
in the bud, another in the bloom, some in the fruit, few like the sheaf, that
comes to the barn in a full age.

Men may p^t far from them the evil day; but they may find^ it nearer then they
are aware of, Revel. 22.12. The pitcher goes often to the water^ but at length it
comes broken home. The cord breaks at last, with the weakest pull, as the
Spanish proverb well notes. The tree falls upon the last stroke: yet all the
former strokes, help forwards. A whirl-winde with one furious blast,
overturneth the greatest and tallest trees; which for many years have been
growing to their perfect strength and greatness: so oftentimes, the third of
life breaks, when men think least of death, as it fared with Saint Lukes
fool, who promised himself many years, to live in ease, mirth, and jollity;
when he had not one night more to live, Luke 12.19, 20. For when like a Iay, he
was pruning himself in the boughs: he came tumbling down, with the Arrow in his
side. John the 22th. prophesied by the course of the Stars; that he should live
long: but whilst he was vainly vaunting thereof, the Chamber wherein he was,
fell down, and bruised him to pieces. His glass was run, when he thought it
but new turned. And the Axe was lifted, to strike him to the ground; when he
never dreamed of the slaughterhouse. And whether thy soul shall be taken from
thee this night, as it fared with him formerly spoken of; thou have no
assurance: the very first night, which the rich man intended for his rest,
proved his last night. Nor was there any more between Nabals festival, and his
funeral, then ten or a dozen days, 1 Samuel 25.38. And could any thing have
hired death, to have spared our forefathers; they would have kept our
possessions from us.

Neither is this all, for if thou be wicked, and unmerciful; thou have no
reason to expect other, then a violent death: for which see, Job 24.24. Psalm.
37.10, 11. Job 36.11, 12. Psalm. 37.37, 38, 39. and 55.23. Prove. 12.27. Great
trees are long in growing, but are rooted up in an instannt. The Axe is laid to
the root, Matthew. 3.10. down it goes, into the fire it must: if it will not
serve for fruit, it must for fuel. And what know thou? but God may deal with
thee, as Mahomet did by John Justinian of Geneva who having taken
Constantinople by his treason, first made him King, according to promise; and
within three days after, cut off his head. God may have fatted thee with
abundance, on purpose to send thee to the slaughterhouse.

Nay, why has God spared thee, so long as he has? probably not in love to
thee, but for some other end: As perhaps God has some progeny to come from
thee; As for good Hezekiah to be born, his wicked Father Ahaz is forborne. Why
did Ammon draw out two years breath? in Idolatry: but that good Iosia was to be
fitted for a King. Many sacrilegious extortioners, Idollaters, etc. Are
delivered, or preserved: because God has some good fruit, to come from their
cursed loins. However, thou can not look to live many years. The Raven, the
Phoenix, the Elephant, the Lion, and the Heart, fulfill their hundred years: But
(...) seldom lives to four score, and thou art drawing toward it. Besides the
last month of the great year of the World; is come upon us; we are deep in
December, And that day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, for when
thou shall say peace and safety, then shall come upon thee sudden destruction,
as the travel upon a woman with child, and thou shall not escape: as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3.

That nothing is more certain then death, nothing more uncertain then the hour
thereof: That this only is sure, that there is nothing sure here below, and
that if we were owners of more land, then ever the Devil proffered to Christ;
yet when death shall knock at our door, no more can be called ours, then the
ground we are put into, needs no more proof then experience. See, Psalm. 37.35,
36. But

Ninthly and lastly, a godly man's desires, are fixed upon the riches of the
mind; which being once had, can never be lost. The which Saint Augustine only
counted true riches. The wise and godly are of Pythagoras his mind: who being
asked why he cared no more for riches? answered, I despise those riches, which
by expending are wasted and lost; and with sparing, will rust and rot. They are
of Stilpons judgment, who used to say; All that is truly mine, I carry with me.
They desire not so much, to lay up treasure for themselves upon earth; but to
lay up for themselves in Heaven, as their Lord and Master has commanded them,
Matthew. 6.19, 20. What says the Apostle? Let not covetousness be once named
among Saints, Ephesians. 5.3. As if that world, which many prefer before Heaven;
were not worth talking of.

All worldly things are but lent us, our houses of stone wherein our bodies
dwell, our houses of clay wherein our souls dwell, are but lent us: honors,
pleasures, treasures, money, maintenance, wives, children, friends, etc. but
lent us: we may say of them all, as he said of the Ax-head when it fell into
the water; 2 Kings 6.5. Alas^, they are but borrowed. Only spiritual graces are
given; of those things there is only a true donation, whereof there is a true
possession worldly things are but as a Tabernacle, a moveable; heaven is a
mansion.

Now put all these together, and they will sufficiently show; that he is a fool
or a mad man; that prefers not spiritual riches, (which are subject to none of
these casualties) before temporal and transitory.

And so at lenght I have shown you what it is not, and what it is to be rich.
And I hope convinced the worldling, that the richest are not always the
happiest: Yea, that they are the most miserable; who swim in wealth, wanting
grace and Gods blessing upon what they do possess: while that man is
incomparably happy; to whom God in his love and favor, gives only a
competency of earthly things, and the blessing of contentation withal; so as
to be thankful for the same, and desire no more. I will now in discharge of my
promise acquaint you; how of poor* melancholy and miserable* you may become
rich, happy, and cheerful.

CHAP. XXVIII.
THe which I shall do from the Word of God. Nor need it seem strage, that for
the improving of men's outward estates, I prescribe them rules and directions
from thence: For would we be instructed in any necessary truth, whether it be
Theological, concerning God, Ecclesiastical, concerning The Church, Political,
concerning The Commonwealth, Moral, concerning Our neighbors and friends,
Oeconomical, concerning Our private families, Monastical, concerning Our selves.


Or be it touching Our Temporal estate. Civil estate. Spirituul estate. Eternal
Souls, Bodies, Names, Estates, Posterities.


We need but have recourse to the written Word. For that alone is a magazine of
all needful provision, a storehouse of all good instructions. And let a man
study Machiavel, and all the Machiavilians, and State-politicians that ever
wrote; he can add nothing, or nothing of worth to what may be collected thence,
touching this subject. Wherefore, if any of poor would become rich, let him use
the means which tend thereunto; observe and follow those Rules and Directions,
which God has prescribed and appointed in his Word, which are principally six;
For as the Throne of Solomon was mounted unto by six stairs: so is this Palace
of Plenty and Riches ascended unto, by six steps set upon this ground already
laid. For I find in the Word, six infallible ways to become rich; or six sorts
of men, whom God has promised to bless with riches, and all outward
prosperity. That is to say, 1 The Godly, 2 The Liberal, 3 The Thankful, 4 The
Humble, 5 The Industrious, 6 The Frugal.


These of all other men in the world, are sure never to want. And these are the
main heads, unto which I will draw all, I shall say upon this Partition, or
Division.

CHAP. XXIX.
FIrst, if any of poor would become rich, let him become religious: for
Godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of the life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Yea, all temporal blessings that can be named, are promised to the
godly, and their seed; and to them only as both the Old and New Testament does
plainly and plentifully prove. As for instance in Deuteronomy the 28th. God
has promised; that if we will hearken diligently unto his voice, observe and
do all his Commandments, and walk in his ways, we shall be blessed in the
city, and blessed in the field, blessed in our going forth, and in our coming
home, blessed in the fruit of our bodies, and in the fruit of our ground, and
in the fruit of our cattle, the increase of our kine, and the flocks of our
sheep. That he will bless us in our storehouses, and in all that we set our
hands unto; and make us plentiful in all good things: and that we shall have
wherewith to lend unto many, and not borrow, Verse 1, to 15th. and Chap. 7.11,
to 19th. To which may be added many the like places; As, Blessed is the man
that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments: wealth and
riches shall be in his house, Psalm. 112. Verse 1, to 4th. Wait on the Lord, and
keep his way, and he will exalt thee to inherit the land, Psalm. 37.34. The Lord
will withold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire, etc.
Psalm. 37. 3, to 7. Fear ye the Lord, ye his Saints: for nothing wants to them
that fear him. The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the
Lord, shall want nothing that is good, Psalm. 34.9, 10. Whatsoever we ask, we
receive of him: because we keep his commandments, and do those things which
are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3.12. What rare and precious promises are
these? to which I might add very many of like nature. All which David had the
experience of, who tells us that he greatly rejoiced in the strength and
salvation of the Lord, and the Lord gave him his hearts desire, and did not
withold the request of his lips: Yea, he prevented him with the blessings of
goodness, and set a crown of gold upon his head, Psalm. 11.1, 2, 3, 4. And the
like of Abraham, and Lot, and Job, and Solomon. Let us first seek the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, and all other things shall be ministered unto us,
or come in as it were upon the bargain, as our Savior has assured us, Matthew.
6.33. Talis est ille qui in Christ^ credit, die qua credidit, qualis ille qui
universam legem implevit; says Hierom, We have a livery and seisin, of all the
precious promises, both in the Law and Gospel, in the first moment of our
faith. Yea, even an earnest, and partly a possession of Heaven it self: Ephesians.
2.6. Neither are these promises made only to the obedient themselves: but
riches, and all earthly blessings are entailed upon their seed also, Psalm. 112.
His seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the righteous shall be
blessed, Verse 2, 3.

Nor is riches, and outward prosperity promised to the godly, and their seed as
others usually enjoy them, that is, single and barely, but they have a promise
of them, with a supply and addition of all other good things, that may make
them every way happy, as that their prosperity shall be durable and lasting.
That with riches they shall have credit, honor, and promotion with long life
added. That they shall be happy and prosper in all they have or do: as having
God their Protector, who with mercy is said to compass them about on every
side, Psalm. 32.10. That they shall be freed from all fears and dangers, and
obtein victory over all their enemies; together with death, hell, and the
devil. That they shall be freed from the Law, and likewise from sin, and the
penalty thereof. That they shall have peace external, internal, eternal. And
joy, even the joy of the holy Ghost: which is both glorious, and unspeakable.
That they shall not only persevere, but also grow in grace, and true wisdom.
That all things whatsoever, shall make for their good. That both their persons
and performances shall be good and acceptable; which before were wicked and
abominable. That by the prayer of faith, they shall obtein of God, whatsoever
they shall ask in Christ's Name, and according to his Word. And in fine, all
other good things, that can be named; whether temporal, spiritual, or eternal:
are by the promise of God entailed, upon them that love him, and keep his
commandments, and upon their seed, as I could plentifully and most easily
prove, were it pertinent to the matter in hand. Nor is all this, that God has
promised to those that serve him, so great a matter comparatively; as that we
need wonder at it, or once question the same: For If he spared not his own Son,
but delivered him to death for us; how shall he not with him freely, give us
all things also? Romans 8.31, 32. It is the Apostles argument. Great, yea, too
great things are they for us to receive; but not too great, for the great and
good God of Heaven and earth to give: all the fear is on our part, whether we
be such to whom the promise is made. For all Gods promises are conditional. And
though of these outward good things, he has promised abundance: yet it is upon
the condition of faith and obedience: as appears by all the forementioned
places; so that if we be not wanting in out duty, and obedience to God; God
will not be wanting in any good thing to us: Nor can we look that God should
make good his promises, if we make them void, by not observing the condition,
as that we may do by our distrusting him. If we will not dare to trust God upon
his promise so confidently as we would a friend, or some great man that is able
and honest.

Besides, the Lord has promised, that there shall be no want to them that fear
him; and that no good thing will he withold, from them that walk uprightly,
Psalm. 34.9. and 84.11. Where observe two things, there shall be no want to
such, and such shall want no good thing: so that he must be such an one, to
whom the promise is made; and he must also be sure, that it is good for him,
which is promised. But oftentimes it is not good, for a man to abound with
earthly blessings: as strong drink is not good for weak brains. Yea, if any
thing be wantiug to a good man, he may be sure it is not good for him: and then
better that he does want it, then that he did enjoy it, and what wise man will
complain of the want of that, which if he had, would prove more hurtful then
gainful to him? as a sword to a mad man, a knife to a child, drink to them
that have a Fever, or the Dropsy. No good thing will God withold, etc. and
therefore not wants themselves, which to many are also good, yea, very good
things, as I could reckon up many: want sanctified, is a notable means to bring
to repentance, to work in us amendment of life, it stirs up to prayer, it weans
from the love of the world, it keeps us always prepared for the spiritual
combat, discovers whether we be true believers or hypocrites, prevents greater
evils of sin and punishment to come; It makes us humble, conformable to Christ
our head, increases our faith, our joy and thankfulness, our spiritual
wisdom, and likewise our patience, as I have largely shown in The Benefit of
Affliction.

To coonclude, All good things were created for the good, and therefore are
they called goods; because the good God created them for good men to do good
withal. Therefore as Jacob got the blessing, so he gat the inheritance also: to
show that as the faithful have the inward blessing, so they have the outward
blessing too; when they will do them good, and cause them to do good. Yea, in
this case, even as the sheaffs fell before Ruth: so riches shall fall in our
way, as they did to Abraham, and Lot, and Jacob, and Job, and Joseph, upon whom
riches were cast they knew not how; but as if God had only said, Be rich; and
they were rich straight. But that this is the true and only way to wealth and
happiness, needs no more proof then that which is recorded of Solomon 1 Kings
3. 2 Chronicles. 1. where the Lord appearing to him in a dream, said, Ask what I
shall give thee. And he asking only an understanding heart, to discern between
good and evil; that he might the better discharge that great place, whereunto
God had called him; wherein Gods glory, and the peoples good, was his principal
aim and end: Hear what the Lords answer is, Because this was in thine heart,
and thou have not asked riches, wealth or honor, nor the life of thine
enemies, neither yet have asked long life, but have asked wisdom and knowledge
for thy self, that thou might judge my people, over whom I have made thee
King: Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches,
and wealth and honor, such as none of the Kings have had that have been before
thee, neither shall there any after th^^ have the like, etc. Yea, he was so
surpassing rich, that he gave silver in Jerusalem as stones, and gave Cedars as
the wild fig trees that grow abundantly in the plain, 1. King. 10.27. 2 Chronicles.
1.7, to 13, 14, 15. Lo, the true way to Wealth, honor, and happiness, is; to
desire grace, that we may glorify God, and do good: for clearing whereof* I Will
give you a similitude, A man spies a fair apple on a tree, has a longing
desire to it; whereupon he falls a shaking the tree with all his might: at
length it not only comes down, but many other come down to him together with it.

And so much to prove, that the way to become rich, is first to become godly.
If any shall ask why the godly are not always, nor often rich, notwithstanding
these promises? I answer, that God not seldom withholds these outward
blessings, from his own people in great love, only affording them all things
that they have need of. Our heavenly Father, who knows us better then we know
our selves, and what is good and fit for us, (even as the Nurse knows better
then the child, and the Physician better then the Patient;) knows too well,
how apt we are to abuse these his mercies; and that we cannot abound with
earthly blessings, but we grow proud and surfeit of them: as we see Solomon
himself did, who was the wisest ( next to Adam in his innocence) that ever
lived: and like wise how happy it is for them, to be kept short. And when the
All-wise God does foresee, that men will serve him as the Prodigal son served
his father: who only prayed until he had got his patrimony, and then forsook
him, and spent the same in riot to the givers dishonor; even as the cloud that
is lifted up, and advanced by the Sun obscures the Sun. In this case he either
denies them riches in mercy, as he denied Saint Paul in his suit, 2 Cor. 12.8,
9. And our Savior himself, Matthew. 26.39. Or grants them their riches in wrath,
Hosea 13* 11. Psalm. 106.15. of which I have largely spoken in the foregoing
pages, where I have declared how miserable they are, who swim in wealth,
wanting grace, and Gods blessing upon what they do possess.

This is the first and main step to riches, and the next is like unto it, viz.
^ounty and liberality to the poor members of Jesus Christ. For,

CHAP. XXX.
SEcondly, He that would be a rich man, let him be a merciful man, and do good
with what God has already given him, be it never so little, for there is not a
more sure and infallible way, to increase and multiply a man's outward estate,
then in being charitable to the poor, if we will believe Gods Word. As what
says our Savior? Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed
down, and shaken together, and r^^ning over shall men give into your bosom,
Luke 6.38. Matthew. 7.2. Mark 4.24. In which regard, it may be truly said:
Eleemosyna non est divittarum dispendium, sed ditescendi potius compendium
quaestusque o^nium uberrimus. And to this accords that place in the Proverbs,
There is that scatters, and is more increased: but he that spares more then
is right, shall surely come to poverty, Proverbs 11.24. The liberal person
shall have plenty, and he that waters, shall also have rain, Verse 25. And
the like in the Psalms, Wealth and riches shall be in the house of him, that
has compassion of, and gives to the poor, Psalm. 112.3, to 10. See here how
bounty is the best and surest way to plenty. But notable to this purpose is
that, Prove. 28.27. He that gives to the poor, shall not lack. A rare and
incomparable privilege never to want. And yet this is a bargain of Gods own
making. Plenty shall furnish the table, where Charity takes away, and gives to
the poor. He has sparsed abroad, (says the Psalmist) and given to the poor,
his benevolence remains for ever, Psalm. 112.9. He has always to give, that
has a free and bountiful heart to give, says Saint Bernard. And of this the
Prophet Isaiah does assure us, The liberal man (says he) devises liberal
things; and by liberality he shall stand, Isaiah 32.8. A man would think, he
should rather fall by being so liberal and bountiful: but this is the right
course to thrive, and hold out. Nor was it ever known, that God suffered a
merciful and bountiful man to want; ordering his affairs with discretion, Psalm.
112.5. But you have not heard a tithe of these promises: for the Scriptures no
less abound in them, then silver did in the days of Solomon: of which only a
few more, for I had rather press you with weight, then oppress you with number
of arguments. What says the wiseman? Prove. 3. Honor the Lord with thy
substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase: so shall thy barns
be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall burst with new wine, Verse 9,
10. In which regard, whhat is this way expended, may be likened to gold the
best of metals: of which experience teaches, that the third part of a grain,
will gild a wyre of 134 foot long; Or rather to those loaves and fishes in the
Gospel: for as they did increase and multiply, even while they were
distributing: so do our riches (and indeed all other gifts.) Even out of that
which the hand reaches to the mouth, it self is nourished.

And thus you see, that (if either Old or New Testament be true) not getting,
but giving is the true and ready way to abundance. That to give in this case,
is the way to have; that parsimony, is no good husbandry: and that we are the
richer for disbursing: Which makes Chrysostom say, that the gainfullest Art is
Almsgiving. And hence it is, that the Scripture compares Almsgiving, to sowing
of seed, 2 Cor. 9.6. he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: but he
that sows bountifully, shall also reap bountifully. The Apostle compares
giving to sowing, to note unto us the great gain, and advantage that comes
thereby, for who knows not what gain a good husbandman, has by his sowing?
He casts his seed into the ground, and only forbeareth it a few months, and
when the season comes, he reaps a harvest of thirty, forty or an hundred for
one increase. And the like of lending or putting money to interest: to which
the Scriptures also compare it, Prove. 19. Psalm. 37. He who has pity on the
poor, lends unto the Lord: and that which he has given, will he repay him
again, Prove. 19.17. The Lord is content, to acknowledge himself the charitable
man's debtor. Yea, by our liberality to the poor, our most gracious Redeemer,
acknowledges himself gratified and engaged; as himself does most steely and
fully acknowledge, Matthew. 25. I was an hungry and ye gave me meat, etc. And for
as much as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren ye have done it
unto me, Verse 35, 36, 40. The poor man's hand, is Christ's Treasury or Bank; as
one fitly calls it, and by putting thereinto, a man becomes a Creditor to his
Savior. Neither will he pay or recompense us, as we do our creditors: For as
Augustine well notes; what we receive, by way of return, is not ten for an
hundred, or an hundred for ten, but an hundred for one, yea, a thousand
thousand for one; an hundred for one here in this world, and in the world to
come life everlasting, together with a Kingdom, even an immortal, eternal
Kingdom of glory and happiness in heaven, which is not to be valued with ten
thousand worlds.

Ann why all this? but in recompense of feeding, clothing and visiting his poor
brethren, and members, when they were destitute. Where note but the
incomparable, and infinite difference, between the receipt and the return: as, o
the unmeasurable measure of our Saviors bounty! And how happy is that man,
that may become a creditor to his Savior! heaven and earth shall be empty,
before he shall want a royal payment.

Wherefore hearken to this, all you self-lovers, that are only for your own
ends: Do you indeed love your selves? and your souls? would you be rich indeed,
and that both here and hereafter? then be charitable to the poor, even to the
utmost of your ability: for this giving is not only an act of charity, but also
of Christian policy: since we shall not only receive our own again, but the
same also with great increase: for as it fared with the widow of Sarepta. whose
handful of meal and cruse of oil with which she relieved the Prophet; the more
she spent, the more it increased, and the more she had; so shall this precious
oil, bestowed on the poor for Christ's sake, be returned upon our heads' in
great measure, as some that I could name can say, out of admirable experience,
and others should find, would they but so far forth believe the Lord, as to
try him: Which makes Saint Augustine say, That the charitable man is the
greatest ^surer in the world.

I know this is such a paradox to misers, and men of the world; that nothing
seems to them more absurd and ridiculous: what? persuade them that giving away
their goods, is the way to increase them? You must make me a fool (will such an
one say) before I can believe it, and therein he speaks truer then he is aware
of: for these are the very words of St. Paul; He that will be wise, let him
become a fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. The wisdom of God is
foolishness with the world: and so is the wisdom of the world foolishness with
God, 1 Cor. 2.14. and 3.19.

To carnal, reason it is as unlikely a thing, as that which Elisha told to the
King of Israel, 2 Kings 7. that whereas the Famine was so great in Samaria one
day that mothers act their own children: yet the next day there should be such
plenty, that a measure of fine flower should be sold for a sheckle, and two
measures of barley for a sheckle. As improbable, as that Abraham should have a
son, being almost an hundred years old; and Sarah past childbearing. As
impossible, as that Lazarus should again live, after he was stark dead, buried,
and stanke again. Yet as unlikely, improbable, and impossible as they seemed to
be: yet they came to pass, and God did not break his promise, nor disappoint
the hopes of such as had the wit, and grace to confide in him: no more will he
in this case, which is by fat the easier to be performed. And what though
carnal minds (like that Nobleman, who was trodden to death in the gate of
Samaria, for his incredulity) will not believe, yet truth is truth, as well
when it is not acknowledged, as when it is.

And I wish men would take heed of unbelief and giving God the lie: for, as
there is nothing he so abhors, as that his own household servants should not
dare to trust him, as we may see in that example of the Noble man, 2 Kings
7.17, 2. and likewise in those Israelites, Psalm. 78. when they said, Can God
furnish a table in the Wilderness? He smote the Rock that the waters gushed
out, and the streams overflowed; but can he give bread also? Can he provide
flesh for his people? Yes, he could and did it, to their small comfort that
made the exception. For because they believed not in God, and trusted not in
his salvation, the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them. He
gave them flesh, even quails in his wrath, until they were choked, Psalm.
78.10, to 38. and, Numb. 11.33, 34. But admit God should not answer thy greedy
desire, in multiplying thy estate: yet if he do that which is better for thee,
viz. give thee a competency together with a more contented mind then now thou
have, or ever would have, were thou as rich as Crassus: would it be ever the
worse, or had thou any cause to complain? no, but greatly to rejoice, as I
have shown in the foregoing part.

Wherefore trust God with Abraham, who above hope believed under hope, Romans
4.18, to 22. For Faith is to God, as Bathsheba was to Solomon, so in favor,
that the King will deny her nothing that good is.

This is the second means, which God has appointed for the improvement of our
outward estates: for the second step to riches and as outward prosperity, viz.
bounty and liberality to the poor.

CHAP. XXXI.
THe third and fourth are thankfulness, and humility; which are no way
inferior to the former.

Thankfulness and humility are the only means to enrich us with Gods blessings:
but pride and unthankfulness, is the only way to make God withdraw, and take
from us both himself, and his blessings. Because the King of Assyria said, By
the power if mine arm have I done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent:
therefore, says the Lord, I have removed the borders of the people, and have
spoiled their treasures, and have pulled down the Inhabitants like a valiant
man, Isay 10.13. Aesops Crow not content with her own likeness, borrowed a
feather of every bird; and she became so proud, that she scorned them all:
which the birds observing, they came and plucked each one their feather back,
and so left her naked: even so does God deal with all proud and ungrateful
persons.

There is nothing more pleasing to God, nor profitable to us; both for the
procuring of the good we want, or continuing the good we have; then humility
and thankfulness: Yea, to the humble and thankful soul, nothing shall be
wanting. God will sow there, and there only, plenty of his blessings; where he
is sure to reap plenty of thanks and service: but who will sow those barren
sands, where they are sure not only to be without all hope of a good harvest,
but are sure to lose both their seed and labor. Ye^ fools as we are, we
forfeit many of Gods favors, for not paying that easy quit-rent of
thankfulness.

Ingratitude forfeits mercies, as Merchants do all to the King, by not paying
of custom. Because Pharaoh says, The River is mine own, therefore God says,
I will dry up the River, Ezekiel. 29.3, to 13. Isaiah 19.5, 6. Deuteronomy, 11.9, 10.
Tamberlain having overcome Bajazet, he asked him whether he had ever given God
thanks, for making him so great an Emperor? he confessed ingenuously, he had
never thought of it; to whom Tamberlain replied, that it was no marvel so
ungrateful a man, should be made such a spectacle of misery When the people
sought themselves only, and how to have their houses ceiled and sumptuous,
neglecting the house of God and his honor, thus it fared with them: Ye have
sown much, and have reaped little; and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to
put it into a bag with holes. Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little: and
when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. I called for a drought upon the
land, and upon all that it brings forth; and upon all the labor of the
hands, etc. Again, when they sought Gods glory, and were thankful, mark the
difference: even from this very day will I bless you, says God, Hag. 1.4. to
12 and 2, 18, 19. He that is unthankful for a little, is worthy of nothing:
whereas thanks for one good turn, is the best introduction to another. Holy
David was a man after Gods own heart, and therefore he ever mixeth with his
prayers praises. Bless the Lord, o my soul, says he, and forget not all his
benefits, Psalm. 103.2. And being of a public spirit, he discovers the secrets
of this skill, as when he says, Let the people praise thee, o God, let all the
people praise thee: then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God,
even our God, shall give us his blessing, Psalm. 67.5, 6, 7.

Wherefore be not like the Swine, that feeds upon the Acorns, without ever
looking to the Oak; from whence they fall. Or the Horse, that drinks of the
Brook, and never thinks of the Spring. Yea, since God is the fountain, from
which all our enjoyments flow; let this be our continual determination: He has
given us all the grace, good, and happiness we have; and we will give him all
the possible thanks, and honor we can. Yea, teach us, o Lord, to receive the
benefit of thy merciful favor, and to return thee the thanks, and the glory.

And the like of Humility, Blessed are the meek (says our Savior) for they
shall inherit the earth, Matthew. 5.5. The reward of humility, and the fear of
God, is riches, and honor, and life, Prove. 22, 4. If there be a hollow in a
valley lower then another, thither the waters gather; And the more lowly we are
in our own eyes, the more lovely we are in Gods: the more despicable in our
selves, the more acceptable in him, as is seen in the example of the Publican,
Luke 18.13, 14. And the Prodigal, Luke 15.18, 19, etc. Nor can any thing make
us more acceptable to God, then the conscience of our own unworthiness: when
with Jacob we can say, O Lord, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies,
which thou have showed unto thy servant: For with my staff I passed over this
Iordane, and now I am become two bands, Genesis 32.10. When with the Publican we
can confess, I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven, Luke 18.13, 14.
And with the Prodigal, I am not worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15. And with
the Centurion, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof, Luke 7.6. And
with John Baptist, and Saint Paul, the like, I am not worthy, I am not worthy.
This is the way to obtein what we would have at the hands of God: who resists
the proud, but gives grace to the humble, Jam, 4.6, 10. Prove. 29.23. and
15.33. and 18.12. unto him will I look, says the Lord, even to him that is:
poor, and of a contrite spirit; and that trembles at my words, Isaiah 57.15.
He has filled the hungry with good things, but the rich he has sent empty
away, Luke 1.52, 53.

So that if thou expectest to have God bless and prosper thee, then beware thou
forgettest not, at whose cost thou live; Beware, lest when thou have eaten
and art full, and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver, and
thy gold is increased, and all that thou have is enlarged* thine heart be
lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God; and thou say in thine heart, My
power, and the might of mine hand has got me this wealth: but on the contrary,
Remember that it is the Lord thy God, that has given thee power to get wealth,
and that it is only his blessing that makes rich. This is Gods own counsel set
home with a very strict charge to all that have not a mind to perish, Deuteronomy.
28.10, to 20.

Many are the examples I might give you, of such as have been undone by their
pride. While Saul was little in his own eyes, God made him head over the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and gave him abundance; but when out of his greatness, be
abused his place and gifts, God took them all away again. And so it had like to
have fared with Hezekiah, when he but began to be puffed up with the wealth,
and precious things that God had given him, 2 Kings 20.12, to 19. But most
remarkable is the example of Nebuchadnezzar; who when he ascribed all to
himself, saying, Is not this great Babel which I have built, with the might of
my power, and for the glory of my majesty? was presently deprived of his
Kingdom, and all that he had, and sent to graze with the beasts: but when he
was humbled to the very ground, acknowledged the Author, and ascribed all to
the God of heaven, he had his Kingdom, and all else restored unto him, Dan. 4.
The way to obtein any benefit, is to acknowledge the Author, and devote it in
our hearts to the glory of that God, of whom we receive all: For by this means
shall God both pleasure his servants, and honor himself. And indeed, that he
may be honored by our wisdom, riches, graces; is the only end, for which he
gives us to be wise, rich, gracious. And who has more interest in the grape,
then he that planted the Vine? Who more right to the crop, then he that owes
the ground, and sows the seed? Therefore, Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength; nor the rich man in his riches,
Jer. 9.23. For we have not only received our talents from God, but the
improvement also is his mere bounty. Of him, and through him, and for him, are
all things: to whom be glory, for ever, Amen. Romans 11.35, 36.

And so much of the fourth means to grow rich.

CHAP. XXXII.
FIfthly, the next means, which God in his Word has appointed to this end, is
labor and industry in some lawful calling: for it is the beating of the brain,
or the sweating of the brow, not the bare talk of the lips, or desire of the
heart, that makes rich, according to the common Proverb, Wishers and woulders
are seldom or never good householders. The idle person, says Solomon, shall be
clothed with rag^: and the sluggards poverty comes upon him, as an armed man;
but the hand of the diligent makes rich, Prove. 10.4. and 12, 27. The Greeks
have a saying. That plentifulness follows painfulness, and that all things are
made servants to care, and industry. Caius Furius, by his painful dexterity,
and unwearied labor, got more means out of one small field, then his neigbours
out of many great ones: whereupon he was accused to the Magistrate, as if by
witchcraft, he had conveyed the corn of other men's ground, into his own; but he
came with all his goodly rustical instruments, with his strong and lusty
daughter, and his well fed Oxen, and spoke thus to the Judges: See, my Lords,
these be my witchcrafts and sorceries; but I cannot show you my watchings and
sweatings; which being done and spoken, he was presently absolved by the
sentence of all. Whence the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, to labor in their
several callings, if they would have sufficient for themselves, and wherewith
to help others. And this makes Solomon, in praising the virtuous woman for her
bounty, note that she works willingly with her hands, and that her candle was
not put out by night, Prove. 31.10, to 31. And Saint Luke the like of Dorcas,
her pains and industry in making coats and garments, Acts 9.36, 39.

And what but Idleness makes so many beggars, and base persons? It is the most
corrupting Fly, that can blow in any humane mind: We learn to do ill, by doing
what is next it, nothing. Whence it is that vice so fructifies, in our Gentry
and Servingmen: who have nothing to employ themselves in, for they only sit to
eat and drink, lie down to sleep, and rise up to play; this is all their
business, and this brings thousands of them to beggary or worse.

Be therefore painful, and industrious in thy calling: and God will undoubtedly
prosper and replenish thee, with the good things of this life. This is another
step.

CHAP. XXXIII.
SIxthly, if thou would thrive and grow rich, then be frugal and thrifty in
spending: For thrift (which is a due saving from sinful, and needless expenses)
and a wary husbanding of what we get, has made as many rich men, as painful
getting.

It is our Saviors rule, so to dispose of that plenty which God in his
goodness has bestowed upon us, that nothing be lost. John 6.12. And it is a
rule, which all good men will be sure to observe: For He who gets what he has
justly,
Pays what he owes duly,
Requites favors received thankfully,
Considers the case of the poor cordially,
Will not, yea dares not spend prodigally,
Let means come in never so plentifully.


And yet he of all men, is sure of a lasting competency, Prove. 28.27. Jam. 4.2,
to 10.

Frugality, says Iustine, is the mother of virtues. But an expensive man
(whatsoever his gettings be) by wasting, and overlashing of his estate is sure
not to thrive. As it fared with that Captain in Tully; who was not a penny the
richer, for that huge sum of money given him, because he had done with it, as
a naked man would do with the Nuts that he gathers; carry them all away in his
belly, for lack of pockets. And this the Poets insinuate, by their lusty Giant
Briarius: who had nothing to show, of all his comings in; because his fifty
bellies did consume the gettings of his hundred hands. All the labor of that
man of Monster, was for his mouth; and did slide through his throat.

Devorat os oris, quicquid lucratur os ossis.
To want and waste, differ but in time.
A poor man has no riches, a prodigal shall have none. The Vessel that runs
out unduly, will be empty, when men come to draw out of it: so will the state
be, if we let it leak like a cracked vessel: But what the difference is, betwixt
a wise and prudent frugality, and a vain expense of Gods benefits, we may learn
from, Genesis 42, etc. where notwithstanding the seven years of famine, Egypt had
corn enough, when all other Countries were without, and the people ready to
famish: which needed not have been, if they had been more sparing in the seven
plentiful years: for those years of plenty, were not confined to Egypt; other
Countries adjoining, were no less fruitful, as the Learned aver. But that
Prodigality has brought many rich men to poverty, and poor men to beggary, I
have sufficiently shown in the 17th. Chapter. And so much of the means, whereby
of poor a man may become rich: I come in the last place to show you, how you
may be happy, as well as rich, and cured of all your care, misery, and
melancholy: which is the principal thing I desire to pleasure you withal. For
millions there are that are mighty rich, and yet are the most miserable,
melancholy, and discontented men alive.

Here ends the First Part, the second follows.
Postscript to the Pleased.
ACcording to my skill, I have taught you to improve your estates: but as to
profit your souls, would more please me and pleasure you; so I have to that
end, taken the greater pains, in providing proper remedies (of the same alloy)
for each soul seduced, or afflicted. If such as they concern, shall be pleased
to make use of them; they may (with Gods blessing) not only have their vices
lessenea, their knowledge increased, and their minds cheared and comforted:
but probably they shall find in them, the flower, cream, or quintessence, of
what would otherwise cost them twenty years reading to extract.

If you meet not with those little pieces, that are printed in this small
Character, at the Stationers* At James Crumps a Book-binder in Little
Bartholomews Well-yard, you may have them all; being in number two and twenty.

An Infallible Way to Farewell.

In our BODIES, NAMES, ESTATES, PRECIOUS SOULS, POSTERITIES.


Together with, Men's great loss of Happiness:

For not paying, The small quitrent of Thankfulness.

Whereunto is Added Remains of The P. A. A Subject also of great concernment
for such as would enjoy the Blessed Promises of this life, and of that to come.

By R. Young of Roxwell in Essex.

To gratify such as have long, and earnestly desired them, To prevent future
mistakes in the Printing, and for other considerable Reasons: I shall Print
some few of these Books; though at five times the rate of my other Pieces,
whereof I Print ten thousand at once; Again, though they will be too great, for
me to give as formerly; or for the poor woman to sell, as she can small ones:
Yet that the Buyer may have enough for his money, I have (like those, that
would distill Roses in the winter:) fairly crowded (as you see) a peck into a
pint Pot. And that my own loss may be the less; my method shall be when I have
Printed off my number of any one sheet, to keep the letters undistributed,
until such are served, as will venture upon each sheet single, and have
patience to stay, until it shall be grown up, to an entire Treatise.

LONDON, Printed by A.M. and are to be sold by James Crumpe in Little-Bart^^.
(...)

To the well-affected READER, that would be HAPPILY RICH.
AS the Orator grown old, wrote of old age to an old man; and of friendship,
to his much indeared friend: so is this Discourse of Riches and Happiness,
writ to such, and such only; as would be Happy as well as Rich.

Not to all, nor to all that are Rich: as well knowing, that the way to please
the best, is to displease the most: and that to frame or fashion my matter, to
please either the Rich or all; were displease him, that is all in all.

Readers may be resembled to the Belgic Armies: that consisted of French,
Dutch, Spanish, Italian, etc for so many hearers, so many humors* And what one
speaks of Learning in general, may be applied to many wholesome truths in
particular: the same dis^ourse, may make the indifferent good, the good better,
and the bad worse.

Again, Some and not a few, are like the Gadarens, (Mark. 5.17.) who ere Christ
entered their City, besought him to depart their Coasts. Nor is it amiss, to
leave such as these to themselves: until time and experience, or their own Rod
has made them wiser.

More especially, was it composed and published for their sakes, who know the
worth and sweetness of these flowers; that prize these Pearls: as having
still sound, when I have finished what I intended; their entertainment to be
such as at first I expected. For these Posies may be resembled, to a Plume of
Feathers, ^r some sovereign Balsome, for which some will give much, others
little or nothing. Whence according to my accustomed manner, I have out of
diverse fleeces, wove one piece of cloth: and brought home to them many famous
Authors, though (like Mummers in a mask) I conceal their Names; as thinking
it sufficient if I deliver profitable matter, after a profitable manner; and
guessing it the greatest point of Learning and Oratoury; to distinguish aptly
that which is confused, and to illustrate plainly, that which is obscure.

Nor do I at all, like those raw fruits of Poetry, Pamphlets, and ^aybooks,
(which take so with our youth and Gentry) that weaken the stomach of the soul,
and fill it full of crudities, which will not be digested into any good blood,
either of knowledge or virtue. And happy it were, if all proud and unsanctified
wits, had but the wit to know, how Satan guls them with chaff instead of wheat,
with copper instead of gold, with glass in liew of Pearl. Which is the earnest
desire of him, who would gladly b^

A furtherer of their Wealth and Happiness, that have a mind to it, (...)

How to become Rich and Happy. The Second Part.
CHAP. I.
THe Surgeons of Greece, (like our English Mountebanks) were wont to show
the operations of their Skill upon Scaffolds, in view of all passengers:
thereby to assure men what they could do, as well us to get more practice and
custom, if they were deserving. The Merchant thinks it a good course, first to
try with a little, how vendible his commodity will be, and after he
replenisheth the Market, according to the esteem it finds with the
Inhabitants. Nor is he held wise, that will venture all his estate in one
bottom. Such were my thoughts, in publishing the first part of this Tracte:
intending (like Phidias touching his portrayture) that if it were liked, did
abide the touch, pass the standard of the judicious Readers approbation: I
would publish the residue, otherwise not: resolving whether allowed of, they
should encourage me; or disliked, they should amend me. And now having found
that acceptance, which in modesty I could not expect, I have sent abroad the
second Part.

In the former Part of this Discourse, I have declared what it is, and what it
is not to be Rich: and withal chalked out the way in six Particulars, how men
that are poor, may become Rich, and rid of poverty. In this which follows, I
shall declare how they may become Happy, and rid of discontent or Melancholy.

Now for the effecting of this, there needs no more be done, than to cure men
of their covetousness: for if that be once done, all is done; otherwise
nothing, or nothing to purpose. For let a covetous man become never so rich, he
is never the happier; his care, misery, and melancholy still remains: but let
his covetousness cease, and then comes peace, and joy, and content, have he
never so little: as I shall show when I come unto it. Yea, let men but leave,
or be willing to leave this one sin, and they shall depart from this
discourse, (like Naaman out of Jordan) as if they had been washed, and all their
sins taken away, like the scales from Paul's eyes, Act. 9.18. For what has
brought Usury, and Simony, and non-residency, and bribery, and perjury, and
felony, and cruelty, and hypocrisy, and subtilty, and envy, and strife, and
debate into the City, and Nation, and made every house an Inn, and every shopa
Market of oaths, and lies, and equivocations, and fraud, and indeed of what
not? but the superfluous and excessive love of money? What is the cause of all
the murmurings* mutinies, jarres, contentions, grudgings, repinings, fretting,
chafing, weeping, vexing, complaining, and discontent in every Family? but the
great controversy of mine and thine. Name but covetousness, and you have
named the Mother of all sins that can be named, which makes (...) principal
endeavor shall be, to prescribe some remedies against this cursed sin. O
that I could with little David, cull out of the Scriptures, (that spiritual and
celestial Brook) the stone or Pible, that would kill this Goliath: then would I
stick it into his temples, with all my might. For I thirst to pleasure these
unworthy men, with that which is more worth beyond compare, than all their
wealth multiplied as many times, as there are sands on the seashore. For let
me tell you, you worshippers of the golden Calf: that the cure which
Erasistratus did upon Antiochus, for which he had fourteen thousand three
hundred and seventy five pounds; was nothing to this cure of covetousness, in
him that is therewith infected, or thereto inslaved: as you will confess if
you but consider, what the difficulty of this cure is, of which I have largely
spoken in Chapter 19, to Chapter 23. of the foregoing part.

CHAP. II.
Now there is no way to remove this let, or to rescue them from this Remora:
except I can insure them, that they shall be gainers by the bargain, and
receive by way of exchange, that which shall more than countervail what they
part withal: which I doubt not, by the blessing of God to do, if they will but
vouchsafe or be willing to hear, either reason or Divine Authority. And 1. I
will prescribe or give them some rare Receipts, acquaint them with some
sovereign Remedies, against this desperate evil: and therein show them, how
they shall or may, of the most miserable men alive, become the most Blessed and
Happy. And who knows whether God has not put me upon this work, and will
accordingly bless the means that shall be used? though by a most unworthy and
insufficient Instrument? Neither is the strength or weakness of means, either
spur or bridle to Gods choice, who sometimes does greatest acts, by weakest
Agents; and gives the greater success, to the weaker means. However, an
Emperick or Quacksalver, has now and then, had the hap to cure a Patient, whom
a learned Artist could not do. Wherefore be at leisure you lovers of money, to
hearken to what I shall produce from the word, to your ears; and God shall
speak to your hearts by his spirit, touching your temporal, civil, spiritual,
and eternal state.

Now if you would relinquish this sin, and so be everlastingly happy; If you
prefer true content, and the peace of God which passes all understanding;
before your own misery and vexation: And rather desire to go to Heaven with
Lazarus, than with Dives to those scorching flames; observe these few things in
order.

In the first place, lay to heart the things formerly delivered; consider that
a competency of earthly things with content, is the best estate in the world.
Yea that a poor and mean condition, (in case God be pleased to give grace, and
his blessing with that little he bestows:) is far better and happier, than to
swim in great wealth and abundance. Consider also, and set before you the
heinousness of this sin and the (...)pany covetousness: and how it is the
cause of many heavy and grievous judgments here, as well as depriving men of
everlasting happiness, in Heaven; and plunging them, into eternal hellish
torments hereafter. Yea apply every word that has been spoken to thy self: and
this will be a good means to make thee moderate thy greedy desire, mortify
thy carnal affections, and curb thine unruly, and insatiable appetite after
gain. And without this all is to no purpose; Little would (...) have availed
the Israelites, that the Manna lay about their tents, if they had not gone
forth and gathered it, beaten it, baked, and eaten it; so let the means of
salvation be never so plentiful; if we bring it not home, and make it ours by
application and faith: we are never a whit the better for the same. Clothes
must be put on, meat eaten, a plaster applied: or they will never warm,
nourish, or heal.

CHAP. III.
Secondly, (though I inverte the order, in setting the cart before the horse)
dote not so upon the world: for while our minds are so scattered among these
visible things, we forget how the state stand^ within us. Besides, I have shown
you that as nothing so alienates a man's love, from his virtuous Consort, as his
inordinate affection to a filthy strumpet: so nothing does so far separate, and
diminish a man's love to God, and heavenly things, as our inordinate affection
to the world and earthly things. The damps of the earth, do not more quench
fire, than the love of the earth stiflles grace. Neither trees nor grass grow
above, where the golden Mines are below. If the love of money, be once entered
into the heart: no fruits of goodness, can appear in the life. Yea there is
an absolute contrariety between the love of God, and the love of money. The
Covetous man is like that Pompous Prelate, who said he would not lose his part
in Parris, for his part in Paradise. Or like Ulysses, who so dearly loved his
Country, that he preferred his native soil Ithaca, before immortality. Or the
Child, that more esteems of an Apple, than of his Fathers Inheritance. For
thus stands the case with them. Man has a precious Jewel to dispose of, viz.
his soul, God and the world come to buy it, the world steps in first, and
tempts him as once Saul his servants, saying, Hear now ye Benjamites, will the
son of Ishay, will the son of Mary, give every one of you fields, and
vineyards? will he make you all Captains over thousands? and Captains over
hundreds? 1 Samuel 22.7. Yea if a man will needs have present possession, Satan
will instantly give him bags of money; as he dealt with Gehazi, Achan, Judas,
Annanias and Saphira, Balaam, and in a thousand the like cases.

God comes and out-bids the world; for he offers grace, and peace, and glory:
but withal he craves day for the greater part of it; and gives nothing in hand
but his promise, his Word, and some small earnest of the bargain. Nay perhaps
instead of bettering our condition, he makes it worse: for the encouragement
that Christ gives is, Whosoever will be my Disciple, let him take up his cross
daily and follow me, (...) what he injoyes unjustly; he must restore the same
to the right owners, though it be to the impoverishing of his estate. As in
case thou would indeed, and to purpose become rich, happy and cheerful; If
thou love not gold, above thy salvation: restore to every man thy evil-gotten
goods. For as humility is the repentance of pride, abstinence of surfeit, alms
of covetousness, love of malice: so only restitution, is the repentance of
injustice. This is the revenge that a Christian must take upon himself, if he
means to be saved, 2 Cor. 7.11. For as the best charm for the tooth-ake, is to
pull out the tooth: Or as they, who have meal in their stomachs undigested, or
store of ill humors, are eased only by vometing them up: so if ever thou
look to find ease in thy soul, and conscience, or to pacify God; be sure to
vomit up all thy extortions, by restitution. For as it fared with those
Mariners touching Jonas, Jonah 1.15. they tremble, pray, unlade, strike
sails, fall to oars, but all in vain, the Vessel was sick, and had taken a
surfeit, when she took in the fugitive Prophet; all the loss of their goods,
cannot expiate the cause of this tempest; there is a morsel that lies
undigested in the stomach, throw out Jonas, and all is quiet.

There are a world of men, that bear the Name, and wear the livery, but have
not the souls of Christians. Others must pay them, or they will use all kinds
of extremity: but they (by their good wills) will not pay what is lent them, in
their greatest need. But a debtor that can pay, and will not, makes himself
incapable of pardon. Indeed such men think to set all on Christ's score, and to
say Dimitte nobis debit^ nostra: forgive us our debts is sufficient, though
they leave out the other part of the petition. But God does not forgive
spiritual debts where men have no care to pay temporal debts. For he that dies
before restitution, dies in his sin: and he that dies in his sin, cannot be
saved. Nor is there a more infallible character of a wicked man, in all the
Book of God: The wicked borrows, but pays not again Psalm. 37.21.

Where is no restitution, of things unjustly gotten, there sin shall never be
forgiven: Non t^llitur peccatum, nisi restituatur oblatum: as St Augustine
speaks, and all Orthodox Divines hold; in case the party have wherewithal. For
if a man have it not, God will accept of the will for the deed. Yea in this,
and all other cases: he does the will of God, who does the best he can to do
it. But in case a man do it not, so far as he is able: well may he gull his
own soul, but God will think it foul scorn to be so mocked. As consider,
Repentance without restitution: is as if a thief should take away thy purse,
ask thee pardon, say he is sorry for it; but keeps it still: In this case,
would thou not say he did but mock thee? The Law of God, under the penalty of
his curse, requires thee to restore, whatsoever by unjustice or oppression,
thou have taken from thy neighbor or master; with a fifth part (for amends)
added to the principal, Levit. 6.5. Numb. 5.6, 7, 8. And we read that there is
a flying roll, a winged curse for him, that gets riches by robbery and
oppression: that shall not only pursue the thief, but even enter into his
house, and consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, Zach.
5.3, 4.

Nor had Zacheus his repentance served his turn, (if ever he had this way been
faulty,) or his bounty to the poor been accepted: if he had not withal,
restored to every man his due, Luke 19.3, 8. Micah 6.10, 11. Ier. ^8.8.

So that, whatever blinded sensualists may think of it; there is wisdom and
gain in restoring: for when all is done, how to be saved is the best p^o^: and
better it is, to case our evil-gotten goods overboard, than make shipwreck of
our souls.

Merchants when a tempest comes, think it wisdom to cast their goods, yea even
their ballayne ^ver board, to save themselves. And for certain thou art worse
than j^e^zy, if thou do not the like. For what shall ^t profit a man^ though
he should win the whole world, if he gain Hell with it, and ^^ose both Heaven
and his own soul? Mat. 16.26. What is it to flourish for a time, and perish for
ever? and well does that man deserve to perish, that so loves the creature, as
that he leaves the Creator. The loss of says is a dangerous shipwreck; if it
be possible save your vessel, save your goods, save your bodies: but though you
loose all else, save your faiths, save your souls.

True, your twenty in the hundred, will not believe this: but an hundred to
twenty, he shall feel it, here or hereafter. As what gained Balaam, or Judas,
or Ahab, or Achan, or Ananias and Saphira? when by seeking unlawful gain, they
lost both what they got, and themselves too?

A man would think, that Achan paid dear enough for his goodly Babylonish
garment, the two hundred shekels of silver, and his wedge of gold which he
coveted, and took away: when He, his Sons, and Daughters, his Oxen, and Asses;
his Sheep, and Tent; and all that he had, were stoned with stones, and burnt
with fire: if that was all he suffered, Josh. 7.18. to 26. But to be cast into
Hell, to lie for ever in a bed of quenchless flames, is a far greater
punishment. For the soul of all sufferings, are the sufferings of the soul; and
in reason, if Dives be tormented in endless flames, for not giving his own
goods to them that needed, Luke 16.21, 23. Matthew. 25.41, to 43. What shall
become of him, that takes away other men's? If that servant in the Gospel, was
bound to an everlasting prison, that only challenged his own debt; for that he
had no pity on his fellow, as his Master had pity on him: whither shall they be
cast, that unjustly vex their Neighbors, quarrel for that which is none of
theirs, and lay title to another man's propriety? If he shall have judgment
without mercy, that shows not mercy, Jam. 2.13. What shall become of extortion,
and Rapine? Psalm. 109.11. Oh the madness of men! that cannot be hired to hold
their finger for one minute, in the weak flame of a farthing Candle; knowing it
so intolerable: and yet for trifles, will plunge themselves body and soul, into
those endless and everlasting flames of hell fire.

True, He that makes gain, blesses himself, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
10.3. Yea, if he can, (I mean the cunning Machevill^n, whom the Devil and
covetousness has blinded) any way advantage himself, by another ruin; and
do it politickly: how will he hug himself, and applaud his own wisdom! Hab.
1.13. to the end. But by his leave, he mistakes the greatest folly, for the
greatest wisdom. For while he cozens other men of their estates; Sin and Satan
cozens him of his soul, See Job. 20.15. 1 Timothy 6.8, 10. And woeful gain it is,
that comes with the souls loss. And how can we think those men to have
reasonable souls, that esteem money above themselves* That prefer a little bas^
pelf; before God, and their own salvation?

Nor are there any such fools, as these crafty knaves: For as Austin speaks; If
the Holy Ghost term that rich Churl in the Gospel a fool, that only laid up his
own Goods, Luke 12.18, 20. find out a name for him that takes away other men's.

And this know, that if thou do not ( willingly, or at least with an
unwilling willingness) do it thy self, yet it shall be plucked from thee with
a vengeance. As what says the Holy Ghost? Job. 20. Though wickedness be sweet
in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue, yet his meat in his bowels,
is turned; it is the gall o^ Aspes within him; he shall vomit them up again:
God shall cast them out of his belly. He shall suck the poison of Aspes, and
the Vipers tongue shall slay him: because he has oppressed, and forsaken the
poor, because he has violently taken away an house, which he builded not.
Surely he shall feel no quietness in his belly. When he is about to fill his
belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon
him, while he is eating. He shall flee from the Iron weapon, and the bow of
steel shall strike him through. And the like from verse. 5. to the end of the
Chapter. And so Jeremy 17. He that gets riches, and not by right: shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool, verse. II.

Wherefore in any case, omit not to restore what thou have unjustly gotten: And
that without disputing the point, or making thy lust of counsel: (as they that
desire with heed, and more surely to see, do shut the one eye.) Do like
Abraham, who when he was bid to offer his Son; rose up betime, and left his
wife at home, never making Sarah privy to it; lest she should stop him, Genesis
22.6. So do it if it be possible, before thy flesh hears of it; like Abigal,
who if she had consulted with Naball, whether she should have supplied David
with victuals or no* the Miser would never have consented: so she had perished,
with her whole family, 1 Samuel 25. Paul consulted not with flesh and blood, when
he went to preach among the Heathen, Gal. 1.16. the case was clear enough,
having a strict command from God. So in this case, there needs no deliberation,
but answer the Devil, as that Martyr answered his Persecutors, when they
offered him both torments and rewards: (rewards if he would deny Christ,
torments if he would not,) but withal time of deliberation: whose answer was,
In re tam iusta, nulla consultatio* The case is so clear, that I need not study
about it.

Here I might (...)stances that restoring and giving rather than sinning, is
the way to grow rich; I mean in pecuniary riches, see Prove. 11.24. and 28.27.
Mark. 10.29, 30. Mat. 6.33. 2 Cor. 9.6, 9, 10, 11. 2 Chronicles. 25.9. and 27.6.
Deuteronomy. 7.13. to 16. and 28.1. to 14. 2 King. 6.25. to Chap. 7. verse. 17. Psalm.
34.9, 10. and 37.26, 28, and 112.3. and 37.3, 4, 5. Luke 18.29, 30. Mark. 4.24.
Hag. 1.2 Chapters, Mal. 3.10, 11, 12. But if this weary not the Muckmonger,
it is well.

Now this being the case, namely that what God gives, is chiefly hereafter,
little at present; yea that we may look to be loosers by him at present;
whereas Satan and the world out-bid Christ, in respect of outward condition,
and present pay: thus it falls out, or this is the issue. The worldling cries, a
bird in the hand is best, hugges his money that he has: God he thinks is not
so good a customer, or he dares not trust him. Yet will this man, rather accept
a reversion of some great Office or Estate, though expectant, on the tedious
transition of seven years, or on the expiration of another life, (which may
prove to be sixty years or more,) than at present a sum of far less value.
But what a strange folly is this? rather to take the idle vanities of this
world in hand, than faithfully to wait upon Gods promise, for an eternal
Kingdom of glory in Heaven!

CHAP. IV.
Thirdly, The rarest of all remedies is Regeneration. As what says holy David?
Turn my heart unto thy Law, and not to covetousness, Psalm. 119.36. As if a
man could not be covetous that sets his heart upon heavenly things; nor have
any leisure to think upon good, so long as he is covetous. Let them seek after
the earth says one, that have no right to Heaven: let them desire the present,
who believe not the future.

As Regeneration is the best physic, to purge away melancholy: so likewise of
covetousness. As may be seen in Zacheus, who before he met with Christ, knew
nothing but to scrape; but so soon as Christ had changed his heart, all his
mind was set upon giving and restoring, Luke 19.8. He was as liberal in alms
and restitution, when he was become a Convert: as possibly he was unjust and
unmercifull, when he was an usurer.

And the like of all other sins. Paul was not a more hot and fiery enemy to
Christ, when he was a Pharisee: than he was a shining burning, and zealous
Preacher when he was an Apostle. When any man is born anew, (and better never
be born, than not to be born again.) there will be new virtues, arise in the
room of old vices. Heretofore, thy soul has been an Idolatrous Temple: if the
Ark of God, that is his Holy Spirit, once enter into it, Dagon, that is the
works of darkness, will down, and soon moulder away: For both cannot stand
together, 1 Samuel 5.3. especially covetousness will be chasheired. Yea God has
set Religion and covetousness, at such variance: that they cannot possibly
reign, in one person. No man can serve God and Mam(...) not in him, 1 John
2.15. Wherefore, as we desire to have peace in the end: let piety be our race.
'Twas Marcus Aurelius, his dying counsel to his Son Commodus: that if he
would live quietly, he should live justly: if he would dye peaceably, he should
live uprightly.

Now if covetousness be once cashiered by Regeneration: have a man much or
little, he will not be overmuch troubled at it.

The godly man has sufficient, though he have no wealth: even as man in
innocence was warm, and comely, though without clothing. A small thing unto
the just man, is better than great riches to the wicked and mighty, Psalm.
37.16. The reason is, the one has his sight to see clearly his happiness, in
having what is best for him, and is content to be poor in outward things,
because his wealth and purchase, is all inward. The other by a just judgment of
God, is so blind, that he cannot see when he is well; but thirsts so after
other men's goods, that he takes no pleasure in his own. His heart is glewed to
the world, or rather to his wealth: and an object too near the eye, cannot be
seen: yea be it but the breadth of a penny, it will hide from the sight, the
whole half heaven at once. Covetousness is like the Albugo, or white spot in
the eye: that dimmes their understandings, and makes fools even of Achitophels,
leaving them never an eye to see withal, according to that of Moses, A gift
blinds the eyes, Exodus 23.8. And this for certain, could the covetous chu^l
but see, what peace, and rest, and joy through contentation the godly man has,
at the same time when he can say with Peter, Silver and gold have I none: he
would be also a suter to godliness, that he might have the dowry of
contentation. He would soon see, that it is much better to be poor than evil,
that it is quieter sleeping with a good conscience, than in a whole skin: and
that there is no comparison, between want with piety, and wealth with
dishonesty.

As what can thou say against it? thou have abundance of all things, yet thou
find small peace, joy, or content in the world. Get but godliness, and thou
shall have true content of mind, great peace of conscience, together with joy
in the Holy Ghost, and Gods blessing upon all thou have, or take in hand: be
thy condition in the world never so mean.

Thou have hitherto like Satan, compassed the whole earth; never thought of
compassing Heaven: thou art as poor in grace and parts, as rich in revenues.
Thy desires about this world, have been insatiable; but for heavenly things, a
small scantling has been thought enough. I believe that Christ dyed for me, I
am sorry for my sins, I hope to be saved: this is sufficient, though thou
do all thy devotions more out of custom, than of conscience: as Simonides
reports of Theodoricus. But will thou prove thy self wise? will thou do thy
self good indeed! the only way is to become godly. For godliness is great
gain, if a man be content with that he has, 1 Timothy 6.6. And this I may be bold
to affirm, that if thou can not say as Paul says, I have learned to be
content, godliness is not as yet come unto thine house. For the compa^ion of
godliness, is contentation: which when she comes will bring you all things.
Therefore as Christ says, If the Son make you free: you shall be free
indeed, John 8.36. So I say, if godliness make you rich: you shall be rich
indeed. Otherwise, have you never so much, it will no more satisfy your
desire, or quench your lust: than fuel does the flame. Yea as oil kindles the
fire, which it seems to quench: so riches come as though they would make a man
contented, but they make him more covetous.

CHAP. V.
As see how insatiable men's desires are, of these transitory things by some
examples. Give Alexander Kingdom after Kingdom, he will not rest till he have
all. Yea giving credit to that opinion of Democritus, to wit, that there were
worlds infinite, and innumerable: he even wept to think, that he was Emperor
but of one only. And Croespis, the richest Prince that ever the world could
boast of; thought he had not enough. Nemo miser, nisi comparatus. And ^icinius
being replenished, with almost infinite sums of gold and silver, was so far
from being satisfied, that he even sighed for, and bewailed his poverty. Marcus
Crassus a private Roman, worth eight hundred fifty and two thousands pounds;
yet never thought himself rich enough; but was still as greedy, and griping as
ever. Ahab has a whole Kingdom, yet because he cannot have poor Nahotb's
vineyard, he goes into his house heavy and in displeasure, lies turning upon
his bed, and cannot so much as eat his meat: all he has will do him no good, 1
Kings 21.3, 4.

And the like might ^e shown of all other outward comforts: For suppose a man
should have all he could wish, or desire, (as it is feigned of Apollonius, that
he never asked any things of the gods in all his life, but it was granted him:)
health, wealth, honors, pleasures, and the like: yet when he had enjoyed them
but one whole day, he would not be contented, something he would still want,
one thing or other would displease him; until God comes; and then he says
with holy David, My cup is full, the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant
places, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.6. and 23.5. As the worldling is
not satisfied with sin, so he is satisfied with nothing. Riches come, and yet
the man is not pleased; Honors come, as an addition to wealth, and yet the man
is not pleased: as it fared with Haman, who having reckoned up all the glory,
promotions, riches, banquets, graces and favors of the King and Queen, respect
of the Nobles, etc. yet he concludes that all is nothing, so long as Mordechai
sits in the Kings gate. He had the homage of all knees but one, and was ready
to burst for lack of that; he is miserably vexed, that all other men, did not
think him so good, and great as he thinks himself.

Again, Pleasures come, and yet the man is not pleased: The lusts of the flesh
are fulfilled by him, and yet he is not pleased: Liberty, outward peace, and
the like, they all come, and yet the man is not pleased: until Christ comes,
as he did to Zacheus: and then he has more than enough, or then he desires,
and therefore imparts, a great part of what he has, unto others that have
less.

CHAP. VI.
But to apply this to the present occasion. I would fain know, whether this be
not thy case, that art an unmercifull rich man? Have thou not all outward
comforts, presenting themselves and their service to thee in great abundance?
Yet they are to thee, and in thy account but miserable comforters. For though
thy house be full, and thy shop full, and thy coffers full, and thy purse full,
and thy pastures full, yet thy heart is still lanke and empty, through an
excessive desire of more: as if thy heart were without a bottom. Whereas, if
thou would but admit Christ into thy heart, (who now stands at the door and
knocks, Revel. 3.20.) thou would then need no more, who now need every
thing: (even what thou have in possession.) For he alone that fills Heaven and
earth, can fill the soul. Nothing but the Trinity of Persons in that one Deity;
can fill the triangular concave of man's heart. Show us the Father (says
Philip) and it suffices, John 14.8. Nay show us but thy truth, (whereby Satan
and our deceitful hearts may not so deceive us,) and it suffices, Dan. 9.13.
When godliness comes, content follows it. What says Christ? Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be satisfied. Not
they that hunger and thirst after riches, nor they that hunger and thirst after
honor, nor they that hunger and thirst after pleasure, but they that hunger
and thirst after righteousness: They shall be satisfied, and satisfied to the
full, Mat. 5.6, etc. Thus is fared with St Paul, who was able to say after his
conversion, that which he nor any else could ever say before conversion, I have
learnt in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. First he learnt
godliness, then godliness taught him contentation; and is there any
satisfaction like content? When Christ brought salvation to Zacheus, his mind
was strangely altered: before he was all for getting, now he is all for giving.
This was not the first day that he seemed rich to others, but this was the
first day he seemed rich to himself. Riches bring contention, Godliness brings
contentation. Gain has often hurt the getters, piety and Godliness is
profitable to all men, and for all things: 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is the most
profitable thing in the world, because it makes all things else profitable;
And it is for want of Piety and Godliness, that the covetous man's riches no
whit profit him. Godliness sets such a glass before the eyes of them, that
possess the same: that it will make a shilling seem as great as a pound, a
Cottage thought as sumptuons as a Palace, a Plow seem as goodly as a Scepter;
so that he which has but twenty pounds, shall be as merry as he who has an
hundred, and he who has an hundred, shall be as jocond, as he who has a
thousand, and he who has a thousand, shall be as well contented, and think
himself as rich, as he who has a million. Even as Daniel did thrive with water
and pulse, as well as the rest did with their wine and iunkets. Godliness is
called by the Apostle great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. And well it may; for it gains
God, and with him his blessing upon all things else. He says also, That bodily
exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy
4.8. But shall I show you in some Particulars, how gainful and profitable it
is? and how it brings the blessing of God upon all, or rather all Gods
blessings upon him that is godly?

CHAP. VII.
The particular Benefits and Privileges of Grace and Godliness, above all
worldly commodities, are innumerable; I Will name only Nine, that you may the
better remember them. There is nothing wherein men usually rejoice, but the
godly more than find it in Christ.

First, Does any man desire or glory in Knowledge? In him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. I desire to know nothing among
you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucifie^, 1 Cor. 2.2. This is eternal life, to
know thee the only God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, John 17.3.

Secondly, Does any man desire, or glory in Honor and Nobility? Believers are
more Noble than any other men, Act. 17.11. The righteous is more worthy than
his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. and 28.6. The best Nobility, is the Nobility of
Faith, and the best genealogy, the genealogy of good works. The only true
greatness, is to be great in the sight of the Lord, as John Baptist was, Luke
1.15. Whence it is, that David thought it not so happy for him, to be a King in
his own house, as a doorkeeper in Gods house. That Solomon preferred the title
of Ecclesiastes, before the title of the King of Jerusalem. That Theodosius the
Emperor, preferred the title of Membrum Ecclesiae: before that of Caput
Imperii: professing that he had rather be a Saint and no King, than a King and
no Saint. And that godly Constantine rejoiced more, in being the Servant of
Christ: than in being Emperor of the whole world.

And indeed, Gods servants, are the only worthies of the world: for Christ has
made them spiritual Kings, Rev. 1.6. So happy are they, as to have this high
honor and dignity given them. Yea so soon as regenerate, we are made Sons to a
King, 2 Cor. 6.18. Brothers to a King, Heb. 2.11. Heirs to a King, Romans 8 17.
Even to the King of glory, Joh. 17.22. Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. Nor are we his
Sons only, but he accounts us his precious Jewels, Mala. 3.17. And reputes us
his intimate Friends, Joh. 15.14, 15. Our Friend Lazarus, says Christ, Joh.
11.11. O what an high and happy condition is this, for mortal men to aspire
unto; that the God of Heaven should not be ashamed to own them for friends,
that before were his cursed, and mortal enemies!

By nature we are like Nebuchadnezer, no better than beasts grazing in the
forest: but when grace once comes, we are like him restored to his reason, and
high dignities, Dan. 4.29. to the end. Or like Manasses, brought out of a
loathsome Prison, to be King of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12, 13.

Thirdly* Does any man glory in riches? Christ is an unexhoustable treasure,
never failing, and of his fullness have all we received, Joh. 1.16. Nor are
these transitory riches, (though these we have also when God sees them good for
us: For riches and treasures shall be in the house of the righteous, Psalm.
112.3.) but we have heavenly, and spiritual riches, that true Treasure, that is
infinitely better than silver or gold, and more precious than Rubies, Pearls,
or any the most precious stones. Yea it surpasses all pleasure and prosperity,
strength, honor or felicity. It is more sweet than the Honey and the
Honeycomb; yea all the things thou can else desire, are not to be compared
to it. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left riches and honor:
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a
tree of life, to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is every one, that
retains her, as Job, David, and Solomon will insure you, Job. 28.13. to 20.
Psalm. 19.10. and 119.103. Prove. 3.14. to 19. and 8.10, 11. Eccles. 9.16. Yea
lastly, Heaven it self, is made sure to every gracious soul for her Patrimony,
Mat. 5.3. to 12. Now consider before we go any further, how poor a clod of
earth a Manor is, how poor an inch a Shire, how poor a span a Kingdom, how
poor a pace, or Acre the whole earth; And yet how many have sold their bodies,
and souls, and consciences, and Heaven, and eternity, for a few grains of this
dust.

Only with Believers, it is otherwise, they consider that commodities, are but
as they are commonly valued: And because transitory things in the next life,
bare no value at all; and because there is not^ing firm under the firmament:
They hold it very good coveting, what they may have, and cannot leave behind
them. And though others most love, what they must leave, and think that money
will buy any thing, like foolish Magus, Act 8.18. Or the Devil, who presumed
that this bait, would even catch the Son of God: Yet the wise and religious,
can see no reason, why it should be so doted upon as it is. But

Fourthly, Does any one desire or glory in Liberty? Christ has delivered us
out of the hands of all our adversaries and enemies, Luke 1.71, 74. As namely,
from the Law, Gal. 5.18. Romans 6.44. From sin, 1 John 2.1, 2. From death, Joh.
8.51. and 5.24. And from the Devil, with all the powers of darkness, Heb.
2.14. Romans 8.35. to the end. Or

Fifthly, Is it safety from fear and danger, that a man wishes for or desires?
Let him become one of those little ones that believe in Christ; then may he
trust to a guard of Angels, Mat. 18.10. and be assured of Gods protection;
without which a worm, or fly, may kill a man, with it no Potentate on earth can
do it. As for Instance, When Valens the persecuting Emperor, should have
subscribed an order for St Bazils banishment: such a sudden trembling took his
right hand, that he could write never a good letter, whereupon he tore the
order for anger, and there was an end of the business. Laremouth Chaplain to
the Lady Anne of Cleave, a Scotchman, being in Prison in Queen-Marie^ days, it
was said, as he thought, once, twice, thrice, Arise and go thy ways:
whereupon* he arising from prayer* a piece of the prison wall fell down, and he
escaped beyond the Seas.

CHAP. VIII.
Sixthly, Would thou have God to prosper all that thou have, or do: then
get grace to serve him, so shall thou be blessed, in all places, and delivered
from all temporal evils, as it is Deuteronomy. 28. Nor can it be other in reason. For,
if when the Ark of the Covenant, (which was a sign of Gods presence) was in the
house of Obed Edom, then the Lord blessed him, and all his house: how much more
shall that man be blessed? in whose heart even God himself, by his Spirit
dwells; and by his grace, which is a more sure, and infallible sign of his
presence then was the Ark. So that if thou be wise, thou will more esteem of
grace, and Gods blessing accompanying it; than thou would of Iasons Golden
Fleece: or the great Chams Tree-full of Pearls, hanging by clusters.

Seventhly, Would thou with all these, have all peace and joy? than get
Grace and Holiness. For as the Unicorns horn dipped in the fountain, makes
the waters which before were corrupt and noisome, clear and wholesome upon the
sudden: so whatsoever estate grace and godliness comes unto, it says like
the Apostles, Peace be to this house, peace and happiness be to this heart, to
this man, etc. That Regeneration is the only best Physic for melancholy, I can
sufficiently evidence, out of fifty years experience. I most gladly
acknowledge, that when I was in my natural condition, without the pardon of
sin, and some assurance of Gods favor: I seldom wakened in a morning, but my
heart was as heavy as lead; as fearing an hell, after that purgatory: which
since my heart was changed, I have not, I bless God, been acquainted with. An
old Disciple of Christ, being asked the cause why he was ever such a merry man,
answered: when I was a young man, I studied how to live well; and when I became
an old man, I studied how to dye well; and so desiring to seek God in this his
Kingdom of grace, and hoping to see him in his Kingdom of glory, one day to me
was better, than a thousand unto those, who weary themselves in the ways of
wickedness, and destruction.

Now if grace and Gods favor, brings such peace and joy: what fools are
sinners? to deprive themselves of it. What mad men are Misers? As how do their
hearts droop with their mammon? How do they weary and turmoyl themselves, vex
their spirits, torment their consciences, making themselves a very map of
misery, and a sink of calamity? Whereas it is nothing so with the servants of
Christ.

Perhaps at their first conversion, they are much troubled in mind, (though it
fares not so with all) and conscience; for their long and grievous offending,
so good a God; but that sorrow is soon turned into joy, and abundantly
recompensed. When the Angel had troubled the waters, in the Fool of Bethesda:
then stepped in those that were diseased, and infirm; and were healed. It is
Christ's manner, to trouble our souls first, and then to come with healing in
his wings. Yea the very tears of repentance are sweet: whereas the covetous
man's heart, even in laughing is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness, Prove. 14.13.

An evil life, sales Seneca, causes an unquiet mind: for as the least moat in
the eye, hinders the ease and sight of it; or as the least gravel in the
shoe, hinders the traveller in his comfortable going; or as the least bone in
the throat, hinders our eating, and threatens to choke us: So the least sin
in the soul unrepented of, hinders the peace, and joy, and hope thereof. But
least (which is not likely) I should glut you with joy, observe with me

In the eighth place, That there is nothing can be wanting to a man, but grace
and Gods favor will more than supply it. When reverend Calvin was upbraided by
the Papists, with the want of Children in marriage, he could answer; That is
nothing, for God has instead of such children, given me many thousand
children, of far more excellent kind, and of nobler breed through the whole
world. And surely a man shall see, the Noblest works and Foundations, have
proceeded from childlesse men: which have sought to express the Images of
their minds, where those of their bodies have failed.

CHAP. IX.
Ninthly, Godliness has the Promises not only of this life, but also of that
which is to come. The quintessence whereof consists in these two things;
freedom from all pain, fruition of all pleasure, which is the purchase of
Christ for his followers. For when he sits upon his Throne, he shall say unto
them, and only to them: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, from before the foundation of the world: where are such
joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. And are there any pleasures,
like those at the right hand of God for evermore? Whereas to those, that have
not had the grace, nor the wit to serve him; he shall say, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And is
there any pain, like the separation from Christ, into everlasting and
ever-flaming fire? Mat. 25.41. Think of this, you that prefer the service of
sin and Satan, before that of our Saviors. Heaven you will confess to be
best of all; yet for Heaven you will use labor least of all. For I may boldly
affirm it, your covetous man, takes more pains to go to hell; than do the
godly to get to Heaven: he rises early, and rests late, and eats the course
bread of sorrow; and after a great deal of tedious and odious misery, goes to
the Devil for his labor. But look to it, this will one day cost men dear: For
it will be the very hell of hell, when they shall call to mind, that they have
loved their sins, more than their Savior, or their own souls. When they
shall remember, what love and mercy, has been almost enforced upon them; and
yet they would by all means, and that of free choice perish.

Now I might go on to other Particulars, yea I might almost be infinite in
these things: but having said enough, to be thought too much: I will mention no
more, only let me a little apply it. We see that the shadow, does not more
inseparably follow the body: than all blessings follow grace. Bodily exercise
profits little, but godliness it profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. as
having the Promises of the life present, and of that which is to come. Men talk
much of the Philosophers stone, that it turns copper into gold: of
Cornucopia, that it had all things necessary for food in it: of the Herb
Panace, that it is instead of all purges, and cures all diseases: of the Herb
Nepenthes, that it procures all delights: of Vulcans Armor, that it was of
proof against all thrusts and blows. Yea, Pliny speaks of no less, than three
hundred and sixty benefits, that may be made of the Palm tree, if we will
believe him. But whether these things be so or not, it much matters not: this I
am sure of, that what they did vainly attribute to these rarities, for bodily
and transitory good; we may with full measure, and without any hyperbole,
justly ascribe to grace and Gods favor, for spiritual. So that Religion,
Piety, and Holiness, are Mistresses worthy your service. Yea, all other Ar^es
in the world, are but drudges to these. Fools may contemn them, who cannot
judge of true intellectual beauty: but if they had our eyes, they culd not but
be ravished with admiration of the same. And men truly wise, have learned to
contemn their contempt, and to pity their injurious ignorance.

All which being so apparent, and undeniable: men's wisest and surest way were,
as one would think, to become the Servants of God, and be as industrious after
grace, as they have been after gold. For in common reason, who would eat husks
with the Prodigal, when if he will but return home, he shall be honorably
entertained, by his heavenly Father? have so good cheer and banqueting, hear so
great melody, joy and triumph? Generally, men are very eager and industrious to
get worldly wealth; yea, no pains is thought too much for it: but where shall
we find men thus eager after spiritual wealth, which alone can make them happy?

CHAP. X.
Objection: But will some say, How shall we obtain this happy condition? It is
not so easy a matter to become gracious, and to gain the favor of God, as you
seem to make it.

I Answer Yes, this may easily be helped, if thou have a mind to it. For as
when a man would have those things to be on his right hand, which are now on
his left: it is but turning himself, and the work is done: so do but turn your
affections from earthly things, to things celestial and heavenly; the case will
be so altered, that you will think your self, as a blind man restored to sight,
a mad man to his senses, a prisoner set at liberty, a beggar advanced to a vast
estate, and as one vexed with an evil spirit, or troubled with a tormenting
conscience, to such a blessed peace, as the world can neither give nor take
away, John 14.27. As thus:

Would you quiet your clamorous conscience, that will not be friends with you,
unless you be friends with God? The air is not so clear, when the cloud is
dissolved by rain, as the mind is, when the clouds of our iniquities are
dissolved by the rain, or tears of true repentance. These waters, are the red
sea, wherein the whole Arm of our sins is drowned. As O the calm spirit of a
godly man! his very dreams are divine.

When Ptolomy King of Egypt, had posed the Seaventy Interpreters in order, and
asked the nineteenth man, what would make one sleep quietly in the night: he
told him the best way was, to have divine and celestial Meditations, and to use
honest actions and recreations in the day time. The godly man enjoyes Heaven
upon earth, peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1.6. Nor is
joy less, when it is least expressed, (as it fares with grief) but as the
windows of the Temple were narrow without, but broad within; so is the joy of
our hearts, greater than it does outwardly appear to the world.

Again, It is as false a slander as common, that when once a man imbraceth
Religion, farewell all joy and delight. For virtue has neither so crabbed a
face, nor so stern a look, as men make her. Pleasure is not gone, when sin is
gone. It is not Isaac that is sacrificed, that is our laughter and mirth; but
the Ram, that is the bruitishnesse of it. The soul of joy, lies in the souls
joy. What says holy David? Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord; and
be joyful all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 32.11. It was not the
Eunuchs riches, nor honors, but his faith, which set him on his way rejoicing,
Act. 8.39. In this rejoice not, (says our Savior,) that the spirits are
subdued unto you: but rather rejoice, that your names are written in Heaven,
Luke 10.20. Yea, there is even joy in grief, where the sorrow is for sin.

Besides, how can men partake of that fountain of joy, and rejoice not? He is
no good Christian, that is not taken with the glory he shall have, and rejoice
that his name is written in the Book of life. The worldly man has joy in
prosperity, the Child of God in adversity. The believing Hebrews suffered with
joy, the spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in Heaven, a better and
more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. Yea, let the worst that can come, they are
still merry and joyful: as has been observed in sundry of the Martyrs, who
clapped their hands for joy, even in the midst of the flames. And reason good,
when all things shall work to their good, that are good: and when the very
draught, and abridgment of Heaven, is in every sanctified heart upon earth.

Then live religiously, and thou shall both live and die comfortably: For live
in grace, and die in peace, is a rule that never fails. Only this hinders our
joy, our love to spiritual things is too defective; of worldly things too
excessive. Earthly goods are earnestly and eagerly sought after; Heavenly not
once thought upon. Much travel taken for the body, little or no care used for
the soul. It would be otherwise, if with Paul at his conversion, they had those
scales taken away from their eyes, by some godly Ananias, some faithful
Minister of the Gospel: which during their natural condition, covers their eyes
from seeing things spiritual. It is a sad thing to see, what fools men are,
that walk according to the flesh; and how they are gulled by the God of this
world, and their own deceitful hearts. The covetous man is like a mad man,
that loves and is unmeasurably delighted, with the sight and gingling of those
chains, wherewith he is fettered and tormented. He hugs them, (I mean his
money) and adores them; and even makes them his god, that occasion him all his
grief. But had he once tasted how good, and bountiful the Lord is, to those
that set their delight on him, 1 Pet. 2.3. If he did grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. If the Lord, would
once incline his heart, unto his testimonies, and not to covetousness, Psalm.
119.36. he should soon know and find, that things themselves are in the
invisible world; in the world visible, but their shaddows only. That wicked men
enjoy whatsoever they have, viz. wealth, honor, wisdom, pleasure, etc. but as
it were in a dream. They dream they are rich, wise, happy, and the like; as a
beggar may dream he is a King: Or one that is ready to starve, that he is
richly furnished with all manner of meats and drinks: but when once he is
awake, he finds himself grossly mistaken. All worldly happiness, has its
being only by opinion: whence St Luke calls all Agrippa's pomp, but a fancy,
Act. 25.23. a mere conceit or supposition. The sweetness of sin, is but as
the sweetness of poison: sweet only in the mouth, in the belly bitter and
deadly. Stolen bread is sweet; sweet in the obtaining, bitter in the account
and reckoning. Yea, this last dish, will spoil all the feast; and make it but
like a drop of pleasure, before a river of sorrow and displeasure: Whereas
whatsoever the godly feel, is but as a drop of misery, before a river of mercy
and glory.

CHAP. XI.
The way of Wisdom and Holinnsse, is the way of Pleasure, Prove. 3.17. As O
that all covetous, miserly muckworms did but know, what pleasure is in the
peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, and the joy of the Holy
Ghost; what a sollace it is, to be the Son of God, an Inhabitant of Heaven;
to live by faith, amp;c. Then would they think it more worth, than all the
worlds wealth, honor and pleasure, multiplied as many times as there be stars
in the firmament: that any thing, that every thing, were too small a price for
it. Then would they change these broken, wormeaten, and poysonfull pleasures of
sin, for the pleasures of Gods House, of Gods Spirit, and those other
pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

God made the world of ^aught, because men should set it at naught: as did the
Apostle, (the better to prevail with others) who after he had been wrapped up
into the third Heaven, reckoned of all earthly things, riches, honors,
pleasures; but as dross and dung, in comparison of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. And what says holy David, a man of a most brave and
divine Spirit? I have had as great delight, in the way of thy testimonies, as
in all riches. They are more to be desired than gold, yea, than fine gold;
sweeter also than the honey and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. And again, How
sweet are thy words unto my mouth? Psalm. 119.103. This likewise was Io^s
judgment, who affirms, That wisdom cannot be valued with the gold of Ophire,
the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire. That the gold, and the crystal, cannot
equal it; and that the exchange thereof, shall not be for jewels of fine gold.
That no mention shall be made of corral, and pearls: for the price of wisdom
is above Rubies, that the Topaas of Aethiopia, shall not equal it, neither
shall it be valued with pure gold, Job 28.12. to 20.

Neither was this the case only of Paul, and David, and Job, and such like
Champions in grace, but every Believer finds the same in some measure. They
can truly say unto God with the Prophet Jeremy, Thy Word was unto me the joy
and rejoicing of my heart, Jer. 15.16. They meet with Christ himself in his
Word and Ordinances, where is also the water of Regeneration, the wine both of
consolation and compunction; the bread of life, the oil of gladness, the
honeycomb of grace, the milk of the Gospel, etc.

But how unlike to these, are natural men? Natural fools indeed: who esteem not
at all of Heavenly treasures, spiritual enjoyments, or riches of the mind.
There is a mighty difference between David's or Paul's spirit, and the spirit of
these Salvage Swine, whose only delight is, to root in the earth: Who are only
pleased and taken with the music of their money; in that they are altogether
unacquainted, with soul-comforts, and heavenly enjoyments. As acorns were
thought very good, until wheat was found out: and bread, before Manna came.
But had they tried both estates, as Believers have done, they would find that
content (the poor man's riches,) were far sweeter than desire, (the rich man's
poverty:) and that the ones wisdom, and spiritual treasure, will bring them to
those joys, that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither has ever
entered into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. while the wisdom and
wealth of these stupefied worldlings, if they take not heed, will bring them to
those endless miseries, that cannot be expressed, nor conceived by any heart,
were it as deep as the Sea. And yet these forsooth, repute themselves, and are
reputed, the wisest of men. But pitifully do they err in every thing, that
are not instructed by the Word and Spirit. The natural man, receives not the
things of the Spirit of God: for they are foollishnesse unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned But he that is spiritual,
discerns all things, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. which is a text or lesson worthy to be
learned, of all that are in their natural estate. O that they would but
seriously ponder the words! For then they would see, that simple or shallow
honesty, will prove more profitable in the end, than the profound quicksands
of craft and policy: Then their neglect would not be most in that, wherein
their care should be the greatest. But the world has always had a mean and
base esteem of Christ himself, and therefore no marvel, if they esteem so
little of his grace and Spirit. The Gadarens preferred their Swine before him;
the Jews, Barrabas; Judas, thirty pieces of silver: whereas St Paul wanted
words to express how he valued him, and therefore breaks off with O the depth!
Romans 11.33. Neither can Christ, or indeed the meanest saving grace that he
bestows upon his, be valued with ten thousand worlds.

But hear another reason why miserable muckworms are so transported with
earthly trash, which the godly so little regard. A main cause is this; Men of
the world, as they know not what the riches of the mind means, so they have no
hope of a better life after this. This is all their Heaven, and here they have
all their portion, they are like to have, Psalm. 73.12. Deliver my soul from the
wicked, (says David) from men of the world, who have their portion in this
life: whose bellyes thou fillest with thy hid treasure; their children have
enough, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes, Psalm. 17.14. But
my teeth shall not water after their dainties. Woe be to you that are rich,
(says our Savior) for ye have received your consolation, Luke 6.24. All here,
none hereafter: and hereupon they covet riches, and honors, and pleasures so
excessively, and insatiably. Nor can it be otherwise in reason; for nothing but
the assurance of heavenly things, makes us willing to part with earthly things.
Neither can he contemn this life, that knows not the other. But this is the
privilege of Piety; The rich man, has not so much advantage of the poor in
enjoying, as the religious poor has of the rich in leaving. Neither is the
poor man, so many pounds behind the rich for this world, as he may be talents
before him for the world to come. So that there is no learning this art,
without being religious: For you will be covetous, until you be gracious. And
during the time of your greediness, you shall never be satisfied; because
happiness is tied to goodness, by the chain of Providence

CHAP. XII.
Now if thou would become godly in good earnest; if thou would have this
change wrought in thee, and have thy affections so altered, as to find more
sweetness in spiritual things, than ever thou have done in thy worldly
enjoyments, be sure to begin at the spring head, I mean thy heart. This is Gods
own counsel to the men of Jerusalem, Ier. 4. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved. How long shall thy wicked thoughts
remain with thee? verse. 14. It is idle and to no purpose, to purge the
channel, when the fountain is corrupt. Had Elisha cast the salt into the
brooks and ditches, the remedy must have striven against the stream, to reach
up to the springs: Now it was but one labor in curing the fountain. Our heart
is a well of bitter venomous water, our actions are the streams: in vain shall
we cleanse our hands, while our hearts are evil. Whence the Apostle orderly
bids us, first be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and then let him that
stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4.23, 24, 28. But alas, how many are there that
set the cart before the horse, and begin to change their lives, before their
hearts? but if we shall be advised so to do, it is not advisedly. It is most
ridiculous, to apply remedies to the (...) skillful Physician, that when the
headache is caused by the distemperature of the stomach, would apply outward
remedies to the head, before he had purged the stomach, where lies the matter
that feeds the disease. To what purpose is it, to crop the top of the weeds, or
lop off the boughs of the tree, when the root and stalk remain in the earth?
Cut off the sprig of a tree, it grows still, a bough, an arm, still it grows;
lop off the top, yea saw it in the midst, yet it will grow again; stock it up
by the root, then (and not till then) it will grow no more.

Great Cities once expunged, the Dorpes and Villages will soon come in of
themselves. Wherefore, as the King of Syria said unto his Captains, Fight
neither against great nor small, but against the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22.31.
So especially we must set our selves, against our mother and Master sin: the
King being caught, the rest will never stand out. The heart is originally evil,
that is the treasure and storehouse of wickedness.

As in generation, so in regeneration: Cor primum vivit: life begins at the
heart. Yea, the heart is the first in our Creation, which is formed; the first
by reason of our fall by sin, which is deformed; and the first in our
regeneration that is reformed. And whenever God does savingly shine upon the
understanding, he gives a soft and pliable heart. For without a work upon the
heart by the Spirit of God, it will follow its own inclination to that which it
affects, whatsoever the judgment shall say to the contrary. That must first be
reformed, which was first deformed.

Out of the abundance of the heart (says our Savior) the mouth speaks, Mat.
12.34. Yea out of the abundance of the heart, the head devises, the eye sees,
the ear hears, the hand works, the foot walks. A man may apply his ears,
and his eyes, (as many blockheads do) to his Book, and yet never prove Scholar:
but from that day, which a man begins to apply his heart unto wisdom, he
learneth more in a moment after, than he did in a year before; nay, than ever
he did in all his life. As you see the wicked, because they apply their hearts
to wickedness, how fast they proceed? how easily, and how quickly they become
perfect Swearers, perfect Drunkards, cunning Deceivers, etc.?

The heart is like the fire, which kindles the sacrifice, 1 Kings 18.38. And
indeed, if the tongue, or the hand, or the ear, think to serve God without the
heart, it is the irksomest occupation in the world. But as the Sun rises
first, and then the beasts arise from their dens, the fowls from their nests,
and men from their beds: so when the heart sets forward to serve God, all the
members will follow after it; the tongue will praise him, the foot will follow
him, the ear will attend him, the eye will watch him, the hand will serve him,
nothing will stay after the heart, but every one goes like Handmaids after
their Mistress. Such as the heart is, such are the actions of the body which
brings forth good things: and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his
heart, brings forth evil things, Matthew. 12.25. Therefore as Christ says,
Make clean within, and all will be clean, Matthew, 35.25, 26. So see your hearts
be sincere and single, and then all your actions will be holy to the Lord. If
we would be rid of noisome fowls, the only way is to destroy their nests in
every place. A vain and lost labor it is, to stop the current of a stream, if
you go not to the fountain. Whence it is that God says, Give me thine heart,
Prove. 23.26. As though he would teach us the pleasantest, and easiest way to
serve him, without any grudging, or toil, or wearisomenesse. As let but the
heart be changed, and we shall attend the Ordinances, and perform all duties
with delight, cheerfulness and alacrity. Whereas to a carnal heart, holy
duties, as fasting, praying, hearing, is so tedious and irksome, that it thinks
one Sabbath, or Fast Day, more tedious and burdensome, than ten holy days, as
their consciences will bear me witness. Whereas the gracious soul, is more
delighted therewith, than his body with a well relished meal. Touch but the
first link of a chain, and all the rest will follow: so set but the heart a
going, and it is like the poyse of a clock, which turns all the wheels one way:
such an oil is upon the heart, that it makes all nimble and current about it:
but without the heart, all is mute and dumb. As the tongue will not praise,
because the heart does not love; the ear does not hear, because the heart does
not mind; the hand does not give, because the heart does not pity; the foot
will not go, because the heart has no affection. All stay upon the heart, like
the Captain that should give the onset. Nor is any service we can do accepted,
without the heart and affections flowing thence. Therefore David's prayer is,
Create in me a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51.10. The
Scribes and Pharisees, did fast, and watch, and pray, and hear, and read, and
give, and do all that we can do: and yet Christ rewarded all their works with a
woe, because they wanted a good heart, and true affections flowing thence. They
honored God with their lips, but their hearts were far away from him. Whence
he also calls them hypocrites, Mark. 7.6. The Disciple that betrayed Christ,
heard as much as the Disciples that loved him.

CHAP. XIII.
But here (least I should be mistaken) let me join to what has been said, and
what shall be further said by way of caution: Expect not that this should be
done by any power of thine own: for except God give thee repentance, and
removes all impediments that may hinder, thou can no more turn thy self, than
thou could at first make thy self. We are not sufficient of our selves to
think, much less to speak, least of all to do that which is good, 2 Cor. 3.5.
We are swift to all evil, but to any good immovable. We can lend no more
active power to our conversion, than Adam did to his creation, than the Child
does to his conception, than the dead man to his raising from the grave. (...)
16.14. the ears of the Prophet to hear well, Isa. 50.4. the eyes of Elishaes
servant to see well, 2 Kings 6.17. and the lips of David to speak well. Bid a
man by his own strength, do the least good, or bear the least trouble: you may
with as good success, stand in the street, and bid a chained prisoner come out
of his dungeon. St Paul before his conversion, could do as much, as the best
accomplished moralist of them all; his words are, If any man thinks, that he
has whereof he might trust in the flesh, much more I, Phil. 3.4. Yet when he
speaks of his doing, or suffering, he shows that it was because the love of
God, was shed abroad in his heart, by the holy Ghost, which was given him, Romans
5.5. Of himself he could do nothing, though he were able to do all things,
through Christ, and by the Spirits assistance, who strengthened him, Phil.
4.13. Man is like an Organ-pipe, that speaks no longer then wind is blown into
it. Wherefore as when David came to fight with Goliath, he cast away Saul's
armor: so let us in this case, cast away all trust and confidence in our
selves, and only set forward in the Name of the Lord God of Israel. If we trust
to our own resistance, we cannot stand: we cannot miscarry, if we trust to his.

Yet this is to be considered, that God does not work upon us as upon blocks,
and stones, in all and every respect passive: but converts our wills, to will
our own conversion. He that made thee without thy self, will not justify, nor
save thee without thy self: Without thy merit indeed, not without thine
endeavor. When those deadly waters were healed by the Prophet, the outward act
must be his, the power Gods: he cast the salt into the spring, and said, Yhus
says the Lord, I have healed these waters, there shall not be from thence, any
more death or barrenness. Elisha was the Instrument, but far was he from
challenging ought to himself.

Wherefore be sure to use that power, which Christ shall give thee, and then my
soul for thine, he will not be wanting on his part. And amongst other thine
endeavor, exercise Prayer: Omit not to beg of God, for the grace thou want,
and praise him for what thou obtainest. Abhor to attribute, or ascribe ought to
thy doing: trust only to Christ's obedience; in whom, only what we do is
accepted, and for whom, only it is rewarded.

Now you are to know, that as no Sacrifice was without Incense: so must no
service, be performed without Prayer. And Prayer is like the Merchants Ship, to
fetch in heavenly commodities. It is the Key of Heaven, as St Austin terms it;
and the Hand of a Christian, which is able to reach from earth to Heaven; and
to take forth every manner of good gift out of the Lords Treasury. Whatsoever
ye shall ask the Father in my Name, (says Christ) believing, he will give it
you, John 16.23. Matthew. 21.22, Unto fervent Prayer, God will deny nothing. It
is like Saul's Sword, and Ionathans bow, that never returned empty. Like
Ahimaaz, that always brought good tidings. It is worth the obse^ving, how
Cornelius his serious exercise of this duty of Prayer, brought unto him first
an Angel, then an Apostle, and then the Holy Ghost himself. Have thou then a
desire after that happiness before spoken of, seek first, to have the
asistance of Gods Spirit, and his love shed abroad in thine heart by the Holy
Ghost? Would thou have the love of God, and the asistance of his Spirit, ask
it of him by Prayer? who says, If any of you lack in this kind, let him ask of
God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given him, James 1.5. Would thou pray that thou may be heard? Ask in faith,
and waver not; for he that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of the
wind, and carried away, Verse. 6. Would thou have faith? be diligent to hear
the Word preached; which is the sword of the Spirit, that kills our
corruptions, and that unresistable Cannon-shot, that battereth and beats down
all the strong holds of sin and Satan, Romans 10.17. Unto him therefore, that
is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask or think, I
commend thee.

CHAP. XIV.
Lastly, For conclusion of this point, Would thou be a contented and Happy
man? then strive to be a Thankful man: and when God has the fruit of his
mercies, he will not spare to sow much, where he reapes much. Would thou
become thankful? then bethink thy self what cause thou have, by calling to
mind and considering, what God and Christ has done for thee. As first, That he
is the Author of thy natural life: For in him we live, and move, and have our
being, Act. 17.28. Secondly, Of thy spiritual life: Thus I live, says Paul,
yet not I now, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. Thirdly, Of thy eternal
life, 1 John 1. He is the way, the truth, and the life, John 14.6. The
resurrection, and the life, John 11.25.

Or more particularly thus: In the first place, He gave us our selves, and all
the creatures to be our servants; yea, he created us after his own Image, in
righteousness and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the truth, with a
power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed and happy condition;
and this deserves all possible thankfulness. But this was nothing in
comparison. For when we were in a sad condition; when we had forfeited all
this, and our selves: when by sin we had turned that Image of God, into the
Image of Satan, and wilfully plunged our souls and bodies into eternal
torments; when we were become his enemies, mortally hating him, and to our
utmost fighting against him, and taking part with his only enemies, ( Sin and
Satan) not having the least thought or desire of reconcilement, but a perverse
and obstinate will to resist all means tending thereunto; He did redeem us, not
only without asking, but even against our wills: so making of us (his cursed
enemies) servants, of servants sons, of sons heirs, and coheirs with Christ,
Gal 4.7. Here was a fathomlesse depth, a wonder beyond all wonders!

2. But that we may the better consider what an alms or boon God gave us, when
he gave us his Son: Observe, that when neither Heaven, Earth, nor Hell, could
have yielded any satisfactory thing, besides Christ that could have satisfied
Gods justice, and merited Heaven for us, then, O then! God, in his infinite
wisdom and goodness, did not only find out a way to satisfy his Justice and
the Law, but gave us his Son, his only begotten Son, his only beloved Son out
of his bosom: And his Son gave himself to die, even the most shameful,
painful, and cursed death of the Cross to redeem us; That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16. The very
thought of which death, before he come to it, together with the weight and
burden of our sins, put him into such an Agony in the Garden, that it made
him to sweat, even drops of blood. A mercy bestowed, and a way found out, that
may astonish all the sons of men on earth, and Angels in Heaven! Wherefore, O
wonder at this, you that wonder at nothing! That the Lord should come with such
a price to redeem our worse than lost souls, and to bring salvation to us, even
against our wills. The Lord Jesus Christ being rich, for our sakes became poor,
that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. Even the eternal
God would die, that we might not die eternally; O the deepnesse of Gods love! O
the unmeasurable measure of his bounty! O Son of God! who can sufficiently
express thy love? Or, commend thy pity? Or, extol thy praise? It was a wonder,
that thou made us for thy self, more that thou made thy self man for us;
but most of all, that thou should unmake thy self, that thou should die
to save us.

3. And which is further considerable, It cost God more to redeem the world,
than to make it. In the Creation he gave thee thy self; but in the Redemption
he gave thee himself. The Creation of all things cost him but six days to
finish it; the Redemption of man cost him three and thirty years. In the
Creation of the world. he did but only speak the word; in the Redemption of
man, he both spoke and wept, and sweat, and bled, and died, and did many
wonderful things to do it: Yea, the saving of one soul single, is more and
greater than the making of the whole world. In every new creature are a number
of Miracles, a blind man is restored to sight, a deaf man to hearing, a man
possessed with many Devils dis-possest; yea, a dead man raised from the dead, and
in every one a stone turned into flesh, in all which God meets with nothing but
opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

What shall I say? God of his goodness has bestowed so many and so great
mercies upon us, that it is not possible to express his bounty therein; for if
we look inward, we find our Creators mercies; if we look upward, his mercy
reaches unto the Heavens; if downwards, the earth is full of his goodness,
and so is the broad Sea; if we look about us, what is it that he has not given
us? Air to breathe in, fire to warm us, water to cool and cleanse us, clothes
to cover us, food to nourish us, fruits to refresh us; yea, Delicates to please
us, Beasts to serve us, Angels to attend us, Heaven to receive us; And which is
above all, (...) we turn our eyes, we cannot look besides his bounty; yea, we
can scarce think of any thing more to pray for, but that he would continue
those blessings, which he has bestowed on us already. Yet we covet still, as
though we had nothing, and live as if we knew nothing of all this his
beneficence.

God might have said before we were formed, Let them be Toads, Monsters,
Infidels, Beggars, Cripples, Bondslaves, Idiots, or Mad men, so long as they
live, and after that Castawayes for ever, and ever: But he has made us to the
best likeness, and nursed us in the best Religion, and placed us in the best
Land, and appointed us to the best, and only Inheritance, even to remain in
bliss with him for ever; yea, thousands would think themselves happy, if they
had but a piece of our happiness. For whereas some bleed, we sleep in safety;
others beg, we abound; others starve, we are full fed; others grope in the
dark, our Sun still shines; we have eyes, ears, tongue, feet, hands, health,
liberty, reason, others are blind, deaf, dumb, are sick, maimed, imprisoned,
distracted, and the like; yea, God has removed so many evils from us, and
conferred so many good things upon us, that they are beyond thought or
imagination. For all those millions of mercies that we have received from,
before, and since we were born, either for soul or body, even to the least bit
of bread we eat, or shall to eternity, (of which we could not well want any
one) Christ has purchased of his Father for us, and yet God the Father also,
has of his free grace, and mercy given us, in giving us his Son; for which
read Psalm. 68.19. and 145.15, 16. and 75.6, 7, Yea, God is many times working
our good, when we least think upon him: as he was creating Adam an help meet
for him, when he was fast asleep. And as much do we owe unto God, for the
dangers from which he delivers us: as for the great wealth and dignities
whereunto he has always raised us.

CHAP. XV.
But the better to illustrate, and set out this Love; it will be good to branch
it out into some more Particulars. As

First, Call to mind all these external, inferior, earthly and temporal
benefits; as that your being, breathing, life, motion, reason, is from God.
That he has given you a more noble nature, than the rest of the creatures;
excellent faculties of mind, perfection of senses, soundness of body,
competency of estate, seemlyness of condition, fitness of calling,
preservation from dangers, rescue out of miseries, kindness of friends,
carfulness of education, honesty of reputation, liberty of recreations,
quietness of life, opportunity of well-doing, protection of Angels.

Then rise higher to his Spiritual favors, though here on earth; and strive to
raise your affections with your thoughts. Bless God, that you were born in the
light of the Gospel, for your profession of the truth, for the honor of your
vocation, for your incorporating into the Church, for the privilege of the
Sacraments, the free use of the Scriptures, the Communion of Saints, the
benefit of their prayers, the aid of their counsels, footsteps of Faith, Hope,
Love, Zeal, Patience, Peace, Joy, conscionablenesse, for any desire of more.

Then let your soul mount highest of all, into her Heaven, and acknowledge
those Celestial Graces; of her Election to Glory, Redemption from Shame, Death,
and Hell, of the Intercession of her Savior, of the Preparation of her Place;
And there let her stay a while, upon the meditation of her future Joys.

This or the like do, and it will teach you where to beg blessings when you
want them, and whom to thank when you have them. For as the Sea is that great
Cistern, to recieve the confluence of all waters: as first from that large and
vast pond, water is derived into all parts of the earth, by veins and springs,
those springs run into rivers, and those rivers empty themselves again into the
Sea: so all blessings come from God, and all praises must be returned to him.

If we have any thing that is good, God is the giver of it. If we do any thing
well, he is the Author of it. God is Alpha, the fountain from which all grace
springs; and Omega, the sea to which all glory runs. All blessings come from
him, like so many lines from the center to the circumference: therefore we must
return all praises to him, like so many lines from the circumference to the
center, Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 10.31. His wisdom he communicates, and his justice
he distributes; and his holiness he imparts, and his mercy he bestows, etc. 1
Cor. 1.30, 31. but his glory he will not give to another, Isai. 42.8.

But this is not all; yea, what can we think of, that can be thought
sufficient, to render unto the Lord our God, so good and gracious, in way of
thankfulness for all these his mercies? For in reason has he contrived so
many ways to save us; and should not we take all occasions to glorify him?
Has he done so much for us, and shall we deny him any thing that he requires
of us, though it were our lives, yea our souls; much more our lusts? We have
exceeding hard hearts, if the blood of the Lamb cannot soften them: stony
bowels, if so many mercies cannot melt them. Was Christ crucified for our sins?
and should we by our sins crucify him again?

Now the meditation of what God and Christ has done for thee, will wonderfully
inflame thee with the love of God, and thy Redeemer; and withal make thee
abhor thy self, for thy former unthankfulness. It will make thee break out
into some such expression as this, Praised be the Lord, even the God of our
salvation, who loadeth us daily with benefits, Selah, Psalm. 68.19. The eyes of
all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat, in due season; thou
openest thine hand, and fillest all things living of thy good pleasure, Psalm.
145.15, 16. To come to promotion, is neither from the east, nor from the west,
nor from the south: but God is the Judge, he makes low, and he makes high,
Psalm. 75.6, 7. And so of all other mercies and deliverances.

He that confers a Benefit, upon a grateful nature, robs him of his liberty,
and self also: and in one and the same act makes him a vassal, will make us to
direct all our thoughts, speeches, and actions to his glory, as he has
directed our eternal salvation thereunto.

But to help and further you herein, if you be willing so to do, take these few
Directions.

First, Let these things be never out of the minds, memories, and mouths of
those whom Christ has done thus for. O let us (I say) remember, as we should
never forget! Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid jam reddam pro me refecto,
says holy Bernard. If I owed my whole self unto thee, for giving me my self in
my creation: what have I left to pay for giving thy self for me to so cruel a
death, to procure my Redemption, which was not so cheap as my Creation? Great
was the benefit that thou would create me of nothing; but what tongue can
sufficiently express the greatness of this grace, that thou did redeem me
with so dear a price, when I was worse than nothing? We are full of thy
goodness: O let our hearts run over with thankfulness! Yea, let so many of
us, as have either heart or brain, in the next place say, O Lord, What is man
that thou art so mindful of him? Psalm. 8.4. And O man, what is God that thou
art so unmindfull of him? And then conclude with, What shall I render unto
thee, O Lord, for all these thy benefits? but love thee my Creator, and
Redeemer, and become a new creature. I will serve thee, O Lord, by the
assistance of thy grace, because thou have given me my self: but much more
honor thee, because thou have given me thy Son Christ.

Nor can any man in common reason meditate so unbottomed a love, and not study
and strive for an answerably thankful demeanure. If a friend had given us but
a thousand part of what God has, we should heartily love him all our lives,
and think no thanks sufficient, but to him that has given me all things, I
have scarce given so much as thanks. Yea, I have striven to multiply offenses
against him, and to make them as infinite in number as his blessings.

Thirdly, The continual meditation of what God has done for thee, will make
thee do, what thou art able for him again. For did God and Christ, do all this
for us? and shall we do nothing for him again? Like favors, require like
gratitude.

This then, should at least make us part with our nearest, dearest, and
sweetest darling sins, to serve him in righteousness and holiness every day,
every hour, all the days of our lives. Even every sin; for what sin should be
so dear to us, as Gods only Son was to him? Do we then for Gods sake not spare
our dearest sin; when God for our sakes, did not spare his dearest Son.

Yea, what a brutish and barbarous unthankfulness, and shame were it, that
God should part with his Son, and his Son with his own precious blood for us,
and we not part with our sinful lusts, and delights for him?

Fourthly, Has Christ done all this for us, his servants, so much, and so many
ways obliged unto him? let us do what we are able for him again. 1. Let us be
zealous for his glory, and take his part when we see or hear him dishonored.
Nor can there be any love, where there^ no zeal, says Augustine. Well-born
Children are touched to the quick, with the injuries of their Parents. And it
is a base, vile, and unjust ingratitude in those men, that can endure the
disgrace of them, under whose shelter they live. 2. Let us seek to draw others
after us, from Satan to Him. 3. Do we all we can, to promote his worship and
service. 4. Take we all good occasions to publish to others, how good God is;
and what he has done for us. 5. Let us wholly ascribe all the good we have, or
do to free grace; and give him the glory of his gifts, employing them to our
Masters best advantage, 6. Let us (that we may express our thankfulness to
him) show kindness to his Children, and poor members, who are bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5 30. 7. Abhor we our selves for our
former unthankfulness, and our wonderful provoking of him. 8. Hearken we unto
Christ's voice, in all that he says unto us; and express our thankfulness by
our obedience. Yea, all this let us do, if we do it but for our own sakes: For
what should we have, if we did thus serve Christ, who has done all these
things for his enemies neglecting and dishonouring him?

CHAP. XVI.
But thou will say, What can we do for God, or for Christ?

I Answer, We cannot properly benefit God, nor add to his fullness. They can
add no good to him, that have all their good from him. The Ocean is never the
fuller, though all the rivers of the world, flow into the same: So, What is God
the better, for our praises or performances, to whom (in that he is infinite)
nothing can be added? If we be righteous, our righteousness may profit the
sons of men; but what can we give unto him? or what receives he at our
hands? Can the Sun receive light from a candle? What profit does the Sun
receive, by our looking upon it? We are the better for its light, not it for
our sight; or at all prejudiced by our neglect. A shower of rain that waters
the earth, gets nothing to it self: the earth fares the better for it. Lord
(says David) our well-doing does not at all extend unto thee; but to the
Saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent ones in whom is all my
delight, Psalm. 16.2, 3. Yea, if we could give him our bodies and souls, they
should be saved by it, but he were never the better for them. It is for our
good, that he would be served, and magnified of us.

True, as the Ocean daynes to take tribute of the small brooks, and accepts
that in token of thankfulness, which was its own before, it being the
maintainer of the rivers streams: Or as Joseph accepted of his Brethrens small
gifts, albeit he had no need of them, Gen 43.15. So does God accept of our
free will offerings, and bountifully rewards them, Phil. 4.18. Yea, if in
impolying our Talents, we aim at his glory, and the Churches good, he doubles
them, Matthew. 25.21, 22, 23.

Nor does God look for such glory, or service from us, as he is worthy to
receive, but as we are able to give. Our praises and performances, are not
sins; yet they are not without some touch of sin. Duties and infirmities,
come from us together: but Christ parts them, forgiving the infirmities, and
receiving the praises and performances. They are full of weaknesses, yet does
not he except against them for their imperfections. He takes them well in
worth, though there be no worth in them: and vouchsafes them a reward, which
had been sufficiently honored with a pardon.

Neither can we hurt, or take away any thing from him: For if we be wicked, our
wickedness may hurt a man like our selves; but what is it to him, Job 35.7, 8.
Yet nevertheless, we may do many things, which he accounts and rewards, as
done to himself; of which I will give you one in special, and I pray mind it.

Though we can do nothing for Christ himself, he being now in Heaven: yet we
may do much for his poor members, those excellent ones whom David speaks of
Psalm 16.2, 3. which Christ accounts all one, as if it were done to himself, as
appears by many express testimonies. When I was an hungered, ye fed me; when I
was naked, ye clothed me; when sick and in prison, ye visited me, etc. For in
as much as ye did it unto one of these little ones, that believe in me, ye did
it unto me, Matthew. 25.34. to 41. He that gives unto the poor, lends unto the
Lord, Prove. 19.17. And many the like which I have formerly cited.

CHAP. XVII.
Now, do we love Christ? or would we indeed express our thankfulness to him,
for what we have received from him? Or do we desire to do something again for
Christ, who has done and suffered so much for us? here is a way chalked out
unto us, which he prefers before all burnt-offerings and sacrifices, Mark.
12.33. When David could do the Father Barzillay no good, by reason of his old
age: he loved, and honored Chimham his son, 2 Samuel 19.38. And to requite the
love of Jonathan, he showed kindness to Mephibosheth. So if thou bear any
good will to God, or Christ, whom it is not in thy power to pleasure; thou will
show thy thankfulness to him, in his Children and poor members: who are bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. Is our Jonathan gone? yet we
have many Mephibosheths: and he that loves God for his own sake, will love his
Brother for Gods sake. Especially when he has loved us (as it were) on this
condition, that we should love one another, John 15. This is my Commandment,
(says Christ) that ye love one another, as I have loved you, Verse. 12. And
greater love than his was, cannot be, Verse. 13. And until we consider, how
infinitely good God has been unto us: we can never show any goodness toward
our Brethren. We must know, he has given us all we have: before we will part
with any thing for his sake.

God in the beginning, had no sooner created the Heavens and the Earth, but he
said, Let the Earth bring forth grass, the Herb yielding seed, and the
fruitful tree yielding fruit, etc. Genesis 1.11, 12. So when he has by his Word
and Spirit, created us anew, he commands us to be fruitful in the works of
Piety, and Charity, Col. 1.10. And the river of Charity, does always spring,
from the fountain of Piety. Faith is as the leads, and pipes, to bring in: and
Love, is as the cock of the cunduit, to let out. And what avails the one
without the other? What avileth it, my Brethren, (says St James) though a man
says he has faith, when he has no works, (that is, works of Charity) can the
faith save him? For if a Brother, or a Sister be naked, and destitute of daily
food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill
your bellies; notwithstanding ye give them not those things, which are needful
for the body: what helps it? Even so the faith, if it have no works, is dead
in it self, James 2.14. to 18. A just man lives by his faith, Hab. 2.4. Heb.
10.38. and others live by his charity. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God,
even the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world, James 1.27. Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. and Faith is the fulfilling of the Gospel,
Act. 13.39. and 16.31. 1 These. 4.14. 1 John 3.23. A Christian in respect of his
faith, is Lord over all, 1 John 5 4. and 2.14. in respect of his love, he is
servant unto all, Gal. 5.13. Faith is the mother grace: by it we are justified,
Luk^ 7.47, 50. Gal. 3.8. our hearts are purified, Act 15.9. our persons are
accepted, and our souls saved, Ephe. 2.8, 9. Luke 18.42. Yet in many respects,
love is preferred before it: as 1 Cor. 13.13. Now abides Faith, Hope, and
Love, even these three; but the chiefest of these is Love. So that what the
diamond is among stones, the Sun among Plaenets, and gold among metals, such
is Love among the graces. Love will make us to have public spirits,
resembling the Moon, which borrows her light from the Sun, that she may
convey it to all the inferior creatures; takes from the Sea, that she may give
to the lesser rivers. It will enforce us to practice, what the Apostle exhorts
unto, Phil. 2. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also of the
things of other men: let the same mind be in you, that was even in Christ
Jesus, etc. Verse. 4, 5, 6. It will make us remember them that are bound, as if
we were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if we were also
afflicted in the body, Heb. 13 3. Which is but reason. As m^ist not thou thy
self be in affliction or want? and would not thou in thy need, be relieved?
Why then should not thou know it reason, to do to others, as thou would
have them do to thee? We ought to love our neighbor as our selves, Levit.
19.18. but how do we so, if we take not care for them, as we do for our selves?
There is nothing that any one does, or indureth, but any other may: We are all
liable to the same common misery, if unsustained. Therefore insult not over him
that is cast down; but let it make thee humble, thankful and compassionate:
because it is a goodness not our own, that makes the difference, though pride
will scarce believe it. The proudest he cannot say, this or that shall never
befall me. Who can say (says Menander) I shall never do, nor suffer this or
that? For that we go not the round of others sins, or punishments, it is
neither our goodness, desert, policy, or power preventing, but from those
lines of gracious Providence, from Gods preventing, and preserving mercy.
Doubtless he had been counted a prating fool, that should have told Haman, he
should have held Mordecai's stir up* much less have changed preferment with
him. That Mordecai should be lifted up into Hamans favor at Court, and Haman
should be exalted to that fifty cubits eminency above ground, in Mordecais
room. But go we on.

Love will cause us to open our hands unto such as are in want; and lend or
give them sufficient for their need, as God commands, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. It will make
us of Jobs spirit, who would not eat his morsells alone, but invited the
fatherless to eat with him, Job 31.17. It will make a man love his enemies,
and do good for them, that do hurt to him, Luke 6. 35. Yea, if need so require,
as in a famine, or common persecution; it will make us sell our possessions and
goods, and distribute them to all, as every one has need, as did the
Christians in the Primitive Church, Acts 2.44, 45. And lastly, which is above
all; It will make a man to lay down his life for the brethren* 1 John 3.16.
Whereas he that has not this Christian grace, feels, and is sensible of common
calamities, just so much as appertains to his own private estate and interest,
and no more. It is the want of compassion, that takes no compassion of others
wants. Yea, this is an argument, that the love of God is not in us, 1 John
3.17. Whatsoever we think, or say, it is not at all in us, John 3.14, 15.17.

CHAP. XVIII.
Again, It Is impossible that he who has love should be ungrateful* Mary
Magdalen had received much, and this made her love much: and loving much, she
thought nothing too much to bestow, even upon the most remote members of
Christ, to express her thankfulness, Luke 7.38. And the like of Naaman, when
Elisha had done that great cure upon him; whose hands were no less ^ull of
thanks, then his mouth. Dry and barren profession of our obligation, where is
power to requite are unfit for noble and ingenuous spirits. And so of Jacob; If
(says he) I come again unto my fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be
my God, and this stone which I have set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house;
and of all that he shall give me, I will give the tenth unto him again, Genesis
28.21, 22. And Hannah, who vowed a vow, and said, O Lord of Hosts, if thou will
look on the trouble of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine
handmaid, but give unto thine handmaid a man Child; then I will give him
unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his
head: and she did it accordingly, 1 Samuel 1.11.27, 28.

An ingenuous disposition cannot receive favors without thoughts of return.
Behold thou have been careful for us (says Elisha to the Shunamite,) with all
this care: what is to be done for thee? would thou be spoken for to the King,
or to the Captain of the Host? what is there to be done for thee? And when he
understood that a son was the only thing she wanted and desired, her husband
being old, he obtained of the Lord to fulfill her desire, 2 Kings 4.13. to 17.
Both Christ, and the Angels, the Prophets and Apostles were wont to be very
beneficial guests to their hosts, and hostesses, and ever paid a bless^ng for
their entertainment. Elias requited his hostess with a supernatnrall
provision: He gave also her own, and her sons life to her for his board. Yea,
in that woeful famine, 1 King. ^7. He gave her, and her son, their board for
his house-room. Yea, it is storied of Pyrrhus an Heathen, that he did
exceedingly grieve, for that a friend of his happened to dye, before he had
required his many favors.

Those hearts that are truly thank^ull, delight no less in the repayment of a
good turn, then in the receipt: and do as much study, how to show their fervent
affections for what they have received, as how to compass favors when they
want them. Their debt is their burden, which when they have discharged, they
are at ease, and not before. Resembling Homer, who never forgot to requite a
benefit received, nor could be at rest, until he had done it.

CHAP. XIX.
Nor can there be a better sign of true love, and ^ound amendment, then that
we can be content to be loosers by our repentance. Many formal penitents have
yielded to part with so much of their sin, as may abate nothing of their
profit. It is an easy matter to say, (yea and think what they say to be true)
that they love God and Christ. There is no Dives among us, but he thinks scorn
to be charged with the want of love. What, not love God? But ask his
conscience the next question; What good have thou done for his sake? No he can
remember none of that, no goodness, no works of mercy or charity has come
from him all his life long But know this thou wretched rich miserly muckworme,
that tho^ artbound to perform these works of mercy to the poor, both ou^ of
duty, and thankfulness to him, who has given thee thy self, and all that
thou have. Yea, if thou be not a mere beast, or block: When thou beholdest
them (the poor I mean) behold how thou art beholding to Him, that suffered
thee not to be like them. Has God given thee all things, and do thou then
think it a great matter to give him back something? especially seeing thou
give him but of his own, as David gladly acknowledged, 1 Chr. 29.14. For
shame consider of it, and let thy conscience make answer to what I shall ask
thee, what can be more equal and just then to give a little unto him, who has
given all unto us? especially seeing he has granted unto us the use only of
what we possess, reserving still the chief propriety unto himself, and to
spare something unto the poor, out of our abundance at his request, who has
not spared to give unto us his only begotten, and dearly beloved son; that
by a shameful death he might free us from everlasting death and condemnation,
and purchase for us eternal happiness. Yea in truth, what madness is it to
deny, being requested, to give at his appointment some small portion of our
goods? who by his own right and authority may take all. And what senseless
folly were it to turn away our face from him, when he asks in the behalf of
the poor, some earthly and momenta^y trifles, from whom we expect as his free
gift, Heavens felicity, and everlasting glory.

CHAP. XX.
But to drive home this duty to men's consciences, see further what cause we
have to extend our liberality to the relief of Christ's poor members; For here
I shall take occasion to slide into a discourse, which in the Title page 1
durst not once mention, as well knowing how averse most men are, and how
desperately most rich men's hearts are hardened against the poor; whereof i will
only give you an instance.

Some six years since, having taken no small pains in composing the Poores
Advocate in eight parts, I printed the first two of them with these words in
the front; That it is an incomparable favor to the rich, that there are poor
to accept of their Charity, had they the Wit to know it. This they no sooner
read but their bloods would rise, saying; We must be beholding to the poor to
accept of our charity, we will see them hanged first. An expression more sit for
a Caniball, then a Christian: And certainly such men had need to look to it in
time: for of all men in the world, they shall have judgment without mercy,
that are so miserably unmercifull. And I would wish them, to take heed of
turning the deaf ear to Christ, when in his members he cries to them for mercy:
lest Christ turns the deaf ear to them, when they (being in far greater need)
shall cry to him for mercy.

Again, (which is worth the observing) when the said two parts took so with the
good, that provision was made, and a way thought upon that to every rich man in
the Nation, there should be one of them, freely given for the poores good, by
the Clerks of every Parish, they (I mean some of them) so abused their trust,
that the donor was forced to withdraw his hand: whereby both Rich and Poor,
might sustain no little loss, the one in their souls, the other in their
purses. For it is well known that a person of quality upon the reading of it,
sent in many hundred pounds to the our parishes, to be be bestowed by the
Churchwardens upon their poor. If any shall think I wrong Parish Clerks, let
them but ask the Clark of Lawrence Church, whether the then Reverend Pastor,
did not deliver him five and fifty of those Books, with the names of five and
fifty rich men in that parish, together with a great charge to deliver them
into every of their hands. And whether he did not most perfidiously and
sacrilegiously barter them away to the Book Women for other Books, instead of
giving them to the parties. And this (for i will mention no more) I acquaint the
wo^ld with, as tendering the good of his soul, more then that of his honor, for
I have done in private what lies in me, to make him sensible of the crime, but
he is the more obstinate.

Now that I have taken occasion to shroud the Remains of the poores Advocate,
under the notion of how to become happy here and hereafter, these are my
reasons.

First, Bounty to the poor, is the most proper means, tending to happiness.
And secondly, it is very probable, that many will read or hear thus far, under
this notion (whether out of curiosity or self ends) and having heard hitherto,
will be willing also to hear me a few words in behalf of the poor, (which is
of no less concernment) when otherwise they would have heard neither of both.
Now such as have read the two first parts of The Poores Advocate, may remember,
that I have dispatched these six heads. 1. The necessity of the duty. 2. The
persons of whom it is required. 3. They to whom it must be performed. 4. What.
5. How. 6. How much we are to give.

In the other six parts, I intended to have treated, 1. Of the time when we a^e
to give. 2. Of the means inabling to it. 3. Of the ends to be propounded in
it. 4. Of the impediments that hinder it. 5. Of the remedies or encouragements.
And 6. Of the Uses. But finding that it would have been as welcome to the
parties concerned therein, as water into a ship, I will only give you a few
gleanings out of them: In which also I will more respect the weight and benefit
of the matter, then the order of handling: that so I may couch all, within a
little compass.

CHAP. XXI.
Touching the grounds, reasons, and inducements, which may move men to be
bountiful and beneficent to the poor, with which I will begin: they are so
many, that only to name them all, would by worldlings be thought too much.
Wherefore I will only nominate such, as every wise man (even out of self love)
will allow for weighty. And therein be as brief as possibly I can in running
them over.

1. If in some good measure we perform this duty, if we deal our bread to the
hungry, bring the poor that are cast out into our houses; and that seeing them
naked, we cover them, as it is Isay 58.7. God has promised and given it under
his hand, that it shall go well with us in our estates, and that we shall be no
loosers by it, but he will surely pay it us again, Ecc. 11.1. Luke 6.38. Matthew.
6.4. And lest any should be discouraged, from performing these duties, because
he is able to give but a little: he assures us, that whosoever gives a cup of
cold water unto a Disciple in the name of a Disciple he shall in no wise lose
his reward, Matt. 10.42. And that because this reward is not grounded upon the
excellency and merit of the work, but upon Gods righteousness and truth, in
fulfilling his promises, according to that Heb. 6.10. For God is not
unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor of love; which ye have
showed toward his name* in that ye have minstred to the Saints, and do
minister; Whereby he implies that it is no more possible, that those who in
love and obedience, have exercised themselves in these works of mercy, should
lose their reward, then that God himself should lose his righteousness. And the
wise man tells us, that he who has pity on the poor, lends unto the
Lord, and that which he has given, he will repay again, Prove. 19.17. Neither
in reason can it be otherwise, for if mercy and bounty be in God, as an
inexhaustible and everspringing fountain, and in us as a little stream that
flows from it, how is it possible that our small and shallow rivulets of
mercy should flow to our Neighbors, and that the everlasting spring of Gods
mercy and goodness should be dry unto us? or how should the stream flow and the
fountain and well ^ead be dried up? Yea let us assure our selves, that we
cannot faster (in a wise and discreet manner) empty our selves of these waters
of Gods blessings, for the satisfying and quenching of the poor man's thirst,
and relieving of his wants: but we shall again be replenished from the fountain
of all goodness; and if like kind Nurses, we let these dear Children of God
suck the breasts of our bounty, for their comfort and nourishment: that which
is thus spent will again be restored: whereas if we churlishly refuse to
impart, and communicate this milk of Gods blessings, it is the readiest way to
have it quite dried up.

Neither are we to imagine that if we be careful in feeding Christ, that he
will be careless in feeding us. That he will deny us meat who has given us
his precious blood. That he will suffer us to want earthly trifles, who has
provided for us heavenly riches. Let such more then heathenish diffidence, be
far from us, who profess our selves to be of the household of Faith. Is it
not he (as Hannah speaks) that makes poor, and makes rich; that brings
low, and lifts up. Do we enjoy all things through Gods blessing? And can we
think to keep our riches, by disobeying his commandment? Indeed the contrary
we may well expect, according to that, Prove. 11. There is that scatters, and
is more increased; but he that spares more then is right, shall surely come to
poverty, verse. 24. And it is but just, if God deny thee thy daily bread, if
thou denyest him the crumbs.

And thus it apppeareth, that by giving to the poor, we shall be no loosers.
But this is not all; For

CHAP. XXII.
Secondly, we shall not only receive our own again, but it shall be with great
increase. Yea, if the Word of God be true, there is not a more compendious way
to thrive and grow rich, then by being bountiful to the poor: But that bounty
is the best and surest way to plenty, and that it is so far from weakening a
man's estate, or bringing him to want and poverty, that it is the only means
to keep us from it, and to bring plenty and abundance. I have largely and
plentifully proved (if you remember) in Chapter the 30. of The best and surest
way to become rich: And I heartily wish, that the Reader would perule the same:
For it is the most piercing and patheticall Chapter of all the parts, and
should methinks exceedingly whet on those that are greedy of gain, to put the
same into practice, and make them bountiful in doing these works of mercy,
and not think themselves loosers thereby; but rather to conclude as a merciful
man once did; The more I give, the more I have. As what Husbandman does not
reckon more of his seed in the ground, then of that in his Barn or Garner? And
shall we be such Atheists, as to trust the ground, and not God?

Yea, let us be so far from grudging these Alms to the poor, when we have fit
occasion, that we do them with joy and thankfulness unto God, that he has
given us so fit an opportunity of sowing our seed, that so we may reap a
fruitful harvest. For what husbandman would not readily and cheerful^y hearken
to one, who should offer him fertile and fruitful land, ready prepared, and
manured, to sow his seed in, with a faithful promise, that he should reap the
whole crop for his own use, and benefit? But thus God deals with us, when he
gives us opportunity of relieving the poor: Yea, in truth much better and more
ability, for he gives us even the seed also we sow with; and whereas, if a man
should freely receive of another, Land to sow his seed in, yet he were not sure
of a fruitful harvest: For many accidents usually happen, which cut off the
hopes of the most skillful Husbandman, as Frosts, and Mildewes, worms and
locusts, tares and weeds, too much wet, or too much drought may destroy the
corn, though the seed were never so good: or when it is ready for the sickle,
the enemy may come and reap it; but if we sow these seeds of our beneficence,
believing Gods promises, and hoping for a happy harvest: we shall never fail of
our expectation, because God who is infinite in power and truth, having
promised a fruitful crop, no outward accident is able to hinder it.

But lest what has been said should not be sufficient to prevail with men to
be merciful to the poor, let them hearken to, and mind well the many other
reasons and inducements that propound themselves, and then I doubt not, but
they will if wise, do good to others, if it be but to do a greater good to
themselves. For of all other graces, the grace of charity and bounty, has the
most primest promises of reward, to us and ours, both here and hereafter, of
which I will mention some.

CHAP. XXIII.
Thirdly, God has further promised to confirm, strengthen, and continue, as
well as increase his prosperous and flourishing estate, and that in sundry
places of scripture already cited and elsewhere. He is gracious and full of
compassion, he shows favor and lends, he has given to the poor, etc. And
what shall be his reward? Wealth and Riches shall be in his house, he shall not
be moved for ever: his righteousness (aye and his riches too, as is implied in
the close) shall endure for ever, he shall be in everlasting remembrance, he
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord,
his horn shall be exalted with honor, Psalm. 112.1. to 10. All grace shall
abound toward him, that he always having alsufficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work, and hold out to the end, 2 Cor. 9. He devises
liberal things, and by his liberallity he shall stand, Isa. 82.8. He draws
out his soul to the hungry, and comfort the afflicted: therefore his light
shall rise in obscurity, and his darkness shall be as the noon day; and the
Lord shall guide him continually, and satisfy his soul in draught, and make
fat his bones, he shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water
whose waters fail not: and they that shall be of him, shall build the old waste
places, he shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and he shall be
called the repairer of the b^each, the restorer of paths to dwell in, Isa.
58.6. to 13. And the like Pro. 28.27. He that gives unto the poor, shall not
lack: And so Psalm ^7.25. I have been young, and now am old, y^^ have I not
seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread: and why so? He is ever
merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed, as it follows in the next
verse, and in the next to that; He that dies good sh^^l dwell for ever more,
Verse 2^. He shall not be forsaken, but the Lord will preserve him for ever,
Verse 28. He shall inherit the Land, and dwell therein for ever, Verse. 29. and
a great deal more to the same effect, Verse 31, 33, 34, 37, 39, 40. See more
Ier 17.25. Psalm. 1.3. and 31.10. Job 1.10. which are all pregnant places, and
full to the point in hand. But I may not stand upon it; Only read these
Scriptures and remember them.

Fourthly, he shall be blessed in his person, and that many ways: yea the
benefits and blessings, temporal, spiritual, and corporal, for soul and
body, which God has promised to bestow upon the merciful, for a reward of
their bounty, are infinite, of which observe with me these few.

First, touching corporal benefits and blessings. Blessed is he says the
Psalmist, that considers the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
trouble, he will keep and preserve him al^ve, he shall be blessed upon the
earth, and not delivered unto the will of his enemies, Psalm 41.1, 2, 3. Great
privileges! but to these are added, Isa. 58* If thou draw out thy soul to the
hungry, then shall thy health spring forth speedily, etc. verse 7.8. But admit
the merciful man be long sick God will preserve him alive, strengthen him upon
the bed of languishing; yea make all his bed in his sickness, the Lord will
stir up the feathers under him, his soul shall be at ease, and his body sweetly
refrashed, mercy shall be his cordial or pillow of repose, until he be raised
up again, Psalm 41.1. to 11.

CHAP. XXIV.
But see how God has rewarded many particular persons for this most excellent
virtue. Abraham in his old age was blessed with an Isaac, a godly son and heir,
a glorious type of the worlds Redeemer, and entertained Angels by his
hospitality: yea the Son of God, the Lord of Angels, as Sinesius observes. The
Shunam^te that entertained the Prophet Elisha, received above a Prophets
reward; namely the promise and gift of a son when she was old, and the raising
of him to life when he was dead, and the restoring of her house and land, lost
in her long absence for the famine, 2 Kings 4 and 8. Chapters. Rebeccah got so
good and great an Husband by her hospitality, as Chrysostom observes. Lot was
honored with the entertainment of Angels, and preserved alive with his whole
family from the destruction of Sodom by his hospitality. The Widow of Sarepta
was blessed with a miraculous increase of her meal and oil, with the
preservation of her family in the time of famine; and with the resurrection of
her son, by her relieving the Prophet in his banishment, 1 Kings 17. Revell or
Iethro (for it is the same man under two diverse names) as Calvin proves upon
Exodus 2. for this, was rewarded with such a son in law as Moses, and by him
better instructed in the true worship of God. Publius the chief man of the
Island Melit^, by entertaining St. Paul and his companions g^t his father
healed of a f^aver, and of a bloody flux, Acts 28.8. It is likewise storied of
Stephen King of Hungary, and of Oswald King of England, that their right ^^nds
d^d never put^efie because so much exe^c^sed in relieving the n^cessities of
(...)

Again Fifthly, It brings the blessings of God upon all we have, or do: And
we know that the blessing of God in effect is all, and does all, Thou shall
surely give to thy poor Brother, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou
give unto him: because for this thing, the Lord thy God shall bless thee in
all thy work and in all that thou put thine hand to, Deuteronomy. 15.10. And the
like Prove. 22.9. Luke 14.14. It were endless to name the particulars, wherein
God has promised to bless the merciful, see only Isa. 58. Psalm. 112. Prove.
10. and 22. Chapters, 2 Chronicles. 31.10. Deuteronomy. 14 28, 29. Ezekiel. 44.30. Or turn to
Luke 11. and there you shall see, that as fasting sanctifies the body, and
prayer the soul; so Alms does sanctify the substance. Give alms of those
things which ye have (says our Savior) and behold all things shall be clean
unto you, ver. 41. Its not spoken without a behold. But,

CHAP. XXV.
Sixthly, The merciful man shall be no less blessed in his name and credit, he
shall be had in honor and reputation: according to that Prove. 14. He that
oppresses the poor, reproacheth him that made him; but he honors him that
has mercy upon the poor, ver. 31. And to this accords that of the Psalmist,
he has dispersed, (...) has given to the poor, his righteousness endures
for ever his horn shall be exalted with honor, Psalm 112.9. And so Proverbs
10. His memorial shall be blessed, Verse 7.

And of this I might give you sundry examples, and pregnant. As Rachab, Gaius,
Job, The Centurian, Boas, Cornelius, and Mary: as how did our Savior value and
honor Mary's bounty? (though so slighted by him that was a thief, and carried
the bag, into which he would have had it come) when he commanded it should be
spoken of to her honor, wheresoever the Gospel should be preached throughout
all the world, Matthew. 26.13, But experience sufficiently proves, that a liberal
and bountiful man, shall have all love and respect with men, all good repute
and report, both living and dead: Nor is this so light a blessing as many deem
it, for what says the wise man? The memorial of the just shall be blessed:
but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7. Yea a good name, is better
then a sweet ointment: and to be chosen before great riches, Prove. 22.1. yea,
then life it self.

B^iefly, for conclusion of this point, let this be the use: when the poor at
your gates ask their daily bread, they highly honor you, yea after a sort they
make you Gods: therefore by your bounty and liberality, show your selves at
least to be Christians, to be men. Secondly, such as have by this divine virtue
obtained a good report: let it provoke them as much to excel others in doing
good, as they do excel them in hearing thereof. For I hold this a sure rule,
He is of a bad nature to whom good report and commendations are no spur to
virtue, but he is of a worse disposition, to whom evil report and blame, is no
bridle and retentive from vice, which made Tully so wonder at the strange
perverseness of Antony: whom neither praise could allure to do well, nor yet
fear of infamy and reproach deter from committing evil. But,

CHAP. XXVI.
Seaventhly, the spiritual blessings and benefits which accompany these works
of mercy, and thereby accrue to the soul even in this life: as they are
inestimable, so they are innumerable, I Will nominate so many as may satisfy, and
not cloy.

First, it is the only means to have the soul prosper, kept safe and
preserved, Psalm. 86. Preserve my soul (says David) for I am merciful. Verse
2. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall also be
watered himself, Prove. 11.25. The merciful man does good to his own soul, Verse
17.

Secondly, it is rewarded with illumination and conversion, The two Disciples
that went to Emaus, were rewarded with illumination, for entertaining our
Savior as a stranger, Luke 24.45. Whence St. Austin observes, that by the duty
of Hospitality, we come to the knowledge of Christ. Lo says St. Gregory, the
Lord was not known while he spoke, and he vouchsafes to be known while he is
fed. And then St. Albone the first Martyr, that ever in England suffered death
for the name of Christ, was converted from Paganism to Christianity by a
certain Clark, whom he had received into his house, fleeing from the
persecutors hands.

Thirdly, works of mercy are infallible signs of a lively faith; whereby we
may prove it to our selves, and approve it unto men. Iam. ^.18. which fruits,
if our faith bear not, it is dead, and not a living body, but a carcass that
breaths not, verse 26. They are signs of a lively faith, for no man easily
parts with his worldly goods to these uses, unless by faith he be assured
that he shall have in lieu of them heavenl^y and everlasting treasures. The
merciful man is ever a faithful man.

Fourthly, it testifies our unfeigned repentance, whereof it is that Daniel
says to Nebuchadnezer; Wherefore O King, break off thy sins by repentance, and
thine iniquities, by showing mercy unto the poor, Dan. 4:27. The which Zacheus
practiced, Luke 19. For no sooner was he converted unto God, but to testify
his unfeigned repentance, he gives half his goods unto the poor, Verse 8.

Fifthly giving much, is an infallible sign that many sins are forgiven us: as
our Savior speaks of the woman, Luke 7.47.

Sixthly, by it we may know our selves to be the children of God 1 John 3.14.
Yea and others may also know it, John 13.34, 35. And hereby we know the
unmercifull to be none of Gods children: ^or the Father of Mercies has no
children but the merciful.

Seventhly, it is said that Obadia feared God greatly: for when Iesabel
destroyed the Prophets of the Lord, he took an hundred Prophets and hid them by
fifty in a cave, and he fed them with bread and water, 1 Kings 18.3.4.
Therefore it is a sure sign of the fear of God.

Eighthly, they are undoubted signs of our love toward God. When as we so love
the poor for his sake, as that we be content to spare somewhat, even from our
own backs and bellies, that we may the more liberally communicate unto their
necessities. But this a wicked man will never do: the only loves the Lord is
(...) did (...) only (...) riches by him; Or as Saul loved Samuel, to gain
honor by him. True they will say they love God, and perhaps think so too: but
let them say what they will, if unmercifull, I will never believe against
Scripture, that they love God whom they have not seen: that love not their
brother whom they have seen; if we love him, we will love one another, 1 John
4.20, 21. If any man (says the Apostle) have these worlds goods, and sees his
Brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3.17. And as they are manifest signs
of our love to God, so also of our love toward our Neighbors: when as we
carry our selves in all Christian bounty toward them, as unto Children of the
same Father, and members of the same body: suffering with them in their wants;
through compassion and fellow-feeling, and rejoicing with them in their fullness
and prosperity. Hereby we know that we love the brethren: because our hearts
and hands are open to them, for love is bountiful. For otherwise it is but an
unprofitable, counterfeit, and hypocritical love, to make show of kindness and
compassion in word, and to perform nothing in deed; as Saint James plainly
affirms, James ^:15. But that this alone is the best touchstone, to show the
sincerity and truth of our love; many places demonstrate, as 2 Cor. 8.8, 24. 1
John 3.18.

CHAP. XXVII.
And as our Almesdeeds are a sign of our love to God and our Neighbour^: so the
quantity of our alms, (respect being had to the proportion of our estate) is a
sign of the quantity of our love, for he loves but little, that having much,
gives but a little; and contrariwise, his heart is in^lamed with fervent love,
who has it inflamed with bounty toward his poor brethren: the extension of
our love toward them, being the true touchstone of the intention of our love
toward God. And as a great tree with many and large branches is an undoubted
sign of a root proportionable in greatness: and a small shrub above the ground,
plainly shows that the root also is small which is under it: so is it with our
Almesdeeds which spring from it. For if we be bountiful in Alms, we are
plentiful in love; if we be slack in giving, we are cold in loving: but if we
be utterly defective, in bringing forth these excellent fruits, then it is a
manifest sign that this grace of love is not rooted in us, 1 John 3.17.

Ninthly, It is an evident demonstration that we have saving knowledge and
spiritual wisdom: for the wisdom that is from above, is full of mercy and good
fruits, James 3.17. Otherwise we are not wise, our wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish, Verse 15.

Tenthly, By these works of mercy, we make our calling and election sure, for
if we do these things we shall never fall as St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 1.7, 8,
10. And St. Paul infers, Col. 3. Put on as the elect of God, holy and beloved,
the bowels of mercy and kindness, Verse 12. Which makes him in another place
call charity a never failing grace, 1 Cor. 1.8. And a little after, he uses
these words; Now abides, Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, but the
greatest of these is Charity, Verse 13.

Eleventhly, This is a duty which undoubtedly must justify the truth of our
religion, or else condemn us as hollow hearted, and swayed by hypocrisy, James
1. This is pure religion, and undefiled before God, to visit the fatherless and
widow in their affliction, Verse 27. O that this lesson would enter home into
every one of our hearts, before we go out of our houses. For men may cry up
this side, and cry down that; but of all the three, the Priest, the Levite, and
the Samaritan; none but the Samaritan (that showed mercy to him that was fallen
into the hands of thieves, was wounded, and stripped of his raiment,) was
justified and approved of by our Savior, Luke 10.36, 37.

And indeed God so highly prizeth, and esteems mercy and the works wherein it
is exercised toward the poor: that he prefers them before the outward acts
of religious duties. Hosea 6.6. I desired mercy and not sacrifice: that is
rather then sacrifice; This is the oblation which he chiefly requires, yea, if
we but look Micha 6. we shall fi^d that God esteems it more, or above all
sacrifices and burnt offerings, were it thousands of rams, and ten thousand
rivers of oil, Verse 6.7. He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what
the Lord requires of thee: to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God, Verse 8 Finally these works of mercy, are not only an odor of a
sweet smell, and a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God: (as the
Apostle speaks, Phil. 4.18.) But also such an oblation, as if we offer unto God
with a lively faith, the use of all the creatures shall be clean unto us:
according to that of our Savior, Luke 11.4^. See more Heb. 13.16. Isa. 58.6,
7, 8. James 1.27. And this is a Twelfth benefit.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Thirteenthly, another no small benefit that we have thereby is, by our bounty
toward the poor, we have the benefit of their prayers unto God, the which are
very available for the obtaining of all good things for us, the which argument
the Apostle uses to incite the Corinthians to a liberal contribution, ^ Cor.
9, 11. to 1^. insomuch that when we hold our peace, or are sleeping in our
beds, the loins of the poor shall bless us, as it is Job 31.20. and 29.12,
13. Whereas on the contrary, he that gives not to the poor, shall lie open to
their curse, according to that Prove. 28.27. and Deuteronomy. 15.9, and 14, 15. the
which curses of the poor, he will hear and ratify, according to that, Job
31.16 to 29.

Fourteenthly, By the same means also, we give them and others occasion of
praising, and glorifying God: whilst by the experiment of this ministration,
they see our professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, as the Apostle
speaks, ^ Cor. 9.^3. Wherefore let us strive to abound in this duty, that
whiles they enjoy our bounty, we may enjoy their prayers; 2 Timothy 1.18. and God
may have their praises, 2 Cor 9.15. And so much the rather, for that of all
men, seldom is any great sin, shame or punishment fastened on the charitable:
for how should he speed ill that has the prayers of so many?

Fifteenthly, it is no small pleasure, and ^oy which a Christian takes in
performing these works of (...) for (...) actions in themselves, do even for
the present fill their hearts with joy, who rightly perform them. But much more
do they fill our hearts with joy, as they are evident signs to assure us, that
we are endued with Gods saving graces, and as they do, being fruits of a lively
faith, ascertaine us of our future reward, and the fruition of Gods presence,
where there is fullness of joy for ever more. Yea the godly man, gives with
more joy and thankfulness of heart, then the other receives the same, as enough
can bear me witness; Yea Seneca an Heathen can testify the same: for he
defines a benefit, to be an action proceeding from love, yiedling joy both to
him that receives it, and much more to him that yeildeth it.

Sixteenthly, The inward habit of goodness and mercy in our hearts, exercised
in the outward actions of liberality and bounty by our hands, makes us to
resemble God himself; and that in such an attribute, as he delights above all
others to style himself withal. For howsoever he is infinite in glory, power,
and all perfections: yet most usually in the Scriptures, he is called a God of
mercy and compassion, and hereby principally, he makes himself known unto
Moses, desiring to see him, Exodus 34.6. Nor can we in any thing resemble God
more, then in this grace: and therefore it is our Saviors exhortation, that we
be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6.36. Now God gives to
all richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. Yea, blessed be God, says the Church, that
daily ladeth us with benefits, that crowns us with loving kindness, and
compasses us about with new songs of deliverance, Psalm 103. and 36

Therefore seeing mercy and goodness do make us above all other graces to
resemble God, and then the creature attaineth to greatest perfection and
blessedness, when he is the likest, and comes nearest unto the excellency of
the Creator. And seeing we profess our selves to be children of our gracious
and glorious God: and we can no way grace our selves so much, as by resembling
our heavenly Father, in those attributes wherein he most shines and excels:
and nothing makes us more like him, then mercy and compassion: let us hearken
unto our Saviors injunction, and imitate our Father in being bountiful as he
is. These are some of the spiritual blessings and benefits which God has
promised for reward to the merciful in this life: it would take up too much
time to mention the many more that might be added; therefore I will leave them,
and so proceed to those that are eternal, and concern the life to come, which
I would have you especially mind: yea if it be possible, pluck up all your
senses into your Ears, that you may the more mind, and better remember; for it
is enough to ravish any Christian soul, and to make him to stretch his estate
upon the ^enters, that he may be the more liberal, in relieving Christ's poor
members; for the greater the liberality, the greater the recompense of reward,
Phil. 4.17.18.

CHAP. XXIX.
That the merciful man, who distributeth liberally to the poor on Earth, (in
conscience and obedience to Gods Word) shall be rewarded with the unvaluable
gain, and matchless profit of everlasting salvation, is assured us here, and
shall be enjoyed of us hereafter. First, at the Hour of Death Secondly, at the
day of Judgment, is fully declared Luke 14.13, 14, 16, 9. Prove. 11.17. 1 Timothy
6.18, 19. Math 5.7. and 6.4: and 19.29. But take these two places for all: Sell
that ye have and give alms, (at no hand let the poor want, what shift soever
ye make, rather sell then want to give) provide your selves baggs which wax not
old, a treasure in the Heavens which fails not: where no thief approaches,
neither m^^h corrupts, Luke 12.33, 34. this is the first, the second is more
full then that. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
Angels with him: then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before
him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another,
as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats, and he shall set the sheep on
his right hand, and the goats on the left; Then shall the King say unto them on
his right hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in,
naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me, I was in prison, and
ye came unto me. And in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me Ma^th. 25.31. to 41.

See here the incomparableness, and infinite difference between the work and
the wages! ye admire the love and bounty of God, and bless his name: who for
the performance of so small a work, has proposed so great a reward; and for
the obtaining of such an happy estate, has imposed such an easy task. Here is
a Kingdom, even the Kingdom of Heaven, Which cannot be valued with many
millions of worlds, in recompense of a little meat, drink, and apparel, who
then (that is in his right senses) would not turn all his scraping into giving*
yea what can we think too much, what not too little to give to attain eternity?
for this incorruptible Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. and for this Kingdom where
are such joys, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into
the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. A place where shall no evil be
present, nor good absent, Matthew. 6.20. In comparison whereof, all the Thrones
and Kingdoms upon Earth, are less then the drop of a bucket, I say ^0.15. and
66.1. Yea how little, how nothing, are the poor and Temporary Enjoyments of
this life, to those we shall enjoy in the next? 1 Cor. 2.9.

Do thou desire Beauty, Riches, Honor, Pleasure, Long Life, or what ever
else can be named: no place so glorious by creation, so beautiful with
delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation, nor so
durable for lasting, Romans 8.18. Heb. 12.22. 1 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 4, 17 There, O
There, one day is better then a thousand, there is rest from our labors, peace
from our Enemies, freedom from our sins, there is no Death nor Dearth, no
pining nor repining, no fraud, sorrow, nor sadness, neither tears nor fears,
defect nor loathing, Revel. 7.16.17. and 14.13. and 21.4. Job 3.17. But of this
I have spoken at large, in The whole duty of a Christian. Now all this is
propounded as a recompense for such as give what they have, have they but a
very cup of cold water, Matthew. 10.42. Yea we cannot give so little to a
disciple in the name of a disciple, but it assures us of our right and title
unto this eternal inheritance. Heb. 6.10. Prove. 14.21. Col. 3.12, 14. 2 Pet.
1.7, 8, 10.11. Phil: 4.18. Matthew. 5.7. Christ has promised to make thee a
great one in Heaven, if thou but relieve one of his little ones on earth.

Alms is a seed which we cast into the earth as it were, b^t we gather the
crop in Heaven. Whence the Apostle would have Timothy to charge them that are
rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the Lord: who gives us richly all things to enjoy. And that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves (mark his reason) a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. And hereupon it is, that he tells the Phil^ppians, he was
glad that they had sent him a supply: not so much for his own benefit, as for
their gain, which should be great in the day of account, Phil. 4.14.17, 18. And
this makes Solomon say, that he who is merciful does good to his own soul,
Prove. 11.17.

So that to distribute to the poor on earth, is before hand to provide a rich
treasure in Heaven. And who then that believes this, would not think himself
happy in such an exchange? Is not this the best Chimistry to turn Earth into
Heaven? is not this a good bargain to part with vain and uncertain things, to
partake of real and durable riches? Believe it, this is the best improvement,
and the most that can be made of these things: Whereupon St. Austin thus
exhorts, Si vis esse mercator optimus, faener^tor egregius, da quod non potes
retinere, ut recipias quod non poteris amittere; da modicum, ut recipias
centuplum, da temporalem possessionem, ut consequaris hereditatem aternam:
Would thou be a good Merchant? a great Usurer? give that thou can not
keep, that thou may receive that which cannot be lost: Give though but a
little, that thou may receive a thousand sold, give thy earthly goods, that
thou may obtain eternal life, though indeed this giving is rather a
receiving then a giving, a receiving of treasure for trash, and for things that
cannot be kept, a treasure that cannot be lost, as another has it: Nor do the
poor so much gain by what we give them, as we do, The deeds of the charitable,
do far more profit the giver then the receiver, and he who gives an alms does
himself a greater alms. Neither is it so much given as laid up, for we may
truly say, what I gave that I have, what I kept that I lost, as one caused it
to be set upon his gravestone. What the charitable man gives her^, is but lent,
for he shall receive is again by Bill of Exchange in Heaven, and that with
unspeakable increase. Yea it shall be a notable advantage to us at the hour of
death: for when all other riches shall fail, what we have bestowed this way,
shall let us in to heaven: God freely cronwing his own grace in us. Make your
selves friends of the Ma^m^^ of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may
receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9* The poor, says Gregory
Nice^, are appointed Porters, to let their rich Benefactors into Heaven. So
that to give much, is to keep much; and that what would otherwise be lost by
keeping, the charitable man keeps by loosing, And so proves richer under
ground, then even he was above it, which makes one say; He is not wise, who
knowing he must hence;
In worldly building, makes great expense:
But he that builds for the world to come,
Is wise, expend he never so great a sum.


And another, he shall depart a beggar out of this world, who sends not a
portion of his estate before him, unto eternal b^isse. Nay it manifestly
proves, that heaven is none of our Country, if we will send none of our wealth
thither before us. Or rather, that we think Heaven nothing worth, when we will
not give a little base pelf to compass it.

CHAP. XXX.
But if giving might not properly be called gaining, why is it compared to
sowing? Experieence proves, that if we keep our seed by us, it will corrupt:
but cast it in^o the earth we shall have it again with manifold increase. A
man treasures up no more of his riches, then what he contributes in alms: The
^oole in the Gospel^ filled his barnes, in fillin^ the bellies of the poor, he
had done more wisely. I confess this is a point of Doctrine, which the world
will not receive, let God say what he will: but godly Chrysostom both affirms
and proves, that the rich are more beholding to the poor, then the poor to
the rich. The poor receive only a single alms, the rich have returned them an
hundredfold here, and everlasting happiness hereafter, Mat. 5.7. and 25.35.
Luke 16.9. wherein the prayers of their poor suppliants carry no small stroke:
For which see 2 Cor. 9.11. to 16. The poor are but the ground, into which
these seeds are cast: But we are the Husbandmen, who disperse and scatter them.
Now as the seed is chiefly for his benefit who sows it, and not for the
benefit of the ground into which it is cast* so the poor have but the present
use and possession of this leed of almsdeeds; but the benefit of the crop or
harvest, belongs to those good Husbandmen, who sow in these grounds the seeds
of their beneficence.

Again, the poor receive only things transitory, and but of small value: but
they that give, things spiritual and eternal, most inestimable and heavenly
riches! Why say we then we give to the poor? when as it may more truly be said,
that we give unto our selves, rather then unto them, Dan. 4.27. Prove. 11.24,
Why then should we think the poor so mightily bound and beholding unto us for
our scraps and superflu^us relics; or that we do such a meritorious
business, when we largely relieve them? And not rather think our selves
beholding unto them and to God for them, seeing they are the occasions of such
inestimable gain, for such trifling disbursements; as Austine speaks.

And to speak rightly, giving is not more an act of Charity then* Christian
policy: since we shall not only receive our own again, b^^ have a far greater
return then can be expected, upon an adventure (...) the East Indies: Since we
are more happy that there are poor upon whom we may exercise our charity, then
they are, that there are ric^ who do relieve their wants though with never so
great supply; for a^ Austine speaks, if there were not some to receive thine
alms, thou could^est not give Earth and receive Heaven: Wherefore give thanks
unt^ him who has given thee means by such a small prise, to procure (...)
thing so precious.

Besides, we may boldly aver, with Chrysostom; That without poverty riches
would be unprofitable: As consider that if with Adam and Eve, w^ had a whole
world, but no body to make ready provision and to attend upon us, nor do any
thing for us; what joy could great men take of their riches, if there were not
poor men to do mean offices for them, what low employments should the highest
be forced to descend unto, if there were no inferiors to perform them? How
then should not a considerate man love and be liberal to them, and exceedingly
bless God for them, and not do as d^ the most, scorn them, and not think them
worthy a familiar word era courteous look.

CHAP. XXXI.
And certainly, he wants both grace and wit, who does not admire the bounty and
goodness of God, in that he has offered us the opportunity of such sowing,
such reaping, yea, O Lord what are we? that thou should give us plenty of all
things here also, which unto them thou have denied: so that every way it is (as
our Savior tells us) a more blessed thing to give then to receive, (which the
Apostle would have us to remember, Acts 20.34, 35.) Yet no reason can we
allege on our behalf, but O the depth! Romans 11.33. Wherefore do thou O my God
and Redeemer enlarge my heart with thankfulness, and implant this grace in my
heart. O make me liberal of my money, as thou wast of thy blood. O let me have
an heart to give Food and Raiment to those, for whom thou gave thy self a
ransom. Yea, of all other graces, enlarge my heart with Christian Charity and
compassion: since it is a grace so universally profitable, and withal so
amiable. As O the loveliness and profitableness of this Christian grace! For to
do good to the poor, is more then a treble good: it pleasures them, most of
all pleasures the doer: for it brings blessings upon their Souls, Bodies,
Estates, Names, Posterity, it increases their reward, cause the poor to pray
for, and praise God for us, and also others to glorify him; it is an odo^r
that smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God; who will
fulfill all our necessities, through his riches with glory in Jesus Christ, as
the Apostle delivers it, Phil. 4.16. to 20. Whence that great praise of it, 1
Cor. 13.13. Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, but the chiefest of these is
Charity. Whence Sozomen calls it, (...) sure ^oaken of a most virtuous mind;
and La^t^^tius a principal virtue; and Calvin the chiefest office of humanity
amongst us; and Aretius, the most elegant ornament of a Christian life, and the
holy Ghost, a never failing grace, 1 Cor. 13.8. whence also it is so highly
commended in the Saints in all ages. As how is Abraham commended for his
hospitality, and alms deeds? And Lot and Cornelius? (of whose alms there was
in the presence of God, a memorandum made, Acts 10.31.) and Doxcas? (whose good
works and almsdeeds were to be seen, and shown, when she her self was not;
and the poor could not tell how with patience to take her death, she had done
so much good for them all the time of her life, Acts 9.36.39.) And those
Christians, Acts 11.29, 30. for the care they had of the poor, in the Apostles
time, Acts 2.45. Thus the Macedonians are highly commended, and much honored
for their freeness and forwardness, in relieving of the poor brethren at
Jerusalem, as is seen upon record, Romans 15.26. And again, 2 Cor. 8.1, ^, etc.
And the like of the Philippians, and many more whom I must pass over in
silence.

CHAP. XXXII.
And as bounty is the most beneficial grace, and giving the greatest gain in
every respect: For alms to the poor, is like pouring a paile of water into a
dry Pump, that fetches up much more then was put in: So contrariwise, to be
unmercifull to the poor, and hard-hearted, or to wrong them whereby to enrich
our selves is alike heinous sin, and the ready way to want here, and to find no
mercy hereafter, as might most plentifully be shown, Prove. 22.16. James 2.13.

It is said, Prove. 11. He that withholds more then is meet shall surely come
to poverty, ver. 24. And so Ver. 25, 26. He that with-draweth hic corn, the
people shall curse him: but blessings shall be upon the head of him that
sells corn. And Prove. 28. He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack; but
he that hides his eyes, shall have many a curse verse. 27. And Prove. 22.16. He
that oppresses ^he poor, to increase his riches; and he that gives to the
rich shall surely come to poverty. Give then, that you may never want: hide not
your eyes, that you may not inherit many a curse. But of this by the way
only; for I would have you specially to take notice, that if we show no mercy
here, if we will not hear the suits of the poor when they crave of us for
relief, neither will God give us audience, when we shall sue unto him
hereafter. According to that Prove 21.13. Who so stops his ears at the cry
of the poor, he also shall cry himself, and not be heard. Yea, he shall have
judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy, James 2.13. For whereas to those
that have fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited the sick, etc. Christ
shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Contrariwise to those that have
not done these duties he shall say, depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For I was an hungered, and ye gave
me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, I was a stranger, and ye
took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in prison, and ye
visited me not: For inasmuch as ye did it not to my poor members, ye did it
not to me: So these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the other
into life ete^nall, Matthew. 25.31. to 47. Where are two things considerable:
They to save their purses, would not be at a little cost for the poor while
they lived: and what have they got by it Now they are dead, b^t first, an
everlasting separation from Gods blisfull presence, and th^se unutterable joys
before mentioned, and to be for ever confined in a bed of quenchlesse flames.
For this departure is not for a day, nor for years of days, nor for millions
of years, but for eternity, into such pains as can neither be expressed, nor
conceived: There shall be no end of plagues to the wicked and unmercifull,
Math. 25.41. Mark 9.44. Their worm shall not dye, neither shall their fire be
quenched, Isa. 66.24.

Neither is the extremity of pain inferior to the perpetuity of it, Rev.
19.20. and 20.14. and 18.6. 2 Pet. 2.4. Heb. 10.2^. Jude 6. The plagues of the
first death are pleasant, compared with those of the second: For mountains of
sand were lighter, and millions of years shorter then a tithe of these
torments, Rev. 20.10. Jude 7. The pain of the body is but the body of pain;
the anguish of the soul, is the soul of anguish. For should we first burn off
one hand, then another, after that each arm, and so all the parts of the body,
it would be deemed intolerable, and no man would endure it, for all the
pleasures and profits this world can afford, and yet it is nothing to that
burning of body and soul in Hell. Should we endure ten thousand years
torments in Hell, it were grievous, but nothing to eternity; should we suffer
one pain, it were miserable enough: but if ever we come there, our payns shall
be for number and kinds infinitely various, as our pleasures have been here:
Every sense and member, each power and faculty, both of soul and body, shall
have their several objects of wretchedness, and that without intermission, or
end, or ease, or patience to endure it, Luke 12.5. and 16.^4. Matthew. 3.12. Yea,
the pains and sufferings of the damned, are ten thousand times more than can
be imagined by any heart under heaven. It is a death, never to be painted to
the life: no pen, nor pensill, nor art, nor heart can comprehend it, Mat. 18.8,
9. and 25 30. 2 Pet. 2.4. Isa. 5.14. and 30.33.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Now what heart would not bleed to see men, yea multitudes run head long into
these tortures, that are thus intolerable? dance hoodwinked i^to this
perdition. O the folly and madness of those that prefer earth, yea, hell to
heaven! time to eternity, the body before the soul; yea the outward estate
before either soul or body. These are the worlds fools, mere children, that
prefer an apple before their inheritance: Besotted sensualists, that consider
not how this life of ours, if it were not short, yet it is miserable: and if it
were not miserable yet it is short* that suffer themselves to be so bewitched
with the love of their money, and their hearts to be rivered to the earth, to
be so inslaved to covetousness, as to make gold their God? Certainly were they
allowed to have but a fight of this Hell, they wo^ld not do thus* if they did
but either see or foresee, what they shall one day (without serious and
unfeigned repentance) feel, they would not be hired with all the worlds wealth,
to hazard in the least the loss of those everlasting joys before spoken of,
or to purchase and plunge themselves into those caselesse and everlasting
flames of fire and brimstone in hell, there to fry body and soul, where shall
be an innumerable company of Devils and damned spirits to affright and torment
them, but not one to comfort or pity them. But O that thou who art the Sacred
Monarch of this mighty frame! would give them hearts to believe, at least,
that the soul of all sufferings, are the sufferings of the soul; that as
painted fire is to material, such is material to hell fire That things
themselves are in the invisible world: in the world visible but their shadows
only: And that whatsoever wicked men enjoy here, it is but as in a dream,
their plenty is but like a drop of pleasure, before a river of sorrow and
displeasure; and whatsoever the godly feel, but as a drop of misery before a
river of mercy and glory. Then would they think it better to want all things,
then that one needful thing; whereas now they desire all other things, and
neglect that one thing which is so needful: They would be glad to spare
something from their superfluities, yea if need requ^re even from their
necessaries, that they might relieve and cherish the poor distressed members of
Jesus Christ. And let so much serve to have been spoken of the reasons that
concern our selves in particular, and how God has promised to bless the
merciful man in his soul, body, name, and estate. I should now go on to
declare, that what the liberal man g^ves, his seed shall inher^t: But I
consider, that if for the increasing of their estates, for the obtaining of
heaven, and the avoiding of everlasting destruction of body and soul in Hell,
will not prevail with rich men to do some good with their goods while they
l^ve; whatsoever else can be spoken, will be lost labor, and to no purpose. I
grant there are some of them such desperate doting fools, that they can find in
their hearts to damn their own souls, and go to hell, to leave their sons
rich: and therefore it will not be amiss to set down (or point them to) a few
of those promises which God has made to the merciful or liberal man's seed,
and posterity after him. I Will allege but three places only.

CHAP. XXXIV.
That if we bountifully relieve the poor, the reward of onr charity shall not
only extend to us, but also to our Offspring and Progeny; the Prophet Esaias
witnesses, Chap. 58. where he tells us, that if we will draw out our soul to
the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, the Lord will not only satisfy
our souls in drought, and make fat our bones, but that those also that some of
us s^^ll prosper unto many generations, ver. 10, 11, 12. And also the Psalmist,
Psalm. 37. I have been young and now am old says he, yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, not his ^ood begging bread; verse. 26^ then gives the
reason; He is ever merc^full and ends, and his seed enjoyes the blessing,
verse. 26. And so Psalm. 112. His seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation
of the righteous shall be blessed, Verse. 2. to 6. Now what better inheritance
can we leave to our Children, then the blessing of God? which like an
ever-springing fountain, will nourish and comfort them in the time of drought,
when as our own provision which we have left unto them may fail; and when the
heat of affliction arises, will like standing waters be dried up.

Nor is this only probable, but God has set down that it shall be so: For he
speaks far otherwise of the unmercifull, as Psalm. 109. Let his children be
fatherless, and his wife a widow: Let his children be continually vagabonds,
and beg their bread. (I pray mind it) let them seek their bread also out of
desolate places. Let the extortioner catch all that he has, and let the
strangers spoil all his labor. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him,
mither let there be any to favor his fatherless children. Let his posterity
be cut off, and in the generation following, let their names be blotted out,
and the memory of them cut off from the earth; Because (mark the reason) he
remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy, Verse 6. to 17.
all which he speaks by the spirit of prophecy, Though indeed we want not
examples of this in every age. Was not this fulfilled in Haman? and is it not
fulfilled daily in our experience? For hence it is, that riches ill got, or i will
kept, shift masters so often.

But take some other instances out of the Scriptures of both kinds; Jonathan
is paid for his kindness to David, in Mephiboshe^h, Iethro for his love to
Moses, in the Kenites, 1 Samuel 15.6. some hundreds of years aftet he their
Ancestor was dead. The Egyptians might not be unkindly dealt withal for their
harboring the Patriarchs, though they afflicted their posterity: But the
Moabites and Ammonites were either to dye, or not to enter into the
congregation of the Lord, to their tenth generation, because they met not Gods
Israel with bread and water in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4.

God caused Soul to spare all the Kenites, for that they had showed mercy to
Israel, who otherwise had all of them been destroyed, 1 Samuel 15 6. Another
example you have in Job, 21.18, 19, 20. all which shows, that God usually
blesses and rewards the children for their fathers goodness, The loving
kindness of the Lord (says the Psalmist) endures for ever and ever upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness upon childrens children, Psalm. 103.17.
And so on the other side, Eternal payments God uses to require of their
persons only, temporary often times of succession, as we sue the Heirs and
Executors of our debtors.

Now if this be so; that what the liberal man gives, his seed shall inherit:
then the good provision that we should make for our Children, co^sists not so
much in laying up, as in laying out, and more in making provision for their
souls, then for their bodies. I confess it is the case of ni^e parts of the
Par^^ts throughout the L^^d, to provide for their childrens bodies, not for
their souls, (to show that they begat not their souls, but their bodies) to
leave fair estates for the worser part, nothing for the estate of the better
part. They desire to leave their children great, rather then good; and are more
ambitious to have their sons Lords on earth, than Kings in heaven But as he
that provides not for their temporal estate, is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy
5.8. So he that provides not for their eternal estate, is little better then a
Devil.

The use which I would have you make of the premises is this; Let none refuse
to give, because they have many children, but give the rather out of love to,
and for their childrens sakes, that God (who as you see has engaged himself)
may be their Guardian, and provide and take care for them.

Or if not for their souls, yet for thine own: For why should thou love
thy children better then thine own person? and in providing for them, neglect
thy self? Yea, why should thou prefer their wealth before thine own soul?
and their flourishing estate in the world, which is but momentany and mutable,
before the fruition of those joys which are infinite and everlasting? Will it
not grieve and gall thy conscience another day to think, that for getting, or
saving some trifles for thy posterity on earth, thou have lost Heaven? or to
remember, that thy children ruffle it out in worldly wealth, and superfluous
abundance? when thou shall be stripped of all, and want a drop of cold water to
cool thy scorching soul in hell.

CHAP. XXXV.
Thus I might go on, and enlarge my self upon this, and add thereunto many
other reasons.

First, in regard of God. Secondly, in regard of Christ. Thirdly* in regard of
the poor. Fourthly, in regard of others. I should also according to the order
first proposed, show what are the ends to be propounded in our giving alms,
and lastly the several impediments that hinder men from giving. but I find
(which when I fell upon it, I did not foresee) matter representing it self,
like those waters in Ezekiel, Chap. 47. which at the first were but anckle
deep, and then kn^e deep, and then up to the loins; which afterward did so
rise and flow, that they were as a River which could not be passed over. Or
like that little cloud which Elias his servant saw, 1 Kings 18. Much has been
said of this subject, bnt much more might be said; for I could carry you a
great way further, and yet leave more of it before then behind. But I am loath
to tire my Reader, or cause any to make an end, before they begin, as not
seldom does Addition in this case bring ^orth substraction, and more writ,
cause less to be read. Wherefore I will only give you the sum of some few
particulars briefly, and leave the rest.

That little which I intend to deliver is: First, the near communion that is
between the poor and us with our head Christ. For besides the civil communion
that is between all men, as being of one f^^sh* the offspring and generation of
God, Act. 1^ 28, 9. The sen^es of the same Father Adam, and Noah, and so
brethren one with another, and proceeding as so many flowers from one root,
many Rivers from one fountain; many arteries from one heat, many veins from
one liver, and many sinews from one brain. And likewise of the same Country
and Commonwealth, yea of the same City and Corporation, yea perhaps near
Neighbors and parishioners, (every of which the Holy Ghost makes a sufficient
argument to move us to do these works of mercy in relieving the poor, Isa.
5.8.6, 7.) There are many spiritual respects, and divine relations which make
a more near communion between Christians one with another: for we are elected
to the same eternal life and happiness, we are not only Gods workmanship,
created in Adam according to his own glorious image, but re created and
restored unto the divine Image (lost by Adam) in Christ the second Adam: we are
redeemed in our souls and bodies, with the same precious blood of Jesus
Christ, we are partakers of the same calling, whereby we are chosen out of the
world, and gathered into the Church and communion of Saints, that we may
inheri^ eternal glory together, and that out of darkness into ma^vellous
light, and out of a desperate condition, to be partakers of the same precious
promises. And by virtue of this Calling, we serve one and the same God, are of
one Church and family, and have one Religion, one faith, one baptism, are
invited guests to the same Table and Supper of our Lord, are all Heirs and
Co-heires of the same heavenly kingdom, and therein annexed also with Christ
our elder brother.

Finally, we are brethren of the same Father, the only Spouse of the same
heavenly Bridegroom, and members of the same mystical body* whereof Jesus
Christ is the head; so that the nearest, and strongest communion that can be
imagined, is between Christians one with another, and all of them with their
head Jesus Christ: And should not all this move us to relieve them? Yea, more
then all this, If we do good to our fellowmembers, the benefit will r^dound
unto our selves, who are of the same body; even ^s the hand giving nourishment
to the mouth, and the mouth preparing it for the stomach, do in nourishing it
provide nourishment for themselves also. Yea more then all this, there is such
a near and strong union and communion with the poor, together with us, and
with our head Christ our Savior: That he esteems that as do^^ to himself
which is done unto them, even as the head acknowledges the benefit done unto
it, which the meanest member of the body receives. Yea, in truth, that is much
more acceptable which we do for his poor members, then if we should do it to
his own person, as being a sign of greater love: For it is but an ordinary
kindness to confer benefits upon our dearest friends, but to extend our bounty
to the poorest and meanest that belong unto them, is a sign of much greater
love. For if for their sakes only, we do good unto these,how much more would
we be ready to do it unto themselves, if they had occasion to crave our help.
And as in this regard, he much esteems this Christian bounty, so he will
richly reward it also at the day of Iudgemeut. For then these merciful men,
who have relieved the poor for Christ's sake, shall with ravishing joy hear
that sentence; Come ye blessed of my Father* because the works of mercy which
they have done to the poor, Christ will acknowledge as done unto himself. And
this will more rejoice thy soul hereafter, then it does now refresh the others
body, when Christ shall say unto thee. Come thou blessed; and inherit the
Kingdom. Nor will it then repent thee, that thou have parted with a small part
of what God has given thee to the poor.

CHAP. XXXVI.
And indeed what can be a more forcible reason to make our hearts relent,
though they be never so stony? and our bowels to yearn with pity and compassion
toward the poor; though they were of brass, and iron. Then to consider, that
our dear Lord and Savior in them does crave relief: for who is so more then
brutishly ungrateful, that can turn him away empty handed? Who being
infinitely rich in all glory and happiness, was contented for our sakes to
become poor, that by his poverty he might communicate unto us his heavenly
riches. Who would not give Christ lodging? Yea even (if need should require)
the use of his own bed, if he remember, that Christ was content so far to
abase himself for our sakes, as to make a stable his chamber, and a manger his
lodging, that we might be admitted into his heavenly, and everlasting mansions*
Who would deny to cloth him being naked? who has c^^^hed our nakedness, and
covered our filthiness with the precious robe of his righteousness, in which
we stand accepted before God, and receive the blessing of eternal happiness.
Who would not spare food out of his own belly to relieve poor Christ, who
has given unto us his blessed body to be our meat, and his precious blood to
be our drink, whereby our souls and bodies are nourished unto everlasting
life? Who would not leave all pleasure and profit to go and visit him in his
sickness and imprisonment, that left heaven, and his Fathers bosom, that he
might come to visit and redeem us with the inestimable price of himself? Yea,
if wise, we will count it an honor, whereof we are very unworthy. As most
unworthy we are of such an honor as to relieve hungry, thirsty, and naked
Christ in his poor members. whence the Macedonians counted, and called it a
favor that they might have their hand in so good a work, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4.
And that David thanks God, that of his own he would take an offering, 1 Chronicles.
29.9. And this is another reason to convince men, that it is most just and
equal they should be liberal to the poor members of Jesus Christ.

And so much touching the reasons and motives to this Christian duty. Then
which, there cannot be either more, or clearer, or st^onger, or weightier
inducements, to persuade to any one thing in the world, then there is to this,
if men have either hearts or brains.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The next to be considered is, The time when we are to give, and that is
twofold.

First, when an opportunity of doing good offers it se^fe, do it speedily
without delay, readily entertain the first ^o^ on, withold not good from thy
Neighbor, when it is in thy power to do it. Say not to him that is in present
need, go and ^ome again, and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it by
thee, Prove. 3.27, 28. When Lazarus is in need of refreshment, let him not wait,
or lie long at thy door, Luke 16.20.21, 22. For nothing is more tedious, then
to hang long in suspense: and we endure with more patience, to have our hopes
beheaded, and quickly dispatched, then to be racked and tortured with long
delays, according to that Prove. 13.12. Hope deferred, makes the heart sick;
but when the desire comes, it is a tree of life. For as one says,
Beneficentia often virtus que moram non patitur: Beneficence is a virtue which
disliketh all delays. And as Seneca tells us, Omnis benignitas properat; All
goodness is quick of hand, and swift of ^oot, and hates as well the
paralyticall shaking, and staggering of those who doubt whether to give or no;
as the gouty lamenesse of such, as after they are resolved to give, make but
slow have. The greater speed, the greater love, for love can abide no lingering.
Then does a benefit loose his grace, when it sticks in his fingers who is about
to bestow it, as though it were not given, but plucked from him: and so the
receiver praises nor his Benefactors bounty, but his own importunity, because
he does not seem to have given, but to have held too weakly against his
violen^^* These delays show unwillingnesse; Et qui moratur neganti proximus
est: He that delays a benefit, is the next door to him that denies it: Even
as on the other side, a quick hand is an evident sign of a free heart. For
proximum est libenter facientis cito facere; It is the property of him that
gives willingly, to give speedily. Being of Boaz his spirit, of whom Naomy
could say out of a common fame, That he would not be in rest, until he had
finished the good which was propounded to him, Ruth ^.18.

And as speed in bestowing graceth the gift, yea doubles it in respect of the
giver, so it doubleth the benefit to him that receives it. Nam his dat qui
cito dat, he gives twice, that gives quickly; and the swifter that a benefit
comes, the sweeter it tastes. Present relief to present want, makes a bounty
weightier. And he cannot but esteem the benefit, that unexpectedly receives
help in his deepest distress: Whereas a benefit deferred, loses the thanks,
and many times proves unprofitable to him that expects it. Ioshuah marches all
night, and fight^ all day for the Gibeonites, else he had as good have saved
his labor. And possibly through these delays, thy alms may ^ome too late,
like a good gale of wind after shipwreck. When his health is lost for want of
relief, or state ru^ned for want of seasonable help; and so thy late and
untimely alms will do him little good: For it fares with men in their
strength and state, as with a leake in a ship, or a breach of waters, which may
be e^sily stopped and stayed at the first appearing: but if let alone, will
within a while grow remediless. There must then be no stay in these actions of
beneficence, but only that which is caused through the receivers
shamefastness.

But specially we must avoid delays in giving, after we have granted; for there
is nothing more bitter, then to be forced to make a new suite for that which
has already been obtained, and to find more difficulty in the delivery, then
in the grant.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Another thing required in doing good works, is constancy and assiduity, the
which is also employed in the Metaphor of sowing seed* for the Husbandman
contenteth not himself, to have sowed his seed in former years, but he
continues to sow it still to the end of his life: and though the Crop be
sometimes so small, that the seed it self is scarce returned, yet he will not
be discouraged, but will again cast it into the ground, in hope of better
success. And this must we do in sowing the ^eeds of our beneficence, casting
them daily into the ground, which we find fitted and prepared, and not think
it enough to adorn our selves with them as with our best apparel, which we
only put on in high and Festival days. We must make it our daily exercise,
benefacta benefactis pertegentes (as one says) making one good deed an
introduction unto another, and never leaving to do good, so long as there is
any power in our hands to do it.

And unto this the Apostle exhorts, 2 Thessalonians. 3.13. Brethren, be not weary of
well doing. And 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. Ever follow that which is good, both among your
selves, and to all men. And in this we shall imitate our heavenly Father, and
approve our selves to be his children* who renews his mercies unto us every
morning, and multiplyeth his blessings upon us every day with a new supply, and
so we shall be sure to receive a rich reward: For if we be steadfast and
unmovable, always abounding in these good works of the Lord, we may be
assured, that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, as it is promised,
1 Cor. 15.58. Many other places there are, that require us to give constantly
to seven, and also to eight, as Solomon phraseth it, even so often as the
necessities of the Saints require: For thus the Apostle says, Distributing to
the necessities of the Saints: He does not say distribute, but distributing,
using the participle, which notes a continued act of distributing. So says
St. Paul of the Philippians, You sent once and again to my necessity. A
Wellhead, or a Spring, runs with a constant stream, and will not be dry: so
should merciful deeds flow from us. The liberal man will devise of liberal
things, and continue his liberality, Isa. 32.8. And such an one was Boaz, of
whom Naomi could say out of a common same, Blessed be he of he Lord, for he
cease not to do good to the living and to the dead, Ruth 2.20.

Again, we must increase in doing good, our care must be as to grow in grace,
so to bring forth new fruits of good works, imitating herein the Church of
Thyatira, whose last works excelled the first, Rev. ^ ^9. Seeing we cannot
otherwise be sure to be constant in them: For they who go not forward, but
stand at a stay, will not long stay in their standin^. And in this the
beneficence of a godly man differs from that which is in worldlings, who do
some good works of mercy by fits, but a^e not constant in well doing: and also
in that which is in Hypocrites, who do some good deeds for praise or profit,
but yet de^ist when their turn is served, The flame of their charity lasting
no longer than the fuel does wherewith it is nourished? but these have only a
green blade of an outward profession, and never come to the bearing of ripe
fruits. They run well for a time, but get not the garland, because they do not
hold out to the end of the race. They are not true Christians, but only dead
images of Christianity, like that which Nebuchadnezar saw in a Dream, which
had an head of gold, the middle parts of silver, his ^hi^^e^ of brass, his
legs of iron, and his feat part of iron, and part of clay: for so the head and
first beginnings of their works, are golden and glorious, but the last, and
latter ends base, and of no worth.

Thus we ought not only to perform this duty presently, and constantly, but
we should increase in the doing of it.

CHAP. XXXIX.
But ala^ the rich worldling takes a quite contrary course: for either he never
does any good at all, or if he do, it is at his death. The miserly Muckworms
manner is, never to be liberal till he dies, never to forsake, or leave his
goods, until his goods leave and forsake him. Being like the Muckhill, that
never does good till carried out: or the fat ho^^ that is good for nothing till
he comes to the knife: or the poor man's box, that yields no money till broken
up. Like a tree that lets fall none of his fruit, till he be forced by death,
or violently shaken by sickness: And then perhaps he may think upon the
poor, and part with something to relieve them. As sometimes, after he has
instead of feeding the bellies of the poor, grownd their faces by usury,
extorting, wracking, enclosing, and half undoing whole Villages; he liberally
relieves some few at his death, and befriends them with the plasters of his
bounty, which is no other then to steal a Goose, and stick down a feather;
rob a thousand to relieve ten. Or rather as the Jews bought a burying place
for strangers with the blood of Christ: so he build^ an Almes^house, or
Hospital for the Children, with their Fathers bones.

Nor is that out of conscience, or love to the poor, but rather he thinks by
this, and a piece of Marble, to raise his name, and revive his credit, which h^
had long since lost, though it no whit avails him with men of judgment.

Again, he thinks that a little alms will make amends for a great deal of
injustice. But this pleases God, like the offering of Cain, or as that of
Nadab and Abihu, when they offered strange fire unto the Lord, Levit. 10. For
certainly, as the Lord would not in the law receive as an offering the price of
a dog, or the hire of a whore, so it is no going about to corrupt God with
presents, and call him to take part of the spoil, which he has gotten by
fraudulent means, and extortion. No, he that offers to the Lord of the goods
of the poor, is as he that sacrifices the son in the sight of the Father,
Eccl. 3.4.

Yea ^ven Plato an Heathen could say, Neither the gods nor honest men will
accept the offerings of a wicked man. Nay, a generous Ro^an would scorn to
have his life given him by such a sordid Pinch gut. As when Sylla the Dictator
had condemned to death all the Inhabitants of Per^^za, pardoning none but his
Host, he would needs dye also, saying, he scorned to hold his life of the
murderer of his Country, as Appian relates. And for my part, I had rather
endure some extremity, then to be beholding to the alms of Avarice. He that
overvalues what he gives, never thinks he has thanks enough; and I had better
shift hardly, then owe to an insatiable creditor.

Now herein is the difference between grace, and corrupt nature: the Christian
exercises himself in the works of mercy, in the whole course of his life, and
gives his goods to the poor, while he might enjoy them himself: but the
wordling is only liberal at the approach of death, and then alone he is content
to employ them this way, when as he sees he can keep them no longer. And that
not out of love toward God, or the poor, but out of fear of approaching
judgment* and that dreadful account which he must presently make before a
just and terrible Judge: Or out of self-love, either that he may gain the vain
glory of the world, or that he may satisfy for his sins, and so escape
eternal condemnation. In which respect he gives to the poor, and casts his
bread upon the face of the waters, as the Merchant casts his goods into the sea
in time of a storm, to preserve the ship from sinking, and himself from
drowning. For were he not in danger to make shipwreck of his soul, and of
sincking into the gulf of hell, and condemnation, he would be no more liberal
at his death, then he has always been in the whole course of his life.

But what do I speak of his being liberal a^ the approach of Death? for not
one of a thousand of these ever entertain such a thought. Yea, they love all
the world so little, that if it were possible, they would with Hermocrates,
make themselves their own Executors, and bequeath their goods to none else. As
he that gives not till he dies, shows that he would not give if he could help
it; and so it appears by their not parting with it, till they be plucked from
it: For to give when they dye, and when they can keep it no longer, is not
worth thanks, it is not in some sense their own to bestow, but rather to be
liberal of that which is indeed none of their own, but other men's. Neither
will God then accept of it, or hereafter reward it; which proves the covetous
man no less foolish, then wicked; for as one light carried before us, does us
more good then many that are brought after: so does a ltitle given in a man's
lifetime, more benefit him, then thousands at the hour of death. Because what
the charitable man gives while he is alive and in health he shall carry with
him being dead; whereas the uncharitable man shall leave his gold behind him,
but carry the guilt with him into everlasting fire. So that Misers may fitly be
likened to the Mules of Princes, that go all day laden with treasure, and
covered with gay clothes; and at night, after a tedious and wearisome journey,
their treasure is taken from them, and they shaken off into a sorry stable,
much galled and bruised wit^ the carriage of those treasures, their galled
backs only left unto themselves: For after all these men's toil and slavery,
what they have shall be taken from them, and they turned off with their wounded
consciences, to that loathsome and irksome stable of hell and damnation.
Wherefore, he that has either grace or wit, will make (...) own hands his
Executors, and his eyes his Overseers. Nor are we (...) of Christ's fold (but
goats and swine) if we do not benefit others more in our lives, then by our
deaths.

CHAP. XL.
It is no small wonder to me, that any wise man should so dote, and set his
affections upon that which is so uncertain, and that will do him so little good
in time of greatest need. As oh the uncertainty of riches* whom either casualty
by fire, or inundation of waters, or robbery of Thieves, or negligence of
servants, or suretyship of friends, or over-^ight of reckonings, or trusting of
Customers, or unfaithfulness of Factors, or unexpected falls of Markets, or
piracy by Sea, or unskilfulnesse of Pilots, or violence of Tempests may bring
to an hasty and speedy poverty. It is in the power of one gale of wind, or a
farthing candle to make many rich men beggars. And then as the greatest floods
have often the lowest ebbs, so are they most poor and miserable, that were
formerly most rich, and in the minds esteem most happy.

2. Or in case our riches thus leave not us, yet we know not how soon we may
leave our riches: For, for ought we know, this very night may be our last
night. That rich man in the Gospel, reckoned up a large bill of particulars,
great barnes, much goods, many years; but the sum was short, one night. He
that reckons without God, shall be sure to reckon twice. And so it may fare
with thee; There is but one way to come into the world, there is a thousand
ways to go out of it.

In Plinies time, Physicians had found out above three hundred diseases between
the crown of the head, and the sole of the foot, all which do lie lingering, and
lurking for our lives. Nor is that all, Anacreon that drunken Poet, was choked
with the husk of a grape. Euripides returning home from King Archelaus his
supper, was to^^e in pieces of Dogs. Archem^rus, son to Lycurgus, King of
Thrace, was slain by an Adder. Lucia sister to M. Aurelius, was killed with a
needle which stuch on her breast, being thrust in by her Child as she held it
in her arms. Heliogabalus was slain upon a Privy. Antiochus the Tyrant,
rotted alive. Herennus the Sicilian, being taken prisoner, fall down dead with
very fear of what he should suffer, being a co-part^er ^n the conspiracy of
Cajus Gracchus. And Plautinus the Numidian, at the very sight of his dead Wife,
took it so to heart, that he fell upon her, and rose no more. I have read of a
Captain, that having murdered many on hors-back, was killed with his own
sword falling out of his scabbard as he did alight.

Bibulus riding through Rome in triumph, a tyle stone fell from the roof of a
house and killed him. And the like of King Pyrrhus Tullius Hostilius was slain
with a Thunder bolt. How easily may some sudden sickness, an Impostum: or the
like cut in two the thre^^ of life* when we think the least of death. There be
as many little Sculs as great ones in Golgotha, says the Hebrew Proverb; for
one Apple that falls from the tree, ten are pulled before they he ripe: And
the parents mourn for the death of their children, as often as the children for
the death of their parents: Which were it well considered, would make men more
wise then so to value the things of this life, and under-value those of the
next: For that which the stern is to the ship, the eye to the body, the
Compass to the Pilot, the same is the consideration of his end to a wise
Christian. Or

3. If he still enjoyes his wealth, together with his life for many years, yet
what will it profit him when sickness comes? All the wealth in the world will
not remove pain, neither will honor or greatness, if they be added to
wealth. It is not the imbroydered slipper that will drive away the painful
gowt. Nor the golden Diadem, the cruel head ache; nor the Diamond ring, the
angry Whitflow; nor the long Velvet Roab, the burning Fever. Yea, the aching of
a tooth, the prick of a thorn; or some passion of the mind, is able to
deprive us of the pleasures of the whole worlds Monarchy. Whence all earthly
enjoyments are so often called vanities, because they are vain things to trust
to, or dote upon, they cannot profit, or deliver in time of sickness or death,
1 Samuel 12.21.

4. And lastly, he cannot carry the leaft part of his riches away with him: For
as with Job, he came naked into the world, so he shall return naked out of it:
only his evil deeds, and his accusing conscience (if he repents not) shall
bear him company. Bona sequuntur mala persequuntur. Be not thou afraid (says
the Psalmist) when one is made rich, and when the glory of his house is
increased: For he shall take nothing away when he dies, neither shall his
pomp descend after him, Psalm. 49.16, 17. And also Solomon; As he came forth of
his mothers belly, he shall return naked, to go as he came, and shall bear
away nothing of his labor, which he has caused to pass by his hand, Eccles
5.15. And likewise the Apostle; We brought nothing into the world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out of it, 1 Timothy 6 7.

Oh my brethren think of it! it is but a poor comfort, to have wealth, and want
grace: It is far better while our health lasts, to sow the seed of godly
actions in the field of this world, that at the Autumn or end of our age, we
may reap the fruit of everlasting comfort. For to every man that does good
shall be glory and hunour, immortality and eternal life, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile, Romans 2.10. And so on the contrary: For unto them that do
not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil, of the Jew first, and
also of the Gentile* verse. 5. to 10. God has said it, and they shall find it:
And that is it to flourish for a time, and perish for ever?

Whence let us learn this lesson; That Justice has lincked as with (...) iron
chain, goodness and blessedness, sin and punishment together, (...) the
cause and the effect, as the body and the shadow, as the work and the wages,
as the Parent and the Child, one begetti^^ another. He that sowes the seed of
godly actions in the field of a repentant heart, shall at the Autumn, or end of
his life, reap the fruits of everlasting comfort, and so on the contrary.

And so much of the time when we are to give. I should now come to tho means
enabling thereunto, which are principally two, Labor and Industry, in lawful
getting, and frugality or thriftinesse in spending our goods lawfully gotten:
that so having greater plenty, we may be the richer in good works, according to
the French proverb; A seasonable gathering, and a reasonable spending, make a
good housekeeping. But of these I have spoken in the means to attain riches,
Chap. 32, 33. beginning at page 50. Only I will add a few lines.

CHAP. XLI.
First, touching Labor or Industry in lawful getting and increasing by all
lawful means in our Callings, that it enables a man to perform this duty, the
Apostle shows in prescribing it to the Ephesians, as a means of bounty and
beneficence; Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor,
working with his own hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give
to him that needs. And Solomon describing the virtuous woman, says in the
first place, that she seeks wool and flax, and works willingly with her
hands; that she lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distaffe: and then that she stretches out her hands to the poor, yea she
reaches forth her hands to the needy. And St. Luke having testified of Dorcas,
that she was full of good works and almesdeeds which she did: He soon after
shows the means, and fountain of her beneficence, to wit her labor and
industry, in making coats and garments. So Peter Martyrs Wife is commended for
having been a prudent and painful housewife, and bountiful to the poor and
needy, the former good quality enabling her to the latter. Be we therefore
painful and industrious in our several callings, that GOD may prosper and
replenish us with good things, that so we may the better communicate them t^
others.

Secondly, Frugality or thriftinesse in spending our goods lawfully gotten: For
thrift, (which is a due saving from sinful and needless expenses) must be as
the purveyor for liberality. Be sparing in unnecessary expenses, that thou
may be liberal in good uses, and this will mightily manifest thy heart to
be right. The fuel of charity is frugality, and the flame piety, as we may see
in Boaz, whom we find to be thrifty, religious, charitable: For as by lopping
off the superfluous branches, a good tree is made more fruitful: So by cutting
off all needless expenses, a liberal man abounds more in good works. Whence
observe that rule of our Saviors, so to dispose of that plenty which Gods
goodness has bestowed on us, as that nothing his left, John 6.12. Now a thing
may be lost and spoiled two ways by our own (...) either when we suffer our
(...) and drink^ to (...) and our garments motheaten, or our gold and silver
cankered and rusty, rather than bestow it upon the poor members of Jesus
Christ. Which makes St. James utter these dreadful words, Chap. 5. Go to now
ye rich men, weep and how^^ for the miseries that shall come upon you; Your
riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten: Your gold and silver i^
canckered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire: and more of the like, Verse. 1. to 7.

But lest I should step too far out of the way, return we to the matter in
hand, which is thrift or frugality, and not covetousness or cruelty. As

Oh! how liberal might we be in charitable uses, and in showing mercy, if we
would use Thrift as a Razor, to cut or shave off all superfluous expenses,
about unlawful and unnecessary things: i^ we would lay it as a rule, to
moderate and diminish all expenses about things even lawful. A good layer up,
is a good layer out, as is plainly verified in that virtuous Ru^h, who was no
less pious and charitable in spending, then soberly frugall in sparing and
saving; for she brought forth, and gave to her poor Mother in Law, that she
had reserved at dinner, after she was satisfied. Frugality, says Iustine, is
the mother of virtues. I am sure it is the basis, and foundation, the pillar
and supporter of liberality and benificence. For instance, though Peter M^rtyr
had forsaken all for the Gospel sake, and left his great riches and
preferments he did enjoy in Italy, having nothing to live on but a small
stipend for his Professorship at Strasbourg: Yet being very frugall and
sparing, he had enough to maintain himself, and to help his friends too:
whereas on the contrary, an expensive man by his wasting and over-lavishing of
his estate, disables him from doing good to himself or others.

CHAP. XLII.
But you will ask me, from what must we save?

I answer, from Riot, Luxury, Drunkenness, Gam^ng, and such like sinful
expenses, by which men waste and lavish that which might suffice many others
besides themselves. Yea, that sordid sin of drunkenness, besides robbing the
poor, has brought a multitude of rich men to poverty, and poor men to beggary.

Secondly, from Banqueting and feasting, wherein at the least, one of these
three spots of unthrift^nesse is commonly seen: Excess of frequency, excess
of plenty, or excess of delicacy. With some feasters it is always Holiday,
never considering that the Rich man in the Gospel is not so much branded for
feasting sumptuously, as for feasting sumptuously every day. Others, though
they feast their friends but seldom; yet when they do, they resemble Isa^cius
Angelus, whose usual feasts did so exceed in abundance and quantity of
provision, that they were said to be nothing else but a mountain of loav^s, a
forest of wild beasts, a sea of fishes, and an Ocean of win^.

Thirdly, others are so for delicacy, that like Phil^xenus that Bell^ god, they
think that sweetest, that is dearest. It is a horrible pride th^^ is practiced
by many now adays, even mean ones, they scorn for sooth that any Butchers
meat should be admit^^^ their Table when the feast it. The true rule of Feasts
and Banquets seem^ to be dead wit^ our Forefathers, whose dishes for so^t,
number, price, and servin^ out, was inferior to our sauce, insomuch that less
then the rever^sion might suffice the whole company, though they suffer the
poor t^ starve, who might be well ^ed with the superfluity thereof. Tantu^^
luxuries potuit suadere malorum.

Fourthly, much might be saved, out of what men spend lavishly it Apparel and
Raiment. For many spend so much in the number, matter, and making of their
Garments, that they have little left to be li^berall withal. The French
proverb, that Silk quenches the fire of the Kitchen, is not more tarte then
true. How many ruffle it in silk, tha^ are scarce able to pay for wool? Yea,
some can carry whole Manors upon their backs, heads, feet, and fingers, what
hospitality then can be expected from such?

Fifthly, much might be spared of what is lavishly spent in keeping of Coaches.
As Oh! the fearful Pride, Atheism, contempt of Gods Word, and want of
compassion to Christ's poor members; that is manifested in, and the sad account
that men have to give even for this abominable excess. I dare say, many within
these few years, have and do keep Coaches, who can remember the time, that
they or their Fathers would have been glad to be kept in an Almes-house. And
who spend more in one year upon this Lordly vanity, then they do in twenty
years upon these works of mercy.

I know it is lawful enough for many to keep them: but if they can afford to
spend forty pounds a year in keeping of a Coach, merely for pomp and
pleasure, and cannot afford half so much to keep thousands from starving in
these hard times, wherein not one in two all the land over, can get sufficient
meat for their bellies, or clothes to their backs, or fire in their ho^ses if
they have any; certainly they can never look to be set at Christ's right hand,
and to hear that joyful sentence, Come ye blessed, Matthew. 2^.

CHAP. XLIII.
Sixthly, how much might be spared of what men vainly spend in keeping of
Horses, Hawks, and Dogs? when not a few, change their Ancestors liberality
upon Christ's members, into prodigality upon Beasts When they will kill an Horse
of price, in the pursuit of a Hare worth nothing. Or to be at twenty pounds a
year charge in Hawks, to catch a few Pa^tridges not worth so many shillings:
when the poor are not so many groats the better for their worships.

Seventhly, how much of that which might be given to the poor, is wa^ted in
that witch Tobacco, when many spend as much in th^^ wanton weed, as their
honest Forefathers spent in substantial hospitality* When an hundred pounds a
year upon this precious stink will scarce serve their turns, were it now as
dear as it has been. Yea I have known a Knight and his company, in one day
drink out five pounds sterling, in five ounces of Tobacco; which I am sure had
been better bestowed upon these charitable uses. The Knights name was Huit. The
Apothecaries Name that sold it, was Bakon; at the Myter in Fleetstreet it was
taken.

Again, hundreds there are, that will buy all the News Books, Declarations and
Proclamations that come forth, (which since the beginning of our troubles, have
amounted to no small sum) and yet are so far from being bountiful to the poor,
that by their good wills, they will neither pay debts nor duties. Others as
bountiful and as good Christians as they, that can afford to give three pounds
for a falling Band, five pounds for a Tulip, ten, twenty pounds for a yard of
Lace: But will Christ take this well, and count them good Stewards? when he
shall sit upon his Throne, and judge every man according to his deeds, Matthew.
25.31. to the end.

To these might be added the vast sums of money that are lavisht out without
measure, in needless and unnecessary Buildings, and trimming of houses, as if
the owners were to dwell for ever in this world; So many Walks and Galleries,
Turrets and Pyramides, such setting up, pulling down, transposing,
transplacing, to make gay habittations, for the memory and honor of men's
Names: So much yearly bestowed in costly furniture; with which their houses
were well stuffed and filled before; whereas multitudes of people, by reason of
the late civil wars, are driven to wander about, as having no certain
dewlling place, yea no other house then the wide world; no other bed then the
hard ground, and no other Canopy then the wide Heaven. And so I might go on to
many hundreds spent in Lawsuits, for the satisfying of a self-will; so much
spent in sports and needless Iourneys, in Gaming and Revelling, in kindnesses
to Friends and Neighbors, and many the like; Whereas they should be sparing in
other things, that they might be the more bountiful in this duty; They spend
where they should spare, and spare where God bids them spend: Yea, whereas
the godly man spares not only from his superfluities, but even from very
necessaries, that he may have the more to spend in bounty and beneficence:
These only spare in the works of mercy, that they may have the more to spend
upon their sinful Vanities. But as the niggard that sows not, shall not reap;
so the prodigal Worldling, that sows only to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption; as it is Gal. 6:8.

Now for conclusion of this point, if Frugallity and saving, be so great an
help to bounty and liberality; let it be our care to practice it; avoiding both
the extremes, Prodigality on the one side, and Avarice on the other; for this
(as all other virtues) is placed between two extremes, as the Planet Jupiter,
between cold Saturn, and fiery Mars; Let it be used as a razor of all wicked
and superfluous, and as a rule of all good and necessary expenses; For that
stock is like to last, that is neither hoarded up miserably, nor dealt out
indiscreetly: We sow not the furrow by the sack full, but by the handful; and
the wise man knows, it is better looking through a poor Lettice-window, then
through an Iron Grate. Let it quite shave off, all expenses about Surfeiting
and Drunkenness, Harlotry and Wantonness, with other debauched courses, which
many amongst the Heathens have been ashamed of; and therefore should not be
once named among Christians, Ephesians. 5.3.

Nomina sunt ipso, pene timenda sono.
And let it also moderate and diminish those excessive charges which too
commonly men are at, about things lawful and commendable; because if men would
so do, the poor would be richly provided for: As how much might be saved, how
many millions of money every year; and how abundant might we be in works of
mercy, and yet be never the poorer at the years end? Yea how would they praise
God, and pray for their bountiful Benefactors? And how would God bless us in
our souls, bodies, names, estates and posterities? As he has abundantly
promised in his Word.

CHAP. XLIV.
AND so much of the means enabling to this duty: Now of the ends we are to
propound to our selves in the doing of it, wherein I will bebrief.

Fourthly, As our Alms or Works of mercy, should flow from faith, obedience,
charity, mercy, unfeigned love; etc. which are proper only to true believers,
and such as in Christ are first accepted; (because as a woman that abides
without an Husband, all her fruit is but as an unlegitimate birth; So until we
be married to Christ, all our best works are as bastards; and no better then
shining sins, or beautiful abominations, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11.6.
Romans 14.23.) So our aim and end must be, the glory of God, the good of our
brethren, who are refreshed with our Alms, the adorning of our Profession with
these fruits of Piety, the edification of others by our good example, the
stopping of the mouths of our Adversaries, our own present good, both in
respect of temporal and spiritual benefits, and the furthering and assuring of
our eternal salvation; all which shows that howsoever any man may give gifts
out of natural pity; yet only the Christian and godly man, can rightly perform
this duty of Alms-deeds; for it is a good work; and there are none do good, but
those that are good; neither is it possible that there should be good fruit,
unless it sprung from a good Tree: Charity and Pride do both feed the poor; the
one to the praise and glory of God, the other to get praise and glory amongst
men; in which Case God will not accept, but reject a man's bounty. As when one
sent a Present to Alcibiades, he sent it back again, saying, He sends these
Gifts ambitiously, and it is our ambition to refuse them. The Hypocrite aims
chiefly at his own glory and good, either the obtaining of some worldly
benefit, or the avoiding of some temporal or everlasting punishment; or
finally, that he may satisfy God's justice for his sins, make him beholding
unto him, and merit at his hands everlasting happiness.

But the Christian does these works of mercy with great humility, remembling
that whatsoever he gives to the poor for Gods sake, he has first received it
from God, with all other blessings which he enjoys: In which respect when he
does the most, he acknowledges that he does far less then his duty, and that
with much infirmity and weakness; and therefore in this regard he humbly
confesses that his Alms are sufficiently rewarded, if they be graciously
pardoned; the which, as it makes him to carry himself humbly before God, so
also meekly and gently toward the poor.

And indeed our axes, saws, hammers and chisels, may as well and as justly rise
up and boast, they have built our houses, and our pens receive the honor of our
writings, as we attribute to our selves, the praise of any of our good actions.
And it were as ridiculous so to do, as to give the Soldiers honor to his
sword; For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to whom be
glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11.36.

If we have any thing that is good, God is the giver of it; if we do any thing
well, he is the Author of it, Ioh. 3.2. Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 4.7. and 11.23. We
have not only received our talents, but the improvement also is his mere
bounty. Thou have wrought all our works in us, says the Prophet Isaiah, Chap.
26. ver. 12. We do good Works, but so much as is good in them, is not ours, but
God's: We for these things, magis Deo debtor est, quam Deus homini; are rather
debtors to God, then God to us. We cannot so much as give him gratias, thanks;
unless he first give us gratiam, the grace of thankfulness. God gives not only
grace asked, but grace to ask: We cannot be patient under his hand, except his
hand give us patience. God must infuse, before we can effuse. The springs of
our hearts must be filled from that ocean, before we can derive drink to the
thirsty. For as the virtue attractive to draw Iron, is not in the Iron, but in
the Adamant; so all our ability is of God, and nothing as our own can we
challenge, save our defects and infirmities.

Whence that of Austin, Lord look not upon my Works, but upon thy Works which
thou have done in me, or by me; which indeed he does even to the amazement and
astonishment of all that are wise and truly thankful: For (mark it well) first
he gives us power to do well, and then he recompenceth and crowns that work
which we do well by his grace and bounty.

Bernard reports of Pope Eugenius, that meeting a poor, but honest Bishop, he
secretly gave him certain jewels wherewith he might present him, as the custom
was for such to do: So if God did not first furnish us with his graces and
blessings, we should have nothing wherewith to honor him, or do good to
others. Of thine own I give thee, said Justinian the Emperor, borrowing it from
the Psalmist, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. The use whereof before we leave it, would be
this: First hope we for, but challenge not a reward for our well-doing: yet not
for it self, but for what Christ has done for, and by us.

Let this be the temper of our spirits, when we do any duty; Do we the work,
give God the praise, To us the use of his gifts; to him the thanks and glory
for ever. Yea having received all we have from him, and done all that we do by
him; what madness and folly is it, not to refer the glory and praise of all to
him, as the Apostle argues, Romans 11.36. to which he adds, as an injunction;
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10.31.

O God, if we do any thing that is good, it is thine act, and not ours: Crown
thine own work in us, and take thou the glory of thine own mercies.

God bestows upon us many indowments, to the end only, that we should employ
them to his honor, and best advantage that gave them us: For that he may be
honored by our wisdom, riches, graces, is the only end for which he gives us
to be wise, rich, gracious, Matthew. 25.27, 30 1 Cor. 12.7. and 14.26. Romans 12.6.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Yea it is the only end for which we were created, Isa. 43. v.
7. and therefore it has always been the aim, end and mark which all the
Saints have ever endeavored to hit, though with several shafts; as the same
beams are many, but the light one. For whereas the ignorant ascribe the effects
and events of things to Fortune, the Atheist to Nature, the Superstitious to
their Idols, the Politician to his plots, the Proud-man to his own power and
parts, too many to second causes: in all these the Servants of God look higher,
resolving all such effects to their first principle, Digitus Dei, the finger of
God; ascribing to Him the praise, as I might abundantly show from the Word,
could I stand upon it: Yea, even Titus the Emperor when he was praised for a
victory that he had got, made answer, That it proceeded from God, who made his
hands but the instruments to serve him, as Josephus testifies. The Godly, as
they do all by his poxer, so they refer all to his glory.

CHAP. XLV.
BUt the Worldling has neither heart nor brain so to do, or once to cast an
eye, or have the least aim at God's glory, even in their greatest undertakings;
or whatever they either receive or do: but instead of giving glory to God, they
take it to themselves, as Herod did, Acts 12.23. ascribing the increase of
their corn, wine and oil, their honors, successes, etc. either to the goodness
and sharpness of their Wit and skill, or to the greatness of their industry, or
of their power and authority; saying with proud Nebuchadnezar, Is not this
great Babel which I have built, by the might of my power? etc. Dan. 4.30. Have
not I got all these goods, victories, preferments, etc. my self, and by mine
own wisdom and providence, which the Prophet calls, sacrificing to their own
net, and burning incense unto their drag, Hab. 1.16. Even as it fared with the
children of Dan, Judges 18. who ascribed the honor of their success to their
Idols. Or as it fared with Israel, God gave them sheep and Oxen, and they
offered them up to Baal: He gave them Earrings* and Jewels for their own
ornament, and they turned them to an Idol: Yea, poor silly souls, they are like
Swine, that feed upon Acorns, without ever looking to the Oak from whence they
fell. Or the Horse that drinks of the Brook, and never thinks of the Spring.
Christ rains down Mannah, they gather it and eat it, and scarce ever think from
whence they had it; at least the thought of his blessings is out of their
minds, as soon as the taste is out of their mouths. As but one of those Ten,
that could lift up their voices for cure of their Leprosy, returned with
thanks when they were cleansed; so it is ten to one if any give glory to God:
Luck, or wit, or friend, one thing or other still lies in their way, and takes
up Christ's glory, and the thanks ere it can come at him. Customary fruition
has made men scarce think themselves beholding to God. But as he that having
fed his body, and assuaged his hunger, and gives no thanks, steals his meat; so
in all other things. In visible benefits, not to see the invisible giver, is
great infidelity and blindness: and indeed, if any thing infallibly proves an
hypocrite, it is when base ends ^are the first movers of good duties.

Now what I have spoken of good men in this point, I might show of good Angels
and glorified Saints in Heaven; yea of Heathens and Idolaters* yea I might add,
that not to be thankful, nor to acknowledge what God our bountiful Benefactor,
bestows upon, and does for us, is to fall short of the very brute Beasts: The
Ox knows no Owner but man, and him he does acknowledge and love according to his
capacity, Isa. 1.3. And it is well known what strange things are recorded of
Lions, Dogs, Eagles, yea, how often shall we see a Dog welcome home his Master,
with all possible expressions of love and thankfulness, when perhaps his Wife
entertains him with frumps and frowns: And certainly, had beasts the like
knowledge with us, of their Maker, they would worship and serve him better then
do their Masters; but for proof of this enough. Though indeed, if the very
worst of men did but know and consider how they should pleasure themselves in
being humble and thankful, they would use all their possible endeavors to that
end; As most pleasant it is to God, and most profitable to us, both for the
procuring the good we want, and for the continuance of the good we have.

CHAP. XLVI.
INto the humble and thankful soul, that gives him abundance of glory; his
Spirit enters with abundance of Grace, sowing there, and there only, plenty of
Grace, where he is assured to reap plenty of glory. But who will sow those
barren Sands, where they are not only without all hope of a good Harvest, but
are sure to loose their Seed and Labor? And in common Equity, he that is
unthankful for a little, is worthy of nothing; whereas thanks for one good
turn, is the best introduction to another. Holy David was a man according to
Gods own heart; and therefore he continually mi^^eth with his Prayers, Praises;
and being of a public spirit, he discovers the secrets of this skill: As
when he says, Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise
thee; then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God, even our God
shall give us his blessing, Psalm. 67.5, 6, 7. When Heaven and Earth are
friends, then Summer and Winter, Seed-time and Harvest, run on their race. When
God was displeased, what was the effect? Ye have sown much, and have reaped
little. Again, when God was pleased, mark the very day; For from that very day
I will bless you, Hag. 2.15. to 20 Whenever glory is given to God on high,
peace and good will shall be bestowed on men below, Luke 2.14 Psalm. 84.11, 12.
Noah gave a Sacrifice of Praise for his deliverance from the Flood; And God
being praised for that one deliverance, he perpetuateth his blessing, and
promises an everlasting deliverance to the World from any more Floods.

Again, it is the only way to procure Gods Blessing upon our endeavors: It
happened that Bernard one day made a curious and learned Sermon, for which he
expected great applause, but received none: The next time he made a plain
wholesome Sermon, and it was wonderfully affected, liked and commended. A friend
of his noting it, asked him what might be the reason? Who answered, In the one I
preached Bernard, in the other Christ; in the one I sought to win glory and
praise to my self; in the other, the glory of God, and the salvation of souls,
which received blessing from above, and that made the difference; yea, were
there nothing good else in it, yet this were the way to gain true honor:

We cannot so much honor our selves, as by seeking to honor God: To seek a
man's own glory, (says Solomon) is not glory, Prove. 25.25.27. but to seek Gods
glory, is the greatest honor a man can do himself: For as Cicero said of
Julius Caesar, That in extolling of dead Pompey, and erecting his Statues, he
set up his own: So who are more venerably esteemed and spoken of, then such as
are most tender of Gods glory, and least seek their own. They are the Lord's
own words to Saul, They that honor me, I will honor; but they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30: The way for a man to be esteemed
the greatest, is to esteem himself the least. It is humility that makes us
accepted both of God and Man, whereas the contrary makes us hated and abhorred
of both: The Centurion did many excellent things, but he never did a Work so
acceptable in the sight of Christ, as was his disclaiming his own Works. While
Saul was little in his own eyes, God made him Head over the twelve Tribes of
Israel, and gave him his Spirit; but when out of his Greatness he abused his
Place and Gifts, God took both from him, and gave them to David, whom Saul
least respected of all his Subjects, 1 Samuel 15.17.28. and 16.14. Other proofs
of such as he will honor, for honoring him, you have Genesis 39.21. Zeph. 3 19,
20. Dan. 2.19. to 50. as when Nebuchadnezzar sought his own honor, honor
departed from him, and he was made like a Beast; but when he sought God's
honor, honor came to him again, and he was made a King, Dan. 4.34. to the end.
Before honor, goes humility, Prove. 15.33. But when pride comes, then comes
shame, Prove. 11.2. And commonly great Works undertaken for ostentation, miss of
their end, and turn to the Author's shame; nor have any less praise then they
that most hunt after it.

It Is true, the Lord sometimes gives wicked men even what in their thoughts
they ask; as some desire riches only, and God gives it them with a curse; some
honor and dignity, and they have it, that their fall may be the greater; others
fame and reputation ( as loving the praise of men more then the praise of God)
and these have many times what they aim at; they are extolled to the skies, and
that shall be the reward of all the good that ever they do. Lastly, God's
people make spiritual and eternal things, Grace and Glory, and God's favor
their only option, and they have their desire; yea not seldom, are riches and
reputation super-added, though they seek them not* they seek only God's glory
on Earth; as for their own glory, they let that alone till they come to Heaven,
knowing that he only is happily famous, who is known and recorded there: True,
he lives so well, that the praise of men (especially good men) will follow; but
as I said before, so say I again, he will not follow it, least to gain the
shadow, he should lose the substance; as Absalom in seeking a Kingdom, lost
himself.

CHAP. XLVII.
IT is a sad thing to consider, how many formal Christians gul^ themselves, in
thinking that Christ will reward them, when they have done him no service: As
for example, we find the Jews in the 58. of Esaias, urging God with their
fasting, (as those Reprobates, Luke 13. allege unto him their preaching in
Christ's Name, and casting out Devils) We have fasted (say they) and thou see
it not; we have afflicted our selves, and thou take no notice thereof; they
expect some great reward; but the Lord answers, Have ye fasted to me? No such
matter; and therefore sends them away empty, ver. 25. to 29. And so will he say
unto these (that perhaps do many good works for the matter of them) Have ye
done these and these things in love, obedience, and thankfulness unto me, and
that in Christ's Name, that my Name may be magnified, and my People won and
edified? No, but in love to your own credit, profit, and such like carnal
respects; and therefore look to it (as you love your own souls) for if in doing
good, and discharging our places, we have served our selves, and sought our
selves rather then God; when we come for his reward, (as Esau when he had
brought the Venison, came for the blessing, making himself as sure of it, as if
he had had it, before he kneeled for it) God's answer will be, Let him reward
you whom you have served; Thou servedst thy self, reward thy self, if thou will; for I never reward any service but mine own: The Pharisaical giver, gives
to himself, not to God; Dat sibi non Domino; He aims at his own praise, what
reward can he look for, let him pay himself: But our Savior, Mat. 6. makes the
case so plain, that none can question it: Take heed (says he) that ye do not
your alms, that ye pray not, that ye fast not to be seen of men; otherwise, ye
have no reward of your Father which is in heaven, ver. 1: and in ver. 2.5, 16:
speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees, that did give their Alms, prayed and
fasted to be seen and praised of men; he says affirmatively, That they had
their reward: And that we might the rather be warned, he adds to it. Verily,
Verily, v. 5.16 Yea, in the next Chapter he gives us several instances of such
as shall at the last day knock at Heaven Gates, (as it were) and cry out, Lord,
Lord, open unto us, for by thy Name we have done many good things: To whom the
Lords answer will be, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, I know you not
whence ye are, ver. 22, 23. And the reason of it is, Civil men's good works are
as a mere Carkase without the soul, since Faith is wanting: Nor is it any
excuse before God, to plead that the matter of the Work is good, when the end
is not so; for which, see Isa. 66:3:

Secondly, That the proud and unthankful shall lose the reward of all their
performances, is not all; for as thankfulness and humility are the only means
to enrich us with God's Blessings; so pride and unthankfulness is the only way
to make God withdraw and take from us both himself and his blessings, yea
instead thereof to send his curse, and to cross us in all we do, as may be
proved plentifully: When the people became murmurers, it displeased the Lord,
and the Lord heard it; therefore his wrath was kindled, and the fire of the
Lord burnt among them, and consumed the utmost part of the Host, Numb. 11.1, 2:
Because the King of Assyria said, By the Power of mine Arm have I done it, and
by my wisdom, for I am prudent; therefore (says the Lord) I have removed the
borders of the people, and have spoiled their treasures, and have pulled down
the Iuhabitants like a valiant man, Esaias 10:13: When Nebuchadnezzar and Herod
took the praise of their greatness, wit, and worth, to themselves, which was
due to God, you know what came of it, Dan. 4. Act. 12.21, 22, 23. Esop's Crow,
not content with her own likeness, went and borrowed a Feather of every Bird,
and then became so proud, that she scorned them all, which the Birds observing,
they came and plucked each one their feather back, and so left her naked. Even
so does God deal with all proud and ungrateful persons.

Hanani the Seer tells Asa King of Judah, Because thou have rested upon the
King of Syria, and have not rested in the Lord thy God; therefore is the Host
of the King of Syria escaped out of thy hand: adding thereto, The Ethiopians
and the Lubims, were they not a great Host, with chariots and horsemen exceeding
many? yet because thou did rest upon the Lord, he delivered them into thine
hand, 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 8. And again, being diseased in his feet, it is said, That
he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians; and what follows? Asa slept
with his Fathers, and dyed; his Physicians could do him no good without God:
the same Chapter, ver. 12.13.

CHAP. XLVIII.
THankfulness for one benefit, inviteth another: but how worthy is he to perish
in the next danger, that is not thankful for escaping the former? Ingratitude
forfeits mercies, as Merchants do all to the King, by not payment of Custom,
Because Pharaoh says, the River is mine own: therefore God says, I will dry
up the River Ezekiel. 29.3, 9. etc. Isa. 19.5, 6. Tamberlain having overcome
Bajazet, asked him whether he had ever given God thanks for making him so great
an Emperor? He confessed ingenuously, that he had never thought of it: To whom
Tamberlain replied, That it was no mervail so ungrateful a man should be made
such a spectacle of misery. All which wise Solomon confirms, Prove. 11.28. and
also Job, Chap. 31. ver. 24, 25, 28. Gods glory to him is as the Crown to the
King: Now there is less danger in stealing any thing from the King, then his
Crown* for if men rob him of his Tribute, or clip bis Coin, he may perhaps
pardon it: (though that were much, and he is not discreet that will run the
hazard.) But if they go about to take his Crown from him, there is no hope of
obtaining pardon for that.

God is very bountiful in all other things; his Wisdom he communicates, and his
Justice he distributes, and his Holiness he imparts, and his Mercy he bestows,
and his only Son he has freely given, as Paul shows, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. But
his Glory he will not give to another, as himself speaks, Isa. 42.8. And indeed
this is the main fruit and return that comes unto God from all his Works. This
in the New Testament is as the fat of the burnt-offering was in the Old: and we
know all the fat was the Lords, and he that did eat that, was to be cut off
from his people, Levit. 3.16. and 7.25. If you will see it in an example, look
upon Herod; who in stead of giving the glory of his gifts unto God, took it to
himself, and was cut off from his people, by, or after a strange and unheard of
manner, Acts 12.

And thus we see by what has been said, that if pride, covetousness,
hypocrisy, or any the like springs, shall set the wheels of our hearts a
moving, our Honey will prove but gall, and our Wine, Vinegar; yea, if these be
the ends of our doing duties, such an end will follow it, as we had better be
without it, even such a misery at the end, as will know no end of misery.

Let men therefore beware they rob not God of his glory, which he so much
stands upon, least Satan by God's just permission, rob them of their souls,
which they ought so much to stand upon.

Again secondly, if the Grace of God be the Fountain from which all our
endowments flow, and that God may be honored by our gifts, is the only end of
our enjoying them; let us not so much as share with God in squinting one eye at
Gods, and another at our own honor; Yea if God will reward no Work, nor bless it
with his Grace, unless it be intended to his glory: Let us direct all our
thoughts, speeches, and actions to his glory, as he has directed our Eternal
Salvation thereunto: Let us make God the Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last, of all our actions and endeavors; Let us add this to all our other
gifts, that we give the glory of them to God: As what else should men propose
for their end, then that glory which shall have no end? Yea let us with one
unanimous voice say, He has given us all the Grace and Happiness we have, and
we will give him all the possible thanks and honor we can; let it be our main
request and daily prayer: Teach us, O Lord, to receive the benefit of thy
merciful favors, and to return thee the thanks and the glory, and that for
ever and ever. And so much of the Ends, which we are to propound to our selves
in our beneficence; the lets and impediments follow.

CHAP. XLIX.
I Might mention many great lets and impediments, as Ignorance, Infidelity,
Pride, Intemperance, self-love, hard heartedness, and other the like, do much
hinder men's bounty and liberality to the poor, as may partly appear by what I
have already delivered; but nothing like Covetousness; yea name but
Covetousnese, and that includes all the rest. Covetousness is the Grave of all
good, it makes the heart barren of all good inclinations; and it is a bad
ground where no flower will grow.

It cannot be denied, but enough has been said in this and the Poors Advocate,
to persuade any rational man, not only that there is a necessity of this duty,
but sufficient to inflame him with a desire of performing it, according to the
utmost of his ability: But so it is, that the Covetous Miser is so far from
being prevailed withal, that he will not come so near the same, as to give it
the hearing.

Or suppose such an one should be so ingenuous as to hear it, there is no hope
of prevailing with him: As what think you, when that rich man, Mark 10 17. etc.
who ran after Christ, kneeled down to him, and was so inquisitive to know how
he might attain eternal life; yea, who had from his youth squared his life
according to Gods Law, insomuch that Christ loved him; Yet when he was
admonished by our Savior to sell all and give to the poor, and he should have
Treasure in Heaven, he turned his back upon Christ, and went away very
sorrowful, because he was mavelous rich. He had a good mind to Heaven in
reversion; but for all that, he would not part with his Heaven, whereof he had
present possession: Whence our Savior so bewails the miserable condition and
difficulty of such men's being saved, v. 17. to 26. And the Apostle the like,
Ephesians. 5.5. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. For if he that had so good affections, made
conscience of all his ways, was so desirous to be saved, that Christ was taken
with him; What hope of this Wretch that has a blockish, seared, and senseless
Conscience, that is past feeling, and never made scruple of any thing from his
infancy? No, these solid Arguments, and strong inducements from Gods Word, will
be so far from prevailing with him, that it is rare if he do not slight and
scorn what has been spoken. The covetous man knows no other God then his
belly, and desires no other Heaven then his Coffers full of Angels.

Thirdly and lastly, admit the best that can be expected, viz. that he shall
not only lend a listening ear to all that has been said, but that it does also
convince, and almost persuade him to become liberal; As I dare appeal to their
own consciences that have hitherto heard what has been alleged out of God's
Word, whether it has not made their hearts burn within them; whether they have
not been convinced, and with Agrippa, almost persuaded to become merciful, Acts
26.28. Whether with Pharaoh, their spirits have not began to thaw a little, Go,
do sacrifice to your God in this Land; yea in their judgments yielded to all
that has been demanded them, and been ready to pray some Moses to pray for
them: And yet harden and knit again, whereby all labor (like Moses Message, or
the sweet words of Paul) it utterly lost. The covetous man, though he be
convinced in his conscience, and does resolve to be bountiful, yet no hope of
his doing it; for his goodness is as a morning Cloud, and as a morning dew; it
goes away as the Lord once spoke to Ephraim and Judah, Hos 6.4.

Good thoughts to carnal and covetous hearts, are only as Passengers, not
Inhabitants; they may make it a thorough-fare, but they can never settle or
remain there: If at any time they melt with Pharaoh, they suddenly knit again.
Nor is there any heart made of flesh, that will not at some time or other
relent. Even Flint and Marble will in some weather stand in drops. It is not
only recorded of Pharaoh, that he did thus melt, and of Agrippa, that he was
almost persuaded to become good; but the holy Ghost further testifies, that
Esau wept; Ahab put on Sackcloth, that Judas repented, and restored; that
Foelix trembled; that Pilate took Christ's part, and washed his hands in witness
that he was free from the blood of that just man; that Balaam wished to dye the
death of the righteous; that Herod delighted in John's Ministry: And yet we see
that all came to nothing.

CHAP. L.
GOod deeds flow from good men (such as know themselves deputed Stewards, not
Independent Lords of their wealth) as naturally as springs out of Rocks: But
with the covetous Cormorant it is far otherwise; as good persuade a Caniball,
as the covetous to show mercy: To wrest any good deeds out of the Dives's of
these days, (though there be millions in the case of Lazarus) is far more hard
then to wring Verjuice out of a Crab; yea, you may as well press water out of a
stone. We read 1 Samuel 25. that churlish Laban ( Nabal I should say, though the
difference be so small, that these two infamous Churls spel each other's Name
backwards) when distressed David asked him victuals, he reviled him, when he
should have relieved him. Nothing more cheap then good Words; these he might
have given, and been never the poorer; but his foul mouth does not only deny,
and give him nothing, but that which was worse then nothing, bad Language; So
fares it with these Churls, when any David is driven to ask them Bread, they
give him stones instead thereof; let them be moved by some one to give an Alms,
or do some charitable deed, they cannot hear on that ear.

Or if this Wretch for his credit sake, does speak fair, all his good deeds be
only good words; and he may be answered as that Beggar did the Bishop, when
instead of an Alms he gave him his blessing, That if his blessing had been
worth a penny, he would not have been so bountiful. So that if every house were
of his profession, Charities Hand would no longer hold up Poverties head.

Words from a dead man, and deeds of Charity from a covetous man, are both
alike rare, and hard to come by. The Mountains are not more barren of fruit,
then he of goodness; The Rocks are not so hard as his heart; he is a friend to
none but himself; His Charity begins at home, and there it ends. To urge or
persuade him to be liberal, is all one, as to entreat a Tiger to be tame and
gentle, or a Wolf to be pitiful and merciful.

There is such an antipathy between his heart, and one that is in distress,
that he has not the patience to hear a poor man speak; yea out of a desperate
resolution to give him nothing, he will not vouchsafe to look upon him, but turn
his face or eyes another way, as though the poor man were such an eye-fore, as
might not be endured. And this he does for fear of being infected with the
contagion of the poor man's misery; or lest it should cause a spmpathy, and
^^llow-feeling of his calamity; or lest his co^scious eyes should check his
churlish heart, and put him in mind of his barbarous inhumanity.

But let all such be assured, that as they turn away their eyes from the poor
in the day of their misery, so the Lord will turn away his face from them in the
day of their calamity: And as they have stopped their ears at the cry of the
poor, so they themselves shall cry, and God will not hear them, as it is Prove.
21.13. And just it is, that as the unmerciful will not hear others when they
stand in need, so God should not regard them when they shall stand in need:
Blessed are the merciful (says our Savior) but that stands not with his
disposition; for the penny which comes out of his purse, is like a drop of
blood drawn from his heart; and his reward shall be answerable.

The covetous man's heart is like his Chest, ever close shut, except it be to
receive. He is sparing and niggardly in giving, but open handed to receive
whatsoever is brought; like an Hog or Medler, he never does good to any til he
be dead and rotten, He is like a Butlers earthen box, out of which nothing can
be drawn til it be broken; Or some kind of Vermin, which is of no use til
uncased. He resembles a sponge that soaks up excessively; but til Death comes
with his Iron grasp to squeeze him, he will not yield one drop; Only then some
good comes of his Goods.

Indeed it is great pity the State does not by him, as Epaminondas did by such
another, who having notice of a rich man that had no care of the poor, (but
would answer them like churlish Nabal, Shall I give my meat and drink unto men
whom I know not? Or like Cardan Doctor of Physiek in Rome, who when Outlandish
Scholars came to him, would answer them, What have I to do with Forraigners? I
am Cardan, I care for no man except he brings me money) sent a poor man to him,
and commanded him under great penalty to give him presently six hundred Crowns;
who hearing it, came to Epaminondas, and asked him the cause thereof; Who
replied, This man is poor and honest; and thou who have cruelly robbed the
Commonwealth, art rich; and so compelled him to be liberal in spite of his
teeth: Howbeit if they hanged him up (as Atillus a good King of this Land, did
all oppressors of the poor, and distributed their Goods to those they had
impoverished) they did him no wrong: But for want of this, like Horse-Leeches,
or a sort of Vermin too homely to name, that have no place for voidance of
their excrements, being nevertheless very insatiable, they swell with sucking
of blood, and so burst.

O the wretched and sad condition of a sordid, sensual self-lover, of a
covetous miserly muck-worm, and the small hope there is of his being better!

The salvage creatures, as Lions, Tigers, Bears, etc. by Gods appointment and
instinct, came to seek the Ark; men did not only slight it, but scorned and
scoffed at it. Nebuchadnezzar was more a Beast before he grazed in the Forest,
then while he did, or afterward.

The death of Christ darkened the Sun; shoke the earth, clave the Rocks, opened
the Graves, and raised the dead; all could not put faith into the Jews hearts,
brutish, yea even senseless Creatures, are more sensible then corrupted reason.
And of all the rest of the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees who were covetous,
were the least sensible, because they did shut their eyes, stopped their ears,
and barrocado their hearts against all our Savior did or said; which is just
the case of these men.

All objects to a meditating Solomon, (a wise and holy Christian) are like
wings, to rear and mount up his thoughts to Heaven. But these sit like sots,
under the sound of Gods Word, and are not at all sensible; yea, though they
feel his Ax at the root of their consciences, and be smitten with some remorse,
yet they go on in sin: But what became of Pharaoh that would not hearken to
Moses, though he came with a Message from God? Of the rich Glutton, that made
no more reckoning of Moses and the Prophets? Of Lot's sons in Law, that counted
their Fathers fore-warnings a mere mockage?

The Birds of the Air seem to be wiser then we; for when they know the Gin,
they will avoid it: But we knowing the Devils illusions, yet wilfully run into
them. Sin blinded Sampson so, that finding Dallilah's treachery three times,
could not be warned, although he never found her true in any thing, Judge. 16.
The case of all impenitent sinners, but especially of the covetous, as
hereafter they will acknowledge when Hell Flames has opened their eyes, which
Covetousness hitherto has blinded, and made mere Atheists; for they
acknowledge no other God but Mammon: Every covetous man is a close Atheist, as
thinking it weakness to believe, wisdom to profess any Religion: The Children
of Israel would not believe Samuel before they saw a miracle, 1 Samuel 12.16.
etc. should the covetous man see as many miracles as Moses wrought before
Pharaoh, he would be the same man still, and a rare miracle it will be if ever he
be saved, as our Savior shows, Mar. 10.25.

CHAP. LI.
ANd so you have (in this, and the other two parts of the Poors Advocate) the
necessity, the matter, the manner, the nature, the kinds, the quantity, the
subject, the object, the time or continuance, the means, the motives, the ends,
the impediments, and the remedies of this most excellent Grace; or Christian
Duty, so often pressed, patterned, and commended in the Word. It remains only
that I should apply them; for I have more need to press the payment, then prove
the Debt, though sure I am, it is from the foulness of men's stomachs,
prevailing above the goodness of the food, if what has been delivered, does
not prove effectual. Wherefore in the first place, Has God so strictly
commanded it? And is there such a necessity of showing mercy to the poor
members of Jesus Christ? That there is no being saved without it, has God
therefore given us all, that we may impart some part thereof to others that
want? Shall God have glory by it? Has he promised to bless the merciful man in
his temporal, civil, spiritual, and eternal estate? Is there no such way to
grow rich, as by being bountiful to the poor? Is it the most certain and
infallible way never to want? Is sparing in this case, the worst thrift? Will
withholding from the poor, bring a man to poverty? Shall we have the benefit of
their prayers, and their loins to bless us? Is this the Way to obtain God's
blessing upon our persons, whereby we shall be kept in perpetual safety, and
delivered from the malicious practices of all our enemies? Will God hear us,
and send us succor in all times of need (as we hear and pity the poor) and even
make our beds when we are sick. Will what we have this way distributed, stand us
in more stead at the hour of Death, and Day of Judgment, then all the Wealth
in the World? Shall the merciful be rewarded with illumination and conversion?
W^^ these Works of Mercy bring such joy and peace, confirm our hope, and
sweeten all our afflictions? Are they evident signs of saying Graces? And do
they assure us of our future reward; and fruition of God's presence hereafter?
Is it the only way to an honorable and honest repute and report, living and
dead, procuring all love and respect from good and bad: Will God bless the
merciful man with an happy match, and a godly off^spring? Shall what we give,
be paid again unto our children, and posterity, with an addition of all other
blessings, who otherwise shall not prosper, but be Vagabonds, and beg their
bread. Is it a thing so pleasing to God, that he accounts what is given to
them, as lent to him: And so acceptable to Christ (by reason of the near union
that is between him, the poor and us, being but one mistical body, whereof he
is the Head) that what we do to them, his members, he takes as done to himself;
and will accordingly reward it, or plague the neglect thereof, both upon us and
ours here, and our bodies and souls hereafter: Is it so, that what we disburse
in this World, we shall receive again by Bill of Exchange in Heaven? And that
it is not so much given, as laid up? insomuch that we may truly say, What we
gave, that we have. If besides all this, God has promised to reward a little
money, meat and clothes, with an infinite and Eternal Kingdom of glory, have the
poor as true a right to it, as we have to the residue? Are we no less beholding
to the poor, then they are to us? Would we (were it our case) think the
contrary very unequal? (For if we look on the sufferings of others, as heavier
then our own, this will beget thankfulness; if we look on the doings, gifts and
graces of others, as better then our own, this will beget humility.) Shall they
thereby be the better able to serve God in their several stations? Shall they
have cause to pray for, and praise God for us? Will it stop our enemies mouths,
and make them think the better of our Religion, and happily win them to embrace
the truth; at least, seeing our good works, they will glorify our Father which
is in heaven? Whereas the Poor shall only have some outward relief and
comfott thereby? Shall we fare the better for it in our souls, bodies, names,
estates and posterities, with many the like which might be added for our
e^couragement to this duty? Then they should serve (as one would think) as so
many effectual and strong arguments to move every Christian to the diligent and
frequent doing of them.

Yea, by this time (as I hope) I have made some way in the Worldlings heart, to
relish the relieving of the poor; at least it concerns men to urge and press
these motives upon themselves, until they have compelled their unwilling wills
to resolve to interest themselves into so many promises and blessings, and to
shun the danger of so many threats and judgments, as the neglect thereof will
incur: As did we thus hide the Word of God in our hearts, and particularly
apply these things to our Consciences, it would work this Grace in us all:
Which otherwise will prove no other, then as a sweet harmony of Music to ^
deaf man. It is not unknown to us, that Nathan wrought more upon David by a
particular, private admonition, then all the Lectures of the Law could do for
three quarters of a year together.

Yea, let but this be done, or indeed do but well weigh what has been said, and
it will be sufficient to persuade any covetous Nabal alive (if he has either
heart or brain) or indeed any care of, or love to himself or his, to become as
liberal as Zacheus himself. However I doubt not but some will be so wise as to
consider the premises, and thereupon to give as God in his Word injoins; And
that others will do the same, if it be but merely out of self-love; for there
cannot possibly be more rational or strong inducements, more rare and
remarkable Benefits and Promises to any duty, then is propounded to this
particular Grace. Wherefore if there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercy
toward your selves or others, think of these things, accept of these
blessings; rush not upon so many Curses, but break off your sins and former
unmercifulness, by righteousness, and your iniquity by showing mercy toward
the poor, Dan. 42 Distribute to the necessities of the Saints, minister unto
them of your Substance, like Mary Magdalen, Ioanna, the wife of Chuza, and
Susanna; And give your selves to Hospitality, Romans 12.13. Luke 8.2.3. Suffer
not the naked to lodge without garment, and without covering in the cold, Job
24.7. Yea, if thou do but well weigh what benefit it will bring to thee, by
being bountiful to them, thou will be glad to meet with, and invite such an
object, or opportunity of doing good, and be thankful for it; even as Zerxes
the Persian Monarch said, when Themistocles came to him, being banished his own
Country; Let the Athenians send us more of such guests. And indeed, if men
will not be moved, nor drawn to good with the threefold cord, inerrableness of
Precepts, innumerableness of Examples, inestimableness of rewards, (and yet
here is more then a sevenfold Cord) no hope that any means should prevail with
them, as St. Austin speaks: If Othniel be told what preferment he shall get for
taking Kiriath Sephar, he will undertake that difficult task, Josh. 15, 16, 17.
And if David does but hear what shall be done to the man that kills Goliath, he
dares accept the challenge of that terrible Champion, 1 Samuel 17. If Moses has
once respect unto the recompense of the reward, he will be content to suffer
affliction with the People of God, Heb. 6.11.25, 26. And if the Apostles expect
to receive some great thing of Christ, they will soon forsake all, and follow
him, Matthew. 19.27, 28. We should therefore be forward to keep this Commandment
of showing mercy to the poor, since in the keeping of it, there is great
reward, Psalm. 19.11.

CHAP. LII.
AGain secondly, if Bounty be the best and surest way to Plenty; If such Gain
comes by giving; If this be the only way to have our Barns filled, and our
Presses to burst with abundance; If by giving to the poor for Christ's sake, our
riches shall increase and multiply, like the Widows handful of meal, or those
Loaves and Fishes in the Gospel, and that the more we give, the more we have:
That liberallity will make a man lastingly rich, as having Gods Word that such
shall never want: If we can no way be so liberal to our selves, as by giving to
the poor, and in them to the possessor of all things; It should methinks make
rich men of all others, put the same in practice, since they are all for gain,
and looking after commodity; all for treasuring up, all for themselves, all
for riches, it being their only summum bonum; For no such way to increase
their Estates, or benefit themselves, can ever be found out; this will do it
above what they are able any other way, or what they were ever yet acquainted
with: How then should it take with them? How should it not whet them on, and
make them put the same in practice? For should you rich men plot and break your
brains to study and contrive all the days of your lives how you may do your
selves the greatest good, this is the only way.

It is fabled of Midas, that whatsoever he touched, it was turned into Gold;
but it may more truly be so said of the hand of Charity; for that turns a Cup
of cold Water into a never failing Mine of Gold: As thus; if we but sow the
seed of our Beneficence, we shall not only reap an earthly crop, but have also
an heavenly harvest, which will never fail us; it will return unto us a double
Harvest, the crop of all temporal and spiritual benefits in this life, and of
everlasting blessedness in the life to come. This is the true Philosophers
Stone, yea it exceeds by far, all that any report of it. For the Lord will
repay and reward us, not only with the true Treasure of spiritual graces, and
eternal glory; but stooping to our infirmity, even multiply and pay us with our
own money also, even with the coin of worldly blessings, which is so current
among us. And what greater gain can be imagined, then to change Earth for
Heaven, transitory trifles for eternal treasures, the bread of men for the
bread of Angels, rotten rags for glorious robes, and a little drink, yea a cup
of cold water (if the Well or River be our best Celler) for the Water of Life,
which will infinitely delight and satisfy us, without glutting or satiety.
Then is our Saviors words, Luke 12.33. worth harkening to of all rich men,
where he says; Give alms, provide your selves bags which wax not old, a
treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither
moth corrupts. And indeed it being so, a man would think there needed no
pressing, or persuading any to this duty, that have either grace or wit; for
who does not wish well to himself and his? and yet no duty more neglected;
insomuch that I can never enough admire! the little Charity of most rich men in
these days, or pity their simplicity. For the want of Charity is the strongest
conviction of folly that can be. Nor were it possible they should be so
close-fisted, if they were not as barren of Wit, as they abound in wealth* As
observe but the depth of such an one, he buies a Lease of seven years, with an
Inheritance that is everlasting.

There can be nothing more strange in my judgment, then that covetous men, who
are all for themselves, and for gain, should so neglect the greatest gain and
interest, (with infallible security) that ever was heard of! But Solomon gives
the reason, Prove. 17.16. for what he speaks there of a Fool, is more true of a
Covetous and Uncharitable Rich man; He has a price put into his hand, but he
wants an heart to make use thereof. As O the brave opportunities such have! to
be happy, and to make their seed happy here, and much more hereafter, if they
were wise, and did but truly love themselves, and their precious souls. Whereas
now like fools and mad men, they will needs be more miserable then thousands
that want those blessings, wherein they abound: yet so foolish and mad are most
rich men, as common experience does too well teach us: As, will they not lend a
man on his Bond for six in the hundred? sooner then accept God's hundred for
one, ensured on a Word so firm, that one Iota of it shall not perish in the
general fire of heaven and earth; and how could this be? were not these words
of Christ, Matthew. 25.41. to the end* and the great day, together with the signs
of God's love manifested on the Cross, a mere tale that is told, and of no
concernment to us. But

CHAP. LIII.
THirdly, If with what measure we mete to the poor, it shall be measured to us
again, as it fared with Dives touching Lazarus, Luke 16.20, 25. If the sentence
of Absolution or Condemnation at the day of judgment, shall be pronounced either
for, or against us, according as we have performed or omitted these works of
mercy; to those and only those who have fed the hungry, clothed the naked,
visited the sick, etc. Come ye blessed, etc. And contrarily, to those that
have not done these duties in relieving Christ's members, according to their
abilities, and the others necessities; Depart ye cursed, into everlasting Fire,
etc. In what a case are all miserly and unmerciful muckworms? Yea what will
become of most rich men in these days, who being worth thousands, will let the
poor starve rather then relieve them with any considerable supply? I profess it
is wonderful to me, that ever such sordid, self-lovers, can look for, or
expect to find the least mercy from God at the great Day of Retribution.
Certainly they must needs think there will be no such Day of Judgment as Christ
speaks of, or that he is a notorious Liar, and means not to be as good as his
word; For if they do in the least believe either of these; yea if they did but
come so near believing, as to grant such a thing may be, or it is possible,
they could not be such careless, witless, and wicked fools, as to venture and
hazard the salvation or damnation of their souls, upon the doubtful event of
such a weighty business.

O my Brethren! bethink your selves (before your Glasses be run out) be
persuaded, be persuaded to love your money less, and your selves and souls
more. And do not lose your souls to save your silver; or if you do, you will one
day dearly rue it, I mean when you come in Hell: As let me ask your Consciences
but this question, What would you give in those scorching flames to be
delivered out of them, into Abraham's bosom, or the Kingdom of Heaven? Yea, what
would you not give, if you then had it? Let Nabal be but ransomed out of Hell,
he will no longer be a Churl: Let Dives return from that fiery Lake, to his
former riches, the sensible World shall admire his Charity. Let Judas be
ransomed out of Hell, he will no more betray his Master for money. Let Esau find
the same favor, he will never again sell his Birthright. Nabal then would no
longer oppress. Achitophel then will be no longer a false-Counsellor, nor Ahab a
bloody Tyrant. Finally, if all damned souls could but be admitted to come out
of Hell, and get a promise of Heaven upon condition of extraordinary obedience
for a thousand years, how precisely would they live? And how would they bestir
themselves, that they might please God, having once tasted of those torments
which now many are in doubt of, because no man ever saw Hell, that returned
back to make the relation? yea, if the offer were but made to these Churls on
their deathbeds, when Conscience begins to accuse, God appears to be angry,
and Satan is ready to seize upon their souls, they would then give all they
have, had they ten thousand worlds, for a short reprieve, to the end they might
have the like possibility; As certainly, when Pharaoh saw the Sea ready to
swallow him; he was heartily sorry that ever he had wronged poor innocents, and
oppressed God's own portion: How much more, when he felt the flames of
Hellfire about his ears? And the like of Ahab, touching Naboth, and all such
covetous and cruel men. What gained Laban, and Nabal, or Dives, or that rich
man in the Gospel, by heaping up Riches, and engrossing all to themselves, when
shortly after by their covetousness and cruelty, they both lost their Estates,
and themselves? The foolish Virgins to save, or spare a a shilling, brought no
Oil; but when their Lamps were out, and the Bridegroom was come, what would
they have given? Yea, what would they not have given for a little Oil, and for
entrance with the wise, into the Wedding? Such will one day be the case of all
covetous men: Indeed at present none are wise but they; for they account poor
honesty but a kind of simplicity; but then they will acknowledge themselves to
have been of all fools, the greatest; nor deserve they any pity: Who pities
that man's death, that having the Medicine by him which can help him, dies and
will not take it? If ever you see a drowning man refuse help, conclude him a
wilful Murderer.

O my Brethren! look not for Dives nor Judas to come out of Hell to warn you,
since all this that I have said, and much more, is written for your learning
and warning; lest it fare with you, as it did with the Greeks of
Constantinople, who had store of Wealth; but because they would spare none to
the reparation of the Walls, and maintenance of the Soldiers, they lost all to
the Turks, which afterward no money could recover. Or as it fared with
Hedelburough, which was lost through the Citizens Covetousness; for being full
of Gold and Silver, they would not pay the Soldiers that should have defended
them; Though neither their folly nor loss was comparable to this of yours; For
what is the Loss of Life or Country, to the loss of a man's Soul, and the
Kingdom of Heaven. The covetous Jews, spoken of by Josephus, loved their money
dearly; when being besieged, they did in gorge their Gold for all the night,
and seek it in their close Stools the next morning: But nothing so well as
these Cormorants I am speaking of, who by covetousness and overmuch sparing,
resolve to lose Life, Substance, Soul, Heaven, Salvation and all. O wretched,
wicked and foolish generation!

CHAP. LIVE.
FOurthly, If there needs no other ground of our last and heaviest doom, than,
Ye have not given, Ye have not visited: If the main point which Christ will scan
at the day of Judgment, is the point of mercy. If he will accuse the Wicked at
the last day, not only for taking the meat out of the poors mouths, or
plucking their apparel off their backs; but for not feeding them, and putting
clothes upon their backs, as is evident by Matthew. 25. and as I have made plain;
then are all Negative Christians in an ill taking.

It is strange to see how many several ways men have to deceive themselves: One
thinks it enough that he is of the outward visible Church, born of Christian
Parents, has been baptized, etc. Another so confidently hopes for Salvation by
Faith, that he little regards honesty, or true dealing amongst men. Another
sort flatter themselves with promises of mercy; as, Christ suffered for all;
God would have all to be saved; At what time soever a sinner repents, he shall
be forgiven, and the like; and with these they batten their own presumptuous
confidence, be their lives never so licentious. Yea where is the man that will
not boast of his love to Christ? though they even hate all that any way
resemble him; but of all others, such as live harmless Lives, and do no hurt,
think it sufficient, and that it greatly matters not for doing good, so they do
no evil. And in these conceits they go on to the end of their lives, without
once questioning how they shall enter in at the straight Gate. Their deceitful
hearts serve them as Iael did Sizera, who flatteringly said to him, Come in my
Lord, giving him Milk, and covering him with a Mantle, but withal, nailing his
head to the gronnd. As see how the Rich Glutton flattered himself with hopes,
until he was in Hel-flames: For notwithstanding he had denied poor Lazarus the
very crumbs that fell from his Table, yet he could challenge Abraham for his
Father, saying, Father Abraham have mercy on me, etc. Luke 16 But refused he
was, because he had not the works, nor indeed the Faith of Ahraham, though he
might seem to profess and pretend it. And the like of those Jews, John 8. For
they could boast to Christ, that Abraham was their Father; but he gave them a
cutting Answer, If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the works of
Abraham, ver. 39. Vainly do they speak of their love to Christ, who yet are
wanting to his members. Neither can there be a truer argument of a godless
person, then unmercifulness: If we know a man unm^rciful, we may boldly say, He
is ungodly, John 3.17. The lack of Charity, is the conviction of Hypocrisy, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, etc. The righteous is merciful, and gives, Psalm. 37.21, 22. But
the Wicked are so far from this, that they borrow, and pay not again. The
Father of Mercies has no Children but the merciful, Matthew. 5.7. He that is not
a feeling-Member of others miseries, is not of that Mystical Body, whereof
Christ is the Head. It is not who is called a Christian, or who is baptized;
for in that number we shall find abundance of Heretics, no fewer Hypocrites,
and inn^merable ungodly persons; some not informed in their Judgments, the
rest not reformed in their lives; Neither is it enough that we are civil honest
men whom none can justly accuse; for we are commanded 1 Pet. 3.11. to eschew
evil, and to do good; to eschew evil, is the first lesson of Christianity, but
not all; to do good is the second, and greater half, 2 ^im. 2.19. Let every one
that calls on the Name of the Lord, depart from iniquity; that is one step, but
not high enough; We must also do the will of our Father, John 7.17. Every Tree
that brings not forth good fruit, (for all it brings forth no bad) shall be cut
down for the Fire; And the servant that does not employ and increase his
Talent, (for all he returns it safe and whole to his Master) shall be bound
hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, Matthew. 25.30.

Thou have a servant who is neither Thief nor Drunkard, nor Swearer; no, none
is able to tax him with any vice or unthriftiness; yet bacause he sits all day
with his hand in his bosom, and does nothing, thou correctest him: Why what
harm has he done? Thou can not charge him with any thing but his not doing
of something, yet he deserves chastisement: So in this case there needs no more
to prove thee wicked, and to make thee of the number of those Goats which shall
be placed at Christ's left hand, and to whom he shall say, Depart ye cursed,
then that thou have not done these works of mercy, which are no less commanded,
then the wickedst actions are forbidden.

Good deeds are such, that no man is saved for them, nor without them. Indeed
Faith is the life of a Christian; but the breath whereby he is known to live,
is Charity, 1 Cor, 13.3. Faith does justify, our works do testify that we are
justified: Therefore justify thy Faith, that thy Faith may justify thee.
There is much Faith talked of, but little faithfulness manifested; abundance of
love, but not a spark of Charity, Gal. 5.22. But let men pretend what they will,
he that has Grace, or the love of God in his heart, will show it in Works of
mercy, to the end, that God may be honored, and others won and edified thereby.
Blessed are the pure in heart, says our Savior, for they shall see God,
Matthew. 5.8. They must lead virtuous lives on Earth, that ever expect in Heaven
to see the Lord Jesus. Now the inward disposition of the heart is outwardly
engraven in the life. Show me thy faith by thy works, says James, Iam. 2.18.
That is, by thy active obedience, which consists in doing God's Commandments;
and passive obedience, in suffering his Chastisements. Though Faith be alone in
Justification, yet not in the justified; as the Eye, though alone in seeing,
yet not in him that sees, but joined with the Ears, Nose, Hands, and many
other members of the body.

Faith the Queen of Graces, has her Gentleman Usher before, and her Servants
following after. If you see not Repentance go before Faith; nor Works attending
on her: know that it is not she. There is a zeal without knowledge, and there
is a knowledge without zeal; there is a faith without obedience, and there is
an obedience without faith; there is a love without fear, and there is a fear
without love; and both are hypocrites. We are justified by faith, says Paul,
Romans 4.3. We are justified by works, says James, Iam. 2.21 St. James dealt with
them that stood too much upon Faith without Works, S. Paul dealt with them that
stood too much upon Works without Faith.

Wicked men, if we mark it, are all for extremes, and extremes only bear rule
in this World, because there is still but one virtue for two vices, which cowch
so close beside her, that the natural man can scarce see her; as for instance,
you shall ever see Pride on the one side, Rusticity on the other side, and
comeliness in the midst; Flattery on the one side, Malice on the other side,
and Love in the midst: Diffidence on the one side, Presumption on the other
side, and Faith in the midst. Superstition on the one side, Atheism on the
other side, and Religion in the midst: Ignorance on the one side, Curiosity on
the other side, and knowledge in the midst: Carefulness on the one side,
Carelessness on the other side, and Diligence in the midst: Covetousness on the
one side, Prodigallity on the other side, and Frugallity in the midst. But to
these Virtues, or to keep the mean, Worldlings are always to seek, as hereafter
they will be of a blessing.

Gods Servants are known by this, they square all their actions and intentions
by the Rule of the Word, as knowing that if they do never so much to satisfy
another Will, or their own, it avails nothing with God, if it be not done for
God. Therefore David prays, Teach me O Lord, to do thy will, not my Will; for
we need not be taught to do our own wills; every man can go to Hell without a
Guide. Now he that will do Gods Will, and live by the direct Rule of his Word,
must repent and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15. that is, join with his faith in
God's Promises, obedience to his Precepts; For Faith and Obedience are as
inseparable as life and motion, the Sun and its light.

And al^beit in our Justification, Christ says, Fiat tibi secundum fidem tuam;
be it unto thee according to thy Faith, Matthew 9.29. Yet in our salvation,
Redditur unicuique secundum opera sua; Every man shall be rewarded according to
his works, Matthew. 16.27. Neither will Christ say when he shall sit upon his
throne, Ye have believed, but you have done; Come ye blessed, Matthew. 25.35. and
in Matthew. 25.21. Well done good Servants; not well known, nor well spoken, nor
well purposed, but well done: This is the perfect Rule, Gal. 6.16. And as many as
walk according to this Rnle, peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God. Again, it is not knowing, or hearing, or preaching, or casting
out Devils in Christ's Name, nor praying, Lord, Lord, etc. but he that does his
will; and when he has done it, accounts himself an uprofitable servant; that
shall be saved, Luke 17.10. And indeed, if men were not wilfully blind, and did
not choose to follow the deceitfulness of their own hearts, rather then believe
God's Word; It were impossible they should ever hope for mercy without filial
Obedience, since the Scripture thoroughout continually calls for practice, as
to ad some instances to the former. If you ask God who shall dwell in his holy
Mountain, he says, The man which walks uprightly, Psalm. 15.2. If ye ask
Christ who shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven; he says, Not they which
cry, Lord, Lord, (though they cry twice Lord) but they which do the will of my
Father, Mat. 7.22. If you ask him again, How you may come to Heaven; he says,
Keep the Commandments, Luke 18.20. If you ask him again, Who are blessed? He
says, Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and do it; here are none but
doers. If you ask an Angel, who are blessed? he says, Blessed are they which
keep the words of this Book Revel. 22.7. Here are none but doers. If you ask
David, Who are blessed? He says, Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he
that does righteousness, Psalm. 106.3. and 103.18. If you ask Solomon, Who are
blessed? He says, The man is blessed that keeps God's Law, Prove. 29.18. Here
are none but doers. If you ask Esaias, Who are blessed? He says, He which does
this, is blessed, Esaias 56.2. If you ask St. James, Who are blessed? He says,
The doer of the Word is blessed in his deed, James 1.25. Here is none but doers
mentioned, Matthew. 7, 21. Romans 2.13. So that blessedness and doing, go always
together; For as the works that Christ did, bore witness that he was Christ,
Ioh. 10.25. So the works that we do, must bear witness that we are Christians.
And least any man should look to be blessed without obedience, as Christ
calls Love the greatest Commandment; so Solomon calls Obedience the end of
all; as though without obedience all were to no end, Eccles. 12.13.

When God created the Trees in Paradise, Genesis 1. he commanded them to bring
forth fruit: So when he creates a lively faith in any one, he commands it to
bring forth Works. And when our Savior would prove himself to John, to be the
true Messiah indeed; he said to his Disciples, Tell John what what things you
have heard and seen; not only heard, but seen, Matthew. 11.4. So if we will prove
our selves to be Christ's Disciples indeed, we must do that which may be seen,
as well as heard. John was not only called the Voice of a Crier, but a Burning
Lamp, which might be seen.

James does not say, Let me hear thy Faith; but let me see thy Faith: As the
Angels put on the shape of men, that Abraham might see them; so Faith must put
on Works, that the World may see it. The works which I do, says Christ, bear
witness of me. And he always linketh Faith and Repentance together; Repent and
believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15. Therefore that which Christ has joined, let no
man separate, Mark 10.9.

I know the Antinomians preach another Gospel; but this is the old Orthodox and
common received truth: They that in life will yield no obedience to the Law,
shall in death have no benefit by the Gospel. And though the Law have no power
to condemn us, yet it has power to command us: Lex datur ut gratia
quaereretur, Evangelium, ut Lex impleretur. The Law sends us to Christ to be
saved; and Christ sends us back again to the law to learn obedience. The former
is plain; The Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be
justisted by faith, Gal. 3.24. The other is as manifest; If thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19.17.

Let our Faith then be seen by our faithfulness, and our Love by our Charity:
and think not to partake of what God has promised, but by doing in some
measure what he has commanded. To conclude in a word, God's servants are
known, by humility and charity; the Devil's by pride and cruelty. Our Persons
are justified by our Faith, our Faith is justified by our Charity, our Charity
by Humility, and the actions of a Godly Life: And so much of the fourth Use.

CHAP. LV.
FIfthly, if we be but Stewards of what we have, and that our superfluities are
really the Poors due: then let none object, (when told of their unmercifulness)
What I have is mine own: Or, May I not do as I list with mine own; for it is
neither their own, nor at their own disposing; their wealth is their Makers,
and they must do with it as he in his Word injoins them.

Nor does this argument always hold good in civil matters: It Is a rule in Law,
No man may use his own right to the Commonwealths wrong, or damage. The Law
provides, that a man shall not burn his own corn, nor his own house: That he
shall not drown his own Land; nay, a man may not bind himself from marriage, or
the manuring or tillage of his own Land, because it is against the good of the
Commonwealth.

Wherefore flatter thy self no longer, but look to it: thou have not two souls,
that thou might hazard one of them. Lose not thy soul, to save thy purse; but
show mercy, if ever thou look to find any. And hear the poor, if ever thou will have God to hear thee: For he has said it, (that will one day Audit the
poor man's complaints, and thy Stewardships account) that no sin but unkindness
to thy Savior in his suffering members, shall be cast into thy dish; to the
feeding of the never-dying worm of conscience.

Sixthly art thou but a Steward put in trust? and art thou to give an account
unto God, how thou have husbanded thy Master's Goods; and will this be the bill
of particulars thou have to give up? Item, so much spent in pride, so much in
lust, so much spent upon revenge, so much upon dice, drunkenness, drabs, and
the like great sums all laid out upon thy self, in the pursuance of thy lust:
But when it comes to a work of mercy, as* What have you done for God? What for
Christ? What ^or the members of Christ? What for the advancement of Religion,
or any pious work, or service. Item, nothing, or as good as nothing. Or thus;
Item received strength, and laid out oppression: Item received riches, and laid
out covetousness: received health, and laid out riot and drunkenness. Item
received speech, and laid out swearing, cursing, lying: received sight, and
laid out lusting; or perhaps, Item so many score pounds laid out in malice and
suits of Law: so many hundreds in lusts and vanities, in feasting and foppery.
So many thousands in building great houses: Item to the Poor in my Will to be
paid at my death, forty shillings; to the Preacher for a funeral Oration to
commend me, ten or twenty shillings: Item to beggars when they came to my door;
or when I walked abroad, a few scraps that I knew not what else to do with, and
sometimes a few Farthings: Item so much spent in excess and superfluity, and
so little in performing the works of mercy: so much laid out upon worldly
vanities, and sinful pleasures; and so little for good uses, especially for
relieving Christ's poor members.

Will this Bill pass current, when God comes to cast it up? When thou have laid
out all for thy self, either in Apparel, or in Feasting, Drinking, etc. for thy
self, self-credit, self-delight and content, even amounting to scores,
hundreds, thousands; while for pious and charitable uses, there comes in here
and there only two-pences, three-pences, and such poor short reckonings, not
worthy to be summed up. Oh miserable man! how will thou answer this before the
Great, Just and Terrible Judge of all the World? And how will thou fare? If
these accounts be not mended in this life, thou will never have thy Quietus
est in the life to come. Methinks I could pity these men whom the World so
adores, even with tears of blood, when I seriously consider their latter ends.

CHAP. LVI.
BUt seventhly, there is another sort worse then these, viz. Such as are not
only strangers unto mercy, but are opposites and enemies to it, walking in a
quite contrary way. These do not feed the poor, but they flay them; they do not
clothe them, but they strip them; they make not any provision for them, but
cast how utterly to ruin, and undo them; instead of healing them, they wound
them; instead of relieving, they rob and oppress them; and instead of being to
them any ease and comfort, they lay upon them heavy burdens and pressures.
These Hammons, hanging is too good for them; for if all those shall be bid,
Depart ye cursed, that have not given to Christ's poor members, What will become
of thee that have taken away from them? that have beaten the poor to pieces,
and ground their faces? that have not only eaten up the Vineyard, but keep
the spoil of the poor in thine house, as the Prophet Isaiah complains, Isa.
3.14, 15. If the Levite be so severely censured for not helping the distressed
man, Luke 10.30. etc. What will be thy portion and punishment, that have robbed
him, and have dealt with him as the cunning Fowler deals with the poor birds;
who sets his limed ears of Corn, to catch them in an hard Frost, or great Snow,
when they be ready to starve.

Dives did but deny to give his own, thou have taken away other men's. Now if he
(says Austin) be tormented in endless flames, that gives not his own goods to
them that need, that gives not meat to the hungry, clothes to the naked, that
takes not the stranger into his house, that visits not his brethren when they
are in prison, as it is Matthew. 25.41. etc. What shall become of him that takes
away other men's, that robs the poor, turns them out of their own houses, and
casts them into prison? O remember I beseech you, if that servant in the Gospel
was bound to an everlasting prison, that only challenged his own debt, for
that he had not pity on his fellow, as his Master had pity on him, whither shall
they be cast that unjustly vex their neighbors, quarrel for that which is none
of theirs, and lay title to another man's propriety?

When the Prophet that was slain by a Lion (though an holy man) buies so dearly
such a slight frailty, of a credulous mistaking: what shall become of heinous
and presumptuous sinners?

Christians should be like Christ: but how unlike to him are these men? Christ
made himself poor to make them rich: but they make many poor to make themselves
rich: yea, they sink others eyes into their heads with leanness, while their
own eyes start out with fatness: and to fill the other bag they will pare a
poor man to the very bones.

Again, many men be unreprovable, and yet rejected: alas, what then shall
become of our gluttony, drunkenness, pride, oppression, bribery, cozenages,
adulteries, blasphemies, and of our selves for them? If he shall have judgment
without mercy that shows not mercy; what shall become of subtraction and
rapine,, Psalm. 109.11. Do thou not know, that with what measure thou metest
to others here, God will measure to thee again hereafter? Mat. 7.2. And were it
not better then, to prevent a mischief before, then repent you did not when
it is too late? O that thou would but fore-think, what thy Covetousness will
one day cost thee. As how will it one day grieve these griping Ingrossers, and
Oppressors? when they shall receive a multiplicity of torments, according to
the multiplicity o^ their cruel and unconscionable deeds? and to the number
also of their abused benefits. They will then wish, that they had not done so
ill, nor fared so well upon earth; that they might have fared less ill in Hell.
For if for one sin at the first, God plagued a world of men; how will he plague
one man for a world of sin?

Consider but these things, thou cruel and unmerciful rich man, and thou can
not choose but tremble. If then they be so terrible to hear, what will it be
everlastingly to feel them? If so intolerable to be felt and endured; be
accordingly careful, that thou may never feel nor endure them: Thou art
taking a Voyage to this Kingdom of darkness, and art near upon arriving; it
were happy if thou would return, before thou art at thy journeys end. And
certainly, did thou but know the place, and thy entertainment when thou
come there; thou would be bound for heaven, steer thy course thitherward,
and fraught thy self accordingly. You know, or may know, what a rich and brave
place Heaven is; the Pavement is of Gold, the Walls of Jasper, garnished with
all manner of precious stones, the Gates of Pearl, etc. Revel. 21. and 22.
chap. For I should but disparage it, by seeking to describe it. But

CHAP. LVII.
EIgthly, (that I may not be said to set in a Cloud) Is he that commanded thee
(this ^asie, and not costly, but most gainful service in the World) thy
Heavenly Father, Maker and Preserver, yea, thy Savior and Redeemer? Is he thy
Lord by a manifold Right? And thou his Servant by all manner of obligations?
As, First, He is thy Lord by the Right of Creation, thou being his Workmanship,
made by him* Secondly, By the Right of Redemption, being his Purchase, having
bought and ransomed thee out of Hell, by his precious Blood, where else thou
must have been frying in flames to Eternity. Thirdly, Of Preservation, Being
kept, upheld, and maintained by him, (all we have, being at his cost.)
Fourthly, Thou art his by Vocation, even of his Family, having admitted thee a
Member of his visible Church. Fifthly, His also (if it be not thine own fault)
by Sanctification, whereby he possesses thee. Sixthly and lastly, He would have
thee of his Court by Glorification, that he might crown thee. So that thou art
every way his. Yea, he has removed so many evils from thee, and conferred so
many good things upon thee, that they are beyond thought or imagination; then
certainly thou art of a sordid and base spirit, if thou deniest him so small a
matter as the surplusage of thy Estate to the relief of his poor and distressed
members; for were you loving children indeed, though there were no Hell to
fear, nor Heaven to hope for; no torments to dread, no rewards to expect; yet
you would obey your good and loving Father, and be the sorrowfullest creatures
in the World, if ye have but once displeased him, only for the mere love you
bear toward him, and for the unspeakble love he has showed toward you: How
much more in this case, when whatsoever we give to the poor, we give it not so
much to them, as to our selves, Dan. 4.27. Prove. 11.17.

CHAP. LVIII.
NInthly, Is it so, that what we give here to Christ's poor members, we shall
receive again in Heaven with ten thousand, thousand fold increase of God
himself; What wise man then will not disburse a good part of his Estate, even as
much as he can well spare, this way, when it will bring in such benefit? Yea,
one would think the more covetous men are, and the more they love their money,
the more liberal and bountiful this should make them. Some love their money so
well, that they would, if possible, carry in with them when they dye; If so,
this is the only way: The only means to have the fruit and benefit of our
riches for ever, is to send them before us into our Heavenly Country, where we
shall have our everlasting habitation: Nor can we carry any more of our Wealth
with us, then what we thus lay out; for these earthly things are lost by
keeping, and kept by bestowing. Neither can they and we long continue together,
seeing either they will leave us in our life time, or we shall leave them at
the hour of death, when all that we possess shall be left behind us, and that
only shall be our own, which we have sent before us. In which respect our
riches are fitly compared unto Seed, which can no otherways be truly kept, then
when we seem utterly to lose it; for if we keep it in our Garners, it will
either be spent in the use, or in time must corrupt and perish; but if we cast
it into the ground, where it seems to rot, and to be lost, it is the only
way to preserve and keep it from losing and perishing. Give then that which
you can no otherwise keep, that you may receive that which you can never loose;
for to part with that which you cannot keep, that you may get that you cannot
loose, is a good bargain.

Again, What folly is it, says Chrysostom, there to leave thy Wealth, whence
thou art a departing, and not to send it before thee, whither thou art going.
To leave and lose thy riches in thy Inn, and the place of thy Pilgrimage, and
not to transport it into thine own Country, and Mansion house, where thou art
ever to reside; let thy Goods be where thy Country is: Let us imitate herein
wise Travelers, who being in a strange and dangerous Country, will not carry
their Riches and Treasures about them, because they be then in danger by
thieves and enemies, to be spoiled of them, hazarding also therewith the loss
of their lives, but deliver them rather to the Agents and Factors of sufficient
Merchants, dwelling in their own Country, that so taking from them Bills of
Exchange, they may receive them at their coming home. The best means of
transporting them thither is, to put thy money into the Lords Treasury, to
deliver it unto the poor, who like trusty Porters, will carry it for us;
whereas if we carry it our selves, it will like heavy burdens, hinder our
journey, and like the Camels Bunch, keep us from entering into the straight
Gate; whereas if the poor whom God has appointed for this service, carry it
for us, we shall avoid the trouble, and escape this danger.

Our Wealth can never do us so much good, as when it helps us in our way to
Heaven, where there is no use of such transitory things; for there the
valuation of Gold cease, Riches are of no use there; and in Hell it was a
drop of water that the Churl wished for; not a Bag of Gold, nor a Lordship of
many Acres, he had too large an Inheritance of them before: Wherefore ye rich
men, yea all men to the utmost of your ability, do that good before death,
which may do you good after death, as Austin speaks; put a good part of your
Goods (even as much as you can well spare from your own use, and for the well
furnishing of your Journey) into the hands of the poor, whom Christ has
appointed as his Agents and Factors, and so it shall most surely be repaid,
with infinite increase (here if we need it; however) having finished our
Pilgrimage, and safely arrived at our heavenly home, when Death has spoiled us
of all the rest, we shall most richly be provided. And this is the right course
to make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon, unto which our Savior persuades
us, Luke 16.9. This is to play the wise Stewards, that when by Death we are
thrust out of our Stewardship, we having discreetly laid out our Master's
Goods, may be joyfully received into those everlasting Habitations.

Nor will it so much grieve a good man (at the upshot of all) that he has been
a poor Treasurer, as joy him that he has been a good Steward: Yea, it will be
the sweetest and joyfullest saying that ever our ears did hear, when Christ
shall say to us, as you heard before, Come ye blessed of my Father, and inherit
the Kingdom, etc. This will far more rejoice thy soul, then it does now refresh
the others body.

Again, Is there any place so safe as Heaven? where no thief comes, where no
Plunderer comes, where no rust comes: Is there any place like that? Or can you
put it into a better and safer hand, then into the hands of God himself? If
then you will lay it where you may be sure to have it forthcoming, put it into
Gods hand, lay it up in Heaven. But if thou will not, or if contrariwise, thy
only care is to hoard up Riches upon the earth, this does plainly show, that
this World is thy native home and Country, and that thou have no right or
inheritance in the Heavenly Canaan; As how is Heaven our Country, when as we
will send none of our Wealth thither before us?

CHAP. LIX.
BUt many to save their purses, will object, that they are poor themselves, and
have nothing to spare them when they want relief: And many of them speak more
truly then they are aware; for though they abound with earthly Riches, yet are
they bare and beggarly in respect of the chief riches, and spiritual Treasure;
though they are rich in goods, yet are they poor in Grace, poor in Love toward
God, and their Neighbors; poor in Faith and Obedience, and poor in Pity, Mercy
and Compassion toward their Brethren, which makes them so niggardly and close
handed, that they will part with nothing for their relief. They have not for the
poor, a few scraps to preserve them from perishing with hunger; but they have
enough for themselves to pamper their bellies, and with the Rich Glutton, to
fare deliciously every day: They have enough to entertain their rich friends
with superfluous pomp and plenty; and they, they will not leave to their own
appetite, but press them with their importunity, to eat still more, when
already they have eaten enough, and too much; but to the poor they will not
allow some poor pittence to keep them from famishing. They who make no spare of
their most costly Wines, but swallow them down themselves with great excess,
and provoke, yea even compel others to drink of them unto drunkenness, will not
give a little small drink to the poor members of Jesus Christ, to quench their
thirst; they have not for the poor some worn and cast Apparel, to cover their
nakedness, and keep their bodies from the injuries of Wind and Weather; but
they have enough not only for their own use, but also for pride and
ostentation, their Chests full thrust with rich Clothing, and their Wardrobes
thoroughly furnished with gorgeous Garments, which serve for little other use,
then to keep those from sloth and idleness, that keep them from moulding and
Moth-eating: And whereas they have no course Clothes to cover naked Christ,
they have costly Ornaments of Arras and Tapastry, for their walls. Finally,
They have not a few pence to spare for the relieving of naked and hungry
Christ, be he in never so extreme necessity; but they have many shillings and
pounds to spend wastfully and riotously upon Dicing and Gaming, vain Sights,
and obscene Stage Plays, and so upon all other sinful pleasures and worldly
delights, which their carnal appetites can any way desire.

But what a fearful reckoning have these men to make at the day of Judgment,
when they give in their accounts unto God? And with what indignation will
Christ look upon them, who have thus meanly and basely regarded him. Then they
will have the wit (or cause) to wish that they had not thus occasioned Christ to
deal with them, as they have dealt with him and his. But there is no persuading
them to believe, that are ordained to perish.

But say thou have but a small pittance of this Worlds goods, and not such
plenty or superfluity as is before spoken of; yet ought thou out of that
little thou have, to spare somewhat to relieve those that are in extreme
necessity, either by selling what thou can spare; or if thou have nothing to
sell, yet God commands thee, rather then thou should neglect these Works
of Mercy; to labor with thy hands, that thou may have to give unto him that
needs, Ephesians. 4.28. And therefore excuse not thy neglect of this duty by
saying that thou have nothing for them, unless thou have nothing to waste upon
thy superfluous vanities, nothing to sell; unless thou art unable by, thy
honest labor, to earn thy living, and art thy self such an one, as needs by
others to be relieved: that the poorest are not exempted from this duty, we may
see in the example of the poor Widow, who was so commended by our Savior for
casting into the Treasury her two mites, which was all her substance, Mark
12.43. In the Macedonians, who being themselves poor, gave even above their
ability to the relief of those that were poorer, 2 Cor. 8.2. In the Apostles,
Acts 3.6. and in our Savior Christ himself, who though he were so poor, that
he lived upon what others out of their love and duty ministered unto him, as
appears Luke 8.3. yet he himself gave Alms to those who were in greater want,
as we may gather John 12.6.8.

Yea, if we did indeed rightly consider it, our small means should move us the
rather to give, and the more carefully to exercise this Christian duty, since
this is the means whereby being poor, we may become richer, as I have
plentifully proved in the Prevention of Poverty, Chap. 30. which I may not
stand to repeat. See Prove. 3.9, 10, and 11.24, 25. and 28.27. Psalm. 112.3. Isa.
32.8. Luke 6.38. 2 Cor. 9.6. Which Scriptures show, that giving to the poor
does not weaken, but much strengthen our Estates, and is so far from being the
cause of our want and poverty, that it is the only means to keep us from it,
and bring to us plenty and abundance.

Besides, if having little we are content in obedience to God, to part with
somewhat, we perform a duty the more acceptable to God, and in the day of
Christ's appearing we shall be so much the more richly rewarded; and for the
present, our Work will be so much the more commendable, as we may see, Mark
12.43. 2 Cor. 8.2.

Neither are we to imagine, that if we be careful in feeding Christ, that he
will be careless in feeding us; that he will deny us meat, who has given us
his precious blood; that he will suffer us to want Earthly trifles, who has
provided for us heavenly riches. Let such more then heathenish diffidence, be
far from us, who profess our selves to be of the Household of Faith. But rather
let us believe God, under hope, above hope; that is, when in respect of humane
means and second causes, we have cause to despair, as Abraham in the case of a
Child, when there was no possibility in Nature, nor probability in Reason.

CHAP. LX.
Obj. BUt there are many Richer by far then thee, who give as little as thou
do; therefore if they neglect to give, much more may thou, as thou
supposest, and yet be excused.

To this I answer; If thou will do as others, or as the most and richest do,
then woe unto thee; for the most and greatest go the broad way to destruction;
or if thou will not live be Precepts, but by Examples, why do thou then
propound for thy pattern those who are carnal and covetous, and not rather the
example of our Savior Christ, and the holy men of God, whose bounty even out
of their poverty, is for this very purpose recorded in the Scriptures.

I, but will the Worldling say, I have a great Charge, and many Children, and
therefore I must not give away my Goods to strangers; for the Apostle teaches
us, that Parents must lay up for their Children, and that he who neglects
this duty, has denied the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
Unto whom I answer with Bazil; They who are miserable having Wife and Children,
would not be liberal if they were without them. Again, Was not the Gospel
written as well to the married, as unmarried? To Parents, as well as to those who
have no Children? Thirdly, Did thou desire Children of God? or did he give
thee Children, that thou might make them a Plea and Privilege to neglect
his Commandments, and thy duty and love to Christ? Or may thou not justly
fear* if thou thus abusest the blessing of posterity, that God will lessen their
number, lighten thee of this Charge, and so take away thy excuse, by depriving
thee of thy chiefest comfort? The which should be most just with God so to
punish thee, seeing thou make Idols of them, loving them better then God who
gave them.

But thy Children are dear unto thee, and must be provided for; and reason
good: Yet let thy God be dearer; and let them not make thee to neglect him who
gave thee to thy self, and them unto thee; and has provided all that thou
enjoyest both for thee and them. Provided for them a competency or sufficiency;
but deny not unto God of thy abundance and superfluity.

But I may answer thee in thine own words; He that provideth not for his
family, is worse then an Infidel. If thou art a Believer, Christ's Family is
thy Family, Ephesians. 3.15. Heb. 2.11, 13, 14, 16, 17. They are thy Mother, Brethren
and Sisters. If we be members of one body, we should think the discommodities
of our Brethren pertain to our selves: Men do well to provide for their Wife
and Babes, but not then when the present necessities of others cannot be
supplied, without the same be lessened. How did they in the second and fourth
of the Acts, provide for their Families, Wives and Children, when they sold
their Houses and Lands, and gave away all the money? Were they worse then
Infidels, because they were more careful to supply the present wants of the
Saints, then to provide for themselves, Wives and Children, 2 Cor. 8.14. Acts
4.34, 35, 36, 37. The Psalmist speaking of the wicked, says, They leave their
substance to their Babes, Psalm. 17.14. They put Wife and Children into their
Wills, but leave out Christ and his Children, because they love Wife and
Children more then Christ. But let such know, He that loves Father or Mother
more then me, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.37. Luke 10:36, 37, 38. If any man
come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, yea and
his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.26. And the Apostles could
say, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee, Mat. 19.27.29. 2 Cor.
4.18.

But lastly, let men leave to their Children never so great Estates, they shall
be never the better for them, if they have not the blessing of God withal: And
is it likely that he will bless unto them thine Estate, which is gotten and
raked together by unjust keeping that which he has enjoined thee to bestow;
and by the utter neglect and contempt of his Commandment? Or that God will
regard and feed thy Children, who have neglected his, and suffered them to pine
and perish for want of Relief? No, the only means to obtain God's blessing
upon thy self and thy posterity, is to obey his Commandments, to trust him upon
his word, and to give liberally unto the poor; for the righteous man, who is
merciful and lends, not only himself, but his seed also is blessed, Psalm.
37.26. He does not say* That his children shall live in a rich and pompous
Estate, for so they may do, and yet with the rich Glutton, be everlastingly
condemned; yea, they may be wasters and prodigals, who will wickedly and
riotously spend what thou have as wickedly gotten and reserved; yea, it may be
this Worldly Wealth which thou leavest them, may be the means of furthering and
increasing their everlasting ruin, and fearful condemnation: As how commonly
does the leaving great Estates to children (which the rich Father minds not)
make them so much the greater sinners, and to spend their days in pride,
pleasure, idleness, uncleanness, tyranny, oppression, and in all excess of
Wickedness? but that they shall have Gods blessing upon that which they enjoy,
which whether it be less or more, will make it sufficient, and so sanctify it
to their use, that it shall be unto them a pledge of God's love, and a pawn or
earnest-penny of their eternal salvation. Whereas if we will not so far forth
trust God, as we would one another; if we will give nothing for God's and for
Christ's sake, who have given us our selves, and all we have: just it is he
should suffer us to beg ourselves, and have our children beggars, permitting
none to extend mercy toward them, as he has peremptorily threatened, Psalm.
109.10, to 17.

As without God's special Providence, Blessing, and gracious Guidance, thine
and their Estates is subject to such innumerable casualties, that ou^ of the
highest flow of plenty; they may easily be brought to as great an ebb of want
and penury. They may be oppressed by those who are more mighty; or be defrauded
by those that are more crafty; the States displeasure, or their own faultiness
may turn them out of all: or in this cunning Age, wherein there are none more
skilful to build strongly, then others are to undermine, and supplant: there
may some crack or flaw be found in their Title; and so for want of words or
letters to carry it, thy Children may be deprived of the benefit of thy care
and providence. But if God take the care and charge over them; he is such a
faithful and powerful Guardian and Protector, that none shall be able to wrest
their portion and patrimony out of his hands.

CHAP. LXI.
BUt admit we were assured, that the goods which we spare from the relief of
the poor, and leave to our children, should prosper with them, and make them
great on the earth; yet were there no reason, why for this we should neglect
these works of mercy: For why should thou love thy children better then thine
own person, and in providing for them, neglect thy self? Yea, why should thou
prefer their Wealth before thine own soul? and their flourishing Estate in the
World, which is but momentary and mutable, before the frui^ion of those joys
which are infinite and everlasting? What comfort will it be unto thee, if for
getting some trifles for thy posterity on Earth, thou have lost Heaven? or to
remember that thy children ruffle it out in worldly wealth, and superfluous
abundance, when thou shall be stripped of all, and want a drop of cold water to
cool thy scorching heat.

But this is the case, (with which I will conclude:) First, the gain of giving
is inestimable: God and Christ, who are owners of the whole World, has
promised we shall be repaid with the increase of an hundred fold here, and ten
thousand, thousand fold in Heaven, and that our children and posterity shall
reap the fruits of our benevolence. And

Secondly, The security is beyond all exceptions; for we have God's Word and
Handwriting for it, even express Testimonies, Precepts, and Promises out of
both Testaments; who is so true of his word, that he never failed a tittle in
the performance thereof, and also all-sufficient to perform: Nihil promittit,
and non reddit; fidelis ille factus est debtor, est^ tu avarus exactor, as
Austin on Psalm. 32. Only herein lies the defect, in this Atheistical age, most
men believe not that there is a God; or if so, they will not, or dare not trust
him so far as they would do a man whom they take to be able and honest. This
must of necessity be the main and only reason why men are no more liberal to
the poor: As for instance; If a man of Worship or Credit should speak or write
to one of us, and wish us to disburse such, or such a sum of money to the poor
about us, and he would take it as his own Debt, and not only pay it us again,
but take it as a great favor; We would willingly do it without any reluctance,
yea rather then fail, we would borrow it, though we had our selves many
children; yea, there is no man when he sows his ground, thinks that it is lost
and cast away, or so buried in the Earth, that he shall never see it more: No,
he looks that that should bring him in a great deal more, and pay him with
overplus, for all his cost; and this hope makes him prodigal of his Seed, so
that it shall have as much by his good will, as the ground can bear or bring
forth: And does not this plainly prove, that we will give credit to a man's Word
or Bond; yea, that we will trust the very ground it self, rather then take God's
or Christ's Bond, or the Bible-Security? You know the place well enough, where
God has given his Bill to you, for the re-payment of what you give to the
poor, Prove. 19.17. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord; and that
which he has given, he will repay him again. Lo brethren, the bil of Gods own
hand (as I may call it) in which he has both acknowledged the Debt, and
promised payment. Be it known unto all men by this present promise, That I the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, do own and acknowledge my self to be indebted to
every merciful or liberal man, all those sums of money which he has bestowed,
or shall bestow in relieving the distressed, to be paid back unto him whenever
he shall demand it, (for a Bond or Bill that names no day of payment, binds to
pay it at demand) and to this payment well and truly to be paid, I bind my self
firmly by this present promise, sent, sealed and delivered by Solomon my known
Secretary or Scribe. So that not to give readily upon this consideration, is to
proclaim the Lord an insufficient or a dishonest Play Master; either that we do
not believe God^s Promises, nor give that credit unto him on his Word, which we
would give to a Turk or Infidel dwelling among us; or that we do not esteem the
payment of his spiritual Grace, or Heavenly Glory (which together with
pecuniary pay, is super-added) for current money, or of equal value to these
transitory trifles, which we impart unto the poor; for if a man of any credit
should promise for the laying out of an hundred pounds, that we should have
Annuity of a hundred pounds a year, for term of life; how eagerly would we
catch at such an offer, though the quick approach of Death might make us
loosers by the bargain? But God promises, that if we will lay out our money on
these uses, we shall have an hundred for one of these Earthly trifles, together
with Spiritual, heavenly, and everlasting Treasures to boot, in the Life to
come. So that it is undeniable, if we do not obey the Precept of God herein, we
charge God with flat falsehood: For consider, God says he will repay it; thou
say, He will not. He says, That to give, is the only way to have, and to
grow rich; yea, never ^o want, nor to have thy Children want: Thou say, if I
give so much, I shall never be rich, yea I shall be a Beggar. What is this, but
to give God the Lie, and to make the excuse worse then the fault.

For shame then, let us acknowledge the sufficiency, and faith^ulness of God:
and go away assured, that he will abundantly perform more then we can imagine,
according to the riches of his grace, in Jesus Christ. Nor can we doubt, but
God is as good a Debtor, as a giver; for if he freely give us wherewithal to
lend, and grace to give; he will much more pay us what we have lent, and give us
because we have given: that is his Bounty, this his Justice. As what says Saint
Paul? God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor of
love, which ye showed toward his Name; in that ye have ministered unto the
Saints, and yet minister. As if he should say, that God were unrighteous, if
he should do so, Heb. 6.10. Do thou then love thy money? and would thou have
it increased? Deliver it not into the hands of men (says Saint Austin) who will
rejoice when they borrow, and mourn when they repay it: entreat, that they may
receive; and calumniate when they should restore: who may be bankrupt and
cannot, or deceitful and will not pay; or who will put thee off with many delays,
and trouble thee with expecting, as they have formerly troubled thee with their
importunity in borrowing. But if thou be a wise Usurer, choose God and Christ
for thy Debtors; who are owners of the whole world, and all-sufficient
sureties. (not subject to any casualties) and just beyond all exceptions, or
comparison. Nihil promitt^t and non reddit, fidelis ille factus est debtor,
esto ti^ avarus exactor, as Austin on Psalm 32. And as the payment is most
assured, so the gain is inestimable; so that we cannot lay up our wealth in a
safer, or better hand: we cannot have a better Debtor then our Maker^ nor a
better Bond then the Bible, Prove. 19.17. Luke 6.35.

CHAP. LXII.
BUt thou see not this increase in thy worldly estate by giving Alms, nor
do thou perceive, that it brings thee any such blessedness as has been
talked of.

Answer, This Objection makes me conclude, that thou art a Miser, and deservest
not the name of an Alms-giver: or if so, let me add, that if thou believe no
more then thou see, why do thou take upon thee the name of a Christian? who
lives by Faith, rather then by Sense: For by how many secret passages can God
conveigh unto thee the reward of thy Alms-deeds? though he writes no
Superscription upon them, to certify thee for what it is sent; it is
sufficient that thou have it, and that thou know that he sent it: As for the
reasons which moved him to give these benefits unto thee, he will acquaint thee
with them more particularly when he shall call thee to make up thy recknoning.
Thou growest in thy stature from a Child unto a Man, and thou see not thy
growing, though thou perceivest that thou art grown: neither know thou the
particular time, and means when, or whereby thou come to this height: And
thou know and acknowledgest, that thou art nourished by thy meat, though
thou see not the secret passages whereby it is carried from the stomach to
the several parts; nor can tell at what time, or by what food thou have been
chiefly nourished. Why then have thou not the like faith? and much stronger in
spiritual, then thou have in respect of natural things? seeing they are much
more secret and insensible; and when thou have God's promise of reward, and
see it performed by his blessings multiplied upon thee, why do thou doubt?
or call them into question* or ascribe them to thy self, or other helps? seeing
whatsoever the means are, they are of God's sending. Finally, if thou say,
that thou see no possibility of increasing thy wealth, by giving away a great
part of it unto the poor; I answer, And what more reason have thou by the
collection of Sense? that thy seed which thou sowest should be multiplied,
which thou castest away, and let to rot in the earth, unless thou have
learned it by experience: And is not God's Word a more infallible Teacher, and
surer ground for thy faith to rest on: especially when thou art not without
experience of the like increase, springing from the sowing of the seeds of thy
beneficence.

To conclude this point, if thou doubtest of these promises of God, made unto
those who relieve the poor; because thou see not how, or when they are
performed; why do thou believe the Remission of thy sins? Salvation by
Christ? and everlasting life? when as thou see none of these, nor have any
other ground but God's promise, even as thou have for the reward of thine
Alms-deeds: And therefore it thou doubtest of the one, thou doubtest of the
other: and were not the profession of thy faith, concerning those spiritual
things good cheap; but that it should cost thee as dear, as the giving of Alms:
thou would doubtless discover and proclaim thy infidelity there, as well as
here; and plainly show, that it was in mere formality and hypocrisy. Methinks
our mistrust, or at least the small confidence we have in what God speaks in his
Word; especially touching temporals, is the greatest wonder in the world. And
certainly if we cannot trust him for our bodies; how do we, or how can we trust
him with our souls? which is the greater trust. But beloved, what I speak I
speak not to all; for we have persuaded our selves better things of you, and
such as accompany salvation, though we thus speak, Heb. 6.9.

And so I have finished, what at first I promised; with an overplus in behalf
of the Poor: But as John could only Baptize with water; so I can but teach you
with Words; and when God withholds his contemned Grace, Paul himself cannot
move a soul.

If the Holy Ghost shall set it home to your hearts, that you may so meditate
on what has been spoken, and so practice what has been prescribed; that God
in Christ may be pacified, your sins by free grace pardoned, and your souls
eternally saved: That while you are here, you may enjoy the peace of God which
passes all understanding, Philip. 4*7. and when you depart hence, you may
arrive at the Haven of all happiness in Heaven; where is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore, blessed and happy are ye, Psalm. 16.11. Which being my
prayer and hope, I shall not only take my work off the Loom, or turn my
Pinnace into the Harbor; by making a conclusion of this subject (as well
considering, that those who are most insatiable in other things, will soonest
be cloied with Mannah) but likewise take leave of the Press; and that for these
Reasons: First, according to my scantling I have said something (if not
sufficient) in one or other of my Six and thirty Pieces, to each soul seduced,
or afflicted. Secondly, (which would by the Reader be considered:) As he
gathers that reads; so he spends that writes: and who so spends ere he gathers,
shall soon prove Bankrupt: Thirdly, because the Bow that is always bent; will
soon grow weak, and sluggish. Fourthly I have bestowed so many years, and taken
so much pains in gleaning ears of corn with Ruth, grinding at the Mill with
Samson; in binding Sheaves, carrying to the Mill, Barn and Garner; in
threshing, Winnowing, Garbling, Kneading it into Paste, making it into Loaves,
and baking it into Bread, that so I might have fine Manchet to set before you,
(my most welcome Guests) that (with Martha, in entertaining her Savior) I have
wearied my self. And the truth is, no money could have hired me to have taken
the pains; had not an earnest desire and hope of the common good continually
spurred me to go on. Only for this cause, and the great pleasure I have taken
in the work or imploiment: I would not for a world have been debarred from it.
This may seem a Paradox; but it is the immediate gift of God, (to those that he
imploies in such his service) thus to counterpoise their labor with more then
answerable delight.


Now unto the King Everlasting, Immortal, Invisible; unto God only Wise: be
Honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen, 1 Timothy 1.17.

If you cannot remember all that I have said; yet at least remember what the
Holy Ghost says in these ensuing places: Godliness is profitable for all
things; and has the promises both of this life, and of the life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord,
shall want nothing that is good* Psalm 34.9, 10. Many sorrows shall be to the
wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about on
every side. Psalm 32.10. He that gives to the poor, shall not lack. Prove.
28.27. All things shall work together for the best, unto those that love God.
Romans 8.28.

FINIS.
The sad and doleful Lamentation of ORIGIN after his Fall: Set up as a Sea-Mark
to make others beware of doing the least Evil, that good (even the greatest
good) may come of it.
BEing much affected with this Example of Origin, as deeming it exceeding rare,
remarkable, and forcible to make others beware: I have much desired, that some
Stationer would print it with some other small piece, for the common good; and
thereupon I engaged first one, and after that another, who were to print Spira,
that they would add this of Origin unto it, leaving my Copy with them; but
neither of them kept their promise, because forsooth, that of Spira alone would
sell for six pence, and both together for no more. A solid reason! while a
little gain shall be more stood upon, then the glory of God, and good of Souls.
Yet this is the worlds method, and as common, as cursed and barbarous. All
which considered, none of them (I hope) can justly bla^^ me for filling up the
void pages of this sheet with that which may pleasure thousands. For I dare
say, there is not one Reader of forty, that have formerly met with the same in
any Author.

IN the days of Severus lived Origin, a man famous for Learning, and in mental
excellencies most rare and singular: he was bold and fervent under the reign of
Severus, Maximinus, and Decius, in assisting, comforting, exhorting and
cherishing the Martyrs that were imprisoned, with such danger of his own life,
that had not God wonderfully protected him, he had bin stoned to death many
times of the heathen multitude; for such great concourse of men and women went
daily to his house to be catechized and instructed in the Christian Faith by
him, that Soldiers were hired of purpose to defend the place where he taught
them.

Again, such search sometimes was set for him, that neither shifting of place
nor Country could hardly serve him. In which laborious travels and affairs of
the Church, in teaching, writing, confuting, exhorting and expounding, he
continued about fifty two years, unto the times of Decius and Gallus; diverse
and great persecutions he sustained; but especially under Decius, in his Body
he sustained Bonds and Torments, Rackings with Bars of Iron, stinking and dark
Dungeons, be sides terrible threats of Death and Burning; all which he manfully
and constantly suffered for Christ: Yet at length (like an Isickle) he that
could endure the rough Northern wind of Persecution well enough, melted with the
heat of the Sun, (sweet Allurements and fair Promises of Satan and his
Adherents; his own flesh also, proving a treacherous Solicitor:) For in the
end, being brought by the Idolatrous Infidels to an Altar of theirs, he
shamefully condescended to offer Incense thereupon, in manner as follows, by
his own Confession.

When (says he) I sought to allure and win these Idolaters by cunning means to
the knowledge of the Son of God, after much fisting they promimised me (unhappy
man!) that they would by crafty conveyances avoid the subtilty of Satan, and be
baptized; But being ignorant and unskilful in their diverse cunning sleights,
they (together with the Devil) undermined my simplicity, and Satan turning
himself into an Angel of light, reasoned with me that same night, saying, When
thou art up in the Morning, go on and persuade them, and bring them unto God;
and in case they demand ought of thee, so they will hearken and condescend unto
thee, do what thou shall think necessary, without staggering at all at the
matter, to the end many may besaved. And again, the Devil going before to
prepare the way, whetted their Wits to devise mischief against me, silly
Wretch, and sowed in their minds hypocrisy, dissimulation, and deceit. But I,
O unhappy creature, skipping out of my Bed at the dawning of the day, could not
finish my wonted Devotions, neither accomplish my usual prayer: But wishing
that all men might be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth. I folded
and wrapped my self in the snares of the Devil, I got me unto the wicked
Assembly, I required of them to perform the Covenant made the night before; and
coming (as I thought) unto the Baptism; I (silly soul) not knowing of any
thing, answered but in a word, and became reproachfully defamed. I spoke
without malice, yet felt I their inveterate and deadly spite; for instantly the
Devil raised an Assembly about me, who carried me to an Altar of theirs, where
a foul filthy Ethopian being appointed, this option or choice was offered unto
me, namely; Whether I would sacrifice to the Idol; or have my Body polluted
with that foul and ugly Ethiopian. In which strait, I having ever kept my
Chastity undefiled, and much abhorring that filthy villainy to be done to my
body, brake out into many moans, lamentations and cries against both. Yet (O
wretched man that I am) at length yielded rather to sacrifice. Whereupon the
Judge putting Incense into my hand, caused me to set it to the fire upon the
Altar; for the which impiety I was delivered both from that and Martyrdom. But
upon my discharge, the Devil raised such an outcry in the City, in pronouncing
against me that just, and yet unjust sentence, Origin has sacrificed.

Whereupon he was excommunicated out of the Church, and driven with shame and
sorrow out of Alexandria; and going to Jerusalem, and being there among the
Congregation, was requested by the Priests to make some Exhortation in the
Church to the people; the which he refused to do for a great while; but at
length being constrained through importunity, he rose up, and turning the book
as though he would have expounded some place of the Scripture, he happened upon,
and read only the 16. verse of the 50. Psalm, where he found it thus written;
But God said unto the sinner, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth; seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my Word behind thee.? Which being read, he shut the
Book, and sat down weeping and wailing, the whole Congregation weeping and
lamenting with him; he said unto the Church, Woe is me; my Mother which brought
me forth as an high and lofty Terret, yet suddenly I am turned down to the
ground; as a fruitful Tree, yet quickly withered; as a burning Light, yet
forthwith darkened; as a running Fountain, yet by and by dried up. Woe is me that
ever I was decked with all gifts and graces, and now seem pitifully to be
deprived of all. The Lord has made and ingrafted me a fruitful Vine, but
instead of pleasant Clusters of Grapes, I brought forth pricking Thorns: Let
the Well-springs of tears be stirred up, and let my Cheeks be watered; let them
flow upon the earth, and moisten it; for that I am soaked in sin, and bound in
mine iniquity; every creature sorroweth, and may well pity my case, for that I
was wont heretofore to pour out my prayers unto God for them all; but now there
is no salve for me: Where is he that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, who
also salved and cured him that was wounded of the Thieves? Whenas I went about
to enlighten others, I darkened my self; when I endeavored to bring others from
death to life, I brought my self from life to death.

Oh blinded heart! how did thou not remember? O foolish mind! how did thou
not bethink thy self? O witless brain! how did thou not understand? O thou
Sense of Understanding! Where did thou sleep? But it was the Devil which
provoked thee to slumber and sleep, and in the end to slay thy unhappy and
wretched soul: He bound my power and might, and wounded me. I bewail sometime
the fall of Sampson, but now have I fallen far worse my self. I bewailed
heretofore the fall of Solomon, yet now am I fallen far worse my self. I have
bewailed heretofore the estate of all sinners, yet now am I plunged worse then
them all. Sampson had the hair of his head clipped off, but the Crown of Glory is
fallen off my head. Sampson lost the carnal eyes of his body, but my spiritual
eyes are dug out: Even as he was severed from the Israelites, and held
captive among Idolaters, so I have separated my self from the Church of God,
and am joined with evil spirits. Alas! my Church lives, yet am I a Widower.
Alas! my Sons be alive, yet am I barren. Alas O Spirit which came heretofore
down upon me, why have thou forsaken me? O thou Devil, what have thou done unto
me? O Satan, how have thou wounded me? It was the wiliness of a Woman that
brought Sampson to his confusion; but it was my own Tongue that brought me to
this sinful Fall. Alas! every Creature rejoiceth, and I alone forsaken and
sorrowful. Bewail him that is bereaved of the Holy Ghost; bewail me that am
thrust out of the Wedding-Chamber of Christ; bewail me that am tormented with
the prick of Conscience; for now it behooves me to shed infinite tears for my
great sin. Who knows whether the Lord will have mercy upon me? Whether he will
pity my fall? Whether he will be moved with my desolation? Whether he will have
respect unto my humility, and incline his tender compassion toward me? Now let
the Elders mourn, for that the staff whereto they leaned is broken. Now let
the young men mourn, for that their Schoolmaster is fallen. Now let the Virgins
mourn* for that the advancer of Virginity is defiled. Now let the Priests
mourn, for that their Patron and Defender is shamefully fallen from the Faith.
Assist me holy Spirit, and give me Grace to repent. Let the fountain of tears
be opened, and gush out into streams, to see if that peradventure I may have
the grace worthily and thoroughly to repent: Why have thou shut my mouth by the
holy Prophet David? Am I the first that have sinned? Or am I the first that
fell? Why have thou forsaken me, and banished me from among the Saints, and
astonished me to preach thy Laws? Saint Peter the Pillar of truth, after his
fall, wiped away that bitter passion of forswearing his Master, with monrnful
tears, and was purged from the venom of the Serpent in a short time. Restore me
again to my former health of salvation. O all ye which behold my wounds,
tremble for fear, least God forsake you, and you fall into the like crime. O woe
is me that I am severed from among the company of the blessed Assemblies: I
have my death's wound: I see the Clouds in the Sky shadowing the Light from
me, and the Sun hiding from me his bright beams. O Satan! What mischief have
thou wrought unto me? How have thou pierced my breast with thy poisoned Dart?
Think thou that my ruin will avail thee any thing at all? Think thou to
procure unto thy self ease and rest, whiles that I am grievously tormented? But
how can I speak, whenas my Tongue is tied? My lips dare not once move; my
throat is dammed up; all my senses and iustruments are polluted with iniquity.
But I will proceed on; and first, I will fall to the ground on my bare knees,
and make mine humble supplication unto all the faithful and blessed of God,
both great and small, that they will help me, silly wretch, which by reason of
the superfluity of my sin, dare not crave ought at the hands of God: O ye
Saints and blessed of God, with waterish eyes, and wet cheeks soaked in dolor
and pain. I beseech you to fall down before the Mercy-seat of God for me
miserable sinner, woe is me, that am compassed thus on every side, and shut up
in my sin: The Lord has made me an Angel, I have made my self a Devil: I was
as as a skilful lawyer, yet am I overthrown by my unrighteous dealing: I was an
heir of the Kingdom of God, but now am an inheritor of the Kingdom of the
Devil: I am choked with infamous doings; but who will Minister Moisture unto
the Temples of my Head? and who will give streams of tears unto my Eyes, that I
may bewail my self in this my sorrowful plight? O all ye my friends, tender my
case, pity my person, in that I am dangerously wounded, in that I am a scorn to
all men; for having trodden under foot the the Seal and Cognizance of my
Profession, and joined in League with the Devil. In that I am rejected and cast
away from the face of God; it is for my lewd life that I am thus polluted. I
see the Spider over my seat building his Cobweb: There is no sorrow like to my
sorrow; there is no affliction that exceeds my affliction; there is no
bitterness that passes my bitterness; there is no lamentation more lamentable
then mine? Neither is there any sin greater then my sin, for there is no salve
for me. Where is that good Shepherd of Souls? I have broken my Vow I made in
Baptism: Alas that ever I was Doctor, and now occupy not the room of a
Disciple! Thou know, O Lord, that I fell against my Will: Who is able to
signify unto me, when again I shall be coupled, and made Companion of the
Saints of God? O! I am not worthy to hear the Message of them that bring such
tidings; for the threats of the Prophets and Evangelists only belong unto me.
O the bosom of Abraham, the which I am deprived of! I am become partaker with
the Rich Man in his Condemnation, and scorching flames in the horrible pit? I
am tormented with the prick of Conscience; I do fear the dreadful day of
Judgment, for that I am damned for ever, I do fear the punishment, for that it
is eternal. I will prostrate my self before the Threshold and Porches of the
Church, that I may entreat all people both small and great, and will say unto
them, Trample and tread me under foot, which am the foolish Salt, the unsavory
Salt; tread me which have no taste nor relish of God: Woe is me that I fell
most dangerously, and cannot rise again. Assist me, O Holy Syirit, and give me
grace to repent, and wipe out of the Book of the Conscience, the Accusation
printed against me: But thou, O Lord, think upon me, though I am of polluted
lips, and have uttered lewd things with my Tongue; and accept thou Repentance,
Affliction, and bitter tears, the dolor of my heart, and the heaviness of my
soul; and have mercy upon me, and raise me up from out of the Mire of
Corruption and Filth; for the puddle has even choacked me up. Woe is me, that
sometime was a Pearl glistering in the golden garland of Glory, but now thrown
into the dust, and trodden in the mire of contempt? Woe is me, that the Salt of
God now lies on the Dunghill! O how many great streams of Lamentation and tears
will wash away and purge mine humble heart? I will turn my talk to God: Why
have thou lift me up, and cast me down? I had not committed this impiety,
unless thou had withdrawn thy hand from me. David sinned too bad in thy
sight, yet after his Repentance thou receivedst him to mercy: Grant that I may
not become an habitation for Devils, but that I may trample under foot the
Devil, which has trod upon me. I have fallen and am bruised, there is no
health in me. Why have thou, O Lord, broken down my hedge and strong holds. The
wild Boar out of the Wood has destroyed me, and the wild Beasts of the field
has eaten me up. Rid me, O Lord, from the roaring Lion, that the Bill of sin
written against me may be blotted out; that I may cease from my Lamentation in
the evening, and receive joy in the morning. Let my sackcloth be rent in
sunder, and gird me with joy and gladness.

Thus in his bitter affliction, and grief of mind he uttered these things
confusedly, and out of order.

FINIS.

