KTPOT PAIDEIA: OR, THE Institution and LIFE OF CYRUS the GREAT.

WRITTEN By that famous Philosopher and General, Xenophon of Athens.

And from the Original Greek made English,

The first four Books By Francis Digby, late of Queens College in Oxford; The
four last by John Norris, Fellow of All Souls Coll. Oxford.

-- Medus ademit Assyrio, Medoque tulit moderamina Perses.

Claud. de laud. Stilic. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Gilliflower, at the Spread
Eagle in Westminster Hall, and James Norris, at the Kings-Arms without
Temple Bar. 1685.



Printed for Matt: Gilliflower and James Norris.

To the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Ailesbury and Elgin, Vicount Bruce of
Ampthill, Baron Bruce of Wharlton, Skeleton, and Kinloss, Lord of the Honor of
Ampthill, High steward of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum of
the Counties of Bedford and Huntington, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
MY LORD,
THE Presumption would be too great, should I offer a Work of less esteem than
this of Xenophon's to a Person of your Lordship's Quality and Honor But as all
Ages past have given a^ Universal Testimony of their valu^ for this Wise Book:
so I have reason to believe all to come, wi^ as generally approve my Choice
(...) your Lordship for its Patron. For who so fit to desend the Cyru^ that was
designed a Pattern for Princes and Great men to imi^tate, as one so remarkably
emi^nent for Loyalty? Whose Descent is from a Race of Kings whose Education has
been agree able to so high a Birth, and, wha^ is yet more rare, whose Virtue
fully answer both. This I may say without being suspected for flattery, that no
one has made a^ nearer approach than your Lord^hip to this Character of
Perfecti^n in general, and that none has qualled your Lordship in that
articular Part which consists in Candor and Forgiveness. It Is his, my Lord,
which has hard^ed me to the boldness of this Ad^ress, which I hope your
Lord^hip will Pardon from

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient and most Humble Servant M. Gilliflower.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of this Incomparable Piece, for which all Antiquity has justly had
so great a Value, was Xenophon of Athens, a Man no less famous in an Active
than in a Contemplative Life; and perhaps the only Person upon Record whose
Words and Actions so highly adorned the Philosophy he professed.

He was born in Hesych. in voce (...)
Ercheja, an Athenian Town belonging to the Tribe Aegeis, so called from Aegeus
immediate Successor to Pandion King of Athens. Tho the time of his Birth be no
where expressly declared, yet by comparing Stesiclides in Laertius (who says he
died the first Year of the 105 Olympiad) with de Long^vis.
Lucian (who affirms he outlived 90 Years) it is manifest, He must have been
born in, or before, the first year of the 82 Olympiad. His Father's Name was
Gryllus, which Name continued in the Family for several Generations.

He laid the Foundation of his after-Greatness in the School of Socrates, the
then celebrated Philosopher of Greece, and whom the Delphick Oracle had
pronounced the Laer^. in ^a So^.
wisest of Men. Of him our Author was a great Admirer, and a ^rudious Imitator;
whose religious Deportment toward the Gods, whose Constancy, Temperance, and
Resolution, he carefully transcribed in the whole Conduct of his Life. How much
he honored him, appears by that elegant Defense he made for him before his
Judges, (tho, in truth, Socrates's Virtues were his best Apology) where he
boldly taxes, and smartly refutes, the malicious Calumnies of Anytus and
Melitus, his inveterate and false Accusers. He was the first that committed to
Writing the Precepts and Memoirs of his Master; which he has performed with
such Accurateness and Fidelity, that therein you may read the very Sense and
Soul of Socrates. The same thing indeed was afterward done, among others, by
his Fellow-Pupil Laert. in vita Plat.
Plato; but he has every where intermixed so many Excursions of his own, that it
is not easy to distinguish the Master from his Scholar. Nor was Socrates less
sollicitous for his beloved Xenophon, as will appear by this one Instance. In
that memorable Peloponnesian War betwixt the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians,
they were both personally engaged in the Fight before Delium; where the
Athenians being worsted, and flying before the Baeotians, Strab. Georg. 1. 9.
Xenophon, then but very young, was overthrown, and unhors'd in the Flight;
which Socrates perceiving, took him up, and carried off upon his Shoulders till
the Enemy gave over their Pursuit.

His second Military Effort, was his famous (...) with the younger Cyrus,
against his Brother Artaxerxes. I know some very Learned Sir Walter Rawleigh,
Lord Bacon, etc.
Men affirm he had never seen the Wars before this Persian Expedition; but this
I suppose is meant of Foreign Wars; because Greece, being at that time, and
having been for many Years before, the Seat and School of Martial Discipline,
it is highly probable, that a young Gentleman, of his Generosity and Courage,
would not be altogether unacquainted therewith. This War he engaged himself in
at the earnest Solicitations of his dear Friend Proxenus the Baeotian, once a
Scholar to that famed Orator and Philosopher Gorgias the Leontine, but now
residing at Cyrus's Court at Sardis in Lydia. Thither went Xenophon, having
first consulted his Master Socrates, and then the Oracle at Delphos. Arriving
at Sardis, he found Cyrus ready for his March, who entertained him with all
imaginable Expressions of Friendship, and held him in no less Esteem than he
did Proxenus himself. However, he then accepted of no Command, but followed the
Army as a Voluntier. In this Expedition Cyrus was slain, and the Grecian Camp
being rifled by the Enemy, they lost all they had except their Arms. These when
Xenoph. Exped. 1.2.
Phalinus, in the King's Name, came to demand, and that they should submit
themselves to his Mercy, Xenophon was the Man that gave him this smart Answer;
We have now, Sir, but two things left us, our Arms and our Valor; if we yield
up one, how shall we make use of the other? Think not therefore that we intend
to part with our Arms, with which we are resolved to manage a Dispute with you.
To him Phalinus smilingly replied, Young Gentleman, you talk like a
Philosopher, and have made a very pretty Speech; but you are mightily mistaken
if you think your Arms or Valor can withstand the Power of the great King.
Thus meanly did this haughty Courtier think of Xenophon. And yet this was he,
who afterward (when all the Captains and Commanders were basely betrayed and
treacherously murdered) with admirable Skill, and invincible Patience,
conducted ten thousand Foot through the midst of the Provinces of Persia, from
Babylon to Greece, over precipitous Mountains, deep Rivers, by straight and
almost unpassable Ways; to the Amazement of the World, even in despite of the
Power and Malice of the Enemy. This unparalleled Retreat so encouraged the
Grecians, and betrayed the Weakness and Degeneracy of the Persians, that
thereupon they began to bethink themselves of invading and subverting that
mighty Monarchy; which soon after Jason the Thessalian first designed;
Agesilaus the Spartan successfully attempted; and Alexander the Macedonian
victoriously completed.

Whilst Xenophon was absent in this Asiatick Expedition, he was by a solemn
Decree banished Athens, for espousing the Cause of Cyrus their Enemy against
Artaxerxes, at that time, their Friend and Ally; tho, Laertius says, this Edict
of Banishment was denounced against him for his favoring (...)
the Lacedaemonians, and following Agesilaus in his Wars against the Persians.
To requite this Unkindness of the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians honorably
entertained him at the Public Charge, and settled him in a fair Estate at
Scylluns, not far from the City Elis, a most pleasant and delightful Place, and
famed for the Celebration of the Olympic Games. Tho the Eleans not long after,
warring against the Lacedaemonians, dispossessed him, pillaged and plundered him
of all he had. He and his Sons escaped to Lepreum a City of Elis, and from
thence to Corinth, where he was kindly received, and there peaceably spent the
Remainder of his Days.

He was a Man highly qualified with all the Ornaments of an ingenious and
gentile Education; honored and courted by most of the great Potentates of his
Time: his Conversation pleasing and lovely; his Person graceful and handsome,
and his Aspect modest beyond (...) Laert
Compare, Wise in Counsels, Politic in his Designs, and admirable in his
Conduct. A Lover of Hunting; an Admirer of Horses; and a great Master in the
Art of War. He was zealously addicted to the Devotion of that Age, and a strict
Observer of all Religious Rites and Exercises: therefore he is very careful to
represent Cyrus, not only as a Martial Hero, but a Devout Prince; one that
never enters upon any Action without first consulting the Gods, both by Augury
and Sacrifice. Thus employed did the Messenger find him when he brought the
News of the Death of his Son Gryllus, killed at the famous Battle of Mantinea
betwixt the Thebans and Lacedaemonians, after he had bravely behaved himself,
and slain the Pausan Attic.
Theban General Epimanondas with his own hand. But so earnest was he in the
Service of his Gods, that hearing he died honorably, with a kind of seeming
Satisfaction, he only replied, -- I knew he was born to dye -- and then
proceeded in his Sacrifice.

And as he was the greatest Master of that Age in Military Affairs, so was he
very choice and curious in his Accoutrements of War, as appears by what Var. 1.
3.
Aelian affirms of him; That Argos furnished him with his Shield, Attica with
his Breast Plate, Baeotia with his Helmet, and Epidaurium with his Horse;
Places, all of them, at hat time, remarkable for excelling in those peculiar
things. He himself gives you this Reason why he delighted in rich Armor,
Because, says he, if the Gods bless me with Victory, then I deserve such; but
if it be my Fortune to dye in the Field, they are very honorable, and the best
Sepulchral Ornaments I can have.

How powerful and insinuating his Languae was, how convincing and satisfactory
his Reasonings, is abundantly evident from his whole Management of that famous
Retreat out of Asia, where, notwithstanding the Murmurings and Discontents of
the harassed and distressed Soldiers, he gained so much upon them, that he
still kept them to their Duty? and buoyed up their sinking Spirits amidst the
severest Extremities, of a tedious March, a naked Country, and an implacable
Enemy. But above all, especially remarkable is his preserving Byzantium from
the Outrages of a mutinous and incensed Army; when by an (...)
admirable Oration (as Epist. ad Matridem.
Chio the Philosopher, an Eyewitness, attests) he appeased the Tumult, and
persuaded the Soldiers into a modest and civil Deportment, when but just now
they had peremptorily resolved to pillage and rifle the City.

Now for his Writings, tho most of them are, (as Epist. ad ^n. Pomeium.
Dionysius Halicarnassoeus affirms) for their subject matter, Noble and
Magnificent, and worthy the Pen of so great a Man and so great a Philosopher;
yet this of the Institution of Cyrus, has in all Ages and Places been looked
upon and admired as his Masterpiece, wherein he has so admirably digested the
most refined Policies of the best-govern'd States of his time, and laid down
the great fundamental Maxims of War, that the wisest of Princes may here inform
himself, and the greatest General find matter for his Imitation. This the brave
Ciceron^ Quest. Tu^ cul. 3.
Scipio knew, and from this Treasury it was that he drew out all those Rules
and Stratagems of War, which enabled him to subdue aspiring Carthage, and
entitled him to the glorious Name of Africanus; For (as Tully observes of this
Treatise) He has not herein omitted any one material point concerning the Duty
of an Active, Vigilant, and Wise Captain. The same Author does likewise attest,
that when that Noble Roman Lucullus was sent against Mithridates King of
Pontus, the most subtle, politic and puissant Prince of his time, by a
serious and frequent perusal of these Books, he, of a raw and unexperienced
Commander, became so great and notable a Warrior, that in several Battles, he
quite vanquished that mighty Monarch, and filled all Asia with the Terror of
his Arms.

They are written indeed (much like Machiavel's Florentine Prince,) Ciceron.
Epist. ad Quinct. Fratrem.
non ad Historioe fidem, not according to the exactness and veracity of an
Historian, sed ad justi Imperii Effigiem, but as a Model of a complete and
perfect Government, and are rather a wish, than a History, representing to us,
not so much what Cyrus was, as what a truly great and generous Prince ought to
be. And to furnish out this Character to the best Advantage he could, he has
given you here, 'as it were an extract of all that Wisdom and Experience he was
Master of; having adorned this Piece with the choicest Observations, and most
instructive Rules that were any where scattered through the rest of his Works,
that so it might every way correspond to the great end he designed it for,
which was, (by laying down such an exact Platform of an Empire) at once to
free his Country from the Insolences of a Popular, and the Inconveniences of
an Aristocratical State; I mean Monarchy; which he has so admirably contrived,
and so effectually recommended, that ever since, that kind of Government has
been held most perfect, which has come up nearest to his Model and Design. For
whether you consider him, in this Book, as a Philosopher, a Statesman, or a
Soldier, no Man has, at any time, delivered more wholesome Precepts for humane
Life, wiser Rules for well-governing a People, or deeper Designs and Stratagems
of War; and those too, not adapted only to the Genius of his Age, or peculiarly
calculated for the Meridian of Greece; but drawn from the eternal and
unchangeable Right of Natures Laws, so that they serve alike to all Men, in all
Times, Ages and Places.

And these Excellencies He has disposed into such Order and Method, as at once
to instruct and please his Reader; leading him on so insensibly, that the more,
and oftener he reads, the greater Appetite he has still to pursue it. Hermog. de
form. dict. Xenoph.
His Words are pure and significant, his Expressions clear, and frequently
smart and poinant, his Characters and Descriptions very natural; and his set
Discourses almost divine; as (not to mention more) that of Love in the fifth
Book, of Happiness and the Immortality of the Soul in the eighth. It Is true
indeed Tom. 2. page 130.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, comparing our Xenophon with his Countryman
Herodotus, will by no means allow him to be a Master of Rhetoric, but boldly
says of him, that if at any time he attempts to raise himself up to a pitch of
Eloquence, he swells a little, it may be, for the present, but falls again
immediately, grows languid and flat; and yet at the same time, he admires the
purity of his Language, and his Perspicuity, and commends him for his choice of
proper and expressive Words; which not only all Rhetoricians, but even he
himself too in another place, confesses to be the chiefest Grace and Virtue of
Eloquution. He is not in his Orations, it is true, so florid and luxuriant as
some others are, nor Cicero. de Orator. l. 2.
has he that impetus and vehemence of an Orator, which is almost peculiar to
those that attend the Bar; but yet the smoothness of his style, the closeness
of his Sense, the soundness of his Judgment, and the Force of his Reasonings
make amends sufficiently for that Default. The afore-mentioned critical Author
accuses him likewise (but how justly let others judge) of being careless in
observing the Dignity and Decorum of Persons, making those that are rude and
illiterate, discourse of the deepest points and speculations in Philosophy: but
this Objection I shall answer by opposing to it the Testimony of one, who was
as good a Judge, and as great a Rhetorician as Denis of Halicarnasse; and that
is By some learned Men thought to be Aristides Ad^anensis.
Hermogenes Tarsensis, who expressly affirms, that Xenophon did particularly
excel in the natural and proper Representations of Persons, showing them
always in the most plain, and yet pleasing simplicity, without any manner of
Affectation or Disguise.

In many things he stood in Competition with Plato himself, and in a neat and
familiar Phrase s confessed to have excelled him. Tully says his Language is
so soft and sweet, that the Muses themselves seem to speak out of his Mouth.
And Quintihan Orat. just. l. 10. c. 1.
affirms, his Style has in it such a natural pleasantness that no Affectation
can equal; as if the Graces themselves had framed it. Hence the Title of Musa,
or Apes, Attica was appropriate to him, as (besides other Testimonies) is
intimated in an Epigram of Chrestodorus a Thebane Poet, with which, as relating
particularly to the following Treatise, I shall conclude this Discourse.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In English thus.
Brave Xenophon, by Noble Athens owned,
( Athens in Arms, as well as Arts, renowned)
Did once proclaim great Persi^s greater Lord,
And in Platonic Strains his Acts record,
Where Rules of War, and Policies of State,
He did with sost, sweet Lines attemperate.
F. D.

(...): OR, THE Institution and LIFE OF (...) the GREAT. BOOK I.
The Preface.
I Have often considered how many Popular States have been dissolved by those
that would (...)
live under any Government rather than a Democracy; and again, how many
Monarchies and Republics have been subverted by the Populacy. As also, of
those that have affected the Supreme Power, how some have, on a sudden, been
utterly destroyed, whilst others, though they have exercised an absolute
Dominion for a long time, have yet been admired as Men wise in their
Administration, and happy in their Conduct. It was also, methoughts, observable
in most private Families, where the Masters have some of them numerous
Attendants, and others very few; yet can they never bring even those few to be
entirely obedient to their Commands. Besides this, I considered that Herdsmen
govern their Herds, and Feeders their Horses; and all those we call Keepers may
properly be supposed to exercise a kind of Command over those Cattle they have
under their Charge. And withal I observed, That all those Creatures are more
ready to obey their Keepers than Men their Governors: for, their Flocks go
what way they direct them, they feed in those Pastures they permit them, and
refrain from those from whence they drive them, and are content that their
Feeders should, at their own Pleasure, enjoy the fruits or profits they afford:
nor did we ever (...)
yet hear of any Flock that conspired against their Keepers, either so as to
disclaim their own Subjection to them, or to deny them the use of the Fruits of
their Increase; nay, they are more cursed and untractable to all others than to
those that have a Command over them, and have been advantaged by them; but Men
set themselves to oppose none so much as those they conceive attempting to
exercise a Dominion over them. Now when I had seriously debated these things
with my self, I came, in the end, to this Conclusion, That for Man to make
himself Sovereign over all other Creatures, is more natural and easy than to
govern Men.

But, when I came to consider that there was a Cyrus of Persia, who held in
Obedience many Men, Cities, and Nations, I was presently forced to shift my
Thoughts, and take up with this Opinion, That to govern Men, provided it were
done with Wisdom and Skill, was a thing neither utterly impossible nor very
difficult. For, we know Men paid a voluntary Allegiance unto Cyrus; some that
were distant from him many days, others many months Journey, some that never
saw him in their Lives, and others that were sure they never should, were
notwithstanding desirous and willing to obey him: for indeed, he so far
excelled other Kings, were their Dominions either Hereditary or Acquired, that
when the Scythian Emperor, though his People are innumerable, cannot make
himself Master of any other Nation, but could be content to be Sovereign of his
own; the Thracian, if he could rule Thrace; the Illyrian, if he could command
Illyricum; and the same we hear reported of other Countries, (for there are
States, it is said, even at this day in Europe, free and independent) yet Cyrus,
when he found some Estates in Asia obliged by no Laws but their own, coming
upon them with an inconsiderable Army of Persians, he brought the Medes and
Hyrcanians into a Voluntary Subjection: He totally subdued Syria, Assyria,
Arabia, Cappadocia, both the Phrygia's, Lydia, Caria, Phoenicia, and Babylon.
He commanded the Bactrians, Indians, and Cilicians, as also the A People of
Scythia Asiatica. Ptol. 1. 6. ^ap. 13.
Sacans, Paphlagonians, and Philelphus, vetus Interp. legit (...), who are a
People of the Inner Asia. Ort.
Megadines, with innumerable other Nations, whose Names are not to be reckoned.
He held in Obedience the Greeks in Asia, and setting to Sea, he mastered the
Cyprians and Egyptians. Thus ^ad he alone the Sovereignty over all these
Nations; Nations as much Strangers to his Language as they were to each others:
and notwithstanding he could awe so great a part of the World with the dread of
his Name, as that all men were struck with Astonishment, and none durst lift up
an hand against him; yet could he withal raise in them such an affectionate
desire of doing what should be grateful to him, that they were always ready to
make his Will the measure of their Obedience. He made so many Nations his
Dependents and Subjects, that what way soever (...)
one should set out from his Royal Palace, whether East, West, North, or South,
to enumerate them all would be difficult. Concerning this great Man, so worthy
our Admiration, I have made diligent search how he was descended, what his
natural Inclination, and what his Education, whereby he became so excellent
above all others in Princely Government: so that whatsoever, either upon
Enquiry I have learned, or otherwise know of him, I shall endeavor to declare.

Cyrus's Father (as is commonly reported) was Cyrus's Parentage
Cambyses, King of Persia; (now this Cambyses was a Descendent of the Race of
the Persidae, so called in honor of Perseus) and it is confessed on all hands,
that his Mother was Mandana, Daughter of Astyages King of the Medes.

Now it is said of Cyrus, and he is renowned as such, even at this day among the
Barbarians, that he was a man by Nature most graceful and affable, a great
Admirer of Learning, and Lover of Honor; in pursuit of which, he would undergo
any Hardship, and encounter any Danger.

And being, as is recorded of him, naturally qualified with such Ornaments both
of Body and Mind, he was instructed in the Laws of the Persians, and Education.
which seem chiefly to take care of, and design, the Advancement of the common
Good. Nor do they begin there, or primarily intend The Persian Laws.
that which the Laws of most other Cities do; for, They for the most part leave
all Persons at their Liberty, to educate their Children as they please, and
indulge the Elder sort the same freedom of living as they will: they enjoin
them, indeed, not to commit Theft or Rapine; not to plunder their Neighbors;
to strike no Man wrongfully; not to commit Adultery; not to be disobedient to
the Magistrate, etc. So that whosoever shall transgress against any of these
Ordinances, the Law has provided a Penalty for him. But to prevent this, the
Laws of the Persians make Provision betimes that no freeborn Citizen there,
may, even from the beginning, have so much as an Inclination to act any thing
that is base or dishonorable. The method they take is this:

They have a Place called the (...)
Free Court, where are erected the Palace Royal and other Princely Edifices,
from whence Merchandise and Traders, and the Clamours and Insolence of those
kind of People are referred to another Place, lest their tumultuary Proceedings
should disturb the decent Order, and corrupt the good Manners of those that
came there to be instructed. This public Place or Court aforesaid is divided
into four parts; one whereof is for the Children, another for the Young Men, a
third for those that are fully arrived at Man's Estate, and a fourth for such,
as by reason of their Age, are discharged from all Military Duty. Now,
according to the Prescript of the Law, every one of these attend in his proper
Place and Season. The Youth, and those that are at Man's Estate, early in the
Morning, by Break of Day: but the Elderly Men, beside certain set Days to which
they are bound, appear only there as every one's Occasions permit them. The
Young Men being provided of light Armor, lodge about the Palace, except those
that are married, whose Attendance is never required unless they are summoned;
no^ yet is it for their Credit to be often absent. Over each of these Divisions
are twelve Presidents, because the Persians are divided into so many Tribes.
Such of the Old Men are chosen to preside over the Children, as are supposed
fittest to render them completely good and virtuous men. Over the Young Men,
such of those at Man's Estate as are thought likeliest to make them the most
gallant Persons. And over those at Man's Estate, such especially as may make
them obedient to the Supreme Magistrate in what he commands, and ready to
perform what he enjoins. Nor are the Old Men without their Prefects, who are
chosen purposely to inspect them, that they also may be faithful in the
discharge of their Duties. I shall likewise particularly declare what by the
Law is incumbent upon every Age to perform; that so it may the more evidently
appear how sollicitous and careful they are that the Subjects of their State
may approve themselves right honest Men.

Now, the Children that come to these Or Courts.
Schools employ their time in learning Principles of Justice, and for this
purpose are said to attend as The Childrens Exercise.
constantly here, as with us they do that go to learn Letters. Then for their
Governors, they spend most part of the day in giving Judgment among them; for,
even they, as well as men, have mutual Indictments and Accusations one against
another, of Thest, Rapine, Violence, Fraud, Slander, and the like; and they
certainly punish whomsoever they find guilty of any such crime; those also
that, without any just Cause, are found to bring false Accusations against
their Fellows. They condemn all those litigious Wranglings which create mutual
Animosities and Hatred among men; especially they give Judgment against
Ingratitude: so that when they know any one that has both Ability and
Opportunity to be grateful, and is not, him they punish very severely; for that
they believe, ungrateful men, above all others, to have no Regard of the Gods,
their Parents, Country, or Friends. Besides, they look upon Ingratitude to be
constantly attended with Impudence, and that is the great Incentive to all
manner of Lewdness and Debauchery. Moreover, they instruct the Children in the
Rules of Sobriety; to the acquiring of which, it is very conducible, that they
have before their Eyes Examples of Old Men, that spend their days in Moderation
and Temperance. They are taught also to yield Obedience to the Magistrate; to
which they are mightily encouraged, by seeing the Elders so cheerfully obey the
Hig^er Powers. They learn here likewise to be sparing and moderate in their
Diet, and to make them so, it contributes very much, first that they never see
the Old Men depart to take any Refreshment before they are dismissed by their
Superiors; and then, that they themselves receive their Sustenance, not from
their Mothers, but from their Masters hands; and that too upon notice first
given by the President. They bring with them from home for their ordinary Food,
Bread; and for their other meats (...)
Cresses: for their Drink, if any one thirst, they have an earthen Pot to draw
up Water out of the River. They learn here also the use of the Bow, to shoot
and to dart; and this is their Duty: this they practice till they come to the
Age of Sixteen or Seventeen; from which time they are reckoned among the Ephebi
or Young Men. Now they lead their Lives after this manner:

For ten years after the time of their Childhood The Youth how employed.
is expired, they lodge about the Palace, partly for the Safeguard of the City,
and partly to make them vigilant and temperate; because at this Age especially,
they seem most to stand in need of a strict Discipline and Governance. In the
day time they wait chiefly upon the Magistrates, to be employed, if any Concern
for the Public call for their Service: and, when occasion requires, they all
give their Attendance about the Palace Royal. Whenever the King goes forth to
hunt (and that he does often every month) he leads out with him half his
Guards: now all that attend upon him must have a Bow and Arrows, with a Quiver;
a short Dagger or (...)
Cymitar in a Scabbard, besides a light Target and two Javelins, the one to
dart at a distance, and the other (if need be) to use at hand. They are careful
to keep up this kind of public Hunting, where the King in Person, as in the
Wars, is their Leader (who both hunts himself and takes care that others do so
too) upon this account; because they look upon it to be the best Preparatory
for, and truest Resemblance of Military Discipline: for, it brings them to a
Custom of rising early in the Morning, it inures them to undergo Heat and Cold,
and exercises them with traveling on Foot and Running. Besides, they are
obliged to shoot at, and dart the Wild Beast wheresoever they meet him; and
many times it cannot choose but quicken and raise their Courage when they
encounter some fierce and noble Prey, for they must strike those that make at
them, and avoid those that eagerly assault them: so that it is hard to find any
one Action in War that is not represented or matched in Hunting. Those that go
forth to hunt, have (as is but fitting) a larger Proportion allowed for their
Dinner than the Children; but in other Respects they fare alike. Whilst they
have Game they must not dine; but if they are forced to tarry long for their
Game, or are otherwise willing to continue their Chase, then they eat their
Dinner for Supper, and the next Day hunt till Supper-time again, accounting
those two days but for one, because they spend only the Portion allotted for
one: now this course they take, so to accustom themselves, that in War, if need
require, they may be able to do the same. These Young Men, if they take any
thing in Hunting, that they have for their (...)
Repast; if nothing, their Cresses. But now, if any man imagine they fare hard
because they have nothing to eat with their Bread but Cresses, and only Water
to drink; let him but consider how savory is a plain Cake, or piece of Bread to
one that is hungry, and how delicious Water is to him that is thirsty.

As for the rest of the Guards that remain at home, besides that they
diligently practice themselves in other things which they learned whilst yet
Children, they exercise themselves in shooting and darting, in which they are
continually striving to excel one another. They have also their public Games
and Contests, and Rewards appointed for the Victors: and look what Tribe
abounds with the most understanding, valiant, and obedient Subjects, not only
their Governor for the time being, but he also that instructed in their
Childhood, is highly magnified, and honored by the People. These Young Men
likewise that stay behind in the City, if there be any occasion either for a
Guard, or to search after Malefactors, or to apprehend Robbers, or any thing
else that requires Strength and Dispatch, are always employed by the Civil
Magistrate. These are the Exercises of the Youth, who after they have thus
employed these ten Years, are taken into the Number of Complete Men; and then,
(...)
for twenty five Years following, the Course of Life they lead is this:

At first, as the Young Men do, they attend The Men's Exercise.
the chief Magistrates, ready to be put upon Duty whenever the Exigency of
Public Affairs calls for Men of approved Wisdom and Courage. And if upon
occasion they are summoned to go out to Battle, they that are under this
Discipline, go not out, as before, armed with Bows and Lances, but with (...)
Weapons fit to grapple with at hand; such are a Breast Plate about their
Breasts, in their left hand a Shield, as the Persians are usually represented,
and in their right hand a short Sword or Cymitar: these are they out of which
they choose all the Magistracy, except only the Childrens Governors. Now when
they have completed these five and twenty years, they may be supposed to be
somewhat upwards of Fifty; from which time they commence Elders both in Name
and Fact.

These Elders henceforward go no more out The Duty of the Elders.
of their own Country to the Wars, but remaining now at home, are to determine
all Controversies that shall arise, both Public and Private, to give Judgment
in matters of Life and Death; to whom also belongs the Election of Magistrates:
and if any of the Young Men, or those of maturer years, neglect to discharge
their Duty as by Law enjoined; against all such Persons, either the Presidents
of their respective Tribes, or any else that will, bring their Presentiments:
where, upon hearing the whole matter, the Elders discard them; and he that is
thus thrown off, leads the residue of his Life in Infamy and Disgrace. But now,
that the whole Persian Polity and Government may appear more plain and easy, I
shall recollect a little what I have delivered; which I shall be able to
comprise very briefly in regard of what has been already spoken.

The Persians then are reported to be in number A Summary of the foregoing
Discourse.
about a hundred and twenty thousand; and none of all these are by Law debarred
from honorable Employments and Offices of State: for, all Persians in general
are at liberty to send their Children to these public Seminaries of Justice;
although they only are sent thither whose Parents are of Ability otherwise to
breed them up at their ease; and they that cannot do that never send them. Now,
they that in their Childhood have undergone the Discipline of these Public
Teachers, may improve themselves afterward among the young Men, which
Privilege the Law denies to those that have not. Likewise, such of the Youth
as have gone on constantly to perform what the Law requires, may proceed yet
higher in the Society of those of riper years, and have equal share with them
in Honors and Preferments. But they that have never gone through this
Institution in either Capacity, either as young Men or Children, are by no
means admitted into Fellowship with them that are arrived at the perfect State
of Manhood. They also that among the full aged Men have in all Respects
acquitted themselves unblameably, are thereupon received into the number of the
Elders: so that such only are constituted Elders that have gone through all
manner of honest and laudable Employments. This is their Polity, this their
Constitution, which they that live up to, are esteemed the best of Men. There
are yet amongst the Persians some Remains of the Moderation they observe in
receiving their Food, and their Labor in digesting it: and even at this day
it is reputed among them a thing not only shameful to be spitting in Public and
blowing the Nose, or to appear puffed up and swollen, but scandalous also so much
as to make Water, or to perform any such like Offices of Nature so as to be
seen of Men; which could never be practicable did they not use a strict
Temperance in their Diet, and by a constant Industry so work out their gross
and sluggish Humors that they should waste themselves some other way. This is
what I have thought fit to say of the Persians in general. Now I shall proceed
more particularly to declare the Noble Acts of Cyrus, beginning even from his
Childhood: in prosecution of which Design I first entered upon this Discourse.

Cyrus then, till he was twelve Years old and Cyrus's Childhood
somewhat upwards, was trained up and educated in this sort of Discipline; and
had manifestly the Pre-eminence of all his Fellows, both in quickness to
apprehend what he was taught, and also in acting every thing with a graceful
and Man-like Mien. About this time King Astyages sent for his Daughter Mandana,
and Cyrus her Son, whom he earnestly desired to see because he was famed for a
very lovely and virtuous Youth. She immediately obeys her Father's Commands,
and brings with her, her young Son; who was no sooner arrived and knew Astyages
to be his Grandfather, but presently (as a Child whose Nature prompted him to
Duty and Affection) he salutes him like an Acquaintance of a long standing, and
embraces him as if he had been a familiar Friend: and seeing him, as the
Fashion of the Medes is, with his Eyes painted, his Face beautified with
counterfeit Colors, and his head adorned with borrowed Hair; (for all these
Devices they use, besides their purple Robes, their rich (...)
Vestments, their Chains about their Necks, and Bracelets on their Arms;
whereas the Persians, such especially as remain at home, are even at this day
in their Apparel very plain and ordinary, and frugal in their Diet.) Cyrus, I
say, seeing Astyages in all this Gayety, O Mother, says he, fixing his Eyes
upon him, what a comely Grandfather have I! And when she asked him whether he
thought was the more sightly Person, his own Father, or Hers? Verily Mother,
replied he, my Father greatly excells all the Persians; but of all the Medes I
have yet seen, either in my Journey, or since my Arrival, this my Grandfather
is exceedingly the most goodly and graceful Man. Then Astyages, in return,
embracing him, arrayed him in a costly Robe, and put upon him the honorable
Ornaments of Chains and Bracelets: and whenever he went abroad he took him with
him, having mounted him on an Horse with gold Trappings, as he himself was used
to ride. And Cyrus, as he was a Child of a great deal of Gallantry and Honor,
was very much taken with his Robe of State, and highly pleased with the
Exercise of Horsemanship: for Persia being a mountainous and craggy Country,
it is very difficult to breed Horses there, and dangerous to ride them; so that
among them it is a rare thing so much as to see one.

Now when Astyages was sat at Supper with his Daughter and Kinsman, being
desirous that the Child's Entertainment should be as grateful and pleasing as
might be, the more to take him off from longing homeward; he caused diverse
sorts of Dishes, served up with variety of the most exquisite (...)
Sauces and Dainties to be set before him. Whereupon, Cyrus, as is reported,
brake out into these Words; O my Lord, says he, What His Discourses at Supper.
a trouble do you create your self in this Supper, if you must reach out your
hand to every one of these Dishes, and taste of all these sundry meats? Why,
says Astyages, don't you esteem this a much better Entertainment than you have
in Persia? By no means, my Lord, replied Cyrus; for we have a much more natural
and easy way to satisfy our Appetite than you: only Bread and a little Flesh
suffices us, whereas you Medes, though you aim at the same thing, yet going
about this way and that way, with many windings and turnings, you scarce at
last procure that, which we, long since, with so much ease attained. But to us,
my Child, quoth Astyages, this wheeling about and wandering is not at all
tedious; and you also, do but only taste, will confess these Dainties to be
most delightful and savory. Yea, but methinks quoth Cyrus, you your self, my
Lord, seem even to disdain these Delicacies. Then Astyages asking him, why
think thou so, Sweetheart? because, says he, after your taking Bread I
never observe that you wipe your Hands; but no sooner do you touch any of these
dainty Dishes but immediately you make clean your Fingers with your Napkin, as
if you were really concerned and offended that you had meddled with them at all.
To which Astyages, If that be thy Conceit, My Dear, come however eat liberally
of the Flesh-meats that thou may return home a lusty Young Man: and
presently ordered diverse sorts of Flesh, both tame and wild, to be set before
him. Which Cyrus perceiving, Does your Majesty, says he, bestow upon me all
this Variety to dispose of as I please? Yea verily, replied Astyages, all this
I freely give thee. Then Cyrus taking the several Dishes, bestowed them all
amongst his Grandfather's domestic Servants, using to every one these or the
like Expressions; This I bestow on thee for thy Diligence and Willingness to
teach me to ride: and on thee this (which is what at present I have) for the
Javelin thou gave me: take thou this Donative for the good and faithful
Service thou do my Grandfather: and thou this because thou do reverence and
honor my Mother. And at this rate he continued till he had distributed amongst
them all the Flesh-meats that were set before him. Whereupon Astyages thus
bespake him; But why gave thou nothing to Sacas my Cup Bearer, who is greatly
my Favorite? Now this Sacas was a very graceful Person, and had an honorable
Employ to introduce such as had business with Astyages, and to deny those
admittance whose Visits he thought unseasonable. To which, Cyrus, as he was a
Child not easily abashed, very smartly made this Reply: And why, good Sir, have
you such a value and esteem for this Fellow? Why, says Astyages, see thou
not how neatly he performs, and handsomely becomes his Office; for these Kings
Cup-bearers serve up their Wine with a singular Grace, and have a delicate hand
at filling it out. They present their Cup bearing it so betwixt three Fingers,
that they may the most easily and commodiously deliver it to him that is to
drink of it.

To whom Cyrus; Let your highness then command Sacas to give me likewise a Cup,
that I also filling out dexteriously to you, may, if possible, obtain your
gracious favor and Affection. Which, when according to Astyages's commands, he
had received, immediately he cleansed it, and washed it very carefully, as he
had observed Sacas to do: and then putting on a settled and composed
countenance, he presented it with such a pretty gentile behavior that made
both Astyages and his Mother break forth into a great Laughter. And he himself
laughing out for Company, ran presently to his Grandfather, and embracing him,
cried out: Now Sacas thou art utterly ruined: I shall thrust thee out of thy
Honor and employment. For I shall not only in other respects discharge this
Office as well as thy self; but also forbear to drink up the Wine. For they
that are Cup-bearers to these Kings, when they present a Bowl of Wine, first
pour out some of it into a Taster in their left hand, and drink it off, to the
end that if they have poisoned the Wine they may be sure not to escape
unpunished. Then said Astyages sportingly; But why Cyrus, seeing you imitate
Sacas in other things, did you not also drink off the Wine? Because, said he, I
was heartily afraid lest Poison might have been infused into the Vessel. For
when upon celebration of your Birthday you entertained your Friends, I was
then fully convinced that this Fellow gave you Payson to drink. But how, my
child, quoth Astyages, did thou discover this? Because, replied he, I saw you
strangely disordered both in Body and Mind. For in the first place, what you
strictly enjoin us Children not to do, that you your selves acted. All of you
set up such a confused Clamor that you could not understand one another. You
sung most absurdly and ridiculously. And would swear such a one sung most
incomparably when you never heard him sing at all; every one was magnifying his
own strength and activity; and when you rose up to dance, you were so far from
observing your Measures or Time, that ye were hardly able to stand upright. All
of ye totally lost your Senses; you forgetting that you were a King, and they
that they were your Subjects. Then did I first learn that this was the time
when every one talked (...)
what and as much as he pleased; for your Tongues were in perpetual motion.
Whereupon Astyages returned, Pray tell me, my Son, is thy Father never
distempered with Wine? No, I assure you, said he, never. But how, quoth he,
does he do to avoid it? He drinks only, answered Cyrus, to quench his thirst,
and receives no other Prejudice by it; for, believe me Sir, he has no Sacas to
be his Cup Bearer. Hereupon his Mother spoke unto him; And why, Child, are you
so violently Sacas's Enemy? Because, said he, I protest I hate him perfectly:
for, many times, when I am very desirous to visit my Grandfather, this
pestilent Fellow denies me Admittance; therefore I humbly beg that I may have
him entirely at my Command but for three days. And how, said Astyages, would
thou exercise thy Authority over him? I would, replied he, take up my Station
in the very Passage where he used to stand; and when he had a mind to come in
to his Dinner, by no means, I would cry out, here is no Entrance for you yet;
my Grandfather is taken up with business: When he would come in to Supper, I
would say, he is now in the Bath: When he was exceeding hungry and fain would
eat, I would tell him he was then accosting the Ladies; till with such Excuses
I have deluded and put him off as he uses to serve me when he denies me access
to your Person. Such Merriment and Pastime did Cyrus his Discourse create them
at Supper. And at other times very difficult was it for any one to be
beforehand with him in observing and executing whatsoever his Grandfather or
Cyaxares.
Uncle commanded: so over-joyed was he if with his utmost Service he could do
any thing that was grateful and acceptable to them.

Now when Mandana was preparing for her Return into Persia, Astyages besought
her that she would leave behind her Cyrus her Son. To Cyrus willing to tarry in
Media.
which she answered, That she was ready in all things to comply with her
Fathers Requests; but to leave the Child there against his own Will she thought
was very hard. Then spoke Astyages to Cyrus; My Son, if you will tarry here, in
the first place, it shall not be in Sacas's power to deny you Access to my
Person, but whenever you please you shall have free Admittance; and the more
frequent your Visits are the more acceptable will they be. My Horses, and
whatever else you please, shall be wholly at your Service: and whenever you
depart, you shall command with you which of them you like best. For your Diet
you shall be left at your liberty to take such course as to you shall seem most
consistent with Moderation and Sobriety. The wild Beasts at present in my Park,
and what others of all sorts I can procure, shall be entirely yours; which, as
soon as you are grown an expert Horseman, you shall chase, and with Darts and
Arrows so baffle and overthrow them, as strong and well-grown men are used to
do. I will provide also young Gentlemen to be your Sport-Companions: and
briefly, whatever else you desire, only let me know your Mind, and you shall
not fail to be gratified in your Request. When Astyages had thus made an end of
speaking, Cyrus's Mother demanded of him, whether he would depart or stay; and
he, without any hesitation, readily replied, He would choose to stay. Then his
Mother further demanding of him the Reason of his choice, he gave this,
Because, said he, at home I have the Repute, and that deservedly, of the most
complete Artist at Shooting and Darting of any of my Companions; but here, as
to Riding, I am very sensible, how much inferior I am to the rest of my
Associates; which, when I reflect upon, I assure you, I am exceedingly
dissatisfied. Now if I stay here and learn to be a good Horseman, I believe,
when I come into Persia, I shall easily surpass the best Footmen there; and
whenever I return again into Media, having got the Name, even among skillful
Riders, of a perfect Master in Horsemanship, I will endeavor to aid and assist
my Grandfather in his Wars. But how, my Child, answered his Mother, will you
learn Justice here, seeing your Teachers are in Persia that should instruct you
therein. To which Cyrus replied, I perfectly understand it already. How know
thou that, quoth Mandana? Because, said he, my Master made me a Judge over
others, as one already exact in the Administration of Justice. And once in the
Decision of a Controversy I was punished for not giving Judgment aright. The
Case was this:

A great Boy that had a scanty Coat stripped The Judgment of Cyrus.
another little Boy that had a large Coat, putting his own upon the little one
and the little ones Coat upon himself. Now I sitting as Judge in this Case,
resolved, That for either of them to have the Coat that fitted him was fairest
and best for both Parties. For this Sentence my Master punished me, telling me
withal, that should I be appointed to judge in matter of Convenience, then I
ought to proceed thus: but where you are to determine whose Garment it is,
here, said he, you are to consider who has the Propriety and Right of
Possession; whether he in Justice ought to enjoy it that by Violence has taken
it away, or he that has made it, or bought it with his Money. For said he,
adding further, what is just that is also lawful; and what is contrary to Law
is Violence: so that in every definitive Sentence, the Judge ought especially
to regard what the Law directs. And thus, Mother, said he, I am pretty well
versed in all things that concern the Distribution of Justice; wherein, if in
any point I am defective, my Grandfather here will instruct me. But, my Son,
said she, your Grandfather does not allow that to be Justice here, which passes
for Law among the Persians. For he, among the Medes, has made himself Lord and
Proprietary of all they have; but among the Persians, to observe an Equality is
looked upon to be just. And your Father, as he is the Principal in making
Statutes and Ordinances for the State, so he himself is the first that receives
and observes them; making that his Rule to walk by, not what his own arbitrary
Pleasure suggests, but what the Law prescribes.

How then will you escape being chastised almost to Death, if, when you return
home, instead of Kingly Government you have imbibed from him the Principles of
Tyranny, the very Nature whereof is to hold it necessary that One should have
more than the whole Community besides. Yea, but my Grandfather, said Cyrus, is
His witty Answer.
so powerful and persuasive as to teach People rather to be content with a
little than to covet much: for, don't you observe how he has taught all the
Medes to rest satisfied with less than himself? Therefore be of good cheer,
Mother, said he, and assure your self, that my Grandfather will so instruct me
also, as well as his own Subjects, that when he dismisses me I shall by no
means covet to possess more than others.

These, and many things of the like Nature, did Cyrus utter; when in
Conclusion, his Mother Mandana departing, he tarried behind, and was there
brought up in Astyages's Court: where he quickly grew into such an Acquaintance
with his Associates, that he became their most familiar and intimate Friend;
and in a short time, what by his Deportment and Civility toward them, and what
by those evident Expressions of Love he showed to their Children, he gained so
much upon the Affections of their Fathers, that if they had any Suit to the
King, they laid their Commands upon their Children, that they should entreat
Cyrus to solicit their Business for them: and he (such was his obliging and
generous Temper) whatsoever his Companions desired of him, made it especially
his own Business to get theirs dispatched. Now Astyages had it not in his Power
to deny Cyrus any thing wherein he might comply with and gratify his Requests:
for, once when he was in a fit of Sickness, he never gave over his attendance
on him, nor forbore to shed Tears for him; so that every one plainly perceived
how mightily concerned and fearful he was lest his Grandfather should dye. If
in the Nightime he called for any thing he wanted, Cyrus was the first that
perceived it; and being more watchful and sedulous than the rest, he
immediately rose up, and administered such things as he thought proper for, and
acceptable to him: by which means, he so won the heart of Astyages, that he
could command of him what he pleased.

Cyrus perhaps was a little too full of Talk and liberal of his Tongue; which
was partly the Effect of his Education, he being obliged by his Teachers to
render a Reason for every thing he did, and to exact the same from others when
he sat in Judgment amongst them; and partly because, he desiring to improve in
Knowledge, was both himself always very inquisitive with those about him, how
the Affairs of the World went; and also, whatsoever Questions others put to
him, so brisk and active was his Wit, he ever had an Answer ready for them; all
which Circumstances caused him to abound with words, and made him naturally
very talkative. But as in those that are very young, though they are already
grown up to a considerable Stature, yet still there appears in them something
juvenile and childish, that discovers and betrays their tender years; so
Cyrus's superfluity of Discourse was not an Argument of too much Confidence and
Boldness in him, but only of Innocence and good Nature; insomuch, that to hear
him still go on freely in his Talk, was, to those about him, more grateful than
his Silence. But in process of time, as he grew up, and added to his Statu^e
more maturity of Years, he began to be more sparing of his Words, and more calm
and sedate in his Expression; and withal became so modest and bashful, that he
would even blush when he met with any elderly Person: he also quite left off
that over-forward and familiar kind (...)
of way of intruding himself into all Companies without Consideration or
Distinction; whereby he became indeed more quiet and reserved, but nothing the
less acceptable at their Meetings and places of Resort: for, of all their Games
and Disputes, wherein Young Men usually make trial of, and prove their Equals,
he never challenged his Companions in any wherein he believed himself
Superior; but where he certainly knew himself overmatch'd, there he would be
sure to give the first Onset, and declare he would perform the Exercise better
than they. He began also now to leap up, and mount readily on Horseback, and
from thence to practice shooting and darting, when he was yet but a very
unexperienced Rider; and if at any time he were outdone and worsted, he would
especially be jocose and pleasant upon himself. He never shrunk back or
desisted upon a Defeat, but would still be making fresh Essays and Attempts,
that he might grow more and more expert in the performance of those Exercises
wherein he had been overcome and mastered; so that in a short time he not only
equaled his Fellows in the business of Horsemanship, but such was the pleasure
he took in it, he quickly excelled and surpassed them. Nor was it long before
he had, what with chasing and shooting, so wasted and destroyed the wild Beasts
in the Park, that Astyages was at a loss to procure Game for him. Now when
Cyrus perceived that Astyages, though he were very desirous, was not able to
supply him, What need you, said he, be thus sollicitous, and thoughtful for my
Entertainment? Only send me forth to hunt with my Cyaxare, his Mothers Brother.
Uncle, and every wild Beast I meet with I will fancy you have kept up for my
Exercise and Diversion: and though he longed extremely to be abroad at his
Game, yet could he now no longer request any thing so earnestly as when he was
a Child, but was rather tardy and backward in his Visits to his Grandfather:
and whereas before he had a Pique against Sacas for refusing to introduce him,
he was now become a Sacas to control himself; for, he never went in to him now
unless he were beforehand assured that it was a proper time; and he entreated
Sacas that he would always signify to him when his Visit would be seasonable,
and when not; so that Sacas now, as well as all others, exceedingly loved and
admired him.

When Astyages came to understand how very Cyrus a Lover of Hunting.
earnest he was to go a hunting abroad, he sent him sorth with his Uncle, and
with them a Guard of Elderly Men on Horseback, to keep him out of hazardous
and dangerous places, and secure him from the more savage sort of wild Beasts,
if any such chanced to approach them. Cyrus therefore was very inquisitive with
those that attended him, which sort of Beasts he might not come near, and which
he might boldly pursue: They told him, that Bears, Lions, Boars, and Leopards,
had torn in pieces many that had adventured to approach too near them; but that
Stags, Goats, wild Sheep, and Asses, were nothing so mischievous and hurtful;
and withal warned him, that he must have equal regard to avoid perilous
Places as to shun the sellest Beasis; for that many Men had already, Horse and
all, fallen headlong down from Rocks and Precipices.

To all these Cautions Cyrus was very attentive; yet no sooner had he espied a
Hind skipping before him, but, regardless of whatever he had heard, he was
instantly in close pursuit of her, minding nothing more but which way she fled;
insomuch, that his Horse, by a kind of a Leap, fell upon his Knees, and Cyrus
was in danger to be thrown over his Neck; however, with much ado he made a
shift to sit him, and the Horse recovered his Legs. As soon as he came into the
Plain he hurled his Dart at the Hind and overthrew her, a goodly Beast, and a
large one; whereat he did not a little rejoice. But his Guard that attended
him, riding up to him, checked him sorely, showing him to what danger he had
exposed himself, and telling him withal, they would complain of him to his
Grandfather. Cyrus hearing them say so, alighted off his Horse, and stood still
somewhat troubled in mind and disturbed, when immediately hearing a great
shout, like one in a sudden Transport, he re-mounted; and seeing a wild Boar
making furiously at him, he rode up against him, and threw his Javelin with
such dexterity, that he hit him on the Forehead, brought him down, and
mastered him. Hereupon his Uncle also seeing his adventurous Rashness, reproved
him; who notwithstanding his Rebukes, requested him that what he had taken in
hunting he would give him leave to carry home and present it to his
Grandfather. To whom his Uncle replied, If he should know that you had chased
these Beasts, he would not only check you, but reprehend me also for permitting
you. Let him, said he, even scourge me if he please, provided I may only make
him this Present: and you, Uncle, if it be your Will, only gratify me in this,
and inflict on me what Punishment you think fit. In Conclusion Cyaxares told
him, You may use your own Pleasure, and do as you list, for you are become
already as it were a King over us. So Cyrus brought the Prizes he had taken,
and presenting them to his Grandfather, told him, he had hunted those for his
sake: as for his Darts he showed them not, but laid them, all bloody as they
were, in such a Place where he thought his Grandfather must needs see them.

Then said Astyages to him, I accept gladly, my Son, whatsoever you offer me;
but yet I stand in no such need of any of these, as to purchase them with the
hazard of your Person. My Lord, says Cyrus, if you need them not, bestow them
upon me, that I may distribute among my Companions. Astyages replied, Take, my
Son, not only these, but if there be any thing else you desire, dispose of
what, and to whom you please. So Cyrus took them, and bestowing them among the
Young Men his Companions, spoke to them to this effect.

How did we, my Sport-mates, trifle and befool our selves when we chased the
Deer in the Park! to me it seems much the same as if a man should go to hunt in
a Prison, and have his Game in Fetters: for first they were confined to a very
narrow Compass, then they were some of them little, lean, and shabby, others
lame, maimed, and dismembered; whereas the Wild Beasts in the Mountains and
open Fields, how comely, how large, and in what good plight they appeared. The
Stags and Hearts, swift as winged Fowl, mounted up into the Air; the Wild Boars
made up at us, and assaulted us, as stout and valorous Men use to do, and were
of so large a size that a Man could not possibly miss them. In short, these
Beasts seem in my eye, though dead, more fair and goodly than those others,
though alive, that are shut up close and impaled. But what think you, quoth he,
Will your Fathers give you leave to hunt? Yes, very readily, replied they, if
Astyages but command it. But who, said Cyrus, shall move Astyages on your
behalf? Who, returned they, is more proper for it, and more likely to prevail
than your self? As for me, says he, I protest, I know not how, I am become such
a strange kind of Man, that I am no longer able to speak to my Grandfather as I
ought, nor look him in the face as becomes me; insomuch, that I am afraid if I
go on at this rate, I shall in the end prove altogether blockish and stupid;
and yet when I was little, methought I was very forward to speak, and had
Tongue enough. Then the Youths replied, This is but bad News for us, if when we
stand in need of your Assistance you can do nothing for us, but we must be
forced to desire that of another which is most proper for you to effect. When
Cyrus heard this, being grieved at the very Heart, without answering a Word, he
departed; and arming himself with Boldness, he went in to Astyages; and having
first considered with himself how he might make his Address to him so without
offense as to obtain what he requested in his own and his Associates behalf, he
thus began; If any one of your domestic Servants should run away, and be again
apprehended, tell me, Grandfather, how would you treat him? How else, said he,
but force him like a Slave, to work in Fetters? But suppose he should return of
his own Accord, how would you treat him then? How think thou, said he, but
that having first caused him to be well scourged, that he might do so no more,
receive him afterward, and treat him as I had used to do. Then said Cyrus,
it is high time for you to set about it and scourge me; for I have a design to
run away, and take my Companions with me a hunting. Well, quoth Astyages, it is
honestly done however to give notice of it beforehand; for now I will lay my
Commands upon you not to stir from home. Would it not be a pretty business, if
for a piece of hunted Flesh I should suffer my Daughters Son to wander abroad
and be lost. When Cyrus heard this, in obedience to his Grandfathers Commands,
he tarried at home, but with a sorrowful Heart and sad Countenance kept still
Silence, and spoke not a Word. Wherefore, when Astyages perceived how strangely
grieved and discontented he was, being willing to gratify and comply with him,
he takes him out to hunt; where having summoned to attend him, a considerable
Number both of Horse and Foot, together with the Young Men, and forcing the
wild Beasts into the open Plains, he made it a great and solemn Day of hunting.
And being present himself in Royal Equipage, he strcightly commanded that none
should presume to shoot before Cyrus had taken his Fill of the Game. But Cyrus
not enduring that he should forbid others, If you desire, Grandfather, quoth
he, to make my Sport pleasa^ ^tome, permit all these my Companions to pursue
the Game, and with their utmost Art and Strength to contend which of them shall
behave himself best. Then Astyages gave them all leave to hunt, and himself
stood still and beheld how eagerly they encountered the wild Beasts, what Strife
and Contention they used in pursuit of, and striking their Darts at them.
Exceedingly pleased he was with Cyrus, who could not contain himself for Joy,
but like a true-bred generous Gr. (...) Whelp.
Son of the Game, still as he drew nearer any wild Beast would set up a full
Cry, animating and encouraging every one by Name: great delight also did he
take to see him laugh at, and deride one, and without the least show of envying
or repining, magnify and commend another. At last having taken much Game,
Astyages departed, and from thenceforward (so highly was he pleased and
satisfied with this Hunting) as often as his Affairs permitted him, he would go
abroad with Cyrus, and for his sake, among many others, he would take the
Youths also to accompany him. Thus spent Cyrus the greatest part of his time,
wherein he was the Author of much Pleasure to, and did good Offices for all
men; but was instrumental in no man's Hu^t or Disadvantage.

Now it happened that about the fifteenth or sixteenth year of his Age, the
Kings Son of Assyria, being just upon the point of Marriage, was greatly
desirous to hunt at that time. And understanding that in the Frontiers between
them and the Medes were wild Beasts good store, which by reason of the Wars had
been undisturbed, his Pleasure was to go thither; where, that he might follow
his Game without Danger or Molestation, he took with him a great number of
light Horsemen and Targeteers, who were to drive the wild Beasts out of the
rough woody Places into the Plains and Champion Fields. And being come as far
as his frontier Towns and Garrisons, he ordered a Supper to be made ready there,
intending to hunt early the next morning. And in the Evening there came out of
the City a Supply both of Horse and Foot to relieve the former Garrison; so that
now he thought he had a considerable Army, having two Garrisons conjoined,
besides abundance of Horsemen and Footmen which he brought with him:
wherefore, upon Deliberation, he concluded it best to make an Inroad into the
Medes Country, and fetch Game from thence, both because his Hunting would seem
more noble and gallant, and also he conceived that by this means he should have
greater plenty of Beasts for Sacrifice. Thereupon, early in the Morning he led
forth his Army, and leaving his Foot imbattel'd thick on the Borders, he with
his Horse advanced forwards to the Fortresses of the Medes, where he stayed,
with the better and greater part of his Forces, lest the Medes Garrisons should
sally out, and make head against those that were straggling and ravaging about
the Confines. Then he sent out several Parties of forward and daring men to
disperse themselves, some one way and some another, giving them in Charge, that
what Game soever they met with as they ranged about, they should drive the same
to him; which they accordingly performed.

When notice was given to Astyages that the Enemy had entered his Country,
himself, with those that were about him, marched out to relieve and defend the
Frontiers; and his Son, with such a number of Horsemen as were in readiness,
attended him: he likewise issued out his Commands to all others, that they
should come forth and assist him. Now when the Medes saw the Assyrians thus
numerous and in good order, their Horsemen in a quiet Posture not changing
their ground, they themselves also made a stand. And Cyrus seeing others
unanimously Cyrus first puts on Armor.
contributing their Assistance, he himself likewise did the same, then first
appearing clad in Armor, when he did not yet so much as expect what he so
earnestly desired, that he should bear Arms. A complete Suit of Armor it was,
well befitting him, which his Grandfather had commanded to be made exactly to
his Body. Thus gallantly accout'red, and well mounted, forth he rode; whom when
Astyages saw, he wondered who, or what put him upon coming thither; but withal
commanded he should now tarry with him. And here when Cyrus had discovered a
number of Horse standing afront them, he enquired, Are those, Grandfather, says
he, our Enemies yonder, that sit quietly on their Horse backs? Yes, said he,
those are our Enemies. And are those too, quoth he, that beat about and drive
the Prey before them? Yes, and they also. Then replied he, Verily Grandfather,
they are, in appearance, but base, abject Fellows, and mounted upon very Jades,
though they thus spoil and carry away our Goods; therefore it is very requisite
that some Party of us should issue out, and set upon them. But, said he, feast
thou not, my Son, what a mighty Troup of Horse stands yonder in Battle Array,
who, if we should out, in pursuit after them, would intercept and cut us off?
Besides, our Strength as yet is not considerable. Yea, but if you will abide
here, replied Cyrus, and recruit your Forces, these, for their parts, will be
so afraid, that they will not dare to stir; and they that are carrying away the
Spoil, will immediately quit their Prey; when they see any Party of us
advancing to charge upon them. And when he Cyrus's seasonable advice.
had thus said, Astyages thought he spoke something to the purpose: admiring
therefore his prudent Circumspection and Vigilance, he commanded his Son
Cyaxares.
to draw out a Party of Horse and pursue those that were driving their Booty
before them; and as for these, I, said he, will fall upon them if they once
stir to make head against you: so that they shall be forced to have an Eye this
way to observe our motions.

Then Cyaxares leading out a Company of the stoutest men, and best mounted,
advanced toward the Enemy; whom as soon as ever Cyrus perceived marching
forward, he also immediately sallied out and marched with them; when getting in
the head of them, he led them on a great pace, Cyrus's Gallan^y.
Cyaxares himself following close after, and the rest not far behind. Now when
these Freebooters saw them approach near, they quickly left their Prey, and
fled: But Cyrus especially, and his Followers, intercepted them; and such of
them as they over-took they presently slew; but such as by shifting and turning
out of the way, had escaped them, those they closely pursued, and never
desisted till they had taken some of them Prisoners. And as a generous Hound,
not yet trained up to the Game, flies eagerly and rashly at the Boar; so Cyrus
rushed on, minding only how he might strike him he could easiliest reach,
wholly regardless of any thing else.

Now the Enemies, as soon as they saw their Fellows thus distressed, brought on
their whole Body, supposing they would give over their Pursuit when they saw
them coming upon them. But Cyrus remitting nothing of his Eagerness, His
Rashness.
for joy calling out upon his Uncle, held them in Chase still; and as he had
the mastery over them, he made a great Rout and Slaughter amongst them.
Cyaxares indeed followed close after, ashamed perhaps what his Father would
think, and the rest came not far behind, being animated by such an Example, the
more cheerfully to maintain their Pursuit, even such, who otherwise were not
over-stout or valorous to engage an Enemy. But Astyages, when he saw his Men
with such inconsiderate Rashness still follow their Chase, and the Enemy's just
now facing them with a strong and well-formed Battalia, being sollicitous both
for his Son and Cyrus (lest they might, in the disorder they were in, by
falling into the hands of their Enemies thus well appointed, endanger their own
Persons) marches directly upon the Enemy; who no sooner saw the Medes coming
upon them, but with their Arrows mounted and Bows bent, they stood their
ground, as if they resolved, according to their usual Custom, to charge upon
them as soon as they came within Arrow shot: for their manner was, at this
distance, and no nearer to make their Onset, shooting at random one against
another, many times till the Evening. But when they saw their Men flying
hastily to them for Refuge, Cyrus and his Followers pursuing them close at the
heels, and Astyages with his Cavalry now come within Bow shot, they themselves
drew back and fled. The Medes followed them with all their Power, and
assaulting them fiercely, took many of them, whom they smote and overthrew,
both Horse and Man, killing and slaying all that fell before them; nor did they
in the least give over their Chase till they came to the Infantry of the
Assyrians; and there fearing lest some greater Party might lie in Ambush to
intercept them, they made a stand. Then Astyages rejoicing exceedingly for this
Victory of his Horsemen, returned; but of Cyrus he knew not what to say or
think; for he believed indeed, that the Success of this Action was to be
imputed to him as the Principal Author; but withal, that he was over-bold and
transported beyond measure: for even then when others were upon their Return
home, he did nothing else but ride up and down to take a view of those that
were slain; so that they that were appointed for that purpose had much ado to
bring him to Astyages; for he and Boldness.
commanded them to go a good space before him, because he saw his Grandfather's
Countenance, at the sight of him, was become very stern and austere.

Thus went Affairs in Media; when Cyrus was continually in every one's Mouth,
whose Praises they made the Subject of their Songs and Discourses; and Astyages
as he had before highly honored and esteemed him, so was he now struck with
Astonishment and Admiration of him.

When Cambyses, Cyrus's Father, heard these He is called home by his Father.
Reports, he rejoiced greatly; and understanding what manly Exploits Cyrus had
already done, he sent for him, that he might go through the whole course of the
Persian Discipline. Whereupon, as is reported, Cyrus declared, That depart he
would, that he might give his Father no occasion of being displeased at him,
nor the State of murmuring against him. Therefore Astyages thinking it
requisite to send him away, presented him with such Horses as he had most
liking to, and so honorably dismissed him, having first furnished him with all
things necessary, because he greatly loved him, and for that he had conceived
mighty hopes of him that he would one day prove a man able both to succor and
assist his Friends, and also to distress and vex his Enemies.

Now when Cyrus was upon his departure home, he was attended by Persons of all
Ages and Degrees, as well Youths and those of his own Years, as full-grown and
elderly Men, with Astyages himself in Person, all mounted on Horseback; nor was
there one, as is said, that taking their Farewell of him, returned back with dry
Eyes: Cyrus himself also is reported not to have departed without shedding
abundance of Tears, distributing amongst his Companions many of those Gifts and
Presents which Astyages before, had bestowed upon him. In fine, putting off the
Median Robe he had on, he gave it to one above all the rest, evidencing thereby
what an especial regard he had for him. Now they that received these Gifts at
his Hands came and presented Cyrus Liberality.
them to Astyages, who took them and dispatched them away to Cyrus again; by
whom they were forthwith returned back into Media, with a Message to his
Grandfather to this effect: If it be your Pleasure, O Grandfather! that I
should ever return to you again well pleased and nothing ashamed for any thing
I have done, suffer, I beseech you, every Man to enjoy what I bestowed upon
him. Which when Astyages heard, he did according to all that Cyrus had
requested of him.

But now to mention one pleasing juvenile Passage, It Is reported, that at
Cyrus's Departure, when all took solemn leave one of another, his Kindred and
Relations, after the Persian Fashion, dismissed him with the formality of a
Kiss, The Persians salute their Kindred with a Kiss.
(which Custom prevails in Persia even at this day) when a certain, worthy, and
gallant Gentleman of Media, seeing the rest of his Kinsmen saluting him with a
Kiss, he himself, surprised for a long time, and astonished at the Beauty and
Behavior of Cyrus, was utterly at a stand: but no sooner were they departed
from him, than he coming up to Cyrus, thus bespoke him; Am I the only Man, O
Cyrus! of all your Relations, that you know nothing of? why? are you also my
Kinsman, quoth Cyrus? yes replied He. This then was the Reason, said Cyrus,
that you so earnestly fixed your Eye upon me, for I often observed you so to do.
In good Truth said he again though I had always a longing desire to come to
you, yet such was my Bashfullness it would never permit me. But that ought not
to have been quoth Cyrus, seeing you are my Kinsman, and immediately came up to
him and kissed him. The Mede after this Salute asked him, and is it indeed the
Persian Fashion for Kindred thus to greet one another with a Kiss? yes said
Cyrus both at your first meeting, after they have been absent from one another
for some time, and also when at parting they take their leave each of other.
Then quoth the Mede, it is high time that you should Salute me with another
Kiss; For you see I am just now upon my departure from you. So Cyrus having
kissed him a second time dismissed him, and went his way. But they had not rode
far before the Mede returned again with his Horse, all in a sweat; Whom when
Cyrus saw, what, said he, have you forgot any thing you had to say to me?
Nothing at all I protest, replied the other, only after a certain time I am
returned to you again. In Truth Kinsman quoth Cyrus, and a very short time it is
I assure you. How short answered the Mede? know you not, O Cyrus, that if I am
absent from you but the twinkling of an Eye, it seems to me a very tedious
while, in regard that for that time I cannot enjoy the sight of so gallant a
Person as you are. Hereupon Cyrus smiled, and the first time it was he did so
since his late Tears; biding him withal to depart cheerfully and be of good
Comfort, for that in a short time he would be with them again, and then said
he, you may, if you please, look your fill, without so much as once taking your
Eyes off me.

Thus Cyrus returned into Persia, where it is said Cyrus returns into Persia.
he underwent yet one year more the Discipline of the Or Children.
Youths, who at his first coming derided and scoffed at him, as one that they
thought had learned all the Delicacy and Effeminacy of the Medes: But when they
saw him eat and drink with the same Relish and Appetite they did; and withal
observed that if upon some Festival Day there were any extraordinary
Entertainment; He was so far from craving more, that he very readily
distributed his own Portion to others: When they perceived besides, that He far
surpassed them in all other things, they began again to have him in great
Reverence and Estimation. And after he had gone through the whole course of
this Institution, he entered into the Society of the Young Men, where likewise,
by being intent and earnest upon his Duty, and vigorously performing what was
enjoined him: by giving a respectfull Deference to the Elders and yiedling a
dutiful Obedience to the Magistrates, He evidently out-did and excelled the
rest.

But in process of Time Astyages dyed in Media, and Cyaxares his Son, Brother
to Cyrus's Mother, Astyages his Death.
succeeded him in the Kingdom of the Medes. And now the King of the Assyrians
having utterly subdued all Svria and that no small Nation; and brought the King
of Arabia under his Subjection; having already reduced the Hyrcanians to
Obedience, and now laying Siege to the Cities of the Bactrians, he thought he
might make an easy Conquest of all the neighboring Countries if he could but
once rebate and weaken the Power of the Medes, whom he looked upon, for their
Strength, to be the most considerable Nation of any round about him. Wherefore
issuing forth his Commands to all his own Subjects, The beginning of the
Assyrian War.
he sent likewise to Craesus, King of Lydia, as also to the King of Cappadocia:
He dispatched his Ambassadors into both the Phrygia's, Caria, and Paphlagonia;
into India also and Cilicia, loading the Medes and Persians with Calumnies and
Imputations, suggesting to them how great and puissant those States were; how
they were affianc'd and conjoined by mutual Marriages, and united together in
one common Interest; so that unless some body did prevent and check their
growing Greatness, very dangerous it was, that, invading one Nation after
another, they would, by degrees, overrun them all. Some prevailed upon by
these and the like Suggestions, and others brought over by his rich Gifts and
Presents, with which he mightily abounded, all entered into a League of
Association with him. But Cyaxares, the Son of Astyages, when he understood
that his Combination and Design was meant against him, he himself, on the other
side, made what Preparations he could, sending his Dispatches as well to the
Persian State in general as to his Brother-in-law Cambyses, then reigning in
Persia. He sent also to Cyrus, requesting him that he would use his utmost
Endeavor, that in case the (...)
States of Persia should send any Forces to his Assistance, he himself might
come Commander in chief of them: (for by this time Cyrus having fully spent his
ten years among the younger sort, was in all points a complete Man.) Cyrus
therefore undertaking Cyrus Commander of the Persian Forces.
this Charge, was, by the Elders, the chief Counselors of State, elect Captain
General of the Median Expedition; to whom they gave commission to choose out
two hundred of the (...)
Nobility; and to every one of those they allowed a Privilege to make choice
of four others of the same Condition and Quality with themselves: so that their
number amounted to (...) Thousand. And to every particular Person of this
thousand they gave Authority to levy, out of the Persian Commonalty, ten
Targettiers, ten Slingers, and ten Archers: by which means, there were in all,
besides a thousand of the choice Nobility, ten thousand Archers, ten thousand
Targettiers, and ten thousand Slingers.

This so mighty an Army was committed to the Conduct of Cyrus, who was no
sooner chosen, but immediately he began at the Service of the Gods; and having
first, by a favorable Sacrifice, found them propitious, he then proceeded to
the choice of his two hundred Peers; who when they had each of them taken to
themselves four others, Cyrus assembling them all together, first spoke to them
to this effect:

Countrymen and Friends, I have made this His Oration to the Chieftains of the
Army.
Choice, not as if I had never had any experience of You till now, but as an
Eyewitness with what Vigor and Alacrity, even from your Childhood, you have
prosecuted those things which this State reputes virtuous and praiseworthy;
utterly renouncing whatsoever is here esteemed infamous and base. Now by what
Motives induced, I have, not unwillingly, undertaken this weighty Charge, and
summoned you hither, I intend to declare.

I have learned by Observation, that our Ancestors were in nothing inferior to
Us, for that they continually exercised themselves in all the Actions of a
virtuous Life: but tho gallant Persons they were, yet what Good they ever
procured either to the Persian Estate in general, or in particular to their
own, I cannot possibly understand: for truly, I believe none ever put themselves
upon the Exercise of any Virtue to this end, that when they are thereby become
perfectly good, they should nevertheless be had in no greater esteem than the
basest of Men. And they that for the present debar themselves of any
pleasurable Enjoyment, do it not because they would never more rejoice; but
they lay this Restraint upon themselves, that hereafter, to make amends for
this their present Abstinence, they may have a full Fruition of all variety of
Delights. They also that desire to become powerful Speakers, make it not the
end and design of their Studies never to give over their eloquent Pleadings;
but their Trust is, that by their winning and persuasive Language, having
wrought upon the Affections of diverse Persons, they shall purchase to
themselves many and great Advantages. In like manner, Men that are upon
Military Duty, and exercised in Martial Exploits, don't undergo all that their
toil and pains that they may never be disengaged from Battle; but this they
propose to themselves, that when they are once become complete and expert
Warriors they shall procure both to them and their Country, abundance of
Riches, increase of Happiness, and exceeding great Honors. Now if any men
after much Travel spent in these or the like Employments, shall carelessly
suffer themselves to be made useless and impotent by old Age, before they have
reaped any fruit of their Labors; they seem to me to be much in the same
Circumstances with him, who being desirous to be a good provident Husbandman,
sows his ground well, and carefully plants it; but when he should come to reap
the fruits of his labor, he suffers the whole Increase untouched, ungather'd,
to fall again to the Ground. And that Champion who by long Exercise has so
prepared himself, that he may now justly be thought worthy to bear away the
Prize, and shall then end his days without any further proof of his Courage;
such a one, in my Opinion, is by no means to be excused from the imputation of
Folly. Let not us therefore, my Countrymen, be blameable upon this score; but
in regard we are conscious to our selves, that even from our Childhood we have
been exercised in all the performances of a virtuous and honorable Discipline,
let us march out against our Enemies, whom I assuredly know, by what my self
has seen of them, to be a very unequal match for us. For they are by no means
to be reckoned complete and able Warriors, who, though they can shoot and dart
well, and are very experienced Horsemen, yet, where they are put upon hardships
and painful Duty, there they fail: but our Enemies are such as are wholly
unacquainted with Labor and Toil. Nor are they to be held in any account, who
when they should be wakeful and vigilant, cannot away with it: but our Enemies
are such as are utterly Strangers to Watchings and want of Sleep. Nor are they
to be regarded, who although they may possibly be sufficiently qualified for
these Duties, yet are altogether ignorant how to behave themselves toward
their Confederates, and how toward their Foes: now it is plain, our Enemies are
such as are perfectly unexperienced in the most considerable points of Military
Discipline. But you can make the Virtue grows greater by commendation.
same advantage of the Night as others of the Day: and in your Account, the
principal Guides to a happy Life are Labor and Travel. Hunger to you is
instead of Sauce; and to drink Water more familiar with you than with Lions.
But of all the most noble and truly Souldier-like Treasure that you have stored
up in your own Hearts, is, that you are more in love with Honor than with all
the Possessions in the World besides: and they that are Lovers of it, must
needs, for the attaining thereof, cheerfully undergo any hardship, and
willingly expose themselves to all manner of danger. Now for me, contrary to my
own Knowledge, to pronounce these things of you, were to put a Cheat upon my
self; and in case your Performances should not answer, the whole miscarriage
would lie at my door. But such is your own Experience, and your Affection
toward me, such the unskilful Ignorance of our Enemies, that I am confident I
shall not be disappointed in the good hopes I have conceived of you. Let us
then march out with undaunted and courageous Hearts, in regard it has been the
least of our Thoughts so much as to seem unjustly to covet other men's Estates:
for our Enemies are now the Aggressors and first Authors of Violence and
Injustice; our Friends and Allies call upon us for Aid. And what is more just
than to oppose and repel Injuries? and what more honorable than to succout
and assist our Friends? Besides, I believe it will not a little raise your
Confidence and Resolution, that upon my undertaking this Expedition, I did not
carelessly neglect the Gods: for you, as being for the most part my Confidents
and Companions, can bear me witness, that not only in enterprizing great and
weighty matters, but also in things of lesser moment, I always began with their
Service. To conclude, what need I say more? You, when you have taken unto you
chosen Men, and are in all other points furnished and prepared, march out
toward Media. As for me, repairing first to my Father, I will then set
forward, when having learned, with all possible speed, what State and Condition
our Enemies are in, I may, as much as in me lies, make such provision for you
that by Gods Assistance, this may prove an honorable and prosperous Expedition.

They then accordingly went and provided themselves; and Cyrus, after his
return home, having paid his Vows to Vesta the Guardian of his Family, Jupiter
the Protector of his Country, and the rest of the Gods, immediately set forth
toward the Army; his Father himself bringing him forward on his way: who no
sooner left the Palace, but as is reported, (an Omen to him propitious) he was
saluted with Thundering and Lightning; upon which Presage, without any further
Augury, (...) Divining by Birds.
they set forward on their march, supposing that these Signs of the mighty God
could not but be visible to and observed by all men. So Cyrus going on his
Journey, his Father began to discourse him to this Effect.

That the Gods, my Son, are auspicious and Cambyses's Discourse with Cyrus, his
Son.
favor your Expedition, is evident not only by Sacrifices but by Celestial
Tokens; and that you your self understand. For I always made it my business so
to instruct you in these points, that you might not rely upon other
Interpreters to make known to you the Counsel and Will of the Gods; but that
your self, seeing the Augural Signs, and hearing the Sounds, might perfectly
comprehend the same, without depending upon your Soothsayers, who might, if
they plea'd, impose upon you, by pronouncing things otherwise than the Gods had
signified. Besides that, if at any time you should want one of these
Interpreters, you might not be left in a doubt what Resolutions to take upon
these sacred Signs and Monitions; but that according to your own skill in
Divination, knowing what the Pleasure of the Gods was, you might obey the same.
Assuredly Father, quoth Cyrus, that the Gods may still be gracious to us, and
inclined to further and direct us, I will, to the utmost of my Power, persevere
in a careful observance of what you advise. For I remember, I have sometime
heard you say, That upon good Reason he might more easily prevail with Heaven,
as well as with Men, not who would servilely flatter in his Distress, but who,
in the height of his Prosperity, would, then We ought in Prosperity chiefly to
implore God's Assistance.
especially, remember the Gods. You said likewise, that the same Consideration
and Regard ought to be had of Friends. Certainly therefore my Son, faith he,
because of this your devout Zeal for the Gods, you come now with more
cheerfulness to implore their Assistance; and with more assurance hope to
obtain what you desire, in regard your Conscience seems to bear you witness,
that you have never carelessly neglected their Service. In truth, Father, quoth
he, I entirely repose my Confidence in the Gods, as in those that are my
affectionate Friends. But what, my Son, replied Cambyses, remember'st thou
those things upon which we sometime made this Conclusion? Namely, That they
that have been instructed therein make better use of the Blessings of God than
those that are ignorant of them. That diligent and industrious Persons, as they
do better improve those Gifts, so also do they lead more quiet and undisturbed
Lives than they that are supinely negligent and regardless of the same.
Wherefore we rested in this Opinion, that we might then sue for good things at
the hands of God, when we approved our selves such as we ought to be.
Assuredly, Father, quoth Cyrus, I well remember I have heard you discourse of
these Points; and I could not possibly but assent to what you said. For I know
it was always your Opinion, that it could not be lawful for those that had
never exercised themselves in Riding, to desire of the Gods Victory in a Battle
against Horsemen; nor for those that never understood a Bow, to hope to gain
the Mastery over such as were experienced Archers; nor for an ignorant and
unskilful Saylor to pray, that, by his Steerage, the Ship may be brought safe
to the Harbor; nor for them that never sowed Seed, to beg of Heaven a
plentiful Crop; nor yet for such, who themselves use no Precaution in Battle,
to make their Supplications to the Gods to protect them: that all these things
directly contradict the Divine Ordinances. You declared likewise, it was
equally reasonable that their Prayers should be frustrate, who beg unrighteous
things at the hands of God, as their Petitions ineffectual who crave unlawful
things at the hands of Men. But have you, my Son, quoth he, forgot those things
which we once, upon very good Reason, resolved upon? That it is a great and
commendable Act in any one, if he can, by a careful Industry, gain himself the
Repute of an Honest Good Man; and withal make such Provision for himself and
his Family, that they may have a convenient Supply of all manner of
Necessaries. Now this being a How hard it is to govern well.
matter of such weight and difficulty, certainly to know how to govern other
People, so, that they may not only have all things needful in great abundance,
but also may approve themselves, all of them, such as they ought to be; this
seems indeed to deserve our Admiration. In truth Father, replied Cyrus, I
remember also I have heard you speak to this Point; and I my self was then of
the same mind with you: That it is a great and extraordinary Task to govern
well. Nor do I yet think otherwise, when I seriously weigh with my self the
Duty of a Governor. But when I come to take a view of other Men, to look into
the Qualities and Conditions of those that are Rulers, and withal, to consider
what kind of Adversaries we are like to meet with; I think it a very foul
Reproach to be afraid of such Enemies, and not dare to march out in Battle
against them; whom I, for my part, conceive (beginning even with these our
Friends and Allies) to be generally of this Opinion, That, to distinguish a
Prince from his People, he ought to exceed them in sumptuous and expensive
Feasts; in domestic Wealth and Treasure; in frequent and long Sleeping; and,
in a word, in leading a more secure and careless Life than any of his Subjects.
Whereas for me, quoth Cyrus, my Opinion is, that a Sovereign ought not to
exceed those he rules over in an unactive slothful Life, but in prudently
foreseeing, and cheerfully undertaking whatever may advance the common Good.
True my Son, replied Cambyses, but there are certain Circumstances wherein we
are not to contend with Men, but with Things, and those too such, as cannot
without extraordinary difficulty be overcome. As for Instance, you know, quoth
he, if your Army be not stored with convenient Provision, you will quickly lose
your Authority and Command. Yes, says he, but Cyaxares, Father, has engaged to
furnish with Necessaries all that go from The Care a General ought to have in
making Provision for his Army.
hence, be their Number never so great. And do you, Son, answered he, in
Confidence of the Wealth and Power of Cyaxares, undertake this Expedition? I do
so, quoth Cyrus. But what, returned he again, know thou how rich and potent
he is? Not I in the least, replied Cyrus, I profess not I. And do you, quoth
he, notwithstanding, adventure to trust to such Uncertainties as these? Know
you not that you shall stand in need of many Things, and will be enforced, even
now, to expend much more, and otherwise, than you already have? I know it,
quoth Cyrus. Well then, replied he, if either his Stores should fail, or he
should designedly put the Cheat upon you, how will you make Provision for your
Army? it is plain you will be but in an ill Condition. Therefore Father, says
he, if you know any means or method that I may put in Execution for raising
such a Supply, pray impart it to me, whilst we are yet amongst our Friends. Do
you, my Son, replied he, put that Question to me, whether there be any way for
you to make Provision for your Army? Why, who is The way how he may do it.
in a fairer way to be furnished with such Supplies than he that has Power in
his hands? You march forth hence with a puissant Army of such Footmen under
your Command, as, I am confident, you would not exchange for a far greater
number; to which the Median Horse, incomparably the best, will join themselves
in Service. What adjacent Country then, do you imagine, will not be ready to
comply with, and relieve you, both out of a Desire to do you a Pleasure, and
also for fear themselves should be endamaged? And these things Cyaxares and You
ought jointly to consider, lest at any time you should be destitute of those
things that are necessary for your Support. Besides, even Custom obliges you to
bethink your selves how to settle a sufficient Fund. But above all, be careful
to remember this, that by any means you omit not to seek out for Provision till
Necessity enforce you; but when you most of all abound, then especially, before
you are reduced to Extremity, make it your Business to lay up in Store: for
when you seem to stand in no Need of it, you shall more easily obtain any
Supply at the hands of those you desire it; and besides, there will be nothing
in you at which your Soldiers will murmur or repine: but by this means you
will command a greater Reverence and Esteem from others. And if you please to
use your Forces either to distress or assist any People, so long as your Men
are furnished with all things necessary, they will readily yield themselves
obedient to you. And know assuredly this, that your Discourses will then be
more prevalent and (...) from (...) and not (...) as is commonly read.
persuasive, when you can give a clear Demonstration, that you have P^ enough
both to do good and ill, both to succor and to molest. Then Cyrus; You seem to
discourse Father, quoth he, upon all these Points admirably well, for that not
one of the Soldiers that shall receive any Gratuity now, will, upon that
Account, make any return of Thanks to me, because they understand upon what
Terms Cyaxares calls for their Assistance; but whatsoever any one shall
afterward receive over and above his set Stipend, this he will esteem as an
honorable Reward, and will, undoubtedly, for the same, pay a grateful
Acknowledgment to the Donor. For a Man then carelessly to neglect to make his
own Advantages when he has Power both to serve and relieve his Friends, thereby
to obtain the like Returns of Kindnesses from them; and also, by making Inroads
and Attempts upon his Enemies to wrest from them what is theirs; is it think
you, says he, less to his Shame and Reproach, than for one who having Lands in
Possession, and Laborers sufficient for Tillage, to let his Ground lie still
unmanag'd, barren, and unprofitable? Wherefore entertain this Opinion of me,
that I will never be wanting to use all possible Diligence to furnish my Army
with Necessaries, whether in a Confederate or an Hostile Country.

But Son, said Cambyses, do you not remember some other things which we
sometimes thought highly necessary to be attended to, and regarded? I remember,
replied he, when I came to you for Money to reward him that told me he had
furnished me with Rules for the Conduct of an Army, you presently, giving me
the Sum, began to question with me after this sort.

Did this Man, Son, to whom you present this Reward, among the Duties of a
General, make any mention to you of Precepts for well ordering a Family.
Oeconomicks? for assuredly it will be equally your Concern to make Provision
for your Soldiers as for Domestic Servants. Here when I spoke the Truth to
you, and told you he did not in the least mind me Diverse Rules for a Commander
to observe.
of any such matter, you again asked me, What Discourse had ye concerning a
healthful State and strength of Body; about which a General ought to be no less
sollicitous than about the Conduct of his Army? And when I denied we had had
any, you again went on to demand what Method he had taught me to use, whereby
my Men might become most excellent and complete in all the Duties of a Military
Life? To this, when I denied he had taught me any, you proceeded yet further,
to inquire what Instructions he had given me, whereby I might quicken the
Spirits and raise the Courage of my Soldiers? affirming, that in all
Undertakings there is a vast difference betwixt a cheerful Valor and
faint-hearted Cowardife. And when to this also, I made Reply he had given me
none, again you made a more narrow Inquiry, Whether he had delivered to me any
Precepts how an Army was to be held in Obedience, and by what means one might
most effectually bring it to pass? But when it appeared that he had passed over
this likewise without so much as once speaking to it; at last you put this
Question to me, what one Point he had taught me, when he declared, He had
taught me the Office of a General? To this, when I replied, He had instructed
me how to (...)
marshal and imbattle an Army; you, smiling thereat, recounted what had been
said, setting every particular before me, as namely, What, said you, can
Discipline and Order advantage an Army that is unfurnished and destitute of
necessary Provisions? What can it avail without a healthful Constitution? What
without the Knowledge of those Inventions which were devised for the
Improvement of War? And what without the Obedience of the Soldiery? Thus you
having made it evident to me that to fet an Army in Battle Array was the least
part of a Generals Care; and I withal desiring to know whether it were within
your Sphere to instruct me thoroughly in any of these Points; you commanded me
to go and conferr with such Officers and Commanders as were reputed Men of
greatest Experience in Military Affairs, and there to inform my self how all
this might be performed. Since which time I have been conversant, especially
with such whose Wisdom and Skill herein had given them the greatest Reputation.
As for victualling the Army, I am persuaded, that what Provision Cyaxares will
make for us will be sufficient for, the present. And for Health, because I both
hear and see such Cities as have a Regard for, and desire to preserve the same,
make choice of able Physicians; and Generals also, for the sake and benefit of
their Soldiers, have Men skilled in Physic that follow their Camp: so I
likewise, as soon as I entered upon this Charge, immediately took special Care
thereof. And I believe, Father, quoth he, I have with me Men of approved
Experience in the Practice of this Of Physic.
Art. To this his Father replied, But these Physicians, my Son, you speak of,
are like certain Botchers that patch up torn Garments; for when Men are brought
low by Sickness then they restore them. For this Reason, your Regard to the
Conservation of Health will be more honorable and praiseworthy, whose great
Care, even from the beginning, ought to be such, that your Army fall not into
any Distemper. And what Method Father, quoth he, shall I take to be able to
effect this? Why thus, replied he, Let it be your principal Concern to mark out
a wholesome place for the Lodging of your Army, where you intend to lie encamped
any considerable time; in which you cannot easily err if you are but careful in
making your Observations; for Men commonly are very free in their Discourse
what Parts of the Country are diseased, and what are healthful. Besides, the
very Constitution and Complexion of the Inhabitants are evident Testimonies
both of the one and the other. Yet, after all, it is not sufficient for you to
enquire into the Nature of this or that Region.
Clime, but you must remember what Endeavors you are to use, what Care to take
of your self, that you may preserve your own Person in Health. I assure you
then, quoth Cyrus, first of all I take good heed that I never surfeit or
overcharge my Stomach; for that is nauseous and irksome. In the next place,
whatsoever I have taken, by Labor I digest and sweat it out: for by this means
chiefly I perceive my Health continued, and my Strength increased. The same
Care therefore, my Son, quoth he, ought to be had of others. But may common
Soldiers, Father, replied he, have leisure to exercise their Bodies? Yes,
assure your self, returned his Father, they not only may, but must: for Men in
Arms, if they would do what they ought, should never sit idle, but be
perpetually employed, either in working Mischief to their Enemies, or Advantage
to themselves. It Is of very ill Consequence, my Son, to feed but one idle
Person; and much more to provide for a slothful Family; but to maintain a whole
Army in Idleness, that is intolerable. In a Camp there are many Spenders, even
of the meanest Rank, and whatsoever they get they waste most profusely; so that
it is utterly inconvenient for an Army to be idle. Your Discourse to me,
Father, quoth Cyrus, seems to tend to this; That as a sluggish Husbandman reaps
no Advantage, so from a lazy General arises no Good. But for a vigilant and
active Commander, I dare undertake, quoth he, (unless some God prevent it) he
shall so provide, that his Army shall be stored with all things necessary, and
his Soldiers enjoy a vigorous Health. To the end therefore that they may be
thoroughly practiced in all Martial Exploits, methinks Father, if I should
proclaim public Games with Proposals of Reward to the Victors, I should
certainly obtain this, that they would be perfectly exercised in all Points of
War; so that when Occasion required, I could command Men experienced and fit
for Service. Exceedingly well said, my Son, quoth he, for if you do this,
assure your self, you will see your Military Bands always as careful to keep a
due Decorum and Order, as Dancers to observe their Measures. Now to make Men
daring and courageous, nothing, quoth Cyrus, seems to me more effectual, than
to be able to raise their Hopes and Expectations. But this, my Son, replied he,
is much after the rate, as if one, following his Chase, should perpetually
encourage his Dogs in the same Note he uses when he has his Game in view. At
first, I know very well, they will readily hear and obey his Voice; but, if he
baulks them too often, at last they will not at all regard him, even when he
really sees his Prey before him. And so it is in this business of Hope: if a
Man put them in Expectation of great matters, and often deceive them, at last,
tho he propose to them certain and real Hopes, he will not be able to gain any
credit with them. Therefore, my Son, a Man ought to be cautious how he affirms
that which he himself is not well assured of. Others may sometimes do so, and
obtain their Ends; but a General, thereby to make them the more plausible,
ought to reserve his Encouragements to the last and greatest Extremities.

In good Truth, Father, quoth Cyrus, methinks you speak to these Points
admirably well, and your Discourse to me is very pleasing.

But how to keep my Army in Obedience, I think, I am not now to seek; for you
your self instructed me herein betimes, even from my Childhood, exacting
Obedience from me; and when you left me to the Tuition of Masters, they also
taught me the very same Lesson. Afterward, How a Prince is to gain ^he
Obedience of his People.
when I came to converse among the Young Men, our Governor had a strict and
peculiar Regard to this very thing. And generally the Laws seem especially to
teach these two Points, to command, and be commanded. And indeed, when I
seriously consider these Things, methinks I discover thus much, that the most
effectual Inducement to Obedience is to reward the dutiful with Glory and
Advancement, and the Obstinate with Punishment and Disgrace. To make Men obey
indeed by Constraint, this quoth he, Son, is the ready way; but to bring them
to, what is far more excellent, a voluntary and free Obedience, there is
another, and that more compendious Method to be used; for whom they believe to
be more prudent in promoting their own Good than themselves, him they will very
cheerfully obey. And that this is really true, as in many other Instances, so
is it more especially perceivable in sick Persons, how ready are they to send
for those that may prescribe to them what they ought to do? Likewise at Sea,
how willingly do the Passengers resign themselves up to their Pilots? How
earnestly also will some People press forward to keep pace with such as they
suppose are more skillful in, and better know the Roads than they. Whereas if
they think their Obedience will turn to their Disadvantage, they will neither
be much humbled by Punishments, not encouraged by Rewards; for no Man willingly
does purchase Gifts with his own Loss. This then, Father, quoth he, is the
Result of your Discourse; That to keep ones Subjects in their Obedience and
Fidelity, nothing (...)
conduces more than to have the Repute of being wiser than they. It is so,
replied he. But how, Father, may a Man soonest gain himself that Reputation?
There is not, my Son, answered he, any readier way, than to be really wise in
those things wherein you desire to appear so. Now if you shall severally weigh
and look into these Particulars, you will be convinced that I speak Truth. For
do but consider, if you have a Mind to pass either for a good Husbandman, or an
expert Horseman, or an able Physician, or a skillful Musician, or any such
like, when in truth you are nothing so, how many Shifts and Contrivances you
must make use of to give a Color to this Reputation. And suppose you should,
by your Persuasions, induce many Men so to praise you, that thereby you might
gain your self a valuable Esteem, and have given fair Essay's in all these
Points; you will only at present put the Cheat upon others, and quickly after,
when you come to the Test, you your self will lie under a Reproach, and in the
end appear a vainglorious Impostor. But how may a Man really attain to such
Foresight, as to consult what will make for his Interest hereafter? Why thus
my Son, quoth he; If you learn all other things that can be taught you, as you
have the commanding (...)
and imbatteling an Army. And as for those things which by ordinary Instruction
are not attainable, nor can by humane Wisdom be foreseen, if therein you by
Divination consult the Gods, you will be really wiser than the rest of Mankind;
especially if you make it your Business to put that in Execution which you know
to be absolutely best. For it is an industrious Diligence to procure what is
requisite, and not a careless Neglect that intitles a Man to more Wisdom than
others. But now for a Prince to win the Hearts and Affections of his People
(which I look upon to be one of the greatest Points of all) he must,
undoubtedly, take the same Measures with him that desires to be beloved by his
Friends. And here, I conceive his Bounty ought to be public and conspicuous.
But therein, my Son, quoth he, lies a great difficulty; for a Man cannot always
oblige those he would: but to seem to rejoice for, and congratulate their good
Fortune, to have Compassion on, and condole their Mishaps; to express an
earnest desire to succor them in their Distress, to be thoughtful and
concerned least they should fall into Calamity, and carefully to endeavor to
prevent the same; in all these Cases he ought to go with them, as it were hand
in hand.

To come now to the Action of War; If Service must be performed in the heat of
Summer, a General ought, in the face of his Army, to endure the scorching Sun
above the rest; if in the depth of Winter, the piercing Cold; if Labors must
be undergone, there to put himself upon the greatest Hardships: for to gain the
Love of his Subjects all these things are highly conducible. This then you
affirm, Father, quoth he, that a Commander, upon all Occasions, ought to be
more forward to encounter Dangers than those that are commanded by him. I do
so, replied he. Nevertheless, my Son, be of good Courage; and know assuredly
this, that the Cicero in Tusc. Quaest. l. 2.
same Labor and Travel does not equally affect the same Constitution of Body
in a General and in a common Soldier; for in a General the Prospect of Honor
makes his Toil more easy, and besides that, he knows all Men's Eyes are upon
him, to see how he will acquit himself. But now, Father, taking it for granted,
that the Army is stored with all necessary Provision, the Soldiery in perfect
Health, fit and ready for Action, thoroughly acquainted with all the parts of
warlike Discipline, prompted by a desire of Glory to approve themselves truly
valiant, and more glad to obey than to be mutinous and obstinate; would it not
now, think you, be a seasonable Piece of Prudence with all possible speed to
give the Enernies Battle? By any means, quoth he, if he be like to make any
advantage to himself thereby: but if not, I, for my part, should proceed with
so much the more Caution, by how much I esteemed my self and my Followers
better appointed and stouter Men than they; just as we deal by other things,
that upon which we put the highest Value, we endeavor to preserve in the
greatest Security. But how, Father, especially may a Man so manage himself as
to be before hand with, and outdo his Enemies? Indeed, Son, that is a Question
of no common nor ordinary Concern: for be assured, that he that would effect
this must be a subtle Designer, a close Dissembler, full of Treachery and
Falsehood, a secret Pillager, and an open Robber; in every thing he must beguile
and circumvent his Enemy. To this Cyrus smiling, replied, Heavens! what manner
of Man will you persuade me to be? Such a one, my Son, as you may be most
exactly just, and a punctual Observer of the Laws. How can that be, quoth he,
seeing in our younger Years you taught us what is directly contradictory to
this? True, my Son, and the same we do still, in respect of our Friends and
Fellow-Citizens. But that you might be able to distress your Enemies, don't you
remember how many Stratagems and Wiles you learned? Not at all truly, Father,
replied he. To what end then, quoth he, did you learn to shoot? to what purpose
were you taught to dart? to what intent did you hunt the wild Boars? entangle
them in Toils, and surprise them in Pits? Why did you go about to betray the
Stags into your Snares and Ginns? Why durst you not, upon equal Terms,
encounter the Lions, and Bears, and Leopards, but would then always endeavor
to attack them when you took them at some Advantage? What, know you not that
all these things are nothing else but so many Wiles, Deceits, Frauds, and
Circumventings? It Is true, quoth Cyrus, they are so, but used only against wild
Beasts: and I remember I was severely scourged if I were but so much as
suspected to go about with a Design to deceive any Man. And justly too, quoth
he, for, I suppose, we did not allow you to shoot or dart at any Man, but
taught you directly to hit the Mark; not that at the present you might mischief
your Friends; but that, on occasion, in time of War, you might more exactly
strike your Enemies. So that you were trained up to practice these Arts and
Stratagems not against Men but against Beasts, to the end that thereby you
might not hurt or molest your Friends, but that, when Wars came on, you might
not appear altogether unexperienced herein. But Father, quoth he, if it be of
such Consequence to know both how to do Men good, and how to injure them, then
certainly we ought to have learned of them both the one and the other. It Is
true indeed, quoth Cambyses, we have it by Tradition, that in the Days of our
Ancestors, there was a certain Teacher who instructed One that taught H^nesty
and Dishonesty.
Youth in the Principles of Justice, much after the rate you would have it; He
taught them not to lie and to lie; not to put a Cheat upon others, and to cheat
them; not to bring false Accusations, and to accuse falsely; not to use
Oppression, and to be Oppressors. And in all these Points, made this
Distinction, how we are to treat our Friends, and how our Enemies. Nay he
proceeded yet farther, and taught, That it was lawful, for our own Profit, to
deceive even our Friends; and to pilfer and steal from them to advantage our
selves thereby. Now he that taught such Principles as these, must needs
exercise his Scholars in the practice of the same one amongst another: like as
it is reported of the Greeks, that in their Wrestling Schools their Champions
are taught to use Falsehood and Deceit; and their Youth are thus trained up, for
the same end, that they may be able to beguile and supplant one another. So
that some of them, proving naturally very witty at putting handsome cheats upon
others, and cunningly deceiving them, and perhaps forward enough to make gain
of any thing, did not spare even their Friends, but made Attempts upon them to
overreach them. Hereupon it was established by a (...) and not (...); so
Lycurgus in Plutarch calls his Laws (...)
Law, which is even at this Day in force amongst us, That we should instruct
our Children in plain downright Honesty; even as we teach our Servants, to
speak truth, and deal sincerely with us, not to cheat, not to rob, not to
circumvent us: and if they offend in these particulars to punish them; to the
end that having thoroughly imbibed these Principles, they may prove more honest
and plain dealing Men. Now when they were come up to about your Age, then was
it thought very safe to instruct them in the Laws of Arms: For that having been
trained up so as to have a mutual Respect and Reverence one for another, it is
not to be supposed that you should afterward lash out so far as to become
Brutish and untractable. Even as we forbear to discourse of Venery, and the
Pleasures of Love before those that are very young, lest possibly the Violence
of Passion meeting with an inclinable Constitution, they might use the same
with Excess. You have said the very thing, quoth Cyrus; and therefore I beseech
you, Father, in regard I come late to learn this Art, that you would not fail
to inform me in all the Points you know, by which I may be enabled to make my
Advantage of my Enemies. Diverse Stratagems of War.
Let this then, replied he, be your main and principal Design, when your own
Men are in all points prepared, endeavor to attack your Enemies in some
Disorder: When you are well appointed, to set upon them unarmed: When yours are
watching, to surprise them asleep: You must view what Posture they are in, your
self undiscovered to them: You must take advantage of the most secure and
fenced Places, where you may at unawares assail your Enemies in Streights and
Difficulties. But how is it possible, Father, quoth he, that a Man should catch
his Enemies in such over-fights as these? Because, Son, said He, there is a
necessity in it, that you as well as your Adversaries, should fall into diverse
of these and the like Circumstances. For you must of necessity, both of you,
forage the Country for Provision; you must both sleep, and take your Rest; and
in the morning you must, almost all of you, range abroad to furnish your selves
with Necessaries; And look what way soever you bend your course, be it better
or worse, you must pursue it. Now of all these things you ought seriously to
deliberate, that where you find your self the weaker Party, there you may use
the greater Precaution: and that you may, when you perceive you have your
Enemies at the best Advantage, then and there especially, attack them, And are
we, quoth Cyrus, to endeavor to be beforehand with our Enemies in these
Points only, or in some others also? Not in these only, replied he, my Son, but
more principally in others. For in these cases, all Men commonly keep a strict
and severe watch, as knowing it is necessary for them so to do: But they that go
about to circumvent their Enemies, can either, by making them first confident,
and think they are secure, surprise them unawares; or by betraying them into a
^ursuit, break their Ranks, and disorder their battle: or by the wile of a
pretended flight, draw them into Streights and Ambuscades, and so attack them.
Now for you, my Son, it becomes you, not only to make use of all those Arts and
Designs of War which you have so earnestly desired to be instructed in; but
also of your accord to invent and contrive other Stratagems against your
Enemies. Just as Musicians don't content themselves barely with the Practice of
those Tunes they have been taught, but are continually inventing new Composures
of their own. And as in Music what is new and gay is most taking and
delightful, so much more in War new Stratagems and Policies are highly approved
of; as being best accommodated to betray and circumvent the Enemy. Now for you,
my Son, quoth he, if you would employ only those wiles and devices against your
Enemies which you have used against lesser Creatures, think you not that you
should make a very fair advance toward the getting an absolute Mastery over
them? For you, even in the dead of the Winter, would up in the night, and out a
Birding: and your Nets and Snares for that purpose were so prepared for them,
that you prevented their first stirrings, and made your counterfeit moveable
Pitfall seem as if it were fixed and real. Besides, you had some Birds so
perfectly well taught, as to be serviceable to your designs, by decoying into
your snares those of their own kind; whilst you lay secretly in Covert to see
them, so as to be undiscovered by them: and your great Care was to secure and
enclose them before they took wing. But for the Hare, because she is a Creature
that shuns the Light and the Day, and feeds in the dusk of the evening, you
kept your Hounds, which tracing her by the scent, might start her; and because
she is no sooner put up, but she betakes her self presently to her heels, you
had other Dogs trained up for the same purpose, that they might take her upon
the stretch. Now if she chanced to outstrip these also, you presently sought
out her musing holes, and observing what paths she generally took, you
accordingly so pitched your nets, that she not discerning them, in the eagerness
of her flight, might fall into them, and entangle her self therein. And that
she might not possibly escape hence, you had your Lurchers and Spies so
planted, that they might observe what passed, who being near at hand, might
immediately come upon her; you in the mean time behind her, filling her cars
with your shouts and hollowings, terrified her so that you might surprise her
unawares; whilst they that lay in wait before her, having been by you charged
to be silent, kept under Covert close and unseen. Therefore, as I intimated
before, if you would put in practice these and the like Artifices against Men,
I for my part know not how you should be inferior to any of your Adversaries.
But now suppose you should be necessitated in an open field, and pitched Battle
to engage your Enemy, Of joining Battle in open field.
when you are on both sides well appointed; in this case, my Son, those Arts
and Advantages of War wherein you have improved your self before, are very
prevalent and effective. As for instance, If your Soldiers have well inured
themselves to bodily Exercise, if their Spirits have, on occasion, been
quickened and enlivened, and they thoroughly acquainted with all the Arts of War.
Besides, you must know this for certain, that all those from whom you your self
exact Obedience, will think it but reasonable that you should consult their
Interest and Safety. Therefore you ought not by any means to be careless and
remiss, but to design in the Night how you will have your Men employed in the
Day, and in the Daytime how best to dispose and order the concerns of the
Night. But how to set an Army in Battle array; how to conduct them in the Day,
and how in the Night; how through Streights, and how in open Plains; how over
Mountains, and how in Champaign Countries; how to Incamp; how to set Watch and
Ward by Night as well as by Day; how to Advance against the enemy, and how to
Retreat; how to march before an hostile City; how to approach the Walls, and
how to retire; how to lead through Forests, and how to pass Rivers; how to
secure your self against the Horse, how against Darters, and how against
Bow-men: likewise if you lead your Army displayed into Wings, and the Enemy
appear and make head against you, how you are to confront and oppose them: or
again if you lead in a close Squadron, and the enemy (...)
flank you on some other side, and don't appear in the Front, how you ought to
charge them, and give them Battle: as also how you may best discover the
Designs of your Enemies, and they not have the least knowledge of what projects
you have in hand; Now all these things I need not repeat. For whatsoever I my
self knew, I have often inculcated to you; and besides if there were any else
that were thought knowing and experienced in these points, such you never
slighted or contemned, and you made no small improvement thereby. Wherefore my
opinion is, that upon all Occurrence you take such measures as you shall think
most conducible to your Designs. And withal, my Son, take with you this weighty
and important Instruction: never hazard any thing either in your own person or
your Army, in contradiction to the warnings of Sacrifices and (...), Divination
by the flying of Birds.
Auguries. For, believe me, Men undertake things only by ghess, not knowing in
the least how, or from whence, any good should accrue to them, which you may
plainly discover by the event. For many there have been, even such as have had
the Reputation of very wise Men, who have prevailed with States to war upon
others, by whom they that have been persuaded to be the Aggressors, have been
utterly overthrown. Many having raised up several private Persons, and improved
whole Communities, have neverthelese suffered the utmost extremity at their
hands that they have thus advanced. Many likewise when they might have used
others as Friends, with mutual returns of kindness and good will, choosing
rather to make them their Vassals than their Friends, have from those very
Persons severely suffered and smarted for the same. Many also not content to
enjoy a pleasant and serene Life with their own Portion and Lot, but having an
Ambition to Lord it over all, have thereby lost even what they were possessed of.
And many having gotten great Treasures of their be loved Gold, have upon that
very account been ruined and undone. So that Humane Wisdom knows no more how to
choose what is best, than if we should make a Lottery the Guide of our Actions.
But the Immortal Gods, my The Gods are omniscient.
Son, know all things, what is past, what present, and what shall be the Event
of every thing. And look whomsoever they vouchsafe to favor, if they crave
advice of them, they forewarn them what they ought to attempt, and what not.
Nor are you to wonder at it, if they will not be equally favorable to all Men;
for no Necessity can constrain them to have a Regard to such as they will not.

The End of the first Book.
BOOK II.
DIscoursing thus together, they were advanced as far as the Confines of
Persia; where, after an Auspicious Eagle had appeared unto them, and conducted
them in their way, first making their supplications to the Gods, and Guardians
of the Persian Nation, that they would favorably and graciously dismiss them,
they passed the Boundaries: which done, and again having supplicated the
Tutelar Gods of Media, that they would vouchsafe them a gracious and favorable
reception, They, as beseem'd them, embraced each other, and departed; the
Father again into Persia, but Cyrus continued on his way into Media to Cyaxares
his uncle. Whither, when he was come, after mutual Congratulations past,
Cya^ares inquired of Him how great an Army He had brought. He replied, al.
(...) 20000,
thirty thousand of those that came to you heretofore to serve as Mercenaries.
Besides these, there come others of the (...) Parium, the Nobility.
Nobility that never yet went forth to War. How many of them? quoth Cyaxares:
For their Number, said Cyrus, when you hear it, it will not greatly please you;
but know this, that few as They are, of those we call Peers, they easily
command all the rest of the Persians. But do you, quoth He, stand in need of
them? or were your fears causeless, and your Enemies come not at all? Yes
assuredly they come, replied He, and your Number is very great. But how does
this appear? Because, said He, many that come from thence, though they make
different reports of things, yet they all agree in this. Must we then of
necessity fight these men? It Is unavoidable, quoth He. Why then, answered
Cyrus, did you not inform me what you knew of their strength, with what Power
they invade us, as likewise what our own forces are? that we being assured of
the We ought to know our Enemy's strength.
strength of both Parties, might take our Measures accordingly which way best
to give them Battle.

Hear me then, quoth Cyaxares, Craes^ King of Lydia, brings, as is reported,
ten thousand Horsemen; and of Tar^ and Bow-men more than forty thousand.
Artamus, Prince of the greater Phrygia, brings into the field about eight
thousand Horsemen, and of Spear-men and Targettiers no less than forty
thousand. Aribaeus, King of Cappadocia, leads forth about six thousand
Horsemen, and of Archers and Targettiers not fewer than thirty thousand.
Maragdus, the Arabian, comes against us with ten thousand Horse, an hundred
Chariots, and of Slingers an innumerable multitude. As for the Greeks that
inhabit Asia, it is not yet certainly said whether they follow or no: but for
those of that part of Phrygia that borders upon the Hellespont, the report is,
that Gabaeus has joined them, who comes from about the Plains of Caystrus with
six thousand Horse, and ten thousand bearing Shields. The Carians, Cilicians
and Paphlagonians, as the Rumor goes, follow not, though they were invited.
And for the Assyrian Monarch Himself (as being Lord of Babylon, and of all the
rest of Assyria besides) He, I suppose, will not bring into the field less than
twenty thousand Horsemen; Chariots, I believe, not above two hundred; but of
Foot, I imagine (as He uses to do when He invades these Countries) an exceeding
great number. According to this your Account, quoth Cyrus, our Enemies Horse
amount to threescore thousand; their Targettiers and Bow-men to above two
hundred thousand. Well now inform me, what is the Number of your own Forces?
The Median Horse, quoth He, amount to above ten thousand; of Targettiers and
Archers, we may possibly in our own Territories, levy threescore thousand. The
Armenians, our Neighbors, will assist us with four thousand Horse, and twenty
thousand Foot. Then at the rate you compute, quoth Cyrus, our Horse are less
than one third part of the Enemy's Cavalry; and our Foot does not fully reach
half their Infantry. How then? quoth Cyaxares, and don't you think those
Persians, you say you have brought with you, to be very few? But whether we
have, quoth Cyrus, any such need of Men, or no, we shall consult by and by:
therefore tell me in order what are your several ways of fighting. We do all of
us in a manner, replied Cyaxares, fight much after the same fashion. For there
are among them, as well as amongst Us, those that use both Arrows and Javelins.
If these are their Weapons, quoth Cyrus, it must of necessity follow that there
will be Excursions and Skirmishes at a distance. Undoubtedly so, quoth
Cyaxares. Then, replied Cyrus, they must needs be Conquerours that are most
numerous: for 'twill be much more easy for the many to wound and destroy the
few, than the few the many. If this be the Case, my dear Cyrus, said He, what
can we think of better than to send dispatches to the Persians, and withal to
give them to understand, that what Calamities soever befall the Medes, the same
will also reach them; and thereupon to crave of them greater Assistance. Well,
quoth Cyrus, but know this, that although the whole Power of Persia should come
forth to aid Us, we shall not yet be able to surpass our Enemies in Number.
What Expedient then, quoth He, can you devise better than this. For my part,
answered Cyrus, were I as you, I would immediately provide for all the Persians
that are coming hither, exactly such Armor as those Noblemen of ours, which
we call Peers, are furnished with: Which is this, a Breast Plate, a light
Target for the left hand, and a Falchion, or Cymitar in the right. This if you
do, we shall be able, with more safety, to close with our Enemies, and
encounter them hand to hand; and they also will think it more eligable to fly
than to maintain their ground. For those of them that keep the field, we
Persians will give them Battle, committing such as fly to you and your
Horsemen; that so they may have no opportunity either to save themselves by
flight, or to rally again. Thus spoke Cyrus, and Cyaxares so well approved of
what He had said, that now He made no further mention of sending for fresh
supplies, but immediately began to make ready the aforesaid Armor, which was
scarce yet dispatched, e're the Persian Nobility were advanced with the Army
sent out of their own Country. Whom when Cyrus had assembled together, He spoke
to them to this effect:

Countrymen and Friends, when I saw you Cyrus's Oration to the Noblemen of
Persia.
thus well Armed, and withal perceived your hearty Resolutions to join close
Battle with the Enemy; but the rest of the Persians, your followers, no
otherwise appointed than to skirmish here and there at random: I was highly
concerned, lest possibly, you, as you are few in Number, and destitute of
others to relieve you, might, being overpowered by your Enemies, be reduced to
Extremity and Distress. But now in regard you bring hither Bodies so manly and
robust, that they cannot be excepted against, and they also are to be armed like
your selves; our great business will be to animate and quicken them. For it is a
General's Duty not only to be brave and daring Himself, but also to take
effectual Care that those under Him acquit themselves with Gallantry and
Courage.

When Cyrus had thus said, and they understood they should have more Companions
in the Battle, they were all exceeding glad; and one of them stood forth and
spoke to this effect: My discourse perhaps would be looked upon as very The
Oration of one of the Nobility.
strange, should I take upon me to advise Cyrus to say any thing in our behalf,
to those that are to be our Fellow-Astros in the War, when they put on their
Armor: but this I am assured of, that Their words make the deepest Impression
in the hearts of their Audience, who have the greatest Power to do good or ill.
Likewise the Gifts and Largesses of such Men, though they are less considerable
than those of a samiliar Friend, yet are they more highly valued and esteemed
by the Receivers. So now these Persians would more cheerfully follow the
Exhortation of Cyrus himself, than if they were counseled and encouraged by
Us. And being admitted into the Order of Peerage, they will think it more
securely confirmed to them, if it be done by their King's Son and their
General, than if they were by Us advanced to the same Dignity. Nevertheless, we
must not be wanting in what concerns Us, but ought by all means possible to
raise and enliven the hearts of these Men: for the more valiantly they behave
themselves, the more will it be for our Honor and Advantage. Hereupon Cyrus
having assembled together all the Persian Soldiery, and plae'd the Armor in
the midst of them, spoke to them as follows:

Men of Persia, In regard you were born and Cyrus's Oration to his Soldiers.
bred in the same Country with Us, and have Bodies nothing inferior to Ours;
it is requisite likewise that you equal Us in Valor and Resolution of mind. For
though you are such stout Men, yet in our own Country you never shared like
Honors with Us: not that We debarred you that Privilege, but that there was a
Constraint upon you to provide Necessaries for your selves. But now, by the
Divine Assistance, I shall take Care that there be no want of these things; and
you, although you are in some sort of a lower Rank, in respect of Us; may yet,
if you please, put on the same Armor we wear, and encounter the same Dangers
we do; and if you perform any brave and noble Exploit, be advanced equally with
Us in Honor and Esteem. Hitherto you have been used to Bows and Darts as well
as we, nevertheless it is not at all to be wondered at, if your Skill and
Experience herein fall short of Ours; for you had not the leisure and
opportunity to practice these things, which we had. But now in this kind of
Armor here before you, we shall not have the least advantage of you. For every
one shall have a Breast Plate fitted to him, in his left hand a light Target
(such as we all have been used to carry) and in his right hand a Sword or
Cymitar, wherewith to s^ite down his Adversaries, who cannot possibly escape Him
if He direct his stroke aright. In these Circumstances what is it wherein we
can One furpass another, but by being daring and forward? which ought to be
Your Concern no less than Ours. For as for Victory (which both instates Us in,
and likewise secures to Us all things that are honorable and good) upon what
account should We be more desirous of it than You? And as for Power (which
bestows upon the Conquerours all the spoils of the Vanquished) what reason have
We to endeavor after it rather than you? To conclude, you have heard the whole
matter, you see all the Armor here before you; let every Man take what is fit
for Him, and so give his Name to some Centurion in the Army, that he may be
enrolled in the same rank and quality with Us. As for those that content
themselves with the Condition of Mercenary Soldiers, let them still continue
to wear such Arms as are proper for Servants and Attendants.

Thus spoke Cyrus, whom when the Persians had heard, they concluded that they
justly deserved to lead a wretched and uncomfortable Life for the future, if,
upon so fair an Invitation, to partake of the like Dangers, and to share the
same Rewards with them, they should offer to refuse: Whereupon they unanimously
listed themselves, and took every Man his Armor. During the time of the Report
that the Enemy was advanced very near them, when indeed there was no such
thing, Cyrus made it his business to Cyrus instructs his Soldiers in the Arts
of War.
improve the strength of those that were about him, by keeping them to bodily
Exercise; He instructed them in Military Arts, animating and exciting them to
all the hazards and adventures of War. And first of all, Cyaxares having
furnished him with Purveyors for his Army, He commanded that every one should
forthwith be plentifully supplied with all things necessary for them. Which
provision being made, the Soldiers had now nothing to do, but to exercise
themselves in feats of Arms: for, it seems, He had perfectly learned this
Point, that they do in all things approve themselves the most excellent Men,
who, forbearing to busy their thoughts about diverse concerns at once, are
intent only upon one. Moreover, having debarred them the use of Bows and
Javelins, He allowed them no other kind of Exercise, but only to skirmish with
Sword, Buckler and Breast Plate; whereby He soon wrought them into an opinion,
That they must of necessity close, and come to hand-blows with the Enemy, or
else confess themselves to be of no account, and utterly unworthy to be styled
Companions in the War. But to acknowledge this were very hard, because they
know they are furnished with Necessaries for no other End but to fight for
those that supply them therewith. Now when He considered likewise with Himself,
that Men more cheerfully exercise themselves in those points wherein there
arises Emulation, and Contention for Victory, He proclaimed Solemn Games
amongst them, such as He knew were very advantageous for the Exercise and
Improvement of his Soldiers.

Now the particulars He enjoined them were these: That a Common Soldier acquit
Himself well; be obedient to his Officers^ willing to undergo hardship; forward
to encounter Danger, without disordering the Battle; acquainted with the Arts
and Stratagems of War; in his Armor gay and brave; and in all things belonging
to a Soldier push't on with Emulation and a Love of Honor. That the Leader of
a (...)
Half-File both behave Himself like a good Soldier, and also, as much as in
Him lies, take Care that those he commands approve themselves so too: That he
that has the Conduct of a (...)
whole File have the same regard to those he commands: That a Lieutenant
likewise look to his Charge: That the Captain General also have a special
Regard, not only that He himself, but all the chief Officers near him, may
acquit themselves with an unreprovable Gallantry, and in like manner keep those
under their respective Commands, to a constant Discharge of their Duty.

Now the Encouragements he proposed to them were these: That those Captains,
whose Conduct, in the management of their several Companies, had been most
remarkable, should be advanced to the Office of Majors; that such Lieutenants
as had made the greatest Improvement and best Advantage of the Commands they
bore, should be promoted to the Dignity of Captains; that they who best managed
their The command of 10 Soldiers.
Decuries should be raised to the Honor of Lieutenants; that they who best
behaved themselves in leading of Five, should be rewarded with the Command of a
Decury; and that those Common Soldiers who gave the most notable Proofs of
their Bravery and Valor, should be encouraged with the Leading of Five. Now by
this means all these Officers and Captains gained this main principal Point to
be obev'd and revered by those they commanded; and consequently, such other
Honors and Respects were paid as were due to every Man's Quality and Station.
Besides this, he spurred on those that were praiseworthy with a fair Prospect
of some greater Promotion hereafter. He likewise publicly decreed honorable
Rewards as well to whole Regiments and Companies as to particular Ranks and
Files, where he saw them most willing to obey and most ready to execute the
Commands of their Superiors; which Rewards were really such as best suited
with the Condition of a Multitude. And these are the Particulars of what he
himself published and ordained, and wherein his Soldiers were trained up and
exercised. Tents also he built for them, in number, equal to the several (...)
Prefects or Captains in the Army; and for their Extent each of them large
enough to entertain a Century: now a Century consisted of an hundred Men; and
so every Hundred were lodged in their respective Tents. Now their encamping
thus together, must needs, as he conceived, be of great Import and Advantage to
him in his Prosecution of the ensuing War, in regard they saw the Provisions
orderly distributed to every one alike; so that no Man could have any Plea for
his Cowardice or Remissness in the Battle, upon pretense of not having an equal
Proportion of Allowance with the rest. Besides, He thought their quartering
thus together would be highly advantageous, to him by promoting a mutual
Acquaintance and Intimacy amongst them: for he was fully persuaded. That if
they all knew one another, they would be ashamed; whereas if they were wholly
unacquainted, they would, like Men in the dark, be more prone to indulge
themselves in Idleness and Sloth. He believed likewise, That this kind of
cohabiting together in the Camp would very much conduce to the due and regular
marshalling of his Army; in regard every Captain had disposed his Regiments in
so good order, that he could as easily march out with an entire Company as lead
them forth one by one: After the same method had the Lieutenants managed their
respective (...)
Bands; the Decurions their Tens, and the Captains of five their Fives. Now
this exact Regulation of the Army he looked upon to be a matter of great Moment
and Concern, both for the avoiding Confusion and Disorder, and also (in case of
any such Misfortune) for the more speedy putting themselves in Battalia again:
just as we see in Stones and pieces of Timber which are to be compact and
coupled togein Building, provided they have some special mark whereby we may
but know for what part of the Structure they were designed; for very easy it
is to fit and frame them together, tho they be never so confusedly scattered
and dispersed. The best Advantage he proposed from their living together in
their Tents was this; He concluded they would be very unwilling to desert one
another, because he saw even Brute Beasts, feeding in the same Pasture, express
a strange desire one for another, if any one did forcibly drive them from their
Fellows.

Cyrus had always a special Regard to this, that they should never go to Dinner
or Supper unless they had first labored till they Sweated again: And for this
purpose, He either led them forth to hunt, or else contrived such Exercises and
Diversions for them, as would effectually cause the same: or if he were to
engage in any Enterprise, he would so lead them on to the Execution of it, that
without Sweating they should not come off. And this he thought did not only
make them eat with a better Appetite and Relish, and kept them in perfect
Health, but also did very much conduce to the enabling them to undergo Labor
and Travel. Besides, he looked upon it that their being Fellow Laborers
together would be a fair opportunity of endearing them each to other; just as
it is with Horses, those that have been wrought hard at the same Drudgery and
Toil, stand more quietly and gently together in the same Stall. And
undoubtedly, they give the best Proofs of their Bravery against the Enemy, who
are conscious to themselves how well they have acted in their exercises one
with another.

Cyrus also erected a Pavilion for himself, fit for the Accommodation and
Reception of those that he invited to sup with him. Now, for the most part, he
invited of his chief Captains, such as he thought proper and convenient:
sometimes he sent for his Lieutenants to his Table; sometimes for the (...) or
(...)
Corporals; and sometimes for the Captains over Five. Upon some Occasions
likewise, he admitted private Soldiers; sometimes also half a File together;
sometimes a whole File; sometimes an entire Band of Soldiers, and sometimes a
whole Regiment. And this kind of Invitation and honoring them thus was usual
with him, when he saw any particular Person perform that which he would have
recommended to the Army in general: now the Entertainment he provided was
always the same for himself and his Guests. He took also special Care that
those Messengers that followed and attended the Camp, Or Sergeants at Arms.
should in all things share equally with the rest, in that he looked upon such
Officers to be, in no case, less deserving of Honor and Advancement than
Heralds and Ambassadors: for he concluded that they must needs be Men of
Fidelity, and Skill in Military Affairs, Understanding, in Business earnest,
quick of dispatch, diligent, and undaunted. Over and above all this, Cyrus knew
'twas expedient that these kind Officers should be treated with the same Regard
as they that were reputed the best amongst them, and so to be managed that they
might refuse nothing that was enjoined them; but that in all things they might
make their Prince's Commands the Measure of their Obedience.

It was likewise his constant Care, as often as he made these public
Entertainments in his Tent, to provide that they might be seasoned with such
Discourses as would at once create Mirth, and incite to some noble and generous
Undertaking. So on a time he occasionally entered upon this kind of Discourse:
How think you, Countrymen, quoth he, do you esteem others any How Cyrus
commun'd with his Captains, etc.
way our Inferiors, or to fall short of us, because they have not had the same
Advantage of Education and Discipline as we have? Or will there, think you, be
no Difference betwixt them and us, neither in our common Conversation, nor when
we come to give the Enemy Battle? To him Hystaspes replied; How they will
behave themselves against the Enemy I don't yet understand: but, I vow to you,
in their ordinary Converse one with another, some of them seem, already, very
morose and refractory. for, Cyaxares sent lately consecrate Victims to every
Company, which being distributed, every Man had at least three Dividends of
Flesh for his share. The Cook, when he carried about the first Course, began
with me: but when he came in with the second, I bad him invert his method, and
begin with the last. Whereupon, one of the Soldiers that sat about the middle
cried out, and said, In good faith this is by no means fair dealing, if he
shall never begin with us that sit here in the midst. Which when I perceived, I
was very much disturbed that they should think they were cozened; and
immediately called the Soldier to me: and therein he as readily obeyed. Now by
that time the Messes which were carried about came to us, and we, I remember,
being to be served last, the Pieces of Meat that were left were very small;
whereat he being heartily vexed, was not able any longer to contain himself,
but muttered out these Words: What hard Fortune had I to be called hither, and
(...)
speed so much the worse! To whom I replied, Come, trouble not your self, for
by and by he will begin with us; then you shall choose with the first, and have
the largest Portion. This said, in comes the Cook with the third Course, even
all that was left undistributed: and here he had his choice next after me. But
when a third had likewise taken, and had, as he thought, met with a larger
piece than himself, down again he threw what he had already pitched upon, as if
he would make a second Choice. But the Cook supposing the Man had no need of
Meat, kept on his way, and carried the Mess quite about before he could seize
on another piece. Whereupon, he took this Disaster so heinously, because that
which he had chosen before was all eaten up, that he overturned even the Sauce
that was left, out of a mere Transport of Vexation and Rage at his ill fortune.
Which when the Officer that stood next Us perceived, clapping his hands
together, he burst out into a great Laughter: and I, for my part, was forced to
counterfeit a Cough, not being able otherwise to forbear laughing outright.
Such a one as this, Cyrus, quoth he, can I show you amongst our own Fellows.
Whereat, all of them, as well they might, laughed heartily. Then stood up
another of the Captains, and said; This Gentleman it seems has light upon a
very peevish humoursome Fellow. But when you dismissed us with your Instructions
for Marshalling an Army, and commanded every one of us what we had learnt of
you, to teach the same to our respective Companies, then went I, as the rest
did, and exercised one Party. When having placed their Leader at the head of
them, and next to him a brisk Young Man, and so the rest in such order as I
thought fit, I stood forth and faced them; where, viewing the whole Band, when
I saw my own time, I commanded A notable Instance of Military Discipline.
them to march forward: Presently my Young Man stepping forth, marched in the
Van before his Leader. Which, when I perceived, You, Sir, what do you mean,
said I? To march on, replied he, as you commanded. But my Commands, quoth I,
were not to you only, but to all the rest. Upon these Words, turning him about
to the Company, What, hear you not, says he, how our Captain commands us all
to advance forward? Hereupon the whole Band moving on, marched before their
Leader, and came up to Me. And when their Officer commanded them back Or Leader,
again, they began to be discontented, and to murmur, saying; Whether of these
two must we obey? for here one commands us, and the other forbids us, to march
forward. All this I patiently bore with, and replacing every one in his proper
Order, I gave them in charge, That not a Man of those that came behind should
fair a foot till he before him began to move; but that they should all have a
special regard to this, That every Man follow his Leader. Now so it was, that
one going for Persia, came to wait upon me for my Letter which I had wrote to
my Friends; wherefore, I wished the Officer (for he knew where the Letter lay)
to run and fetch it: He did accordingly; when immediately the aforesaid
Young Man guarded, as he was, with a Breast Plate, and a Halbert in his hand,
followed his Leader; which the rest of the Company perceiving, all ran after,
so that the whole Band of Soldiers came and brought me my Letter. Thus you
see, quoth he, how perfectly my Party have learnt all that you enjoined me to
teach them. Hereupon some indeed laughed exceedingly, that a Letter should be
guarded with such a Military Convoy as this: But Cyrus, O Heavens, quoth he,
What brave Men have we for our Associates! so easy to be obliged, that a small
piece of Meat shall engage many of them to be your Friends; so ready to obey,
that their Performance shall even prevent your Commands: so that for my part I
cannot imagine what manner of Men I should rather wish for than such as I
already have. Thus did Cyrus at once both laugh at the Discourse, and commend
the Soldiers.

It fortuned that there was at this time in his Tent one of his Captains named
Aglaitadas, a Man of a rough unpleasing Temper, who began after this manner: Do
you suppose it, Cyrus, to be Truth what these Men tell you? Why, replied Cyrus,
what can they propose to themselves by framing Lies? What think you, quoth he,
but that they have a mind to create Laughter, for which Reason they tell you
these Stories, and proudly boast themselves in so doing. Nay, soft and fair,
answered Cyrus, don't look upon them as (...)
Braggadocio's, for that Name, I take it, is appropriate only to those who
pretend they are really more wealthy, or more courageous than in truth they
are, or make Protestations of their performing that which they are not able to
affect; and that too, when it evidently appears that they do it upon the
account of some by-end or private Advantage. But they that go about to move the
Company to Laughter, not out of any Principle of Profit to themselves, nor
prejudice to the Hearers, nor with a design of doing any the least Injury, why
should they not be styled (as in Justice they ought) merry-conceited facetious
Drolls rather than proud Boasters? And thus did Cyrus plead for, and excuse
those that caused Merriment and Laughter. Then stood up an Officer, the same
that had told the pleasant Story of his Party of Soldiers, and said, I
suppose, Aglaitadas, had we applied our selves to cause you to weep, (as some
there are who in their Songs and Orations by devising lamentable doleful Tales
endeavor to force Tears from us) you would have reproved us very severely,
seeing you treat us with such Contumely and Reproach, notwithstanding you your
self know very well, that it is our desire only to make you merry, and not to
injure or affront you in the least: Yes, upon my Life, should I, quoth
Aglaitadas, and that very justly too. For I look upon him that causes his
Friends to sit down and lament, to deserve incomparably better of them than one
that moves them to Mirth and Laughter. And even you, if you examine the matter
rightly, will find that I speak Truth. For it is by making them weep that
Parents teach their Children Modesty, that Masters instruct their Scholars in
Arts and Sciences: and the Laws, so long as they constrain Subjects to sit down
and weep, so long do they oblige them to live justly and honestly. But for
those that provoke to Laughter, wherein can you affirm that they either
advantage the Body, or so improve the Mind as to make it more fit for the
Administration of Affairs, whether private or public? To him Hystaspes spoke
after this manner; Come, Aglaitadas, if you will be ruled by me, you shall
boldly and bravely bestow this upon your Enemies which you value at so high a
rate, and do your Endeavor to make them sit down and bemoan themselves; but
upon us that are your Friends, by any means, expend something of that you set
so lightly by, your Laughter: For I know you cannot but have a great Reserve of
it in store, in regard you your self have never used it lavishly or profusely,
nor do you, by your good Will, allow either Friends or Strangers to partake of
it. So that you can have no pretense in the World why you should not afford us
a little Laughter. To whom Aglaitadas replied; And do you, Hystaspes, intend to
force a Laugh from me? No said the abovementioned Officer, I swear, he were a
Fool if he did; for I believe one may sooner strike Fire out of you than move
you to Laughter. Hereupon the rest of the Company, being acquainted with the
Humor and Temper of the Man, laughed outright; and Aglaitadas himself offered
at a Smile: when Cyrus, seeing him somewhat disposed to be pleasant, Sir, said
he, to the aforesaid Officer, you do not do as becomes you, thus to impose upon
any sober grave Man, to constrain him in a manner to laugh, especially one that
is so professed an Enemy to all kind of Laughter. And here concluded this kind
of Discourse: when, Chrysantas stood forth, and spoke after this manner.
Chrysantas's Advice about disposing of Rewards.


Cyrus, and Allye the rest that are here present, I suppose there are come with
us in this Expedition, Persons, some of greater and some of lesser worth: Now
if our Enterprise be attended with Success, they will all expect to be rewarded
alike. But for my part I think nothing in the whole World can be more
unreasonable and absurd than that Cowardice and Valor should go hand in hand
in the Distribubution of Rewards. Hereunto Cyrus replied, It Is therefore most
requisite, Sirs, that this be proposed as matter of Debate to the Army; Whether
(if God crown our Actions with Success) we should make all Fellow-sharers
alike, or dispose of Honors and Rewards in Proportion to every Man's particular
Deferts. And what need is there, answered Chrysantas, to propound this to the
Army, and not rather solemnly declare that your Pleasure is so? For have not
you already proclaimed Public Games and appointed Prizes for the Victors? It Is
confessed, quoth Cyrus; but in good Truth, that is nothing to this Purpose. For
whatsoever they get in the Progress of this War, that I suppose they will look
upon as common to them all: the Conduct perhaps and Command of the Army they
may allow to belong to me by right of Deputation from the State. And therefore
I believe they will not think me to be Arbitrary or Unjust if I take upon me to
constitute Officers over them. Think you then, quoth Chrysantas, that the whole
Multitude being assembled together will come to any such Resolution as this,
That every Man shall not share alike; but that in the Disposal of Honors and
Rewards, Consideration shall especially be had of the best? In earnest, for my
Part, answered Cyrus, I am of that Opinion, both because, I suppose, you will
acquiesce in what I say; and also it is very scandalous and base for any one to
offer to oppose this, That he ought to be most honorably rewarded, who behaves
himself with the greatest Bravery and Courage, and does his Country the best
Service. And I verily believe it will animate even Cowardice it self to see
Valor honored and preferred. Cyrus was very The admirable Wisdom of Cyrus.
willing that such a Decree should pass upon the account, and for the sake of
the Nobility; for he took it for granted, that they would show themselves more
valorous according as they saw themselves rewarded in proportion to the
Services they did. He thought it therefore very seasonable at this time to
determine the Point by Votes and Suffrages, when the Nobility began to repine
at, and dread this levelling kind of Equality. Wherefore, by the unanimous
Consent of those that were met together in Cyrus's Pavilion, it was thought
good to put the Matter to the Vote, that every one who would be reputed a Man
indeed, should countenance and further it.

Hereat one of the Captains smiling, said, I know a certain Fellow, a
Common-Souldier, who will readily give his Assent that this unadvised Equality
shall never pass. Another asked him who he meant; I mean, quoth he, a certain
Tent-Fellow of mine, who presses upon all Occasions to share more than the
rest. What, said the other, in Labor too? Nay, hold there, replied he, not a
Word of that; there I confess you have caught me: for in Labor and Toil, or
any thing of that Nature, he will give any one, that will, free leave to take a
greater share than himself. But, Sirs, quoth Cyrus, An excellent Discourse of
Cyrus.
my Resolution is, that such Fellows, as he now speaks of, ought to be
cashiered, and expelled the Camp, if we intend to have a stout, valiant, and
faithful Army. For I look upon the Generality of Soldiers to be naturally
disposed to follow what way soever any one leads them. Now I believe Men of
Gallantry and Courage are zealous to excite others to noble and brave Exploits;
whereas bad Men make it their Business to betray them into Villainy and Folly.
And indeed it often falls out, that Men of base corrupt Principles bring more
over to their Opinion and Party than those that are truly virtuous and good.
For Vice coming recommended with present Pleasures, does by their Allurements
induce many to comply with and embrace it: but Virtue aiming only at Heights
and Difficulties, is not powerful and attractive enough to draw us readily to
her, especially when others invite us the clean contrary way, to our beloved
Ease and Pleasure. So that if there be any who contract a vicious Habit merely
by a sluggish stupid Disposition, such I esteem as Drones, expensive only, and
burdensome to their Fellows: but where they are backward to engage in common
Duty and Service, yet shameless and eager in pursuit of their own private
Advantage, they are likely to be Ringleaders to Mischief and Vice; because
they are many times able to evidence to the World, that their Villainy has been
crowned with Profit and Success. Wherefore such as these ought by all means to
be discharged. Nor need you be hereupon sollicitous how to recruit your broken
Forces with Countrymen of your own, but, as in Horses, you don't confine your
self to those of your own breed, but make choice of such as are best: even so
in Men of all others, choose especially such as you think most able to do you
the best Service and Honor. Now that this kind of proceeding will turn to our
good I am abundantly satisfied, because neither can a Chariot be swift which is
drawn by slow Horses; nor a Family well governed where dissolute Servants are
employed. Nay, less prejudicial were it to have no Servants at all, than to be
molested with those that are vicious and false. Besides, assure your selves of
this, my Friends, quoth he, that by this purging of ill Men out of the Army, we
shall not only gain this great point that we shall be fairly quit of them; but
also as many of those that are left behind, as Vice has already seized on and
infected, will again be purged of the same: and those also that are good and
faithful when they see base Villainies slighted and disgraced; will with more
cheerful Resolution embrace Virtue. And this was the Effect of Cyrus's
Discourse, All which his Friends unanimously approved of, and did accordingly.

Then Cyrus began to be pleasant again, and perceiving that one of his Officers
had brought a Guest with him to Supper, and had made him sit down by him very
hairy and ugly as he was, calling the Officer by his Name, he said unto him:
What Sambulas, and do you too follow the Greek Fashion, and carry about that
delicate Youth that sits next to you, for his Beauty? Yes, quoth Sambulas, as I
live, I take great Pleasure both in his Converse and Countenance, which when
the rest of the Company heard, they all turned about, and viewing well the
Young Man's extraordinary deformity, laughed out right. And one among the rest,
Now, for Heavens sake, Sambulas, quoth he, prithee tell me, how this Fellow has
thus ingratiated himself with thee? I will tell you, quoth he, Friends, the
very Truth; How often soever I have called upon Him either by Night or by Day, He
never pretended Business to excuse himself, nor does he go about his work
lazily, but always with Vigor and Dispatch. Nor did I ever see him go about
any thing I commanded him, but he wrought at it till he sweat again. Besides,
he has made twelve others really such as himself, demonstrating to them not by
Word, but by Fact, how they ought to behave and acquit themselves. Upon this,
says one, seeing He is such a Person as you speak of, how can you forbear to
greet and kiss him as one of your Kinsmen? To whom the ill-look'd Fellow
himself replied, He does not do that because he hates taking Pains; for if he
should offer to kiss me, it would excuse him sufficiently from all other
Exercises. Such kind of Story's as these partly jocular, and partly serious,
were discoursed of and debated in the Tent. At last having offered Sacrifice a
third time, and beseeching the Gods to bless them with Victory and Success, the
Company brake up, and betook themselves all to their Rest. The day following
Cyrus, in a full Assembly of his whole Army, spoke to this Effect.

Countrymen and Friends, the Battle now Cyrus's Oration to the whole Camp.
approaches; our Enemies are at hand. If Victory attend us, the Enemy, and all
they possess, will be certainly ours: if we are vanquished (and we must ever
suppose the worst) all that we are Masters of, will, as their Reward, fall into
the hands of the Conquerors. This therefore you must know, that where Men,
concerned in the same common Engagements of War, make this Resolution to
themselves, that nothing can succeed well, unless every particular Person
heartily espouse the Cause, there, in a short time, they are able to perform
great and glorious Exploits; and that upon this Account, that no Man, out of a
slothful Negligence forgets to discharge his Duty. But when every one shall
think that others will bear the Burden of the Day, and encounter the Dangers
of the War, tho they indulge themselves in Softness and Ease, then you may
assure your selves of this, that all such Persons are subject to all manner of
Calamity and Distress. And Providence it self seems in some sort so to order
it, that they that will not impose it as a Task upon themselves to labor and
contend in an honorable way, shall be sure to have Taskmasters set over them
to command them. Now therefore let some one amongst you stand forth, and speak
to this Point, Whether he thinks we shall be induced rather to acquit our
selves valiantly like Men, because he that performs best, and exposes himself
to the greatest Hazards, shall likewise have the greatest share of Honor and
Reward; or because it makes no Difference whether we come off like Cowards or
not, in regard the Spoil shall be equally divided among All. Then stood up
Chrysantas, one of the Nobility, neither for Stature big, nor to the view
strong, but a Man of admirable Wisdom, who thus began.

I suppose, Cyrus, quoth he, you did not The Oration of Chrysantas.
propose this Question to us, as if it were your Opinion that Cowardice and
Valor ought to be had in equal Esteem; but to prove whether there be any Man
here that will declare in behalf of him, who (tho he himself perform nothing
honorable and praiseworthy) expects nevertheless to carry off an equal
Portion of all that Honor which others by their Valor have acquired. I, for
my part, neither excel in the strength of my Arm, nor the swiftness of my
Feet: and I am abundantly convinced, that for what I shall atchieve in my own
Person, I shall neither merit the first, nor the second, nay, I believe not the
thousandth, perhaps not the ten thousandth Place. Notwithstanding, this I am
sure of, that if the brave Men amongst us vigorously prosecute the Business of
the War, I my self shall have such a share in their Conquests as in Equity and
Justice I ought to have: but if the lazy Refuse of the Army shall do nothing at
all, and our stout and valiant Men be crest-fall'n and disheart'ned, I am
afraid I shall partake, and that in a far greater measure than I desire, of
something else rather than of what is honorable and good. When Chrysantas had
thus spoke, Pheraulas, one of the Commons of Persia, who upon the Account of
their domestic Converse, was familiar with, and beloved of Cyrus. A Man of no
ungraceful Mien, nor of a Humor any way unbeseeming a Gentleman. And he began
to this Effect:

I believe, O Cyrus, and all ye Persians here The Cration of Pheraulas.
present, that we do all with equal Earnestness and Contention strive for
Honor; because I perceive we generally accustom our Bodies to the same sort of
Diet, we use the same mutual Society and Converse, and have all the same
honorable Advantages set before us. For to obey our Superiors is a Duty alike
incumbent upon all; and he that does it most frankly and openly, him, I
observe, Cyrus always treats with Honor and Respect. In like manner, to give
signal Proof of our Courage against the Enemy, is not commendable in one, and
not so in another, but confessedly acknowledged to be equally laudable in All.
We are now in prospect of a Battle; and how every Man should behave himself
therein, Nature, I perceive, has sufficiently instructed us: just as we see in
other Creatures; they have all learnt some way of Fighting or other, and that
from no other Principle but the mere Dictates and Instinct of Nature. For
instance, the Bull fights with his Horns; the Horse with his Hoof; the Dog with
his Mouth; and the Boar with his Tusk; and all these Creatures are naturally
prompted to avoid that of which they ought especially to beware, without coming
under the Discipline of any Teacher. And I remember, even from a Child, I knew
how presently to desend and guard my self from him that I thought had a Design
to strike me; for, if I had no other Weapon, as well as I could, I put by, and
resisted his Stroke with my Hands: and this I did not only without any Body's
Suggestion, but even when I was sure to be punished and scourged for the same.
Indeed, when I was yet but a mere Child, I would, without any more ado, snatch
up a Sword wherever I saw it, not having learned of any one so much as how to
take hold of it, but only, as I conceive, by the mere Guidance of Nature. Nay,
I was so far from being taught by any, that I was expressly forbidden; as there
are other things which Nature did, in some sort, force me to do, in direct
Opposition to the Commands of my Parents. And if I could smite any thing
undiscovered with my Sword, I was sure to do it. For it was not only as natural
to me, as it is to walk or to run; but over and above that, I found,
methoughts, a certain Complacency to my self in so doing. In regard therefore
that here is a Battle at hand, wherein cheerful Courage is like to succeed
better than Art and Stratagem; why should not we, out of a generous Emulation,
strive and contend with these Peers; seeing the Rewards of Valor are on either
hand the same; but we don't both run equal Hazards: For they expose an
honorable Life, which is the only, the most desirable; but we, a toilsome,
inglorious Life, which I look upon to be, of all others, the most irksom and
uneasy. But above all, my Fellow Soldiers, that which chiefly animates and
excites me briskly to undertake this Contest with the Peers, is, because we
shall have Cyrus for our Judge, whose impartial Sentence no Prejudice can sway;
who I believe (and I dare call Heaven to witness it) loves those that he sees
behave themselves valiantly, no less than he does himself. For I observe, He
takes more Pleasure in bestowing what he has among such, than in keeping it to
himself. It Is true indeed, I know they value themselves much upon this Account,
That their Education has prepared them to endure Hunger, and Thirst, and Cold;
not considering rightly in the mean time, that all this we have thoroughly
learned, and that under the Institution of a better Teacher than they. For in
things of this Nature there can be no such Discipline as that of Necessity,
which has taught us to be very accurate and exact therein. They have been used
to exercise themselves in bearing Arms, which all Men have so contrived, that
they might be most light and portable: but for us, We have been compelled not
only to Go, but to Run, and that under the Pressure of heavy Loads; so that now
the weight of my Armor seems to me rather like Wings than a Burden. Know
therefore, O Cyrus, that I will do my utmost Endeavor, and be my Condition
what it will, according to my Merit and Desert so shall I expect to be
rewarded. As for you my Friends and Fellow-Commoners, I exhort you vigorously
and resolutely to maintain this Conflict with these well disciplined and
experienced Gentlemen. For, indeed, these Men are now over-match'd in this
Popular Contention.

So spoke Pheraulas. Many others there were who rose up, and declared their
Approbation both of the one Opinion and the other. So it was resolved, that
every ones Reward ought to bear Proportion to his Worth; and Cyrus to be the
Judge of the Merits of the Cause. And thus proceeded these Matters.

Cyrus also on a time invited to Supper with him a Captain and his whole
Company; because he had seen him divide his Soldiers into two Parties, and set
them in Battle Array one against another; both Divisions being armed with
Breast-Plates, and light (...) made of Twigs.
Targets in their Left-hands: in their Right-hands he gave to one half good
stout Truncheons; the other half he commanded to take up Clods, and therewith
to pelt their Adversaries. Now when they all stood thus ready armed, he gave
the Signal for the Skirmish. Then one Party threw their Clods, and hit some of
them on the Breast-Plates, some on the Targets, some on the Thighs, and some on
the Legs. But when they came to it hand to hand, they that were armed with
Truncheons smote their Adversaries, some of them Hip and Thigh, some on the
Hands, and some of them that stooped down to take up Clods, on the Neck and
Shoulders. At last the Battoon bearers put the others to flight, and smote
them, and chased them, with much Sport and Laughter. In like manner, when heir
turn came, the other took the Truncheons, and dealt just after the same rate
with those that threw Clods against them. Cyrus greatly admired this notable
Invention of the Captain, and commended the Obedience of the Soldiers, who did
at once both Exercise and recreate themselves; and withal observing that they
that imitated the Persian way of Arming themselves, always came off with
Victory, he was mightily pleased therewith, and invited the Combatants to
Supper. Now when in his Pavilion he espied some with their Legs bound up, and
some their Arms, he asked them, what they ailed? They answered, They had been
bruised with Clods. He then put the Question further to them, whether they were
hurt when they came to close, or when they fought at a distance? The
Truncheoners (...)
replied, When they skirmish'd at a distance. For said they, when we came to it
hand to hand, we had very pleasant Sport on it. Then they that had been sorely
mauled with the Truncheons cried out, That they did not think it such fine
Pastime to be bastinado'd at that rate when they came to close fighting; and
withal showed in their Arms and Necks, nay, and some of them in their Faces
too, the very Prints and Strokes of the Batoons. This done, as well they might,
they laughed at, and derided one another. The next day all the whole Field was
thronged with Men, who came to practice this way of Combating: and whenever
they were not taken up with Business of greater moment, they constantly used
this kind of Exercise and Recreation. Another time he saw a Captain leading his
Company from the River one by one to (...), not (...), as most ^ples (...) it.
Dinner, who, when he saw his time, commanded the Rereband to pass by the third
and fourth Ward, and march up into the Forefront. Now when they stood all in
the Vanguard, he commanded them to double their Files, and lead them out by
two and two. Then the Decurions, with their Leaders of Ten.
Files, advanced into the Front: Where he, when he thought convenient,
commanded them again to re-double their Files, and lead them on by four and
four. Then came on in order the Captains of five, yet so that they also might
march by four and four. Now when he was come to his Tent door, he gave the Word
that they should again march one by one; so he led in his Vanguard, and
commanded the next to follow them in the Rere; and giving the same Charge to
the third and the fourth, he led them all into his Pavilion, where he made them
sit down to meat in the same order they came in. Cyrus mightily admired the
Man, as well for the Mildness of his Temper, as for his Discipline and his
Industry; and therefore solemnly invited Him and his whole Company to Supper.

Now it fortuned, that at the same time there was another Captain invited to
Supper, who thus bespake Cyrus: Why don't you invite my Company to your Tent?
for when they are here at Supper they do the very same thing that these do. And
when the Entertainment in your Pavilion is at an end, the Leader of the last
File brings out the Rere-ward, and in the first place sets them in Battle
Array. Then follows the Leader of the second Band; and so in order the third
and the fourth: that so when they are to make good a Retreat, they may know in
what Order they ought to do it. Now when we come into a Plain where we use to
have a running March, if it be toward the Sunrising, I lead the Van, and the
foremost Band takes place first, after that the second, and so in Course the
third and the fourth; then follow the lesser Bands of Ten, and of Five, so long
as I give the Word of Command. But if we march toward the Sunsetting, then the
Rere-ward and the Officer that leads it, begin to march off first; and they do
nevertheless obey me though I come hindmost of all? that so they may with equal
Obedience accustom themselves both to lead and to follow. And do you, quoth
Cyrus, use always to do thus? Yes, I assure you, replied he, as constantly and
duly as we go to our Meals. I invite you therefore, answered Cyrus, partly
because you carefully practice to keep good Order both in your Approaches and
Retreats, whether by Night or by Day; and partly because you exercise your
Bodies by moving up and down, and also improve your Understandings by
Experience and Practice. Cyrus wittily encourages his Soldiers.
So that in regard you perform a double Duty in every Thing, it is but
reasonable that you should be treated with a double Repast. Not in one day, for
Heavens sake, quoth the Captain, unless you will supply us with double Bellies
too. And thus ended this Entertainment in the Tent. The next day, as also the
Day following, Cyrus invited this Company to his Pavilion: which when the other
Regiments understood, they all ever after imitated them.

Now Cyrus held a general Rendezvous of all his Forces in their Arms, and was
mustering them in order for Battle; when Cyaxares, by an Express, advertised
him of an Embassy arrived from An Embassy from India.
India, and withal signified his Pleasure, That he should immediately repair
unto him. The Messenger likewise told him, That he had brought him, from
Cyaxares, a very noble Robe of State: for, quoth he, his Desire is, that you
should appear with all Magnificence and Splendor imaginable, because the
Indians will see how you make your Entry. Cyrus having received this Message,
he gave order to the principal Officer that led the Vanguard, that he should
draw out his Company one by one, and place himself in the Front. He commanded
him likewise to give the same Charge to the next, and so on, that it might pass
through the whole Army. In obedience to his Commands, they immediately gave the
Charge, and All as readily performed it: so that in a very short time, there
were two Hundred in the Forefront (for so Rather, as Leunclavius observes, it
should be 300, which multiplied by 100 makes completely 30000.
many principal Captains he had) and the Files were each of them an
hundred-deep. In this Order he commanded them to follow, as he should lead
them; and presently he began to march at a very great rate. But when he
understood that the way leading to the Palace-Royal was too narrow for them to
march thus all afront, he gave Command that the first Thousand should follow
him in the same Order they were placed, and that the next Thousand should close
with their Rere-ward and follow them; and the same Method to be observed
throughout the whole Army. Thus he led them on without any stop, and one
Thousand still orderly succeeded and followed another. He dispatched likewise
before him two of his Attendants, to make Proof of the straightness of the Way,
that so if any one were at a loss therein, they might of them be informed what
they ought to do. Now when they were come to Cyaxares his Palace-Gates, he
commanded the Captain of the first Band so to order his Files that they might
stand twelve deep, and to place the File-Leaders afront before the Palace. He
commanded that the same Charge should be given to the second Captain, and so on
throughout the Army. And all this they accordingly performed.

Cyrus came into Cyaxares's Presence in a plain Persian Robe, whom when
Cyaxares saw, being well pleased that he had repaired to him with such Celerity
and Dispatch, but disturbed at the Meanness of his Garment, he thus bespake
him: What mean you, Cyrus, to appear thus in such a Garb before the Indian
Embassy? My Desire was, that you should have made your Entry in a most splendid
manner; for it would have been much for my Reputation and Honor, that my
Nephew should have appeared in all Magnificence and Royalty. To this Cyrus
replied, Whether should I have done you more Honor by deferring and slighting
the Execution of your Commands, that so I might have come before you, arrayed
in Purple, adorned with Bracelets, and bedecked with Chains; or rather (as I
have now done) by expressing my Obedience and Diligence in leading hither so
great and gallant an Army, and all to maintain your Grandeur and Honor? I come
adorned, you see, with Sweat and Labor, that I may make you glorious by
teaching others to obey you. When Cyrus had thus spoke, Cyaxares approved well
of what he said, and commanded that the Indian Ambassadors should be
introduced. Who, when they were admitted to Audience, declared, that they
Cyaxares gives Audience to an Indian Embassy.
were sent by the King of India with Instructions to demand the Reasons and
Grounds of the War betwixt the Medes and Assyrians; and that when they had
received his Answer, they were further impovver'd to go likewise and demand
the same of the King of Assyria: and upon the whole matter to let each of you
understand, that the Indian King was resolved, out of a due regard to Justice
and Equity, to join with and ass^ist the injured Party. To this Embassy
Cyaxares answered; Hear therefore what I shall declare: We have been no ways
injurious to the Assyrian King. Go on therefore in your way to him, and learn
what his Declaration is in this Point. Cyrus also being present, craved leave
of Cyaxares to impart his Thoughts to them; which being granted, he thus
bespake them: To the King of India, (Your Master) if Cyaxares please, make this
Report: That if the King of Assyria pretend he has been any ways injured by Us,
We declare'tis our Resolution, to refer to the King of India the Arbitration of
the Matter. Their Audience thus ended, they departed; whereupon Cyrus began to
address himself to Cyaxares in this manner.

I came from Home furnished with no great store of Treasure of my own; and of
what I had I have very little left, having expended most of it upon my
Soldiers; which perhaps you may wonder at in regard'tis You that Victual Cyrus
confers with Cyaxares about raising Money.
and provide for the Army. But assure your self, I have employed it no
otherwise than in rewarding and gratifying such of them as have deserved my
Admiration and Esteem. For I am clearly of Opinion, that for all such whose
Assistance we desire in any Concern whatsoever, it is much more easy and
pleasant to win and engage them to us by good Words and kind Treatment, than to
fright them into their Duty by Rigor and Compulsion. And especially in Cases
of War, he that would have his Soldiers cheerfully and heartily espouse his
Cause, must be sure to gain upon them by all manner of indearing and gracious
Expressions; for they must be Friends and not Foes, that will stand and fall
with, and (without any little pretenses for Excuse) follow the Fortune of their
General, neither repining at his Successes, nor murmuring at his Misfortunes.
These things considered, I conceive it necessary that I have Treasure at
Command. But to expect a Supply of every thing from you, especially when I know
what extraordinary Charges you are at, I look upon it to be very preposterous
and absurd. Therefore I think You and I ought jointly to consult the common
Interest that you may not be destitute of Money. For this I am assured of, if
you abound, I shall not want when I have occasion; especially if I receive it
with that Intent, that the expending thereof may redound the more to your
Honor and Advantage. Sir, I remember I lately heard you say, Cyaxares and
Cyrus consult about the reducing the King of Armenia.
That the Armenian King does at this Juncture despise you, because he is
advertised our Enemies are coming against Us, so that he will neither assist
you with an Army, nor send the Tribute he stands obliged to pay. This is the
Case, Cyrus, quoth he, and thus he treats me; so that I am at a Stand whether I
should make War upon him, and by force of Arms endeavor to bring him to
Reason; or whether, as Affairs now are, it were not better for me to take no
notice of him, lest thereby I should oblige him also to join with, and increase
the Number of our Enemies. Cyrus then proceeded to enquire, Are the Towns of
Armenia situate in strong defensible Places, or not? Why truly, replied
Cyaxares, they are not very strongly fortified; for I have been particularly
curious in that Point. But Mountains there are, whither, if the Armenian King
retire, he may so secure himself, and whatsoever he removes thither, that he
need not fall quickly into the Enemy's Hand, unless he will sit down to
beleaguer and streighten him with a standing Camp, as my Father has sometimes
done. Here Cyrus went on, and said: If therefore, you think fit to send me with
a convenient Number of Horse, I doubt not but, with the Gods Assistance, to
compel him to aid you with an Army, and oblige him to pay the Tribute due to
you. Nay, and after all this, I make no Question but he shall hold a stricter
Friendship with you than at present he does. And I am persuaded, quoth
Cyaxares, the Armenian will much rather come in, and join with You, than with
Us. For, I have been informed, that some of that King's Children have been your
Companions in Hunting, and they may probably strike in with you again. Now if
you can but get any of them into your Hands, we cannot fail of effecting what we
our selves desire. But what think you, says Cyrus, is it not expedient that
this Design of ours should be carried on with Secrecy and Concealment? By all
means, replied Cyaxares, for so we may with less difficulty trepan some of
them; and if we should in an hostile manner set upon them, they will be less
provided against such a Surprise. Hear me then, quoth Cyrus, whether what I
shall say be to the purpose or no. I, and all my Train of Persians that
attended me, have often hunted about the Confines of Media and Armenia, and
that many times I have been followed with a Troop of Horsemen, my Friends and
Familiars from hence. You may therefore, replied Cyaxares, make the same
Attempt now without incurring the least Suspicion: But if you lead out
considerably more Forces now than did usually follow you to Hunting, this will
make them jealous of your Design. But we may, quoth Cyrus, even in that Case,
frame a very specious Pretense; as suppose some one spread a Report there, that
I intend a great and solemn Hunting, and for that end have openly requested you
to furnish me with Horsemen. I approve well of what you say^ quoth Cyaxares,
and indeed those I shall furnish you with will be but very few, because I my
self will make show, as if I intended to visit my Frontier Garrisons upon the
Borders of Assyria, which I do verily purpose to do, and to make them strong
and fit for Service. Now so soon as you are advanced to the Confines with what
Forces you have, and have spent some two days in Hunting, I will send you of
the Forces I have levied a sufficient Recruit both of Cavalry and Infantry,
with whom (as soon as they have joined you) you may immediately march on
further into the Country: and I, with the Remainder of my Army, will endeavor
to keep at such a distance, that whenever Occasion serves, I may come in to
your Relief.

Hereupon Cyaxares presently drew together a Body of Horse and Foot for the
Service of his Garrisons; and withal, sent Wagons ^aden with Provisions the
very direct way leading thereunto. But Cyrus, in order to his March, did
Sacrifice to the Gods; and at the same time sent to Cyaxares to request of him
his younger Horsemen: He, tho great Numbers of them readily offered him their
Service, yet sent him but a few. Now as Cyaxares was marching at the Head of
his Forces to visit his Castles, Cyrus by Sacrifice had an auspicious Presage
of a fortunate Expedition against the King of Armenia: whereupon, Cyrus under
color of Hunting invades the K. of Armenia.
out he leads his Men, as one prepared only to hunt. No sooner was he entered
the first Field, but up starts a Hare; when an Eagle, coming from a luckey
Quarter, and perceiving her Flight, made at her, beat her down, seized her, and
so took Wing again; and carrying the captive Prey to the top of a neighboring
Hill, she used it as she pleased. Cyrus liked this Omen well, and rejoicing for
the same, he paid his devout Acknowledgments to King Jupiter, and withal,
told those that were present; My Friends, quoth he, by the Favor of Heaven,
this will prove a fortunate Hunting to us. Now when they were come to the
Frontiers, as his usual manner was, he began his Sport. When the ordinary sort,
as well Horse as Foot, rushing forth, beat up and down, to rouse their Game;
but for the more choice Men, they stood distributed here and there, that they
might be in a readiness to receive and pursue the wild Beasts, many whereof
they took, as wild Boars, Goats, Stags, and Asses: for there are in those Parts
good store of wild Asses even at this day. Now when they had concluded that
days Sport, Cyrus entering the Marches of Armenia, sat down and supped there;
and the next day renewing his Game again, he made his Approaches to those
Mountains where he longed to be; which done, and his Hunting ended, to Supper
he sat down again. But so soon as he discovered Cyaxares his Army marching
toward him, he sent private Dispatches to them, that they should sup some
eight miles distance from him; for he (...)
foresaw this would very much conduce to conceal his Approaches from the Enemy.
He likewise signified his Pleasure, that after Supper the chief Captain should
repair unto him. So when Supper was ended, he commanded the Officers of the
Army to appear before him, and when they were assembled, bespake them after
this manner:

Heretofore, my Friends, the King of Armenia Cyrus's Oration.
was in Confederacy with, and also tributary to Cyaxares. But now,
understanding that we are invaded by our Enemies, he despises us, neither does
he send us any Supply either of Men or Money. He therefore is now to be our
Game; Him we are to Hunt out if we can. In order to which, I think, we must
thus proceed: You, Chrysantas, after you have somewhat refreshed your self with
Sleep, shall take with you one half of the Persians that are here, and entering
the mountainous part of the Country, make your self Master of those Hills,
whither, it is reported, He uses to fly when he is apprehensive of Danger.
Guides I will give you to direct you: and, they say, those Mountains are so
thick and woody, that I hope there is no fear of your being discovered.
However, if you send out some before the Army, that may both for their Number
and their Garb resemble Robbers, nimble active Men; look what Armenians they
meet with, if they can take them Prisoners, they will be sure to prevent their
giving Intelligence; but if they let them escape their Hands, they will force
and drive them so far off, that they shall not possibly have a sight of the
main Body of the Army, nor design any thing more against you than what they
would against common Rovers. And this, quoth he, Chrysantas, shall be your
Charge: I, for my part, with the remaining half of the Foot, and all the Horse,
will, by break of day, march the direct and plain Road to the Palace Royal;
where, if we find any Opposition, we shall of necessity be obliged to fight;
but if he quit the plain Field, then we must undoubtedly pursue him. Now if we
fly to the Mountains, there it will especially be your business to suffer none
to escape that fall into your Hands. For, you must imagine this to be a kind of
Hunting-match; and look upon us as those that are to find out and rouse the
Game whilst you your self attend the Toiles. Be sure therefore, that all the
Avenues and Passes be stopped before your Chase begin. And they that are
appointed to manage this Concern, must take care to lie close under Covert,
lest, as their Game makes up toward them, they startle it, and turn it back
again. But for you, Chrysantas, you must not think to do now, what out of your
extreme Love to Hunting, at other times you have been used to do. For you have
often spent the whole Night without Sleep: but now you must allow your (...)
Men to take some moderate Repose, that they may be able to encounter Sleep,
and repel it: Neither must you attempt now to pass difficult and uncouth
places, because heretofore you have been used to travel over Mountains and
Craggs, even without a Guide, that you might be sure to follow your Game
closely, which way soever it went; but you must command your Guides to lead you
the easiest and most passable, if there be not another far shorter and more
expeditious way. For to an Army, the easier their Way is, the quicker their
Dispatch. Nor must you lead your Men a running March over the Mountains,
because you your self were used to pass them at that rate; but you must advance
moderately, and hasten leisurely, that the Body of your Army may be able to
keep Pace with you. It would likewise be a matter of very good Consequence,
that some of the stoutest and most forward Men should now and then stay behind
to encourage the rest; for when such a Wing moves, it will be a great
Incitement to the rest to quicken their March, when they see their Leaders walk
at that rate before them, that the Residue of the Army shall seem to run.

When Chrysantas had heard this, being transported with the Instructions that
Cyrus had given him, he took with him his Guides, and departed; and having
given his necessary Orders to those that were to march with him, he betook
himself to his Repose. Now when they had taken what Rest he thought convenient,
he began to advance toward the Mountains. And Cyrus, early the next Morning,
dispatched a Messenger to the King of Armenia, giving him it in Charge to speak
to him to this Effect.

Cyrus his Commands to you, O King of Armenia, are, that you do thus and thus;
namely, That you repair unto Him with all possible Diligence, and bring with
you both your Tribute and an Army. If he enquire of you where I am, tell him
the Truth, that I am already entered his Frontiers. If he enquire further,
whether I come my self in Person or no; tell him here also the Truth, and
answer him, You know not. But if he be still inquisitive to learn how strong we
are, bid him send out some of his Spies to inform him.

With these Instructions Cyrus dispatched his Messenger; for he looked upon
this kind of Treatment to be more civil and friendly, than altogether to
surprise him with an unexpected Invasion. This done, and Himself being every
way well appointed either to perform the Expedition, or, if occasion were, to
give the Enemy Battle, he marched on; having first given it in Charge to his
Soldiers, that they should injure no Man: but look what Armenians soever they
met with, they should bid them take Heart, and fear nothing; and tell them,
that any Man that pleased, might come and keep Market wherever the Camp was,
and sell them Provisions either of Meat or Drink.

The End of the Second Book.
Xenophon's Institution, AND Life of CYRUS the Great. BOOK III.
Cyrus was very intent upon these Matters. Now the King of Armenia was greatly
startled and astonished when Cyrus's Messenger delivered to him his Master's
Commands, especially reflecting upon his own Injustice, both in detaining his
Tribute, and not assisting him with his Army. But that which he feared most of
all was, That his late beginning to build and fortify his Palace Royal, would
look as if it were done with a Design to oppose them. Upon all these Accounts,
he being in great Perplexity of Mind, issued forth Commissions for his Forces
to come together, and conveyed into the Mountain Country his younger Son
Sabaris, his Wife, and his Son's Wife, and his Daughters, with all their costly
Ornaments and rich Furniture, appointing them a Convoy to secure their Passage.
He sent out Spies likewise to inform him wh^ Cyrus did; and what Armenians he
had with him, he put them in order of Battle; when immediately other Messengers
repaired to him, with Intelligence that Cyrus also himself in Person was hard
at hand. Whereupon He, not daring to give him Battle, secretly withdrew
himself: which the Armenians that were with him perceiving, they fled every Man
to his respective Home, with an Intent to convey their Movables farther off.

Now when Cyrus saw the Field full of runaway Stragglers, driving their Cattle
before them, he sent to them to let them know, That he would offer no manner of
Hostility to any that stayed; but if he overtook any in their Flight, those he
declared he would treat as his Enemies. Upon this Message, a multitude of them
stayed; nevertheless, many withdrew themselves secretly with the King. Now when
they that went before to conduct the Women fell into their Hands that guarded
the Mountains, they presently set up a great Cry, and attempting to save
themselves by Plight, were many of them taken. At last his Sons, their Wives,
their Daughters, with all the Riches and Treasures they brought with them, were
seized on by the Enemy. When the King understood what had befallen them, not
knowing which way to turn himself, he fled to the top of a certain Hill; The
King of Armenia flies.
which Cyrus likewise perceiving, with what Forces he had ready with them, he
closely begirt it round, sending withal to Chrysantas, commanding him to quit
the Mountain where he was posted, and come to him. When Cyrus had held a
Rendezvous of his Army, he dispatched a Herald to the King of Armenia, with
these Questions to be proposed to him: Tell me, O King of Armenia, whether you
will choose rather to stay where you are, and fight with Hunger and Thirst, or
take the plain Field, and join Battle with us? To this the King of Armenia
replied, That his Desire was, not to fight with either. Then Cyrus sent again,
and demanded, Why therefore do you sit still there, and not come down? Why,
quoth he, because I know not what Course to take. But you ought not, quoth
Cyrus, to make any doubt in this matter; for you have free leave to come down,
and plead your own Cause. And who, replied he, shall be Arbitrator in the Case?
Who, answered Cyrus, but he whom the great God has empowered, even without
hearing your Plea, to treat you as he list? Here the King of Armenia, having a
regard to the Streights and Necessities he lay under, came down. Him Cyrus
received, with all that belonged to him, into the midst of his Army, and
surrounded them with his Camp, having now mustered up all his Forces together.

Now it happened, that at this time, Tygranes, the King of Armenia's eldest Son
(who had often been a Fellow-Hunter with Cyrus) was just returned from some
Foreign Progress; who hearing what had happened (with such Equipage as he had)
went directly to Cyrus. But when he saw his Father, his Mother, his Brother,
and Sisters, and his own Wife, all made Prisoners of War, he (as justly he
might) burst out into Tears. Whom when Cyrus saw, he received him with no other
Complement, but only told him, You come, Sir, very opportunely, to be present
at the hearing your Fathers Plea. And immediately he assembled together the
Chief Captains of the Medes and Persians, inviting also such of the Armenian
Nobility as were present, not excluding even the Women that were there in their
Chariots, but permitted them also to hear. And, when he thought convenient, he
thus began.

In the first Place, O King of Armenia, I advise The K. of Armenia pleads his
own Cause.
you to be ingenuous, and speak Truth in this Cause, that so you may be free at
least from one Imputation, which of all things in the World is the most
hateful: for know this assuredly, that nothing can be a greater Obstacle to a
Man's obtaining Grace and Favor, than to be detected in an Untruth. Besides,
your Children, these Ladies, and all the Armenians here present, are thoroughly
acquainted with all your Proceedings; who, if they come to understand you speak
otherwise than what is really true, will conclude, that you condemn your self
to suffer the utmost Calamity if once I come to discover the Truth. Ask me
therefore, O Cyrus, quoth he, what you please; for resolved I am, to declare
the Truth, be the Issue what it will. Answer me then, said Cyrus; Did you ever
wage War against my Grandfather Astiages, and the rest of the Medes, or no? I
did, replied he. And when he had conquered you, did not you enter into
Covenants with him to pay him Tribute, to assist him in his Wars whenever he
summoned you, and to have no Forts or Citadels in your Dominions? It Is granted,
replied he. Upon what Account therefore at this time have you not only not paid
your Tribute, nor sent your Auxiliary Forces, but have begun to build
Garrisons, and sortifie? The desire of Liberty, quoth he, induced me to it: for
I look upon it as a very honorable thing, both to enjoy my own Liberty, and
also to leave it as Legacy to my Children. I confess, quoth Cyrus, it is
commendable Cyrus deals subtly with the K. of Armenia.
and brave in any Man to fight so that he may never fall into Servitude: but if
any one be detected in attempting a Revolt, and shaking off his Masters Yoke,
who either by the Fortune of War, or by any other Accident, has been brought
into Captivity, I would fain know of you, in the first place, whether you (if
you seize him) promote such a one as an honest Deserving Man, or rather punish
him as an Offender? Why, said he, (for you will not allow me to lie) I punish
him. Well then, quoth Cyrus, come on, deal frankly with me in all these
Particulars. If any one entrusted with Authority and Power, offend, whether do
you continue him in the same Station, or substitute another in his Place? I put
another, said he, in his Place. How if he be very wealthy, do you permit him to
be rich still, or reduce him to Poverty? I strip him, quoth he, of all he has.
But if you perceive him revolting to the Enemy, how then do you treat him? I
put him to Death, quoth he; for why should I dye under the Conviction of Lying
rather than the Confession of Truth? When his Son Tygranes heard this, he tore
his Turbant from his Head, and rent his Clothes in pieces; and the Women giving
a lamentable Shriek, bemangled themselves, as if their Father were already a
lost Man, and they themselves undone for ever. Hereupon, Cyrus, commanding
Silence, began again: This then, O King of Armenia, is your Law, this the Rule
you walk by: But what would you advise Us to do in such a Case? Here the
Armenian King was silent, as being in Suspense, whether he should counsel Cyrus
to put him to Death, or make his present Advice contradict what he had
confessed he himself did already practice. But his Son Tygranes, seeing his
Father in this Confusion, addressed himself to Cyrus, and said; May I, Sir, by
your leave, advise you concerning my Father, what I think best for you to do?
And Cyrus having observed that when Tygranes was his Companion in Hunting, he
had a subtle Sophister, whom he held in great Admiration, attending upon him,
he was very desirous to hear what he had to say; and therefore bid him speak
his Mind freely.

I, for my part, quoth Tygranes, advise, That Tygranes pleads his Fathers Cause.
if you approve of either what my Father intended, or what he has already
acted, you would therein exactly imitate him; but if you look upon him as a
Delinquent, not to follow him. I must not therefore, quoth Cyrus, imitate an
Offender, if I intend to do what is Just. True, said he, therefore according to
this Rule of yours, I ought to punish your Father, if it be a Principle of
Justice to punish him that deals unjustly. But whether do you think it better,
O Cyrus, quoth he, to advantage or prejudice your self by exacting Punishment?
Not the latter, said he, for so I should punish my self. Yea, and be assured,
replied Tygranes, that if you should destroy any of your own Subjects, when the
Preservation of them might be most for your Service, you would be the greatest
Sufferer your self. But how, quoth Cyrus, can they be looked upon as Men of
Value and Worth, who are taken in the very Act of Injustice? If at length,
quoth he, they become more wise and sober. For it is my Opinion, Cyrus, that
unless Prudence sit at the Helm, all other Virtues will miscarry. For what
signifies a strong, robust Man? What Service can a Horseman perform, if he want
Conduct and Discretion? What is a wealthy Citizen, or a powerful Magistrate,
without this? But with an Allay of Prudence, every Friend proves for our
Advantage, and every Servant promotes our Good. This is that you say then,
quoth Cyrus, that your Father is this Day returned from his Folly, and of an
inconsiderate Man become wise. I do so, quoth he. Then you look upon Wisdom and
Prudence, as you do upon Sorrow, to be an Affection of the Mind, and not an
acquired Habit. But granting it necessary that a Man must first be
understanding that will be discreet; yet it does not follow that an unwise Man
shall all on a sudden become Wise. Why, good Cyrus, quoth he, did you never yet
observe one Man in a foolish Rashness undertake to fight with another greater
and more powerful than himself, who notwithstanding when he has been vanquished
by him, presently renounces his former Folly, and will no more act so
unadvisedly against him? Or have you not seen one City bid Defiance to, and
oppose another, which nevertheless, when it has been once reduced, chooses
rather to obey than to resist the conquering City. But upon what Disaster of
your Father's, quoth he, do you ground this strong Presumption of yours, that
he is become sober and well-advis'd? Upon this, quoth he, because he is now
conscious to himself, that having too eagerly affected Liberty, he has brought
himself into such a Servitude as he never before knew; and because he finds
himself utterly unable to effect any thing of that which by secret and
clandestine means he supposed he might bring to pass, or else by open Violence
obtain. Besides, he knows very well that wherein you designed to circumvent
him, you did it with as much ease as one may impose upon Persons that are
blind, or deaf, or arrant Idiots. Then he is sufficiently satisfied, that what
you intended should be carried covertly, was managed with such Secrecy, that
in those very Places which he looked upon as most secure for his Recess, you
had cooped him up and imprisoned him before he was aware. Then for Expedition
and Dispatch, you have so far outdone him there, that you have been able to
bring a mighty Army out of a remote Country before he could muster up his
Forces that were round about him. But think you, quoth Cyrus, that to be thus
baffled and defeated is sufficient to bring a Man to a sober Understanding, and
make him acknowledge others to be better than himself? Undoubtedly, replied
Tygranes, and that much more than if he were overcome in Battle. For oftentimes
he that has been overpowered by main force, thinks when he has duly exercised
his Body, he shall be able to renew the Combat again; and Cities that have
been forced to a Surrender, have, upon calling others to their Aid, thought
themselves in a Condition to take up the Quarrel afresh. But whenever any
People look upon others to be better and mightier than themselves, to them they
will commonly pay Obedience freely and without Constraint. It seems then,
replied Cyrus, you are of Opinion, That insolent Persons have no regard for
those that are of a more sober Deportment than themselves; nor Thieves and
Robbers of those that are not so; nor Liars of those that speak Truth; nor
unjust Oppressors of those that do Justice. And are you ignorant, quoth he,
that at this Juncture your Father has dealt perfidiously, nor has he performed
Covenants with us, tho he knows we have not transgressed one Tittle of the
Articles agreed upon betwixt Astyages and Him? Nor do I affirm, quoth Tygranes,
that the bare knowing of their Betters makes Men seriously consider, unless
they also suffer by them, as my Father now does. But your Father, replied
Cyrus, as yet has been no Sufferer at all: it is true indeed, I know, he is
afraid he shall suffer the utmost Extremity. Think you then, answered Tygranes,
that any thing can more subdue and un-man one than an overruling Fear? Know
you not, that they that are smitter with the Edge of the Sword (which is looked
upon to be one of the severest kinds of Sufferings, will nevertheless
rencounter and fight the very same Enemies again? but those that Men are
heartily afraid of, they are not able (yea tho they treat them friendly) so
much as to look them in the face. Do you say then, quoth Cyrus, that the fear
of Suffering is to Men a greater Punishment Fear is the worst of Punishments.
than the Suffering it self? I do so, replied he, and you know that therein I
speak nothing but the Truth. For you are not ignorant, that such as are afraid
they shall be banished their Native Country, and they likewise, who being to
encounter the Enemy, fearfully dread an Overthrow, live of all Men most
wretchedly. They also that at Sea are in fear of a Shipwreck, Slavery, and
Bondage, can neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep for very dread; whereas they
that are already Exiles, already vanquished, Slaves already, can many times
enjoy themselves, eat, drink, and sleep, better than those that are in a
happier Estate: besides, these Instances will plainly evince how grievous and
insupportable Fear is. For some there are, who, fearing lest they should
miserably end their days in Captivity, do, either by throwing themselves
headlong from some Precipice, or by Strangling, or by laying violent Hands on
themselves, antedate their Death for very Fear. So that of all the most
dreadful things in the World, nothing does so much astonish Men's Minds as Fear.
Now for my Father, quoth he, what Distraction of Mind think you does he labor
under, not only lest he himself should be carried into Bondage, but for Me
also, his Wife, and all the rest of his Children? I can easily believe, replied
Cyrus, that your Father does lie under those Perplexities you speak of: but I
know also, it is natural for the same Person to be haughty and insolent in
Prosperity, and yet presently, upon the. Approach of Affliction, to be as it
were thunderstruck and amazed, and yet let him but be re-instated in his
former Condition, he shall again be as arrogant as ever, and create you the
same Disturbances as before. I confess, O Cyrus, quoth he, it is too true; our
past Miscarriages are a sufficient Ground for you to distrust us: but it is in
your Power to fortify the Strong Holds, to put Garrisons into the Castles, and
to receive of us what other Pledges and Hostages you please; nor shall any of
these things make us in the least murmur or repine, as remembering that we our
selves are the Authors of our own Sufferings. But if you shall depute any
Persons to the Government who have not been Delinquents, and yet you your self
seem diffident and distrustful of them, beware, lest whilst you oblige and
advance them, they look upon you to be none of their Friend. On the other side,
if you, to avoid their Hatred, forbear to lay Yokes upon their Necks, whereby
to awe and restrain them, take heed that hereafter you don't find it more
difficult to curb and reclaim them, than now to reduce us. For my part, quoth
Cyrus then, I protest I think I shall very unwillingly entrust my Concerns in
their Hands whose mere Necessities, I know, oblige them to accept my Service.
But those that I perceive willing to do their Duty out of pure Affection for,
and Love to me. Such, I think, even in their Miscarriages, I should soonner
bear with, than those that hate me, yet are very diligent in performing a kind
of Compulsive Service. To this Tygranes replied, Whom can you lay such
Obligations upon to Love and Serve you, as you may now upon Us? Upon those I
believe, quoth Cyrus, who never yet acted in an hostile Manner against me,
provided I conferr the same Favors upon them which now you would persuade me
to bestow upon you. But can you then, think you, O Cyrus, quoth he, at this
time find out a Person upon whom you may lay so many Obligations as you may
upon my Father? For should you only spare the Lives of any of those that never
yet injured you, you cannot imagine how expressive the Returns of his Gratitude
will be. Then should you spare his Wife and Children, Who do you think will
love and serve you more than he that believes he does deservedly suffer all
this at your Hands? And can you suppose any Persons so much concerned for the
loss of the Kingdom of Armenia, as We? Most manifest, therefore it is, that He,
who by the loss of his Kingdom, must needs be the greatest Sufferer, would, if
he should receive the same of your free Grace, be your most obedient Friend and
Servant. Besides, if upon your departure hence you desire to leave all things
in a sedate and quiet Posture, consider with your self, whether it will more
conduce to the Peace and Tranquillity of the State, to continue the old
established, or to introduce a new Government? Then if you are desirous to lead
out a puissant Army into the Field, who do you suppose can make a better choice
for you, than he who has often tried and experienced their Worth? And should
you stand in need of a Pecuniary Susidie, who can you imagine more proper to
levy the same, than He that both knows and commands the Revenue of the Kingdom?
Beware therefore, most Noble Cyrus, left by ruining Us, you bring upon your
self a greater Mischief than my Father posibly could do. So spoke Tygranes.

Now when Cyrus had heard this Speech, He was exceedingly pleased, believing he
had effected all that which he had promised Cyaxares to perform: for he
remembered he had said, he doubted not but to bring the King of Armenia into
more strict Engagements of Friendship than before. Wherefore, turning to the
King of Armenia Himself, he said; What Army, O King, will you furnish me with?
What Subsidy will you raise toward the carrying on of this War, provided I
accept the Conditions you have proposed? To him the King of Armenia replied, I
cannot, O Cyrus, in Honesty or Justice, promise you less, than to give you an
Account of all the Forces of my Kingdom, that you, knowing what they are, may
take out of them what number you please, leaving a Guard sufficient for the
Defense of the Country. Likewise, it is but reasonable I should discover to you
all my Treasure, that you, taking an Account of the same, may make Use of, and
leave what you think fit. Come then, quoth Cyrus, let me know how considerable
your Strength is, and how rich your Treasury. As for my Forces, replied the
King of Armenia, I have about eight thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot.
Then for my Treasure, reckoning what Sums my Father left me, it amounts to
above three thousand Talents of Silver. To this Cyrus immediately subjoined,
because the Caldeans, your Neighbors, make War against you, you shall only
assist me with half your Army, and because you have neglected to pay Cyaxares
the Tribute due to him, instead of fifty Talents, you shall send him double the
Sum. To me likewise you shall lend an hundred Talents, which, by the Assistance
of Heaven, I engage either to repay, if I am able, or else to do you some
Service, which may more than answer it. But in case I do not pay it, I may
possibly be looked upon as not Solvent, but cannot reasonably fall under the
Imputation of being unjust. For Heaven's sake, said the King of Armenia, I
beseech you Cyrus, don't speak this, if you intend I should confide in you; But
assure your self this, that whatever you leave behind you, is as much your own
as what you carry with you. Well, granting this, quoth Cyrus; but now what Sum
would you be willing to give for the Redemption of your Wife? Even all that I
am worth, said He. What for the Redemption of your Children? Even all that I
can possibly raise. According to your reckoning, quoth Cyrus, this is double
the Value of what you possess. Now Tygranes, tell me, quoth he, what Ransom you
would willingly pay for the Restitution of your Wife? (by the by Tygranes had
been lately married, and was a passionate Admirer of his new Spouse) I would,
said he, O Cyrus, even at the expense of my own Life gladly purchase her
Freedom. Take Her to you then, quoth Cyrus, for I don't at all look upon Her as
a Captive, Cyrus dismisseth his Prisoners Ransomfree.
in regard you your self never deserted Us. You also, O King of Armenia, take
to you your Wife and your Children without Ransom, that they may be satisfied
their departure from us is Free. At this time you shall sup with us, and Supper
once ended, you are at Liberty to depart to what Quarter you please. Here then
they tarried, and after Supper, whilst they were yet in the Tent; Tell, quoth
Cyrus to Tygranes, what is become of that Person who did use to hunt with us?
For I remember you had a great Esteem and Veneration for him. Why, replied he,
Has not this Father of mine put him to Death think you? What, said he, were the
Crimes he charged him withal? His Accusation was that he corrupted me. And I
assure you, Cyrus, he was so Virtuous and Good a Man, that when he came to die,
he sent for Me, and said, O Tygranes, don't you, by any means, murmur, or
repine at your Father, because he will put me to Death, for this is not an Act
of An excellent saying of a Dying Man.
Malice but of Ignorance: And I look upon all manner of Crimes to be purely
Involuntary which proceed from Ignorance. Alas, good man, quoth Cyrus. To him
the Armenian King replied, Men that find Strangers very Familiar and conversant
with their Wives, don't therefore persecute them ever to Death, because their
Conversation makes them more knowing and gentile, but therefore do they treat
them as Enemies, because they are jealous they steal away that Love and
Affection which is due to themselves. In like manner, the Reason why I
entertained such a jealousy of that Man, was, because I thought he made my Son
revere and value Him more than he did my self. To whom Cyrus replied, in good
Truth, O King of Armenia, I look upon this Action only as a common Humane
Infirmity; and therefore you, Tygranes, ought to acquiesce in your Fathers
Proceedings against this Man.

Thus they discoursed at this time; when having, as was proper after such a
Reconciliation, with friendly Embraces saluted each other, they, together with
their Wives, mounted their Chariots, and joyfully departed. So soon as they
came home, some began to commend Cyrus's Wisdom, some his Courage and Patience,
some his Clemency, and some his Beauty and graceful Mien. Then Tygranes asked
his Lady, Tell me, Madam, quoth he, did not you think Cyrus a very goodly
Person? I assure you, said she, I did not so much as look upon him. Where then,
quoth Tygranes, did you fix your Eyes? Even on him that protested he would
purchase my Freedom with the loss of his own Life. This done, they all betook
themselves to their Rest.

The Day following, the King of Armenia sent Presents of Hospitality to Cyrus
and the whole Army; and gave it in Charge to such of his Subjects as were to go
to the War, that they should be in readiness the third Day. To Cyrus likewise
he sent double the Sum of Money he had demanded. But Cyrus, deducting what he
had required, returned the remainder; desiring withal, to know whether of
those two would put themselves at the Head of their Army, the Son, or the King
Himself? To which they both returned Answer, the Father thus; He whom you your
self shall please to command: the Son to this Effect; Assuredly Cyrus, quoth
he, I will not fail to follow you, tho it be to serve you as your Slave or
Vassal. To him Cyrus smilingly replied, And upon what Terms would you be
content to have your Wife hear that you are become Luggage-Carrier to the Camp?
She shall not need to hear of it, quoth he, for I will bring Her with me, that
she may be an Eyewitness to all my Actions. But it is already high time, quoth
Cyrus, that you prepare for your March. I make no doubt of it, quoth Tygranes,
but that we our selves shall be in a readiness with whatever else my Father has
appointed for your service. This done, the Soldiers, after an hospitable
Reception, betook themselves to their Repose.

The next day Cyrus took with him Tygranes, and the best of the Median Horse,
with as many of his Friends as he thought convenient, and coasting about the
Country, considered where He might erect a Fortress. Then coming to the top of
a Mountain, He inquired of Tygranes which were the Hills from whence the
Chaldaeans made their Descents to spoil and pillage them? Which when Tygranes
had pointed out to him, he farther asked him; whether they had at that time
deserted them or no? No, believe me, quoth he, but they have always their
Spies there, who signify to the rest whatever they discover. And what, said
he, do they upon any Discovery made? They hasten, quoth he, to the defense of
these Frontier Mountains, with all the speed and power they can. When Cyrus had
heard this, he looked about him, and beheld a great part of the Country of
Armenia lie waste and desolate by reason of the War. Then they returned to the
Army, and having supped together, betook themselves to their Rest.

The Morrow after, Tygranes himself was in all readiness, well appointed, being
enforced with four thousand Horse, ten thousand Archers, and as many
Targetiers. But whilst this Army was levying, Cyrus having first made an
auspicious Sacrifice, called together the Captains both of the Persians and the
Medes, and in a full Assembly spoke to them to this effect; These Mountains, my
Friends, which we see before Us, are the Boundaries of the Chaldaeans, which if
we Cyrus consults how he may be Master of the Caldean Mountains.
make our selves Masters of, and thereon build a Citadel or our own, both
Nations, as well Armenians as Chaldaeans, must of necessity be awed by Us. Our
Sacrifices promise good success, and to effect this, nothing can so much
further and advance humane Resolution as Celerity and Dispatch. For if we can
reach the top of these Hills before the Enemies Forces can come together, we
shall either be Masters of them without any manner of Resistance, or else
engage with an Enemy that is very inconsiderable and weak. So that no Labor
can be more easy, no Undertaking less dangerous, provided, what we have
resolved upon, we quickly, out of hand, put in Execution. To your Arms
therefore. And you Medes, march on your left; you Armemans, half of you on our
right Hand, the other half lead the Van, and conduct us in our way. You
Horsemen, bring up the Rear, animate us, and force us forward; and be sure you
suffer no one to be Lazy or Remiss.

When Cyrus had thus said, disposing his Army into (...)
deep Files, He marched on in the Head of them. But when the Chaldeans
perceived that they made a resolute Ascent, they presently gave notice to their
Fellows, who, upon mutual Alarms and Outcries each to other, ran together.
Hereupon Cyrus, encouraging his Soldiers, said, It Is high time, O ye Persians,
for Us to make haste. For if we can prevent our Enemies, and gain these Hills
before them, all the Power they can bring will little avail them. Now the
Caldeans are armed each of them with a The Caldeans a Warlike Nation.
light Target, and two Javelins, and are reputed the most Warlike People of
all that Country. They serve also, if Occasion require, as stipendiary
Soldiers, because, tho they are a very Martial Nation, yet are they very poor.
For the Region they inhabit is Mountainous, and rich Soil they have little or
none. Now when Cyrus his Soldiers had well nigh mastered the Ascent of the
Hills, ^ygranes, who marched near him, said: Know you not, O Cyrus, that we our
selves must immediately engage the Enemy? For, as for the Armenians, they will
by no means sustain the Assault. Cyrus told him, he knew that very well, and
presently gave command to the Persians, that they should prepare themselves for
Battle; telling them, that they must fall upon, and pursue the Enemy, as soon
as the Armenians, by turning their Backs upon them, had brought them somewhat
nearer. So the Armenians, advanced in the Front; who approaching near the
Enemy, as many of the Caldeans as were present, making, as their Custom is, a
great Shout, fell furiously upon them, so that the Armenians being unable to
abide the Onset, gave back, as they are used to do. But when the Caldeans,
pressing forward in pursuit of them, saw others with Swords in their Hands
marching up directly against them; some pushing on, and attacking them, were
presently slain upon the Spot, others fled, and others were made Prisoners of
War. So that in a short time they became Masters of those Hills. Which when
they had gained, taking from thence a view of the Caldeans Country, they saw
them quit and abandon all the Neighboring Habitations. Now as soon as the Army
was come together, Cyrus commanded the Soldiers to dine. Which done, and he
understanding that the Place where the Chaldaean Spies were posted, was very
defensible, and well watered, immediately began to erect a strong Fort there,
commanding Tygranes to send to his Father, willing him to repair thither, and
bring with him all the Masons and Carpenters he had. Whilst this Messenger was
dispatched to the King of Armenia, Cyrus, with those about him, went on with
his Fortifications. In this interim were brought unto him Prisoners, some
bound, and others wounded, whom when Cyrus his Goodness to the Caldean Captives.
Cyrus saw. He presently commanded those that were in Bonds to be loosed, and
sending for Chirurgions, charged them to take care that such as were wounded
might be healed. This done, he told the Caldeans, that he came thither not out
of any Ambition he had to conquer them, nor needed he make War upon them; but
very desirous he was to establish a Peace betwixt the Armenians and Caldeans.
Now before we had made our selves Masters of these Mountains, I know you were
not in the least desirous of Peace: For your own Possessions were in safety;
but the Armenians you pillaged and plundered at your Pleasure. But now you see
evidently what Circumstances you are in. You that are here Prisoners, I dismiss
you, and give you leave to return home, and consult the rest of the Caldeans,
whether they will wage War again, or enter into an Alliance with Us. If you
choose War, return not hither unarmed, if you are wise: but if you think you
have need of Peace, leave your Arms behind you. For if you are desirous to live
in Amity with us, I will take care that all shall, be well with you. When the
Caldeans heard this, after they had been very liberal in praising of, and very
Free in expressing their thanks to Cyrus, they departed.

Now when the King of Armenia heard that Cyrus had sent for him, and
understanding what Design he was upon; bringing with him Soldiers, and what
else he thought necessary, he hastened to Cyrus with all possible Diligence.
Whom when he saw, he began to this Effect; Many and Great, O Cyrus, are the
Designs The King of Armenia to Cyrus.
which we Mortals attempt, and yet how shortsighted are we as to the Event and
Success thereof! For I my self even now aiming at Liberty, was plunged into a
greater Servitude then ever I had known before: yet when we were made Prisoners
of War, and looked for nothing but inevitable Death, we find our selves now in
a much safer Estate than formetly we had at any time enjoyed. For now I see
those very People that perpetually annoyed us, reduced to such Circumstances as
I ever wisn'd them. And know, O Cyrus, that to have forced the Caldeans to quit
these Mountains, I would gladly have given a far greater Sum than you have yet
received of me: So that that Service you engaged to do us, upon our furnishing
you with so much Money, you have already abundantly performed. We freely
therefore acknowledge, that we lie under new Obligations of Gratitude to you,
which if we are not very ill Persons, we may be ashamed not to perform; to
whom, what Requital soever we make, it can bear no proportion to the Services
done us by so great a Benefactour. So spoke the King of Armenia.

Now the Caldean Deputies coming to Cyrus to entreat him to be at Peace with
them, he asked them, For what other Reason do you Caldeans at this time sue for
Peace, but only because you think you shall live more securely so, than in War?
For no other, said the Caldeans. But what, replied Cyrus, if more Advantages
should accrue to you by a Peace? That, said they, would make our Joy so much
the greater. Well said he, what is it think you that makes you poor, but only
that you are destress'd for want of a fruitful Soil? True, said they. Would you
then, quoth Cyrus, be willing to pay as much Tribute as other Armenians do,
provided you might manure and till as much Armenian ground as you pleased?
Gladly, replied the Chaldeans, if we could be assured we should not be injured
hereafter. And could you, said he, O King, be content, that so much Ground of
yours as now lies waste should be made Tillage, provided you received a
proportionable Tribute? Yes, said the King of Armenia, I would purchase this
Advantage almost at any Rate; for it would bring a very considerable Addition
to my Revenue. And you, Chaldeans, said he, since you are possessed of fair and
fertile Hills, will you give the Armenians leave to use the same for Pasture,
provided they give you a valuable Consideration? Most readily, answered the
Chaldeans; for that will bring Us in great Profits, without any Labor or Toil
of ours. But would you, O King of Armenia, make use of the Chaldees Pasturage,
if for a small Advantage accruing to them, you your self might reap much
greater Profits? With all my Heart, replied he, provided I might quietly enjoy
the same. Well, said He, and may you not enjoy this Pasture-ground without
Danger or Disturbance, if you have the Advantage of the Hill-Tops? Yes, said
he. But we are very well assured, said the Caldeans, if they be Masters of
these Mountains, we shall be so far from enjoying their Land quietly, that we
shall not be able in safety to manure our Own. But what, said he, now, if these
Mountains should contribute to your safety? That would make very well for Us,
said they. True, said the King of Armenia, but I protest, it would make little
for our Advantage if they should be again possessed of the Mountains,
especially being immured and fortified as now they are. Thus then, quoth Cyrus,
will I deal with you, These Mountains shall be given up to neither of you, but
I my self will be there Commander in Chief: and if either of you wrong the
other, I will espouse the Cause of the injured Party.

Now when both sides had heard this his Resolution, they praised it extremely,
concluding it was that only means whereby to establish a firm Peace. Hereupon
they gave and received Hostages interchangeably; and came to these Terms of
Agreement. That both Parties should use a Conditions of Peace between the
Armenians and Caldeans.
common Freedom each with other. That they should promote mutual Marriages.
That they should use Tillage and Pasturage indifferently. And in Fine, That
they should mutually assist each other with their joint Forces, if either
Nation were at any time invaded. Thus were matters at this time transfacted.
And the Articles of this Treaty now concluded on, remain in full force, even at
this Day, betwixt the King of Armenia and the Caldeans. As soon as these
Conditions of Peace were ratified and consummate, both Parties readily
assisted, and jointly contributed Necessaries for the carrying on and finishing
the Fort, which they looked upon as a Common Bulwark and Defense to both
Nations.

When the Evening was come, Cyrus entertained at Supper both Parties, being now
in perfect Amity each with other: And as they sat together, one of the Caldeans
began to this Effect. These Terms of Agreement cannot but be very desirable and
pleasing to all the rest of our Countrymen, save only such as live by pickering
and robbing, who neither know what belongs to Tillage, nor can apply themselves
to it, being always accustomed to lead their Lives in War. They are constantly
upon the hunt for Pillage and Plunder; and many a time have they taken pay of
the King of India, (who is famed for a mighty wealthy Monarch) and served
Astyages as Mercenary Soldiers. And why will they not, quoth Cyrus, serve me
in the same Quality at this time? For I will allow them as fair a stipend as
any Man ever did, that paid them best. They accepted his Proposals; and
assured him, that many would be very willing to serve Him.

Matters being thus adjusted; and Cyrus understanding that the Caldeans sent
frequent dispatches to the King of India, and withal remembering that there had
been Spies sent from thence, first into Media, to pry into, and discover their
Designs; and afterward into their Enemies Country, to inform themselves what
Circumstances they were in, he was ambitious that the Indian King should know
what he had done. So he spoke to them to this Effect. Tell me, O King of
Armenia, and you Caldeans, if Cyrus consults about sending an Ambassador to the
King of India.
I should from hence dispatch a Messenger with Instructions to the Indian King,
would you join with him any of your Deputies who might both conduct him in his
way, and also assist him in procuring from that King a Grant of what I request?
For I could wish my Treasure were yet more augmented, that I might be in a
Condition not only to pay my Soldiers liberally, but also to compensate their
Services with proportionable Honors and Rewards. On these Considerations I
would amass together as much Treasure as possibly I could. For tho I know I
shall have need of it, yet, because I now look upon you as Friends and Allies,
I would as gladly spare yours, as I would willingly receive a supply from the
King of India, if he would furnish me with it. The Messenger therefore (whom I
expect you should conduct in his Journey, and assist in his Embassay) shall
upon his Arrival there, make his Address to this purpose. To you, O King of
India, has Cyrus sent me, with an Express to acquaint you that he needs a
present supply of Money, because he expects yet another Army from Persia; (for
so in truth I do, said he.) Provided therefore you will furnish him with as
much as conveniently you can, he declares, that if God crown his Actions with
Success, he will endeavor so to approve himself to you, that you shall have
Reason to confess, you did then really consult your own Interest, when you
complied with, and gratified Him. With these Instructions I shall send away my
Envoy; but for your own you may Commission them to act as you think fit. And if
he send us a supply, we shall be able to expend so much the more magnificently:
but if he refuse, we shall look upon our selves to lie under no manner of
Obligation to Him, but shall be left freely to our own Liberty to take such
Measures, as may, without any regard had of him, conduce most to our Interest
and Advantage. So spoke Cyrus, expecting that the Armenian and Caldean Agents
should represent him after the same manner, as he desired the whole World
should both talk and hear of him. This done, and the Feast ended, they thought
it convenient to betake themselves to their Rest.

The next Day Cyrus sent away his Envoy with these Instructions; the King of
Armenia likewise and the Caldeans appointed Persons to attend him, whom they
esteemed best qualified to solicit for, and also to report of Cyrus things
that were worthy him. After this, Cyrus having now finished the Fort, he put
into it a sufficient Garrison, and furnished it with all things necessary then
constituting a Mede Governor of the Place, (which he knew would be highly
pleasing to Cyaxares) he departed, taking with him not only the Army he brought
thither, but also the additional Forces of the Armenians, together with those
of the Caldeans, to the number of four thousand, who looked upon themselves as
a People of more Bravery and Courage than any of the rest. Now when he was come
into those parts of the Country that were cultivated and well peopled, not one
of all the Armenians, either Man or Woman, but quited their Houses, and came
forth to meet him; expressing their Joy The Armenians Entertainment of Cyrus at
h^s Return.
for this Peace, by bringing and presenting to him whatsoever was of Worth or
Value amongst them. Nor was the King of Armenia dissatisfied hereat, believing
Cyrus would be very well pleased, to be thus nobly received and honored by
All. At last, the Queen of Armenia her self, attended with her Daughters, and
her younger Son, came forth to meet him; who, amongst other rich Presents,
brought with her the Gold, which Cyrus before had refused to accept. Which when
he perceived, he said, You shall never make me a Mercenary Benefactor.
Wherefore, Madam, take this Money to your self, and don't return it again to
the King to be by him horded up and buried; but rather make use of it to
accoutre your Son, and send him forth with an honorable Equipage to the Army.
Secure the Remainder to your self, your Husband, and your Children, that so
you, enjoying thereof, and adorning your selves therewith, may spend your days
in more Gayety and Pleasure. And let it suffice that your Bodies when dead
shall be buried in the Earth. This said, he rode forward, the King of Armenia
himself in Person with all his People attending him, and calling him their
good, their gracious Benefactor, still following him with these Acclamations,
till they had conducted him beyond the Frontiers of their Country. The Armenian
King likewise, having now Peace at home, furnished him with a greater Army.

Thus Cyrus departed, having not only richly supplied himself with present
Treasure, but also (by his gracious deportment) assured to himself a much
greater Store, which he could at any time command, as his Occasions required.
At present he sat down with his Army, and encamped in the Frontiers. The next
day he sent his Army and Money to Cyaxares, (who according to his Promise was
hard at hand,) whilst he, Tygranes, and the Persian Nobility, diverted
themselves with Hunting. Afterward, being come into Media, he distributed
amongst his principal Officers good store of Money, as an Encouragement to
them, to honor and reward such of their Soldiers as they themselves set a
value upon; concluding that the whole Body of the Army must needs be admirable,
if every particular Officer did so discharge his Trust, that those he commanded
should act nothing but what was honorable and brave. Besides, if he himself at
any time knew what would advance Cyrus's Liberality.
the Interest and Grandcur of the Army, he would purchase it at any Rate, and
generously bestow it amongst the most deserving; as fully persuaded, that
whatsoever was great or glorious amongst them, still rendered him so much the
more Illustrious. Now when he had distributed his Largesses among them, in a
full assembly of his Captains, Lieutenants, and other inferior Officers, that
were in Reputation and Esteem, He spoke to this Effect.

Me thinks at this time, my Friends, I discover His Oration to his Captains,
etc.
a kind of cheerful Rejoicing amongst us, I suppose, because we have obtained
so liberal a Supply, that now we have wherewithal to reward those that merit
well, and may also our selves expect to be honored according to our Dignities
and Deserts. Let us then especially recollect by what Steps and Methods we have
gained our selves such considerable Advantages: For if you Measure your own
Actions aright, you will find, that Watching and Labor, and Diligence, and a
resolute withstanding the Enemy, has made you what you are. Wherefore your Duty
it is to acquit you for the future, like men truly valorous and brave: assuring
your selves, that nothing but Obedience, Resolution, and Perseverance in
difficult and dangerous Enterprises, can purchase true Pleasure, and
substantial Good.

Now when Cyrus perceived how vigorous his Soldiers were; their Bodies robust
and strong to undergo the Toils of War; their Souls truly generous, and daring
to despise the Enemy; well skilled in what belonged to their particular Armor;
and all of them freely disposed entirely to obey their Commanders: very
desirous he was, upon these Accounts, immediately to execute some Design or
other against the Enemy. For he knew that by lingering and delay, the noblest
Projects, even of the bravest Generals, are often baffled and defeated.
Besides, he saw Heats and Animosities fomented in the Army, through the
Ambition of some, and Jealousy of others; for which reason he thought it the
best Policy to bring them without delay into the Enemies Country: having learnt
by Experience, that common Dangers, even among Soldiers, hinder their
Affections each to other. For in such Case no man envies the glittering Armor
of one, or repines at the Ambition of another; but do equally commend and
congratulate one another Success, believing that they are all jointly
concerned to procure the Advancement of the common Good. First then, he
furnished out, and marshaled his Army after the best and most sightly manner he
could. This done, he assembled together his Colonels, Captains, Lieutenants
and Ensigns (for these were free-Officers, and not enrolled in the ordinary
Lists of Soldiers; yet when they were to wait, upon the General for his
Commands, or to inform him in any particular, the Army was not, therefore left
at random, but allthings were plausibly managed by inferior Officers, who
commanded some perhaps twelve, some six in a Party.) Now as soon as these (...)
prime Commanders were met, Cyrus took them into his Tent, and not only
demonstrated to them what Order and Discipline was; but also thoroughly informed
them wherein particularly consisted the Strength of their Allies. And when he
had raised in them an earnest desire of entering presently upon Action, he sent
them back to their respective Charges, there to teach every Man in his proper
Province, what they had learned of him; and endeavor to kindle in them All, a
Zeal heartily to espouse and pursue this War, that so the whole Army may march
out with all imaginable Cheerfulness, and carly in the Morning appear before
Cyaxares his Gates. They immediately departed, and did as he commanded. And the
next Morning, by break of Day, came and presented themselves before the Palace
Royal. Then Cyrus with his Principal Officers entering the Court, addressed
himself to Cyaxares in this manner. His Oration concerning invading Assyrid.


I know very well, O Cyaxares, quoth he, that the point I shall now speak to,
has been long since approved of by You, as well as by Me: but You perhaps may
be unwilling to declare your Thoughts, lest possibly, if you should mention the
leading forth our Armies, it might be suspected you were weary of the Expense
of maintaining them at home, since therefore you are pleased to be Silent, I
will undertake to manage this Concern in your behalf as well as my own. We are
all then resolved upon the point, since we are so completely furnished, not to
suffer your Enemies to invade your Country before we give them Battle, nor will
we sit down securely here and wait their coming; but immediately march out into
their Territories. For so long as we remain within your Dominions, we cannot
(tho sore against our Wills) but spoil and impoverish them: Whereas, were we
advanced into the Enemies Quarters, we should pillage them with Pleasure and
Satisfaction. Besides, you now maintain us at a vast Charge; whereas did we
make our Enemies Country the seat of the War, we would maintain our selves at
their Expense. I confess, did greater Dangers threaten us there, then here, we
might have some color to choose the safest Place. But since they will
certainly be the same Men, whether we expect their coming and fight them here,
to whether we pass their Frontiers, and meet them there: and we our selves
shall be equally able to oppose them, whether we stay here to receive them, or
march out against them, and give them Battle. Nay, in truth, we shall find our
Men much more forward and daring, if we be the Invaders, and don't seem afraid
to look the Enemy in the Face. And they likewise will so much the more dread
us, when they understand we don't sit at home like a faint-hearted People for
fear of them; but upon the first Notice of their coming against us, we
presently march out to meet and fight them; not lingering at home till our own
Country be harassed and destroyed, but prevent that by first laying theirs
waste. Now, I conceive, that to make them more timorous, or our selves more
bold, will be to us a matter of very great Consequence; for by this means, I
reckon the Danger on our side will be less, and on the Enemies considerably
greater. Besides, it is a common saying with my Father, and with you also, which
every one else likewise takes for granted, that a Man may better judge of the
Issue of a Battle, by the Courage and Resolution of the Hearts, than by the
bodily Strength of the Combatants. So spoke Cyrus; and Cyaxares thus ^eply'd.

I would neither have you, O Cyrus, not the rest of the Pers^ns entertain any
such Thoughts of me, as if I quartered you here grudgingly, and with regret.
Nevertheless, I esteem it most advisable, in every respect, that we immediately
fall into the Enemies Country. Since then, quoth Cyrus, we are both upon the
same point, let us be all in a readiness with Bagg and Baggage; and if the
divine Sacrifices quickly favor our Design, let us as speedily set forward.
This said, having given the Soldiers charge to prepare themselves, he
sacrificed first to King Jupiter, (...)
then to the rest of the Gods, beseeching them that they would be propitious
and favorable to them, that they would vouchsafe to go forth with their
Armies, guide, succor, and assist them, and in all things direct them for
their Advantage and Good. He implored likewise the Assistance of the Tutelar
Demi Gods, Inhabitants and Guardians of Media. When he had fortunately finished
his Sacrifice, and the whole Army was now assembled on the Frontiers;
encouraged by Auspicious Presages, he invaded the Enemies Cyrus invades Assyria.
Land. No sooner had he passed the Marches, but he poured out Propitiatory
Offerings upon the Earth, and by Sacrifice appeased the Gods and Demigods,
Patrons, and Inhabitants of Assyria. This done, he sacrificed yet once more to
Jupiter, the Protector of his Nation: nor did he (...)
neglect any other God that came in his Way.

All things having thus prosperously succeeded, the Foot presently advanced by
easy Marches, and encampt; whilst the Horse, making, frequent Inroads into the
Country, brought off abundance of Spoil and Booty. Furnished thus with store of
Provison, they dislodged thence, and encamped farther, to wait the Enemies
coming, still ravaging the Country all along as they went. Now when Cyrus had
Intelligence that the Enemy was advanced within ten Days March, It Is high time,
quoth he, Cyaxares, to set forward and meet them; that we neither give occasion
to them, nor to our own Soldiers, to think we are afraid to go out against
them; but rather let us evidence to them both, that we come with all
Cheerfulness and Resolution to fight them. This Cyaxares approved of; and
henceforward they moved always in Battalia, making longer or easier Marches as
they thought fit. They supped still by Daylight. They never made any Fires in
the Night time within the Camp, but without the Camp they did, that by the
Advantage of the Light thereof; they might be able, themselves undiscerned, to
discover whether any one came toward them in the Night. They would oftentimes
kindle Fires behind the Camp, to amuse the Enemies, so that now and then their
Scouts would fall in among our Out-Guards, persuading themselves by the
distance of the Fire, that the Camp was a great way off.

Now when both Armies drew near each other, the Assyrians and their
Confederates (a thing practiced even at this Day among those Barbarian Kings)
fortified themselves with a Trench; which they always do, when ever they lie
encamped, and that with a great deal of ease, by reason of their vast Numbers.
For they know very well that a Troop of Horsemen (especially Barbarians) is
very troublesome and unserviceable in the Night; their Horses being always tied
by the Feet to the Manger: so that upon any sudden surprise, they would find it
very difficult to unloose and bridle them, and no less troublesome to saddle and
harness them, and at last to mount them, and ride through the Camp, utterly
impossible. All this considered, they, as well as other Barbarous Nations, use
thus to entrench themselves; believing that being so a Persian Word: it
contained three Furlongs, near four Miles English.
strongly fenced and fortified, they cannot be obliged to fight but when they
please. Whilst this was doing, the Armies were advanced somewhat near one
another, not distant above a (...)
Persian Mile, the Assyrians lying encamped, as has been said, within a strong
Entrenchment, but very open and exposed to view. But Cyrus pitched his Tents in
as close and secret a Place as he could, raising up Rampires and Mounts of
Earth afront his Camp, knowing that all Warlike Preparations, the more
surprising they are, the more do they terrify and amaze the Enemy. So for that
Night, after their Sentinels were set, both Armies betook themselves to their
Repose.

The Day following, the King of Assyria, Graesus, and the rest of the Captains,
kept their Army quiet within their Trenches. But Cyrus and Cyaxares stood in
Battalia, ready to fight, expecting when the Enemy would come out. But when
they knew for certain that the Enemy would not quit their Trenches, nor come to
Battle that Day, Cyaxares, calling to him Cyrus, and the rest of the chief
Captains, spoke unto them as follows. I think it advisable, my Friends, that we
march in this posture, imbattled as we are, to our Enemies Trenches, and let
them know we are very desirous to fight them. For if upon this, they refuse to
come forth against us, our Men will attaque them with greater Vigor and
Courage; and they seeing us so resolute and daring, will be so much the more
disheartened. Thus he delivered his Opinion. Then Cyrus. For Heavens sake, said
he, I beseech you Cyaxares, let us attempt no such thing. For if we should
march out now, and show our selves to the Enemy, as you advise us, they will
look upon us with a kind of contempt, not fearing us in the least, because they
know themselves so securely fortified against our Assaults, that nothing can
hurt them: then if we draw off again without effecting any thing, they will
presently disdain and scorn us, seeing us so much inferior to them in Number;
and the next Day sally out upon us with greater Resolution and Assurance. But
as Matters now stand, knowing we are so near, yet not seeing us, believe me,
they are not forward to despise us, but wonder what we mean, and I dare assure
you we are very much the Subject of their Debates. Whereas, if they come forth
on their own accord, it will then behoove us not only to let them see, but feel
what we are, falling upon them immediately in that very Place where we would
gladly have fought them before. When Cyrus had thus spoke, not only All the
rest, but even Cyaxares himself applauded his Counsel. Then, after having
supped, the Watch being set, and Fires kindled before the Camp, they retired to
their Rest.

The next Morning early, Cyrus, crowned with a Chaplet, came forth to
sacrifice, commanding the rest of the Persian Nobility to appear in the Cyrus
his Oration to the Nobility of Persia.
same dress, and attend at the Solemnity. These Ceremonies performed, he spoke
to the Assembly to this Effect. The Gods, my Friends, as the Soothsayers
declare, and I my self am verily persuaded, foreshew a Battle at hand, and not
only promise us Victory, but by the Sacrifices to assure us of Safety. Now for
me to exhort you how to behave your selves in this juncture, I suppose will be
needless; for I am abundantly satisfied you know that as well as I, having
already heard and studied, and still hearing and practicing this, no less than
my self; so that herein you may justly pretend to instruct others. But if you
are yet to seek, if you are yet to be informed, hearken to me. These our
new-listed Associates, if we have a Zeal to make them like our selves, must be
put in mind for what end Cyaxares has maintained us, what kind of Exercises we
have been trained up in, to what purpose we have animated and provoked them to
declare themselves ready to share with us the Danger and Fortune of the War.
You must likewise remember them that this is the Day which will signalize every
Man according to his Merits. For it is not to be admired at, if they that begin
late to learn, stand in need of one to encourage and advise them. But well it
is when Men behave themselves valiantly, tho quickened thereunto and excited by
others. Besides, your encouraging them will be an evident Proof of your own
Worth. For he that can upon such Emergencies as these, infuse Resolution and
Valor into others, may very justly believe that he himself is already a most
absolute Master of the same. But if he be only a Remembrancer to himself, and
his Monitions have no further Influence, he cannot reasonably believe but that
he is yet half way short of Perfection. Upon this Account it is that I don't
direct my Discourse to them, but leave that Charge wholly to you, that they
also may endeavor so to acquit themselves as to be approved by you. For you
are near them, and converse with them, every Man in his proper Station. And
know this, that so long as you convince them that you are bold and courageous,
so long do you teach them to behave themselves valiantly, not by Precept only,
but Example. This Discourse he closed up with his Commands that they should sit
down to dinner crowned as they were, and after they had offered their
Drink Offerings, return to the Army with their Garlands on their Heads.

After they were departed, He immediately sent for the 1 Rere-Officers, and
spoke to them (...)
as follows. Countrymen and Friends, you also are of the Peerage of Persia,
choice Men reputed, as in other Respects equal to the best, so in regard of
your Age wiser than any; For which cause you are entrusted with a Charge no
less honorable than theirs who command in the Front of the Battle. For
marching as you do, in the Rere, by observing and exciting those that do well,
you animate them still with new Courage; and those that are lazy and unactive,
by having an Eye upon them, you make them ashamed of their Cowardice. And
indeed the Authority of your Age, as well as your Garb, makes Victory, if to
any, due to you. If therefore any of the Leaders of the Vanguard call upon you
and encourage you to follow them, be sure you obey them; and that this may not
seem a lessening of you, do you exhort and quicken them to lead on more briskly
against the Enemy. For the present you may depart hence to Dinner, that done,
repair all of ye to your Respective Commands, crowned with Chaplets, as the
rest of the Officers are. And these were the Instructions that Cyrus enjoined
his Captains to observe.

The Assyrians, after Dinner, boldly quitted their Intrenchment, and with great
shows of Resolution and Gallantry were drawn up in Battalia. The King himself
marshaled them, and riding up and down the Army in his Chariot, encouraged The
King of Assyria's Oration to his Army.
them with this Exhortation. Men of Assyria, This is the Day wherein you are to
signalize your selves by your Valor. For now you must fight for your Lives,
for the Country wherein you were born, the Houses wherein you were bred, your
Wives, Children, and all your Possessions. If you come off with Victory, you
will remain as before, Lords and Proprietors of all this: But if you are
conquered, assure your selves, at the same time you give up all into the
Enemies Hands. You therefore that would gladly return Victors, bear up bravely
against them. For it is an unaccountable piece of Folly in them that hope for
Conquest, to expose the naked, unarmed, and defenseless parts of their Bodies
to the Enemies pursuit. And no less absurd is it for any one, that would
willingly save his Life, therefore to betake himself to flight; as knowing that
the Conquerours are they that survive; but for Fugitives and Renegades, they
oftener dye than those that stand the heat and brunt of the Battle. But he is a
most inexcusable Sot, that is desirous to heap up Riches, yet is content to be
vanquished at an easy Rate. For who does not know that the Victors not only
secure what is their own, but seize also upon the Wealth and Treasures of the
Conquered: whereas they that are overcome, at once enslave themselves, and
forfeit all they have. So spoke the King of Assyria:

Then Cyaxares sent to Cyrus, to let him know he thought it high time to march
out against the Enemy. For, said he, although few of them have yet quitted
their Trenches, yet by that time we are advanced up to them, they will be very
numerous. Let us not therefore lie lingering here, till they are able to
overpower us in Number; but fall on and attacque them now whilst we believe we
may obtain an easy Victory over them. To this Cyrus replied; Assure your self
of this Cyaxares, that unless we engage with, and defeat the major part of
them, they will certainly report, that their Numbers so terrified us, that we
durst only encounter them in small Parties; and consequently will not at all
look upon themselves to be overcome; So that you will be obliged to try the
Fortune of another Battle, wherein possibly they may use other and better
Policy than now they have done, by susfering themselves so to be (...)
shut up in their Holds, that we may fight them in what Numbers we please. With
this Answer the Messengers departed.

Now Crysantas the Persian, and others of the Nobility were newly arrived at
the Camp, having brought in with them some Deserters, whom Cyrus examined
concerning the Enemies Actions and Designs. They told him, that they were
already marched out of their Trenches armed; that their King at the Head of
them was setting them in Battalia; and that as they had received it from those
that heard him, he encouraged them still as they came forth, with many pressing
and effective Exhortations. Then said Crysantas; what if you, O Cyrus, should,
whilst you have yet Opportunity, call your Soldiers together, and by some
pathetick Oration stir up in them brave and heroic Thoughts? To whom Cyrus
replied, Trouble not Cyrus his Discourse to Crysantas, etc.
your self, good Crysantas, at these Monitory Discourses of the King Assyria;
for be they never so vehement and persuasive, they cannot in one day make
Cowards valiant: nor teach Men the perfect use of the Bow, that have not yet
been trained up in Archery: nor are they powerful enough to make those good
Darters, or complete Horsemen, who have not by frequent Practice mastered the
same: nor teach men to undergo Hardships, whose Bodies have never been inured
thereunto. But said Crysantas, it is sufficient, O Cyrus, if your Exhortations
prevail with them to show themselves more courageous. Can there then, quoth
Cyrus, be such Efficacy in a single Oration, that the bare pronouncing of it,
shall not only make the Hearers ashamed of doing any thing that is base and
infamous, but also excite in them noble Resolutions, for the Love of Glory, to
undergo all manner of Toil, and encounter the most desperate Dangers, fixing
them firmly in this Opinion, that to dye bravely in Battle is much more
preferable, than to save ones Life by an inglorious Flight. Besides, to imprint
in Men's Minds such generous Thoughts as these in lasting and indeleble
Characters, is it not think you necessary that the Law should make such
Provision for valiant, worthy Men, that they may live in a state of Freedom and
Honor; but Cowards may be doomed to an abject, wretched and uncomfortable
Life? And further, I hold it very requisite, that Teachersand Governors
preside over them, who may by Example as well as Precept so prevail upon them,
as to fix in them this Opinion. That Men of Valor and Honor are truly the
most happy; but Cowards and Villains the most miserable People in the World.
For indeed they that would rather signalize themselves by their own good
Discipline, than take Advantage of the Enemies Fear, ought to be thus qualified
and Soldiers.
instructed. Now when just marching out to Battle (for upon such a surprise
many of them forget their old Instructions) if it were possible then by a
tumultuary Oration, to make them immediately warlike Men; how easy would it
be, both to learn and to teach the greatest and Fortitude.
noblest Virtue that Mankind is capable of. I, for my part, could hardly
confide in these Men's Resolutions (though they have been trained up and
exercised with us) but that I see you ready, in your own Persons, to give them
Examples what they ought to be, and also able to inform them wherein they are
deficient. And to me, Crysantas, it is no less wonderful, that the graceful
Delivery of an Oration should make raw undisciplined Men truly valiant, than
that a tuneful Melody sweetly sung, should make them complete Musicians, who
are utterly unacquainted with the Art.

Whilst matters were thus debating, Cyaxares sent again to Cyrus, to let him
know he did very ill to make such delays, and blamed him for not marching
directly against the Enemy. But Cyrus sent back the Messengers with this
Answer: Acquaint Cyaxares, quoth he, that there is not yet a sufficient number
of our Enemies come forth of their Camp: and this be sure you tell him in the
hearing of the whole Army. Nevertheless seeing it is his Pleasure, I will
instantly march. This said, having first made his Supplications to the Gods, he
led forth his Army. Now when he began to lead them on a great pace, he himself
marching in the Head of them, his Soldiers all followed him in Battalia, as
having by long Experience and Practice perfectly learned to keep such Order.
They marched on briskly too, because there was a kind of Emulation amongst
them; their Body's were hardened and inured to Travel; and all their Leaders
were principal Commanders. They advanced likewise with a great deal of
Cheerfulness, because they were expert and knowing. For they understood well
enough what they had learned long before, that it was the easiest and safest
way to charge the Enemy close, especially if they were Archers, Darters, or
Horsemen. Whilst therefore they were yet out of Arrows-shot, Cyrus gave them
the signal, Jupiter, our Protector and Leader. Which, when it had passed
through the Army, and back again to him, he began a solemn Hymn to Castor and
Pollux, in which the whole Host very devoutly bare a part with him, singing
with a loud Voice. For they that at such a juncture are thus superstitiously
given, stand so much the less in fear of Men. This Solemnity being ended, the
Nobles marched on cheerfully together, as being perfectly instructed in the Art
of War; And looking round about one upon another, they called their Friends and
Followers by name, encouraging them by the frequent Repetition of these Words,
(now beloved Friends, now valiant Fellow Soldiers) to bear up briskly against
the Enemy. Which when they in the Rere heard, they likewise animated and
exhorted their Leaders to march on boldly. So that the whole Army of Cyrus was
full of Alacrity, Emulation, Vigor, Resolution, Exhortation, Temperance and
Obedience, than which nothing can be a more terrible Sight to an Enemy. But of
the Assyrian Army, those that came first out of their Intrenchment to begin the
Battle as soon as the Persian Host drew near, mounted their Chariots, and
retired into the main Body. Their Archers, Darters, and Slingers discharged at
the Enemy sooner than they could possibly reach them. Now when the Persians
were so far advanced that they trod upon the Enemies Arrows, Cyrus said with a
loud Voice: Most valiant Captains, let some one amongst you immediately step
forth, and by some notable Exploit animate and encourage the rest. Which Words
passing from them to others, some out of a courageous Forwardness and Zeal to
fight, began to run, and were seconded by all the rest of the Army. Cyrus also
himself, forgetting his walking-March, ran now at the Head of them, crying out.
Who follows? Who is the most daring? Who first kills his Man? Which the rest
hearing, did the same; So that the whole Army resounded with this pathetick
Exhortation, Who will follow? Who dares be courageous? Thus warmed and excited,
the Persians fell on, and charged the Enemy fiercely, who not being able to
maintain their Ground, turned their Backs, and fled to their Rampires. The
Persians pursued them closely to the very entrance of their Cyrus his Victory
over the Persians.
Camp, where they slew many of them, thronging hard one upon another. Those
that fell into the Trenches, they leaped down upon them and slew them Horse and
Man. Some of their Chariots likewise in their flight were forced into the
Ditches: Which when the Median Cavalry perceived, they fell furiously upon the
Enemies Horse, and made them give way. Hereupon began a desperate pursuit both
of Horse and Men, with a mighty slaughter of both. The Assyrians within the
Camp, who were got up to the top of the Rampire, had neither Will nor Power to
shoot at those that made such Havoc of them; So dreadful was the Spectacle,
and so astonished were they with Fear. Nay presently, when they understood some
of the Persians had by a breach forcibly entered their Intrenchments, they
quitted their Posts, and fled. Now when the Wives of the Assyrians and their
Confederates saw them fly even in their own Camp, they skrieck'd out, and ran
up and down like People distracted, Matrons as well as Virgins rent their
Garments, tore their own Flesh, and begged of those they met with, not to run
away and leave them helpless; but to protect their Children, their Wives and
themselves. At last, the Kings also, with a Reserve of the most trusty Men they
had, came to the very entrance of the Camp, and mounting the Rampires, both
fought themselves in Person, and likewise encouraged others so ^o do, Cyrus
understanding what was done, and fearing lest, if they should violently break
in upon them, they being inferior in Number, might suffer by them; He sounded
a retreat, commanding them upon their Obedience to draw out of Arrow-shot.
There one might have seen how admirably the Nobility had been educated: For
they not only readily obeyed themselves, but immediately commanded the rest to
do the like. And no sooner were they out of the Enemies reach, but every man
ranged himself in his proper Place, as easily and readily as in any Dance,
because they all knew perfectly their own Stations. His Orderly Retreat.


The End of the Third Book.
Xenophon's Institution, AND Life of CYRUS the Great. BOOK IIII.
WHEN Cyrus had kept his Forces together some time, and declared that his Men
were in a Posture to fight, if the Enemy would quit their Trenches; which none
doing, he withdrew his men at such a distance from them, as he judged
convenient for his Purpose. When having pitched his Camp, and set his Watch,
and sent abroad his Scouts, he himself appearing in the midst of them, made a
Speech to the Soldiers that were assembled to this Effect. In the first place,
I praise the Deities of Persia, and I suppose you do the same, that we have
gained the Victory Cyrus his Gratitude to God and Man.
with safety and security. And for this, it becomes us to pay our
Acknowledgments to the Gods according to our Abilities. And for you, I cannot
but commend you All. For what is passed, has been purchased by you very
honorably. But when I have inquired of such as are concerned, what each has
merited, then my Endeavors shall be to proportion Acknowledgments and Rewards
to each, according to his Rank. For Chrysantas's part indeed, next in command
of the Cohorts to my self, I have no need to enquire of others, for I my self
am Witness how he behaved himself. For all the Services that ye all did, he
performed; and when I called him off by name, although he was prepared to
attaque the Enemy, yet notwithstanding he obeyed my call, and left undone what
he was about to do, to do what he was commanded. For he not only drew off his
own Forces, but gave his Example and my Commands to the rest; in such sort, as
he drew off the Cohorts out of shot of the Arrows, before the Enemy could so
much as suppose we would retire, and yet they could bend their Bows, and dart
their Javelins at us; whence it came, that he brought himself and his men off
safe, by his Obedience. Some others of you indeed I discern wounded, of whom,
when I have examined what time they received their Wounds, I shall then deliver
my Opinion. But for Chrysantas, as he is stout and expert in fight, and knowing
both to command and to obey, I shall confer on him at present the Honor of a
Tribune, and as God shall do better for us, we may for him; and for you all;
(says he) I would have you taught by his Experience: for Images of what we have
seen pass in this Fight, ought always to dwell upon your Minds, that so ye may
determine with your selves, whether you are to maintain your Lives with Honor,
or by Flight? And which do better, they who stoutly stand to their Arms, or
they who basely run away? This Pleasure we owe to a Victory. For of these
things we shall judge best, when we have made Trial, and the Scene is yet fresh
before our Eyes. And as you duly reflect on these things, you will commence
more experienced. Now like Men acceptable to the Gods, magnanimous, yet
moderate, furnish out a Banquet, sacrifice to the Gods, sing Poeans, and take
care, that whatever is commanded may be put in Practice. This said, he got up
on Horseback, and rode to Cyaxares: with whom, after he had, as was fit,
shared the Pleasure in common between them of mutual Congratulation, and had
informed himself of what past there, and enquired if they had need of him, he
returned to his Army. After which, his Soldiers having supped, and set their
Watch, they composed themselves to Rest.

But the Assyrians, whose Prince fell, and with him the Flower of their Force,
were all in great Dejection, many also were the Deserters by Night. Which when
Craesus and his Companions discovered, they were perplexed, for all things were
in ill Plight. But what afflicted them most was, that that Nation, whose Army
had the Van, should neither have Force or Counsels The flight of the Assyrians
and their Fellows by Night.
left sufficient to maintain it self. Therefore betaking themselves to flight,
they abandoned their Camp by Night. As soon as Day once broke, and the
Desolation in the Enemies Camp was perceived, Cyrus strait drew his Forces
thither; Wherein the Enemy had left many Sheep and Beeves, besides many Wagons
laden with Provisions. Moreover, the Medes also, who were under the Conduct of
Cyaxares, all passed over and dined in the Enemies Camp. Which once over, Cyrus
having assembled the Officers of his Cohorts, spoke to them after this manner.
What, and how great (my Soldiers) are the Favors which Heaven has vouchsased
us? For ye your selves see, that even an Apprehension of you has put the Enemy
to flight. But they who have deserted a fortified Camp, how will they think you
be able to stand their Ground, when they see us in the Field? And they who
could not bear the Shock, when as yet they had not tried your Force, how will
they sustain it now that they are altogether vanquished, and reduced by you to
many Straits? And they of whom the bravest are cut off, how shall their Refuse
be able to dispute with you? Here one interposing; Why therefore, says he, do
we delay the pursuit Cyrus consults how to pursue the Enemy.
of them, when such Encouragements are fairly offered us? To whom Cyrus; We
stand in need of Horse for that Matter, says he; For the choicest of the Enemy,
and whom it would be most advantageous to cut off or surprise, are retired with
their Horse. Those indeed by the Gods Assistance we may put to flight, but we
are not able to take Prisoners in the pursuit. Why therefore say they, do you
not repair to Cyaxares, and consult him in the Matter? Do you all therefore,
says he, attend me together, that he may understand these Motions are with the
good liking of us All. They all then attended Cyrus, and presented to him what
they thought was convenient, upon this Occasion.

Cyaxares, partly because he somewhat envied what Advices first came from them,
partly because he thought he should do better, not to expose himself again to
Hazard (for he then indulged his Pleasure, and many of the Medes seemed to do
the same) answered them in this Cyaxares is of Opinion against the Chase.
manner. Among other People, O Cyrus, especially you Persians, as I have both
heard and seen, make it your Aim to avoid the immoderate Use of all Pleasures;
But for my part, it seems to me more expedient, that in the free Enjoyment of
the greatest Pleasures, every one should show a Moderation. But what greater
Pleasure can arrive to us at any time, than that of good Fortune? Which proves
to be our Case at this Time. If therefore, when good Fortune smiles upon us, we
wisely maintain the same, we may perchance grow old in Happiness without
intermission. But if what we enjoy affords us no satisfaction, but we go to
pursue good Fortune in all its shapes, take care, that that be not our Fate,
which is of many that put to Sea, who, transported with their good Luck, make
no end of sailing till they are lost. And so in like manner, it fares with many
Conquerours, who, greedy of new Victories, at length come to lose their share
in the old. For if our Enemies that are o'er-run were fewer then we, it might
perhaps be safe to pursue a less Number; but I would have you to consider well,
with how small a part of them we all encountered in fight successfully. Those of
them who never fought, if we force them not to fight, through inexperience and
sloth, will retire without knowing what either we or themselves are able to do.
But if they esteem themselves in no less danger in their retreat, then if they
fought, beware lest you press them to behave themselves with greater bravery
than they intended. For you cannot imagine that you are more ambitious of
taking Prisoners their Wives and Children, than they are of preserving them
from being taken. For even wild Hogs, when once you have set sight on them,
haste away with their Young, be their Herds never so great: But let any one of
their Young be hunted, and the Dam, though she be single, will turn back and
push the Hunter. Now while we are under Covert, they give us the Opportunity of
drawing forth, as out of a Storehouse, and engaging them with such Bodies as
we think good; but if we shall encounter them in open Field, and they dividing
their Force, shall hem us in, partly on the Front, as it happened even now,
partly on the right and left Wing, and partly in the Rear, beware lest each of
us have occasion for many Eyes and Hands at once. Besides, says he, indeed I
would not oblige the Medes, who are indulging their Pleasures, to enter upon so
hazardous a March. Which Words Cyrus taking hold of. You would oblige none of
them, says he, but permit me those at least for this Service, who would be
Volunteers. Perchance Cyrus his sly Artifice, to cheat Cyaxares.
our return may pay its thanks to you, and the rest of your Friends. For we
purpose not to pursue the gross of the Enemies Forces, for what means have we
to come up to them. But if we meet with any Straglers from the main Body,
lagging behind, as tired in the March, those we may return with to you. And
even you your self are to bear in mind, how long a march we undertook at your
entreaty, that we might perform a thing acceptable to you. It is but just
therefore that you gratify us so far in return, that we our selves may have
some Profit of our Journey, and may not all have an Eye to your Coffers. To
which Cyaxares; If any one, says he, of his own free Will be inclined to follow
thee, you have my leave to draw him out. Send therefore some one of your trusty
Fellows to represent your Pleasure. Come on, says he, whomsoever of these you
have a mind to, take him. There was by chance a Mede present, who sometime had
given out, that he was Cyrus, Cousin, and had been so saluted by him. Cyrus
therefore forthwith, This Man (says he) suffices me: He has good leave (says
the other) let him follow you. And do you (says he) proclaim to all, that
whoever will, may go with Cyrus. Cyrus therefore embracing his Men, upon his
being drawn out, strait said, Deal now ingenuously, did you speak truth, when
you said the very sight of me fed you with a secret Pleasure? Surely, said that
Mede, I will never leave you, since you put me in mind of that. Then added
Cyrus: Will you take care to represent this, to move the rest of your
Companions? He calling Jove to witness, Most certainly, replied he, till I have
effected what will make me welcome to you. When therefore he had offered very
readily many Encouragements to those Medes that were detached by Cyaxares, he
added among other things, that he would never be wanting to so brave and very
lovely a Person; and, which was above all, to one descended from the Gods.

While these things were managed thus by Cyrus, it fell out, not without a
Divine Providence, that Ambassadors appeared from the Hyrcanians. The
Hyrcanians Embassy to Cyrus.
Now the Hyrcanians are a People bordering upon the Assyrians, a Nation indeed
of no great extent. For which cause they were subject to the Assyrian Yoke, but
yet good Cavalry they ever were esteemed, and are so still. Wherefore the
Assyrians made use of them in the same Nature, as the Spartans of the Scirites,
employing them constantly in all Fatigues and desperate Services. And at this
very time they had it in charge, to bring up the Reserve, which made us to the
number of about a thousand Horse. So that if any Danger pressed them in the Rear,
they were to receive the Shock. And these Hyrcanians, who marched in the Rear,
brought up also their Carriages and Families in the Rear. For many of the
Asiatick People in their Expeditions use to carry their whole Families along
with them, which Custom the Hyrcanians also observed in this very Expedition,
when it came to their Minds, what they had suffered from the Assyrians, whose
Prince was now lost, themselves vanquished, their whole Army in great
Apprehensions, their Allies weakened and dispirited: As they weighed these
things with themselves, they thought a fair Opportunity offered in this time of
general Defection, for Cyrus his Forces together in Conjunction with them, to
Charge the Enemy. They send therefore their Ambassadors before to Cyrus, to
whose Name the Fight had given an extraordinary Reputation. They that were
employed, thus represented to Cyrus the Justice of his Hatred to the Assyrians,
and that if he would indeed attaque them at present, they would be both his
Guide and Companions in such an Expedition: They also remembered him, in what
Posture the Affairs of the Enemy were at present, omitting nothing which might
encourage him to undertake the Expedition. But Cyrus demanding of them,
Whether, says he, do ye think, that we may yet be able to reach them before
they are got into their Holds? For we reckon this no less than a great
overthrow, that they have so secretly stole from us. These things he said to
confirm them in their Confidence in him. To which they replied, that it was
feisible even the next day to overtake them, if upon the approach of the
Morning they held themselves ready to march; For that the Enemy advanced
slowly, by reason of their Numbers, and their Carriages, and because they had
watched the foregoing Night; therefore they could make no great Progress in
their Removes. Have ye Cyrus his League with the Hyrcanians.
therefore, says he, any Pledge to assure us of your Fidelity, by which it may
appear to us, that you have been just in what you have reported. We will
forthwith, say they, upon our departure, return you Hostages this Night. Do you
only, calling the Gods to witness, plight us your Faith, and join your right
Hand with ours, that those Assurances you have given us, we may transmit to
others. With these Rites he plighted his Faith, upon their Performances of what
they promised, that he should esteem them in the Rank of his Friends and trusty
Allies, nor should they be of less value with him, than either his Persians, or
the Medes themselves. And at this very instant, we may discern that his Faith
is kept with the Hyrcanians, and that they are no less admitted to Commands,
then those that appear qualified among the Medes or Persians.

Cyrus drew out his Forces, after their Repast, by break of Day, and ordered
them to wait the coming of the Hyrcanians, that so they might march in
Conjunction. Strait all the Persians, as it became them, drew out, and the like
did Tygranes with his Forces. Of the Medes some Several Grounds of the Medes
Inclinations to serve Cyrus.
drew out, because in their Youth they had begun a Friendship with Young Cyrus;
others from their Acquaintance with him, and his Behavior, which they admired,
from their Conversations with him in his Huntings. Others out of Gratitude to
him, for freeing them from their Fears. Others, from a Hope they had conceived,
because Cyrus so evidently excelled all Men in Virtue; therefore also in time
he would be very Great and Fortunate. Others, because they would be something
grateful to him for his Favors showed on them in his Education among the
Medes. Many truly for the many good Offices his Goodness had done for them,
with his Grandfather. Many also, because they saw the Hyrcanians, and a Fame
was spread abroad, that these were to show them the way to the best of their
Spoils, for that very reason went, that they might get by their Journey. So it
was, that almost all the Medes presented themselves, excepting those that
perhaps were left in Cyaxares his Pavilion. For these, with those under their
Rule stayed behind. All the rest with willing and cheerful Minds marched off,
as those who were not compelled to offer their Services, but moved from their
own free Will, and a Desire of obliging. But when they now set forth, he first
adressed to the Medes, and having commended them, he entreated the Gods to
favor them, and them he entreated to be his Captains. Then, that he might
return them his Acknowledgements for their Endeavors, He ordered the Foot to
march before, and them to follow after with the Horse. And accordingly as the
Army lodged, or was posted in their Marches, he ordered that Courriers should
arrive to give them advice from time to time, what Measures they were to take
upon every Occasion.

After this, he ordered the Hyrcanians to lead the way. But they demanding, Why
do you not stay, say they, till we return you Hostages, that so you may proceed
with Assurance of our Fidility? To which Cyrus is said to have made Answer,
Cyrus his brave Herangue.
I truly am of Opinion, that we have Securities for your Fidelity in our own
Hearts and Hands: For we think our selves sufficient, that we have abundant
means in our own Power to recompense you, upon Experience of your Truth: or if
you use Deceit, we take our selves to be of that Ability, that we are not in
the least at your Mercy, but you rather at ours, if it so please the Gods. And
for the Hyrcanians, because you have told us they march in the Rear, as soon as
you shall discern them, signify to us that they are your Countrymen, that they
may taste our Mercy. The Hyrcanians having heard this, marched before to lead
the way as Cyrus had ordered, having the Greatness of his Soul in Admiration,
nor were they any longer in Apprehensions either of the Assyrians, the Lydians,
or the Allies of these, only of this, lest Cyrus by any means should esteem
them of no Importance, whether he had their Assistance or not.

Now when they marched, and that Night came on, it seemed to Cyrus and the
Army, that a great Light as it were from Heaven opened to them, which humbled
them to a Veneration of the Deity, and raised in them a Confidence toward
their Enemies. And because it is but just to believe, that considering the
Dispatch and Expedition of their March, they had proceeded a great way, they
were together with the Evening not far removed from the Hyrcanian Troops. This
when their Courriers once discovered, they brought News to Cyrus, that those
were their Countrymen. This too he himself might be able to judge of, both
because they were posted in the Rear, and from the blaze of their Fires. Then
he dispatching one of these to them, ordered him to tell them, if they were
indeed his Friends, they should strait present themselves all with their right
Hands raised aloft: Some also of his own he joined with them, to whom he gave
in charge, that they should let the Hyrcanians know, that he and his should
demean themselves toward them, as they saw them inclined toward them. Thus
one Messenger of theirs remained with Cyrus, at the same time another was
dispatched to the Hyrcanians.

But in the mean time, while Cyrus was to expect what Measures the Hyrcanians
would take, he ordered the Army to make a Halt. Then Tygranes and the Princes
of the Medes being brought to him, he demanded what was to be done. To whom he
spoke thus; This next, says he, is the Troop of Hyrcanians, to whom one of the
Courriers is dispatched, and together with him some of ours, to signify to
them, that if they are our Friends indeed, all of them should meet us with
their right Hands lifted up on high. Wherefore, if they accord to this
Condition, let every one of you in his Place, embrace them with your right
Hands, and so give assurance to them. But if they should make ready their Arms,
or prepare for flight, let it be your Endeavors that none of these Enemies
escape. To this Effect were Cyrus's Commands. In the mean time, upon hearing
the Courriers, the Hyrcanians were filled with Joy; and getting up nimbly on
their The Hyrcanians pass over to Cyrus his Camp.
Horses, presented and stretched out their Hands for the Signal, which the
Medes and Persians in return, received them with their right Hands, and gave
them Assurance. Then Cyrus; We truly, says he, have a Confidence in you
Hyrcanians, and it becomes you in like manner to have the same in us. But
acquaint us, in the first Place, how far is the Place off, where the
Headquarters and entire Forces are? They replied, that the distance was
somewhat greater then a Mile from thence. To which Cyrus; Go you then, says he,
ye Persians, Medes, Hyrcanians, (for now even you also I style my Friends and
Allies) you ought to understand, that our Affairs are in such a Posture, as if
we proceed remisly and with slackness, extraordinary Mischiefs may betide us.
For our Enemies cannot be ignorant of the Cause of our coming. But if pushing
with all our force, we shall with due Courage and Bravery attaque the Enemy,
they will strait appear in the fashion of Slaves and Fugitives, who are found,
some to turn Supplicants, others to run away; others not to have so much
Resolution left them as to run. For the vanquished will behold us, c're yet
they can persuade themselves into a belief of our coming. They will be
surprised in no Martial Order, and wholly unprepared to fight. Wherefore, if we
will sup sweetly, and give this Night to our selves, and live afterward, we
must not leave them any leisure, either of consulting, or of providing ought
that they may have occasion for; nay, nor indeed of so much as reflecting that
we are Men, but rather that they may imagine, that hurdles, and hunting-Spears,
and Axes, and Strokes, and Wounds are their Lot. And for you, Hyrcanians, said
he, I would have you still proceed to keep your Order in the first Rank before
us, by which means, your Cognisances being discerned a far off, at a good
distance, we may impose upon the Enemy; But when I shall arrive where the
Forces of the Enemy are, leave me a Band of Horse, which I, continuing with the
Army, may employ as there shall be Occasion. But you, who are Princes, and old
Commanders, proceed keeping your Ranks unbroken, if you are wise, lest whilst
you spread wide against the gathered Forces of the Enemy, you should be
forcibly repulsed. Give the Youth the Opportunity of charging and doing
Execution on the Enemy. For at this time it will be our Security to permit very
few of them to escape. But if that should chance, which fortunes to many by
Custom, who bear rule, that we should master their Wealth, great Caution is to
be used, how we apply our selves to the Pillage; For he who takes this Course,
is not to be looked upon as a brave Man and a Soldier, but a High-shoon
Peddler; and whom every man ought to treat as a mercinary Slave. That Saying we
always ought to bear in Mind, that Nothing costs so dear as a Victory. For he
that is Master of the Field, sweeps all before him, Men, Women, Baggage, and
the whole Country. In this Case there is only one thing to be observed, that we
maintain the Victory, and that even the Pillager himself is kept within the
Bounds of that. Last of all, I must remember you, that you desist from the
Pursuit, and return to me before Day shuts; For when the Dusk once approaches,
we receive none. This said, he dismissed them all to their several Posts, and
gave all in charge in common, that when they repaired to their Troops, each of
them should communicate the same to his Cornets; For the Cornets being posted
in the Front, were capable of receiving their Orders. And every one of the
Cornets they charged to report the same to those under their Command. This
Order being taken, the Hyrcanians marched first, Cyrus with the Persians
followed in the main Body, while the Horse, as was fit, were disposed in the
two Wings.

When Day once appeared, some of the Enemies were astonished at what they saw;
Others were casting about what was to be done; Some were employed in Reports,
others in Exclamations; Some turned their Horses loose, others were packing up
their Goods; Some unharnessed their Horses, others harnessed them; Some leapt
on Another Victory obtained by Cyrus his flig^.
Horseback, others bridled their Horses; Some were stowing their Wives in the
Wagons, Others were taking care to preserve what they had of great value; a
third sort were burying their Treasure: but the greatest part betook themselves
to flight. A great variety of many other Employments you may imagine them
engaged in, excepting that one thing that none of them fought, but were ruined
without a stroke. Craesus his Escape.
Craesus the King of the Lydians, had conveyed away his Women in Wagons by
Night, because it was Summer, that so they might take their Journeys in the
Cool; Himself followed after with the Horse. The same they report of that
Phrygian, who ruled the Phrygia by the Hellespont. But when some of them
perceived others to fly, and to come up to them, finding what was done, they
also fled with all their Force. The King of the Cappadocians, and of the Arabs,
who were near hand, and fought without their Armor, the Hyrcanians killed. In
like manner they that were slain, for the most part, were Assyrians and Arabs.
For since they were arrived at their own Country, they had marched very slowly.

Whilst the Medes and Hyrcanians thus played their Parts in the Pursuit, as you
may imagine Conquerors use to do, Cyrus gave in charge to the Horse that were
left behind with him, that they should ride about the Camp, and if they saw any
armed men go forth, they should cut them off; and make Proclamation by a Crier
to those that kept within, that whatever Soldiers of the Enemy, that were
either Horse, or Targetteers, or Archers, should bring in their Arms packed up,
leaving their Horses at the Tents. This, whoever should fail to do, was to be
punished with the loss of his Head: and that they should appear with their
Hunting Spears all in their Hands in Order. Therefore, those of them that had
any Arms, should commit them, when they were cast from them, into such a Place
as Cyrus appointed, where they might be burnt by such as he had given this
Matter in Charge.

But when it came to Cyrus his Mind, that they had advanced thus far without
any Provisions Cyrus his Advice about laying in Provisions.
for Bag or Bottle, without which, neither any Expedition was to be undertaken,
nor any thing else to be done; he cast about by what means he could provide
plenty of both in due manner, and with dispatch. He therefore reflected, that
all Armies stood in need of some whose Office it was to take care that the
Tents, and other Necessaries should be still in a readiness for the Soldiers
in their Marches, imagining therefore, that it was highly probable, that
especially at the instant they would be found in the Tents bu^ in packing up
their Goods, he made Proclamation by his Cryers, that all the Military
Purveyors should present themselves, and if there were no Purvey or there, in
such case the eldest Soldier should come forth of his Tent, threatening very
grievously those of them that should give no Obedience. They, when they found
even their Masters to submit, forthwith paid Obedience. When they made their
Appearance, he made them to be placed first, who had in their Tents more
Provision than for two months. When he beheld these, he again ordered, that
they should be placed, who had one months Provisions. Then, when almost all of
them were placed, and he found this, he addressed to them in these Words. Come
on then, says he, my Hearts; Whoever of you have no love for your Sufferings,
and are desirous to gain our good Will, take Order readily, that every one of
you in your Tents, provide for Bag and Bottle more then double the quanity of
your daily Provisions for Master and Servant; and see that all things else be
ready whatever they are that belong of any kind to good eating. Because the
Pursuers will strait be on their return, and will expect to find plenty of all
Necessaries, I would therefore have you understand, that for the future, it
will be your concern to accomodate them without any grudging. When they had
heard these things, they used their best Endeavors to execute his Commands.

But Cyrus, assembling the Head-Officers of his Army, delivered himself to them
after this manner. We know well, my Friends, that you have Liberty to go to
Dinner before your Fellow Soldiers, who are gone upon Duty, and to solace your
selves with your well-drest Dishes and Drinks. But I truly am of Opinion, that
we shall not gain so much by our Dinner, as if it appeared that we took thought
of our Fellows, or that our Feeding will conduce so much to the repairing of
Nature, as it would, if we had more Consideration of our Fellow Soldiers. But
if we shall seem so much to neglect the Thought of them that are in Pursuit of,
and doing Execution on the Enemy that runs, and in Dispute with those that make
Resistance; that we shall dine in such haste, before ever we so much as
understand how matters go, I fear much we may blemish our selves with an
imputation of Baseness, and our Strength may come to be lessened by the Straits
of our Companions. But to take Thought of them, who undergo Fatigues, and
expose themselves to Hazards, that they may not be unprovided of Necessaries
upon their return; this way of Dining, in my Opinion, truly will make us much
better Cheer, than if we should address immediately to gratify our Palates.
This truly, I would have you bear in Mind, although you should entertain no
thoughts of them, that yet nevertheless nothing ought to be shunned more by you
then Riot and Excess. Cyrus persuades his Men to sparing Diet, and abstinence.
For as yet we have not completed what we intended, but all being now on the
very point of a Precipice, call for our utmost Endeavors. For we have yet an
Enemy in the Field, in number much superior to us, and yet at Liberty to act
against us, over whom it becoms us to keep a watchful Eye, and to make use of
them, that we may not want those that may provide us Necessaries. Our Horse
besides are wanting, for whom we are in pain what may become of them, and if
they return safe, cannot subsist with us. Wherefore truly, in my Opinion, we
are to make such cheer at present, as every one in his Opinion may judge
equally removed from the proceeding extremes of Sleep and Debauches. I know
also full well, that in these Tents there is lodged good store of Treasure,
whereof I am not ignorant it may so fall out, that we make our selves masters
as we please; so as still we share it in common with those that are Partners
with us in the Spoil. But yet I conceive that it will not turn to so great
Advantage to us, if we seize on them, as if we show our selves just to them, by
which means we may gain this point, that they may embrace us with less
suspicion then before. Besides, I am of Opinion, that the sharing of the Spoil
is to be permitted to the Medes, the Hyrcanians, and Tygranes, upon their
coming up to us; and if they should afford us a smaller share, even that is to
be reckoned our Advantage. For these Advantages will invite them to stay with
us more willingly. And for us truly at this time to have an Eye to our own
Advantage, will procure us less durable Riches. Wherefore, waving these, let us
provide our selves of that which Riches are built on, which truly, in my
Opinion, may establish to us and all ours more lasting Treasures. Besides that,
I suppose we have been accustomed at home to moderate the Pleasures of the
Palate, and of excessive gain; that so we may conveniently taste the Enjoyments
of both, when Occasion requires. Now upon what Occasions we can give an
Instance of this Moderation, better then the Present, truly for my part I see
not.

This was Cyrus his Speech; to which Hystaspes the Persian, one of the
Commanders of the first Rank, gave Approbation in these Words, to this Effect.
What an Absurdity would it be, O Cyrus, if we, who to maintain the Chase,
ordinarily abridge our selves of eating, in prospect only of the Prey, and that
perhaps of no great value; and now that we are in Chase of Substantial Honor
and Riches, if we should suffer any such things to be an impediment to us, as
indeed are the impedious Masters over the base, but yet are in subjection to
great and generous Souls: it ought not therefore to be once supposed, that any
thing which is so unworthy of us, should ever be imputed to us. In this manner
Hystaspes approved the Opinion of Cyrus, to which he had the Consent of all the
Rest. To which Cyrus added; Come on then, says he, since in this point the
Opinion of all you is the same. Send every one of you out of his Band five men
of the graver sort, who, riding about the Tents, may encourage them whom they
observe to make due Provision of Necessaries, and to reflect upon those that
are remiss, with as little reserve, as if they had Authority over them.

Which things they did accordingly. But of the Medes, part lighting on the
Wagons laden with Necessaries for the Army, which sometime since past the
Enemies Tents, after they had obliged them to return and come up to them, were
carried in them. Part brought back to their Tents such Wagons as they had
intercepted, with the finest Women, which being their lawful Wives, or their
Concubines, the Soldiers had brought with them to the War for the sake of
their Beauty. For the Asiaticks, when they enter upon their Expeditions, so
undertake them even at this Day, that they take with them things of the
greatest value. For they say for themselves, that they are greedier of fighting
when those things are in sight, which they hold most dear: as if a Necessity
thereby was laid upon them of defending them with more Resolution. And perhaps
the Case stands so indeed, or else perhaps it is so pretended, to excuse their
Pleasures.

Cyrus, after he had been Witness of the Exploits of the Medes and Hyrcanians,
seemed a little displeased with himself and his, that others at this instant
seemed Superior to them in Vigor, and to make their Acquests while they lay
out of the way of exercising their skill: For they who returned home with
Spoil, having presented to Cyrus what they brought, marched back strait in
quest of the Enemy. For which course they pleaded the Orders of their several
respective Officers. These things, though they galled Cyrus, yet he reserved
their Spoils in a convenient Place.

But summoning at length his Head-Officers together, when he had so placed
himself, that what he said might be heard of all, he thus delivered himself. I
suppose, my Friends, you reflect of what importance it is for all the Persians
to be accomodated with all Necessaries and we especially, as it is reason, by
whose assistance all is gotten, if we truly would be Masters of what we see
exposed to view; But by what means we Cyrus his Contrivance to furnish out
Horse for the Persian Army.
may arrive to be Masters of the like Treasure, since we have not strength
sufficient to acquire it, unless the Persians had Horse of their own, I for my
part understand not. For I would have you still to bear in mind, says he, that
we Persians are abundantly supplied with those Arms, with which, when we come
close with the Enemy, we may be enabled to put them to flight. But when they
once are put to flight, what, either Horsemen, or Archers, or Targetteers, or
Slingers, can we either cut in pieces, or take Prisoners, when we are
unprovided of Horse for the Pursuit? On the other side, who of them should fear
to charge us, and with what Mischiefs may they plague us, whether it be their
Bow-men, their Slingers, or their Horsemen, when they are assured they shall
have no more Annoyance from us, then from so many rows of rooted Trees? Which
things, when they are so, is it not plain that those Horsemen who were with
you but now, will reckon upon all this Plunder as no less their own, then Ours?
Nay perhaps much more their own then ours; since of Necessity this was not
acquired but by their Horse. Now then if we shall provide our selves with
Horse, not inferior to theirs, will it not appear most evident to all; it may
well be, that we may do against the Enemy without them, what we do only now
with them, and that so we may expect them less insulting in their Behavior
toward us? Besides, we shall be in less pain, whether they give us their
Assistance or not, if we of our selves alone can do our own Business without
them. But to let pass these things; no man in my Opinion can be against this
Proposition, but will altogether grant it, that the Persians should furnish out
their own Horse. But perchance ye may demand, by what means this may be brought
about. Let us consider then, if we would be supplied with Horse, what we are
furnished with, and in what we are wanting. Horses we have good store of the
Enemies in the Tents; Bits we have to manage them, and other things of which
there may be need for the equipping them. Furniture too besides, this we want
not for Horsemen, as Armor for the Back and Breast, to guard their Bodies, and
Weapons which may be of use to dart or defend themselves. What therefore
remains? It is plain, that we have need of Men, which indeed we have more then
all. For Nothing is so truly Ours, as we our selves. But yet some perhaps will
object, that we areundisciplin'd. But truly, not any one of them who are
expert, before he was trained was expert. Perhaps it will be objected here,
that they were trained in their Youth. Has Youth therefore a stronger
Inclination to follow what they are showed and taught, than Men? Or after they
have been taught, whether have Men or Youths abler Bodies for Exercising?
Besides that, we have had Leisure and Opportunity to practice, which neither
Youths, no nor all Men have at their command. For the Art of Archery is not now
to be taught us, as to Youth, because we have been now long since acquainted
with it; Nor the skill of slinging also we are no Strangers to it. Nor is our
Lot the same with that of other Men, who have the Avocations of Husbandry,
Trades, or Civil Affairs. But for us, we have not only Leisure to exercise the
Military Art, but are obliged to it by Necessity. Moreover, in Matters of War,
the case is not the same, as in many other things, which if they are gainful,
are not without their Difficulties: For in a Journey, is it not more pleasant
to ride than go a Foot? In Races, is it not more desirable to use dispatch, to
meet a Friend upon Occasion, and in the Chase, to intercept Man or Beast in the
full Career, according to Occasion? In bearing of Arms, are not any kind of
them light and easy, when the Burden is the Horses and not Yours? Indeed, it
is the same thing to possess and wield them. But perhaps, what you are in most
Apprehensions of, lest of Necessity we should endure the brunt of the Fight on
Horseback, e're yet we rightly know how to manage our Horse. If so, I must
tell you, we are neither able Foot-Souldiers, nor good Horsemen; for this is
not difficult to clear to you thus: For whenever we please, we may dismount and
fight a foot: for having been taught the Discipline of Horsemen, does in no
wise unteach us the Discipline of the Foot.

This was Cyrus his Speech; which Crysantas Chrysantas approves of Cyrus his
Measures.
approving of, spoke after this manner. Indeed, said he, I so passionately
affect being taught the Horse-mans Art, that I should fancy my self become a
flying Man at the same instant that I commenced an Horseman. For hitherto I
thought it sufficient, if in a Race I was able to top any man upon full Speed,
or to command the Chase so well, as to be able to prevent any wild Beast in its
Career, by piercing him with Dart or Sling, before he could outrun me. But,
were I once made a Horseman, I would propose to kill a Man as far off as I
could see him, and to wound Beasts in the Chase, partly by coming up close to
intercept them, and partly by shooting at them, as if they stood like Butts.
For two fleet things brought upon full speed within a little distance of one
another, want but a little of standing still together. From this Ground it is
says he, that of all Creatures, I ever use to admire most the Centaures, if at
least there were ever any such in Being; because they used their Reason like
Men, and what they had need of they wrought with their Hands; and who had
Strength and Speed to overcome in the Chase, and to subdue in Fight; which
Qualifications should all meet in me, were I a Horseman: The Reason of a Man
to direct me, his hands to bear Arms, the Feet of a Horse to pursue, and his
Back to bestride the Enemy. Nor will there be need to pinion me to the Horse,
as the Centaures, though that be better than to grow to the Horse by Nature.
For I truly am of Opinion, that the Centaures are in a sort Strangers both to
many Pleasures which Art has invented for Men, and which Nature has allowed
to Horses. But should I e're learn to play the Horseman, on Horseback, I would
lead the Centaures Life, and when I lighted off my Horse, I would choose to
become a Man, and feed, and dress, and sleep like such a one; what other thing
then should I prove at this rate but a Centaur, who could be thus artificially
taken in Pieces, and set together again? In this respect indeed I should be
superior to a Centaur, for he sees alone with two Eyes, and hears with two
Ears; but I truly should have no less then four Eyes for Spies, and four Ears
to take every Alarm. For it is said, that a Horse will after his fashion tell
his Rider the News of all what he has seen and heard. Therefore set me down in
the number of those that would be Horsemen, and the like said all the rest. To
which Cyrus: What say you then, says he, since this choice is wonderfully
approved by us all? Shall we impose a Law upon our selves, that it shall be a
disgrace for any Man whom I shall supply with Horses, to appear on Foot in any
of our Marches, be the Journey either little or great; that so we may have
reason to persuade our selves, that we are in all points Centaures.

This demand he no sooner made, then they all agreed to it; whence it comes to
pass, that this very thing, even from that time unto this Day, is in use with
the Persians: nor are any of the gentiler Persians by their good Wills ever
seen as yet on foot. With these Discourses they were at that time taken up.
When now, after Noon once was over, in came the Medes and Hyrcanians, and with
them several Men and Horses Prisoners. For they put none of them to the Sword,
who delivered their Arms. Upon their Arrival, Cyrus first demanded, whether all
of them were safe? which they having satisfied him in, he then enquired after
what manner they had behaved themselves? They reported to him their Adventures,
and were not sparing to set forth with Embroidery their Bravery upon each
Occasion. Cyrus, when he had patiently heard all that they had to say, gave
them Praises after this manner. It is very visible, says he, that you have
behaved your selves with Bravery, we can read it in your Looks; for you make a
goodlier, a more graceful, and fiercer Figure than before. He then demanded,
how far they had marched into the Country, and whether it were well Peopled?
They replied, they had traversed the greatest part of it, and that they found
the Country every were Peopled, and stored with Sheep, Goats, Beeves, Horses,
Grain, and all kind of Provisions. Two things, says he, we are to have in
Prospect. First, that we may have in our Power those that have all these in
Possession; Next, that they may not look out for other Masters. For that
Country which is Peopled, is sufficiently rich, and the same, if it be
depopulated, wants even those Provisions which it has. I understand you put
those to the Sword, who stood upon their Defense, and it was well done. For
this Course principally assures a Victory. But those that submitted their Arms,
you made Prisoners Cyrus his Resolution touching the Slaves.
of War. Whom, if we set free, we shall therein, I think, consult our own
Interest. For first, we shall be in no Apprehensions of them, nor shall we keep
any Guard over them, nor dress any Victuals for them; for to be sure we shall
not starve them when we have dismissed them. Besides, when we have parted with
these, we shall not want Captives enough for our Occasions. For if we possess our
selves of the Country, we shall make all the People Captives, who will have
more Reason to continue in our Service, and show stronger Inclinations to obey,
than to try it out on the Swords point, when they perceive these living, and
enlarged. This is my Opinion; if any one judges any other Course better, let
him propose it. They all allowed his Advices were fit to be put in Practice.
Cyrus then summoning the Captives, spoke to them in these Words; My Friends,
Cyrus offers certain Conditions to the Slaves.
ye have preserved your Lives by submitting your selves; and if you demean your
selves accordingly for the future, no Mischief will befall you more then this,
that those who were your Lords before, will not be so now; But you will live in
the same Forms, and till the same Land, and enjoy the familiar Conversation of
the same Women; and so in like manner have your own Children in your Power as
before. Only against us you may not employ your Arms, nor against any Other.
But if any shall injure you, we our selves will right you with our Arms. But
lest any should employ your Force, your Arms are to be in our Possession. Those
of you that have submitted them, shall enjoy firm Peace, and the other
Conditions we engage for, without any Deceit. And against as many as have not
consented to lay down their Arms, we are now about to direct our Force to
reduce them. But if any of you shall come to us with an ingenious Intention of
submitting your selves for our sakes to such Services as we shall appoint, we
are ready to treat such not as Slaves, but as Friends, and deserving well at
our Hands. This I would have you take notice of, and report to the rest of your
Fellows. But if any of you prove more refractory, and refuse to acquiesce in
our good Pleasure, we shall turn our Arms against them, to reduce them to
Obedience to us, instead of our paying Obedience unto them. This said, they
made their Obeisance, and promised their Compliance in all things.

Upon their Departure, It is time, says Cyrus, O Medes and Armenians, for us
all to say, Necessaries we have provided for you, according to the utmost of
our Ability. Go therefore, and send us half your Provisions of Biscuit, since
there is enough in the Stores laid in for us both. But Meat and Drink we have
need to send none. For of these we have sufficient provided of our own. And you
Hyrcanians, wait upon them to their several Tents; upon their Men of Quality,
to those that are richest in your Opinion, and upon the rest, to the most
convenient for their Reception. And you your selves Sup where you shall think
it most agreeable. For you have entire Tents for your own use, ready furnished
with all Accommodations, as even they have. This both of you may take Notice
of, that we shall keep the Night-watches at your Doors; all within the Tents is
committed to your Care, and to be guarded by your Arms. For as yet they are
none of our Friends that we have in our Tents. After that all things were
ready, the Medes and Tygranes his Soldiers washed, and shifting themselves,
went to Supper. Their Horses also had Provender and Litter; and they sent to
the Persians one half of their Biscuit, without any addition of Wine or
Victuals; taking it for granted, that Cyrus his Men were supplied with these,
because Cyrus Cyrus his Meat and Beverage.
had told them they had store of both; though Hunger in Cyrus his Language
passed for Meat, as pure River-water for his Beverage.

Cyrus thus having supped his Persians, when the Dusk came, sent several of
them, by five and ten together in a Company, this way and that way, with a
charge to go and conceal themselves about the Tents; For he thought this might
be of use, if any Strangers should invade them from without, or if any Thieves
from within, that should attempt to make their Escape with their Booty, they
might be apprehended, as indeed it fell out after. For both many attempted
their Escapes, and not a few were taken. But Cyrus shared the Money amongst
those that apprehended them; but appointed the Thieves to condign Punishment.
By which Means it came to pass, that after this, if you would never so fain,
you should not find one idle gaping Fellow in a whole Night.

For the Persians, they lived after this rate. But the Medes caroused and made
good cheer, Cyaxares his Rev^l
and even surfeited themselves with Music and Revelling. For many of their
things were rifled, so as the Watch never wanted Employment. Even Cyaxares
their King, that very Night that Cyrus took leave, was Drunk himself with those
in his Quarters, as if it were no disparagement; and thought that the rest of
the Medes, a few only excepted, had tarried in their Tents, because he heard so
great a Noise. For the Domestics, and menial Servants of the Medes, upon the
going away of their Masters, drunk and roared very jovially, for they had newly
sent them Bottles of Wine, and several good things from the Assyrian Army. But
when it dawned, and none appeared to make their Court besides those that supped
with him, and that he heard the Tents were stripped naked of the Medes, and Men
of Quality, and that he walked out to make a Discovery of it himself, then he
stamped and raged against Cyrus and the Medes, for going away and leaving him
alone. And immediately gave order, as he is reported to be very fierce and
brutish, to one of the Bystanders to take a Party of Cyaxares his
barbarousness.
Horse with him, and with all speed to find out the Troops that followed Cyrus,
and let them know, I little thought Cyrus would so ill have consulted my
Interest; But if those were Cyrus his measures, he less expected it from the
Medes, that they should quit his Service, and leave him alone. Therefore now
let Cyrus recall his if he thinks good, but if not, let the Medes not fail to
give Attendance in all haste. This he gave in Charge to them. But he, who had
this Expedition in Charge, replied, My Liege, Which way shall I find them?
Which way, said Cyaxares? the same way that Cyrus with those in his Train has
sound them against whom he is marched; For truly, said he, I have been
informed, that several of the Hyreanians, who were Deserters from the Enemy,
departed hence soon after their Arrival, to be Guides to Cyrus his Troops. Upon
the News of which Cyaxares was the more incensed against Cyrus, for not
acquainting him with these things, for which cause he used greater Endeavors to
recall the Medes over, a means to weaken Cyrus his Force; which made him
command the Attendances of the Medes under severer Penalties than before, not
without mingling sharp menaces to the Messenger himself, if he failed to
represent those things to them very pressingly. He marched strait with his
hundred Horse, and seemed to have no other Trouble but this, that he was not
one of those that at went first with Cyrus. When they had proceeded in their
Journey, and come where the Ways parted, their mistake made them lose their
Rode; so as instead of coming up to Cyrus his Army, they stumbled upon certain
Straglers from the Assyrian Camp, whom they forcibly compelled to be their
Guides. By which means, and the light of their Fires, they arrived there about
Midnight. But after they had arrived at the Camp, the Watch, as Cyrus had
appointed, refused them admittance, till Daylight. Cyrus at break of Day,
summoning the Magi, had given them in Charge, to select what was fit for an
Offering to the Gods, for such great Successes, which they were engaged in this
Affair, he summoned his Persian principal Officers, and spoke to them thus.
Many Blessings my Fellow Soldiers, the Gods have heaped upon us. But we, O
Persians, at this instant, are too few to continue them in our Possession. For
if we leave the Fruit of all our Labors unguarded, they will fall to the Lot
of others. And if we depute some of ours to guard our Acquests, our Strength
that way will be weakened. Wherefore, in my Opinion, it will be best for some
one of you to haste to Persia, and acquaint them with the state of our Case;
and require Supplies from them with all Expedition, if ever the Persians have a
mind that the Strength and Riches of Asia should be in their Power. Go you
therefore, says he, who are the Eldest, and represent these things to them upon
your Arrival. To which you may add, that the care will be mine of Victualling
such Soldiers as they send, after they have joined our Forces. What Spoils we
have, you see, and therefore keep nothing of that kind from them. But of which,
what we shall make for the Presents we design for Persia, that we may be duly
informed; for what concerns the Gods, consult my Father; and for what concerns
the State, consult the Civil Magistrate. Let them also send us, as well those
who may be assisting to us from time to time in the manage of our Affairs, as
also those who may have an Eye and Inspection over them. Do you, therefore,
says he, prepare for your Journey, and take your Band of Men with you, to
convoy you thither. After this, he summoned the Medes, when at the same instant
Cyaxares his Messenger was arrived, and laid before them his Displeasure
against Cyrus, and his Menaces of the Medes; and told them in the Close, that
Cyaxares his Will was, that the Medes should return, although Cyrus his
Intention was to keep the Field. Which Words of the Messenger, the Medes
received with Silence, as not being able to determine how to avoid his Summons,
and yet as ignorant through Fear, how to comply with his Threats; being so well
acquainted with the Cruelty of his Nature. But Cyrus stepping in, I admire not
at all, says he, O Messenger, and you Medes, that Cyaxares is so full of
Apprehensions for us, and for himself; when at the same time he knew our Enemy
was numerous, and knew not how we might succeed. But when once he understands,
that many of the Enemies Forces are cut off, and even all of them put to
flight; first, he will lay aside his Fears, and next, he cannot but own, that
he is in no wise abandoned, because his Friends have cut off his Enemies. And
what Right has he to complain of us, that deserve so well from him; and
when we truly have done nothing rashly of our own Heads? For I truly did
persuade him to permit me, that you should join me upon my departure, and you,
as not ambitious in the least of the Expedition, asked his Consent, whether
you should dravv out or not, and so arrived hither; nay, as many had his
Command to march off, as were not displeased with my Motion; Wherefore the
Displeasure he has conceived, I am very confident, will be mitigated with
our Success; and when he finds his Fears are Vain, will vanish together with
them. Cyrus his discreet Answer to Cyaxares his Messenger.
And for your part, O Messenger, since you are so far spent with your Journey,
repose your self a while, we Persians, because we have an Enemy in present
Prospect, either to dispute it with us, or gain the Power over us, keep our
Ranks in Battalia. For if we keep that Course, we may possibly the sooner
effect what we Design, you therefore, O Prince of the Hyrcanians, give out your
Orders to the Commanders of your Forces, with a strict Charge to their Men to
take Arms to cover us. Which being done, when the Hyrcanian presented, Cyrus
said, It is very pleasing to me, O Hyrcanian, to observe, that you not only
appear with us, to evidence your Friendship in Fact, but also give us large
Testimonies of so sharp a Wit as you are Master of, which at this time is very
clearly of no small Advantage to us. For though the Assyrians are indeed my
Enemies, yet now they are more implacably Yours, than Mine. Wherefore we are
both of us to consult our interest so, that none of our Allies who have now
joined us, may fail, but rather that we may have yet more Forces if possible to
join us; But you have understood but now, that this Mede recalls his Horse, who
if they quit our Service, what Means have we to keep the Field, that consist
only of Foot? This therefore remains to be done on your Part and mine, to
dispose even this very Man who recalls his own Men, to tarry himself with us.
Do you therefore pitch on some Tent to assign him, where he may live with
Convenience, and want no Accommodations which he may have Occasion for; and I
in the mean time will make it my Business to find out some Employment for him,
which he may be encouraged to accept of, rather than return home. Do you
besides Discourse him, of those Advantages which may fairly be supposed in
Prospect, if things be duly managed as they ought; when this is done, return to
me again. The Hyrcanian then went to conduct the Mede to his Tent, and he that
was ordered for Persia, was by, ready fixed for his Journey. And Cyrus had
given him in charge to report to the Persians what he had represented in the
foregoing Speech; and to give his Letters to Cyaxares. But says he, I will
make Repetition to you, of all that I have written: that so you may know my
Mind and express it, if any shall make enquiry of it: this was the Tenor of his
Writing. Cyrus to Cyaxares Geeting. Cyrus his Letter to Cyaxares.
We left you not naked, since no Man can be said to be left of his Friends,
that has his Enemies vanquished by them, and since we left you not in our
Opinion exposed to any Hazards: for the greater the Distance is we are removed
from you, so much the stronger Wall we conceive we are about you. For they that
are idle within the Reach of their Friends, render them not the more secure by
their Neighborhood; and they that are removed farthest from them engage their
Enemies, so as to get them out of the reach of Danger, abandon them not at the
greatest distance. Weigh therefore with your self the Experience of my
Behavior to you, and compare it with your Returns to me, when you make
complaints against me. I truly joined your Force with the largest Supplies I
could, and such as were moved by no Entreaties of yours, while you, when we
were upon good Terms, allowed me only so many as I could prevail upon by my
persuasions; and now that I am sat down in an Enemies Country, you recall not
only those that are disposed to leave me, but even all of them at once. As
Matters stood then, truly I conceived my Acknowledgments were due to you, but
now you constrain me to forget you, and to endeavor the whole return of my
Acknowledgments to them that took their Fortune with me. But I can by no means
force my self to be like you, but having at this instant dispatched a Messenger
into Persia for Supplies, I have given him in Charge, that as many of them as
come for my Recruits, if you have any Occasion to employ them before they join
me, shall be at your Service, not of their own choice, but to make use of at
your own Discretion. Only let me give you this Advice, though I am younger than
your self, that you withdravv not those Forces which once you granted, that
we may not owe you ill Will in the Place of Acknovvledgments; that you summon
not with Menaces such as you would have kept home, nor say that you are
abandoned, and be so liberal of your Threats upon all occasions, lest in
Conclusion you teach yours to despise and set you at naught. We for our Parts
shall not be wanting in our Endeavors to visit you, at such time as we have
perfected our Affairs; the perfecting of which we conceive will in the end
prove of equal Advantage to You and Us. Farewell. This Letter deliver into his
Hands, and if he question you about any of the Contents, satisfy him that it
is as the Letter states it. And the like Charge I give you in relation to the
Persians, that my Letters will clear all things to them. Having spoke this, he
strait dismissed him with his Letter, giving him in charge over and above, that
he should use the greatest dispatch, since he might be sufficiently sensible
that a speedy return now if ever, might be of no small Advantage.

After this he went to take a view of the Forces, that were drawn out as well
of the Hyrcanians as of Tygranes his Soldiers. The Persians too appeared very
well Armed; for some of the Borderers had supplied them with Horse and Arms.
Those that brought in Arms he ordered to bring their Javelins into the same
Place as they had brought the rest before, to Burn them, for which he took this
Order, since now they had no more occasion for their Use. Those that brought in
Horse, he appointed to attend them in the Tents, and to wait his Pleasure, till
they heard further from him, summoning now the Horse Officers, and those of the
Hyrcanians together, he made them this Speech. It ought not to be strange to
you, Friends and Fellow Soldiers, that you are Assembled so frequently, since
there arises at present new Matter, and many of our Affairs are not well
digested. And what things are yet confused and out of place, will of necessity
create Business, to marshal them and reduce them to their proper Place. You
have taken much Spoils and many Men, and because we Cyrus is taken up in
parting the Spoils.
are ignorant which of these is each man's Property, and the Slaves themselves
know not whom they may call their Masters, therefore not a few of them are
busied, and almost all of them at a Loss, what they are to do in this Case;
wherefore it is your part to make a due Distribution of our several Acquests.
When therefore any one is Master of a Tent, which is sufficiently stored with
Victuals and Drink, and Servants, and Bedding, and other Furniture, with the
other Requisites which are convenient for his Military Housekeeping, such a
one has no need of any farther Accession, but only that He whose Lot this is,
should understand, that he is to manage this as his own Property; But for those
who lodge in Tents, that are unfurnished, after a due inspection, take you care
to supply all those Wants. For I am not ignorant, that there is an over-pluss
of all such Necessaries as they stand in need of, since our Enemies were more
plentifully stored with all things then we. There were with me some of the
Treasury of the Assyrian King and the Princes, who spoke of some Gold ready
coined in their Hands, and made mention of Tribute: Therefore require by
Proclamation, that they should bring it all in to you, and threaten those that
shall refuse to obey your Orders. And when it is paid in to you, let every
Horseman have double Pay, and every Footman single; that they may be
provided, if they are destitute of any thing, and have wherewith to purchase
it. Let the Crier, says he, strait forbid the Market to be abused by any, and
let him order the Vi^tuallers and Hucksters to make Merchandise of their Goods,
and when they once have had a free vent for them, to import new; that so our
Tents may not want a resort of People. This they forthwith made Proclamation
of; But the Medes and Hyrcanians demanded of him, what means they had to make a
due Distribution of all things, without the Concurrence of Him and His? Which
Words Cyrus taking hold of, replied; Is that indeed your Opinion, that whatever
is transacted we must still be personally assisting in every thing? Will it not
be sufficient for us to act for you, and you again for us, as far as Occasion
requires? What way is more likely than this, to have more Business lying on our
Hands than we are able to dispatch? For pray observe, says he, We had these
things in our Custody for you, and you repose a Confidence in us, that we have
kept them entire; Do you therefore in like manner distribute them, as we shall
repose the same Confidence in you, that you make a due distribution; and we in
return will make the same riddance for you in matters of common Concern. Take
notice first what Horse we have with us, and what Horse has been taken and
brought Prisoners. If you leave them us so without any Riders, neither will
they be of any use to us, nor shall we be excused the trouble of attending
them. But if ye place Riders on them, by one and the same Expedient, you will
diminish our Care, and add to our Strength. But if there be any others that you
would rather present, and with whom you would look Danger in the Face more
willingly than with us, let them have your Horse. But if Cyrus advises to
bestow upon the Persians the Enemies Horse.
you mean to have us assisting to you on all Occasions, let us have them. For
when without us you sallied upon the Enemy, and went to meet Danger, we were in
no small Apprehensions for you; lest you should do otherwise than well, such
were out Fears for our Friends, nor was our Shame less for our selves, that we
should not be where ever you were. But if we receive your Horse, we shall be in
a Capacity to attend your Motions, and if we shall appear of more use to you,
fighting on Horseback, we shall take our Fortune with you, with the greatest
Alacrity; But if we shall be esteemed of greater Service to you on Foot, it
will be easy to light, and so strait to be in a Posture of assisting you on
Foot, while we consider into whose Hands we commit our Horses; Thus spoke
Cyrus. To which they replied, We have not, O Cyrus, Riders to place on our
Horses, and if we had, since this is your choice, should we prefer any other
Course to that which you have proposed. Therefore now accept our Horses, and
pursue that Course which you shall take to be best. I accept them then, said
he, and so, which I wish may be lucky to us, we shall Commence Horsemen;
proceed you now to make Distribution of those things that call no Man Master.
And in the first place, select for the Service of the Gods, whatever Cyrus his
opinion of dividing the rest of the Spoil.
the Magi, according to the Skill of their Profession, shall direct you. Then
select for Cyaxares his Use what presents you conceive will render you
Acceptable to him. They smiling replied, that they would call out the most
beautiful of the Women-Captives to present him. Therefore, says he, make a
Choice of the She-slaves for him, and what else besides you approve of. And
after you have made this Choice for him, do what in you lies, O Hyrcanians,
that all these Medes who freely offered their Service to follow me, may have no
just Cause to complain; And be not you wanting also, O Medes, to honor and
reward these our principal Allies, that so they may persuade themselves they
had a true Sense of their own Interest, when they embraced our Friendship,
Moreover, out of all these, award a Share to the Messenger sent to us from
Cyaxares, nor only to him, but even to those that he has here in his Retinue,
and endeavor also to persuade him to make his stay with us, and possess him,
it is with my Approbation; that so when he has a right Sense of our
Proceedings, he may report the true state of all to Cyaxares. And as for the
Persians who are here with me, whatever remains in Surplusage, after you are
all well equipped, will be sufficient, for we have not been brought up very
delicately, but according to our plain Country Fashion. And therefore we may
perhaps make but a Comical Figure dressed up in any splended Accoutrements, even
such as for ought I know we may make sitting on Horseback, or perchance, as I
guess, unhorsed upon the Ground.

After they had applied themselves to the parting Cyrus gives several of the
Slaves their Freedoms.
of the Spoil, not without laughing sufficiently ^t so Comical a mention of
their Horsemanship; Cyrus, summoning the Officers of his Troops, appointed them
to receive the Horses and Horsefurniture, and Grooms, to such a Number as was
in Proportion to the Poll of the several Soldiers, and as the Distribution
fell by Lot to each Troop. He made also Proclamation by the Crier, that if
there were any Slave in the Army of the Assyrians, the Syrians, or the Arabs,
taken by force out of Media, or Persia, or Bactriana, or Caria, or Cilicia, or
Greece, or elsewhere, he should strait render himself; which Proclamation being
made, many presented themselves very willingly. Cyrus having made Choice of
such out of their number, as excelled in Beauty, told them they should bear
Arms as if they were Freemen, and Arms he would bestow upon them, but they
should take care to provide themselves with other Necessaries. After which,
taking them to the Officers of his Troops, he recommends them to their Notice,
and gave them in Charge, that they should give them Shields, and Swords, with
which Accoutrements they might be equipped for Horsemen, and that they should
furnish them with Provisions as if they were his Persians; but that the
Officers of the Troops should be completely armed themselves, and well mounted,
and provided with Spears, which Institution he first of all begun to Establish.
And that each of them should in the Place of those Horse-Officers, substitute
new Foot Officers, while they were thus intent upon these Matters. Gobryas the
Assyrian comes over to Cyrus.


In the mean time, Gobryas, an old Assyrian, with his Retainers, all Horse,
himself an Horse-Officer too, presented himself. All of them completely armed
with Arms for Horse. But they whose Post it was to take their Arms, required
them to surrender their Spears, to be burnt with the rest of their Arms.
Gobryas told them, that he would fain see Cyrus first. The Officers then
leaving the rest of the Horse behind, conducted Gobryas to Cyrus his Presence.
He, when he saw Cyrus, turned to him in these Words, Sir, I truly am by Nation
an Assyrian, and Owner of a strong Castle, and entrusted with the Government of
a large Territory, and used to bring into the Field a thousand Horse for the
Service of the Assyrian King, and held no small Place in his Favor; But since
that truly brave and good Man fell in Battle by your Sword, and his Son, but my
utter Enemy, is advanced to the Helm, I come to you, and present my self
prostrate as a Petitioner at your Feet. I submit my self to be your Servant,
and Companion in your Wars, and Beg of you to Revenge my Injuries, and for that
End, in such sort as I may, I adopt you for my Son, for I am without Children
of the Male Line; For, Sir, the only Son which I had, Conspicuous for his
Person and Virtue, Dutiful to me, and paying me that Regard, in paying which,
any Son might truly make a Parent happy, Even this Son, He, who is now my King,
demanded of his Father, who then was King, that so he might give his Daughter
in Marriage to my Son, and truly I then parted with him, out of an Ambition to
see him Husband to a King's Daughter) This Son, I say, He who now Commands as
King, invited to the Chase, and gave him this Occasion of exerting his utmost
Force in Hunting, as esteeming him a better Horse man than himself. He
therefore followed the Chase with him, as his Friend, but when the Bear was
once in view, and both of them in Pursuit of him, he that now is our Prince let
fly his Dart, but missed him, though I could wish it had not, while my Son,
having cast his Dart, but too invidiously, laid him flat on the Ground. And
then the Prince, stung with this, kept secret his Resentments. But when a Lion
came in their way, and he erred again, which truly in my Opinion was no wonder,
and in Conclusion, my Son with a more unerring stroke dispatching the Lion,
claimed to himself, that at two strokes, he laid one after the other prostrate
on the Ground; then was it, that that base Man being able no longer to suppress
his Envy, snatched on a sudden a The Manner how the Son of the Assyrian King
killed Gobryas his Son.
Spear from one of the Company, guided it to his Heart, and so took away the
Life of my dear and only Son. And I, miserable Wretch, in the place of a living
Bridegroom, embraced a dead Corpse, and old as I was, gave Funeral Rites to my
Best, and best beloved Son in the Flower of his Age. But the Murderer, as if he
had embrued his Hands in the blood of an Enemy, never showed any marks of
Penitence, nor to expiate for so heinous a Fact, did any the least Honor to
the dead Body. His Father indeed expressed Compassion of me, and gave out
publicly, that my Calamity troubled him very near. Therefore, had he now been
Living, I had never moved you with the story of my Loss, for I had many marks
of his Favor, and he had many good Offices from me in Return. But since his
Empire is devolved upon the Murderer of my Son, I can never truly profess any
Inclinations of Service to him, and I am thoroughly convinced he never ranked me
in the number of his Friends. For he is no stranger to my Sentiments of him,
and, as before this, my Life was full of Pleasure, so now this Loss requires
that I spend my Old Age in Sorrow; wherefore, if you will now Embrace me, and
that through you there remain in prospect any Gobryas entreats Cyrus to revenge
the death of his Son.
hope of Revenging the Death of my dear Child, I shall look upon my self even
to grow young again, and reckon, that I shall neither Live in Disgrace nor Dye
with Grief. When Gobryas had spoke thus, Cyrus made Answer; If it can appear,
my Gobryas, that your Sentiments agree with your Words, I truly shall espouse
your Cause, and Promise you, by the Gods Assistance, to do Justice on the
Murderer. Say now, then says he; If we should deal thus with you, and permit
you to enjoy your Castle, your Land, your Arms, and that Power wherewith you
were clothed; in lieu of all these, what Returns would you make Us? My Castle,
says he, whenever you please, I will deliver to you, to enjoy as freely as your
own, that Tribute, which I paid him for my Lord, you shall receive, and when
Occasion presents to undertake any Expedition, I will follow your Standard with
all the Force under my Command. Moreover, I have a Daughter, and a Virgin, who
is all my Joy, of Marriageable Estate, Her, before this happened, I had designed
for the Bed of him that now is King, but now my Daughter has besought me with
many Tears, that I would not think of marrying her to her Brothers Murderer. A
Resolution now no less my own than hers. Her disposal I freely commit to you,
to advise me therein, no otherwise than it is Evident that I have sincerely
advised with you upon these Terms. Then said Cyrus, I sincerely give you my
Hand, and with that my Heart, and take yours in Exchange; The Gods are witness
between Us. Which done, he ordered Gobryas to keep his Arms and take his
Journey, and having enquired the extent of his Journey, how far he was to Go;
If, says he, You set forward to morrow early, the next day after you may be our
Guest. Gobryas therefore departed, leaving his Guide behind him.

And now the Medes were present, having allotted the Magi what they had claimed
to be reserved for the Gods; the fairest Tent they had reserved for Cyrus, and
the Captive Susiona, whom Report styled the most Beautiful of all in Asia, and
two very expert Minstrels. In the second Place, they reserved the second Choice
for Cyaxares. Nor were they wanting to supply such others with what they were
unprovided, that so they might not be destitute of ought in use for a Military
Life; for there was great plenty of all things. The Hyrcanians also in like
manner took such things as they had Occasion for; Besides which, they admitted
Cyaxares his Messenger to an equal Share with the rest. But those Tents that
remained in Overplus, they presented Cyrus, for the Use of his Persians; The
Money, they said, they would distribute when they had collected it all, which
too was afterward done. These things, on their part, were said and done; but
what they had selected for Cyaxares his Presents, Cyrus ordered them to take
into their Care and Custody, as well knowing them to be his Confidents. And for
what you bestow on me, I receive it with a good Will, says he; But each of you
is at Liberty to use notwithstanding, which of them he most stands in need of.
Then a certain Mede, that had a Genius to Music, said, Truly, my Cyrus, as I
in the Evening heard those Minstrils, which now you have, I took so great a
Pleasure in listening to them, that if you should bestow but one of them upon
me, I should flatter my self with passing my Life more pleasantly in the Camp
than at Home. Then Cyrus replied, I freely give her thee, and thank you more
for your Suit, than it is possibly for you to thank me for my Gift, so great a
Thrist have I to oblige all of you. And thus he that begged the Minstrel had
Her.

The End of the Fourth Book.
XENOPHON'S INSTITUTION AND LIFE OF CYRUS the GREAT. The Fifth Book.
-- Quid melius desidiosus agam?

AS for Cyrus, after he had called to him Araspes the Mede, (who was his
Companion from a Child, and to whom he gave his Median Robe at his Departure
from Astyages unto Persia) he commanded him to keep for him the Woman and the
Tent. Now this Woman was the Wife of Abradatus, the King of the Susans; but her
Husband was not in the Field at the taking of the Tents of the Assyrians; but
was gone on an Embassy to the King of the Bactrians. He was sent by the
Assyrian to desire his Assistance in the War, upon the account of his being
once a Guest to the Bactrian King. Cyrus therefore commanded Araspes to secure
this woman till such time as he should be ready to take her to himself.
Araspes, when he was bid do so, asked Cyrus, whether he had ever seen the woman
whom he commanded him to keep? No truly, said Cyrus, not I. But I did (said
Araspes) when I chose her out for you. And truly upon our first entrance into
her Tent we did not know her: For she was sitting on the Ground with her
waiting Maids all round about her; and her Habit was for all the world like
theirs. But after we had took a View of them all, to see which The excellent
Beauty of Panthea.
was most likely to be the Mistress, she presently seemed to excel all the
rest, though sitting, veiled and looking down upon the Ground. When we bid her
rise up, all her Female Attendants rose together with her: But then it appeared
how she excelled them all, first in Stature, then in Strength, Portliness and
graceful Movement, though with the Disadvantage of a mean Dress. And then you
might have seen her all in Tears, some trickling down upon her Clothes, and
some down to her very Feet. And when the Eldest among us bad her cheer up,
telling her, that although by report she had a very excellent Husband, yet we did
now design her for one who was no whit behind him, neither for Person,
Ingenuity nor Power; and that Cyrus certainly, (if ever any man) was in our
Judgments most worthy of Admiration, whose she should now be. As soon as she
Her Virtue.
heard this, she rent her upper Garment, and sell aweeping; and her maids too
cried in confort with her: And here the greatest part of her Face came in view,
together with her Neck and Hands. And now Cyrus, I must needs tell you, 'twas
my Fancy, and the rest of my Fellow-Spectators, that there was never yet known,
nor born of Mortals such another woman in all Asia. But by all means, says he,
you shall see her too. Ay, but if the be such an one as you set her out,
replied Cyrus, I have the less mind to it. And why so, says the young man?
Because, says he, if now upon the bare Character of her Beauty, and not having
over much Leisure, I Whether Love can compel men against their wills?
should suffer my self to be prevailed upon to go and see her, I am afraid she
will much more easily induce me to make her another Visit; and so in a while,
neglecting my Affairs, I shall do nothing but sit and stare her in the Face.
And do you think then (says the young man with a Smile) that there are such
powerful Charms in humane Beauty, as to compel a man against his Will to do
any thing which is not best? If 'twere naturally so, all would be compelled
alike. See (says he) how the Fire burns all equally; and the reason is, because
it burns naturally: But now among Beauties, some we love some we don't; one
loves this, and another that: For this depends wholly on the Pleasure of the
Will: So that every one loves whom he pleases. A Brother does not fall in love
with his Sister; but some body else does: Neither is a Father Inamourd with his
Daughter, but some body else is. For Fear and the Law are sufficient to
restrain Love. But if there were a Law made, that they which eat not should not
be hungry, and that they which drink not should not be thirity; or that People
should not be a-cold in the Winter, nor hot in the Summer: These are things
which are beyond the Power of any Law, to make practicable by Men; because
Humane Nature is apt to be overcome by these things; but to love is a thing
altogether voluntary: every one loves what is agreeable to his particular
humor, just as he does such or such a Mode in his Habit. How then comes it to
pass (says Cyrus) if Love be thus voluntary, that a man cannot give over loving
when he will? Have not I seen some weep merely through that Grief which their
Love occasioned, and serve those whom they loved, though before they were
smitten, they thought it a miserable thing to be a Slave; and give away a great
many things which they could not with any tolerable Convenience be without?
Have not I known some wish as earnestly to be rid of their Love as of any other
Disease, and yet could never free themselves of it; but were held by a stronger
necessity than if they had been fast in Irons? And thence it is that they lay
out themselves wholly upon those they love in many and fruitless Services; and
do not so much as endeavor to disintangle themselves from the Evils which they
suffer; but rather make it their Business to foment and keep alive the Flame.
It Is confessed (replied the young man) Men of degenerate and grovelling Minds do
as you say: And thence'tis, I believe, they are always as miserable men wishing
to die; and yet when there are a thousand ways of departing this Life, they
live on still: And such Men as these also are light-finger'd, and given to
stealing: But whenever they do play the Thief, none so ready, you know, as your
self to r^prehend them (which argues you don't think they were under any
necessity of Stealing) and therefore you don't pardon, but punish them. In like
manner beautiful persons don't force men to fall in love with them, nor to
desire what they ought not, but poor silly men are ungovernable in their
Passions; and then they lay the Fault upon Love. But honest and good men, though
they may desire to have Money, good Horses, and handsome Women, yet they can
easily abstain from all these things, so as not to meddle with them in an
unlawful way. As for my own part, though I have seen this Woman, and take her to
be a great Beauty too, yet you see I am still with yon upon the March, and
discharge whatver belongs to my Office. But perhaps (says Cyrus) you went away
too soon for Love to level a Dart at you: For it is possible for a man to touch
Fire, and yet not presently be burnt, and wood is not immediately kindled. And
yet for all that I neither use to touch Fire when I can help it nor to gaze on
Beauty. Neither would I advise you Araspes to let your Eyes dwell long upon a
beautiful Face: For Fire indeed burns not unless you touch it; but Beauty
kindles a Flame of Love in those that view at a distance. No Cyrus, says he,
you may assure your self, though I should never leave looking upon her, I shall
not be so far enslaved as to commit any thing unworthy of my self. You say very
well, says he, and therefore keep her for me as I command you, and have a care
of her: For perhaps she may be of great use for us at a convenient Opportunity.
After this Discourse was ended they parted from each other.

But the young man, partly through the Sight of this Araspes in Love with
P^thea.
incomparably fair woman, partly because he had observed her excellent
Accomplishments, and partly also, because he waited upon her, and perceived his
Service was acceptable to her; and withal, found her not ungrateful (as who in
return took care of him by her Servants, that whenever he came in and out, he
should be handsomely accommodated; and if he happened at any time to be
indisposed, he should want no Conveniences) all this I say conspiring together
he fell in love with her, which perhaps was no such great wonder: And so much
for this.

Let us now return to Cyrus, who being willing that the Medes, and the rest of
his Fellow Soldiers should abide with him cheerfully and of their own accord,
called together as many as he thought convenient; and when they were convened,
said thus to them, I am well assured (ye Medes, and all you that are here
present) that you took not this Expedition along with me, either for want of
money, or for any thoughts of doing Service herein to Cyaxares; but purely out
of a min'd to oblige and honor me, you would hazard your Lives with me in
these Night-Marches, for which reason I cannot without great Injustice deny my
self much indebted to you; but yet methinks I am not at present in a capacity
to r^te you; which I am not ashamed to confess: B^ to tell you, that I will
requite you in case you ^arry with me, indeed I am ashamed of that: For that
would look, I fancy, as if I said it for that very reason to make you more
willing to stay with me. Instead therefore of that I say this, That although in
Compliance to the Command of Cyaxares, you should go away from me, yet if I do
any thing prosperously, I will endeavor so to do it, that you your selves
shall praise me: For I am not now about to depart; but will be faithful to the
Hircanians, to whom I have given my Hand in token of a League of Amity; so that
it shall never be said that I have dealt treacherously with them. And as for
Gobryas his part, who has given up to us the Fortifications, the Country, and
the Forces, I shall make it my Care, that he never have occasion to repent him
of his Journey to me. Lastly, that which weighs most with me, is, that since
the Favor and Good Will of Heaven appears so manifest in our good Success, we
ought to fear the Gods the more, and be ashamed to go away, and leave our
Blessings behind us. This is my Resolution; but you do what you shall think
good, and tell me what you resolve to do: Thus far Cyrus. Then he that once
claimed Kindred with Cyrus made the first Reply: I believe (says he) you were
no less designed by Nature to be a King than the Leading Be is in the Hive:
For to him the Bees pay a voluntary Homage; and wherever his Abode is, there is
the Court whither they all resort: And if he chance to take a Progress any
whither, none of them all offer to desert him: Such an incredible Love have
they naturally for their King.

After the same rate methinks these Men stand affected How Cyrus was beloved.
toward you, for when you went from us unto Persia what Person among the Medes
either young or old was absent from accompanying you, till Astyages gave us
order to return? And when you came again from Persia to our assistance we saw
almost all your friends following you of their own accord. And again when you
made an Expedition into these parts, all the Medes voluntarily followed you.
And now you have such Influence upon us, that with you we can dare and be bold
in the Enemies Country, but without you we should be afraid to return home.
Therefore let others declare for what they will, as for me, and those under my
Command, we will all abide with you, and fetching Supplies of Courage from your
sight will endure any thing, and yield to nothing but the Indearments of your
Kindnesses. After this Tigranes began. I would not have you wonder Cyrus at my
silence, for my mind is not prepared for long Debate but to Execute whatever
you Command. And then Hyrcanius. If you should go away, now ye Medes, I should
say it came to pass through the spite of some ill Genius that maligned your
growing happyness, For sure no man that Consults his Reason would turn away
from his flying Enemy, or refuse to take his Arms or himself when he Surrenders
both. Especially when we have such a Leader, who I verily believe would take
more delight in benefitting us, then in Enriching himself. Then said all the
Medes, You Cyrus lead us forth, and do you bring us home with you when you see
good. Cyrus when he had heard all this, made this Prayer. Grant I beseech thee
Almighty Jupiter, that I may outdo them in kindnesses who honor me. After this
he gave order that the rest having first placed the Guards, should take care of
themselves, but that the Persians should dispose of the Tents, to the Horse
such as were convenient for them, to the Foot such as were fit for them. And
that they should so order things, that all those who were in the Tents should
provide things Necessary and bring them home to the Ranks of the Persians, and
furnish them with Horses ready for Service. But that the Persians should have
nothing else to do, besides Exercising their Arms.

And thus they passed the Day. On the Morrow, as soon as they rose they made an
Expedition to Gobryas, Cyrus himself being on Horseback with the Persian Horse
who were now improved to the number of about two thousand. After these followed
a company of Men of the same number with Grated Irons and hunting Spears. And
so the rest of the Army Marched on in due order. Cyrus also gave Command to
every Leader, that they should tell their fresh Soldiers, that whoever of them
should be seen behind the Bringers up of the Rear, or before the Front, or out
of their Ranks in either Wing should be sure to be punished. The next day
after, about Sunset they arrive at the place where Gobryas was, and perceive
the Fortification to be very strong, and that the Walls were furnished with all
things requisite for their own defense. Besides they observed that a great many
Oxen and Sheep were brought under the Works. Gobryas upon the news of Cyrus his
Arrival sent word to him that he should Ride round about the Castle, and
observe where it was most Accessible, and that he should send some trusty Men
in unto him, who should inform him of all they saw within. Cyrus therefore
willing to see whether the Castle might any where be taken, or whether there
was any deceit in Gobryas, rode round about it, and perceived 'twas every way
too well fenced for Access. And withal those who were sent in unto Gobryas
bring Cyrus word, that there seemed to them to be Provision enough within for
an whole Age. Now as Cyrus was perplexed to think what this should be, Gobryas
himself comes forth to him, bringing all that were within out with him, some of
which brought Wine and Meal, some drove Oxen, Swine, Sheep and Goats, and what
other Provision of Victuals they had they brought it all out, so that Cyrus his
whole Army met with a very plentiful Supper. But Gobryas when he had brought
out all his Men, bid Cyrus get in with as much safety as he could. Cyrus
therefore having sent some spies with a Troop of his own beforehand, at length
enters himself. And when he was got in, holding the Gates open he called to him
all his friends and the Captains of his Army. And after Gobrias entertains
Cyrus and his Army.
they too were got in, Gobryas bringing out his Golden Plate, Lavers, Pots and
all kind of Ornaments, and a great deal of old Coin, and last of all his
Daughter (who was of a goodly Stature and exceeding Fair, but in mourning for
the Death of her Brother) spoke after this manner: I deliver up this my
Substance to you Cyrus, and I entrust you with this my Daughter, whom you may
dispose of as you please. But we both are come humble Supplicants to you, I as
before, that you would revenge the Death of my Son, and she now of her Brother.
To which Cyrus replied, I promised you then to avenge your Cause to the utmost
of my power, on condition you did not deceive me, and now since I have found
you true, I acknowledge my self bound to make good my promise. And the same I
here promise to do for her. And as for your Money I accept it, and here give it
all to this your Daughter, and the Man that shall Marry her. There is yet one
gift more which when I have received from you, I will be gone. Which if you
give me, I shall be better pleased then with all the Treasures in Babylon.
Gobryas wondering with himself what this might be, and conjecturing 'twas his
Daughter, asked him what it was. To which Cyrus replied I believe there are
many Men who would not willingly be guilty of any impiety, or any injustice, or
any deceit. But because no Body would ever commit Money, Power, Castles or
lovely Children to their trust, they be dyefore they are known to be what they
are. But you by intrusting me with your Fortifications, your Treasures, your
Power and your Daughter, which is worth all, have given me an occasion of
showing to the World, that I am one, that will neither be guilty of any
Unkindness toward my Guest, nor any injustice for the sake of Money, nor of any
false-hood in not standing to my Covenant. Assure your self therefore that I
will never forget this action of yours as long as I have any Justice in me, but
will endeavor to requite you by doing you all the good I can. Neither would I
have you doubt of getting such an Husband for your Daughter as is worthy of
her. For I have many and good Friends, whoever of which shall Marry her will
have as much Money as you give, if not more. I would have you know there are
some among them who will not respect or admire you one jot the more, for the
Money which you bestow. And yet they now Emulate my good Fortune, and pray to
all the Gods, that they may have an opportunity, of declaring to the World that
they are as faithful to their friends as I, and that they would never yield to
their Enemies, while they have Breath. Neither do they prefer all the Wealth of
the Syrians and Assyrians and yours to boot, before Virtue and a good Name.
Such Men as these I assure you are here with me. To this Gobryas Smiling, pray
Cyrus will you tell me where these Men are to be found, that I may beg one of
them of you for a Son-in law. You need not, replied the other, inquire this of
me, but if you will go along with us, you shall be able to show every one of
them to another.

This said, he took Gobryas by the hand, and went out, with all his Retinue.
And when Gobryas was mighty earnest with him, to Sup with him, he refused, and
Supped in his Tent, and took Gobryas to Sup with him. Where as he was sitting
on his Bed of Straw, tell me Gobryas, says he, do you think you have more Beds
then me? No truly, replied Gobryas, I am sure you have most Beds, and your
House is much larger then mine, for all Heaven and Earth are in stead of a
House to you. And you have as many Beds as there are resting places upon the
Ground. Neither do you make your Blankets of Fleeces of Wool, but of the
Branches of Trees which grow on the Mountains or in the Fields. Gobryas having
never Supped with them before, and observing the Meanness of the Meat which was
set before them, thought their way of Life was much more Liberal then that of
his own Nation. For no well The temperance of the Persians.
Disciplined Persian seems any more concerned at the sight of any Meat or
Drink, so as in the least to forget what is becoming, then if there were none
at all before him. But as good Horsemen, because not disturbed with riding, can
look about, hear and discourse as they ride, so these think it fit to appear
prudent and moderate at Meals, and look upon it as a Brutish thing to be
affected or moved at the sight of Meat or Drink. He observed also that they
asked one another such questions, which was more pleasant to propose, then not,
and that they used such sharpness of Repertees which was better to use, then
not, and that their jesting was without any scurrilousness, filthiness or
passion. But that which seemed to him most observable was, that when they were
in an Expedition, they did not assign any of them the largest Portion, who
under-went the same danger, but thought the best Banquet was to have the
stoutest and best Fellow Soldiers.

But as Gobryas rose up, and was ready to go home, says he to Cyrus, I now no
longer wonder, that we have more store of Cups, Clothes and Gold then you, and
yet that you are of greater worth then we. For we make it our business to
abound with these, and you to be as excellent as you can. Then said Cyrus to
him, see Gobryas that you come hither to Morrow-Morning with your Horse ready
Armed, that I may take a Survey of your Forces, and that you may lead us
through your Territories, that we may know what belongs to our Friends, and
what to our Enemies. This said, they went both of them to their respective
places. As Soon as 'twas Day Gobryas was come with his Horse, and lead them the
Way. But Cyrus as every Commander ought to do The Duty of a Good General
represented i^ Cyrus.
was not only intent upon his Journey, but considered with himself as he went,
whether there was any way to weaken the Enemy, and fortisie his own Party.
Whereupon calling to him Hyrcanius and Gobryas (for these he took to be most
skilful in the things where in he wanted to be informed) I believe says he, my
Friends, I shall not miscarry in this War, if I use the Advice of such faithful
Men as you: For I believe you ought to make it more your Concern than I, that
we be not worsted by the Assyrians: As for my own part, if I chance to miscarry
in this, I know whither to retreat; but as for you, if you be overcome, all
that you have will be taken from you. He is my Enemy not for any particular
Pique he has against me; but because he thinks it not expedient for himself
that we should flourish; and that is the only reason why he makes War with us:
But you he hates, and complains of wrong done to him by you. To which they both
made answer, That they were apprehensive how the Case stood; and that they
would make it their great Care how the Issue of the present Affair should be.

Then said Cyrus, I would fain know of you whether Cyrus advises about taking
to him more assistants.
the Assyrian takes you to be the only Enemy he has, or whether you know of any
other that is hostily affected toward him? Yes, replied Hyrcanius, the
Cadusians are great Enemies to him, a very populous and warlike Nation; and
also our Neighbors the Sacians, who have suffered many Affronts from the
Assyrian: For he endeavored to subject them to himself as well as us. Do you
think then (says he) these two will readily combine with us to invade the
Assyrian? Yes, say they, with all their Hearts, if they could but associate
with us. Why, what hinders? Says he, these very Assyrians, through whose
Country you are now passing. When Cyrus heard this, said he to Gobryas, and
have not I heard you complain of the intolerable Pride and Insolence of this
young Man who now enjoys the Kingdom? Yes, says Gobryas, I have had enough
Experience of it. And did he behave himself so toward you only, or toward
others also? Yes, says Gobryas, toward a great many: And as for those which he
has maimed and abused, it is in vain to go about to reckon them. Particularly
one above the rest, who was the Son of a man of much greater Quality than my
self, and his own Companion too, whom, as they were drinking together, he took
and gelded; and that because, as some report, his Miss commended him for an
handsome Man, and magnified the Happiness of her that should have him for her
Husband; but, as he says, because he had attempted the Honor of his Concubine.
So he is now made an Eunuch, and upon the Decease of his Father, has the
Government in his own Hands. Do you think then says Cyrus, that this man also
would be well pleased to see us, if he thought he should have our Assistance?
Yes to be sure, says Gobryas; but it is a thing of great Difficulty to come to
the Sight of him. How so? says Cyrus. Because whosoever will join Forces with
him, must necessarily pass along by Babylon. And what Difficulty is there in
that? says Cyrus. Because, says he, I know greater Forces have been sent out
thence than yours by far; and you must know, that the reason why the Assyrians
do not bring forth as many Arms and Horses as they were wont to do formerly, is
because your Forces seemed very inconsiderable to those that saw them, and
because they are so represented by Common Fame: And therefore in my Opinion
it is best Prudence to march on warily. You say well, replied Cyrus, in advising
us to march as safely as we can; But upon Consideration, I cannot think of a
safer Cyrus deliberates about going to Babylon.
Course, than to march on directly toward Babylon, since there lies the main
Strength of the Enemy: For that they are very numerous you your self
acknowledge; and if they once take Courage too, they must needs be very
formidable to us. Now if they should not see us, and think that we conceal our
selves for fear of them, they will certainly shake off that Fear which was once
upon them, and heighten their Courage in proportion to the time that we keep
out of Sight: whereas, if we now march on directly against them, we shall find
many of them bewailing their Slain, many binding up the Wounds which they
received from us; and all of them bearing in mind the boldness of this our
Army, and the Flight and Misfortune of their own. And you must know Gobryas,
that it is natural for most Men when they are flushed up with Confidence, to be
very ven^urous and daring; But when they are once seized with Fear, the more
they are in multitude, the greater is their Dread and Astonishment: For their
Terror is augmented from the number of ill Reports, and false Alarms, from the
variety of sad Accidents, and from the multitude of dispirited and drooping
Faces. Neither is it an easy matter to take off such a great Terror with an
Harangue, or to inspirit them with new Courage by the best managed Conduct: For
the more they are exhorted to take Courage, the greater they suspect the
Danger. This likewise is to be taken into Consideration, that if in War the
greatest Number be sure to be victorious, you have reason to fear our Success;
and indeed the Danger lies on our Side. But if now, as ever heretofore, the
Event of the War be to be measured from the Valor and Courage of the
Soldiers, you have more reason to take Heart and hope well: For by the help of
the Gods, you will find there are more true Fighters among us than among them.
And to encourage you the more, consider this also, that our Enemies are fewer
in number now than they were before they were overcome by us; and that they are
now fewer than when they ran away. Whereas on the contrary we are greater now
than at first when we overcame; and more confirmed in Courage by our good
Fortune, and more numerous by the Addition we received from you: For I would
not have you any longer undervalue your own men, now they are ingrafted into
one Body: For they that go along with Conquerours partake of their Courage. And
you would do well to consider that it is possible for the Enemy to see us even
as we are now, but we have no way to appear more formidable to them, then by
marching directly against them. This then is my Resolution, and therefore lead
on toward Babylon.

Whereupon they did accordingly, and on the fourth Day they touched upon the
Borders of Gobrias his Country. Cyrus upon his Entrance into the Enemy's
Confines, commanded as many of his Horse and Foot as he thought Sufficient to
stand with him, in a ready Posture of Arms, and the rest of his Horse he
suffered to sally out, commanding them to kill all that were Armed, and to
bring the ^est with the Cattle that they took to him. He commanded also the
Persians to sally out, many of whom returned back having tumbled off from their
Horses, and many with much Plunder with them. Upon the sight of which he called
together the Commanders of the Mede's and Hyrcanians, and the Persian Peers,
and thus bespoke them. Gobryas (my Friends) has entertained us with abundance
of good things, and therefore if after we have first set apart a convenient
Portion for the Gods, and the rest of the Army, we give the remainder to him, I
think we should do well, that so it may appear that we endeavor to outdo our
Benefactours in kindness. As Soon as this was heard they all applauded and
consented to the Motion. But one more forward then the rest, said, let us do
so Cyrus by all means, for I fancy this Gobryas took us for a company of Poor
Fellows, because we did not come laden with Ornaments made of old Coin, nor
Drink out of Golden Vessels. But now if we do this, we may let him see, that
men may be Liberal without Money. Go therefore and set aside what is due to the
Gods and Sufficient for the Army, and give the rest to Gobryas. which was done
accordingly.

After this Cyrus Marched on toward Babylon, having disposed his Army in the
very same order as when they engage. But perceiving the Assyrian declined to
come forth, Cyrus commanded Gobryas to ride up and down and declare to them,
that he Cyrus Challenges the Assyrian.
would Fight with their King himself, if he would come forth and Fight for his
Country. But if he would not appear in his Country's defense, they must of
necessity yield to their Conquerours. Gobryas therefore went on toward them as
far as he might with safety, and told them the words of Cyrus. whereupon the
Assyrians sent out one to him with this answer, thus says thy Master Gobryas,
It does not at all repent me that I killed thy Son, but that I did not kill
thee too. But if you have a mind to Fight, come here again thirty days hence.
But now we are not at leisure, because we are yet in Preparation for War. I
wish, says Gobryas, thou would always repent, because then I should be thy
Tormentor from the first minute of thy Repentance. After this Gobryas returned
the Answer of the Assyrian, to Cyrus, who thereupon drew off his Army, and
calling Gobryas to him, tell me, says he, did not you say that he who was gelt
by the Assyrian would join himself with us? Yes, says he, I am well assured of
it. For he and I had not long ago a great deal of free discourse together. Why
then, says Cyrus, when you have a convenient time go you to him, and at first
comply with him in every thing, and do as he would have you. But if aftex you
have conversed with him a pretty while you find him inclinable to Associate
with us, your next business must be to contrive how his siding with us may be
concealed. For this you must know is a Maxim, That no one can do his Friend a
greater kindness in War, then by being thought his Enemy, nor a greater
diskindness to his Enemy then by seeming his Friend. I know, says Gobryas, that
this Gadatas, would willingly even buy an oppoxtunity of mischiefing this
Assyrian King. But his ability must be considered as well as his will. Tell me
therefore, says Cyrus, whether you think that the keeper of the Garrison will
admit this gelt man with his Forces into this Castle, which stands behither
this Country, and which you say was built to secure it against the Assaults of
the Hyrcanians and Sacians? Yes without doubt, says Gobryas, since as he is now
he may come to him unsuspected. Why then, says Cyrus, he will be as little
suspected if I Cyrus's Stratagem.
make an Invasion upon his Coast, as if I had a mind to take it, and he seem to
defend it to the utmost of his power, and I take something that is his, and he
take some other of my Men, or else those Ambassadors of mine whom I sent to
them, who you say are ill affected toward the Assyrian. And let those that are
taken pretend they are going to the Army, to fetch Ladders wherewith to scale
the walls of the Castle. Whereupon, let the Eunuch pretend hat he will go
thither and discover the business. Well, says Gobryas, if matters be thus
carried, I don't question but the Governor of the Castle will receive him, and
Entreat him to stay with him till you draw off. But do you think (says Cyrus)
if he once get into the Castle he will be able to deliver it up into our Power.
It Is very probable (says Gobryas) considering what he may do by managing things
within, and you by your violent Siege without. Go then, says Cyrus, and give
the Eunuch his lesson, and when you have done, return hither again; but don't
warrant him a closer League of Amity than you have with us your self.

Upon this Gobryas departed; the Eunuch looked very pleasingly and chearsully
upon him, and immediately consented to the Business. Cyrus having received
Information from Gobryas, that they had made sure of the Eunuch, the very next
day began the Siege. Gadatas the Eunuch made defense. Cyrus took those places
which Gadatus ordered him to invade. As for the Messengers which Cyrus sent /
some Gadatas let pass, that they might bring a fresh Supply of Forces, and
carry thither some Ladders; but those which he took he put to the Inquisition,
in the Presence of a great Number of People; and when they had confessed upon
what Errand they were going, he presently preparing himself for a Journey,
posted away by Night on a pretense of disclosing the Plot. At length his Report
being credited, he got into the Castle in the Score of an Assistant; and at
first indeed he assisted the Governor of the Castle in what he could. But
as soon as ever Cyrus was come, Gadatas takes the Government of the Castle into
his own Hands, using the help of Cyrus his Captives. As Soon as this was done,
Gadatas setting all things in due Order within, comes forth to Cyrus, whom, as
soon as he had honored according to the Ceremony then in use, Much Joy to you
Cyrus, says he. I am very joysul, replied the other: For you by the Favor of
Heaven not only bid me rejoice, but compel me whether I will or no: For I would
have you know, that I look upon it as a great Happiness, that I can leave this
Country to these my Fellow Soldiers in a State of Peace: But as for your part
Gadatas, though the Assyrian has deprived you of the Faculty of getting Children,
yet he has not took from you the Knack of making Friends. Assure your self
therefore, that by this single Deed of yours, you have obliged us to be your
Friends, who will in requital be so far assistant to you on all Occasions, that
you shall find Son and Nephews in us. Thus Cyrus: And then Hyrcanius, as soon
as ever he had notice what was done, ran to Cyrus, and taking him by the Hand,
How much am I indebted to the Gods, says he, Cyrus, my best of Friends, that
they have joined me with you! But go your way, says Cyrus, and take the Castle
into your own Power, for whose sake you so embrace me, and so manage it, to the
best advantage of your self, the rest of my Fellow Soldiers, and especially of
this Gadatas, who surrendered it up to us. Shall we then, says Hyrcanius, when
the Cadusians and the Sacians, with my Citizens, are come call him too, that
all of us who are concerned may consult in common how to make the most of this
our Castle? which Proposal, Cyrus liked very well. When therefore they were all
convened who had the charge of the Castle, they agreed that it should be kept
in common by those whose interest 'twas to have it quiet, that it might serve
them for a Garrison in War, and for a Defense against the Assyrians. When this
was so ordered, the Cadusians, Sacians and Hyrcanians, were much more forward
to Lift themselves together. So that from among the Cadusians, there was raised
an Army of twenty thousand Target men, and about four thousand Horse, and among
the Sacians, ten thousand Archers, and two thousand Horse of the same. The
Hyrcanians also augmented the number of their Foot as much as they could, and
made their Horse up two thousand. For before the greater part of their Horse
was left at home, because the Cadusians and Sacians, were at eumity with the
Assyrians.

But during all the time that Cyrus abode there, to order the Affairs of the
Castle, many of the Neighboring Assyrians brought him Horses and Arms, The
Assyrian Forrages the Country of Gadatas.
because they now stood in fear of all Borderers. After this, Gadatas came to
Cyrus, and told him that he was informed by Messengers that came to him, that
the Assyrian was mightily concerned about the delivery of the Castle, and that
he was in Preparation to make an Incursion upon the Coast of Gadatas. Wherefore
if you will dismiss me, Cyrus, I will endeavor at least to secure the Works,
as for the rest no great matter what becomes of it. If you go now then, replied
Cyrus, against what time will you be at home? By the third day, says Gadatas, I
will Sup within my own Territories. And do you think you shall find the
Assyrian there? Yes without doubt, says Gadatas. For the farther off he thinks
you to be, he will make the more have. But how soon do you think (says Cyrus) I
can Arrive thither with my Army? You must consider, says Gadatas, your Army is
now swelled to a considerable bigness, and therefore you can scarce come to my
Habitation in six or seven days. Do you then, says Cyrus, hasten away with all
s^eed, and I will march a^r as fastas I can, Whereupon Gadatas ^ent.

But Cyrus calling together the chiefs of his Fellow Soldiers Cyrus prepares
to assist Gadatas.
who now seemed to be many and gallant Men, made this Speech to them. Gadatas
(my Fellow Soldiers) has obliged us all with Kindness of a very high Nature,
and that before he had received any from us. And now it is reported that the
Assyrian invades his Territories, intending to revenge himself upon him,
because he thinks himself very much wronged by him. And perhaps he thinks with
himself, that if he should take no Revenge upon Revolters, and if those that
adhere to him should be thus continually slaughtered by us, in a little time
none will be on his Side any longer. I think therefore 'twou'd be a very
commendable thing, if we did cheerfully lend our assistance to Gadatas, a man
that has so well deserved at our hands. This I think would be but a just
Gratitude to him, and it may be a piece of self-interest: For if Men once
observe that we endeavor to outdo them in ill Turns that hurt us, and them in
good Turns that oblige us, it is probable that we shall have many that will seek
our friendship, and that none will much care to be at Enmity with us. But now
if we seem to neglect Gadatas, with what Rhetoric shall we prevail with others
to do us any Kindness? How shall we be able to justify our selves? How will
any of us be able to look Gadatas in the Face, if we who are so numerous suffer
him to overcome us in Kindness; and at such a Pinch of Necessity too as this?
Thus Cyrus, to which they all unanimously agreed. Well then, says Cyrus, since
all of you like the Proposal, let every one of us leave those with the Horses
and the Carriages who are fittest to march with these; and let Gobryas head
them, since he is acquainted with the ways, and useful also for other Services:
But let us, taking the choicest both How Cyrus ordercd his Army to make them
more fit to march.
of Horse and Men, and three days Provision, set out immediately: For the less
we incumber our selves, we shall Dine, Sup and Sleep the sweeter for these
three days following: Now let us march in this Order. In the first place do you
Chrysantas lead those that wear Breast-Plates (since the way is smooth and
broad) having all the Captains in the Front; and let every Company march one by
one after each other: For if we are close knit together in a Body, our March
will be the faster and the safer. And for that Reason I would have those that
wear Breast-Plates lead before, because they are the heaviest part of the Army.
Now if the heaviest part go foremost, the lighter must needs follow with more
ease: But if the most expedite Part lead by Night, it is no wonder if the Army
be severed: For then the forepart leaves the other lagging behind. Next, let
Artabazus lead the Persians, who carry Targets and Bows. Next, let Andramias
the Mede lead the Medi in Foot; then Embas the Armenian Foot; then Artucas the
H^rcanians; then Thambradas the Sacian Foot: And after all these le^ Damatas
lead the Cadusians. And let all these so lead, that the Captains of the
Companies be in the Front, the Target-men on the right Wing, and the Archers on
the left Wing of their respective Companies: For if they march in this Order,
they will be the readier for any Service: Then let the Lieger-Boys follow with
the Carriages, and let the Captains take care that they pack up all their
things before they sleep, and that they are ready in the morning at the set
place with their Carriages, and so march in their Order. After the Carriages
let Madatas the Persian lead the Persian Horse, having the Centurions of the
Horse in the Front: And let every Centurion lead a single Company by himself,
as the Commanders of the Foot do. After these let Rambacas the Mede lead his
Horse, and after him do you Tigranes lead yours: And let the other Commanders
of the Horse lead those whom they brought with them when they came to us. After
these let the Sacians be led. The Cadusians, as they came last of all, so let
them bring up the Rear: And these, Alcenna, I commit to your Conduct: And now
let every Commander show his Wisdom by marching silently: For every thing must
be observed and done in the night more by the Ear than the Eye. Besides, there
is more danger in having any Disturbance happen by Night than by Day, and more
difficulty in allaying it again. You must of necessity therefore be silent, and
keep your Order. As for our Night-Watches, as often as we have occasion to move
our Station by Night, we must make them as short and as frequent as we can,
lest over-watching indispose us for our March. When the hour of marching is
come the Signal must be given by a Trumpet. And then let every one make ready
what he thinks necessary, and be present in the way that leads toward Babylon.
And let every one that goes before encourage him that is behind to follow him.

After this they went to their Tents, and as they were going they discoursed
among themselves what a vast memory Cyrus had, in that if he had any concern
Cyrus's great Memory.
with any man he would speak to him by name. But this Cyrus did on set purpose,
as thinking it a great shame, that a Mechanic Artificer should know the name of
all his Tools, and that a Physician should know the names of all the parts of
the Body and of the Medicaments which he uses, and that a General should be so
foolish as not to know the names of his Underofficers which he must make use
of as Instruments, whether he be minded to take any thing or keep any thing, to
encourage his Soldiers or to terrify them. Besides, if the Why a General ought
to know the names of his Soldiers
should have a mind to bestow any Honor upon any one, he thought it very
expedient that he should call him by his name. And again, he was of opinion
that those who thought themselves particularly known to the Prince would the
more desire to be seen when they did any brave exploit, and abstain from what
was unworthy of them with the greater abhorrence. He thought it also very
unseemly that a General when he would have any thing done, should command in
the same manner as some Masters of Families do at home, Go some body and fetch
me some Water, and some body go cleave the wood: For should he command after
this manner, he thought all would stand looking one upon another, and no body
would do the thing commanded. And that though they were all equally in fault yet
no body would blush for shame, or be concerned for himself in particular,
because he had a great many to bear him company in his guilt. For these reasons
whenever he commanded any thing to be done, he spoke to them all by name.

This was the judgment of Cyrus, as to this. Now his Soldiers when they had
Supped and placed the Guards and packed up what was necessary betook themselves
to their rest. At Midnight the Trumpet alarmed them up for the march. Cyrus
giving order to Chrysantas that he should stay on the way, at the head of the
Army, set forth with a small Guard attending him. In a short time after
Chrysantas was come leading those that wore Breastplates, Cyrus gave him some
to be his guides on the way and bad him march leasurely on till the return of
the Messenger. For they were not all yet upon the way. He himself standing
still in one place, bad every one as they came along go in his order, and if
any lagg'd behind he sent one to him to hasten him forward. As Soon as all were
upon the Way, he sent a company of Horse to Chrysantas to tell him of it, and
that he should therefore march the faster. He himself riding on toward the
Front, silently observed their Orders, and whomsoever he observed to march
orderly and quietly he rode up to them and asked who they were. And when he
knew he commended them. But if he took notice of any that made disturbance he
examined the matter and used his endeavor to Compose the disorder.

There is yet one more Instance of his Industry Cyrus his great Diligence in
marching in the Night.
by night to be mentioned, which is, that he sent a few nimble Footmen before
the body of the Army, who might still be in sight of Chrysantas and be seen by
him, that if any thing considerable came within their notice they might inform
Chrysantas of it. And there was one among them who Commanded and managed them.
Who if any thing occurred worth Communication he imparted it, if not, he would
not trouble them with needless alarms. And after this manner they marched that
night. On the Morrow Cyrus left some of the Cadusian Horse with their Foot in
r^d they marched last of all, lest they should be quite destitute of the aid of
the Horse. The rest he ordered to march in the Front, directly opposite to the
Enemy, that in case any Opposition should be made, he might be in a ready
posture to encounter it, but if any fled, he might pursue with all Expedition.
And he had always those ready by him, who were fit for a Persuit if need were,
and those who were fit to bide with him. For he would never suffer all his
ranks to be dispersed by a Persuit at once. Thus did Cyrus lead his Army.
Neither did he keep constantly to one place, but rode up and down and bestowed
his Care and Labor where ever there was need of it. In this posture marched
Cyrus his Army.

But a certain man belonging to the Troop of Gadatas, of considerable quality,
hearing that his Master had revolted from the Assyrian, thought he should be
able to beg all that Gadatas had of the Assyrian, in case he should miscarry.
Whereupon he dispatches a trusty messenger of his own to the Assyrian, telling
him that if he saw the Assyrian forces One of Gadatas his Subjects conspires to
betray him.
in the Coast of Gadatas, he should tell the Assyrian that if he would ly in
Ambush he might easily take Gadatas and those that were with him. Moreover he
had him a quaint him with the number of forces which Gadatas had under his
conduct, and that Cyrus did not accompany him. He gave him also directions how
to find Access. And to make the business the more plaosible he gave order to
his Domestics that they should deliver up the Castle which he had in the
Country of Gadatas to the Assyrian with every thing in it. Telling them withal
that he himself would come to them when Gadatas was killed, if he could, if
not, however he would henceforth side with the Assyrian. Now when the person
employed in this business was come with all the expedition he could to the
Assyrian, and had given an account of his errand, the Assyrian immediately upon
the reception of this News, sieses the Castle, and lays a great number of Horse
and of Chariots in Ambush all the Villages round about. Gadatas being but a
little way off from these Villages, sent out some to spy the Country. The
Assyrian perceiving it Ordered two or three Chariots with a few Horsemen to
fly from them as if they were afraid, and their number but very small. As Soon
as the spies took notice of this, they not only Persued themselves, but gave a
sign to Gadatas to do the like. He gulled with this Pretense follows on with
all the eagerness imaginable. The Assyrians when they thought they had Gadatas
sure rise immediately from their Ambush. Upon this Gadatas his Men fled, and
the other partly Persu'd. In the Persuit he that laid this Ambush for Gadatas,
wounded him in the Shoulder, but not mortally. As soon as he had don't he rode
off and joined himself with the rest of the Persuers. Where as soon as ever he
was known, riding on briskly with the Assyrians he assisted the King in the
Persuit. And here those who had but slow Horses were taken by them who were
better mounted. The Horse of Gadatas were now in a great strait, being almost
quite run off their legs, when by good Fortune they saw Cyrus coming with his
Army. This you must needs think was as welcome a sight to them, as the Haven to
weather-beaten Seamen. Cyrus was at first startled at the strangeness of the
accident, but as soon as he understood the business, as long as the Enemy
attacked them, he led on his Army against them. But as soon as the Enemy finding
which way the wind stood began to retreat, Cyrus sent out a company fit for the
purpose to pursue them, and he himself followed on with some others as far as
he thought convenient. Here they The Traitor is slain
took some of their Chariots, and killed a great many of their Men, and among
the rest him that wounded Gadatas. But the Assyrian foot who were laying siege
to the Castle of Gadatas partly secured themselves within the Works, partly
betook themselves to a certain great City of the Assyrian King, whither he
himself also with his Chariots and Horses had fled.

After these Transactions Cyrus retreats into the Country of Gadatas, and
committing the care of the Prisoners to those who were deputed for that Office,
he marches directly on toward Gadatas, to see how he did of his wound. As he
was in his march Gadatas meets him with his wound bound up, whom as soon as
Cyrus saw, I was coming, says he smiling, to see how you did do. And I, replied
Cyrus and Gadatas congratulate each other.
Gadatas, on the other side, was coming to see you, that I might once more
behold that face where such a great Soul lodges. For though you stand in need
of me in nothing that I know, nor have obliged your self by promise, nor been
at all engaged to me by any kindness (unless this must go for one that I seemed
to do a small piece of service to your friends) yet you have afforded me your
assistance with all readiness and alacrity. I protest to you Cyrus, were I in
the condition that I was born in, and had Children of my own, I question
whether one of my own Sons would have been so kindly affected toward me. For I
know how ^is with other Children, and particularly that this very Assyrian King
has been an occasion of more trouble to his own Father then he can be now to
you. Then said Cyrus, Gadatas you spend all your Admiration upon me and pass by
a greater wonder unobserved. And what is tha^ says Gadatas. That so many
Persians, so many Medes, Hyrcanians, Armenians, Sacians and Cadusians came to
your aid. Then said Gadatas, may Heaven shower down plenty of blessings upon all
these and on him that gained me their good will. But that we may bestow a
handsome Collation on these which you so commend, take these Presents such as
they are which I here make you. With that he brought forth good store of good
things, that those who were so disposed might do sacrifice, and that the whole
Army might have a splendid entertainment, according to the greatness of their
Exploits, and the happy success of the day.

But now Cadusius who brought up the Arrear being Cadusius slain.
minded to do something notable himself in regard he was no partner in the
Persuit, made an Excursion into the Country near Babylon never acquainting
Cyrus with his Design. And when his Horse was all in disorder, the Assyrian
King came unexpectedly upon him from the City where he took refuge with his
Army ranged into good Order. And perceiving the Cadusians to be alone, he set
upon them, and killed their Leader with many others. He took also a great many
of their Horses, and the Prey which they then had accidentally with them. The
Assyrians having Persued the Cadusians as far as they thought they might with
safety, retreated. The Cadusians which escaped came home to their Tents about
the Evening. Cyrus when he had an account of the adventure came forth to meet
the Cadusians, and whomsoever he saw wounded Cyrus his compassion toward the
Cadusians.
he took and sent him to Gadatas, that he might be cured. The rest he put
together in the same Tents, where he took special care that they might have
what was necessary. This sad accident Cyrus took so much to heart, that when
the rest were at Supper, he with the attendants and Physicians, left no man
neglected with their good will, but either he himself would stand and look on,
or if he could not do so, he would send those who should attend upon them.
After this they betook themselves to their rest.

But as soon as it was day he ordered a Proclamation to be made that of the rest
the Commanders only, but that all the Cadusians should convene together, to
whom he made this Oration. The Accident He encourages the Cadusians.
which has befallen us Fellow Soldiers is but what Humane Nature is Subject
to. For that men should be guilty of an error is no such strange matter.
However this accident has taught us one good lesson, That a party which is not
able to cope with the Enemy must never venture to stray from the Body of the
Army. I do not say but that a man may go out whither he has occasion with a
less Company then Cadusius ventured out with, but then I would have him
Communicate his resolution to one that his able to help him. And even then it is
possible he may be disappointed, but withal it is also possible that he may
cheat the Enemy with a reserve behind, and divert them from Persuing his
Emissaries. Besides he may find some work or other to keep the Enemy employed
and so secure his friends. And thus a Party may make an Excursion and yet not
be absent, but still depend upon the strength of the Army. But he that makes
private sallys out and tells no body whither he goes, it is all one as if he
made an Expedition alone. But for this execution we will be revenged upon our
Enemies ere long, God willing. As Soon as ever you have dined therefore I will
lead you to the place which was the scene of this Tragedy, where we will bury
our dead, and withal, show our Enemies that there are others more able than
themselves now in that Place, where they think they have won the day, neither
shall they be able to endure the sight of the Place, where they killed our
Fellow Soldiers. But if they refuse to come out against us we will burn up
their Villages, and lay wast their Country, that instead of pleasing themselves
with a Scene of our mise^ies, they shall be troubled with a Survey of their own
Calamities. Let the rest therefore go to Dinner. But do you, ye Cadusians, as
your manner is, choose one forthwith that may preside over you, and join with
Heaven and us in taking care of you in whatever your needs shall require.
As Soon as you have chosen him and taken your Dinner, send him to me. And so
they did. Cyrus ^venges the slaughter of the dusians.


But Cyrus when he had led out his Army, and allotted him his station who was
chosen by the Cadusians, he commanded him to lead his Company near him,
because, says he, I would fain make these men take heart again if possible.
Thus they marched, and when they came thither, they buried the Cadufians, and
laid wast the Country; which when they had done, taking Provision along with
them from the Enemies Portion they returned into the Country of Gadatas. But
when Cyrus considered with himself that those who revol^ed over to him being
near Babylon would be hardly used unless he himself was ever ready at hand, he
acquainted the Assyrian not only by those whom he dismissd of the advers party,
but also by an Ambassador sent on purpose, that he was ready to spare the
Husbandmen, and would do them no harm if he would permit those Husbandmen, who
revolted to him to follow their Employments quietly. Adding moreover, that
although 'twas in his power to prohibit them, yet he could prohibit but a few
(since those who revolted to him had but a small parcel of Ground) whereas the
Cultivation of a great deal of the others Ground lay at his Mercy. Moreover,
says he, when the Harvest is to be gathered in, if there is War betwixt us the
strongest by my consent shall gather all, but in case we enter into a League of
amity you shall do it. Lastly if any of mine take up Arms against you, or any
of yours against me, we will both jointly be revenged upon them to the utmost.
With this message the Ambassador was sent. The Assyrians when they heard the
Proposals, endeavored by all means to persuade their King to give way to all
these things, and to leave as little of hostility among them as might be. The
Assyrian whether out of a desire to comply with his Nation, or an absolute
liking of the thing, consented to the Proposals. Whereupon 'twas agreed betwixt
them that they should be at peace with the Husbandmen, but at War with the
Soldiers. Thus did Cyrus, concerning the Husbandmen. He bad his Men feed their
Horses if they would within their own precincts, but to Plunder the Enemies
Country what they could, that so the warfare might be the more pleasant to his
Fellow Soldiers. For there were the same hazards to be undergon whether they
took any Plunder or no. But to have their Provisions supplied from the Enemies
Country, would take off mightily from the uneasiness of the War.

Now when Cyrus was just ready for the march, Gadatas was come, and with many
other gifts and great Varie^ (...) Household Stuff, he brought with him a great
many Horses, which he had taken from their riders, whom he would now no longer
trust because of their Treacheries. When he was come near, I bring you these
things Cyrus, says he, which I would have you use at this time, if you have
occasion for any of them. And I would have you think that whatever I have
besides is all yours. For I neither have, nor ever shall have any Natural Heir,
to whom I may leave my House. But of necessity both my kindred and my name will
expire with my self. And this, Cyrus, I have suffered (as Heaven is my witness
that sees and hears all things) though I have neither said nor done any unjust
or base thing. And as he was speaking he lamented his Misfortune with tears,
and was not able to say any more.

Cyrus hearing this was moved with Compassion toward the Man, and said to him,
well I accept your Horses, for I think 'twill be a kindness to you to bestow
them on men who are better affected toward you, then those who had them before.
And Cyrus greatly augments the Persian Horse.
I will now immediately augment the Persian Horse (a thing which I have a good
while purposed to do) to the number of ten thousand. As for the rest of the
Household Stuff and Money take it away with you and keep it, till you see me in
a capacity of requiting you. For if you should go away leaving more with me
then you have received from me, I cannot tell how I shall avoid being ashamed.
To which Gadatas replied, I can easily believe you in this, for I perceive what
disposition you are off. But I would have you consider whether I am able to
keep those things. For as long as the Assyrian and we were at peace, methought
my Pa ^ony seemed a very good and convenient thing. Since it being nearly
situated to the great City Babylon, all the Commodiousness that a great City
could afford we had the benefit of. And for the trouble and disturbance of it,
we were far enough out of its reach. But now we are at Enmity as soon as ever
you withdraw, they will immediately vent their spite against our House and our
whole Family. So that in my opinion we shall be in a most miserable case, when
we see our Enemies so nigh and so much more potent then our selves. But perhaps
you will say, why did not I think of this sooner before I had revolted? Why to
tell you the truth, Cyrus, my mind was so overcome with a passionate resentment
for the wrongs I received that I did not consider what was safest, but was
always revolving this with my self, When shall I be revenged of this wretch
hated by God and Man, who continually bears a spleen against not only those
that do him any injury, but are any way better then himself? Since therefore he
is an ill Man himself, he will I believe use such Fellow Soldiers as are worse
then himself. But if any one among them seem to excel him, you need not
trouble your self, Cyrus, to fight against that Eminent Man, but leave the
Execution of him to the contrivance of the Assyrian. But however weak his
Associates are, I am afraid he will be never the less able enough to afflict me.

When Cyrus heard this, he thought it worthy of Consideration. Then, says he,
But what do you say Gadatas, have not you fortified your Castle with a strong
Garrison, which may afford you security when ever you betake your self to it?
Are not you imbody'd with us, so that if the Gods side with us as they have
done hitherto, he has more reason to dread you, then you him. Come then and
march along with me, and take with you whatsoever you have that you delight in.
For you will be of great use to me, and I for my part will endeavor what I can
to be so to you. Which when Gadatas heard, he sighed and said, And can I make
ready my things before you go? For I would fain carry my Mother with me. You
may, replied Cyrus, for I will stay till you say you are ready. So Gadatas went
away, and he and Cyrus together placed Garrisons in those Castles which he had
fortified, and got together as much Household Stuff as would sufficiently
furnish a large House. Moreover he carried most of his Men along with him, both
those which were faithful whom he delighted in, and those whom he distrusted.
Some of which he made carry their Wives with them, others their Sisters,
thinking by these bonds to hold them the faster to himself. Cyrus having Cyrus
returns to Babylon.
now every thing in readiness departed with Gadatas and his company. Who served
as a guide to him in the Ways, and showed him where Water and other Provisions
were to be had, that so he might quarter always in the best places.

But as soon as he came in sight of the City Babylon, and perceived that the Way
which he was in did lead home to the Walls of the City, he called Gobryas and
Gadatas to him, and asked them whither there was any other Way, that they might
not approach so nigh the Walls. Yes, replied Gobryas, there are a great many
Ways, but I thougt you had a mind to lead up as home to the City as you could,
that they might see what a numerous and brave Army you have. For when your
Company was less, you came up to the very Wall, where they saw how few we were.
But now although the Assyrian be in readiness, (as you know he, said he, was
making Preparation for an engagement) yet I know when he sees your Forces he
will again think himself unprepared.

To this said Cyrus, you seem, my Gobryas, to wonder that then when I came with
a much less Army I led quite up to the Walls, and that now when I Why Cyrus
would not now approach too near the walls.
come provided with more Forces, I scruple to lead by them. But you should not
wonder at that. For it is not the same thing to lcad up to, and to lead by a
place: For all Men use to lead up in such order as is most convenient to Fight
in, but all that understand any thing lead off so, as they may withdraw with
the greatest safety, not with the greatest speed. Now in passing by the
Chariots must needs be extended, and the other Carriages be mightily
discomposed, and all these must be surrounded with armed Men. So that the
carriages be never seen destitute of a Guard by the Enemy. And if we march at
this rate the choice and Warlike Souldicrs must needs be placed just by the
feeble and infirm part. If therefore the Enemy should body together and assault
any of these that pass by from the Works, with what part soever they engage
they will be too hard for those that pass by. Besides, they who march in a long
tr^in, cannot receive recruits but at a great distance, whereas those who break
forth out of the works, can pass off and on in a little time to those who stand
hard by. But now if we march just within sight, and with our ranks all at large
as we do now, they will see how numerous we are, and all our Company will
appear dreadful by reason of the Armed Men that are every where interwoven. Now
if they come on against us as we march so, we shall see them long enough
beforehand to prevent a Surprise. But it is most likely they will not venture
to assault us at all, since they must make their retreat a great way off from
their Walls, unless they think they with all their Forces can worst our whole
Army. For a retreat is a very dangerous thing. When he had said this, all that
were present were satisfied with his discourse. So Gobryas led as he commanded
him. And when the Army was passing by the City Cyrus so drew off that the
Arrear was still the most Fortified part.

Thus marching on in a few days he arrived at the borders of the Assyrians and
Medes, whence he first set out. There he took one of the weakest of the
Assyrian Castles by force, the other two partly by the dread of Cyrus and
partly by the persuasion of Gadatas surrendered themselves. After these
transactions he sent a Letter to Cyaxares to desire him to come to the Army.
That so they might advise what to do with the Castles which they had taken, and
that when he had seen the Army himself he might consult with them about other
Affairs, and tell them what he thought best to be done next. And Cyrus sends
for Cyaxares to go one to the Army.
if it be his pleasure to have me come to him, tell him I will do so, and
incamp there? with this errand the Messenger was sent away.

Cyrus in the mean time gave order to Gadatas, that he should furnish the Tent
of the Assyrian, which the Medes had set apart for Cyaxares, with all the
neatness imaginable. And that he should place both the Women in a particular
apartment of the Tent, and with them the Musical Women which were chosen out
for Cyaxares. Which was done accordingly. But when he that was sent to Cyaxares
had don his errand, Cyaxares thought it more expedient that the Army should
remain in the Confines where it was. For the Persians, which Cyrus brought with
him, were there already, who were about forty thousand Archers and Target Men.
Wherefore perceiving that the Country of the Medes suffered great detriment
even from these, he was so Far from being willing to admit of a greater
multitude that he would fain be rid of them. And when he that brought these
Forces from Persia asked Cyaxares according to Cyrus his command whether he had
any need of this Army, and he told him no, he led the Army again to Cyrus on
the same day wherein he heard he was arrived.

The next day Cyaxares with the Median Horse which remained with him began his
expedition. Cyrus hearing of his coming took with him the Persian Horse who
were now very numerous and all the Medes, Armenians, Hyrcanians and those of
his other Fellow Soldiers who were best accommodated with Horse and Arms, and
went out to meet him, and showed him the Pomp of his Army. Cyaxares when he saw
what a company of brave stout Men were in Cyrus his r^tinue, and what a small
despicable Handful of attendants were with himself, he Cyaxares envies Cy^
thought this was much to his dishonor, and was mightily troubled about it.
And when Cyrus lighted from his Horse and came near to salute him according to
the mode, he lighted also from his Horse, but turned away his Face, and refused
to kiss him, but wept in open view.

Then Cyrus commanded all the rest to withdraw and be silent, and he himself
taking Cyaxares by the hand, led hin a little aside under some Palm Trees,
where ordering some Median Blankets to be put under Foot, he sat close by him,
and begun thus with him. I conjure you my Uncle by all that is sacred, to tell
me on what account you are angry with me? What is it that you see here that so
troubles you? To this Cyaxares made this answer. Because whereas the Ancestors
from whom I am descended have been Kings time out of mind, whereas I had a King
to my Father, and I my self am also accounted a King, yet I see my self in such
a mean Equipage, and you appear here in such Magnificence with my Servants and
other Forces. And this in my opinion is hard to take at the hands of an Enemy,
but much more grievous to suffer by those from whom I least expected it. In
earnest, I think it better to be ten times buried under Ground then to appear
so vile and contemptible, and see my self neglected and made the scorn of my
Soldiers. For I am not ignorant that not only you are greater then I, but that
my own Servants meet me with a stronger Equipage then I have with me, so that
they are better able to hurt me then I them.

At the speaking of which words he was again overcome with Tears; So that he
brought even Cyrus himself to that pass, that his Eyes stood full of Water: But
when he had a little controlled his Passion, he addressed himself thus to him:
Indeed, my Cyaxares, you are under a great Mistake if you Cyrus excuses himself.
think the Medes are therefore in such a Posture whereby they are enabled to do
you any Mischief, because they are with me: I do not much wonder that you are
angry, and that you are distrustful: But whether you have just Grounds for it
or no I shall enquire: Because I know you will not take it well if you should
hear me turn their Advocate: But to deal freely with you, it is a great piece of
Imprudence for any Governor to be angry with all his Subjects at once: For
when many are afraid, many will of necessity turn Enemies: besides, to be angry
with all, is the ready way to make all band together into a Conspiracy: And I
would have you know, that 'twas for this very reason, that I would not return
these men to you again without coming with them my self, because I was afraid
lest any thing should happen through your displeasure which might occasion
Grief to us all: Therefore you need not fear any Danger from these while I am
here present: But whereas you think you have sustained much wrong from me, I
cannot choose but be mightily troubled, if while I endeavor to the utmost to
oblige and pleasure my Friends, I shall be thought to do quite contrary. But to
what purpose is it thus rashly to charge one another? Rather, if it be
possible, let us understand clearly what manner of Injury it is that I have
done you: And I think this is a very just Proposal among Friends. For if it
appear that I have done any ill, I will own my self unjust. But if it shall
appear that I am guilty of nothing ill, not so much as in thought, will not you
also confess that you have not been injured by me? That truly is but reason,
replied the other. But in case it appear that I have been the Author of good to
you, and that I have been Industrious to heap as many kindnesses upon you, as I
could, will you not think I deserve rather to be commended, then blamed? And
good reason I should, said the other. Well then (says Cyrus) let us examine
all the particulars Cyrus reckons up his good Services done for Cyaxares.
of what I have done, and so we shall know what there is of good in them and
what of evil. In the first place then, when you understood that a great
Multitude of your Enemies were banded together against you, and had made an
inrode into your Country, immediately you sent to the Persians in common for
assistance and to me in particular, desiring that I would come my self, and
that if any of the Persian Forces were willing to assist you, I would head
them. And did not I comply with you in this, did not I come, did not I bring
with me as numerous and as good an Army as I could? It Is true, you did so. Then
tell me in the first place, was I Injurious to you in this particular or
beneficial? It Is plain said Cyaxares that you were beneficial. To proceed
then, when the Enemy was arrived, and opposition was to be made against them,
did you then take notice that I spared any labor, or shrunk from any danger?
No truly I did not. When again by the favor of Heaven we got the Victory and
the Enemy retreated, and I desired you that we might join our Forces in the
Persuit, and execution of them, and that whatever happened either good or bad
we might share alike in it, can you in any of these tax me with selfishness, or
that I was over and above Studious of my own interest? To this Cyaxares made no
reply. Then said Cyrus again, well since you think silence in this point is the
best answer, did you take it as an injury that when it seemed not safe for you
to Pursue, I would not suffer you to hazard your Person, but desired you to let
me have some of your Horse? Did I do you any injury in asking this of you,
especially since I had before been an Assistant to you in the fight? this I
would fain have made out. To which when Cyaxares made no answer, Cyrus went on.
But since you will neither answer to this, tell me Cyaxares, was I injurious to
you because when you told me you would not take off the Medes from their
Merriment which you saw them engaged in by employing them in an hazardous
Persuit, I would not give way to any resentment, but afterward renewed the
same request to you, then which nothing less could be granted by you to me, and
nothing easier be imposed upon the Medes? For I only asked you to give me those
who were willing to follow me. And when I had a grant, I did nothing but by
persuasion. So that I came to them, won upon them by persuading them, took them
and so departed, and all this by your permission. And if I am to be blamed for
this, then 'twill be a fault to take any thing that you give me. This was the
manner of our setting out. And when we were gone, what was there done by us that
is not known to all? Were not the Tents of the Enemy taken? Were not the
greater part of those slain who came against you? Did we not take away from
those that remained alive their Horses and their Arms? And as for the fortunes
of those that heretofore invaded your possessions, you see them now in the
hands of your friends, part of which they bring to you, and part by your leave
they reserve for themselves. And which is the most glorious thing of all, you
see your own Territories enlarged, and those of your Enemy diminished. You see
their Castles taken, and your own which the Syrians had possessed themselves of
now in your own power again. And now methinks it is an insignificant thing to
inquire whether these things be good or bad, but yet however I am willing to
hear what your sentiments are.

To this Cyaxares returned this Answer: Indeed Cyrus, I know not how to charge
your actions with any thing ill: But I would have you know, that Cyaxares
discovers his envy toward Cyrus.
these good Turns of yours are of such a Nature, that the greater Show they
make, the more troublesome they are to me:For I would rather see your Dominions
enlarged by my Forces, than mine by yours: Because these Actions which make you
illustrious, eclipse my Light: And so for these Gifts, I had rather you were at
the receiving hand than I; for by thus enriching me you make me the poorer. In
truth, if I should see my Subjects moderately injured by you, it would not
grieve me so much as it does to see them thus laden with Obligations: But if
this seems to you an unreasonable Complaint, make it your own Case, and
consider: Suppose any body should make much of those Dogs which you bred up to
keep your House, so as to make them more familiar with him than with your self,
would you thank him for such a piece of Service? But if this seem an
inconsiderable Instance, suppose he should so endear those Servants whom you
keep for the defense of your self and your Family, that they would rather be
his than yours, would you think your self obliged to him for this Kindness? But
to instance in a thing which all men set the highest Value upon, and take the
greatest Care of: Suppose any one should so far oblige your Wife with Offices
of Kindness, that at length she should love him more than your self, would this
please you? I think not: Nay, he could not do you a greater Injury. But to come
nearer home yet, suppose any one should by civil Applications so far win upon
the Affections of those Persians whom you led hither, that they would more
willingly follow him than your self, would you think him your Friend? No, I
believe not; but rather more your Enemy than if he had killed a great many of
your men. What if a Friend of yours, when you courteously bid him be his own
Carver, and take what he please of your Substance, should go and take all that
he could, and so enrich himself, leaving you the least Share, would you think
such a Friend altogether faultless? Now, Cyrus, this is the Case betwixt you
and me, or at least much of this Nature: For by your own Confession, when I
gave you leave to take as many as were willing to follow you, you took all my
Forces, and left me quite alone: And now you bring me those things which you
took by the Service of my Army and enlarge my Dominions with my own Forces; I
in the mean time appear here like a Woman, nothing contributing to your
Advantage, but altogether at the receiving hand, and that even from my own
Subjects. You carry the appearance of the man, whilst I am thought unworthy of
Government. Are these your Kindnesses, Cyrus? Methinks you should know, that if
you had any Esteem for me, you ought to be tender of nothing so much as of
lessening my Authority and Dignity: For what am I the better, if while my
Territories are enlarged I my self am contemptible? For I was not advanced to
the Median Crown upon this Account, because I really was more excellent than
all the rest; but rather because I was presumed so to be.

Then Cyrus interrupting him; For God's sake, my uncle, if ever I did any thing
pleasing to you in my Life, gratify me in what I shall now request of you;
which is, that you would make an end of Cyrus interrupts his uncles complaints.
complaining of me for this time: But when you have seen by Experiment how I
stand affected toward you, if it appear that what I have done was all for your
Good, return me Love for Love, and think that I have well deserved at your
hands; but if otherwise, then complain on. Well, I think, says Cyaxares, you do
not talk much out of the way: I will do as you say. Shall I then salute you?
said Cyrus. Yes if you please. And will not you turn away from me as but now? I
will not, says he. Whereupon They are friends again.
Cyrus embraced him; which when the Medes, Persians, and the rest saw, (for
they were all very much concerned what would be the Issue of these things) they
were mightily affected with Joy.

And now Cyaxares and Cyrus mounting their Horses, rode on before the Medes
following Cyaxares (for so Cyrus beckoned to them to do) and the Persians
Cyrus. When they were come to the Camp, they placed Cyaxares in the Tent which
was provided for him; and those who were assigned for that Employment, served
him with Necessaries. The rest of the Medes, during the leisure time which
Cyaxares had before Supper, came to visit him, and partly of their own accord,
but chiefly by the Order of Cyrus, presented him with Gifts of all sorts. The
Medes bring presents to Cyaxares.
One brought him a good Butler, another a good Cook, another a Baker, another a
Musiclan, another Cups, another a fine suit of Clothes. Every one for the most
part presented him with something of that which he had taken, In so much that
Cyaxares wholly changed his mind, and no longer suspected Cyrus of alienating
his Subjects affections from him, or that he was less observed by them now then
before.

Now when Supper time was come, Cyaxares called Cyrus to him, and desired him
since he had not seen him for a long time, to Sup with him. But Cyrus begged
him to excuse him in this particular. Don't you see (says he) that all that are
here present were brought hither by me? Therefore 'twon't be convenient to
neglect them and seem to indulge my own pleasure. For when Soldiers once think
themselves neglected, the Courageous will be dejected and dispirited, and the
Cowardly will grow Insolent and intolerable. But do you since you are come
along journey go immediately to Supper, and if you have any particular Friends
invite them to your Table and cheer your self with their Society, for my part,
I will dispose of my self as I said. But to morrow morning all of us that are
fit for Consultation will be ready at your Gate that we may advise with you
what is best to be done next. And do you let us know your mind in this, whether
you are for carrying on the War yet, or for disbanding the Army.

After this Cyaxares went to Supper. But Cyrus calling together some of his
choice Friends who were fittest for Counsel or action as occasion required
expressed himself thus to them. We have, my friends, by the favor of the Gods
obtained what we chiefly wished for. For where ever we go we are Victorious. We
see the Enemy in the Wain, and our selves in the Increase. Wherefore if those
who are already come to us, will continue with us, we shall be able to go
through with more undertakings, whether we are to use Violence or Persuasion.
Therefore it is your concern as much as mine Cyrus is for coninuing the
Expedition.
to endeavor to prevail with the Major part of our Fellow Soldiers to tarry
with us.

Now as in a fight he that takes most is counted the best man, So he that in
debate brings most over to our side, ought to be accounted the most Eloquent
and Prudent Man. Neither would I have you ambitious of showing to us what
Rhetoric you use with every one of them, but endeavor so to deal with them,
that they may show how you have gained upon them by their actions. This
therefore I commit to your Care. My business shall be to see the Soldiers
furnished with Provisions, and that a Consultation be had about an Expedition.

XENOPHON'S INSTITUTION AND LIFE OF CYRUS the GREAT. THE SIXTH BOOK.
WHen they had thus spent the day and Supped they betook themselves to their
rest. The next day after, in the morning all the Soldiers Convened together at
Cyaxares his Gate. Now while Cyaxares upon the report of a great multitude
gathered together at his Gate, was dressing himself, some of Cyrus his friends
brought to him the Cadusians petitioning him that he would stay, some the
Hyrcanians, one Gobryas, and another Sacas. Hystaspas brought Gadatas the
Eunuch desiring the same favor of Cyrus. Then Cyrus knowing that Gadatas was
long since almost dead for fear lest the Army should be disbanded, said to him
with a smile, it is plain now that Hystaspas put you in the Head to ask this of
me. Whereupon Gadatas lifting up his Hands to Heaven protested solemnly, that
he was not persuaded to it by Hystaspas, but I know (says he) if you go away I
shall be utterly undon. And 'twas upon that consideration that I went to him,
to ask him what was your mind concerning the disbanding of the Army. Then it
seems, said Cyrus, I blame Hystaspas undeservedly, yes truly, replied
Hystaspas. For on the contrary I dissuaded Gadatas, and told him 'twas
impossible you should stay, because you were sent for by your Father. How says
Cyrus, did you dare to tell him so, whether I would or no? Yes indeed, for I
know you are impatiently desirous to ride up and down Persia in Pomp, and give
your Father a particular account of all your brave exploits. And are not you,
says Cyrus, desirous of returning home too? No says Hystaspas, I Will stay here
and perform the Office of a Commander, till I have made this Gadatas Master of
the Assyrian.

While they were thus seriously jesting, Cyaxares They consult whether it is
best to put an end to the War, or not.
came forth adorned in his Robes of State and seated himself on the Median
Throne. And when all whose, presence was needful were assembled together, and
silence proclaimed Cyaxares delivered his mind to this purpose. Since I am here
present (Fellow Soldiers) and am elder then Cyrus, it may be proper for me to
speak first. I think it high time to deliberate whether it be most for our
advantage to carry on the War or to disband the Army. Concerning this point
therefore let some Body or other give his Opinion. Whereupon Hyrcanius first
began. I know not, says he, what need there is of many Words, when the matter
is so clear. For we all know that when we are all together in a body we do more
damage to the Enemy then we receive. But when we were severed one from another,
we found by sad experience that they dealt with us as they pleased. Then
Cadusins, to what purpose, says he, should we go home, and every one live by
himself, when as we find now we are in a posture of Arms it is not convenient
for us to be asunder? I Am sure we Cadusians paid severely for offering to stray
from the Body of the Army, though but for a little while. Then Artabazus who
called himself the Kinsman of Cyrus, for my part, says he, I dissent thus far
from all that have spoken before me. They say that we ought to stay here in a
military posture. But I say I was continually in an Expedition, even while I
was at home: For I oftentimes afforded my assistance both when our goods were
plundered and our Castles besieged treacherously, besides my care of the
Garrison, and all this I did at my own charge. But now I am possessed of their
Castles, and am not at all afraid of them, and eat and drink of the Enemies
Provisions. Since therefore my Domestic Life was a warfare, and my military
Life a continual feast, I would not by any means the Army should be disbanded.
Then said Gobryas, I cannot choose (Fellow Soldiers) but commend the
performances of Cyrus's hand, for he has been wan^ing in nothing that he
promised. But if he should leave this Country, it is plain in the first place
that the Assyrian will be at rest, nor suffer punishment for those injuries
which he has endeavored to do to you, nor those which he has in effect don to
me. And besides I shall be sure to be plagued by him for fiding with you.
Neither am I ignorant (said The Opinion of Cyrus after all.
Cyrus last of all) that if we disband the Army, our Forces will be weakened
and the Enemy strengthened. For whosoever of them had their Arms or Horses
taken from them will quickly get a new supply of each, and others will spring
up in the room of those that were slain, so that without a miracle they may
again find us employment. Why therefore did I advise Cyaxares to call a Council
about disbanding the Army? Truly because I was afraid of what is behind. For I
see marching up toward us such Adversaries which we cannot encounter if we
incamp here. The Winter is coming on apace, and though we have Houses for our
selves, yet we have not for our Horses, nor our Servants, nor for our common
Soldiers, without whom we cannot fight the Enemy. And then as for our
Provision, as far as we have come we have spent it all, and where we have not,
'twas carried into the Works for fear. So that the Enemy has fast hold of that,
and will in spite of our Teeth. Who then is so Courageous, who so strong as to
encounter hunger and cold? If this then be like to be the Condition of a
Military Life, it is better in my judgment willingly to disband the Army, then
against our wills to be broken with hardship and indigence. But if you are
resolved to hold out in this warfare, our best way will be to endeavor
forthwith to take away as many fortified places from the Enemy as we can, and
to fortify more for our selves. For if we take that course, they will be best
stocked with Provision who hoard up what they take from the other, and they
will be besieged who are less stored. For the present, our Condition is just
like that of Mariners. For they Sail on still, but yet that part of the Ocean
which they have left behind is no more their own, then that which they have not
Sailed over. But if we take their Castles, the whole Country will be the more
alienated from the Enemy, and we our selves shall enjoy the more quiet. And
whereas some of you may fear lest you should be placed in Garrisons far off
from your own Country, I would not have you trouble your selves with that; for
we will take the places next to the Enemy, under our Charge, and you shall
inhabit the Regions of Assyria, which Border on your own Country. For if we can
keep those places which lie next the Enemy, you who dwell agreat way off from
them will pass your time in great peace and quiet. It being not likely that
neglecting the dangers nearer home, they will molest you at that distance.

When these discourses were ended, some presently stood up and readily
proffered their Service, and among the rest Cyaxares himself. Cyrus perceiving
them so ready to perform whatever he proposed, said thus, if then you are
resolved to do what has been said, we must with all speed get Engines made to
demolish the Enemies Walls, and Smiths to raise up Fortifications for our
selves. Then Cyaxares promised that he would get them an Engine made, and
Gadatas and Gobryas undertook for another, Tigranes for another, and Cyrus for
another. The business being thus resolved upon they immeately hired Workmen and
provided Materials, and set some Select Persons to oversee the Work.

Cyrus perceiving this was like to be a tedious A cunning Artifice of Cyrus.
piece of Work, encamped his Army in a place which he thought was wholesome and
of easy access to those who should bring Provision. And he so fortified all
places that were out of repair, that those who were in them should be safe though
sometimes remote from the body of the Army. Besides he inquired of those who
were acquainted with the Country, what places would be most convenient to
incamp in, and so always led some of his Men out to seek after Provision,
partly that they might store themselves the better with things necessary,
partly to make them strong and healthy by continual Exercise, and partly that
they might be accustomed to keep their Ranks. Thus did Cyrus keep himself
employed.

But news was brought by some Renegades and Slaves which came from Babylon,
that the Assyrian The Assyrian goes into Lydia;
was gone into Lydia with a great many Talents of Gold and Silver, and other
Riches, and Furniture of all sorts. Whereupon the Common Soldiers conjectured
that he carried his Wealth to another place, because afraid to trust it at
home. But Cyrus who knew the errand of his departure was to Excite Cyrus alone
perceives the design of his Expedition thither.
against them more Adversaries if he could, prepared himself for whatever
Opposition he should meet with. Whereupon he augmented the Persian Horse, the
Slaves supplying him with some Horses and his Friends with others. For he took
all that was brought him refusing nothing whether Horses or Arms. He provided
himself also with Chariots, some of which he had taken in War, and some he
procured otherwise. The old Trojan Way of driving Cyrus abolishes the old way
of driving Chariots.
Chariots, and also that which is in use at this day among the Cyreneans he
utterly abolished. For in former times the Medes, Syrians, Arabians and all the
Nations of Asia did use their Chariots in the same manner as the Cyreneans do
now. Now Cyrus thought with himself, that that part of the Army which was
likely to be the most strong (the choicest men being commonly in the Chariots)
would according to the old way of making Chariots, only be a part of the light
harnessed Soldiers, and contribute but very little to the Victory. For three
hundred Chariots supply but three hundred fighting men, and yet require twelve
hundred Horses, besides three hundred Charioteers: But these are those And
invents a new sort.
that do no considerable hurt to the Enemy. Wherefore these sort of Chariots he
put away, and instead of them, he provided others which were fit for War, with
firm Wheels, that they might not easily be broken, and with long Axletrees,
because broad things are not so^apt to be overturned: The Coachbox was like a
Tower, made of strong Timber, and came up to the Elbows of the Coachmen, who
were Armed all Cap-a-pe except their Eyes. Besides he faslned Irons Siths of
two Cubits long on each side of the Axletree, and another under the Axletree
tending downwards: And these very Chariots which Cyrus then invented are now
still in use among those that live in the Kings Dominions, Cyrus had also got
together a great many Camels, some given to him by his Friends, and some taken
in War. After this manner did he prepare himself.

But being minded to send a spy into Lydia to Araspas in love with the Lady
Panthea.
know what the Assyrian was doing there, he thought none so fit for that
employment as Araspas the keeper of the fair Lady Panthea. Now this Araspas had
an accident happened to him, which was this. Being desperately in love with
this Lady he could not forbear, but must needs solicit her for a nights
lodging. But she refused, resolving to be true to her Husband though absent (for
she loved him mightily) yet she did not accuse Araspas to Cyrus, being loath to
breed difference betwixt Friends. But when Araspas thinking thereby to
accomplish his desire threatened her, that unless she would consent willingly,
he would force her whether she would or no, then indeed fearing lest Violence
should be offered her, she no longer conceals the business, but sends her
Eunuch to Cyrus with a command to acquaint him with the whole matter. Cyrus
as soon as he had a Relation of it, laughed heartily, to think how far he lately
fancied himself out of the reach of love. Whereupon he sends Artabazus along
with the Eunuch and bids him tell Araspas that he should by no means offer
Violence to a Lady of her quality, but if he could persuade her by fair means,
well and good. But Artabazus when he came to Araspas fell foul upon him,
telling him that he had betrayed his trust, and called him impious, injurious
and incontinent. Insomuch that Araspas fell aweeping, and was quite out of
Countenance with shame, and almost dispirited with fear lest Cyrus also should
take Cognizance of it. Which when Cyrus knew, he sent for Cyrus speaks kindly
to Araspas.
him, and discoursed with him in private. (...) perceive (says he) Araspas, you
are afraid of me, and greatly ashamed. But I would not have you trouble your
self. For I have been told that the Gods themselves have yielded to the Charms
of love, and I know what some have suffered from love who had the reputation of
Wise Men. Nay, I am not such a stranger to my self as to be ignorant, that I
cannot sit with a fair Woman and be unconcerned. But the truth is I am in the
fault for shutting you up with such irresistible Charms. Then Araspas
interrupting him, Cyrus, says he, you are ever like your self, that is,
merciful and apt to pardon Humane frailties. But yet other men overwhelme me
with grief, for ever since the noise of this accident has been spread about, my
Enemies triumph upon my misery, and my friends advise me to abscond, lest you
punish me for the great wrong I have don you. Then said Cyrus, know Araspas
that by this common opinion of the World concerning you, you may have an
opportunity of doing me a great kindness, and your Fellow Soldiers much good.
Would I could (replied Araspas) be again any way serviceable to The subt^ty of
Cyrus.
you. Why, if you will pretend that you fly from me, and join your self to the
Enemy, I fancy you will easily be believed. Truly, says Araspas, I am confident
^twill be rumored about by my friends that I fly from you. Then, says Cyrus,
you may return to us again, and inform us how matters stand with the Enemy. For
I am confident they will trust you so far, as to make you privy to all their
Counsels and designs, so that you may be ignorant of nothing that we desire to
know. Well then, says Araspas, I will e'ne go without any more ado. For this
one thing will be enough to render my coming unsuspected, that I shall be
supposed to have turned Renegade for fear of you. But can you find in your
Heart to leave the fair Panthea? Truly Cyrus I am sure now I have two Souls.
This Philosophy I have just now learnt from my cruel Master love. For if I had
but one only Soul, it would not be at once good and bad, nor at the same time
love honest things and filthy things, nor at once will to do and not to do the
same. But it is plain we have two Souls, and when the good Soul gets the upper
hand, we undertake honest Actions, but when the evil Soul bears sway, we do
evil. But now since my good Soul is furthered by your assistance it has much
the better of the other. Well then, says Cyrus, if you are resolved to go, you
must so contrive your business that you may be the more believed. I would have
you tell them what we are doing, and so order your story that what you shall
say may hinder them from doing what otherwise they would do. And the way to do
that, is to tell them that we are preparing to make an inrode somewhere upon
their Country. For if they hear of that, they will not collect the strength of
their Forces all into one place, since every one will be concerned for the
safety of his own House; I would have you also spend a considerable time with
them: For It will be much for our interest to know what they do when they are at
a little distance from us: And besure you advise them to set their Army in
battle array after their best method: For they will be sure to observe the same
order after Araspas joins himself with the Enemy on purpose to betray them.
you are gone from them, which you saw when you were there: For they will be
afraid to alter their postures, neither can they do it on a sudden, without
much disorder. Araspas being thus lesson'd took a few trusty Servants with him
and went his way.

Now when Panthea heard that Araspas was gone she sent a message to Cyrus to
this effect: Don't trouble your self, Cyrus, because Araspas is revolted to the
Enemy, for if you will give me leave to send for my Husband, I Will undertake you
shall have a friend of much more fidelity then Araspas, and besides I know he
will come to you with as many Forces with him as he can bring. For the Father
of this King that now Reigns was his great friend, but he that is now in the
Throne endeavored to separate me and my Husband from each other, And therefore
I am sure that since he has had experience of his insolence he will come over
to such a man as you are with all his Heart. When Cyrus heard this he bad her
send to her Husband, which she did: Now when Abradatas knew his Wives Abradatus
comes over to Cyrus.
Zeal, and perceived also how other things stood, he with all readiness and
joyfulness came over to Cyrus with about two thousand Horse with him. As Soon as
he arrived as far as the place where the Persian Spies were, he sends away to
Cyrus, and signifies who he was, Cyrus gave order immediately that the Man
should be conducted to his Wife: As Soon as they saw each other they embraced
with all the passionate indearments that were proper for such an unexpected
meeting. Then Panthea gave him a relation how piously, temperately and
mercifully Cyrus had behaved himself toward her: which when Abradatas heard,
what shall I do my Panthea, says he, to express my gratitude to Cyrus both on
your account and my own? I know no better way, replied she, then that you
endeavor to behave your self toward him, as he has toward you.

After this Abradatas came into Cyrus's presence, whom as soon as ever he saw,
taking him by the hand, the greatest return (says he) which I can make you for
those favors wherewith you have so obliged us, is that I here present my self
to you as your friend, your Servant, and your Fellow-Souldier: What ever you
undertake you shall be sure of the best assistance which I can afford you. And
I (replied Cyrus) accept of your service, but I will dismiss you for the
present that you may Sup with your Wife: Henceforward you shall make use of my
Tent, with your friends and mine.

After this Abradatas observing that Cyrus was mightily taken up with his
Chariots that bore Sithes, and his Horse and Horsemen that were armed with
Brest-Plates, he provided an hundred Chariots made after the same fashion, and
he himself led them riding in a Chariot of his own, which was so hung that it
had four draught Trees and eight Horses. His Lady Panthea, out of her own store
made him a Golden Breast Plate, a Golden Helmet and likewise Coverings for his
Arms. His Coach-horses were adorned all over with Brass- Trappings: And thus
was Abradatas employed. Cyrus taking notice Cyrus makes Chariots to be drawn
with eight yoke of Oxen.
of his Chariot with four draught Trees, perceived 'twas possible to make one
with eight, that so it might be drawn with eight yoke of Oxen: And this Chariot
stood three else from the Ground. He thought if these great Towers followed
with his ranks, 'twould be a great strengthening to the Body of his Army, and a
great disadvantage to the Enemy. In every one of these Chariots he made Towers
and Fortifications, and in every Tower he placed twenty Men.

But when all the work that belonged to the Towers was finished, he made trial
of the drawing them. And he found that those eight yokes would much more easily
draw a Tower with the Soldiers in it, then one yoke its single carriage: For
the lading of one yoke used to amount to the weight of twenty five Talents. But
now whereas each Tower was about the thickness of a Tragic Scene, and bore
twenty men apiece with their Arms, every yoke had not so much as fifteen
Talents weight to its share. Now when he perceived that these Chariots might be
driven with small labor, he prepared to lead on against the Enemy with his
Towers and his Army. For he thought the desire of bettering ones Condition a
very just and prosperous thing in War.

About this time some Ambassadors came from The Indian King sends Money to
Cyrus.
India who brought money to Cyrus, and a Letter from the Indian King to this
effect. I take it very kindly, Cyrus, that you would acquaint me with your
wants: I am willing there should be an intimacy betwixt us, in token whereof I
send you this money; Besides I have commanded those that bring this to you to
do what ever you bid them: Which when Cyrus had read, my pleasure is, says he,
that some of you remain in the Tents which you have lodged in, and guard this
money, and live as pleasantly as you can. And that three of you go to the Enemy
pretending that you come from the Indian King to treat about a league, and when
you know in what posture things are with them, bring me and the Indian word
as soon as may be, both what they say and do: If you will be serviceable to me
in this I shall take it as a greater kindness then the money which you brought
me. For as for spies they like Servants can bring intelligence of nothing but
what is known to all. But such men as you oftentimes, have the luck to know
even their Cabinet-Counsels. The Indians after they heard this, and were nobly
entertained by Cyrus, departed the next day, engaging themselves under an oath
to return as soon as ever they had sufficiently informed themselves concerning
the state of the Enemy.

Now when Cyrus had made Preparation for the War in a very magnificent manner
(as indeed he was a man that did nothing meanly) he did not only busy himself
about those things which his Fellow Soldiers thought fit to be don, but
kindled an ambition among his friends who should appear best armed, best
skilled in riding and throwing of a Dart, and best able to endure hardship and
labor. And this he did by leading them out ahunting, and by honoring those
who excelled. Moreover if he observed any Commanders that made it their
business to improve their Soldiers, he encouraged them partly by commending
the partly by gratifying them in what he could. And if at any time he did
Sacrifice or celebrated a festival, he instituted warlike Games and exercises
and conferred great rewards on the Victors: So that there was a great deal of
joy and content in the Army.

Cyrus had now almost finished all things in order to his Expedition except the
Engines. For the number of the Persian Horse was now improved to ten thousand.
And there was about an hundred Chariots that bore Sithes of his own making,
besides so many more which Abradatas the Susan made in imitation of them. Cyrus
also persuaded Cyaxares to change his Median Chariots from the Trojan and
Libyan form to the same fashion: And these made up another hundred. Besides,
there were Soldiers chosen out for the Camels, two Archers for each: And
(which was the Crown of all) the greatest part of the Army, was of such a
resolved mind, as if they had already overcome, and as if they thought they had
to do with a very inconsiderable Enemy.

But when the Indians which Cyrus sent as spies were returned from the Enemy,
and brought word that they had made choice of Craesus for their Commander, and
that 'twas ordered that all the assisting Kings should come with their whole
Forces and bring a great quantity of Riches with them, which should be spent
partly in hiring Soldiers, partly in bestowing gifts as occasion required.
Besides that The strength of the Enemy is discovered.
a great many Thracians were already hired who wore long Swords. That the
Egyptians also were landed, about an hundred and twenty thousand in number,
with Helmets reaching down to their Feet, and huge Spears, such as are now also
in use among them, and falchions. That the Cyprians also and all the Cilicians,
both the Phrygians, Lycaonians, Paphlagonians, Cappadocians, Arabians,
Phaenicians, Assyrians and Ionians, with the King of Babylon, the Aeolensians
and almost all the Grecians that dwell in Asia were listed under the Conduct of
Craesus. And that he had sent Ambassadors into Lacedaemonia for more help.
That the Army encamped by the River Pactolus, and that they were about to march
toward Thybarra (where now also the Barbarians of the lower Syria who are
under the Kings Jurisdiction use to incamp) and that't was proclaimed that the
public Market for all saleable Commodities should be kept there, and when all
this was confirmed by the report of the Slaves (for it was the aim of Cyrus to
take some Captives from whom he might pump out something, he also sent out
spies, under the disguise of Slaves and Renegades) when Cyrus his Army heard
all this, every one began to be concerned (as indeed, they might well enough)
Cyrus his Army discouraged.
and all of them marched on more silently then they used to do, and a great
many of them seemed very much damped. Moreover they parcell'd themselves out
into Companies, and every place was full of discoursings about this News. Cyrus
perceiving the infection to spread, called together the Commanders and all
others whose Fear or Courage might have any influence upon the Army. He gave
order also to the Officers, that if any of the Common-Souldiers was minded to
hear him, they should not keep them off. When they were convened together he
spoke to this effect: I called you here together (my Fellow Soldiers because I
observed that some of you were like men astonished upon the hearing of the News
brought from the Enemy. Indeed, I cannot but wonder that you are so much
affrighted to hear that the Enemy are in a Body, since our number is greater
now then when we overcame them, and by the help of Heaven we are better
provided now then before. So that I think you have more reason to cheer up then
despond. If you are so much out of heart at this, what would you have done had
you been told that the Enemy was come to fight against you armed with your own
Provisions? Had you been told that those who had conquered you once before were
now come again with Victory in their minds, and that those who had broken the
assaults of the Archers, were now come again with many more like themselves:
And that as then they worsted our foot, so they were come provided to engage
with our Horse, and that laying aside their Bows and Darts they were resolved
to ride up so close as to fight Hand to Hand with Javelins. That they were come
with Chariots not made opportune for flight as before, but that their Horses
were armed all over in the Chariots, and that the drivers of them stood in
Wooden Towers having all the eminent parts of their Body covered with Coats of
Male and Helmets, that Hooks of Iron were fastened to the Axle-Trees, whereby
they might easily break in upon the ranks of the Enemy. Besides this that they
had Camels with them, which they rode upon, one of which would fright a hundred
Horses, with his very looks. That their Chariots were such, out of which they
might help their own party, and by shooting their Arrows hinder you from
fighting in the plain. What a Condition would you be in if you should be told
that the Enemy was thus provided, since you are afraid now? Now, when you are
told that the Enemy has chosen Craesus for their Commander, who was so much
more faint-hearted, then the Syrians, that when they were put to the worse: He
seeing their misfortune instead of helping them as he ought (being a
Fellow-Souldier) he e'ne fled too. Besides it is reported that the Enemy
distrusts his ability to cope with us upon his own strength, and therefore
hires others who may fight better for them, then they are able to do for
themselves. If therefore here be any among you that think the Enemy's party
formidable and our own weak and inconsiderable, let them with my consent be
turned over to the Enemy. For I think 'twould be better for us to be without
them then with them. When Cyrus had thus said, Chrysantas, the Persian stood up
and spoke, I would not have you wonder Cyrus, that some seem to be sad upon the
hearing this News. For this is not the effect of fear but of indignation, just
as if some when they were sharp set, and as they thought upon the point of
going to Dinner, should be told of some Work which they must do before they
should Dine, none I suppose would look very pleasingly upon this. And so now we
who were in expectation of a rich booty, after we heard that there was work to
be done first, look a little discontentedly, not because we are afraid, but
because we long to have it over. But since we are to fight not only for Syria,
which abounds with Corn, Cattle and fruitful Palm Trees, but also for Lydia, in
which there is great store of Wine, Figgs and Oil, besides the advantage of
being near the Sea, upon this consideration we are no longer discontented, but
of a firm Resolution and Courage, that so we may the sooner possess our selves
of these good things of Lydia. These were his words, whereat all his
Fellow Soldiers were well pleased.

And then Cyrus, in my opinion (Fellow Soldiers) 'twould be our best way to
march on against them with as much speed as we can, that we may get before them
if possible, to the place where they take up their Provision. Besides the
sooner we come upon them the more unprovided we shall find them. This is my
judgment, but if any one thinks we may go a safer or an easier way to work let
him propose it.

But when 'twas resolved upon without any Contradiction that 'twas the best way
to march against the Enemy with all Expedition, Cyrus begun thus to the Army.
We have been (my Fellow Soldiers) this good while provided with Minds, Bodies
and Arms for our service: But now we must carry with us Provision for the
march, and that no less then what will serve us and our Horses twenty days. For
I find by Computation that we shall have above fifteen days journey without any
new supply of Provision. For it is carried away partly by our selves, and
partly by the Enemy, as much as they could. Wherefore we must carry with us a
competency of Victuals (for without this there is neither fighting nor living)
and so much Wine as may suffice to accustom us to the drinking of Water. For
there is no Wine to be had for the greater part of the way. And if we should
carry never so much it would not suffice us. Lest therefore a sudden defection
of Wine should make us sickly and infirm, we must learn forthwith to drink
Water at Meals. For if we begin betimes we shall find no great alteration by
it: But if we take a draught of Wine after meat it is no great matter. Only we
must daily lessen our proportion that so at last we may come to drink Water:
For any Constitution may endure alteration if it be by degrees And this Lesson
is taught us by God himself, who from Winter by little and little brings us to
endure the most Violent heat, and so from heat to endure cold. Him therefore
let us imitate. I would have you moreover carry with you good store of
Blankets; for although you be over-stock'd, yet the Surplusage will be of great
use. But in case you want, you will hardly sleep very comfortably. Whereas he that
is well-stockt with Clothes is provided either for sickness or for health. The
meat which you provide must be such as is acid, sharp and salt. For these both
whet the stomach and stick by a man a long time. But as soon as we arrive at the
place where we are like to have Corn, we must get us some Hand-mills: Wherewith
we may make our Bread. That being the lightest of all Instruments of that kind;
we must also carry Leathern Thongs with us, for these are of great use both to
men and Horses, and therefore in case they should break we must be forced to
stand still by the way, unless we have others to make all fast again. And if
any one has learnt how to sharpen a Javelin let him be sure not to forget it.
'Twill be also useful to have files with us; for he that whets his Spear does
at the same time whet his Courage also: For the very sense of disgrace will not
suffer him to be a Coward; it will be necessary also to have good store of Wood
to repair the Chariots and Wagons: for in much service and Action there must
needs be a great deal of decay. And moreover we must provide our selves with
necessary instruments, for Workmen are not every where to be had: Neither will
a few be able to do the work of every day. There should also be a Rake and a
Mattock in every Chariot, and an Ax and an Hook upon every Pack-Horse. For
these will be both for private and public use. As for meat, you who are
leaders of the Horse must inquire of those who are under your Command what is
necessary. For I would not have any one want what is fitting: For their
Indigency will redound to our damage. And do you Masters of the Carriages see
that the Horses be provided for according to my Orders. We will also carry with
us Smiths and Carpenters and Shoomakers, with their Instruments, that in case
we should stand in need of their work, nothing may be wanting: And these shall
have a station by themselves off from the Soldiers ranks, where they shall
work for those that will hire them. And if any Merchant will follow the camp
with a design to sell any Commodity, let him also have with him so many days
Provision as I said before. And if he be taken in the selling any thing before
those days be over he shall forfeit all that he has: But when those days are
past he shall sell at what rate he please. And whosoever of the Merchants shall
most advance the Market, he shall be amply rewarded both by my (...) and my
Fellow Soldiers. And if any one thinks he shall want money to buy Commodities
let him bring to me some that know him and that will engage that he shall go
with the Army, and let him take what we have. And this is what I thought good
to impart to you, if any one knows of any thing else that is needful to be done
let him communicate it to me. And now do you go and make ready, and I in the
mean time will do Sacrifice, and when we have any token of good success, we
will beat the march: Let all be present at the place appointed with their
Captains, and provided with all the necessaries before mentioned. And do you
Captains after you have marshalled every man in his rank, come all together to
me that I may assign every one his place.

When they heard this they prepared themselves for the march, Cyrus in the mean
while being employed in doing Sacrifice, which as soon as he had prosperously
ended, he marched with his Army. And for the first day he encamped as near as
he could, that in case any one had left any thing behind he might go back for
it, and if any one perceived he had need of any thing he might procure it.
Cyaxares with the third part of the Medes tarried behind, that things might not
be left too desolate at home. Cyrus marched Cyrus marches against the Enemy.
on with all possible speed; having placed the Horse in the Front, before whom
he sent Spies into all convenient places. Next to these followed the Carriages,
and next to them the Body of the Army, that in case any of the Carriages should
drop behind the Captains coming after might take care of them, that so they
might not be hindered in their Progress. And if the way happened any where to be
narrower then ordinary, the armed Soldiers taking the Carriages into the
middle, marched on both sides of them, and if they also met with any
encumbrance there were other Soldiers ready at hand to assist them. Most of
the Companies marched so as to have their particular Carriages just by them:
For all those that looked to the Carriages had order to keep to their
respective Companies unless some necessary accident hindered them. And 'twas
also ordered that every Over-seer of the Carriages should go foremost carrying
the Colors of his Centurion which were well known to the Soldiers of the same
Company: They marched all in a well knit Body, and 'twas the great concern of
every one not to lay behind his Fellows. So that they had no need of seeking
one another out, and all things were ready at hand and in greater security, and
the Soldiers were the sooner supplied with what they wanted.

But the Spies which were sent before seeing some in the Plain gathering
Provision and Wood, and seeing also Horses there, laden with the same and
seeding: And when looking on further they saw either Smoke or Dust ascending
upward; from all this they concluded that the Enemy's Forces were somewhere at
hand. Whereupon the Commander of the Spies sent a Messenger to Cyrus, to
acquaint him with it. He, when he heard it gave order that the Spies should
abide still in the same place, and as they discovered any new Motion they
should give him Intelligence. Moreover he sent a Company of Horse on further,
with Command that they should endeavor to take some of these in the Plain,
that so they might have a more certain account of the Business. Which was done
accordingly by those who were deputed to that Charge. Cyrus himself ordered the
rest of He prepares himself for Battle.
his Army to abide here, that they might provide those things which he thought
they would have occasion for before they engaged. In the first place, he gave
order that they should Dine, and then that they should remain in their Ranks,
and observe what was commanded them. When they had dined, he summoned together
the Commanders of the Horse and Foot and of the Chariots, together with those
who had the Charge of the Engines, Carriages and Wagons. While these were
getting together, in the mean time, those who made a sally out into the Plain,
brought with them some men which they had taken: Who when they were examined by
Cyrus, told him that they belonged to the Enemy's Camp, and that they went
abroad partly to get Victuals and partly to get Wood, having passed beyond the
first Guard: For their Army being so numerous they were all in great Scarcity:
Which when Cyrus heard, and how far off (says he) is the Army? They told him
about an hundred Furlongs. Then says Cyrus, and had you any news concerning us?
Yes, (replied they) a great deal, and that you were just hard by. And were they
glad (says Cyrus) when they heard that? Which Question he asked for the sake of
those who were present. No indeed (replied) they) they were not glad, but on
the contrary very much cast down. And what do they do now? says Cyrus. Why now
they are mustering as they have been this three days. And who is it that
Disciplines them? They answered, Craesus himself, and with him a certain
Grecian, and a Mede, who is said to be a Renegade from you. Well, says Cyrus,
Heaven grant I may take him as I desire.

After this he ordered the Captives to be led off, and turned himself toward
them that were by as if he had something to say to them. In the mean while
another Messenger was come who brought News that a great Company of Horse was
seen in the Plain. And says he, it is our fancy that they come out of Curiosity
to view our Army. For before this Company there are almost thirty Horsemen
making up very fiercely against us. Perhaps with a design to take our
Watchtower if they can. And there are but ten of us there: Then Cyrus
commanded some of his Horse which he had always about him, to march up to the
very place; and there to bide unseen by the Enemy. And says he, as soon as our
men shall quit the place, then do you break forth from your Ambush, and invade
them that would get the Watchtower into their power. And that you may receive
no hurt from that great Company, do you Histaspas march out with a thousand
Horse and Confront the Enemy. But be sure you don't pursue them to any blind
and obscure places, but as soon as you have taken care for the security of the
Watchtower, retreat again. And if any shall make signs of coming over to our
side receive them Courteously.

Hystaspas therefore went and armed himself, and in the mean time, the other
Emissaries of Cyrus, marched forth according to their Commission. And as they
were going they met Araspas, with his retinue Araspas returns from the Enemy.
on this side the Watchtower: 'Twas he that was sent out before as a Spy, the
Keeper of the Susian Lady. As Soon as Cyrus saw him he leapt down from his seat,
and went to meet him, and took him by the Hand. This was matter of great wonder
to the rest (as well it might) that knew nothing of the business, till Cyrus
said to them, My Friends, here is a very good man returned to us: For it is fit
you should all know what this man has done. 'Twas neither shame for any ill
thing committed, nor fear of me that was commissioned by me to go and learn the
state of the Enemy, and bring me a true account of it. I will remember my
Araspas what I promised you, and I with all these, here will take care to repay
you. And you Fellow Soldiers ought in justice to honor him as a man of
Courage. For for our sake he exposed himself to danger, and underwent the
Imputation of the Crime, with which he was charged. Whereupon they all embraced
Araspas, and gave him their right hands. When Cyrus thought there was enough of
civility expressed, we would now Araspas, have you tell us what it concerns us
to know, but do not mince the matter, nor make our Enemies less considerable
then they are. For 'twould be better for us to find things less then they are
represented, then greater.

For my part, says Araspas, I made it my business to know things fully. For I
was my self, present at their mustering. Then, says Cyrus, you know not only
their number but the order which they observe. Yes, replied Araspas, and their
way of fighting too. But in the first place, says Cyrus, The Enemy's Forces
very great.
pray give us an account of their number. Why, says he, their Horse and Foot
are ranged into such a form that they are three hundred in a breast, besides
Egyptians: They take up the space of about forty Furlongs; for I was very
curious to observe, how far they spread themselves. But after what manner are
the Egyptians marshalled? Says Cyrus. Why, says he, the Captains of ten
thousand divide every Army of ten thousand into hundreds. For this they said
was the manner which they observed at home. Craesus indeed could hardly be
persuaded that they should be disposed in such a form, because he would have
his Army extended beyond yours, in length. Why so? says Cyrus; Because he would
compass you about with the overplus of his men. But let them take heed, replied
Cyrus, lest while they think to compass us, we compass them. But we have heard
enough from you of what concerns us to know. Now my Fellow Soldiers you must
do thus; when you are gone hence, do you look upon your Horses Armor and your
own. For often times it happens through the want of a little thing that both
Man, Horse and Chariot is disabled for any service. To morrow morning while I
do Sacrifice you may feed your selves and your Horses, that we may not be
wanting in what soever is to be done afterward. Then do you Araspas take the
Charge of the right Wing which you have now, and do you Captains of the ten
thousands, keep the same station which you have already. For when we are to
engage, no Chariot can have opportunity to change Horses. And do you tell the
Lieutenants and Captains that they shall How Cyrus will have his Army
marshalled.
stand two Companies in a Breast: Each of which Companies did consist of four
and twenty Soldiers. Whereupon one of the Captains of ten thousand said, And
do you think Cyrus if we are dispersed into so many Companies, that we shall be
able to encounter such a thick Body as theirs? If (says Cyrus) our ranks should
be so thick that we cannot reach the Enemy, what damage do you think that would
do them, and what good to ourselves? For my part I could wish that those
Companies which are divided by hundreds were divided by ten thousands. For then
we should fight with a few at a time. But how thick so ever my ranks are, I
suppose they will be strong enough, and ready to assist one another. I will put
those that fling Darts after those that wear Breast-Plates, and after the
Darters the Archers. For who would place them in the Front who confess
themselves that they cannot endure to fight Hand to Hand? But if they have the
Breast Plate Men before them facing the Enemy they will stand the Field. And
the one with their Darts, and the other with Arrows, shot over the Heads of
them that are before them, will do Execution upon the Enemy. And look whatever
mischief any one does to the Enemy; So much does he add to the cheerfulness of
his Fellow Soldiers. After all these, will I place the Rear. For as an House
can neither be firm without Stone-work, nor fit for any thing without a
Builder, so neither will an Army be good for any thing which has not a strong
Front and Rear. Do you marshal then your Ranks as I Order you, and do you
Leaders of the Target-men place your Companies behind these, and you Leaders of
the Archers, place yours next to the Target-men. And as for your part that lead
up the Rear, do you take care of your Charge, and Command them to look back and
have an Eye upon one another, and do you encourage those that do well, and
severely reprove those who are Cowardly. If any one turns his back with a
design to quit his station let him be punished with Death. For the main
business of a Commander is to cheer up those that follow both by his words and
by his Example. And as for you that are in the Rear, you should make the
Cowardly fear you more then they do the Enemy. And do you Abradatas whose
charge is to look to the Engines, see that the Teems which draw the Towers
follow close to the Body of the Army. And do you Abradatas, who preside over
the Carriages, lead on next to the Towers, and do you animadvert upon those
that run on too fast, or lagg behind their Fellows. And you Carduchus, who are
to look to the Wagons, that carry the Women, do you place them just after the
Carriages. For if all these follow behind 'twill both make the greater
appearance, and afford us an opportunity of lying in Ambush, and force the
Enemy if they design to surround us, to take the greater compass about. And
consequently the farther they spread themselves, the weaker they must needs be.
And as for you Artabazus and you Artagersas do you lead each of you your
thousand Foot next after these. And you Pharnuchus and you Asidatas, don't you
place your thousand Horse within the Body, but stand ready armed behind the
Carriages, and then come to us with the other Captains. But however I would
have you in such a posture of readiness, as if you were to give the first
onset. And do you who have the Charge of the Camels take your station behind
the Wagons, and obey the Orders of Artagersas. And do you who have the Command
of the Chariots, cast lots, and to whomsoevers turn it falls, let him place his
hundred Chariots before the Body of the Army. As for the other Centuries of
Chariots, let one of them take to the Right-Wing and the other to the left.

Thus did Cyrus dispose of all things. Then Abradatas, the King of the Susans,
told Cyrus, Abradatas his Courage.
that if he pleased, he would willingly take to the other opposite part of the
Army. Whereupon Cyrus wondering at the man, took him by the Hand, and asked the
other Persians that were in the Chariots, whether they would yield to it? They
giving their approbation of the thing, he determined the business by Lot, and
so that fell to Abradatas by fortune, which he had before took upon himself: So
he took his station just over against the Egyptians. This being over, and care
taken of the things before mentioned, they were dismissed every one to Supper,
and when they had set a Watch, they betook themselves to their rest. The next
day following, in the morning Cyrus offered Sacrifice. But all the Army, after
they had dined, and likewise done Sacrifice, armed and provided themselves:
putting on many brave Coats of Male and Head-pieces, they armed also their
Horses with Frontlets and Breast-plates. The Horses that carried single had
their Thighs armed, but the Teem-Horses their Sides: So the whole Army shined
in their Armor, and Scarlet Habit.

The Chariots of Abradatas had four Draught-Trees, and was drawn by eight
Horses, very richly adorned. And as he was about to put on a Breast Plate
covered over with white Linen after his Country fashion; Panthea brought him a
Golden Helmet and a Gaunlet and a Scarlet Coat that reached down to his Feet,
hanging all in Folds like a Gown, and a Crest of Violet Color. These she
provided for her Husband, privately and ordered them to be made according to
the size of his other Armor. He was mightily affected at the sight, and asked
Panthea whether she had cut up the Ornaments of her Head, to make him this
Armor? No truly, said Panthea, not that Ornament which I most esteem. For you,
if you approve your self to others, as you appear to me, are like to be my
greatest Ornament. With that Panthea arms her Husband and exhorts him to be
Courageous.
she put on his Armor for him, and although she refrained what she could, yet the
Tears began to trickle down her Cheeks.

Abradatas, though of a good presence before, yet after he was dressed up in this
Armor looked very Gallant and brave, being naturally of a Generous manly
Aspect. And when he had took the Reins of the lower Coachman, he prepared
himself to ascend into his Chariot. Then Panthea desiring those who were
present to withdraw, My Abradatas (says she) if ever any Woman valued her
Husband above her own Soul, I believe you are convinced that I am one of them.
What need therefore have I to mention particulars? For I think the actions
which I have done for you, will find more credit with you then any words I can
now utter. But although I am thus affected toward you as you know, yet I swear
both by your love and my own that I would rather be buried with you after you
have acquitted your self bravely, then to live with you upon any dishonorable
terms: I have so much Honor both for my self and you. Moreover I would have
you consider that we are mightily indebted to Cyrus, for as much as after I was
reduced to the Fortune of a Slave, and set apart for himself, he would not use
me as a Woman of a Servise Condition, nor yet dishonor me as free. But after
he took me, he kept me, for you, as if I had been his own Brothers Wife.
Besides when Araspas, who was my Keeper, revolted from him, I promised him that
if he would give me leave to send to you, you should come to him, and prove
more noble and faithful to him, then ever Araspas The Picture of love betwixt
Man and Wife.
was. Thus she said to him, where at, Abradatas moved with a pleasing wonder,
touching his Head, and looking up to Heaven, grant O Jupiter (says he) that I
may show my self a worthy Husband to Panthea, and a worthy Friend to Cyrus, who
has dealr thus honorably with us. When he had thus said, he went up into his
Chariot. And when after his ascent, the Coachman had shut fast the Seat,
Panthea having now no other way to embrace him, kissed the very Seat. And now
the Chariot drove on, and she followed after privately, till Abradatas looking
back and seeing her, bad her cheer up and take her leave of him. Then her
Eunuchs and waiting Maids took her aside, and put her into a Bed in the Tent.
But although, Abrodatas and his Chariot, made a fine glorious show, yet people
could hardly be at leisure to take notice of it, till Panthea was retired.

But when Cyrus had ended his addresses to Heaven, and the Army was Marshalled
according as he gave order, calling together the Commanders of his Army, he
thus addressed himself to them. The Gods (My Friends and Fellow Soldiers) give
us such discoveries in the intrails of our Sacrifices, as they did when they
gave us the last Victory. But however I will put you in mind of such things
which if lodged safe in your memory will make you go much the chearfuller to
the Battle. For in the first place, you are better trained up in War, then your
Enemies, and besides, you have been longer at it, and withal have been lately
flushed up with a Victory. But many of the Enemy have seen one another
overcome. And as for those, of either side, who were never yet in an
engagement, those of the Enemy's Army know that they have Traitors and
Renegades, to their Fellow Soldiers, whereas you who are with us are assured
that you have those to fight with you who will be ready to help their Fellows.
And it is to be expected that they should fight unanimously, who confide in one
another; but as for those that distrust each other, their greatest concern will
be how to sculk away. Let us march on therefore (Fellow Soldiers) with our
armed Chariots against the unarmed ones of the Enemy, and fight near at hand,
with our armed Horses and Horsemen against the unarmed. You have the same Foot
to encounter which you had before, and the Egyptians are armed and marshalled
after the same manner as they were before. Their Shields are too great for
them, either to see any thing, or do any thing, and being divided into hundreds
they must necessarily be an hindrance one to another. But if they think to bear
us down with multitude, they must first stand the shock of our Horses, and then
of our Iron Instruments. And if any of them, should maintain their ground
against these, yet how will they be able to contend against our Horse, our
Body, and our Towers? For those Men of ours who are placed in the Towers will
be able to Succor us, and by doing Execution upon the Enemy make them more
inclinable to despair, then willing to fight. If you think you stand yet in
need of any thing more, let me know what it is. For I hope by the help of Heaven
we shall not be driven to any streights. If any one has any thing to say, let
him speak. But if not, go to your prayers, and when you have prayed to the Gods
to whom we offered Sacrifice, betake your selves to your ranks: And be sure to
remember every one of you what instructions you have received from me, and by
the manliness of your behavior, Countenance and Speech, approve your selves to
be worthy of Command before your respective Charges.

XENOPHON'S INSTITUTION AND LIFE OF CYRUS the GREAT. THE SEVENTH BOOK.
WHen therefore they had prayed to the Gods, they went to their ranks. And
Cyrus, with his attendants, had Meat and Drink brought them, while he was doing
Sacrifice. He dined in a standing posture, and distributed to every one, always
as he needed. And when he had done Sacrifice again and prayed, he drank
himself, and those that were with him. After this, praying to Jupiter, the God
of his Country; that he would vouchsafe them his guidance, and Protection, he
mounted his Horse, and commanded those that were next him to do so too. Now all
those that were about Cyrus, were armed after the same manner that he was.
Every one had his Scarlet Coat, his Brazen Breast Plate and Helmet: White
Crest, Sword and Javelin. Their Horses were armed with the like Brazen
Frontlets, Breast-Plates and Side-Peices. And they had also, the same coverings
for their Thighs. The only difference was this, that whereas the others Arms
were dipped with Gold-Colour, Cyrus his did shine like a Looking-Glas. Af er he
was on Horseback, and stood still a little to look about which way he was to
go, it Thundered luckily on the left hand. Whereupon he said, we will follow
thee great Jupiter. And forthwith he began his march: Chrysantas the Commander
of the Horse, leading the right Wing, and Arasambas the Commander of the Foot
the left. He bad them have an eye to the Colors, and follow after with an even
pace. His Ensign was a Golden Eagle displayed upon a long Spear. And this same
Ensign is retained by the King of Persia to this day. But before he came within
Ken of the Enemy he refreshed his Army three times.

After they had marched about twenty Furlongs they began to have a glimps of
the Enemy making up against them. Now when they were both in view of one
another, the Enemy's design was to compass the adverse Body on both sides. And
accordingly they stopped their own, because otherwise they could not do it, and
so winded about to intercept the Enemy in the middle, that so ranging their
Army in the Figure of the Letter (g) they might fight on all sides. Which
although Cyrus took notice of, yet he made no stop, but lead on as he did before.
But when he observed that they took a large compass about, do you mind
Chrisantas (says he) how they bend off? Yes (says Chrysantas) neither do I much
wonder at it, for in my mind they draw off their Wings a great way from their
Body. So they do (says Cyrus) and a great way from ours too. And why so?
because (says he) they are afraid lest if they should bring their Wings
nearer, their Body being so remote we should set upon them. But then (says
Chrysantas) how will they be able to help one another, when they are so far
distant? Why it is plain (says Cyrus) that when their Wings are got just
opposite to the sides of our Army, they will close as it were into a Body, and
fall upon us on every side. And do you take this to be such a good piece of
Policy says Chrysantas? Yes truly with respect to what they see, but as to that
which they do not see, 'twere better they came on directly against us. But do
you Arsamas, lead on the Foot leasurely, as you see me go before. And do you
Chrysantas follow after at the same rate with the Horse. And I for my part,
will make toward that place which I think fittest to engage in. And as I go, I
will consider how to make the best of every thing. As Soon as I am come thither,
and we are upon the point to engage, I will begin a shout, and then do you
follow: You will easily know when we are at it by the Tumult, and then
Abradatas shall break in upon them with his Chariots. Do you follow as close to
the Chariots as you can, for by this means we shall fall in upon the Enemy when
they are greatly disordered. And I my self will be ready at hand, and by the
help of Heaven pursue them with all speed.

When he had thus spoken, and given this to be the Word, Jupiter our Savior
and our Guide, he marched on. And as he was between the Chariots and the
Soldiers armed with Coats of Male, as often as he looked upon any in the
Ranks, he would sometimes say: How pleasant is it (Soldiers) to behold your
Faces! And sometimes, again to others, do you consider Soldiers that we are
now to contend not only for this days Victory, but also for that which we
obtained before, and indeed that our whole happiness lies at stake? And then as
he passed by another, We shall have no reason hence forward (Fellow Soldiers)
to complain of our Gods, for they have given us opportunity of many and great
achievements. But however (Soldiers) let us acquit our selves like Men. And
again, to others: To what better Banquet could we desire to be invited then to
this? For now is your time, if you are resolved to play the men, to enrich and
advantage one another. And then again, to others. You know (I suppose)
Soldiers that here are rewards proposed before us; To them that overcome the
reward is to pursue, kill and destroy, Plunder and be commended; to be free and
Command: But to those that are overcome, the contrary; whoever therefore loves
himself, let him fight along with me. For I will not away with any Cowardliness
or baseness if I can help it. Again, when he came to some of those who had been
in the former Engagement: But to you (Soldiers) what need I say any thing? For
you know well enough what is the fate of the Courageous and what of the
Cowardly.

Then marching on a little further he came to Abradatrs, and made a stop. And
Abradatas delivering up the Reins to the lower Coachman, went to him. Others
also who were nigh there abouts came flocking to him. When they were come,
Cyrus spoke to this purpose: It has pleased Heaven Abradatas, to make you and
yours (as you desired) chief among your Fellow Soldiers. But you are to
remember that when you engage, the Persians are the men that are both to see
you, and come after you: Neither will they suffer you to fight alone or be
deserted. To whom Abradatas; Indeed Cyrus I think matters stand very well with
us. But I am concerned for the sides: For I see that the Enemy has spread out
their Wings a great way, and withal they are very strong both in regard of
Chariots and all manner of Forces. And we have nothing to oppose to all this
besides Chariots. And therefore as for my own part had not this station fallen
to me by lot I should be ashamed of it, I seem to be so very safe. Well then,
replied Cyrus, if you think you are well enough your self, don't trouble your
self for the other. For I warrant you by the help of the Gods, you shall see
these sides of the Enemy quite bare. And I desire you that you would not engage
with the Enemy, till you see these whom you are so much afraid of, fly before
us. (Thus magnificently did he talk now the Battle was at hand, whereas at
other times he was not much given to boasting) but when you see these fly,
then conclude that I am not far off, and make your onset upon the Enemy. For
then shall you find the Cowardliness of the Enemy, and the Valor of your own
Men. But while you have leisure Abradatas, ride along by your Chariots, and
encourage your Men to fight, partly by inspiriting them with your looks, and
partly, by chearing them up with hopes. And do what you can to excite an
Emulation among them, of appearing the best in the Chariots. For assure your
self if you do thus, they will all say at last that nothing is better than a
good Courageous Heart. Whereupon, Abradatas getting up into his Chariot, rod up
and down and did accordingly.

Cyrus marching forwards, came to the left Wing where Hystaspas was with half
of the Persian Horse. Whom he called to by his Name, and said, now you see
Hystaspas a work which requires all your speed: For it we can but prevent our
Enemies by killing them first, none of us shall perish. To which Hystaspas
smiling replied, let me alone to deal with those that stand opposite, but do
you take care that those that are of the sides want not work. Those are the men
(says Cyrus) I am now going to. But do you remember Hystaspas, that to
whomsoever of us Heaven shall grant the Victory, if any part of the Enemy
remained unvanquish'd, we are both to join against those who oppose us. When he
had thus said he marched forward. And when he was come to the Commander of the
Chariots, I am come, says he, to help you. But when you perceive that we are
invading the skirts of the Enemy, then do you endeavor to break through the
midst of the Enemy. For '^will be safer for you to break through, then to be
intercepted by them in the middle. But when he was come behind the Wagons, he
commanded that Artagerses and Phatnuchus with their thousand Horse, and so many
Foot should stand still in the same place. But (says he) when you see me invade
those who are on the right side, then do you fall on upon those who stand
opposite to you. For you will fight that Wing where the Army is weakest. And
you will also be the stronger for having a Body. You see the Enemy has placed
their Horse in their Rear, and against these do you oppose the Ranks of the
Camels. And be you well assured that the Enemy will appear ridiculous to you
before you are to engage.

When Cyrus had thus done, he went to the Right Wing. But Craesus supposing
that the Body which he himself led was nearer to the Enemy then the Wings which
were drawn out into a great length he gave a token to the Wings that they
should venture no further, but turn to the Enemy in that very place where they
were. And when they all stood still, and viewed Cyrus his Army, he gave them
the Word to fall on upon the Enemy. And thus there were three Squadrons that
ran on upon Cyrus his Army, one directly opposite, and the other two on each
side, so that all Cyrus his Army was in a great fear. For it 'twas like a
little Brick in a great Building compassed about every where, except behind,
with Horsemen and Target-men, Archers and Chariots. But however as soon as
Cyrus gave the Word, they all wheeled about and faced the Enemy. And all things
were hushed in great filence, for fear of the event.

Cyrus thinking it now high time, began the shout, which was answered by the
Echo of the whole Army. Then with a loud voice calling out Mars, he broke
forth, and planting his Horse against the Flank of the Enemy, he presently
engaged with them. The Foot keeping their Ranks followed Cyrus engages the
whole Body of the Enemy.
speedily after, and were compassed on every side with the Enemy. But they were
in much the better Condition, for they set upon the Wing, with the Body
strengthening them. So that there was quickly a great flight among the Enemy.
Artagerses as soon as he saw Cyrus engaged, invaded the left side of the Enemy
sending in his Camels among them, according to Cyrus his Order. The The Horses
of the Enemy are frighted with Cyrus's Camels.
Horses could not endure them at a great distance, but some of them ran away
Mad, some pranc'd and leapt, some rushed upon one another: For thus Horses use
to do at the fight of Camels, Artagerses keeping his Men in their Ranks, fell
upon those which were disordered, with his well ordered Company, and withal,
sent in the Chariots which were on the right and the left among them. Many that
escaped from the Chariots, were killed by those that followed the Wing, and
many that escaped them were intercepted by the Chariots.

And Abradatas no longer able to contain himself, cried out aloud, Follow me
Friends, and rushed in with his Horse upon the Enemy, and shed a great deal of
Blood among them, giving quarter to no Body. And with this, the other Chariots
broke in also. Whereupon the opposite Chariots fled immediately, some of them
carrying those that fought out of them away with them, and some leaving them
behind. Abradatas making his way directly through them set upon the Squadron of
the Egyptians, those that were next him in the Army attending him. And here
they verified that which is otherwise evident enough, ( viz.) That there is no
Body of Men stronger then that which is made up of Friends. For those that were
his intimate Companions, and sat with him at the same Table, accompanied him
in this assault upon the Enemy. And some of the Chariot-men when they saw that
the Egyptians stood the shock, with a full Body, turned to the Chariots that
fled, and followed after them. But those who were with Abradatas because the
Egyptians were penn't up so close that they could not give way, overturned some
with the Violence of their Horses, and those that were down they trampled under
foot. And not themselves only, but also their Armor, Horses and Wheels.
Whatsoever their Hooks took hold of was cut off by mere force, whether Arms or
Bodies. And in this Tumult, too great to be described, it happened through the
jumping of the Wheels over the heaps that laid in the way, that Abradatas with
some of those that made this onset with him, was thrown out of his Chariot. And
so these after they had for a while behaved themselves like men, were cut down
and killed. But the Persians following hard after broke in upon the Place where
Abradatas with his company charged the Enemy, and made a Slaughter among them
that were disordered.

The Egyptians as many as were unbroken among The engagement (...) the
Egyptians and Persians
them (and truly they were a great many) made directly against the Persians.
And now commenced a cruel fight with Lances, Darts and Swords. The Egyptians
had the advantage both as to number and Weapons: For their Spears were firm and
long, such as they have at this day among them. And their Shields which were
fastened to their Shoulders covered their Bodies more, and served to keep off
any hurt better then Coats of Male. Wherefore they advanced with their Shields
shut close together, and carried all before them. The Persians could no longer
stand their Ground, but retreated leasurely, still fighting and receiving
Wounds as they went, till they came under the Engines. When they were come
thither; the Egyptians were then wounded from the Towers. And now neither the
Archers nor those that flung Darts could have opportunity of retreating for
those in the Rear. But were forced to stand to it with their Swords and their
Arrows and Darts. And now there was a great Slaughter of Men, a great
clattering of Armor and all sorts of Weapons, and a great cry, some calling
out upon one another, some encouraging one another, some imploring the help of
the Gods. In the mean while Cyrus comes from the pursuit of those that were
opposite to his Company. And when he saw the Persians had lost ground he was
troubled, and perceiving that there was no better way to stop the further
Progress of the Enemy then by attacquing their Rear, he commands those that
were with him to follow him, and sets upon them in the Rear. And here he did
great Execution upon them. Which when the Egyptians perceived they cried out
that the Enemy was behind, and changed their posture as they were fighting.
Then the Horse and the Foot fought promiscuously. And it happened that one
Horseman fell under Cyrus his Horse, and being trod upon, run the Horse into
the Belly with his Sword. The Horse being wounded fell a wincing and threw off
Cyrus. Then did it appear what 'twas for a Prince to be beloved by his
Subjects. For on a sudden they all cried out aloud, and fell to it pell-mell,
justling one again another and wounding one another, till at last one of Cyrus
his Guard alighting from his Horse, put Cyrus upon him. But as soon as Cyrus was
mounted again he saw great Execution done upon the Egyptians on all sides. For
Hystaspas was now come with the Persian Horse, and also Chrysantas. But these
he would not suffer to press home upon the Egyptian Squadron, but bad them
shoot at them at a distance. But after that he was come as far as the Engines,
he had a mind to get up into one of the Towers that he might see whether any
other of the Enemies Forces stood their ground and fought. As Soon as he was got
up he saw the Field was full of Men and Chariots; some flying, some persuing,
some conquering, some yielding; his Enemies flying and his own conquering. But
of the conquered he could see none appear besides the Egyptians. These being
hardly put to it, huddled themselves together into a Ring, so that nothing
appeared but their Arms, and sat under their Shields. And this was all that
they were able to do, but in the mean time, they were all upon the suffering
Hand. Cyrus admiring their Fortitude thought it great pity that such brave men
should die at that manner, Commanded his Men to retreat, and would not suffer
any of them to fight against them any more. But sent an Herald to them with
this proposal, Whether they would rather die for them that deserted them, or be
saved with Honor as being brave Men? To which they replied, But how can we be
saved and withal secure the Reputation of stout men still? To which Cyrus
returned, Because we are Witnesses how you maintained your Ground alone, and
fought to the last. But upon what Condition may we be preserved? Upon this only
(replied Cyrus) that you yield up your Arms, and enter into a League of amity
with those who when 'twas in their Power to kill you, chose rather to spare
you: When they heard this they asked again, But to what Service will you employ
us if we League with you? Why says Cyrus, I will benefit you, and be benefitted
by you. Then said the Egyptians, And what benefits do you mean? To which
Cyrus, I will give you a larger stipend then that which you now serve for, as
long as it is Wartime. And when it is peace, whoever of you are minded to remain
with me, I will give them The Egyptians life themselves under Cyrus.
Ground and Cities, Wives and Slaves. When the Egyptians heard this, they
desired that this only might be excepted, that they should not be put upon it,
to fight against Craesus: For him only they could forgive. So upon all the rest
they were agreed, and plighted their Faith mutually to each other. And so that
Remnant of the Egyptians which was then preserved remain still in the Service
of the King. And Cyrus gave them Cities in the higher parts of the Country,
which are called to this day the Cities of the Egyptians. Such as are Larissa
and Cyllene by Cluma bordering upon the Sea, which their Posterity now enjoy.
Cyrus having dispatched these affairs returned by night and encamped at
Thyribare.

In this Battle, the Egyptians were the only men among the Enemies Army, that
came off with any credit. And of Cyrus his Soldiers, the Horse seemed to do
best: So that the Armor is kept to this day, wherewith Cyrus armed his
Horsemen. Moreover the Hooked-Chariots performed so well, that those Warlike
kind of Chariots are retained in use by the King at this day. All the good
which the Camels did was only to frighten the Horses. For as those that rod
upon them killed none of the Horsemen, so neither were they killed by the
Horsemen themselves, because no Horse would dare to come near them. And in this
respect they were something useful, but however now '^s out of fashion, for
great Men to keep Camels for their use, or to exercise themselves in fighting
from them: They are now put to their Primitive Work of carrying Burdens. Now
when Cyrus his Soldiers had supped and placed the Guard they betook themselves
to their rest.

Craesus with his Army made directly toward Craesus flies to Sardes.
Sardes. Those of other Nations went every one as far homeward as they could
that night: As Soon as it was day Cyrus led his Army directly against Sardes.
And as soon as he came to the Walls he erected his Engines and Ladders against
the Works: At length he had made way for the Persians and Chaldeans to scale
the Walls of the Sardians, the night following in the most difficult and
seemingly desperate place of all the Works. The Leader of this undertaking was
a certain Persian, who was a Servant to one of the Keepers of the Garrison, and
knew both the descent to, and the ascent from the River. When 'twas known that
the Tower was taken, the Lydians fled from the Walls, every one where he could.
Cyrus Sardis is took by Cyrus.
entering the Town at break of day, gave order to his Army that none should
offer to leave his Rank. But Craesus locking himself up in his Palace. called
out upon Cyrus: Who when he had left him in Custody, went to the Tower that was
taken: Where when he saw the Persians keeping the Tower as they ought to do,
but of the Chaldeans, nothing but their Arms; because they were gone down to
plunder the Houses; he presently called together their Commanders, and
forthwith casheer'd them from his Army. For, says he, I will never endure that
those that desert their Ranks shall fare better then others. And I would have
you know, that 'twas my design to make all you, that fight in my Service, such
as all the Chaldeans should call happy. But now think it no wonder when you are
gone from me if you meet with those that are stronger then your selves. When
the Chaldeans heard this, they were afraid, and desired him not to be angry,
and they would refund all the Plunder back again. Cyrus told Cyrus punish^s the
gre^dy Chaldeans.
them he had no need of it, but if they would have him reconciled, they should
give all which they had taken, to those who stood guarding the Tower. For (says
he) if my Soldiers observe that those who keep their Ranks, are best rewarded,
then all will go well. Whereupon the Chaldeans did as Cyrus had commanded them:
And so those that behaved themselves obediently were well rewarded. Cyrus
having encamped his Army in the most convenient place about the City, Commanded
his Soldiers to keep on their Armor, and take their dinner.

When this was done, he gave Command that Cyrus Commands Craesus to be brought
before him.
Craesus should be brought to him. He, when he saw Cyrus, God save you Master
(says he) For that is the Name which Fortune has now ordered me to call you by.
And you too Craesus (replied Cyrus) forasmuch as we are both Men. But what say
you Craesus, will you give me some advice? Yes, replied Craesus, I would be
ready to serve you in any thing, for I believe thereby I should also advantage
my self. Then the business is this, Craesus, I see that my Soldiers are quite
spent with Labor, and have exposed themselves to much danger, and that now
they think to have the richest City in all Asia, next to Babylon, and therefore
I think it is but reasonable they should be something the better for it. For I
know that unless they reap some benefit from their Labors, I cannot expect to
have them continue Obedient to me long. But yet I am not willing to yield up
the City, to be Plundered by them. For then the City would go near to be
utterly destroyed, and besides, I know that in such pillaging those would get
most who least deserve it. Upon the hearing of this, says Craesus, let me tell
some of the Lydians, whom I please, that I have prevailed with you, that there
shall be no plundering, and that their Wives and Children shall not be dragged
from them, and that I have engaged to you for this Privilege, that the Lydians
shall come and offer you of their own accord what ever is of any worth in
Sardis. For I am confident if they hear this, they bring you all the good
things they have among them: And besides, by this means the City will be able
to afford you a new supply of good things another year. Whereas if you suffer
Arts are the Spring^ from whence Riches flow.
it to be plundered, all Trades and Arts which are the Seminaries of plenty
will be destroyed. But besides, you will have time enough to think of
plundering as you pass along, and survey every thing. But in the first place, I
would have you send to my Treasures, and my Keepers shall surrender it up to
those you employ. Cyrus liked all these proposals of Craesus very well.

But tell me Craesus (says he) what is become of what the Oracle of Delphos said
to you. For they say that Oracle is in great esteem with you, and that you
undertake every thing you do by his Direction. I wish things were so with me,
Cyrus, but I have offended Apollo by doing things quite contrary at first. How
do you mean (says Cyrus) for methinks you speak paradoxically. In the first
place, says he, neglecting to inquire of him about the things which concerned
me; I Craesus tries the Truth of the Answers given by the C^cle of Apollo.
must needs try whether he could give true answers or no. Now you know that not
only God, but even good and honest Men don't love to have their Integrity
questioned. But when I perceived that I had not done wisely, being at a great
distance from Dephos, I sent to know of him Whether I should have any Children
or no. For the first time he would not so much as vouchsafe me an answer. But
at length, after I had ingratiated my self into his favor (as I thought) by
presenting him with many Offerings, Gold and Silver and frequent Sacrifices, I
enquired of him again what I should do to have Children? He told me I should
have Children. And indeed he was as good as his Word, for I had Children, but
to little purpose: For one was very dumb, and the other a ever hopeful Young
Man dyed in the very Flower of his Age. Having such ill Fortune with my
Children, I sent to him again, and desired to know of him, what course I should
take to spend the remaining part of my Life as happily as might be. His answer
to me was this; You shall live happ^ly, Craesus, if you know The answer of the
Oracle to Craesus.
your self. I was mightily pleased with this answer, for I thought the Terms of
my happiness were so easy, that the God did in a manner give it me. For indeed
as for other Persons, they might partly be known, and partly not; but thought
I, every one must needs know himself. And after this, as long as I lived in
peace, I had nothing to Charge upon my Fortune since the Death of my Son. But
being overperswaded afterward by the Assyrian to War against you, I went
through dangers of all sorts, and yet was preserved without sustaining any
harm. And thus far I had no reason to complain of Apollo: For when I perceived
that I was not able to make my party good against you, by the help of Apollo, I
and those that were with me made a safe escape. But being again dissolved in
the luxury of my present wealthy Condition, and overcome partly by the
importunity of those who would have me head them, and partly by the Presents,
whereby they oblige me, and partly by the flattery of those that told me, how
ready all were to obey me; and what a great man I should be, if I would but
take the Command of the Army upon me; being puffed up I say, with such
Addresses as these, and pleased to see my self courted thus by Princes on all
sides, to accept of the Generals Office, I did so, as if I were capable of
becoming some great Person. And this I did out of self-ignorance, thinking my
self able to deal with you who are descended of the Gods, born of Kings, and
from a Child trained up to Arms. Whereas I was informed that of my Ancestors,
he that first got the Kingdom, was made King, and a Freeman at the same time.
Now since I did not consider these things, I deserve to be punished as I am.
But now Cyrus, I know my self: Do Craesus disputes against the Oracle.
you think then that Apollo will be as good as his Word to me now, since he
told me, I should be happy if I knew my self? And I ask you the rather, because
you seem at this time to be able to give a shrewder conjecture then another
Man: For it is in you to make me so. Then said Cyrus, I would have you advise me
Craesus in this case, for considering with my self your former happy Condition,
I am moved with Compassion toward you, and therefore I do permit you to keep
your Wife which you have at this time, and your Daughters (for I hear you have
some) and your Friends and Servants, and to use the same Table which you did
formerly: And I acquit you also from all military Service. Then says Craesus,
you need not deliberate any longer what answer to make concerning my happiness.
For I now tell you my self, that if you do what you promise I shall be happy
both in other men's Opinion and my own too. Then said Cyrus, and who What life
may be accounted happy.
is there that is so? My Wife, replied Craesus for she was partaker with me of
all my good Things, Delicacies and Mirth: But as for my Cares, and how it fares
with me now, and what is the issue of the Battle, she knows nothing of it. And
you seem to be willing to make me as happy as I did her, whom I loved beyond
any Person in the World. And therefore I think I must offer some more Presents
to Apollo, as a Testimony of my Gratitude. When Cyrus heard these Words of
Craesus, he admired at the even temper of his Mind. And ever after that time
Cyrus had him along with him wherever he marched, either because he thought him
useful to him, or for the better security: After these discourses they parted,
and went to Bed.

The next day Cyrus calling together his Friends and the Commanders of his
Army, ordered some of them to receive the Treasures, others he employed in
setting aside such a proportion of the money surrendered by Craesus for the Gods,
which the Magi should think fit. The rest he ordered to be chested up and put
in the Wagons, and to be carried about with them wherever they went, that so
as occasion required every Men might receive his reward. Which things were done
accordingly.

Cyrus calling some of his Guard to him, tell me (says he) did any of you see
Abradatas? For I Cyrus is made acquainted with the detah of Abradacas.
admire that whereas he used formerly to frequent my Company, now he does not
appear: Whereat one of the Guard made answer, There is good reason for it, Sir,
for he is not alive, but was killed in the Battle, when he made an onset upon
the Egyptians with his Chariots. It Is said that all his men, except some few of
his Friends, deserted him, as soon as they saw the Squadron of the Egyptians.
And now they say his Wife has took him up dead, and put him into the Sedan,
which she used to be carried in her self; and brought him hither to the River
Pactolus. And it is reported that her Eunuchs and Servants are digging a Grave
for him upon a little Hillock, and that his Wife sitting upon the Ground has
dressed him with all the Ornaments which she had about her, holding his Head in
her Lap. Cyrus hearing this, struck his Thigh, and immediately mounting his
Horse, and taking with him a thousand Horsemen made toward this Tragedy. But
before he went, he left word with Gadatas and Gobryas, that they should take
what Ornaments were proper for a dead Man, who was both a Man of Valor and a
Friend, and follow presently after them. He commanded also those who had Cattle
with them, that they should drive more to the place where they heard he was,
that so he might do Sacrifice for the dead.

Now as soon as he saw the Lady sitting upon the Ground with the dead Body lying
by her, he could not forbear shedding Tears at the sight, and Cyrus laments the
Death of Abradatas.
broke forth into this passionate Expression: Alas my dear Courageous and
Faithful Soul, have you thus left us? And with that he took him by the Hand,
which came off with his taking hold of it: For it had been cut off by an
Egyptian Spear. Which when Cyrus saw, he was the more passionately concerned
for him: But his Wife fell a crying most grievously, and taking the Hand from
Cyrus kissed it, and then put it on again as well as she could, and said, all
the rest Cyrus is so as this. But to what purpose is it for you to see more?
But I know he came to this upon my account, and perhaps Cyrus as much upon
yours too. For I like a Fool as I was pushed him on forward with much
earnestness, that he would make it appear by some considerable adventure or
other what a friend of yours he was, and he, I know, did not mind what happened
to him, so that be might but gratify you by some eminent piece of Service, So
now he is dead and gone without the least stain of dishonor behind him, but I
sit here alive by him who put him upon these attempts. Cyrus having wept a
pretty while silently to himself, at length says he, But however (Lady) he has
died Honorably, for he is gone off with Victory. But do you take this which I
give you, and ad^rn him with it (for now Gobryas and Gadatas were come with
plenty of rich Ornaments with them) and know that I have yet other Honors in
reserve for him, for he shall have a Monument made for him suitable to his
Quality, and withal such Sacrifices offered for him, as become a Man of his
Valor. And you for your part shall not be left desolate, for I will ever
honor you for your Chastity and your other Virtues, and leave you in Charge
with one that shall carry you about whither so ever you are minded to go. Only
let me know whither you would be carried. Then said Panthea, don't trouble your
self about that, Cyrus, you shall be sure to know to whom I intend to go. Cyrus
after these discourses went away, pitying the Woman for the loss of such an
Husband, and the Husband for being taken away from the sight of such a Wife.

The Lady commanding her Eunuchs to withdraw, till she had wept her fill, bad
her Nurse to stay with her, and withal told her that she should cover her when
she was dead and her husband with the same Cloth. Her Nurse begged her most
earnestly not to think of doing any such thing to her self. But when she saw
'twas to no purpose, and that she only provoked her passion the more, she sat
by her weeping. Then the Lady drawing out a dagger The Lady Panthea stabs her
self.
which she had before provided for that purpose, Stabbed her self, and leaning
her head upon her husbands breast dies. The Nurse after a great deal of
Lamentation coverd them both according as Panthea, had ordered. Cyrus as soon as
he had heard what the Lady had done, came in a great fright to try whether he
could bring any help. Her three Eunuchs when they saw what was done, drew out
their Daggers, and without any more ado Stabbed themselves in the very place
where she ordered them to The Monument of Abradatas, Panthea and her Eunuchs.
stand. And now they say the Monument is built along as far as the place where
the Eunuchs stood. In the upper Pillar the names of the Man and the Woman are
said to be written in Syriac letters, and underneath they say there are three
Pillars more with this Inscription, Royal. Cyrus as he drew nigh to this sad
Spectacle stood amazed at the passion of the Lady, and when he had sufficiently
Lamented her went away; But he took special care (as 'twas fit he should) that
they might be honorably treated, and accordingly made, they say, a great and
stately Monument for them.

After this the Carians happening to have a Sedition among them, and waging War
against one another who should inhabit the fortified places, both Parties
applied themselves to Cyrus for help; who was now at Sardis taken up in making
of Engines and battering Rams, that he might beat down the Walls of them that
refused to yield. In the mean while he sent Adusius a Persian, a prudent Man
and well Cyrus sends Forces into Caria.
Skilled in Military affairs and of a complaisant Wit, with an Army unto Caria.
The Cilicians and the Cyprians readily joining themselves to him. Which
forwardness of theirs was the reason why he never sent a Governor among the
Cilicians and Cyprians, contenting himself with the Governors of their own
nation. But he exacted Tribute from them, and a Supply of Soldiers as often as
he had occasion. As Soon as Adusius was come with his Army into Caria, some of
each party came to him, offering to Adusius is sent into Caria.
admit him within the Works to the detriment of the contrary Faction. Adusius
dealt alike with both of them, telling each faction that the other made the
most reasonable offers, and that they should keep all things private, that the
adverse party might not know that there was a League of Friendship betwixt
them, as if by this means he intended to assault the other party when they were
least provided. Moreover he would have both Parties swear to him, that they
would admit the Persians within the Works without any fraud, and to the good of
Cyrus and the Persians. And he also would swear himself that he would enter
within the Works without any fraud; and what was more, to the benefit of those
that admitted him: When he had thus delivered his mind to them, he entered into
the same engagement with both of them, severally, whereupon he was admitted
within the Castle with his Horse, and took possession of both their
Fortifications. As Soon as 'twas light next day he sat in public with his
Army, and summoned together as many as were convenient. When they saw each
other they began to look very sorrowfully, as suspecting that both of them were
brought into a Snare. But while they were thus surmising, Adusius Adu^ compoles
the Difference amongst the Carians.
spoke to them to this purpose. I have obliged my self by an Oath to you ye
Carians that I would enter within your Walls without any fraud, and to the
benefit of those that gave me admission. Wherefore if I destroy either of you,
it must be granted that I entered these Walls to the hurt of the Carians, but
if I make peace between you, and so order the matter that you enjoy your
Country in quietness and security, then I shall think that you are no loosers
by my coming. Know therefore that from this very day forwards, you must
converse friendly one among another, and till your Ground without fears and
suspicions, and give your Children in Marriage one among another, and if any
one offers to begin any disturbance, both Cyrus and my self will be their
professed Enemy. Whereupon the Gates of the Castles were immediately opened, and
the Ways full of Passingers going to and fro, and the Fields were full of
Husbandmen. There were feasting days kept on both sides, and all things were
full of Peace and Mirth. In the mean while there were some Messengers came from
Cyrus, who asked Adusius whether he wanted another Army or any Engines, or no.
To whom Adusius made answer, That he could use the very same Army elsewhere
also. And with that he drew off his Army, leaving some Soldiers to Guard the
Towers: But the Carians were very earnest with him to tarry with them, which
when he refused to do, they sent some of their men with a petition to Cyrus,
that he would make Adusius their Governor.

Cyrus in the mean time had sent away Hystaspas with an Army into Phrygia near
the Hellespont: As soon therefore as Adusius was arrived, Cyrus commanded him
to follow after Hystaspas with his Army, that so they might be the more pliable
to Hystaspas, when they heard that another Army was coming after behind. The
Graecians that bordered upon the Seaside had purchased by a great sum of
money, that they might not admit the Barbarians The Graeclans made Tributary to
Cyrus.
within their Walls, but yet they were tributary, and bound to assist Cyrus in
his Wars whenever he required them. But the King of Phrygia, began to make
Preparations as if he would defend his Walls and not obey the Summons, and so
likewise he declared he would do. But after that his Deputy The King of Phrygia
is taken.
Governors revolted from him, and he was left alone, he came at length into
the Hands of Hystaspas, and the cause was committed to the judgment of Cyrus.
Hystaspas having left a strong Garrison of the Persians in the Towers drew off,
and led with him besides his own Company a great many of the Phrygians both
Horsemen and Target-men. But Cyrus had given Order to Adusius, that after he
had joined himself to Hystaspas he should bring those Phrygians who sided with
him armed as they were; but as for those that would have stood it out, he
should take away from them their Horses and their Arms, and command them to
follow all behind with Slings. And this was done so accordingly.

But Cyrus moved now from Sardis, and having left a considerable Guard of Foot
there, and retaining Craesus also with him, he carried away with him a great
many Wagons full laden with plenty, and Variety of Wealth. Then Craesus came
to him and brought him an exact Catalogue of every thing that was in every one
of the Wagons, telling him: If you take this Inventory, Cyrus, you will know
who restores his Charge honestly again, and Cyrus shows himself not to be
Covetous.
who does not. To which Cyrus replied, you do very well Craesus in being so
Provident, but I intend that those shall carry these Riches who are worthy to
posfefs them. So that if they filch any thing, it shall be nothing but what is
their own. And with that he gave the Papers to his Friends and his Captains,
that so they might know who delivered up their Charge safe and sound, and who
not. He had also with him some of the Lydians, whom he observed to be Curious
and neat in looking to their Arms, Horses and Chariots, and whom he observed to
be Studious and Industrious how to please him: These he led with him in their
Armor. But as for those whom he observed to follow him grudgingly and
unwillingly, he took their Horses and gave them to those Persians that first
went with him to the Wars. He also disarmed them, and made them follow behind
with Slings: Because that kind of Armor is counted the most servile of any.
And besides it sometimes happens that the Slingers when they are backed with
other Forces do a world of good, but if they are alone they are not able to
stand before a very few Soldiers that fight Hand to Hand.

But as Cyrus was marching on in the way that Cyrus brings many Countries under
his Yoke,
leads to Babylon, he subdued the people of the greater Phrygia, the
Cappadocians and the Arabians, with whose Armor he armed no less then forty
thousand of the Persian Horse. And many of the Captives Horses, he distributed
among his Fellow Soldiers. And returns to Babylon.
And thence he came to Babylon with a vast number of Horse, with many Archers
and Darters; and an innumerable Company of Slingers. And when he was come to
Babylon, he placed his Army all round about the City; and he himself with some
of his Friends and a few other Soldiers traversed round the City. After he had
surveyed the Walls he was preparing to draw off his Army, when a certain
Renegade came to him out of the City, and told him that the Babylonians had a
design to set upon him when his Army retreated. For, says he, when they beheld
your Army from the Walls it seemed to them very inconsiderable, which indeed is
no wonder, for since the Walls which they surrounded are of a very large
compass, the Army must needs be reduced to a great thinness. Which when Cyrus
heard, he went and stood in Cyrus's stratagem.
the middle of his Army with the retinue that was with him, and gave Order that
the Soldiers which were heavy-arm'd at each extremity of the Squadron should
repair to that part of the Army which stood still, till each extremity met in
the middle. Which when done, those that stood still were the more encouraged,
because the Body of their Army was now doubled, and those that drew off were
likewise more confirmed in Confidence. For before, those that stood still were
just close by the Enemy. But when both extremitres were met and embodyed
together, they stood more t^ss and compacted, both those that drew off, because
all those who were beyond them, and likewise those beyond, because of those who
clapped in behind. Their Squadrons being thus ordered, it must needs be that
the foremost and hindermost were the strongest, and that the weaker sort were
placed in the middle. Which order seems to be the most advantageous to fight
in, and most convenient to prevent escape. Besides, the thicker the Body was
made, the Horsemen and those that were light armed drew from the Wings the
nigher to the Leader. When they were thus collected together, they retreated
leisurely from the place whence the Artillery was discharged upon them: And
when they were got out of reach they faced about, with their Shields before
them; and in this posture they stood and viewed the Walls. And the further they
were off, the seldomer did they change their posture. But when they apprehended
themselves out of danger, they retreated in a full Body till they came to their
Tents.

Where being now arrived, Cyrus calling together Cyrus shows what way he thinks
it most convenient to besiege Babylon.
as many as he thought necessary, thus bespoke them: We have taken a survey of
the City (Fellow Soldiers) on all sides, and truly how such strong and high
Walls may be taken, I confess I do not know. Only this I must tell you, that
the more men are in the City and come not out to fight, the easier 'twill be to
starve them into compliance. And therefore unless any of you can think of a
better Expedient, I think that must be our way to deal with them. Then said
Chrysantas, Does this River which is above a quarter of a Mile broad go through
the City? Yes (replied Gobryas) and Chrysantas gives his Opinion also, which is
rejected.
it is so deep withal, that if two Men should stand one upon the other they
would not reach above Water: Whence it comes to pass that the City owes more of
its strength to the River then to the Walls. Then said Cyrus, let us let alone
those things Chrysantas which we are not able to compass. And let every one
fall to work and cast a large and deep Trench, such as may need but few to
Guard it. Having therefore measured out a space of Ground all round the Walls,
leaving some void space on this side the River, as much as would serve for some
Outworks, he cast a great Trench about the Walls, throwing up the Earth toward
themselves. Then he built Towers by the River, founding them upon Palm Trees,
which were no less then an hundred yards tall, (for there are some of a greater
length then this:) And it is the nature of Palm Trees when they are pressed with
any weight to rise up into a great bunch, just as the backs of Asses do that
carry Burdens. And these Palm Trees he chose for the Foundation of his Towers,
that he might observe the manner of those that lay siege against a City, that
though the River should get into the Trench, yet the Tower might still stand
fast. He raised also many other Towers upon the Earth that was thrown up, that
there might be a great many places for standing Sentinel: And thus were Cyrus
his Men employed. But those that stood upon the Walls laugh't at this siege,
having Provision enough to last them above twenty years. Which when Cyrus
understood he divided his Army into twelve parts, that so every part might keep
Ward one month in a year. When the Babylonians heard of this, they laughed so
much the more, as thinking with themselves that they should have the Phrygians,
Lydians, Arabians and Cappadocians to keep Ward against them: Who, as they
thought, were better affected toward themselves, then toward the Persians. And
now by this the Trenches were made.

But Cyrus hearing that the Babylonians were to have a great Festival
celebrated, when they used to revel all night long, as soon as it was dark by
the help of a great many Hands, he opened a passage into the Trench toward the
River. When this was done, the Water flowed into the Trenches by night, so that
that part of the River which ran through the City began at length to be
passable. When this had taken effect, Cyrus commanded the chief Officers of his
Horse and Foot to come to him, and that they should each of them lead their
Thousands, divided into two Companies. And that the rest of their Fellows
should follow behind after their wonted manner. When these were come, Cyrus
sent some of his Horse and Foot into the shallow parts of the River, to try
whether it was passable or no. And when they had brought word that it was
passable, then calling together the Officers of his Horse and Foot, he thus
delivered himself to them. This River (Fellow Soldiers) has afforded us a
passage into the City: Let us therefore enter with Courage and fear nothing,
but let us consider, that those whom we now let upon are the very same which we
overcame before, when they were assisted by Neighbor Forces: When they were
all awake and sober, armed and in Martial order. But now we go against them at
a time when many of them are fast asleep, many drunk, and all in a disorderly
posture. And besides, when they once know that we are got within them, they
will be ten times more impotent then they are now, because they will be in a
Consternation. But if any be terrified with that which uses to be most
formidable to those that enter Cities, lest getting up upon their Houses they
throw down things upon us, let that rather add to your Courage. For if any
climb up into the tops of their Houses, we have, you know, the God Vulcan
for^our Fellow-Souldier. And their Porches are very easy to take fire: For
their Doors are made of Palm Tree, and daubed over with Sulphur which is very
apt to kindle. And we for our parts have good store of Torches, Pitch and Tow
which will quickly kindle a great fire, so that they must of necessity either
quickly leave their Houses or be quickly burnt. But come on and take to your
Arms, and I by the help of the Gods will lead you the way. But do you Gadatas
and Gobryas, show us which way we must take, because you know it, and as soon as
we are come in, lead us to the Palace. Then said those that were with Gobryas,
it is no wonder if the Gates of the Palace stand now open, for the whole City
seems this night to be given up to Revelling. But however we shall light upon
the Watch before the Gates of the Palace, forasmuch as they always stand there.
Come, says Cyrus, let us not lose time, but make have that we may take them
napping: And with that they marched on. Those that met with them were either
killed or fled, and made a great noise. Gobryas his Company answered them in
the same noise, pretending that they also belonged to the Revel. Cyrus takes
Babylon whilst they were feasting, which agrees with Daniel's History.
Thus they kept on till at length they were come to the Palace: Where they
found the Gates shut; but those that were commanded to set upon the Guard, fell
upon them while they were drinking by a great fire, and used them after the
hostile manner. But as soon as there began to be a great clamor and noise, and
those that were within perceived the Tumult, the King commanded them to see
what was the matter, and some of them opened the Gates and ran out.

When Gadatas his men perceived the Gates were open, they presently rushed in,
and following hard upon them, and slaying them as they retreated, they came
where the King was, and found him standing with his Sword drawn. But he was
easily overcome by the more numerous Company of Gadatas and Gobryas. And those
also that guarded him were all slain, some flying and others offering to defend
themselves as well as they could. Cyrus sent his Troops of Horse all about the
ways with a Commission to kill all those whom they found straggling out of their
Houses, but as for those who were within Doors he sent them word by some that
understood the Syriac Language that they should keep within, and that if any
one were caught without doors it should be as much as his life was worth.

But when Gadatas and Gobryas were come to Cyrus, they first of all gave thanks
to the Gods for giving them the opportunity of punishing such an impious King,
then they kissed Cyrus his Hands and Feet and wept for the very excess of joy.
The next day when 'twas light those that kept the Walls perceiving that the
City was taken, and that the King was killed, they surrendered up all without
any more ado. Cyrus took the Castles, and placed a Garrison in them. He gave
their Friends leave to bury their dead, and ordered a Proclamation to be made
by his Heralds, that the Babylonians should come and bring in their Arms,
denouncing death to all those in whose Houses any Arms should be found. They
brought in their Arms accordingly, which Cyrus put up in the Towers that they
might be in readiness upon any occasion: When this was done he called his Magi,
and commanded them that since the City was taken in War, they should lay aside
the chiefest part of the spoils for the Honor of the Gods, and that they
should assign Temples for them. Then he made a distribution of the other Houses
and Palaces among them whom he took to have the greatest share in what was
done. And after this manner he distributed according to his old rule, the best
to those who had best deserved: And in case any one thought he had less then
his due, he said he would have him come to him and tell him so. He gave order
also that the Babylonians should till the Field, pay Tribute and discharge
those Duties which were allotted to every one. He commanded the Persians and
their Associates, and as many of his Fellow Soldiers as would tarry with him,
to show themselves like Masters to those that were delivered to their Charge.

And from that time Cyrus himself also began How Cyrus got himself honored as
King.
to take upon him the state of a King, and to this purpose he was advised by
his Friends to appear in public but seldom, and that after a more splendid
manner then before; which he contrived after this manner: Early in the morning
he stood in a convenient place and admitted any one to come to him that had any
business with him, and when he had given him his answer, he dismissed him. But
when his men understood the time of access, they came in vast Multitudes to
him. So that there was great thronging and quarrelling among them who should
come first. His Officers gave them admittance as well as they could according
to their Quality; and if any one of his Friends appeared pressing forward among
the crowd, then Cyrus reached out his Hand and plucked them to him, saying to
them, Stay a little my Friends till we have dispatched this crowd, and then we
will converse at leisure. Wherefore his Friends waited, and in the mean while
the crowd increased, till the evening was come upon him before he could have
opportunity of conversing with his Friends. Therefore Cyrus said to them: Now
Friends it is high time to adjourn, but to morrow morning I would have you be
here again: For I have something to say to you. When his Friends heard this
they departed contentedly, though by reason of waiting up and down they had
neglected their necessary affairs. So for that night they betook themselves to
their rest.

The next day Cyrus was present in the same place, and now a greater Multitude
of Visitants thronged to come to him then before, who had got the start of his
Friends. Cyrus therefore setting a Guard of Persian Spear-men in a large
compass round about him, commanded them to admit none besides his Friends, and
the Persian Captains, and those of his Fellow Soldiers; when these were come
together before him he made this Oration to them. We have no reason (Friends
and Fellow Soldiers) to complain of the Gods, as if hitherto all things had
not succeeded according to our desires. But if this be the fruits of performing
great exploits, that a man cannot be master of his own time, nor have the
freedom of enjoying his Friends, farewell all such happiness. For you know I
began early in the morning Yesterday to hear those that came to me, and that
'twas quite night before I was released. And now you see those same Persons,
and a great many more besides are come here again to find me more work. And
therefore if a man will once endure this I see I shall have but little of your
Company, and you of mine. But of my own Company I know I shall have none at
all. Besides I take notice of another thing, which seems to me very odd and
ridiculous. For to you I stand affected as I ought, but of these that flock
round about me I scarce know so much as one, and yet these are so ready to
press forward that they would prevent you in their Petitions if they could.
Whereas on the contrary I think the best way for these Petitioners would be to
study how to oblige my Friends, and to desire them to introduce them. But
perhaps some of them may say, Why did he not use this Method at first, but
afford himself freely to all Comers? Why, because I understood that the Nature
of War was such, that a Commander ought not to be the last either in
understanding or in doing what was necessary. And if Commanders should appear
but seldom, they must needs Omit many things which ought to be done. But now
we have finished the greatest part of our Wars and enjoy a little respite, I am
willing now to consult my own ease. Wherefore since I am in doubt what is best
to be done for the security both of our own affairs and theirs whom we ought to
be concerned for, let some body or other advise with me and propose what he
thinks most convenient.

These were the words of Cyrus. Then stood up Artabazus, he that said that he
was Cyrus his Kinsman, and said, Indeed Cyrus you have well done in beginning
this discourse. For when you were very young I began to get an interest in your
Friendship, but when I saw that you stood in no need of my Services, I was
something scrupulous of coming to you. But when you desired me by chance to
deliver the Commands of Cyaxares to the Medes, I thought with my self that if I
served you readily in this, I might ingratiate my self with you, and have the
privilege of conversing with you, which I desired for a long while. And that
Charge indeed I performed well, so that you your self commended me. For 'twas
then that the Hyrcanians first began to League with us, at a time when we were
very destitute of assistants. So that we could e'ne have hugged them in our
Arms for very kindness. After that when the Enemies Tents were taken I thought
you were not at leisure for me, and indeed I forgave you on that score. At that
time Gobryas entered into League with us, which was matter of great joy to me,
and Gadatas too; And now I thought 'twould be exceeding difficult to have
access to you. And then when the Sacians and Cadusians came over to us, 'twas
but fit you should attend upon them because they did upon you. But after that
we were returned to the place from whence we first set out, because I saw you
were taken up in ordering your Horses, Chariots and Engines, sure, thought I,
when this business is over he will be at leisure for me. But when we were
alarmed wi^h that terrible News, that almost all the World were banded together
against us, I was sensible that we then stood upon a very ticklish point, but
in case things succeeded well I seemed to be pretty well assured of having very
intimate Converse with you. And now at length we have with much ado overcome,
the Sardians with Craesus himself are in subjection to us, Babylon we have
taken and reduced all things within our Power, and yet by Mithres Yesterday I
could no come to you had I not struggled with the crowd. But when you took me
by the Hand and commanded me to sit down by you, then was I fain to sit there a
whole day in the view of the Multitude without either meat or drink. Now
therefore if things may be so ordered that those that have deserved most at
your Hands may enjoy your Company most, well and good, but if not, I will again
in your own words give order that all shall withdraw from you except those that
have been your Friends from the beginning. Then Cyrus and a great many more
laughed heartily.

Then stood up Chrysantas the Persian and said thus, You did very well Cyrus
formerly in exposing your self to common view, partly for the reasons you your
self just now mentioned, and partly because we were not worthy of such a
particular regard: For we were then with you upon our own account. But it was
necessary for you at that time to procure a Multitude at any rate, that they
might share with us in undertaking Labors and undergoing dangers. But now you
are in this Condition and can have more supplies of Soldiers when you please,
it is fit now that you as well as others should have a fixed abode. For what will
you be the better for your Empire if you alone want an Habitation, then which
nothing is counted more sacred among men, nor more peculiarly our own. Besides,
do you think we are not ashamed to see you weather it out abroad, when we in
the mean time live in our Houses, and seem to be in a better Condition than
you. When Chrysantas had thus spoken he was seconded by others who approved of
his opinion.

Then Cyrus entered into the Palace, and those that carried the Money from
Sardis here delivered up their Charge. As Soon as he was entered, in the first
place he did Sacrifice to Vesta, and then to Jupiter and some other Gods, as
the Magi thought fit. When this was done he began to take other business in
Hand. And when he considered with himself what a Charge he had taken upon him,
who was to Govern such a vast Multitude of People, and that he was to reside in
such a great and Famous City, which was as ill affected toward him as it could
possibly be, these things considered he thought he had great need of a Guard,
considering withal that Cyrus takes a Lifeguard.
Men were never so exposed to Violence as when they were eating or drinking,
bathing or Sleeping: He made it his care to procure such as should be faithful
to him in these Circumstances. And he was of Opinion that no Man could ever be
faithful and trusty, who had a greater love for some other then for him whom he
was to Guard. He considered withal that those who had Children or agreeable
Wives, or any other indearments of affection, were under a kind of Natural
necessity of loving Why he made choice of Eunuchs for that purpose.
them best. But seeing the Eunuchs were destitute of all these, he thought they
would have them in greatest esteem, by whom they might raise their Fortunes, be
avenged of their Injuries, and be graced with Honors. And withal he thought
that there was none that could oblige them by more Favors than himself.
Besides, whereas Eunuchs are in great disesteem and contempt with other men,
for that very reason they want the protection of a Master. For every one will
think to take place of an Eunuch in all things, unless he be restrained by the
dread of some higher Power. But now nothing hinders but that he that is
faithful may take place of others, though he be an Eunuch. And whereas it might
be objected that Eunuchs are much the weaker for being so, Cyrus was of a
different opinion, observing that it was not so in other Creatures. For mad
unruly Horses when they are cut cease indeed to bite People, and abate
something of their frolicksomeness, but however they are still fit for the
services of War. And so Bulls when they are cut remit something of their Rage
and untractableness, but yet they retain their strength to Labor. And in like
manner Dogs when they are cut are as good for keeping the House or for hunting
as ever they were: So Men are not indeed altogether so brisk after they are
quit of the Heat of Concupiscence, but yet they are never the more^negligent in
performing the business, or unfit to ride, or ^hrow Darts, or less ambitious of
Honor and Praise, as may appear from that Emulation which they discover both
in Wars and hunting. And as for their fidelity they have given great proofs of
it when their Masters have been killed: For none have shown themselves more
faithful in their Masters Calamities, then Eunuchs have done. And if they
should have some small disadvantage in point of bodily strength, yet Arms will
make the weak equal to the strong in War. These things considered he chose all
his Lifeguard, his very Porters not excepted, from among the Eunuchs. But
considering withal that this Guard would not be enough to defend him against
the Multitude of those that were disaffected, he looked out for some others
whom he thought Cyrus takes himself more Guards, out of the Persians.
most faithful to Guard his Palace. And because he knew that the Persians who
were left at home lived very hardly by reason of their poverty, and endured a
great deal of Labor partly because of the roughness of the place, and partly
because they were forced to Work with their own hands, these he thought would
be very ready to embrace such a way of life with him. He chose therefore among
them ten thousand spear-men who should keep Ward round about the Palace night
and day, whenever he was within. But if he was gone abroad any whither, they
were to Guard him on each side as he went.

And because he thought that all Babylon stood in need of a Garrison which
might be able to defend it, whether he himself was nigh at hand or afar off, he
placed a Garrison there, and ordered the Babylonians to pay a set stipend
toward the maintaining it, because he would keep them low that so they might be
the more tractable. And this is the state both of the Kings personal and of the
City Guard to this day. Moreover casting with himself how he might maintain the
Empire which he had, and gain more, he considered that these Tributary-men did
not so far exceed his other Subjects He also keeps the rest of the Persian
Soldiers with him.
in goodness, as they came short of them in number, and therefore he thought
best to retain those stout men with him, by whose assistance and the favor of
Heaven he had got himself this degree of Power, and to take care that they
might not intermit their exercise in Arms. And that this might not seem a mere
arbitrary Imposition upon them, but that they themselves might be convinced
that this was the best course, and consequently might persevere in the exercise
of Martial Virtue, he summoned together the Peers of Persia, and as many others
as he thought worthy to share in the Labor and the Profit: And when they were
convened he made this Oration to them. We are much indebted to the Gods (My
Friends and Fellow Soldiers) that they have granted us the possession of those
things, whereof we thought our selves worthy. We are now in the possession of a
large and rich Country, and we have those that will manure it for our
maintenance. We have Houses, and those too well furnished: Neither is there any
reason why any of you should scruple at the possession of these things, for
it is an eternal Law among all Men, that when a City is taken in War the Bodies
and Fortunes of those that are in the City shall be in the disposal of the
Conqueror. And therefore you have a jnst Title to what you possess, but if you
permit the Enemy to retain any thing, that is wholly to be imputed to your
courtesy. But now concerning what is to be done next, this is my opinion: If we
turn to the lazy and Voluptuous life of poor-spirited Men, who think Labor the
most miserable thing in the World, and idleness the greatest pleasure; we shall
soon become unprofitable to our selves, and lose what now we have. For it is not
enough that we were once Valiant-Men to make us continue so, unless by
diligence and industry we still keep our selves in ure. For as other arts
dwindle away through neglect, and as our Bodies though in never so good Health
yet grow out of order for want of Exercise: So Temperance, Continence and
Fortitude by a little intermission will by degrees degenerate into Debauchery.
We must not therefore be idle and indulge our Sloth, nor rush greedily upon
that which is sweet at present. For I think it a great Atchievment to gain a
Kingdom, but I think it a much greater to keep it: For to gain it, often times
nothing more is required then to be bold and dare. But to the keeping it there
is required Temperance, Continence and a great deal of care and wise
management. And therefore considering this, we ought to Exercise our Virtues
more now then before we were in possession of these things: And besides, we
must know that the more any one possesses, the more Envy, Treachery and
Hostility he is obnoxious to, especially if he has Men's goods and Services
against their wills, as it is our case: We have reason to expect the favor of
the Gods; For we did not come by these things through Treachery or Injustice,
but we revenged the Treachery which was designed against us. Now that which is
next best we must obtain for our selves, and that is to think our selves worthy
of Government, no farther, then we are better then our Subjects. It Is necessary
that our Servants share with us in heat and cold, meat and drink, labor and
sleep, but these things must be so common to them with us, that in every of
these things we show our selves Superior to them. But we must Communicate
nothing of our Military Discipline and Exercise to them, whom we keep only to
Labor for us and to pay Tribute, but we must excel them in these Exercises,
and know that they are given us by the Gods as Instruments of Liberty and
Happiness. And as we have deprived them of their Arms, so we must never be
without them our selves, well knowing that those have all things at command as
their own, who are constantly ready furnished with Arms. Now if any one should
throw in this Objection; What then are we the better for obtaining what we
wished for, if we must still endure hunger and thirst, care and Labor? You
must consider that the precedent labor does always sweeten the enjoyment. For
Labor is the greatest Banquet that can be to men of Generous Minds. But it is
not all the sumptuousness in the World that will make that sweet and grateful
which a man did not stand greatly in need of before he had it. But if as
Providence affords us what men most desire, so to make them relish the better
every one provides them for himself, such a man will be in a much better
Condition than other indigent Persons in this respect, because his hunger will
sweeten his meat, and his thirst will sweeten his drink, and his weariness will
indear his rest. Wherefore I think it is our interest to keep up our Military
Discipline as becomes men, that we may find the more relish in what we enjoy,
and secure our selves from experimenting the greatest of Afflictions. For it is
not half so grievous a thing not to get, as it is to lose what a man has gotten.
Besides I would have you consider, what cause we have to pretend for an idle
life now more then we had before. Is it because we are in Power? But it is a
disparagement for those that Govern to be worse then their Subjects: Is it
because we seem now to be in a more flourishiug Condition then before? Can
Idleness then be warrantable in a prosperous Fortune? Shall we animadvert upon
those Servants which we have if they behave themselves amiss. But with what
face can he that does ill himself punish others, for idleness or any other
misdemeanour? Besides, I would have you consider that we have undertaken to
maintain a great number of Guards both for our Persons and our Houses. Now what
a shameful thing will it be that when we think we stand in need of others
Guards, we be not Guards to our selves. But you must know there is no such
Guard in the World as for a man to be Diligent and Valiant. For this will
always inseparably attend us. But he that wants this, will never speed well in
any thing else. What is it then that I would have you do? And wherein would I
have you employ your Valor and Care? Why I will lay no new Injunction upon
you, but as the Peers among the Persians live at the Court, so would I have you
Peers that are here take to the same employment which we used there: And I
would have you be intent upon me and observe whether I make it my business to
mind my Duty, and I in like manner will observe you, and those whom I perceive
to be careful and diligent I will honor and reward. Moreover we will here
educate those children which we have here. For 'twill be a means to improve our
selves, if we endeavor to thew good Examples to our children, and 'twill not
be an easy matter for our children to grow debauched if they would never so
fain, when they shall neither see nor hear any thing that is filthy, but shall
spend their whole days in the study and Discipline of Virtue.

XENOPHON'S INSTITUTION AND LIFE OF CYRUS the GREAT. THE EIGHT BOOK.
THese were the Words of Cyrus: Then Chrysantas stood up and spoke to this
effect. I have long since observed (Fellow Soldiers) that in diverse respects
there is no difference between a good Prince and a good Father. For Fathers
provide for their Children that they may want nothing that is good for them,
and Cyrus seems now to advise us to those things which make for our Happiness.
But in as much as he seems to me to have said something less then the matter
required, I will endeavor to make up what is wanting for your better
Information. Think then with your selves, what City of the Enemy can be taken
by those who will not obey the Commands of their Governor? Or what City of our
Friends can be preserved by them? What Army of Rebellious Soldiers can obtain
the Victory? How can men be more easily overcome in Battle, then when they
pursue every one a divided interest? Or what other great exploit can be done by
those who refuse to resign themselves to the conduct of their Governors? What
Cities can be rightily ordered? What Families can be kept up? How do Ships
arrive to the place which they are bound for? How have we our selves attained
to this prosperous Condition we are now in any otherwise then by yielding
Obedience to our Governor? For by this means we speedily arrived, whether by
day or night to all places according as our business lay. And while we followed
our Governor all in a Body, none were able to sland before us, neither did we
leave any thing done by halves of all that was commanded us. If therefore to be
obedient be the greatest good in order to the obtaining all other good things,
know for certain that it is also the greatest good in order to the preserving
what is already obtained. Consider moreover that before many exercised power
over us, and we over none, but now your Condition is such that some of you
command more and some less. As therefore you think it fit that you should be
obeyed by those who are under your Command, so let us obey those to whom in
Duty we are bound. And let there be this difference betwixt us and Servants
that whereas they serve their Masters grudgingly and unwillingly, let us if we
are in love with liberty, do those things of our own accord which are most
commendable. And you shall find (says he) that those Cities which are not under
Monarchical Government, yet if they obey their Magistrates with all diligence,
will hardly ever be brought into Subjection by the Enemy. Let us therefore
according to the order of Cyrus be always in readiness here at the Court, and
exercise our selves in our Arms, that so we may keep what we have got, and
offer our Services to Cyrus that he may use them to what he thinks expedient.
For this we must know, that Cyrus cannot find out any thing that may promote
his own private interest divided from ours. We have both one Interest, and both
the same Enemies. When Chrysantas had thus said, the other Persians and
Fellow Soldiers rose up and gave their approbation to what had been said.
Whereupon 'twas resolved that the Nobles should always stand at the Gates and
offer their Services to Cyus, till he should please to dismiss them.

Which decree is still observed by them that are under the Kings Dominions in
Asia, in as much as they are very Officious in frequenting the Gates of their
Princes. And as Cyrus (as we have observed) Cyrus lays a solid Foundation of
Government.
had so ordered the Constitution of the Government that he might preserve it to
himself and the Persians; so the Kings that came after him wrote after his
copy. But it falls out in this as in all other things, when he that has the
Government in his Hands is a better Man then ordinary, then the Ancient Rites
and Customs are kept more exactly, but if otherwise, more remissly. The Nobles
therefore frequented the Gates of Cyrus with their Horses and Spears, in
conformity to the order of those chief Men that were Partners with him in the
overthrow of that Kingdom. But the rest had other things by Cyrus committed to
their Charge. For some were Toll-gatherers, some were Stewards, some were
Overseers of his Buildings, some were Treasurers and some were Caterers to buy
in Provision. And to some he committed the care of his Horses and his Dogs,
that he might have them trained up for his use.

But that those whom he would have to share with him in maintaining his happy
Condition might be improved to great degrees of excellence, this he made his
own peculiar Care, and would not leave it in Charge with others. For he knew
that if any time he should be engaged in War he must take his Guard from among
those who had been exercised in the most desperate services, and that the
Captains of his Horse and Foot must be taken also from the same Nursery. He
knew also that he should make use of some of their services that they might be
Deputy Governors of Cities and whole Nations, and that some of them might be
employed upon Embassy. Which he took to be a thing of the most considerable
moment, that so he might obtain what he had a mind to without being forced to
wage War for it. And if those by whom the greatest businesses of state were to
be managed were not Ambassadors very necessary in all Government.
such as they should be, he though his Condition would be none of the best. But
if they were, then he thought all would go well. And being he was of this
Persuasion, he did all he could to make them so.

He thought it also necessary that he himself should apply himself to the
exercise of Virtue: For he thought it a great piece of indecency that he should
incite others to great and laudable performances if he was not as he ought to
be himself, which when he considered he found that he had need in the first
place of leisure and opportunity if he would enter upon great designs. He
thought it impossible that he should neglect his revenues, because he saw there
were great expenses in a great Kingdom. And again, whereas his revenue was very
great, he knew he should be always taken up in the Care of managing it, and
that that would call him off from the greater concerns of state. Wherefore
while he was considering how his private Affairs might be rightly ordered, and
he, in the mean time enjoy his opportunities of leisure, he called to mind how
'twas with the Military Officers. For, for the most part the Captains of ten
take Care of their ten, and the Captains of the Regiments take Care of the
Captains of ten, the Tribunes take Care of the Captains of the Regiments, and
the Captains of ten thousand take care of the Tribunes. By which means it comes
to pass that among so many thousands none are left uncared for: And when the
head General is pleased to employ the Army, it is but to give his Orders to the
Captains of ten thousand and the work's done. Cyrus therefore made use of the
same Method in the Administration of his domestic Affairs, so that he needed
only to impart his mind to a few, and his private concerns would by no means be
neglected. By which means he had more leisure then either any House-holder or
Master of a Ship. And having thus ordered his own Affairs he taught those of
his Court to do the like. And so procured leisure both to himself and to his
Friends.

After this he took upon him to reform those Cyrus his way to bring his People
often to Court.
who lived at Court with him: And in the first place he looked after those who
were able to live by the Labor of others, though they never came to Court.
Because he thought those that were present would not be guilty of any
misdemeanour, partly because they were in the Kings presence, and partly
because they knew that they should have the chiefest of the Nation continual
eye witnesses of their Actions. But for those who were not present, he thought
that either Intemperance, Injustice or Negligence were the causes of their
absence. Wherefore upon that account he compelled them to be resident: Which he
did by authorizing some of his dearest Friends to take Possession of their
Goods when they were absent. When this was done, those that were dispossessed
of their Goods came and sued for Justice. But 'twas always a long time before
Cyrus would suffer the matter to come to a hearing. And after he had heard it,
he used to delay a long time before he would give Sentence. And this he thought
an excellent way to engage their Services to him, better then if he should
force them to be present by direct and open punishments. This was one way
whereby he taught them to be always upon Duty: Another was by commanding those
that were present nothing but what was easy and for their advantage to do;
another way was, by giving them nothing who were absent. But if none of these
courses proved effectual, his last way of dealing with them was to take away
their Estates, and give them to those who he thought would attend upon him
better. And by this means, he gained a profitable Friend instead of one that
was unprofitable. And this manner of animadverting upon those that are absent
when they ought to be upon Duty, is kept up in use by the King of Persia, at
this day. And thus did Cyrus behave himself toward those that were absent: But
as for those who gave him constant attendance he thought he should sufficiently
stir them up to the undertaking of great and laudable Actions, if he himself
that was their Prince made it appear that he was eminently endued with all
Virtuous accomplishments.

He observed likewise that Men were made much the better by written Laws, but
that a good Prince was to men a Law with Eyes: Since he could not The whole
World follows the Kings example.
only prescribe Rules, but also see and punish the Violation of them. Upon this
account he discove'd at this time a more then ordinary Zeal for the Service of
the Gods, because he was now in a happier Condition then ever. And now was the
order of the Magi first constituted, whose Office was to sing Hymns of Praise
to the Gods constantly as soon as 'twas light, and to offer Sacrifice every day.
And these Constitutions are now retained by the King of Persia. The other
Persians imitated him in this his Devotion, because they thought they should
prosper the better if they worshipped the Gods as he did who was both happy
himself, and commanded them to follow the same course. Besides, they thought
hereby to ingratiate themselves the more with Cyrus. And he himself also was
persuaded that the Religion of his Subjects would turn to his own interest,
being of the same sentiments with those who would rather sail in the same
Bottom with those that are Religious, then with those that carry the guilt of
some heinous Crime about them. Besides, he thought that if all his Courtiers
were seasoned with a sense of Religion they would be the less apt to Plot any
mischief either against one another, or against himself, who he thought had
well deserved of his Court.

And whereas he had made it appear that nothing pleased him so well as that
neither his Friends nor his Fellow Soldiers should sustain any damage, and
that he had an eye to Justice in all his Actions, he thought this would be a
means to dissuade others from enriching themselves by indirect Methods.

He was also of opinion that the best way to make his Subjects modest, was by
showing them openly that he so much revered their opinion of him, that he would
not speak or do any undecent thing in their sight. And this he thought an
excellent expedient for this reason, because Men are apt to reverence not only
Princes, but those whom otherwise they stand in no awe of, if they are modest,
more then if they are immodest. And so do they reverence those Women most whom
they perceive to be most Modest.

He thought also that 'twould be an excellent way to engage the obedience of
his Subjects, if he rewarded those openly who obeyed him without any
reluctance, more signally then others, who had done never so many and so great
Services. And this was his constant Practice as well as his opinion.

Moreover he taught them how to use Moderation by showing them what a Master he
was of it himself. For when men observe that he who has the greatest privilege
to be extravagant, behaves himself modestly and soberly, those that have less
liberty will beware how they be guilty of any insolence. But the distinction
that he made between Modesty and Moderation was this, that the Modest would
avoid all indecencies in public, but the Moderate in private also.

The best way to recommend continence to his Subjects was, he thought, by
declaring as often as he had opportunities of pleasure offered him, that he
would not be drawn off from what was Virtuous, but that he preferred labor
joined with Honesty before the sweets of pleasure. And by thus ordering his own
Conversation he brought things to that pass, that Inferiors carried themselves
with a great deal of Modesty and submissiveness toward their Superiors at the
Gates, and that each behaved themselves with a composed gravity. You should see
none there extravagant in their Anger, or ungovernably merry, but so orderly
that when you saw them you would think they lived up to the very Rules of
Virtue. And this was their manner of life at the Court.

But now for the better inuring them to Military Exercises, he used to lead
them out ahunting. Because he thought that might be very advantageous to all
parts of Military Service, but especially to riding. For it makes them the
better able to sit their Horses in all sorts of places, because they must
follow after their Game. Besides, it makes them nimble and active for any
performance of Chivalrie, partly by the ambition of Honor, and partly by the
desire of gaining the Prey. And here he disciplined his Courtiers in the
severities of continence, labor, cold, heat, hunger and thirst. And this way
of life is used by the King and Court at this day. It may appear from what has
been already said, that he thought none was worthy of the Government who was
not better then his Subjects. And also that by this continual exercising of
them, he had sufficiently disciplined himself in Continence, and all Military
Arts and Exercises. For he led forth others ahunting when there was no
necessary occasion for their tarrying at home. But as for his own part, when
his business detained him at home he used to hunt Beasts, which he kept on
purpose in his Parks; Neither would he take any meat till after he had sweated,
nor would he bait his Horses till they had been exercised. And to this private
hunting he invited his Nobles. And this perpetual course of Exercise was a
great improvement both to himself and those that were with him. Thus exemplary
did he show himself.

Moreover, if he took notice of any that were more then ordinarily diligent and
industrious, he encouraged them by gifts, offices, pre-eminence and all sorts
of Honors. By which means they all began to be very ambitious of approving
themselves to Cyrus. This moreover is to be observed in Cyrus, that he did not
only think that Princes should excel their Subjects, but that they should
endeavor to please and sooth them as much as they could. Whereupon he thought
fit to wear the Median Habit himself, and persuaded all his Court to do the
like. For if there was any defect in the Body, this Habit he thought would hide
it, and represent those that wore it hansomer and bigger then they were. For
they have such manner of Shoos that you may hide something in them, so that
they will appear a great deal bigger then they are. He gave them also liberty
to Paint themselves, and so to improve their Natural Complexion. Moreover he
taught them not to spit openly, or to blow their Noses, and that they should
not turn about to gaze at any thing, as if there were nothing which they
admired at. And all this he thought would contribute something toward the
securing them from the contempt of the Vulgar. And thus he disciplined those
whom he intended should partake of the Government, partly by exercising them,
and partly by his own Majestic Example.

But as for those whom he bred up to be Servants, he did not make use of them
in any liberal Exercises, or suffer them to wear any Arms. And he took care
that they should never want meat or drink upon the account of liberal
Exercises. He permitted the Servants as often as they went ahunting After what
manner Cyrus was wont to treat his Servants.
to carry meat with them, but he would not let any of the Nobility do so. And
when they were to take a Journey he led them to Water just as he did his
Horses. And when 'twas dinner time with them he would stay till they had eaten
something, lest they should be over-hungry. So that the Servants as well as the
Nobles would call Cyrus their Father, forasmuch as he provided for them so
well, that by their own consent they would never be any other then Slaves. And
thus did Cyrus strengthen and confirm the Persian Empire.

But as for those whom he had conquered, he apprehended himself in no danger
from them. For he considered that they were but in a weak Condition, and under
no Order or Discipline. And besides none of them was permitted to come near
him, either by night or day. But for those who he saw were the strongest, and
furnished with Arms, and embodyed together in a great number, and who were
partly Commanders of Horse and partly of Foot, and whom he perceived to be of
great Spirits fit for Government, and who had near access to Cyrus his Guard,
and many of which used to come oftentimes to Cyrus himself (which could not be
avoided because he had occasion to use their Service) these indeed he was
afraid of, and that upon several accounts. Considering therefore with himself
how he might secure himself from them, also he thought 'twas not his best way
to disarm them, and render them unfit for War; because that could not be done
without injury and the overthrow of his Kingdom. Again not to give them
admission, and to declare his distrust of them openly, would, he thought, prove
the occasion of a War. Instead therefore of all this, he thought the safest and
most honorable way, would be to make the chiefest men among them more
affectionately disposed toward himself then toward one another. And he took
this course to affect it. In the first place, he endeavored upon all occasions
to show as much candor and courtesy toward them as he could; as knowing how
hard a thing it is to love those whom you think disaffected toward you, and how
hard on the other hand it is to hate those of whose kindness toward your self
you have full conviction. As long therefore as he was not in a Capacity to
oblige them by Gifts, he endeavored to win upon their Affections, partly by
consulting their welfare, partly by laboring for them, and partly by showing
them how much he rejoiced at their Prosperity, and how much he was troubled at
any ill that befell them.

But as soon as he was in a capacity to bestow Cyrus his Liberality.
Collations upon them, he observed that no favor of the same value was more
acceptible to men, then to have meat and drink given them. Whereupon he gave
order concerning his Table, that they should set before him meat enough to
suffice a great many men of the same sort, with that which was for his own
eating. And of this he always distributed among his Friends, to show how
mindful he was of them, and how much he loved them. Moreover he sent meat to
them whom he perceived to be diligent on their Guard or officious to serve and
Honor him, telling them withal, that he was not ignorant of the good will of
those who were desirous to please him. He vouchsafed also the same Honor to
his Domestics when he was minded to encourage any of them. And he ordered that
all the meat of those his Domestics should be put upon his own Table, thinking
this would be a great indearment to them as it is to Children. And if he had a
mind to recommend any of his Friends to the esteem of a great many, he would
send them meat from his own Table. And it is the manner at this day for all men
to Honor and Reverence those who have any thing sent them from the Kings
Table. Because they look upon them as special Favorites who have an interest to
gain any thing for them if need be. Neither is it upon these accounts only that
those things are most welcome which are sent from the King, but those meats are
really more delicious which come from the Kings Table: And no wonder. For as
other Arts arrive to higher improvements in great Cities, so are the Kings
meats more curiously ordered then any other. For in little Towns it belongs to
one Trade to make Bedsteads, Gates, Ploughs and Tables, and build Houses: And
it is well if they can get their living so. But now it is impossible that those
who are taken up in so many employments, should do them all well. But in great
Cities where there are a great many that want each of these, one of these
Trades is enough to maintain a Man. Nay, oftentimes one does not ingross a
whole Trade to himself, but one makes men's Shoes, and another Women's Shoes.
Sometimes it is maintenance enough for one man to work Shoes, and for another to
cut them out. Sometimes it is one man's work to cut out Clothes, and another's
to make them up. Wherefore when each man's task is but little, he cannot choose
but do it well. And this is the very case in Victuals. For when it belongs to
one and the same Person to make Beds, lay the Cloth, knead the Dow and cook the
Meat, he must needs do these things but very indifferently. But when ones whole
business is to boil meat, and another's to roast it. When it is ones work to
boil Fish, and another's to fry it, and another's to bake Bread, and of that
too only one particular sort, these things in my opinion must needs be done
very artificially, And thus did Cyrus exceed all men in obliging his Friends
with his meat.

But how eminent he was for obliging his Friends in other things also, I am now
to relate. For although he excelled other men in this, that he had a very great
revenue, yet he excelled them more in his munificence. And this custom of
making great Collations begun by Cyrus, is still in use with the Kings of
Persia. For who has more wealthy Friends then the Persian King? What King is
there whose Nobles are more splendidly habited then his? Who is there that
gives such noble Gifts, such as are his Jewels, and Bracelets, and Horses with
Golden Bridles? For with the Persians none are suffered to have these things
but those to whom the King gives them. Who is there besides that ever so far
indear'd himself by his liberality as to be beloved more then Brothers, Parents
or Children? Who could ever revenge himself upon his Enemies who were distant
from him the space of many months Journey so as the King of Persia? What other
Prince after he had destroyed the Kingdoms of other Nations so ended his days
as to be called a Father by his Subjects, besides Cyrus? Now it is well known
that that is a Name which uses to Who amongst the Persians, are accounted the
Eyes and Ears of the Kings.
be given more to them that bestow benefits, then to them that invade what is
another. It is said moreover, that Cyrus made sure to himself those who are
called the Eyes and the Ears of the King no other way then by obliging them
with Gifts and Honors. For when 'twas observed that those that informed him of
any material concern, were sure to be rewarded, every one would lie at catch
for some discovery or other which might make for the Kings interest. And hence
arose that Proverbial saying among them, that the King had a great many Eyes
and a great many Ears. Now if any one is of opinion that 'twould be more for
the Kings interest to have but one very considerable eye or ear, he is much out
of the way. For one can see or hear but a very little, and besides if this
charge were committed only to one, 'twould look as if all the rest had a Patent
to be negligent and heedless. And besides whomsoever they knew to be the Kings
Eye they would be aware of him. But 'twas not so here, for the King would give
ear to any one that offered any considerable information. And by this means
'twas thought that he had a great many Eyes and Ears, and people were afraid
to speak anywhere against the King as much as if he was present. Nay, they were
so far from whispering any thing amiss of him to any Body, that every one was
so affected as if all those with whom at any time he conversed were the Kings
eyes and ears. Now I can assign no other reason that men were thus generally
affected toward him, but that he was wont to repay small deservings with great
Favors.

Neither is it any wonder that he exceeded all others in the magnificence of
his Gifts, in regard he was so very rich. But that he who was a King should
condescend so far as to outdo his Friends in Obsequiousness and Courteousness,
that indeed is much to be admired. For it is said of Cyrus, that he was never so
much ashamed upon any occasion, as when he was outdone by the Kindness of his
Friends. And 'twas a common saying with him, Cyrus's his parallel between a
Shepherd and a good King.
that a good King was in all points like a good Shepherd. For a Shepherd after
he has contributed to the welfare of the Sheep, and put them into a good
plight, may then make use of them. And so it is but right that a King should be
served by those Cities and Men whose Happiness he has minister'd unto. And
therefore since he was of such Sentiments, it is no wonder that he endeavored
to outdo all Men in Offices of kindness.

There is a very notable piece of Instruction which he gave to Craesus, who
told him that he would beggar himself in a little time by his over-liberalness;
whereas, being a single Man he might hoard up great Treasures. Then Cyrus asked
Cyrus makes a Demonstration to Craesus of h^ inexhaustible Treasure.
him; And how much Money do you think I might have had, if as you would have me
I had hoarded up ever since I came to the Crown? Then Craesus named a very
large Sum. Then said Cyrus, Well Craesus, I would have you send some Body whom
you can best confide in with my Hystaspas. And do you Hystaspas, go about to
all my Friends, and tell them, that I have an Occasion for some Money (and
indeed, so I have) and that every one of them should supply me with as much
as-he can spare, and that he should deliver it sealed up in Letters and
superscribed to Craesus's Servant, to be brought to me. And when he had written
some Letters to the same purpose, he gave them to Hystaspas to carry to his
Friends; whom also he desired to receive Hystaspas as a Friend of his. He when
he had gone his round, and Craesus his Servant was returned with the Letters,
told Cyrus, that now he must treat him as a rich Man, for he was come to him
with a great many Gifts. Then said Cyrus, look Craesus, here is one of my
Exchequers, and do you compute now the rest, and consider how well I am
provided with Money, if occasion be. Craesus, upon Computation found that it
came to a great deal more than he said Cyrus would have had, if he had hoarded
up himself. Then said Cyrus to him, do you see now Craesus that I have my
Treasures too? But you would have me by hoarding expose my self to envy and
hatred, and trust a parcel of Mercenary Keepers. But I think my enriched
Friends are my best Treasurers, and more faithful Keepers, both of my Person
and of my Wealth, than if I should entrust it in the Hands of a Mercenary
Guard. But I have another thing to tell you, Craesus. I must confess that I am
not free from that Humor, whereby the Gods have made every Man poor, for, I
have as unsatiable thirst after riches, as another Man. But I think there is
this difference between me and other Men, that when they have got more Money
then what is sufficient, they either hide it under Ground, or else give
themselves perpetual Trouble by counting it over and over, and weighing it, and
turning it up and down, and keeping a careful eye over it. And yet, in the mean
time, while they have it, they neither eat any more then they can bear away,
for then they would burst; neither, do they wear more Clothes then they can
carry, for then they would be stifled. But that superfluity of Wealth serves to
no purpose, but only to disturb and disquiet them. I, in the mean time serve
the Gods and desire more. But when I have more then will serve my turn, I
relieve my Friends with the overplus; and thus by enriching Men, I gain their
good will; which makes both for my Security and my Credit. My Wealth, in the
mean time is neither consumed with rust, nor oppresses me with its weight. But
now for Glory, the more it is, the more splendid and the lighter to be born,
and oftentimes it makes those the more expedite that carry it. And besides
Craesus, I don't think those the happiest Men that possess and keep most, for
then those that keep the Walls of a City would be the only happy Men, because
all that is in the City is in their Custody. But I take him to be the happiest
Man in point of Riches who can procure most, and come honestly by it, and when
he has it can put it to a commendable use. These were his Words, and his
Actions were conformable.

Moreover observing that the generality of Men while they are in good health
make it their business to store themselves with things necessary and useful for
the time of sickness, and withal observing that they did not much concern
themselves about it, he thought it was his part to provide here also. Wherefore
he summoned together the best Physicians, because he would spare no cost. And
whatsoever Instruments, Medicaments, Meats or Drinks he was told were
convenient he laid up great store of them all in readiness. And if any of his
Friends were sick he would come and look upon them himself, and supply them
with all Necessaries. And he would give the Physicians thanks as often as they
had cured any by those Medicines which he had laid up. By these and many more
such Arts, Cyrus gained himself great esteem among those by whom he would be
beloved.

It made also much for Cyrus his Commendation that he provoked his Soldiers to
Emulation by setting up Martial Games and proposing rewards to the Victorious,
in as much as therein he showed how much 'twas his Care to keep up the
Exercises of Martial Virtue. And these Games did occasion a great deal of
Contention, and Animosity among those of the chiefest Rank. Wherefore Cyrus
made an order that as often as there was any Cause to be decided, both parties
should repair together unto the Judge. And then to be sure both the Adversaries
would have recourse to such a Judge whom they thought the best, and most
favorable to themselves. So that he that was cas^ would envy him that
overthrew him, and hate him that gave it against him. And on the other side, he
that won the day would impute his Victory to the equity of his Cause, and think
himself indebted to no body. And so those who contended to be chief among Cyrus
his Friends, did envy one another as much as those that dwell in Cities.
Insomuch that most of them could wish one another out of the way, rather then
do one another any kindness. And these were the Arts by which Cyrus contrived
to make his Nobles love him better then they did one another.

The next thing we have to relate is the manner The Majesty and pomp of Cyrus,
when he went out of his Palace.
of Cyrus's Procession out of his Palace. For the Majesty of this Procession
seems to be one of those Arts whereby he secured the Dignity of his Kingdom. In
the first place therefore, before he came forth, he called all the Persians,
and all others that were in any Office, and distributed Median Garments among
them. And indeed that was the first time that the Persians wore the Median
Habit. And while he was distributing them, he told them he would go to some of
the Temples which they had set apart for their Gods and do Sacrifice. Wherefore
be ye all ready at the Gates adorned in this Habit before Sunrising, and do you
stand in such order there as Pheraulas the Persian shall direct you to from me.
And when I go before you, do you follow as you are directed. And if any of you
can think of a better way of Procession, let them show it when we come back:
For all things shall be done for the best. After he had distributed the best
Garments among those of the best quality, he brought forth other Median
Garments. For he had made Provision of all sorts, Purple, Brown and Scarlet.
And having divided these among his Captains, he ordered them to adorn their
Friends in like manner as he did them. Then said some of those that stood by:
And when do you mean to adorn your self Cyrus? To which Cyrus replied, and
don't I seem to you to be adorned now while I adorn you? For so long as I can
be beneficial to you my Friends, whatsoever Garment I wear I shall think my
self fine in it. So they went away and dressed their Friends with that Habit
which Cyrus had recommended to them.

Now Cyrus looking upon Pheraulas to be a Man of quick ready parts (though of
mean quality) and one that loved neatness and order, and withal one that was
very careful to please him, he calls him to him, and consults with him how he
might so order his Procession as to make it a delightsom Spectacle to his
Friends, and a dreadful one to his Enemies. And when they had agreed both upon
the same Method he desired Pheraulas to take Care that the Procession might be
made the next day in the same order as they had contrived it. As for keeping
order in the Procession (says he) I have commanded all to obey you. But that
they may do it the more willingly, here take these Coats for the Captains of
the Spear-men, and these for the Captains of the Horsemen, and these for the
Captains of the Chariots. Pheraulas took them and carried them with him. As Soon
as the Captains saw him you are a great Man Pheraulas, (said they) since you
are to order us also what to do. That is not all (replied Pheraulas) but I am
to carry your Packets for you too: I have here two Coats you see, one for you
and one for him, whereof I offer you the choice. Then he that took the Coat
forgetting his envy, asked his Counsel which to take. Pheraulas when he had
told him which was the better, if you now do tell (says he) that I gave you the
choice, you shall not find me so much your Servant another time. Pheraulas
having thus distributed these things as he was commanded, made it his next
business to provide for Cyrus his Procession that every thing might be as neat
as possible. The next day before 'twas light, all things were made clean and
put in readiness, and they stood all in a row on each side of the way as they
use to do when the King is to ride by. And between these rows none might pass
unless he were a Nobleman. There stood also Men with Rods to correct those who
made any disturbance. Before the Gates there stood four thousand Guards in four
Companies, and on each side two thousand. All the Horsemen likewise were
present, and alighted from their Horses with their Hands appearing out of their
Cloaks, as the manner of the Persians is to this day when they are in the Kings
sight. The Persians stood on the Right Hand, the others on the Left Hand of the
way, and after the same manner were the Chariots divided half on one side, and
half on the other. After the Gates of the Palace were opened, In the first
place four great fair Bulls were led forth to be sacrificed to Jupiter and the
other Gods, according as the Magi had appointed. For the Persians make use of
Artists more in Divine Service then in any thing else. Next to the Bulls there
were Horses led to be Sacrificed to the Sun. After them was drawn a white
Chariot with a Golden Harness, crowned with Garlands, and sacred to Jupiter.
After that followed a white Chariot of the Sun, crowned like the other. After
these followed a third Chariot whose Horses had scarlet-Trappings. And after
these came Men with fire in a great Hearth. Next came forth Cyrus himself in
his Chariot with a Persian Ornament upon his Head and a purple Robe half-white
(which is an Habit peculiar to the King) and silken Garters upon his Legs, and
a loose Veil all purple upon his Shoulders: upon his Head he wore a kind of
Diadem and a certain badg proper to those of the Royal Blood which is now still
in use. His Hands he held forth out of his Sleves. As Soon as he appeared in
view they all reverenced him with a very low bow, either because they had
orders to do so, or because they were affected with the pomp and grandeur of
the thing, or because Cyrus appeared tall and graceful. However 'twas, it is
certain that Cyrus never had such Veneration from any of the Persians before
that time. But now when the Chariots of Cyrus was come forth the four thousand
Guards marched before, and two thousand attended on each side of the Chariot.
The Nobility followed after on Horseback in their Robes with Javelins in their
Hands, in number about three hundred. Next after these were led two hundred
Horses that were kept for Cyrus his use, with Golden Bridles and embroidered
trappings. After these followed two thousand men with long Spears, after them
ten thousand Horsemen divided all along by hundreds, whose Leader was
Chrysantas. After them ten thousand of the Persian Horse alike armed led by
Hystaspas. After them other ten Thousand led by Datamas. After them another
Company led by Gadatas. After these came the Median Horse, then the Armenians,
then the Hyrcanians, then the Cadusians, and then the Sacians. After these
Horsemen followed Chariots four in a Breast, led by Artabates the Persian. As
they were marching in this order, a great many men would be apt to run out of
their Ranks to beg Favors of Cyrus. Wherefore he sent to them some of his
Nobles, who waited three of each side of his Chariot, on purpose to carry
Messages, and bade them tell them that if anyone had any petition to present he
should impart it to the Underofficers, who should Communicate it to him.
Whereupon they went their way to the Horsemen, and considered whom they were
best go to. Cyrus when he was minded to Honor any of his Friends publicly, he
would send and call them to him severally, and thus bespake them: If any of
those that are behind should say any thing to you, if it be not material do not
regard it. But if they desire any thing that is reasonable I would have you
acquaint me with it, that so we may consult together in common what to do.
Whenever Cyrus called for any they rode to him with all the speed and
readiness they could, and by their Obsequiousness added much to the grandeur of
his Empire, and showed how ready they were to obey him.

Only there was one Diapharnes a Man of a roughcast Temper, who thought it a
point of Gentility and Freedom not to seem so ready and Officious to obey.
Which when Cyrus took notice of, before he was come near enough to speak to
him, he sent him word by one of his Nobles that he had now no more business
with him, neither did he ever send for him afterward. But he that was called
for after him, rode up to Cyrus long before him. Whereupon Cyrus gave him one
of his led Horses, and commanded one of his Nobles to attend him whither he
sent him. This was thought by those that saw it to be a very great Honor, and
this procured him more reverence. When they were come to the Altars they burnt
whole Bulls in Sacrifice to Jupiter. Then to the Sun they Sacrificed whole
Horses. Then they offered Sacrifice acccording to the direction of the Magi in
Honor to the Earth. And afterward to the Heroes of the Syrian Country. When
they had performed this, because they were come into a very pleasant place, he
measured out a piece of Ground five Furlongs long, and ordered some Select
Persons to run their Horses for Mastery. He himself with the Persians that were
of his side were Victors, because he was well skilled in managing a Horse.
Among the Medes Artabazus had the Victory, for Cyrus had given him one of his
Horses. Among the Syrians he that led them. Among the Armenians Tigranes. Among
the Hyrcanians the Commander of the Horse his Son. Among the Sacians a certain
private Soldier outrod the rest of the Company by half of the Race. And here
it is said that Cyrus asked the Young Man whether he would part with his Horse
for a Kingdom. The Young Man made answer, I would not take a Kingdom in
Exchange, but I would part with him to oblige a good man. Well then, says
Cyrus, I will show you a place where if you fling any thing winking you cannot
miss a good man. Show them me (replied the Sacian) that I may fling this clod
among them. Then Cyrus pointed him to a place where a great many of his Friends
were. He flung at a venture with his Eyes shut, and by chance hit Pheraulas as
he passed by. For he was at that time employed upon a Message by Pheraulas as
solely intent upon Cyrus his Business.
Cyrus. When he was struck he would not so much as turn about, but went on
without any Intermission to do what he was sent about. The Sacian opening his
Eyes asked who 'twas that he had struck. None of those that are here, answered
Cyrus. I Am sure (says the Young Man) it could be none of those that are absent.
Yes, says Cyrus, you struck him that rides full speed by those Chariots yonder.
How comes it to pass then, says he, that he did not turn back? Why he is a mad
man (replied Cyrus) as you see plain enough. When the Young Man heard this he
went to see who 'twas. And as he was going he met with Pheraulas with his Beard
and Chin all bloody, which was caused by the bleeding of his Nose. When he was
come to him, he asked him whether he had been struck or no. You see I have,
replied he. Then (says he) i will give you this Horse: upon what account, says
Pheraulas. Here the Sacian up and told him the whole business, and withal (says
he) I think I have not missed a good man. Then said Pheraulas, had you been
wise you would have reserved this present for a greater Man then I am. But I
accept it, and heartily desire of the Gods (by whose will it fell out that you
hit me) that I may be in a capacity of making such a requital that you may not
repent of this Gift. But now for the present, here take my Horse, and I will be
with you again by and by. And so they made an exchange.

Among the Cadusians, Rathonices overcame. Cyrus made the Chariots also run
races. And to all the Victors he gave Oxen to feast withal and Cups. He himself
took an Ox because he was Victor, and gave Pheraulas part of his Cups because
he had pleased him in ordering the Procession. And this same way of Procession
which was then instituted by Cyrus is still retained by the King at this day,
only there are no Oxen led forth when there is no Sacrifice to be offered.
After they had made an end of this solemnity they returned to the City, and
those who had Houses given them repaired to them, those who had not, went to
their Ranks. But Pheraulas entertained the Sacian who gave him Pheraulas his
Gratitude.
the Horse, in his own Lodgings, and among other rarities, after Supper he
filled those Cups which he had of Cyrus, and drank to him out of them, and
afterward gave them to him. The Sacian looking about him, and seeing a great
deal of fine Hangings and other rich furniture, and a great many Servants, tell
me Pheraulas (says he) are you one of those who are great Men only at home? Yes
(replied Pheraulas) I am one of those great Men that get their living with
their Hands. My Father made a hard shift to maintain and educate me while I was
a Boy, by his own Labor, but when I grew up to be a Man, because he could not
keep me in Idleness, he put me out into the Country to Work. And there I in
requital afforded him a maintenance by delving in my Garden, and by husbanding
a little Field, but one that was very just and grateful. For whatsoever it
received, it returned with Interest. And one time above the rest, I remember it
returned me double increase. And after this rate I lived while I was at home.
But now all these things which you see here, Cyrus gave me. Then said the
Sacian, Well I take you to be a very happy Man as in other respects, so
particularly upon this account, because from a Poor Man you are made rich. For
your former want and vehement desire of Riches must needs make them relish much
the better now you have them. Do you think then (replied Pheraulas) that I live
so much the pleasanter now I am Rich? I don't find that my Meat; Drink, or
Sleep is one jot sweeter now then 'twas when I was Poor. This is all Pheraulas
his generous mind in contemning Riches.
that I get by being Rich, that now I have more to keep, more distributions to
make, more to Care for, and more Trouble to undergo. For now I have a great
many Servants to be fed and clothed, and physic'd. One brings me word that my
Sheep are torn by Wolves, another, that my Oxen have broke their Necks from a
Precipice, and another that a Pest is got among my Cattle. So that I am apt to
think I have had more Trouble and Vexation in my great Possessions, then when I
had nothing at all. But however (says the Sacian) when you see all things
prosper and thrive, you must needs enjoy more pleasure in your large
Possessions then I. Ay but (says Pheraulas) there is not half so much Pleasure
in possessing as there is Trouble in losing. And the Truth of what I say will
appear from this Observation, that the pleasure of having a great Estate does
not hinder a man from Sleeping; whereas those that lose any thing cannot Sleep
for the sorrow and Vexation. Neither can a man Sleep for pleasure when he has
newly received something. You say true, replied Pheraulas, for if 'twere as
pleasant to possess a thing as it is to receive it, the Rich Man would have the
advantage of the Poor Man by much in Happiness. But he that has a great deal
must make great disbursements, partly for the Service of the Altar, partly in
collations upon his Friends, and partly in Hospitality toward Strangers.
Whosoever therefore has his Heart much set upon Money, must needs be much
troubled at every expense. But (says the Sacian) I am not of that number, for I
think the greatest happiness of having a great deal lies in this, that a Man
may spend a great deal. Well (replied Pheraulas) you are a happy Man, and have
made me so too. Take therefore all that is here and do with it what you please,
and keep me with you in the Nature of a Guest, or if you please somewhat
meaner. For 'twill content me well enough to partake of what you have: you jest
sure, replied the Sacians No, says Pheraulas, I swear I am in earnest. Neither
is this all that I will do for you, for I will prevail with Cyrus to dispense
with your absence at Court, and to exempt you from all Military Services, that
so you may live in all manner of plenty at home. This I will do both for my own
sake and yours. And if I chance to get any other good thing either by my
serving of Cyrus, or by any Military Office, that will I bring to you to
increase your store. Only do you ease me of this Care. For if I may be
disingaged from these things, I believe you will be very serviceable both to me
and Cyrus. After this passed between them, they struck a bargain and stood to
it. And so the one thought himself now very happy in that he was Master of so
much Wealth, and the other thought himself most happy in that he had a Steward
to manage his business for him, and that he was now Master of his own time.

Now 'twas the Nature of Pheraulas to take Pheraulas his Natural ^isposition.
great delight in making Friends. And 'twas his opinion that there was not so
much pleasure and profit to be had from any one thing as from obliging Men. For
among all Creatures he took Man to be the best and the most grateful, because
he saw that those who were commended by any one would be very officious in
commending them again, and that Men were very forward to oblige them who had
shown them any favor. And that they were more grateful to their Parents then
any other Creatures, whether alive or dead. Pheraulas therefore was very glad
that being now disentangled from other Cares he could serve his other Friends.
And the Sacian was as glad on his side that he should now live in a plentiful
Condition. The Sacian loved Pheraulas because he always brought him some new
thing. And Pheraulas loved him because he would receive all, and though he had
daily more and more to look after, yet he took all the Trouble to himself. And
this was the manner of life which they led.

Cyrus, when he had done Sacrifice, and made a Feast for joy of the Victory,
invited some of his choice Friends whom he knew to be well-affected toward
him. And amongst these he invited Artabazus the Mede, Tigranes the Armenian,
Hyrcanius the Captain of the Horse, and Gobryas: Gadatas had the ordering of
the Feast. And as often as Cyrus had any to Sup with him Gadatas did not sit
down, but mind his Charge. But if Cyrus had no Company Gadatas used to sit with
him. For Cyrus was mightily delighted with the Conversation of Gadatas, who
upon that account was much honored Cyrus observes a certain Me. thod in
seating his Guests at Table.
by Cyrus, and by others for Cyrus his sake. When the Guests that were invited
were come to Supper, he did not place them at a venture, but whom he honored
most he set at the Left Hand, because that is most exposed to Treachery, the
next to him he placed on the Right Hand, the next on the left again, and so on.
He thought it convenient to have it known openly how much every one was
honored. For when Men think that he that excells the rest has neither honor
nor reward, it is impossible there should be any Emulation between them. But
when it is observed that the best Man has the preference, then all contend for
eminency with the greatest alacrity. And thus Cyrus quickly made it appear by
seating his Guests who were his greatest Favorites. But he would not that every
one should always fit in that place which was first allotted him. But he
settled it for an order, that he that had done any Worthy Action should be
advanced to a more Honorable Place; and that he that behaved himself ill
should be degraded. Cyrus also thought it would reflect upon him, if he did not
bestow some signal benefits upon those whom he preferred in sitting. And these
Institutions of Cyrus are still observed.

While they were at Supper Gobryas did not at all admire at the splendidness of
the entertainment, because he considered the greatness of the Person. Gobryas
admires the Humanity of Cyrus.
But he could not choose but wonder to see that a Person of Cyrus his Quality,
whenever he lighted upon a more delicate bit then ordinary, would not eat it
alone, but trouble himself with asking his Friends to partake with him. Nay, he
observed that sometimes he would send some of his delicacies to his absent
Friends. Wherefore says Gobryas to Cyrus when Supper was ended, I thought
before that your excellence above other men lay in your skill of Military
Discipline: But now I see you are a better Friend then a Soldier. I confess
(replied Cyrus) the Offices of kindness are much more pleasing to me, then the
Works of Military Discipline. And why so? Says Gobryas. Because (says he)
whenever I show these I do Mischief, whereas the other are beneficial to
Mankind.

When they had drank pretty fre^ly, says Hystaspas Why Cyrus preferred
Chrysantas before Hystaspas.
to Cyrus, Will not you be angry with me, Cyrus, if I ask you somewhat which I
have a mind to? No, I shall rather be angry with you (says he) if I perceive
you suppress any thing which you would ask me about. Then tell me, Cyrus, did I
ever refuse to come when you sent for me? Good Words pray, replied Cyrus. Was I
ever slack in obeying your Orders? No, nor that. Did you ever Command me any
thing which I did not perform? No, I have no reason to complain of any such
thing. But of all the things which I have done, is there any that was not done
with that cheerfulness and pleasure as it ought? No, I can least of all tax you
with that. Then tell me, Cyrus, how has Chrysantas so far obliged you, that he
should be placed in a more Honorable Seat then my self? Shall I tell you?
Said Cyrus. Yes, by all means, replied Hystaspas. But then you must also
promise me that you will not be angry when you hear the Truth. No, I shall be
rather pleased, if I find I am not wronged. Why then in the first place, this
Chrysantas did not use to stay till he was sent for, but would come to me of
his own accord, when he thought I had any business for him to do. Besides, he
did not only do what was commanded him, but whatsoever he thought would be for
my profit to have done. And as often as any thing was to be said to my
Fellow Soldiers he would always give me his advice concerning whatsoever he
thought agreeable to be spoken. And when he observed that I would fain have my
Soldiers know something, but was hindered by overmodesty from delivering it my
self, he would so declare the matter to them as if 'twas his own opinion. Upon
this account therefore he was a greater Friend to me then I to my self.
Besides, he always declares himself content with the present, but for my profit
he thinks he can never enough improve it. In the last place, he rejoices more
for any good Fortune of mine, then I do my self. Then said Hystaspas, By Juno
I Am glad that I asked you about this. Why so? Says Cyrus. Because (says he) I
will now endeavor to do the same. But I Am ignorant of one thing, how I shall
make it appear that I rejoice at your good Fortunes. Must I show it by clapping
my Hands, or by laughing, or what must I do? Then said Artabazus you must cut a
Persian Caper. At which Words they all fell a laughing.

When they had drank on a little higher, says Cyrus to Gobryas, Tell me,
Gobryas, are you more willing to bestow your Daughter upon one of these now,
then when you were first Conversant among us? Will you give me leave to tell
Truth? Replied Gobryas. Yes (says Cyrus) for no Question stands in need of a
lie. Then (says he) I am more willing. Can you give us a reason for it? says
Cyrus. Yes I can. Because then I observed that you could not bear labors and
dangers with an even and patient Spirit. But now I perceive you can bear
Prosperity with the same Moderation. And I think ( Cyrus) that it is a rarer
thing to find one that can bear Prosperity as he should, then Adversity. For
the former is apt to make Men Insolent, whereas the latter is apt to make them
Modest. Then said Cyrus, Do you hear Hystaspas, what Gobryas says? Yes (says
he) and if I hear any more of the same from him, I shall be a more earnest
Suitor for his Daughter than if he showed me his Cupboard full of Plate. Why,
says Gobryas, I can show you a great deal more of the same in writing, if you
will marry my Daughter. Then said Cyrus, If you Hystaspas, or any of the rest
will but tell me when you have a mind to Marry, you shall see how much I will
befriend you. But suppose (said Gobryas) any of us be minded to Marry his
Daughter, whom must we tell that to? Make me privy to that too, replied Cyrus,
for I understand this Art mighty well. What Art? Says Chrysantas. Why, the Art
of match-making. Then tell me (says Chrysantas) what kind of Wife would be
fittest for me. In the first place (says he) one that Cyrus joaks with his
Courtiers.
is little, because you are a little Man your self. Whereas if you Marry a tall
Woman, when ever you have a mind to kiss her as she stands upright, you must
leap like a Camel. That (replied the other) is well thought of, for I am not at
all made for a Leaper. In the next place, one that has a flat Nose would be
very suitable for you. Why so? Because (says he) you your self have a crookt
Nose, and those two would do very well together. Is it fit then (says he) that
I that have made a full Supper should Marry one that is fasting? Yes (says
Cyrus) because a full Belly is hooked, and an empty one is flat. Then said
Chrysantas, Can you tell me what kind of Wife is fit for a King that is Frigid?
Here Cyrus and the rest of the Company fell a laughing. Then said Hystaspas,
you are the happiest Man in your Kingdom, Cyrus, for one thing. What is that?
says Cyrus. Because though you are so Frigid, yet you can move laughter. Then
said Cyrus, I Will warrant you would not for a good deal but that you had said
these things, that it may be told your Mistress how witty you are. Thus they
droll'd upon one another.

After this, Cyrus brought forth a dress for a Woman's Head to Tigranes, and bad
him give it his Wife, because she had such a Masculine Spirit, as to accompany
her Husband to the Battle. To Artabazus he gave a Golden Cup, to Hyrcanius an
Horse, with many other good things. But for your Cyrus gives in Marriage to
Hystaspas the Daughter of Gobryas.
Daughter, Gobryas, I will give her a Husband. You shall give me then (says
Hystaspas) that I may get those Writings of Gobryas. Then said Cyrus to him,
have you an Estate answerable to her Fortune? Yes (says he) and a great deal
more. And where (says Cyrus) does this Estate of yours lie? Why here (says he)
where you sit, who are my Friend. Well (says Gobryas) that is enough for me. And
with that, reaching out his Hand, Give it me, Cyrus (says he) for I stand to
the bargain. Then Cyrus gave Hystaspas his Hand to Gobryas, and he shook Hands
with him. Then he gave Hystaspas a great many fine Gifts to send to his
Mistress. Chrysantas he took and kissed him. Then said Artabazus, Sure Cyrus
the Gift which you gave me and that which you gave Chrysantas are not of the
same Gold. Well, but, says Cyrus, you shall have one of the same. But when?
Thirty years hence, says he. Well, says Artabazus, besure to be as good as your
word, for I am resolved not to dye before that time. And thus they ended their
Banquet for that time. And when they rose from Table, Cyrus also rose with
them, and brought them, going as far as the Gates. The next day he sent home
all those Reformades, who joined themselves to his assistance, except those who
were willing to dwell with him. And to those he gave Houses and Lands. Which
their Posterity enjoy to this day. They were most of them Medes and Hyrcanians.

He gave also a great many Gifts to those that went away, and after he had
given them all full content, he dismissed them. Then he distributed Cyrus
rewards his Soldiers.
among his own Soldiers, the Money which he had at Sardis. The Captains of ten
thousand and his Guard had an extraordinary Portion, every one according to his
deserts, but the rest he divided, here and there as he pleased. And when he had
given a certain portion to every Captain of ten, he permitted them to
distribute to others, as he had done to them. The rest of the Money he ordered
to be so distributed, that every Officer should make inspection into those that
were under him, and so distribute the remainder according to every ones
deserts. And by this means, every one had his due. After the distribution was
made a great many said of Cyrus, Sure he must needs be very rich that can give
so much to every one of us. Others said again, But how is that possible, for
Cyrus never used to hoard up? But the truth of the business is, it is a greater
pleasure to him, to give then to possess.

When Cyrus heard of these discourses, and opinions of men concerning him, he
called his Friends and some others together, and spoke thus to them. I have
known some (my Friends) who would be thought to possess more than they do, out
of a design to appear the more liberal. But in my mind they take the quite
contrary way. For when a man has a great deal, and does not communicate to his
Friends accordingly, he takes the ready way to be thought illiberal. Again,
there are some in the World, who are of a humor to conceal their possessions.
But these also seem to me not to do kindly by their Friends. For when the Value
of their Estates is unknown, their indigent Friends are loath to make any
applications to them for relief. Now I think the greatest Honesty and Ingenuity
is to make known what a man has, and to endeavor to get the Reputation of a
Liberal Man, according to the measure of his Estate. Wherefore I will show you
all of my Estate which is to be seen, and as for that which is not, I will give
you an Inventory of it. And with that he showed them a great part of his
Treasures, and as for that which lay so far in that it could not be seen, he
gave them an account of it. And now, says he, I would have you look upon this
not as mine, so much as your own. For I have gathered it together, not that I
may sp^ it my self, or squander it away (for that is almost impossible) but
partly to Crown your Deserts, and partly to relieve your Necessities. After
this man^er did he discourse to them.

But now when he thought matters were so ordered at Babylon that he might
safely be absent from it, he began to prepare himself for an Expedition into
Persia. And when he thought himself sufficiently provided with all things
Necessary, he moved from Babylon. We intend to give a Relation of this
Expedition, it being considerable that so great an Army should be so orderly in
laying down their Carriages, and in taking them up again, and so speedy in
repairing to their proper Stations upon Occasion. For where ever the King
incamps, there all those that attend upon him are upon Duty in their Tents both
Winter and Summer. The first thing that Cyrus did, was to pitch his Tent so
that it might stand just against the rising Sun. Then in the next place, he
gave order at what distance he would have the Tents of his Guard from his own.
Then he appointed the Cyrus takes Care that they be placed in Order, and in
their proper Stations.
Right Hand place to his Bakers, and the left to his Cooks. The Right Hand also
was allotted for the Horses, and the left for other Cattle. There was such
distinct order kept that every one might know his Station both as to measure
and as to place. Now when they are to make up their Carriages, every one packs
up those things together which are assigned for his proper use, and then there
are others whose office is to lead the Horses. So that by this means all the
Carriers come to fetch those Goods which are allotted to their Charge, and
everyone puts what is his own upon his own Horses. So the same time that serves
for the removing the Goods of one Tent, serves for all. And they unload their
Carriages after the same manner. Besides, every one in particular receives
orders what to do, and what necessaries to provide, and so the same time that
serves one to make Preparations in, serves all. And as each of those Ministers
that attended on these Affairs, had his proper Station allotted him, so
likewise the Soldiers had every one his own place in the Camp, and knew it
very perfectly. So that they took to those that were their own immediately
without any hesitation. For Cyrus considered that 'twas a very commendable
thing in a Family for every thing to have its proper place, that so in case a
man should want any thing he might know whither to go directly for it. But in
an Army much more, because delays are there more inconvenient, by how much
their Occasions are more sudden. And withal he considered what great things
were done by a timely application. This was the reason that he bufied himself
so much about the orderly placing of his Men. He made choice of the middle of
the Camp for his own Station, because there was the most security. Round about
him he had the most faithful of his Guard as he used to have, and round about
them his Horsemen, and his Chariots. For these he thought had need of a secure
place, because they required some long Preparation before they could use those
Arms they had against the Enemy. On the Right and Left Hand of himself and his
Horsemen, was the Station for the Target-men. And before and behind him and
his Horsemen stood the Archers. The heavy armed Soldiers like a Wall
encompassed all the rest, that so the Horse might be secured while they were
preparing themselves if need were. The Target-Men and the Archers slept in the
same order with the heavy-arm'd-Souldiers, that so if any invasion happened by
night they might be ready to use their Arrows and Darts at a distance, as well
as the other their Weapons near at Hand. Moreover all the Commanders had
peculiar Signs before their Tents. So that Cyrus his Guard knew every one of
their Apartments, as well as Men know one another Houses in the City. And
therefore if Cyrus had occasion to use the Service of any of them, they were
not long in seeking him out, but went directly to his Tent. And whereas all of
every Nation had their several Stations by themselves, it was much the easier
to observe who was orderly and obedient, and who not. And being in this order,
he thought if any should invade them by day or night, they would light upon his
Tents, as upon an Ambuscade. He thought the skill of marshalling an Army did
not confist only in knowing how to draw out the Squadrons, or to thicken them,
or to make a Squadron of a Wing, or to turn toward the right, or the left, or
the Rear, according to the several Postures of the Enemy: But also to know how
to spread, as occasion required, and to place every part where it will do most
good, and to hasten when there is need of Prevention. These he took to be the
parts of a good Commander, and in all these he employed his utmost diligence.
In his Expeditions he changed his Postures very often according to the variety
of accidents. But when he encamped he used the forementioned order for the
most part.

Now when he was come into the Country of the Medes, he quartered with
Cyaxares. And when they had embraced and saluted one another, Cyrus told him
that he had now a Court in Babylon, and that if he would come thither he should
be as welcome as at home. After that he made him a great many Presents.
Cyaxares accepted them, and sent his Daughter to him with a Golden Crown,
Jewels and Bracelets, and a very rich Median Robe. And while the young Lady was
crowning Cyrus, Cyaxares offers his Daughter in Marriage to Cyrus.
says Cyaxares to him, you shall have this Daughter of mine, Cyrus, for your
Wife. For your Father married my Fathers Daughter, whose Son you are. And this
is she whom you used to play withal while you were with us. And when she was
asked by any one whom she would have for her Husband? She would say, Cyrus. Her
Dowry shall be all Media, since I have no Male Child. These were the words of
Cyaxares: to which Cyrus returned this answer, That he liked both the Lady and
her Parentage, and accepted of her Gifts; but that he could promise nothing
without the consent of his Marriage not to be contracted without the consent of
Parents.
Father and Mother. And though Cyrus would not absolutely engage himself, yet he
gave the Lady a great many such Gifts as he thought Cyaxares would like. These
things being over, he made toward Persia.

When he was come within the Confines of Persia, Cyrus returns into his own
Country.
he left the rest of his Army there: He himself with his Friends went to the
City, carrying with him Cattle enough to suffice the whole Nation of the
Persians both for Sacrifice and Feasting. And Presents such as were fit to be
made to his Father and Mother, Friends, Magistrates, Elders and Peers of the
Kingdom. He gave also all the Persian Men and Women such Collations as use to
be given at the return of the King.

His Father Cambyses having called together an Cambyses makes a perpetual
League of Amity betwixt his Son Cyrus and the Persians.
Assembly of the Elders and Magistrates of Persia, and Cyrus among the rest,
made them an Oration to this purpose. I bear an hearty Affection both to you my
Persians, and to you Cyrus. And it is very reasonable that I should, for you are
my Subjects, and you are my Son. Wherefore it behooves me to Communicate to you
whatsoever I think may be for your Interest. As for what is past, you have
consulted the greatness of Cyrus, by giving him an Army, and making him General
of it. And Cyrus by the well management of his trust, and the favor of Heaven,
has made you great and glorious in the esteem of all Men, and filled all Asia
with the dread of your Name; has enriched the chiefest of those that listed
themselves under his conduct, and took care to supply the common Soldiers both
with their pay and their diet. If therefore you continue in the same mind for
the time to come, you will mightily contribute to the promotion of each other.
But if either you, Cyrus, lifted up with the success of your uudertakings,
design nothing but your own private interest in the Government of the Persians
as of Strangers. Or if you, my Citizens, envy his growing Power, and endeavor
to alienate the Kingdom from him; know for certain that you will prove an
hindrance to one another in many great Achievements. In order therefore to the
prevention of these mischiefs, it seems good to me that after our solemn
addresses made to the Gods, we enter into this Covenant: That you Cyrus in case
of any foreign invasion or innovation offered to the Laws of Persia, be ready
to assist the Persians to the utmost of your Power. And that you Persians, if
any endeavor to depose Cyrus, or to stir up his Subjects to Rebellion against
him, afford him your assistance. While I live the Kingdom of Persia is mine,
but after my decease it is plain that it devolves to Cyrus. When Cyrus is here
in Persia 'twill be best for him to offer Sacrifice in your behalf, as I do
now. But in his absence, I think it most convenient for one of the Royal Family
to do it, whom you shall best approve of. When Cambyses had thus said, Cyrus
and the Persian Magistrates agreed upon the Premises by common consent, and
entered it among the Decrees. And this solemn League which was then confirmed
is, now constantly observed to this day. And when these things were ended,
Cyrus departed.

And when he was come into Media, by his Parents Cyrus marries Cyaxares's
Daughter.
consent he married Cyaxares his Daughter, who, as they say, was a very
beautiful Lady. Some Historians say that he married his Mothers Sister, but
that is improbable, because she would have been at that time an Old Woman. When
the solemnities of his marriage were over, he went away with her. And when he
was come to Babylon he thought it now concerned him to set Deputy-Governours
over the Nations which he had conquered; for as Cyrus's Policy.
for the Governors of the Castles and Garrisons, and the Tribunes of those who
were upon Guard all about the Country, he would not have them under any besides
himself. For by this means he thought that in case any of the
Deputy-Governours, upon the account of their greatness, or the number of their
Subjects, should behave themselves insolently, and refuse to yield obedience,
they might have their Adversaries ready to encounter them in the very same
Country. Being therefore resolved upon this Expedient, he thought it necessary
to summon them together, and acquaint them with the business, that those who
were to be sent might know what their errand was. For then he thought they
would take it the better. Whereas if they should find it out after they were
invested with their Power, he thought they would take it amiss, as if they were
not fit to be trusted. Having therefore convened them together, he said thus to
them: We have Garrisons (my Friends) in our conquered Cities, and Governors in
them which we left there. To these I gave order at my last parting with them,
that they should not attempt any thing of their own Heads, but make it their
whole business to look to the Garrisons. Now I do not think it fit to divest
these of their Power, because they have so well discharged their trust. But I
must send other Deputies who may preside over the inhabitants of those
Countries, receive Tribute and pay the Garrison-Men their Stipend, and do what
ever else is necessary to be done. And as for those of you who live here, whom
I employ upon business abroad among those Nations, I think I must give you
Houses and Lands there, that so they may know whither to bring their Tribute,
and that when they come they may be entertained. When he had thus said, he gave
most of his Friends Houses and Servants in the conquered Cities. And their
Posterity have the same in Possession at this day, though they themselves
reside in the Kings Court. It is necessary moreover (says he) that we pick out
such Deputies for those Countries, who will be mindful to send over hither
whatever choice Commodity every Country affords, that so we that are here may
partake of all manner of their good things. For if any ill befalls them we must
be concerned in their protection. When he had thus said, he commissioned some
of his choice Friends that were willing to go, to be Deputies according to the
Conditions proposed. To Arabia he sent Megabizus. To Cappadocia Artabazus. To
Phrygia the greater Artacamas. To Lycia and Ionia Chrysantas. To Caria Adusius,
who was desired by the People of the Place. To Phrygia near Hellespont and
Aeolis, Pharnuchus. But to Cilicia, Cyprus and Paphlagonia, he sent no Persian
Deputies, because they offered to side with Cyrus against the Babylonians of
their own accord. But however, he imposed a Tribute upon these as well as the
rest.

The Garrisons remain still in the Kings Power according to Cyrus his
Constitution at that time, and the Tribunes of the Garrisons are deputed by the
King, and their Estates have a tax upon them. Moreover he charged all the
Deputies which he sent, that whatever they had seen him do, they should imitate
as near as they could. That they should in Cyrus his Command to his Deputies.
the first place, take their Horsemen and Coach-men out of those Persians and
other Associates that accompanied them. And that they should make all
House-holders and Masters of Estates frequent the Gates, that so they might
live temperately, and be ready to serve the Deputy upon any occasion. That they
should Educate and Discipline their Children at the Gate, as the manner was
with him. That the Deputy should have those that attended at the Gates out
ahunting pretty often, and Exercise both himself and his men in feats of Arms.
And for your encouragement (says he) whosoever according to his Ability shall
furnish me with most Chariots, and train up most Horsemen, him will I Honor
as an excellent Fellow-Souldier, and one that is a Fellow-Guardian both of the
Persian Dominions and of my own.

And I would have you honor those that are best deserving with pre-eminence of
place, as I do. And I would have you keep such a Table as I do, one that is
sufficient to diet those of your own Family, and withal to spare some portions
to your Friends, and to honor those who perform some notable exploit every
day. I would also have you keep Forests for Game, and never to sit down to
meals till you have undergon some labor, nor to bait your Horses unexercised.
For it is impossible, that I alone upon mere Humane Strength should keep up your
Interest. But it is necessary that I employ all my Courage and Forces to help
you, and you all yours to help me. And I would have you also consider, that I
lay none of these Injunctions upon Servants which I do upon you. And that what
I require from you, is no more than what I perform my self. In the last place,
as I would have you imitate me, so would I have you persuade the inferior
Magistrates to imitate you. And according to this order of Cyrus, all the
Garrisons are at this day under the immediate Command of the King, all the
Gates of the Magistrates are officiously frequented, all Houses great and small
are governed the same way, all those that are eminently deserving are honored
with pre-eminence of place. All Expeditions are ordered in the same manner, and
Multitudes of Affairs are compendiously managed by a few Governors. When he
had thus instructed them how to demean themselves, and given every one of them
a Company of Soldiers he dismissed them, telling them that they must prepare
for a General Muster against the next Year. And in this also Cyrus set a
Pattern to Posterity, which they still imitate.

For some Body visits all the Countries round with an Army every Year, and if
any of the Deputies wants help he helps him. And if any of them behave
themselves insolently he controuls him. If any refuse to pay his Tribute, or to
defend the Inhabitants, or to manure the Ground, or to perform any of those
things which are commanded him, all this he reforms. But in case it be more
than he can do, he gives his Information to the King. He upon the hearing of
the business gives Sentence. Oftentimes the Kings Son, or the Kings Brother, or
those whom they call the Kings Eyes, go the rounds privately. For every one of
these return again at the Kings Command.

There is another expedient which Cyrus invented for the grandeur of his
Kingdom, whereby he might know how the state of things were at never so great a
distance. For having considered how far Posthorses first ordered by Cyrus.
a sound, able Horse could conveniently go in a day, he ordered Stables to be
made at every one of those distances, and he placed Horses in them all with men
on purpose to look after them. Moreover in every one of these Stages he ordered
one whose business was to receive the Letters that were brought, and to deliver
them to others. And to receive the Men and Horses that were woary, and to
supply fresh ones. So that these journies sometimes were not ended with the
day, but a night Post succeeded the other. And after this rate, they say they
would make dispatch in their journeys equal to the flight of Cranes. But
however, that may smell of a Romance, yet this is certain, that of all
Foot-journeys there is none to compare with this in Expedition. And it is very
good, immediately upon the notice of any accident to take Care about it,
without any delay.

After this year was over, Cyrus gathered all his Army together at Babylon, and
it is said, he had an hundred and twenty thousand Horse, two thousand hooked
Chariots, and six hundred thousand Foot. And with these Forces, he made that
famous Expedition, Cyrus subdues many Nations.
wherein it is said, he subdued all those Nations that live beyond Syria, as far
as the Red Sea. After this, it is said he made an Expedition into Egypt, and
overcame it. So that now Cyrus's Dominions were bounded toward the East, with
the Red Sea, toward the North with the Euxin-Sea, toward the West with Cyprus
and Egypt, toward the South with Aethiopia. The extreme Coasts of which
Countries are scarce habitable, partly through heat, partly through cold,
partly through abundance of Water, and partly through the want of it. Cyrus At
what Places be^ (...) ^o make his abode.
himself living in the middle of these, used to spend seven months in the
Winter time at Babylon, because that is a hot Country. Three months in the
Spring at Susa. Two months in mid-summer at Ecbatanc. And for this he was said
to live always in Summer, Winter and Spring.

Now he had such Interest in the Affections of all Men, that every Nation would
think themselves Cyrus is beloved by all.
mightily damaged, if they did not send to Cyrus whatever good things their
Country afforded, whether Natural or Artificial. Every City, nay every private
Man thought themselves abundantly rich, if they could but oblige Cyrus. For he
accepted every Present that was made him, whereof the givers had plenty of the
same kind. And in requital supplied them, with whatsoever he perceived they
wanted. After he had lived on after this manner for a considerable time, he
came again into Persia Cyrus's last journey into Persia.
(which was the seventh time that he visited it since he was King) being now a
very old Man. And now by this time his Father and Mother (as it is very likely)
had been long dead. Here Cyrus as his manner was, performed all the solemnities
of Sacrifice, leading a Quire of Persians after his Country fashion, and
distributed Gifts among his Friends. One The approach of Cyrus his Death is
rev^'d to him in a Vision.
day as he was asleep in his Palace, he saw this Vision; some body seemed to
come to him in a Divine Form, and to speak thus to him. Prepare your self.
Cyrus, for you are now to go to the Gods. When he had seen the Vision, he
awoke, and was very sensible that his Life drew now to an end. Whereupon he
offered Sacrifice to Jupiter the Guardian of his Country, the Sun and the rest
of the Gods upon the tops of the Mountains (as the custom of the Persians is)
and withal offered up this Prayer. Accept, O Jupiter, and thou O Sun, and ye
other Gods the Rites which I now perform, and wherewith I close up many great
and brave Actions. I thank you for instructing me what to do or omit by
Entrails, Celestial Signs and Auguries. I also give you many thanks for the
sense which I have of your Care of me, and that you have not suffered me in the
greatest Gales of Prosperity to forget either my self or you. And I entreat you
that you would now be propitious to my Children, Wife, Friends and Country. And
for my own part, all that I desire of you, is, that you would be as favorable
to me in my Death as you have been in my Life.

After this he returned home, and laid himself down to take a little repose. At
the usual time, his Servants came to him to know whether he would wash, he
desired them not to disturb him, for he was in a sweet slumber. At meal time
they came after their custom and set meat before him. But Cyrus was not
disposed to eat, but seemed to be very thirsty, and thereupon drank with a
great deal of pleasure. When he had continued two or three days in the same
condition, he called his Children together (who lived at that time in Persia)
and his Friends, and the Magistrates of Persia, and when they were all before
him, he began this his last Speech to them.

I am assured (my Children and Friends) and Cyrus his last and most wise Speech.
that by many tokens, that the end of my Life is now at Hand. And I would have
you after my decease in all your Words and Actions to behave your selves
toward me as one that is happy; for when I was a Boy I enjoyed all the
excellencies proper to that Age, and when I was a Young Man all that were
proper to that, and when I was of a full manly Age all that were agreeable
then. And after that I felt my strength still increasing with my Age. I never
perceived my Old Age to be any thing more infirm then my Youth, neither do I
remember that ever I desired or undertook any thing which I did not succeed in.
I have seen my Friends advanced in their Fortunes by me, and my Enemies by me
reduced to servitude, and my Country which before made no Figure at all in
Asia, I now leave in great Glory and Splendor. Neither did I ever lose any
thing of all that I got. And though I was successful in all my undertakings for
the time past, yet there was a certain fear of the various turns of Fortune
which always checked my rising Spirit, and tempered the extravagance of my joy.
But now I die I shall leave you my Children surviving, and my Country and my
Friends in a happy State. How then is it possible that I should not be esteemed
happy, and live for ever in the memory of Men? But I must declare who shall
succeed me, lest the omission of that occasion after-disturbances. I love you
(my Sons) both alike, but I give the pre-eminence of Counsel and Government to
him that is the Elder, and in all likelihood has most Experience. For as I have
been taught by the customs of our Country to give place to my Elders, not only
Brothers but also Citizens, whether in the way, or in sitting, or in speaking;
so did I ever accustom you (my Sons) to give place to your Elders, and to take
place of your Inferiors. Submit then to what I say, as that which is
primitive, customary, and confirmed by the Authority of the Laws. The Kingdom
then is yours, Cambyses as much as the Gods, and I can make it. And to you
Tanaoxares, I give the Lie utenantship of Media, Armenia and Cadusia. And in
this, I think I give you the largest Empire. Your Elder Brother, indeed, has
the Name of a King; but you have all the happpiness of it, without the Trouble.
For I cannot imagine what Humane delight you can want: For you will have the
Command of all those things wherein men place Happiness. But now as for the
love of those things which are difficult to be accomplished, the Trouble and
Anxiety in a Multitude of Affairs, a way of life that is a stranger to all
rest, and the Designs and Suspicions of Treachery, all this will be the lot of
him that has the Kingdom. And these I am sure are enough to sour the Gaieties
and Pleasantness of Life. And I would have you know (my Cambyses) that it is not
this Scepter that must be the Guardian of your Kingdom, but that faithful
Friends are a Kings best Scepter. But I would not have you think, that Men are
faithful by Nature (for then, as all other Natural Agents, they would be alike
to all) but those that are faithful must be made so. And the way to do that, is
not by Violence, but by Obligations and Arts of Indearment. Wherefore, if you
have a mind to take any Partners to share with you in the administration of the
Government, be sure to take none but those who are of the same Country with
your self. For Fellow-Citizens, have a nearer Relation to us, then Foreigners,
and those of the same Family, then Strangers. But those who are descended of,
and educated by the same Parents, and have grown up together in the same House,
and call the same Persons Father and Mother, how is it possible but that they
should be under the greatest ties of Affection imaginable? Let not therefore
those Indearments, whereby the Gods unite Brothers, be bestowed upon you in
Vain. But upon these Foundations of Nature, do you raise a superstructure of
kindness and benevolence, that so your Friendship may be impregnable. For he
that takes Care for his Brother, takes Care for himself. For upon whom does the
advancement of a Brother reflect so much Ornament and Credit, as upon his
Brother? Who will Honor a Person of great Quality, so much as his Brother?
Whom will a man more fear, then him who has a Brother in great Power?
Therefore, let no Man be more ready to obey your Brother upon all occasions,
then your self; considering that you are more concerned in his Prosperity, or
Adversity, then any one besides. And I would have you consider this, Who is
there whom you can oblige more to your own Interest, then your Brother? What
stronger Associate can you make by your help in War? Whom is it more
dishonorable not to love, then your Brother? Whom is it more commendable to
observe and honor, then your Brother? Your Brother (my Cambyses) is the only
Person whom you may prefer without the hazard of envy. Wherefore I entreat you
(my Sons) by the Gods of my Country, that if you have any desire to please me,
you would show it by mutually honoring and loving one another. For I would not
have you persuade your selves that after this life of mine is ended, I shall be
nothing. For you did not see my Soul while I was living, any more then you will
after I am dead, but you concluded it is Existence from it is Operations. Have
you not yet observed what terrors the Souls of the Murdered, ^rike upon the
Murderers? And how they take revenge upon the wicked? Do you think the dead
would retain such honor as they do among Men, if their Souls had now no being?
Indeed (my Children) I could never persuade my self that my Soul had such
dependence upon my Body as to live while in it, and to perish when out of it.
For I see that it is the Soul which is the Principle of life to these Mortal
Bodies. Neither can I be persuaded that the Soul is destitute of all sense and
perception when it is separated from this senseless Body. But on the contrary, I
find it most reasonable to believe that in this state of purity and freedom,
the Soul is much more knowing then before. In the dissolution of a man it is
plain to be seen that every part returns to it is proper Principle, except only
the Soul which is neither visible then nor before. Consider that nothing more
resembles death, then sleep does. Now in sleep, the Soul gives the greatest
evidence of it is Divinity, and foresees things to come, being then in a state
of the greatest freedom. If then the Soul survives after it has taken it is
farewell of the Body (as I verily believe it does) fulfill this my desire out of
reverence to my Soul. But in case it be otherwise, and my Soul die with my
Body, yet however fear the Gods who are Immortal, Omniscient and Omnipotent,
who preserve the order of the Universe, and secure it is Beauty and Greatness
from the decays of time; fear them, I say, and have a Care how you commit or
design any Wickedness. And next to the Gods I would have you reverence the
succeeding Generations of Mankind. For the Gods have not placed you in the
dark, but where your Actions will be conspicuous to the Eyes of the World.
Which if they are pure and just, will advance you among Mankind. But if you
deal injuriously one by another, you will have no credit among Men. For how is
it possible that any should confide in you, when they observe you cannot
forbear injuring your nearest Relatives? Now if you think my Instructions are
fit to be followed, well and good; but if not, I would have you learn by the
Examples of those that have gone before us, what is best to be done. There are
great examples of the love of Parents toward their Children, and the love of
Brothers one toward another. And there are many instances of the contrary:
Your wisest way will be to follow the example of those whom you observe to have
prosper'd best. Now for my Body after I am dead, I would not have you put it
either in Gold or Silver or any other thing, but lay it in the Ground
immediately. For what is better then to be hid in the Earth, which is the
Mother and Nurse of all good things? For as in my life time I have been a lover
of Men, so after my decease 'twill rejoice me to partake of that which is most
beneficial to mankind. But I perceive I now begin to fail, and therefore if any
one of you have a mind to take me by the Hand, or to look me in the Face now
while I am alive, let him draw nigh. But I entreat you (My Sons) again and
again, that neither you your selves, nor any man else, offer to stare upon my
Body after I am covered. Let all the Persians and my Fellow Soldiers be called
to my Funeral, that they may congratulate my happiness, as being now out of the
reach of all evil, whether I enjoy the society of God, or am reduced to
nothing. And I would have you bestow upon as many as come, such Collations as
use to be given at the Funeral of a happy Man. The last iostruction which I
commend to your Memory is this, that if you do good to your Friends you will be
in a capacity to punish your Enemies. And now (my dear Children) farewell, and
commend me to your Mother. And farewell all my Friends, you who are here
present, and you who are absent. When he had thus said, and given his Hand to
all of them, he covered up himself, and died.

That the Kingdom of Cyrus was the greatest and the most glorious that Asia
ever knew, will be evident upon a survey of it. It was bounded Eastward with
the Red Sea, Northward with the Euxin-Sea, Westward with Cyprus and Egypt, and
Southward with Aethiopia. And yet though 'twas of such a large extent, it was
governed by the sole management The Conclusion of the History, which compares
the ancient Customs of the Persians with the modern.
of Cyrus, who honored and indear'd his Subjects to him like Children, and was
reverenced by them as a Father. But as soon as he was dead, there began a feud
among his Sons, Cities and Nations revolted, and all things began to turn for
the worse. And that this may appear to be true, the first instance that I give
shall be in point of Religion. It Is well known that formerly if the King or his
Officers had made a solemn contract with any (though the greatest Villains
imaginable) they stood firm to their Words. For had they not done so, and
gained themselves the Reputation of Honest Men in the World, those that came
over to the aid of Cyrus and accompanied him in his marches, would never have
trusted him, any more then they do his Successors, who are known to be
perfidious. But now when they had committed themselves to them upon the account
of their former credit, they were brought before the King and had their Heads
cut off. A great many also of the Barbarians who accompanied Cyrus in this last
Expedition, were by false pretenses decoyed into their ruin. They degenerate
also in this from their Forefathers. For heretofore if any one had hazarded his
Life for the King, or had added a City or a Nation to his Dominions, or had
done any other remarkable piece of Service for the King, they were sure to be
honored and rewarded for it. But now there is no other way for preferment, but
by betraying ones Father as Mithridates did, out of a pretense to serve the
King, or by pawning ones Wife and Children and Friends as Leomithres did at
Egypt, or by the breach of Vows. And these ill Examples have gained upon the
greatest part of Asia. For as the Governors are, so for the most part are
those that are under their Charge. And by this means, People are more wicked
now, then they were formerly.

They are also more given to rapine and extortion, now then before. For they do
not only seize upon the notoriously wicked, but upon the innocent, and make
them pay Money against all reason and equity. So that now it is as dangerous a
thing to have a good Estate, as to be wicked. And men are now afraid to
converse with those that are in authority above them, or to join themselves
with the Kings Forces. So that any one that has a mind to wage War against
them, may traverse all over the Country without the least resistance, because
of their impiety toward the Gods, and their oppressions toward Men. And in
this respect also they are worse then formerly.

Neither have they the same regard to their Bodies now as they had before. It
was a piece of Discipline among them not to spit, or blow their Noses. But it is
plain that this was not enjoined to spare the moisture of their Bodies, but
that they should make them solid with Labor and Sweat. Now indeed they retain
the formality of not spitting or blowing their Noses, but they care not how
little they use bodily Exercise. It was also an order among them to make but
one Meal a day, that they might have the more time for Business and Exercise.
Now indeed the custom of eating but once a day, still remains, but then they
begin as soon as those that dine earliest, and continue at it as long as those
that go to bed latest.

They had also a custom not to bring forth any Bottles at a Feast, because they
thought it would be best for the Health of their Bodies and Minds not to drink
too much. And now indeed there are no Bottles brought into play, but then they
drink at such a med rate, that instead of bringing in, they themselves have
need to be carried out.

It was also a custom with them not to eat or drink in a Journey, or to ease
nature openly: Now the custom of abstaining from these things is still kept up,
but then their journies are so short, that their abstinence is no such great
wonder.

Heretofore they used to go abroad ahunting so often, that they had no need of
any other Exercise, either for themselves or their Horses: But after that King
Artaxerxes and his Nobles began to drown themselves in Wine, they left off all
hunting, or if they did now and then use it, yet they would have none out along
with them, because they envied at and hated those that loved the Exercise of
hunting, as better men than themselves. They still retain the custom of
disciplining their Youths at the Gates, but to learn the Art of riding is quite
out of date, because they are in a place, where they have no opportunity to
credit themselves by giving any Specimen of it.

Another instance of their corrupt manners is this, that whereas formerly their
Young Men had good notions of Justice instilled into them by hearing just
Judgment given upon Causes in the Court. Now they see that those win the day
who give the largest Fees. Heretofore their Boys were instructed in the Natures
of Herbs, that they might use those that are wholesome, and forbear those that
are hurtful. But now they Study their qualities only to know how to do
mischief. So that there is no where so much poifoning as among them.

They are now also more effeminate and Voluptuous, then in Cyrus his time. For
then they used the Discipline and Continence of the Persians, and the gallantry
and spruceness of the Medes; but now they have let fall the Persian Discipline,
and retain the Median Luxury: Of which I will give a little description. In the
first place, they are not contented to have soft Down Beds, but even the feet
of the Bed must rest upon Tapestry, for the pleasure of a yiedling softness.
Then as for their Cookery, nothing of the former inventions is abated, and new
Ar^ices are found out. In the Winter time it is not enough for them to have
their Head, Body or Feet covered, but they must wear thick Furrs home to the
very ends of their Fingers. In the Summer they are not contented with shady
Walks and cool Grotts, but they must have Men stand by and hold Umbrella's over
their Heads. If they have great store of Plate, they pride themselves mightily
in showing it, but to have gotten it by indirect means, that they reckon no
scandal at all. For they are quite overrun with Injustice and Covetousness.

'Twas a custom with them formerly never to take Journies on Foot, and that for
no other rea on but to train them up to riding. But now they have more Clothes
upon their Horses then upon their Beds, for their Care is not to learn to ride
well, but to sit easily. Now as for their Military Exercises, how can they
otherwise choose but be much worse then they were? For before 'twas a custom
that all those who had Estates should supply so many Horsemen for the Militia,
and that the Garrison Men should fight for pay in the defense of their Country.
But now the Porters, Bakers, Cooks, Butlers, Keepers of the Bains, those that
set the Meat upon the Table and take away, those who have them to Bed, and call
them up a mornings, those who Paint them and make every thing sit neat about
them, these are the Men whom the Magistrates pick out for Horsemen. And these
indeed serve to make up a number of Men, but there is no use of them at all in
War, as appears by what they do. For Cyrus took them out of the number of the
light-Harness'd Soldiers, and armed both them and their Horses, and gave every
one of them a Javelin that so he might use them in close fighting.

Now they neither skirmish with the Enemy, nor fight Hand to Hand. Their
Footmen have now their Holbards, their Faulchions and their Axes, with which
they may fight, as they did in Cyrus his time, but even these don't dare to
engage. Neither do they use their hooked Chariots to those purposes for which
Cyrus designed them. For he had good stout well disciplined Coach-men to make
an onset upon the Body of the Enemy, whereas the Persians that are now adays,
put up them whom they don't so much as know, and think that such raw
undisciplined Fellows are able to cope with those that are well Disciplined.
And these indeed do sometimes adventure to drive in upon the Enemy, but before
they can get within them, either they fall out of the Coach-Box, or leap down
of their own accord. And then their Chariots having lost their Drivers, do more
prejudice to their own Party, then to the Enemy. For when they perceive how
poorly they are provided for War, they yield up themselves. Neither will any of
them make War without the assistance of the Graecians, whether they are to
fight against one another, or against the Graecians themselves. And thus I
think I have made good the Charge which I undertook, viz.

That the Persians and their Co-habitants are now less Religious toward the
Gods, less affectionate toward their Relations, more unjust toward others, and
more effeminate in War than before. If any one be of a contrary Persuasion, let
him consider their Actions and he shall find that they justify the Character
which I give of them.

FINIS

