The Improvement improved, BY A SECOND EDITION OF The great Improvement of
Lands BY CLOVER: OR, The Wonderful Advantage by, and right management of CLOVER.

BY ANDREW YARRANTON of Ashley, in the County of Worcester.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Francis Rea, Bookseller in Worcester. 1663.

To the Industrious HUSBANDMAN, FREEHOLDER or FARMER.
Honest Countryman,
ONe sight of this ensuing Pla^^ discourse of Clover, will convince thee I
intend not to interrupt thy honest Labors with a few empty words to no
purpose. Had I the art to garnish my discourse with Rhetorical flourishes of
wit, I should hold it as unsuitable to the temper of my ho^est plain Cou^^^y^^^,
as it is to my present design, which is to give you my best directions how you
may make the best of your Lands. To persuade men by arguments to improve their
Estates, is to suppose them fools or madmen: those that are in their wits,
(that is, are wise) need not arguments; those that are otherwise, must be
otherwise dealt with. I suppose you are all so far convinced that the right
management of your Husbandry is your concernment, that my directions will be
acceptable, if I show you how it may be done. And though in this little book I
confine myself to one sort of Husbandry (which is as useful and profitable as
any other) yet here it will not be unseasonable if I caution you to beware of
these four great obstructions to good Husbandry in the general, especially
since they are injurious to this Husbandry amongst the rest.

1. The first is Ignorance, either of the nature of our Land, or what
improvement it is capable of; the fittest Seed for it, and season of Plowing,
Sowing, laying down, and breaking up Land; drawing Meadows and waterish Ground,
destroying Weeds and Vermin, raising Manure, planting Woods, with many other
such parts of Husbandry; wherein it is true every Husband has some knowledge,
but many have little more then their Fathers left them: and how wilfully
ignorant are many men of that advantageous art of improving land by floating it
with water! though this improvement is so great, and many men's lands lie most
visibly convenient for it, yet the owners of them (though many of them are men
ingenious in other matters) do not discern it.

I write not this to upbraid any: for I believe we have as good husbandry in
England, as is in most parts; and our knowled^e therein is much improved of
late: but I know there would be much more advantage to our selves, and to the
Public, by our estates and good husbandry, if we did better observe those
advantages that lie before us, and better inform our selves how to make the
best use of them. I wonder that any man that knows what true Husbandry
means, should think that Son to be sit for Husbandry, whom he takes to be
scarce capable of any other employment: Husbandry is not so easy a matter as
some men imagine. The unjust censures that men's ignorance has brought upon the
improvement of Lands by Clover, I will not mention, because I find of late men
have better ^it the way of managing it to its credit.

2. The second obstruction to good Husbandry and improvement of Lands, is a too
stiff adhering to old Customs. I have many times wondered at the wilfulness of
the Irish and Welch-men, who have many old Customs in their plowing, sowing,
drawing with Withes, etc. It can scarce be believed that men should be guilty
of such folly as you may see amongst them: Neither can you imagine how
difficult it is to bring them off these old dotages: and though our English
husbandmen are wiser, better husbands, and have cast off may of those old
Customs; yet we are in many things as culpable as they, in retaining those
Usages and methods in Husbandry which never any man pretended any good reason
for, but were introduced when men were most ignorant, as a mere shift for that
time only; and were handed from one to another, till they had got the
venerable name of Antiquity; especially with those men who (as King Henry the
eighth says) will not leave an old Mumpsimus for a new Sumpsimus. Our Fathers
worshipped in this mountain, and our Husbandry was thus managed before we were
born, are arguments against which there is no disputing.

I am not willing to uncover our Fathers nakedness, else I could give you too
many instances, wherein we have little reason to imitate them. How careful were
they (in the case before mentioned) with all possible speed, by private gutters
and ditches, and other means, to convey away all rivulets, landslouds, or other
helps for floating their Lands, as though they could not be too soon rid of
them; when^s they might have made an unspeakable advantage by them, in floating
their lands! and how hard is it, and has it been, to dissuade men from
following their example, or to step one foot out of the common road! Why should
we trouble our selves (say they) to Float, or Clover our Land? our Fathers
lived well without these new inventions, and so may we. Thus some men keep the
old road, till the whole Country is convinced there is a nearer and better way;
and then it is ten to one they as much abhor the old as they did the new. But my
advice to thee (Countryman) is, in thy Husbandry, quarrel with nothing merely
because it is new; esteem nothing merely because it is old: let thy Reason
judge; and when there is like reason for both, preser the old; but let not an
old Custom prevail against the Truth and Reason.

3. The third Obstruction to good Husbandry and improvement of Land, is a
timorous unseasonable withholding our stock, when it may be laid out to great
advantage: this we call penny-wise, and pound-foolish, or loosing a good Sheep
for a halfpenny worth of Tar. And this is either in our common Husbandry, when
we will not be at a little cost, though we are almost sure of a great
advantage; and to save a little money, loose much more. It is but a lazy
contentment, to be content with what the Land will yield us, without our cost
and pains. 2. Some men are afraid of adventures (as they call it) though the
case is never so plain, until others have broke the Ice for them; and so either
loose that opportunity they might have improved, or are discouraged by some
petty miscarriages or inconveniences which seem only to attend their
undertaking.

He that is afraid of venturing 12 lb of Clover-seed upon an Acre of Ground,
(that is fit for it) the price of seed being so low, and the advantage so great
and certain, let him lay down his Land without it, and at the three years end
compare his own with his Neighbors profit who made that adventure.

4. The fourth Obstruction to good Husbandry and improvement of Land, is men's
undertaking more then they can well manage: how often do men that could not
live upon a great Farm, thrive upon a less! the reason of this may be, either
through the incapacity of the Husbandman, or want of stock. As he shall never
improve his Lands to the best, nor be exemplary in good Husbandry, that wants a
stock to bear him out in his undertakings; so he that has a great Farm, and a
stock suitable to it, but wants skill and discretion to manage it, I advise him
to make the first improvement upon his Understanding: but if that cannot be,
let him get an honest and skilful Husbandman to do that which himself cannot
do; or let him set his great Farm, and take a less; and he may be sure of this,
at least, his money will hold out the longer.

I could give you many instances, and show you more particularly in each of
these four Observations, how they hinder all improvements in the general,
especially the improvements of Clover; but it would be too large for my Epistle.

Countryman, thou have here the best directions (I think) the Country can
afford thee; though it may be thou may meet with some judicious person that
can better instruct thee: if thou do, take his advice, and much good may it
do thee. But lest the extraordinary profit of Clover should make thee too
serious in the pursuit of it, I present thee for thy recreation with a sew
Verses an honest Countryman of ours gave me, who it is like had tasted somewhat
of the profit of it.

I have here endeavored (by discovering) to remove those four Obstructions to
good Husbandry and improvements: the last mentioned is, want of money; which,
if thou observe the directions of this book, will (by Gods blessing upon thy
labors) be speedily removed.

January 2. 1662. Andrew Yarranton.

Folium in Trifolium ENCOMIASTICON.
WHen Poets call for aid, do they invoke
The oil of Barley, Hopps, or Indian smoke?
Must Bacchus fill their veins? these drown and smother,
And dull their wits: give me the oil of clover:
One drop of which contains such virtue in it,
It makes a perfect Poet in a minute.
I crave no aid; give me the Gooses quill
That Is fed with Clover, and I Will try my skill.
With what delight and pleasure have I seen
The barren pastures clothed all in green!
Where neither Grass nor Corn would grow before,
It has of Honey suckles planted store.
A barren Farm (with speed) you will fruitful call,
If thus you quilt one quarter of the ball.
The green Leaf is an object for your eyes;
The Flower for your taste, where honey lies:
The savor on it exceeds the sweetest Roses;
It brings these fragrant pastures to our Noses.
The sound of Gain, to please our hearing tends;
But feeling best its object apprehends.
It fills each Sense with Joy, our Purse with Money;
Our Land (like Canaan) flows with mike and honey:
It brings us store of Butter and of Cheese,
It feeds our Sheep, our Turkeys and our Geese;
It feeds our Horses, Oxen, and our Kine,
(And that with speed) our Pigs do feed like Swine.
Fat Beef and Bacon now shall be our fare;
And with Westphalia-gammons we'll compare.
The Milk-maid has her wish, her Pails it fills
Just at the Dayry door, such store it yields.
Our Tenant-squeezing-landlords thirst's appeased,
Our g^^mbling Tenant's racking Rent is oas'd;
The Land, that once we thought not worth our sowing,
For three years time stands to it with six times mowing.
From wet and weeping land it wipes the tears,
It makes the Wheat and Rye fall to it by the ears.
But Wheat-land must not now contend with Rieland;
Our watered Meadows date not vie with dry-land;
Nor can our richest Vales (whose deeper soil
Yeil^s Ceres her full sacrifice with toil)
Vie henceforth with the Rye land in their wealth,
More then they justly could before for health
For though we yield that Wheat's the better grain,
That Is better Land, that yields the greater gain:
And sure I am, here is a reason why
Our Meadows are below the land that is dry.
Of Weeders Weed-hooks now we have no need;
It saves our three years plowing, and our seed.
Our Land, when Clover leaves it, yields such store,
As though it had not yield us ought before;
The root whereof does so manure our Land,
It fills our Binders arms, our Reapers hand:
Such virtue these three leaves do leave behind them,
That yield such mighty Sheaves we cannot bind them.
The charge of Hop-yards does quite blast the gain,
From other blasts if any thing remain;
And commonly to him, whose hopes defend
On Hopps, they prove but bitter in the end,
But Three-leav'd-grass soon yields a threefold profit:
Three Volumes may be writ in pr^ise of it.
B^t to conclude; thy purse will never run over
Till thou have got the art of sowing Clover,
THE Contents of the BOOK.
1. THe reason why some that have used Clover, have not found profit by it. 2.
Clover does not impoverish, but improve the Land. 3. What are the fittest Lands
to sow Clover upon. 4. The profit that is to be raised by this Husbandry. 5.
When, how much, and how to sow Clover-seed. 6. Directions for mowing, making,
and using the Hay. 7. What Cattle are fittest to grase it with. 8. The Authors
readiness to give any man further satisfaction, and to prove the truth of what
he affirms by visible Experiments. 9. Where the Seed that is good and new may
be had.
The great Improvement of Land by Clover.
IN my former Discourse of Clover, I gave you a short account of the persons
that have writ on this subject, and when this husbandry was first set on foot
in England; the repetition of which, for brevity sake I shall omit, and only
give you an account of some of their observations and e^periments, as I find
them pertinent to the method I intend in this little book. And this I do,
because I find some will not take the pains, others cannot spare the time,
which the reading of those books does require: but whosoever pleases to read
those former writings about Clover, and compare their experience with ours of
late, will see much of the reason, why that husbandry seemed to be wholly
disused for a time. For though those Gentlemen writ very well, considering it
was in the infancy of Clover in England; yet they came far short of that
knowledge, which men (less ingenious) have of late attained to by practice and
experience; so that the first directions from those men were not what now may
be given.

Those improvements of Land, which are now much used, and applauded amongst us,
were once as much decryed (as ever Clover has been) before we well understood
them. And what improvement (even to admiration) have some men made of their
Estates, by such ways and means as seemed improbable to such men, who in a
short time have followed their examples, when they have seen th^^^ successes;
whereas, if by any accident^^ miscarriage in the management of it they have
seen the first authors in any measure fallen short of that profit propounded
to themselves, they would presently have cried out against the whole, and
abhorred the thoughts of any further trial, in stead of inquiring wherein the
miscarriage lay, and endeavoring to prevent it in the next essay: such is the
unreasonable impatience of some men, not considering that knowledge in all
arts, especially in Husbandry, is attained by industry, observation, often
practice, and patience. Though we now know much more of the nature of Clover,
then we did a few years since, and the whole Country is very much convinced of
the extraordinary profit, and usefulness of it; yet a few years practice more,
will give us much more light into it.

I remember about two years ago, it was objected by some (of which I hear
nothing now in these parts) that some, that did sow this Seed, have left off
the sowing of it, not finding that profit in it, which is talked of. It is
true; and it is as true, that many men after they have some time used and
employed themselves in trades that are very advantageous, and by which others
have got great Estates, yet finding no profit to be got by them (as they
conceive) have disused the said Trades, and betaken themselves to other
employments; when indeed the fault was not in the Trade, but in the person or
management of it.

About 13 years since, Sir Richard Weston by observation, and discouse with
Merchants and others in his travels in Flanders and Brabant, and other parts,
found that there was very great profit raised out of poor and barren Lands, by
sowing it with Clover: whereupon he set on foot that Husbandry herein his own
Country, and in a little time it so spread it self, that there was some of it
(more or less) sowed in most Counties in England: and as it began, so it
continued in some repute for a time, but shortly after some began to be
discouraged, and at last it was in a great measure laid asid: and indeed it was
almost impossible it should be otherwise, for it was then under these (amongst
other) disadvantages.

1. First, it was then a new, and foreign sort of Husbandry, and therefore
suspected; and suspicion ever aggravates every little inconvenience to the
damage, and takes no notice of what is for the credit of that which is
suspected.

2. The Seed was dea^, worth two shillings the pound, so that then it was
chargeable trying experiments to find out the nature of it: and if any man
failed, he was exasperated by his loss to speak the worst of it.

3. In all trials there must be many miscarriages, all men (almost) here in
England being ignorant how to manage it: and hence it is: First, instead of 12
li. they sow but 5 or 6 li. upon an Acre, so that it was a wonder if any came
up, that the natural Grass and Weeds did not choke it all.

Secondly, some sowed upon extreme wet, and gawled Land, which retains the
wet; and others upon extreme binding clay Land, which will not bear it, and
wherein it could never get any good rooting.

Thirdly, some buried it all in the sowing and harrowing; and some, lest they
should bury it, did not sufficiently cover it; and of this the Birds had more
then their share.

Fourthly, some sowed it upon such Land as had not strength enough to bear any
thing; for men had a conceit, that it would grow upon any Land, though never so
poor; and in this also many times it must fail them: for though it would bring
advantage upon such Land, as would scarce yield our rent in grass, or pay our
charge and rent in tillage; yet we must not expect that profit upon poor Land,
which may be raised upon better, until it is brought into a better capacity by
good Husbandry: and there is some Land, which will bear nothing in the
condition it is in.

Fifthly, some destroyed it immediately after it came up out of the ground,
while it was tender, by the grazing and treading of Cattle. I might mention
many more, as mixing the Seed with Sand, sowing upon Land wherein the natural
Grass was not sufficienty destroyed by tillage, or upon Land that was not well
prepared before, I mean, not mellow and made fine, for it delights much in a
soft bed.

Sixthly, and some, through ignorance of the danger, put their Oxen and Kine
hastily into it, whereby they have sustained loss. Many such disparagements
through our ignorance and unskilfulness has it met with to it is detriment.

Seventhly, especially, the Seed was very bad; where one pound was good (I
think I may say) three was either old, mixed, corrupted at Sea, or afterward at
Land by bad keeping it; and many men, to save something in the price, bought
such Seed as was worth nothing. I am apt to think, that one of the greatest
discredits this Husbandry has met with, has been from the Seed: it were too
long to tell you, what envious base arts were used in Flanders and other parts
(as Kiln-drying, etc.) to prevent our having good Seed, lest we should get the
perfect art of Clover, as well as they: so that much of the Seed being bad,
never came up; and being dear, the loss was great, and the disappointment no
less, and in this case, the Country had no remedy, not knowing good Seed from
bad, but must take such they could get, or none; which made many (after a few
trials) disuse it, rather then run the hazard of such chargeable adventures.
Now to prevent these or any other obstructions for the future, the following
directions are intended; and Seed, that is certainly good and new, will be sold
at the places hereafter mentioned.

But in regard it has been objected, that Clover does improverish the Land
(though experience has fully answered this objection with us) I crave your
patience, while I give answer to it; for the sake of such, who have not had
Clover amongst them long enough, to make a sufficient trial of it, so as to
know the truth whether it do or not.

Clover does not improverish, but improve the Land it grows on.
IT is objected, Clover does improverish the Land.

1. And first, suppose it do, it is beyond all doubt it does, while it grows,
yield such advantage, as does much more then recompense the damage.

2. Corn does improverish the Land, yet this shall not discourage me from
sowing it.

3. If Clover do abate somewhat of the heart of the Land, yet it utterly
destroys all Weeds, Fern and Broom, which I think is no small disadvantage,
and brings the ground into a fresh capacity of tillage; which cannot be done by
laying down your Land without Clover, except it lie longer then it need to do;
and for the first and second year it yields you very little, and many grounds,
if they be not layn down in good heart, yield almost nothing for the three
first years, all which time Clover yields a very great advantage, and by that
time is almost ready for a second breaking up, if you desire it.

4. Fourthly, but herein has been a very great mistake, and this Husbandry
has unjustly passed under this censure: It does not impoverish, but improve
the Land; for if you graze it altogether as some do, the ground maintains so
many more Cattle then what it did before, that puts the question out of doubt:
if you mow it once a year, and graze the rest; so many Cattle as it will
require to keep it down, will sufficiently manure your Land: if you mow twice a
year, it helps you to keep so many the more Cattle in the house, whose dung if
it were laid upon the same Land would add more heart and virtue to it, they
your two crops of Clover took from it. In my former Book I mentioned some other
reasons, and I am now more fully convinced, that the leaves, which will
unavoydably fall from it, do very much enrich the Land; you may many times see
the ground black over with them; and it is very observable, how the ground in
the absence of these leaves is covered over with some lower branches of the
Clover, which spread themselves, and rot upon the ground, whilst the top or
upper branches flourish; and the Clover is much enriched by this connatural
food, viz. a corruption of a superfluous part of the plant: for I perceive the
Land does receive wonderful advantage by these leaves and branches; and as the
leaves and branches, so the root does very much contribute toward the
enriching of the Land; and the truth is, since our Country by experience has
been convinced, that the Land by Clover is much bettered, they have for the
most part ascribed it to the long and large root which this plant leaves in the
Land. But it is Experience, that must resolve us in this case, (and indeed so
it has) though there is reason enough against this objection; he that has
sowed Clover, and had the profit of it three or four years, and then has sowed
Corn, till be come to lay down his Land with Clover again, is most like to give
the truest answer to this question. I confess, I had a great desire to be
resolved in this point, and to that end, I have made all the trials I could for
this 5 years, and have observed others Clover Husbandry, and Co^n after it, and
have put some upon the trial of it, by sowing Corn just after it: and truly,
though at first I was of the objectors opinion, yet by my experience and
observation I am convinced of the contrary; and I cannot upon inquiry find any
one judicious person (that has for any competent time used this Husbandry) but
he is fully satisfied, that Clover leaves the Land better then it found it. It
were too long to tell you, what many men, with whom I have discoursed, have
told me, who were once discouraged by this objection, but are now upon trial
fully satisfied. If you peruse any writings about Clover, you will find, that
in the first trials of it in England, those Gentlemen that then wrote, found,
that it did improve the Land. Mr. Walter Blithe tells us that Clover has this
property, after 3 or 4 years it does so frame the earth, that it is much the
fitter for Corn, in his Improver improved, page 104. Sir Richard Weston says,
the Land being ploughed after Clover, it will yield 3 or 4 years together rich
crops of Wheat, and after that a crop of Oats; with which you may lay it down
again with Clover. These are his own words. I could give you many more answers
and experiments that may fully satisfy any that yet doubt, but that I perceive
there is no need with us; and therefore I leave you to experience, which has
convinced many, that otherwise would not be satisfied.

And though I think no reasonable man can object, yet if any should imagine
that it would abate our tillage of Corn, it were easy to make it out that it
will much increase it: for a third part of that ground you are forced to lay
down for grass to maintain your Cattle, wherewith to Till your Land, will
maintain them; so that you may Till much more of your Land, then before you
could. I can make it appear, six Acres of Land in Clover will keep as many
Cattle, as thirty Acres of natural grass; and besides, your Land need not now
lie out of tillage, so long as it was wont to do; but once in four or five
years you may break it up, and it shall be as sit for tillage, as though it had
lain 20 years with natural grass. The case indeed is so plain, that I need not
trouble you with an answer to this conceit.

What are the fittest Lands to sow Clover upon.
IN my former Book, you have an account of the fittest Lands for this
Husbandry; and as they are the Lands most fit, so it is Land that may be best
spared, especially at the time when it is to be Clovered, viz. when you are to
lay it down for grass, for the two first years it yields very little profit. I
find upon my observation in general, all garvelly dry Land is good for this
purpose; especially, if it be limed well before, and be Land that is not very
poor, nor extremely out of heart; but if it be in good heart, and be worth nine
or ten shillings the Acre, the profit of it will be the greater and more
certain. It is a conceit directly against reason and experience, that the
barrenest and poorest Lands are fittest for Clover: for though it will grow
upon very poor Land that has been limed, and will raise very great profit,
yea, and poor Land without lime, with a little good Husbandry by Clover, will
yield good advantage; yet we must not think the poorer the Land is, the fitter
it is for Glover: though Clover is the best improvement of barren Land, yet
poor and barren Land is not best for Clover. But as for the particular Lands
that are fit for this Husbandry, I say,

1. First, it is beyond all doubt, that the best and fittest Land is that which
has been in tillage about six or eight years, that has been well limed, and
is dry and gravelly, and not apt to bear its natural grass the first and second
year.

2. A second sort is a broomy and fearny dry Land, that has been well limed,
and has been in tillage six or eight years.

3. A third sort is mixed Land, that is naturally dry, that has been limed, and
that lies dry in the Winter.

4. A fourth sort is Rie-land, which is dry and sandy, which also has been
limed.

I take these four sorts of Land to be fittest for Clover; and though I mention
them all as limed, yet in those parts where no lime can be had at reasonable
rates, and they have any of these four sorts of Land, Clover will yield them a
very great advantage: for these Lands are in their own nature very fit for
Clover, and it grows very well upon it, where there has been no lime; yet, I
advise you to use lime where it is to be had.

I have endeavored to find out the reason, why Clover does so extremely
thrive upon limed Land, rather then upon the same Land when it has not been
limed; which experience does fully convince us, is true, and for which many
reasons are assigned. That it is so, none deny: and why it is so, I have given
you some account in my other book.

There are two other sorts of Land that bear Clover.

1. Land that is of a mixed nature, and that has somewhat more of clay in it,
then the third sort of Land before mentioned; whose clods are apt to fall in
pieces, in a wet time, and is not subject to clinging.

2. Secondly, Clay-land that is not subject to retain the wet, and that lies
upon a shut, so that the rain and other water runs speedily off it; which
Land is much the better, if it face to the South. We may be so much the more
confident of success upon these two sorts of Land, if they have been well
limed, and we have a dry seeding time: and you must be sure to make this Land
as fine, light and mellow, as you can; and when you have got Clover upon it, it
will by its root and broad leaf make and keep your Land much more lighter and
mellow or moustree; which will be a great advantage, when you come to sow corn
again.

I have observed upon this sort of mixed and Clay-land excellent good Clover,
and I know some that have a very great advantage upon it; yet I think the
unseasonableness or extreamness of the weather has a greater influence upon
Clover to its detriment (in this Land) then they have in the other sorts of
Land, upon my own knowledge. I say, this Land will bear it, and that with very
much advantage; yet I advise the unexperienced rather to make their first trial
upon one of the four sorts of Land before mentioned. I have heard of some, who
falling upon this sort of Land in their essays, and either though their
unskilfulness, or some other miscarriage, it has failed them; they have then
made it their business to cry out against Clovering of Land in the general, or
at least to persuade men that that sort of Land will not bear it.

I do believe that there are many secrets about the Nature of Clover yet to be
discovered, and about the fittest Lands for it; and I do not doubt but in a
short time we shall attain to much more kowledge about the management of Clay
Lands, so as to raise good Clover upon them: I have heard from good Authors,
that in some Clay Lands (where it is not extreme binding Clay) they have much
success, and have made good progress in the discovery. I could heartily wish
some ingenious person would so far befriend the public, as to give more full
directions about Clay Land, then I can upon my own knowledge; not having the
opportunity of so many trials upon that Land, as upon other Lands first
mentioned.

The profit of Clover.
AS for the profit that may, and usually is made by Clover, I am at a great
stand, whether I had not better wholly omit i^, and say nothing of it: for if I
tell you what I have read and heard from others, I shall forfeit my credit with
some, and what I affirm will be taken to be impossible: if I tell you what I
have seen, and the whole Country will subscribe to the truth of, yet it will be
taken to be very impossible with many, especially those which have not seen it:
and if report the advantages to be less, it is a detraction; and though I
should then speak the truth, yet it is not all the truth. I am resolved to
speak within compass; and if I err, it shall be on the safer hand, and herein
I shall be the sooner pardoned.

The first sort of Land it is dry, gravelly, and limed; supposing it to be in
heart, it yields to Graze or Mow, at least Three pounds each Acre per annum.

The second sort was broomy or fearny Land limed: this Land in Clover is (at
least) worth Four mark each Acre per annum.

The third and fourth sorts of Land is mixed Land, naturally dry, and Rye Land;
which Clovered, is (at least) worth Forty shillings per Acre.

Many persons have offered to give me a particular account of the money they
have raised out of several pieces of Clever, which amounts to more then I have
mentioned: and I know the benefit in some parts will be very great, where Grass
is much wanting; especially, in the midst of Summer, when all other Grass is
burned up. So far as I can understand the nature of this Plant, it seems to be
designed on purpose for those Countries where natural Grass is wanting, and for
a supply where the Sun has burnt up their grass in the midst of Summer: for as
the Land in those parts is fittest for Clover; (bearing little natural grass)
so Clover is fittest for those Lands; which indeed, is the best improvement can
be made of them. There is a Gentleman Sir John Winford late high Sheriff.
my neighbor, that has about sixty Acres (and I know of several parcels)
sowed with Clover-seed, being very barren gravelly Land; which Land if laid
down to bear natural Grass, is not worth above four shillings six pence the
Acre at most, here with us; and I know there has been made of it at least
forty five shillings per annum, upon each Acre by Clover. As also, Mr. Thomas
Hill a Grazier, can give you an account of the profit of it, whom you may see
in most of the Fairs in Worcestershire, Staffordshire, or Shrop-shire. I
sowed about sixteen Acres with Barley, and after my Barley I had about
Michaelmas a great After-math, into which I turned by way of Tack about forty
Hoggs, at six pence per the week; and for that time I had about four pound ten
shillings for Tack of Swine, which I thought was pretty well for an After-math;
and take my Land to be much bettered by the dung of so many Piggs. Had I let
this Land lie to bear natural Grass, it would not have brought me five pounds
in the two first years; and as to bear Corn, it would not any longer to any
advantage, being worn out with liming and long tillage. This I mentioned in my
Book last year, to which I could add this years experience: but to give you
the particulars of it were too long: in a word, it was answerable to my
expectations, and such as you will scarce believe, except you saw it, or had
had some experience of this Husbandry your self. If the After-math in the first
quarter after the Barley is cut yield such advantage, you may guess what the
next years profit may be. I would not have spent so many words about the
advantage of Clover, but that it is more then possible my Book may fall into the
hands of some that either have not seen it growing, or have not had that
opportunity of knowing the profit of it, as all men have here about us, if they
will take any notice of their neighbors Lands.

When, how much, and how to sow Clever.
FOr the time of sowing it, in my former Book I told you that the best season
is from the 10th. of March, to the latter end of April; but I hold it best in
March, because the seed may have time to root before the drought catch it.
Since I wrote my last Book I have made several trials, I have sowed some in
every week in August and September, and I do intend to try a good quantity, to
sow it in the middle or rather in the beginning of August, for I perceive that
does exceeding well which is then sowed: and I begin to think that after a
little time, the Country will be much inclined to that season as the best. If
any person please to make trial, I advise him to order his ground according to
this direction, and I dare almost warrant it shall thrive. So soon as your
Barley or your Pease is taken off your Land, plough it with a narrow round
furrow, that so all the pelf and weeds may be buried; then harrow your Land,
and lay it as plain and as fine as may be, and pick off the stones; then sow
the seed (without any corn in it or before it) according to the following
directions. Keep your Land well enclosed, that it may not be trod upon by any
cattle till about the middle of April; then Graze it if you will, or keep it a
little longer and Mow it. I sowed last year about eight Acres without any
Grain, or any thing else upon the ground with it, and it thrives very well; but
it was sowed in April, and I conceive if it had been sowed in August it had
been much better; and amongst others, one reason why I conceive sowing in
August is best, is, because I find one great enemy to Clover is natural Grass:
Now if the seed be sowed in August, it will have taken root and be able to bear
out the winter; and when the spring comes it will be so high and forwardly,
that it will be able to cover all the ground, and shade and keep down that
grass which else would be injurious to it.

For the quantity of seed I need say but little, for all men are now convinced
of the error in sowing six or eight pound upon an Acre; and I cannot hear of
any that sow less then twelve pound, some sow fourteen pound, and some sixteen
pound: I have my self sowed sixteen pound upon an Acre: but for your directions
herein, I shall only give you the very words of my last Book. The quantity of
seed that I do prescribe to sow one Acre, is twelve or thirteen pound: it is
true, formerly they did not sow above six pound of seed upon an Acre, but I
find by practice, that no less then twelve pound must be sowed: for when but
six pound was used to be sowed, then the natural grass did presently abound,
and the branches did grow into great stalks, whereby the Clover grass did soon
decay, and the grass was course; but now by sowing twelve pound upon an Acre,
you do prevent the natural grass, which is a great enemy to the Clover; as
also, sowing thick does make the grass the finer, and by consequence sweeter,
and it does also by its thickness and shade, kill all Broom and Fearn, and
other weeds; which a good husbandman knows are great advantages to the Land, in
order to the next breaking up for Corn: therefore, I desire that all would sow
twelve pound on each Acre.

As for the manner of sowing it, I do not by any means approve of the mixing it
with Sand, or any thing else; I shall not trouble you with reasons against it,
because it is now wholly laid aside: the Country is sensible of the great
hazard and inconvenience of it: my direction therefore is, if you sow in
August, let your ground be ploughed as aforesaid, and made as even, fine and
plain, as one plowing and harrowing will well make it; then sow your Seed thus:
put about so much as will sow one Land into a bowl, or some such thing, holding
it in your left hand, or under your left arm; and with your right hand sow it
as you do Corn, taking it between your two forefingers and thumb; and according
to your best skill divide your Seed, so as that every place may have its share:
wherein you must observe that the wind be not too high, and so to order your
Seed, that the wind do not drive it together in heaps. If you sow it after
Barley, prepare your Land, and make it sowed and well harrowed, sow your Clover
Seed either the same day, or two or three days after; then line your Harrows
with a Bush, so that they may not go above two inches in the ground; and if
good part of the Bush hangs behind the Harrows, it will be much the better. I
have sometimes sowed when the Barley has been two inches above the ground, and
only rolled the Barley, and herein I have had good success; but I approve not
this way, except in case of necessity: for if dry weather come immediately
upon it, it will not be sufficiently covered. I find by experience, that it is
much better to sow Clover with Barley, when you lay down your Land, rather then
with Oats; and if I mistake not, the Clover will be much the better: it will
not be labor lost, if you take notice of the birds, lest they devour the Seed
so soon as it is sowed.

Directions for mowing, making and using the Hay.
THe best time to mow Clover-grass, is about the beginning of June, for the
first cutting of it; and in August for the second cutting. In making* your Hay,
do not shake your swathes as you do other Hay, only turn it with as much
tenderness as may be until it is fit to cock, for the leaves of it are too apt
to fall, which must be prevented; for such is the virtue of them, your labor
will not be lost: and if it should happen to be an extreme wet time, so that
you cannot make your Clover Hay as it should; if you mix it in the Rick with a
little Barley or Oaten-straw, it will tend much to the preservation of your
Hay, and in the winter will be excellent fodder: If it so happen that you have
a piece of ground that you can float with water in summer, about two or three
days after you have taken off your Clover-Hay, let your water run quick over
your Land, and you will have speedily a wonderful burden of Clover-Grass upon
the ground. A little rain upon our Clover-Hay while it is withering, does it no
hurt, but makes it more tough; but too much drought and heat when we out our
Clover makes our Hay too brittle, short, and apt to crumble; and I find also
the roots are much damnified by cutting Clover in a hot time. Some think it is
better rick Clover-Hay then house it; but that I leave to your convenience.

What Cattle are fittest to graze it with.
CLover-Grass is food for all sorts of Cattle, but you must have a special care
when you first put Oxen or Kine into it: I have heard of some Oxen and Kine
that have been put in well, and have been dead in four or five hours: but a
little care does prevent the danger. When you put them in, for the first day
let them be in about a quarter of an hour, the second day half an hour, the
third day an hour, the fourth day an hour and a half, the fifth day about two
hours, and the sixth day three hours, and the seventh day you may let them
stay in without danger: you must also have a care that your Kine or Oxen drink
not of two hours after they come out of the Clover: for this Grass is so sweet
a feeding for them, that drinking immediately after it, they are in danger of
swelling. It is excellent feeding for Oxen and Kine; and it is observed, that
Kine do give more and better Milk in Clover-Grass then they do in any other;
and the Butter and Cheese is much better then that which is raised upon
ordinary Grass.

Horses you may put into it at any time without any danger, and it does feed,
and cure them of many diseases. Sheep may be put in without danger, and indeed
it is a very expeditious way of fatting Sheep. Clover-Grass will be ready for
them in the beginning of March, and you will find them fat in ten weeks: some
men have made good profit by this way of feeding them.

Swine you may put in at any time without danger, who feed and grow wonderfully
in it. To those persons who want meat for their Swine, this food will be very
acceptable: and as it is a certain, cheap and speedy way of feeding Swine; so
it is observed, that Swine do very much improve the Land, their dung being an
excellent manure. As for the Hay of Clover in the winter, we see that our
Cattle will forsake our meadow-Hay for it, and it is with us accounted as good
for a horse as ordinary Hay and Provender. I do not approve of grazing Clover
in the winter, for I know it does it much hurt; and cutting it in a very dry
time is injurious to it.

To conclude this point of feeding. Reader, let me tell thee, if thou have a
good parcel of Land that is fit for Clover, and have money to stock it as it
ought to be, a better opportunity of increasing thy estate thy heart cannot
desire. I know many men that have made great advantage by Clover, yet have not
made that profit by it, which they might have done, for want of a sufficient
stock to put upon it; and some men that upon very good Farms could not keep so
many Cattle as their tillage did require (not having meadow-grounds) that can
now keep with Clover many more, though they have much more of their ground in
tillage, then they had before.

I might tell you how it feeds Geese and Turkeys; but if any of it grow near
your houses, you will soon be sensible of it: and I am sure it will save much
of that Corn, which is given to that sort of Poultry.

The Authors readiness to give any man further satisfaction.
IN my last, I told you that if any Gentleman or other person desire to be
further satisfied in any thing relating to this Husbandry, I should be ready to
contribute my best assistance in order thereunto; if they please to come to my
house at Ashley, in the Country of Worcester, there I shall be ready to show
them what experiments I have made, and to give them such visible arguments of
the truth of what I have printed, that may convince the most incredulous. This
my offer I shall God willing make good: and in my absence, Mr. Robert Vicaris
my next Neighbor will be ready to perform what I have here promised.

I would have given you an account in this book of many more experiments and
observations, but that it would too much enlarge this second Edition; and in
that I designed this also, chiefly for Worcestershire, Staffordshire,
Shrop-shire, and some parts of Hereford-shire; such quotations are the less
necessary: for great part of the Lands in these Counties are so fit for this
Husbandry, that the management of it is the less difficult; and men generally
begin to be expert in it: yet such has been the importunity of some, for my
first Book (of which I have none left) that forces me with this enlargement to
reprint it, before I have performed what in it I promised, viz. A second part
of the discourse of Clover, and of other Lands that are fit for it; the delay
of which I hope will be recompensed by those trials that are now on foot upon
such Lands: for if there were none of those four sorts of Land before mentioned
in England, I should yet make no doubt of raising a very great profit by Clover
upon many sorts of Clay, or clayish Land; and this I hope in a short time to
make appear, though this Land requires somewhat more of art and patience, and
may in our first essays give us more discouragements then those Lands that are
every way fitted for this husbandry. But my present business is to give my
Countrymen a remedy for his Gravelly, Dry, Sandy, or Rye Land which is worn out
with tillage and liming: I know it is a common disease in these parts where
lime is cheap, and the common cure is as bad as the disease it self. But Clover
you will find to be a certain, speedy, profitable cure for such Lands, for it
yields you a great advantage in the interim, that is, for three or four years,
and in the fifth year after is as fit for Corn as though it had lain in Grass
twenty years. And as Clover is fittest for Land that is thus become useless,
and almost incapable of any other Husbandry with profit, so this Land is
fittest for Clover; and that which renders it unprofitable to us, viz. that it
is unapt to natural Grass the two first years, does render it most profitable
to us in Clover. And as lime by its speedy working downward, does soon get
through the uppermost part of the earth (which longer retains our other
soil) so the Clover does shut its root straight downward and deep in the
earth, whereby it partaketh of that virtue, which otherwise would be lost,
being got without the reach of other roots: and this may be one reason, why
Land that has been limed bears much more Clover, then the same Land, when it
has not had lime upon it: besides, the lime does much mellow and open our
Land, whereby the Clover has the better advantage of taking root.

I intended here to add a few Letters about this Husbandry; but because they
are long, I print only this ensuring from an ingenious Gentleman.

SIR
SInce we have had such convincing experience, and have tasted the profit of
Clover-Grass; we now wonder, that so great an improvement was no sooner
discovered, and justly impute it to our many miscarriages in our first
management of it. It was no small encouragement to us, when we heard and saw
you had better success then we at first had; especially when we saw you so
ready to communicate your experience for the public good: to comply therefore
with your desires and my own inclination to promote improvements, I have sent
you some remarques of mine about this Husbandry of Clover-Grass, amongst many
more, (and perhaps more considerable) which might be added.

I have observed the outlandish Seed to bring somewhat the broader leaf, and of
a deeper green; but I know not whether it be constantly so, nor whether it be
better, if it be.

I can assure you from experience, that to steep the Seed (which to other grain
is thought helpful) is hurtful; for much of the Seed will swell and break, and
that in short time. Dry grounds and light are conceived most proper for this
Seed; for they are soon and easily made mellow, otherwise the Clover would not
take root to any purpose: but it is past doubt with me, that if strong Land and
marley ground could be made fine enough (as they use to speak) that is, small,
it would bring the best and most durable Clover; for we see it naturally
growing on such Land: and for the preparing such Land for this end, I shall
adventure to offer something before I conclude. Trial would also be made in
boggie grounds, for such Land once drained is exceeding light; so that if
excess of moisture rot not the Clover, it must needs grow very swiftly:
besides, this succulent and swift growing Grass may possibly prove a secret
kind of draining to the Land: and I do the rather encourage to this trial,
because I have this year in a kind of curiosity sowed Turnips on such Land with
good increase, and (which may be thought strange) not any of them rotted,
though there was no drain to the ground.

The usual time of sowing is with Barley or Oats; which if late sowed,
indangers the Seed by drought: I therefore for trial sowed several Acres early
with pease, which grows well.

The usual way of covering it when sown, is with a bush of thorns, which yet
will bury some, and leave more above ground to the birds: to prevent both
inconveniences, I having first sowed the Seed, caused lime newly slacked to be
thinly sowed upon it, and the Clover grows well; and probably the lime is a
further advantage then the first preservation.

To fill the ground full of Seed is now agreed the best way, though perhaps the
bottom of the reason is scarce yet thought on: that the keeping the earth
moist by its shade does much good is certain, and that the keeping out other
Grass does more good, is as certain; but how it keeps out other Grass is the
question, to which I cannot think it a sufficient answer, to say it does it by
covering the surface of the earth, but believe the cause is a little more
remote from common view, viz. that the greater number of Roots there are shot
down into the earth, the more do they both dispose the earth by a subtle kind
of ferment or motion for their proper nourishment, and also the more strongly
draw away that nourishment when prepared, whereby other Grass is prevented. We
see things of long and spreading roots do much mellow Land below the surface,
especially, if they be many together; for a few may be overmastered by the
hardness of the parts of the earth. Coppice-woods thrive well, and the thicker
the more thriving, in such grounds where single bushes would not thrive at all;
which also takes away the objection of such as may suppose the ground will
scarce nourish so many. Perhaps you may judge these kind of reasons too
fanciful; but I purpose to indulge my own conceit so far, as to sow twenty
pound weight upon an Acre, this next year.

Sowing it in rows, and hoing it once or twice in a summer, would make it
prosper incredibly; but that the ordinary Husbandman will never undergo the
trouble of, till some more expeditious instrument then the common Hoe, is found
out, which to an ingenious man would be a work of no great difficulty.

The Spring is the common season of sowing, which because it ordinarily
succeeds, must not be found fault with: but though that be a good time, I do
not think it is the best; for the Autumn (besides that it is seldom or never
accompanied with drought) gives the greatest advantage of mellowing the Land,
by ploughing it immediately after the grain is off: especially, if such
preceding crop were Gray-pease, Buck-wheat, some broad-leafed Plant; for such
do generally most conduce to mellow and meliorate Land: And this is the way I
would offer for bringing stiff Lands in order for Clover: And I wish; some
ingenious man would sow some (if but a little for trial sake) with his winter
Corn, for I dare assure him, if no extreme frost do suddenly catch it, he shall
find it the best time. And here I think it proper to propose the sowing of
such Lands with Clover, as lie in common Fields; and such a great part of our
Lands in England are, by reason whereof Hay and pasture-grounds are wanting in
many places; and for remedy, they are fain to sow a great part of their Land
with horse-meat, and that at a great charge; which the Team devouring next
Winter, and the Family most or all the bread-Corn, the poor Farmer can hardly
pay his rent, and is always kept necessitous. I think truly that for such Lands
Clover is the greatest, if not only improvement: for by sowing Clover either
with or without his winter Corn, the year after the fallow, he shall that year
not only have excellent fodder far beyond what ordinarily comes with Barley or
Oats; but also the Clover will have gotten so good rooting, that the next
winters grazing shall not destroy so much, as it does usally that which is sown
in spring; so that without further charge, he shall have a second years profit
to be employed either for Hay or grazing, as his occasions best serve. It Is
easy here to foresee the objection against this course, viz. that so soon as
the Corn is out of the field, the Clover is exposed to all the neighborhood;
and it is as easily answered, that though that be true, yet 1. You have the
Summers profit, 2. Your Land by such grazing shall be hugely improved, even to
recompense you sufficiently for loss of your Clover, so that against your next
tillage after the next fallow you shall need little or no Soil.

Having thus considered the best ways and ^ime for sowing Clover, it will be
now fit to look to the use of it: Cutting and giving in racks green is a known
good way, and raises much soil; to make it well into Hay, requires a long and
dry season, yet not vehement hot, for that scorcheth the leaves, causing them
to fall off, as much rain washes out much of its sweetness; but by a gentle
rain (or rather dew) they are preserved for the same reason, also it should not
be unnecessarily tossed. A knowing Husbandman told me it was the best way to
rake it into large rows rather then make it into Cocks, and so let it lie in a
sort open, and in the middle of the day open it a little more, and after all is
done, it will be better put it into a Rick then into a Barn, and into an open
then a close Barn. Note also, that the sooner it is spent the better, and not
keep it as sometimes other Hay is kept till two years old; for the stalks of it
being hollow and spungy, it cannot lie so close and other Hay, (nor is it
convenient it should, except it be very well made) whereby the finer parts do
exhale and fly away.

To the continuance of Clover, grazing is an enemy; but especially, in the
hottest and coldest seasons, and most of all the first year: doubtless in other
pastures grazing kills much, but the ground naturally sends forth more, so
that we see not the defect: we see unseasonable and immoderate cutting or
biting (for as to the effect it is all one) of the strongest plants destroys
them, not only such as are young and tender (though these soonest) but even
such as are in their greatest vigor: if any man then would preserve his Clover
wholly from biting, (and as much from treading as he could) I am confident he
should find it endure much beyond his expectation. And here let me acquaint
you, that I once heard of a way to perpetuate Clover, which though it be not
very likely for that purpose, yet being otherways useful, I here give it you.
The Clover; declining, let one Crop grow to a good ripeness; which being cut
and made into Hay, let it be set up in a Rick in the same ground: the following
winter Fother Cattle with it all the ground over, and the Seed coming thence
(as the Relator supposed) will new stock the ground as at first. Now this I
say, that though from hence no such increase is to be expected, as from the
first orderly sowing upon mellow Land, yet the Seed so scattered upon the Land
will grow, though it will be small, and so make the pasture thicker and better
then otherwise it would have been: for I once scattered some seed upon the
green turfe, and it grew, but was small: besides, the Fothering will much
enrich the Land.

As for the common objection, that it impoverisheth the Land, I say, first, the
objection lies far stronger against tillage, which is a far greater and more
often repeated charge. But next, I take the truth of the matter to lie here,
that such as Clover very poor Land (as is most in custom) do find their Land
to come but poorly with grass, after the Clover spent; and I know not why in
reason they should expect it otherwise; for so it would have been, or worse, if
the Clover had not been there. If now they will either restore it its own
again, that is, lay on the soil that has been raised from the Clover, or break
it up for tillage, they shall find no cause to complain that their Land is
impoverished.

Thus Sir, have I given you such observations about this matter, as I thought
might tend to advance the Husbandry; which I wish, as that which will be of
public advantage.

December the 3d. 1662. Yours J. B.


Where the Seed that is good and new may be had.
ANd whereas I found the Country in these parts frequently disappointed in
their expectations, through the badness of the Seed; I did for the last year
provide a considerable quantity, of such Seed as I knew to be right good, and
new; of which parcel I cannot hear of one pound that failed of coming up,
though the last year we had not such seasonable weather for it, as sometimes we
have had, and may hereafter expect: and in regard of some other employment
which I have undertaken, effectual care is taken by other persons for the
future, to furnish these Cities, Towns, and places hereafter mentioned, with
such Seed as is warranted to be good: and if the Husbandman follow the
directions I have given, he has not the least cause to doubt of success (by
Gods blessing upon his endeavors) but may assure himself of that or more
advantage then here I have propounded.

As for the price of the Seed, the last year it was sold for seven pence the
pound, but I hope this year it will be sold cheaper. I have no instructions to
set any certain price upon it, because the persons that undertake it, are
resolved to sell it at the lowest price that may be, and to that end have taken
order for a great quantity, by which means they themselves having it at a
cheaper rate, will be able to sell it so much the cheaper in the Country. As
for the persons who are by these undertakers appointed to sell this Seed,
public notice will be given by Printed papers, who they are in each of the
places following, and in some other places herein not mentioned.

At Worcester, Mr. Nicholas Baker Ashley, Mr. Robert Viccaris Beaudley
Kederminster Bromsgrove Stourbridge Kinvar Ombersley Dudley Teauxbury Tamworth
Liechfield Newport Shrewsbury Bridgenorth Ludlow Tenbury Rosse Dean Newent
Sutton-cofield Warsall Woolverhampton Brimingham Hailes-owen Shifnall
Wellington Wenlock Clibbery

FINIS.

